A GODLY SERMON: Preached before the Queens most excellent Majesty, upon the
17. 18. 19. verses of the 16. Chapter of S. Matthew:

Wherein is contained the conclusion of a Dialogue between Christ and his
Disciples: Showing breefely that the authority which the Pope of Rome does
challenge to himself, is unlawfully usurped.

Very necessary for these perilous times wherein the simple may perceive their
intolerable impiety, usurping that office and action, which ever appertayned
unto Christ only.

Published at the request of sundry godly and well disposed persons.

Imprinted at London by John Windet for John Perin, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's churchyard, at the sign of the Angel

A godly Sermon preached before the Queens most excellent Majesty, upon the
17. 18. 19. verses of the 16. Chapter of S. Matthewe.
Matthew. Chap. 16. verse. 17. 17 And Jesus answered, and said to him: Blessed art
thou Simon the son of Jonas: for flesh and blood has not reueiled it unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

18 And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not euercome it.

19 And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.


THese words which I have read (right honorable, and beloved in our Savior
Christ) contain the conclusion of a Dialogue, between Christ and his
disciples. For we read immediately before in the thirteenth verse of this
sixteenth Chapter, that when Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi:
our Savior Christ, partly to make trial of the faith, knowledge, and
profiting of his disciples: having been now so long taught by him, and seen so
great and wonderful miracles: and partly to learn whether they conceived any
better of him than the common multitude: as also to cause them to make a
confession of their faith and belief in him, in which he might strengthen and
confirm them against al troubles and persecutions that were after to ensue: he
demanded of them all, this question, whom do men say that I the son of man
am. Answer was made by them, that some said he was John Baptist, Matthew. 14.2.
for so surmised the Herodians, as apeareth in the 14. of this Gospel. Where it
is said, that when Herod the Tetrarch, who had beheaded John Baptist, heard of
the fame of Jesus, he said unto his servant, this is John Baptist, that is
risen again from the dead, and therefore great works are wrought by him. Some
said he was Elias, being deceived partly by the Prophecy of Malachie,
misvnderstoode, who had prophcied that Eliah the Prophet should be sent before
the coming of the great and fearful day of the Malach. 4.5.
Lord, partly, by the like spirit they perceived in Christ that was in Elias,
as the free liberty of rebuking vices in ye scribes and Pharisees, the power
of working miracles, raising up the dead to life again, as Elias did. Some
other thought him to be Hieremias because he bare a figure of Christ, and for
that it was said of him, Behold this day have I set thee over the nations,
and over the kingdoms, Ierem. 1.9.
to pluck up, and to root out, and to destroy and throw down, to build and
to plant: which was in very deed, truly to be performed in Christ. And they
that thought him none of these, yet because of his doctrine (for he taught them
as having authority, Matthew. 7.29.
not as the Scribes) and for his life and miracles they accounted him as one of
the Prophets. Christ hearing this, to draw out a more certain and excellent
confession out of his disciples than this was, he further demanded of them
all, but whom say ye that I am: as though he should have said, whatsoever
other men do think of me, or howsoever they be distract in opinions, you who
ought to have better knewledge of me, whom do ye think me to be. Then
answered Simon Peter in the name of all the rest: thou art Christ the son of
the living God. Christ rejoicing at this true perfect and constant confession
that Peter had made, as it were in recompense and commendation thereof, he burst
out into these words: Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and
blood has not reueiled it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven, etc.
Which words are even the conclusion of that Dialogue between Christ and his
disciples, and do contain the approbation and commendation of Peter's
confession. In the which many things do offer them selves to our
considerations, but for this present time and occasion, in these three verses,
three especial points may be here observed by us. The first from whence Peter
had this knowledge and faith of Christ, that he was the son of the living
God. Secondarily, what is the foundation and rock, whereupon the Church of God
was built. Thirdly, what the power, authority, and commission was, that is
given unto Peter in this place. The first point is declared in the first verse
of this text by two means, first by removing and denying those things, which
might seem to be the cause and yet are not, as flesh and blood. Secondarily,
by expressing the true and perfect cause, which was the revelation of Almighty
GOD. For the first, by flesh and blood is meant here, the nature of man, and
all his gifts that he has naturally, as his wit, understanding, and will: for
so it is taken in sundry other places of the holy Scriptures, as in ye first
of Saint John's Gospel, Joan. 1.12.
where he says that such as received Christ, they were borne not of blood nor
of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And in the first to
the Galathians, Galath. 1.1^
where he testifies, that when it pleased God to reveal his son in him,
that he should preach him among the Gentiles, he communicated not with flesh
and blood, and in like manner, in the sixth to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.12.
exhorting us to put on all the armor of God, that we might be able to stand
against the assaults of the devil, because we wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against principalities, and powers, etc. In which places as in
diverse others also, by flesh and blood is meant nothing but the nature of man,
and whatsoever is in him by his natural birth and procreation, so that this
phrase and manner of speech used of our Savior Christ here in this place does
signify and declare unto us, that this knowledge of Christ, and confession of
faith, which Peter made, he had it not of himself, neither by any means of
man, but from above, by the manifestation and revelation of God, who had opened
this great mystery, and given him this faith. This doctrine overthrows the
judgment and opinion of the Heathen Philosophers, Pelagian heretics, and of
the church of Rome, who wholly or in part ascribe the cause of all knowledge
of God, of our faith, of the good works we do, either to the light of nature,
force of reason, or free will and industry of man, contrary not only to this
testimony of Christ here in this place, which depriueth man of all knowledge
of Christ, but also unto the whole tenor of the Scripture in other places,
where both generally and in particular sort, is taken away al understanding
and perceuerance, in matters appertaing unto faith, religion, and the true
knowledge of God. First, for proof hereof, that it is generally denied unto
man of himself, or by the reach of his own wit and understanding to attain
to the knowledge of Christ, and those things which appertain to the kingdom
of God, what can be more plain then that Paul testifies to the contrary in
the first of the Corinthes, 1. Cor. 2.
and the second Chapter, that (...). The natural man is not able to perceive
the things of the spirit of God. The natural man, that is the man that has
no farther knowledge then he has by the light of nature, whose knowledge, and
judgment is not lightened and cleared by the spirit of God (for so is this
term expounded by Jude in his Epistle, in the 19. verse Jude. 19. v.
) that that man perceives not these things which appertain unto the spirit
of God, For proof hereof he adioyneth two reasons, the one is because
spiritual things are foolishness unto him: the other, that he cannot know
those things, because they are spiritually discerned, that is they cannot be
known but of them that are endewed with the spirit of God. For as Paul
testifies, 1. Cor. 2.11.
as no man knows the things of man, save the Spirit of a man which is
within him: even so the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God,
and therefore in the same Chapter he shows, verse. 9.
that those things which God has prepared for them that love him, are such as
eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither yet has entered into the mind
of man, so that neither by the outward senses, nor yet by the understanding of
man, we are able to conceive the things of God, but it is the spirit of God
which opens them unto us, which searches all things, yea the bottom of Gods
secrets. 1. Cor. 2.10.
In respect of this great ignorance in us, and want of power and ability to
perceive, the mysteries of Gods kingdom and of our salvation, the holy Ghost
has by most notable terms and Epithetes, whereby he describes the nature of
man, declared unto us, how utterly we be void of all knowledge and judgment
in spiritual matters. What can more effectually, and significantly, show
forth that unto us, then for us to be termed darkness it self, which is don
not in a few places of the holy Scriptures, as in the first of Saint John's
Gospel, where it is said, that that life which was the light of man shined in
darkness, John. 1.5.
but darkness was not able to comprehend it that was man. Saint Paul thereof
draws an exhortation in his Epistle to the Ephesians Ephesians. 5 8.
to persuade the^ unto newness of life, that forasmuch as they were sometime
in darkness, meaning before their conversion, and receiving of the Gospel of
Christ, now being light, being illuminated by the spirit of God through the
preaching of his word, therefore they should walk as the children of light.
And in the second to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 4.6.
setting forth the power and efficacy of the word he sets down, that as
God in the creation of the world, commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, so has he shined in the hearts of his ministers, to give the light
of the knowledge of the glory of god in the face of Jesus Christ. Where the
comparison is to be noted, which the Apostle makes, that as God in the
beginning of the world, created light out of darkness, so has he done in the
hearts of his ministers, that by the preaching of the Gospel, that light might
shine to others to lighten them, that they might see the glory of God in
Christ. Wherefore even as before God said: Let there be light, there was no
light, but mere darkness, even so before God work in us by his word and
spirit, there is nothing in us, but mere ignorance and darkness, no light
to behold the glory of God in Christ. No marvel therefore if Saint Paul
being called to preach the Gospel do tell Agrippa the King, Act. 26.18.
that God has called him to open their eyes, that they may turn from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, or if Saint Peter
compare the doctrine of the Prophets as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, 2. Pet. 1.19.
and compare the preaching of the Gospel unto the dawning of the day, and the
day star arising in our hearts. Hereby may it appear, what we ought to
judge of our selves to be nothing but ignorance and darkness, to be void of
all light and knowledge of Christ, until by the working of his spirit he
opens him self unto us. Before which time as Paul testifies, we walk as
the Gentiles in ye vanity of our mind, Ephesians. 4.17.
having our understanding darkened, being stranger from the life of God,
thorough the ignorance in us, because of the hardness of our hearts. Thus
uses the Spirit of God, to paynt out the estate of man, before God begins
to work our regeneration to ascribe ignorance and blindness unto our minds,
dullness and hardness unto our hearts, yea, and that a stony hardness, as
appears by Ezechiel, Ezech. 11.19
where he promises that in mercy he will take away our stony hearts. And
under the person of the Jews Esaye Esa. 48.4.
says, that we are all obstinate, that our necks are as Iron sinews and
our brows as brows of brass, that is not flexible unto the yoke of Gods
commandments, and past all shame to commit wickedness. Therefore the holy
Ghost, describing the corruption of our nature does term us not only sick,
weakened or infected with sin, but even to be dead in sin. For so Paul to
the Ephesians, where he sets out the grace of Christ, Ephesians. 2.1.
affirms that he has quickened us that were dead in trespasses and sins.

And in like manner, in the second to the Colossians: 2. Coloss 13
that us which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of our flesh,
has he quickened together with him forgiving our trespasses. These manner of
terms and epithetes, whereby it has pleased God in his holy word, to
express both the utter want of knowledge, in matters of faith, and the
corruption of our minds and manners is diligently to be observed by us, by
reason of the doctrine of the Romish clergy, who although they teach, that
Adam through his fall, lost part of that excellent knowledge of pure and
heavenly things wherewith he was endewed at his first creation, and was
greatly wounded both in mind and will thorough his disobedience, and that now
he is not able to perceive and do these things which God commands him to
understand and practice without the help of God: yet do they not ascribe that
whole ignorance and blindness unto the mind of man, neither yet that deadly
wound of sin, whereby all power and ability to attain either to the
knowledge of God, or practice of righteousness, is taken from us, which by these
titles of right they ought. Our light with them in heavenly matters is in some
part darkened, but not clean put out, our understanding diminished, but not
extinguished, the image of God, it was appaired, but not utterly defaced, the
free will of man to good, it was wounded and weakened, but not quite taken
away. But further we say, that our knowldge is become plain ignorance, our
light, darkness, our righteousness sinfulness, our liberty and freedom,
servitude and bondage, the image of God, the image of Satan, that we are not
only deprived of all goodness, but further defiled with all naughtiness,
that our former power and ability was not only shaken and weakened through
the fall of our first parents, but that we are utterly become unable and
impotent, to know or do any good thing, and of all ability and readiness to
commit all sin and wickedness. Most just then and true is that accusation
wherewith Paul charge all mankind in general, Romans 3.10.
that there is none righteous no not one, that there is none that understands
none that seeks God, that all are gone out of the way, that we are become
altogether abominable, that there is none that does good, no not one, our
mouth to be as an open sepulcher, our tongues to be used to deceit, the poison
of aspes to be under our lips, our mouth to be full of cursing and
bitterness, our feet to be swift to shed blood, nothing but calamity and
destruction to be in our ways, that we know not the way of peace, no fear
of God to be before our eyes. Thus it is apparent what the Apostle S. Paul
thought both of Jew and Gentile, and in them of all men considered in himself,
to be corrupt abominable without understanding, and thereof he concludes he
could not be justified by the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ. So that
evident it is, saving to him that will not know how the spirit of God has in
general most plainly and ple^tifully deprived the whole progeny of man of all
knowledge of God (...) all goodness, yea of all ability to attain thereunto,
yet for our further assurance herein, and that this thing may be yet more
manifest and clear unto us, the holy ghost has not only in this general
sort, as I say in the beginning taught this doctrine, but has even in
particular so denied that unto us, as it cannot but compel every man to
confess the truth thereof. For to the obtaining or doing of any thing there be
three things requisite, the mind to think and conceive it, the will to
atchiue it, and the execution thereof. And if any of these points be wanting,
what can be performed or done by us, but neither to do, nor to will, neither
yet to think, lies in our power, how far are we therefore from having power
or ability, either to come to the knowledge of Christ, or to do any good
thing. The first, Christ himself witnesses in the first of John, Joan. 15.5.
Sine me nihil potestis facere, without me ye are able to do nothing. Saint
Augustine August. in Joan.
weighs and presses these words notably: Non enim (inquit) sine me
difficulter potestis etc. Christ says Austine: says, not without me ye can
hardly do any thing, neither said he without me ye cannot absolve, or finish
any thing, or do any matter of great weight, but he says simply without me
ye can do nothing. The power therefore to do any thing is flatly denied man in
this place by the judgment of that ancient and learned father. In like manner
to will any thing, lies not in us, but it comes by the operation and working
of Gods spirit. So testifies the Apostle Paul in the second to the
Philippians, Philip, 2.13.
it is God which works in us both the will and the deed, and that even of
his good pleasure, that is of his mere mercy and good will toward us. If by
the gifts and power of nature we were able to do this, the Apostle would not
ascribe it to the particular operation of God, especially in them that be
justified. But yet further what seems more free and at our liberty then
thought, yea, eue^ that also is denied us, for to think any good thing, lies
not in us. So says the Apostle Paul in the second to the Corinths: ^. Cor.
3.5.
We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but
all our sufficiency is of God. Wherefore, if both in general sort, the
scripture thus determines the natural man to be nothing but darkness, that
in him there is no understanding, that his heart is as hard as a stone, that of
himself he is dead in sin and unrighteousness, that he is not able to
perceive those things, which appertain to the spirit of God, that they cannot
once enter into his heart or mind: but also in particular sort does deny him
the power to do, to will, or to think any thing, we may well conclude against
the Philosophers, Pelagians, and Papists with our Savior Christ, that flesh
and blood has not reueiled either to Peter, or to any other of the children of
God, neither yet can do, either in whole or in part, that Christ is the living
God, which confession contains the sum of Christian religion. What then is
the true and perfect cause of this knowledge, whenever we attain thereunto,
that is expressed also unto us by Christ in ye Evangelist, to be God, who
opens and reuealeth this unto us: for as he denies it to flesh and blood,
so does he ascribe the cause thereof to his Father which is in Heaven. For
confirmation whereof although many, I may say infinite testimonies may be
brought out of the holy Scriptures, yet for that the declaration of the former
point, has been the proof of this in so clear a matter, it shall be
sufficient to auouche one or two manifest places, for the further establishing
thereof. Among other, that which is said by Ezechiel, must needs most
manifestly, and clearly declare and prove this point. For the Prophet showing
what great mercies and benefits he would bestow upon his people, he promises
a new heart will I give you, a new spirit will I put within you, and I will
take the stony heart out of your body, and will give you an heart of flesh.
And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall eepe my judgments and do them. Ezech. 36, 26
In which words Ezechiel attributes the whole work of our regeneration unto
the gift of God, he it is that takes away that old and stony heart, whereby
we are given to all iniquity, and hardness from giving ear unto any
commandment of God, and he gives a new heart, an heart of flesh, whereby we
become apt to receive the commandments of God, and a new spirit, which
leads us, both to the knowledge of the will of God, and to the obedience
thereof. Likewise Moses in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 36.6.
setting forth the great goodness of God to his people Israel, he ascribes
the circumcision of the heart to the operation and working of the Lord. For
God promises, that if they return unto him, and obey his voice, the Lord God
shall circumcise their hearts, and the heart of their seed after them, that
they may love the Lord their God with all their heart, with all their soul.
And to conclude this matter which needs no further proof, that which ye
Evangelist Saint John writes in the first of his Gospel, Joan. 1.12.
how iumpeth it with this that our Evangelist affirms here, and how
evidently does it confirm both those points we have hereto stood upon,
where he assereth that such as received Christ and believed in his name, were
borne not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man but of God.
By which words both the knowledge of Christ, and the believing in his name is
denied to man, and given to God alone. The very word (...) used here of our
Evangelist, being well weyed does sufficiently argue, that all heavenly things
are hid from us, until they be opened and manifested by God. For this word
being attributed unto God, does signify a revealing by him of such things as
were quite before hidden from our knowledge and understanding. Now if this
general doctrine shall be proved by particular example, Deuteronomy. 29.30.
what can be required for the further certainty and truth hereof. Moses in the
29. of Deuteronomy. obbraideth ye people of Israel for their obliuio^ and forgetfulness
of the graces and mercies god had showed them in the land of Egypt, yet
therwithal he there notes, that they could not take any profit by these things
but thorough the working and goodness of God. Ye have seen, says Moses, all that
the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt, unto Pharao and unto al
his servants, and unto al his land. The great temptations which thine eyes have
seen those great miracles and wonders, yet the Lord has not given you an
heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. And in ye
13. of Math. Christ having taught many things by parables, his disciples came
to him and demanded why he spoke thus in parables, he made answer, Mat. 13.30.
because it is given to you, to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but
to them it is not given, therefore speak I unto the^ in parables because they
seeing do not see, and hearing they hear not, neither understand etc. Thus we
see how ye people of Israel although they saw ye great wonders and miracles,
which God did for them in Egypt, notwithstanding they reap no commodity
thereby, because the Lord did not open their eyes to behold them to profit,
neither yet their ears to attend unto such things, or their heart and mind to
conceive the goodness of God, and obedience and thankfulness, which they ought to
perform unto God therefore. The disciples of Christ, they understood the
doctrine of Christ, they profited and increased in knowledge thereby, but why or
by what means? because to them it was given to know the secrets of the
kingdom of God. The Jews they were not able to perceive the doctrine of
Christ, they learned nothing thereby, but rather be came more blind and
obstinate, the reason is added, because to them it is not given. So that it
wholly depends upon the gift of God. Cleophas and the other disciple in the
24. Chapter of Luke, Luc. 24.27.45.
when Christ ouertooke them going to Emaus, although Christ rebuked them for
their slowenesse in believing all that the Prophets had spoken. And
accompanying them began at Moses and the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in
all the Scriptures the things which were written of him, yet were their eyes
so holden that they knew him not, whom before they had often seen, neither
yet understood they the Scriptures until such time as God opened their eyes
and understanding both to know him and understand the Scripture. Even as the
disciples of our Savior Christ had no knowledge, no understanding until God
gave it them: so fares it with all the rest of the children of God, hear they
never so much his Apostles preach, yea, Christ himself personally sounding in
their ears: yet except the Lord open our hearts and minds, as he did Lydia
the sick woman's in the Acts, Act. 16.14.
it avails not one jot, wherefore flesh and blood reuealeth not Christ unto
us, but our Father which is in heaven. It remains now we weight and
consider, what commodity and profit we ought to reap by this doctrine, and
to what use it ought to serve us. First, if God be the author and fountain
and sole giver of all knowledge, faith and all other heavenly gifts, it must
kindle in us, an earnest and fervent desire to prayer, to desire him to give us
knowledge and faith, and understanding, for that otherwise we cannot attain
thereunto. The consideration of this heretofore, has moved the saints of God,
to be feruente in prayer unto almighty God for the obtaining of these graces.
Among others, how often and how vehemently does the Prophet David pray for
this at Gods hands, as in the 119 Psalm. Psalm. 1 19, 18.27, 33, 34, 35, 36.
Open thou mine eyes O Lord, that I may see the wondrous things of thy law,
make me to understand the way of thy commandments, so shall I talk of thy
wondrous works. And again: Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I
shall keep it unto the end, give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law,
make me to go into the path of thy commandments, incline my heart to thy
testimonies, etc. and in the 51. Psalm, Psalm. 51.
that God would make him a clean heart, and renew a right spirit with in him,
that he would thoroughly wash him and cleanse him from his sin. And the Apostle
S. Paul prays not only for himself, but for the Church of the Ephesians,
Ephe. 1.16, 17.18.
that the GOD of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory might yield unto
them the spirit of wisdom and understanding, through the knowledge of him
that the eyes of their understanding may be lightened, that they may know
the hope of his calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in
the Saints. These things as the opening of the eyes, the understanding of the
way of Gods commandments, the making us to go in the path of them, the
creating of a clean heart, the renewing of a right spirit, the clensing of
sin, the inclination of our hearts to his testimonies, they would not have
craved so constantlye at Gods hand, by earnest and humble prayer if they had
not been persuaded they came only from him, to be his mere gifts.
Secondlye, as the meditation of this ought to make us to pray to obtain, so
having atteyned by his goodness to any of these benefits, it should excite
us also to thankfulness after the example of all Gods Children, and of our
Savior Christ, who gives thanks to his father Lord of heaven and earth,
Mat. 11.20
because he had hid his gospel from the wise and men of understanding, and had
opened it to babes. Thirdelye having received any light of knowledge and
graces of GOD, we must have a great care in using them to increase his gifts
in us, to provoke God through our thankfulness to bestow his mercyes in
most humble manner upon us. Mat. 13.12.
For whosoever has, to him shall be given, but whosoever has not, from him
shall be taken away, even that which he has, it cannot, neither ought it
to engender sloothfulnesse in us, because GOD gives and works all in all:
for most true and excellent is that warning which Saint Augustine gives in
his Book De correptione and gratia. Aug. de Correptio: and gratia. cap. 2.
Non se itaque fallant qui dicunt, vt quid nobis predicatur, etc. That is: Let
not (says Augustine) them deceive themselves, who say, Wherefore is it
preached and taught us, to eschew evil, and to do good, if we do it not,
but it be GOD which works in us, both the will and the deed, but rather let
the faithful know that they are led with the spirit of God, that they may do,
that they ought to do, and when they have done it, they may give thanks to him
that caused them, for they are driven to the end they should endeavor to
work, not that they should do nothing themselves. Fourthly, and last of all
this puts us in mind of our own want and imperfection of our blindness
and ignorance, whereby we are driven to acknowledge our own miserye, to humble
our selves before the Lord, to praise God in his gifts, we see in our
brother, and not to contemn and despise them whom we see to want, nor to be
proud and lofty for any thing in us, but to give the whole praise and glory
to God alone. Thus notes Augustine very well in his book De bono
perseuerantiae. Cap. 63 and 6, Nos volumus, sed Deus operatur in nobis velle,
August. de bono perscuerantiae. cap. ^3 and 6
nos operamur, sed Deus operatur in nobis, etc. that is: We will, but God
works in us to will, we do, but God works in us the deed after his good
pleasure, this is profitable for us to believe and to say, that is godly and
true, that our confession may be humble and lowly, and the whole may be given
to God, and in his sixte chapter of the same book he says, Tutiores viuimus
si totum Deo damus, non autem nos illi ex part, and nobis ex part
committimus, we live or deal the safelier if we give the whole to God, and
not partlye to him, and partly to our selves. The Apostle S. Paul hereof
beats down the pride and vainglorye of the Corinthian Doctors in that
whatsoever they had they had received it of God. For so he reasons, 1. Cor.
4, 7.
What have thou that thou have not received, if thou have received, why
reioycest thou as though thou had not received it? If the knowledge of this
doctrine, work these effects in us, then shall we have learned this lesson,
that Christ here teaches us, to good purpose otherwise it shall avail us no
more then to see the meat whereof we may not feed, shall nourish our bodies,
or to behold the gold which we may not use, shall serve our turn. To conclude,
on this part one only caveat is to be given, that we take heed, that we
abuse not this doctrine and manner of speech, as the Euthusiasts, Anabaptists,
and the family of Love, to the contemning or neglecting of the preaching of the
word of God, who for as much as here and in diverse places besides, it is
said that God reuealeth the mysteries of his kingdom unto us, and works all
things by his holy spirit, thereof have they condemned the vocal preaching of
the word, and have fled to private inspirations, and reuelatio^s, dreams, and
fantasies, whereby they have been lead into diverse dangerous heresies. But we
must this learn and understand, that although god reueleth his will unto us, and
works both knowledge and faith by his holy spirit, yet does he it not, but
by that means he has appointed, that is by the ministry of his word, and
therefore Esai Esai. 59.21.
the Prophet ioineth in the promise of God made, both the word and the spirit
together. My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of
ye seed of thy seed (says the Lord) from henceforth for ever. Where we see he
joins both ye word and the spirit together, they are not to be sundered. The
Apostle Paul plainly teaches to the Romans, Romans 10.14.17.
that no man can believe in him of whom he has not heard, and that they
cannot hear without a preacher, that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. And in the 4 to the Ephesians, Ephe 4.10.
he testifies, that when Christ ascended up into heaven, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men, that he therefore gave some to be Apostles,
some prophets, and some Evangelists, and some pastors, and teachers, to what
end? he expresses it to yt gathering together of the saints, for ye work of
the ministry, and for ye building up of the body of Christ. If belief and
faith in him cannot come but by hearing the word of god preached, and his
ministers in his church be appointed by him, that the saints might have all
things necessary to the edifying of the body of Christ, what impiety is in
these Anabaptisticall spirits either to condemn or neglect this so excellent
not only an instrument, but even the sole ordinarye means God has appointed
to his church, to work our salvation. Paul in the 5 to the Thessalonians, These.
5.19.
gives warning that we quench not the spirit, but therewithal he joins yt we
despise not prophesying, he himself though he was rapte up unto the third
Heaven, where he heard words which cannot be spoken, 2. Cor. 12.2.
which are not possible for man to utter, yet did he not therefore broche any
new revelations or dreams, but confirmed his doctrine by the testimony of the
law and the Prophets. He exhorts his scholar Timothy 1. Tim. 4.13.
to give attendance unto reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, to learning, and
to continue therein to save himself and them that should hear him. God
revealed unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, that he was the son of the
living God, but by preaching so unto Cleophas and the other Disciple going to
Emaus, Luc. 24.45.
expounding the Law and the Prophets, he opened the doctrine of his passion.
God opened the heart of Lidia, converted her unto Christianity, but by Paul's
ministry. Wherefore although God reuealeth all things, Act. 16.14.
yet is not the spirit to be severed from the word, neither yet the word from
the spirit, God does use both these instruments jointly. And thus much for the
first part.

The second point I said we had to consider was, what the foundation and rock
is, whereupon the Church of God is builte for that is expressed in the 18
verse. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not overcome it. Concerning the true meaning and sense of
these words, what it is that Christ appoints to be that rock, whereupon he
will build his Church, there is no small variance between us and the church of
Rome. We according to the tenor of the rest of the scriptures, and circumstance
of the place affirm, that Christ by this word Petra a Rock, means that
which Peter confessed, which was Christ himself. But the Popish Clergy
to establishe the authority of the Bishop of Rome, and his superiority, power
and dominion over all other churches, has applied this saying of our Savior
Christ unto Peter alone, making him that Rock, whereof Christ here speaks,
against which the gates of Hell cannot prevail, affyrming that Christ in this
place has given by these words a certain chiefetie and pre-eminence to Peter
above all other Apostles, and made him the foundation and head of his church
here in earth and his vicar general for the gouernmente thereof, enduing him
with especial power and authority above all others. Which exposition as also
Article of Religion, to be most untrue being the main post of their
religion, and such an Article of faith, the which who believes not, (as they
say) cannot be saved, and this place being used of them all, especially
above all others, as the cheifest for the confirmation of the Supremacye, and
authority of the Bishop of Rome: it shall not be amiss, being apparante
since this Progress, that howsoever this Doctrine has been heretofore
beaten down, that notwithstanding it remains rooted in many men's minds, it
shall be expedient to show and declare this their interpretation to be
erroneous, and their collection vain and frivolous. Which I will do first by
the very words and circumstaunce of the place. Secondly by that, this their
exposition is contrary to the express words of the Scripture, and rules of
Faith. Thirdely, by the opinion and practice of the Apostles. And last of all
by the judgment, and interpretation of the ancient and learned Fathers, and
practice of their age. First, that even the very words of the Text do
argue, that when Christ says upon this Rock I will build my Church, by this
word Petra a Rock, he means not the person of Peter the Apostle, but that
which Peter confessed, which was Christ it may appear by this in that it
pleased the holy Ghost, the Evangelist should alter and change the name
(...) into (...) when as he might have used the self same word to express
that their meaning to make Peter the Rock whereupon he would build his church,
for although the word (...) and (...) do agree in signification, in that both
of them by interpretation does signifi a stone or rock: yet the alteration and
change of ye word in propriety of speech and termination in gender, and in
construction of person does import that the holy ghost by these diverse words
would mean a diverse thing. For the one word (...) is nomen atticum, after the
propriety of the Attike tongue, the other (...) is nomen communis linguae,
after ye propriety of ye vulgar tongue, the one word is the masculine gender,
the other the feminine, the person in co^truction differs, for from the
second person he goes to the third, he says not (...), upon thee Peter, but
(...) upon this rock By this variety and change it is plain the Evangelist
meant to express some diverse thing, otherwise it needed not to have made any
alteration at all, there is no doubt therefore but the holy ghost upon
purpose, did alter and change the word (...) into (...) even to avoid that
error that might be gathered thereof, if Christ would have taught us in
this place so weightye an Article of our Faith, as that is, (as they make it,)
that Peter must be the Head of the Church, upon whom except we be
builte we cannot be saved, he would not in declaration thereof, so have
varied from his ordinary name he gave him, seeing it might so well have
served the turn, and by which he might plainly have declared this ground
of Faith. Wherefore by the word (...) is meante not the Person of Peter, but
Christ, whom Peter confessed and believed on. For which cause Peter
immediatelye before in the former verse, was pronounced blessed by our savior
Christ, for that GOD had opened and revealed unto him, that Christ was the
son of the living GOD, and further for the knowledge and belief hereof, he
did not only term him blessed, but he also gave him another name, that
whereas before he was called Simon Bar Iona, he should now be named (...),
that is a Rock, according as he had promised in the first of John, because
he knew and believed in the Rock, upon which not only he, but the whole
Church of GOD should be builte. For he was so named of Christ, not because
he should be Petra the rock, whereupon the Congregation of God should be
builded, but he was called (...) because he was builte upon that Rock
whereon the Church should be founded. Petra which is the Rock (as Augustine
August. sermon. 21. de verbo domini.
says) has not his name of Peter, but Peter of Petra the Rock, as Christ
has not his name of a Christian, but a Christian of Christ, Ierom in 8. Math.
and Saint Jerome affirms that Peter had his name of Petra, which is
Christ, which name agrees not only to the person of Peter, but unto all
Christians and faithful people, which believe in this Rock, and hold the same
faith and confession Peter did. Whosoever confesses and believes that Christ
is the son of the living God, as he did, is a Peter. Therefore Jerome upon the
sixth of Amos, Ierom in 6. Amos. Origin. tract. 1. in Math.
terms al Christ's Apostles Peter's: And Origin plainly testifies, that if we
affirm and confess that Christ is the son of the living God as Peter did,
then are we Peter's, and shall obtain the same felicity that he has obtained
because our confession and belief is al one, and again in the same place, if
we confess Christ to be the son of the living god, the father revealing it
unto us, it shall be said of each one of us, thou art Peter, and upon thee will
I build my congregation, every man is Petra a Rock, that is, a follower of
Christ. Thus much Origin, By whom it is plain that Peter was so named
because of the Rock he believed in, not for that he was to be the foundation
of the church: and that also, that name to be termed a rock is not agreeable
to Peter alone, but unto all the faithful, and no marvel, for it is an
usual thing for the properties of Christ to be attributed to all his
children, as christ is called a stone, so are his people and servants named
lyuelye stones by participation, as they are the light of the world, and
salt of the earth, because the salt and light that they have is derived and
proceeds from him. And as we are called righteous, because christ is our
righteousness and wisdom, so are we termed Rocks because by him we are so
made, being the true, perfect and sound Rock. Wherefore if Peter be
pronounced blessed, only because of the confession he made, and that his name
was changed from Simon unto Peter, for that cause alone, and that his name
agrees to all christians, who hold and make the same confession he did, as
well as unto him, then is it apparante by the order and Sequel of the Text,
and truth of the matter, that the Rock whereon christ will build his
church, is not the person of Peter, no more then it is the person of any
other Apostle, but that whereby both Peter, and other faithful, shall be come
both blessed and Peter's. For if we mark the order and course of the Dialogue
between Christ, and his Disciples first we may observe, that the Question is
propounded not to Peter alone, but generallye unto all, whom do ye say that
I am. And again, Christ demanded not what they thought of Peter, but what
they thought of him, so that in ye respect we cannot imagine any especial
thing meant, and intended toward Peter more the^ any other. For in that he made
answer alone, that was in the person of them all, to avoid confusion and
declare unity, Cyprianus de simpli. praelat. August. sermon. 21. de verbo domini.
as Ciprian says, he was but their mouth, So also Austin says Petrus saepe
vnus respondit pro omnibus, etc. Peter oftentimes made answer for all, the
Lord asking and saying whom say ye that I am, Peter answered, Thou art the
son of the living god, he only gave answer for many, to declare unity in
many. And what was the confession of Peter, it was that Christ was the son of
the living God, this confession was approved and commended of Christ, not the
person of Peter, but in respect of the confession, herewithall if we mark
what happened immediately after the conclusion of the dialogue unto Peter,
nothing can be more plain than that Peter cannot be that rock whereupon God
will build his Church, for that rock must be such against which the gates of
hell can not prevail, how can Peter then be that foundation, who immediately
after this confession fell so grievously, that he was termed of our Savior
Christ, Satan. For Peter diswading him from going up to Jerusalem, to
accomplish the work of our redemption, he said unto him, away from me Satan,
thou sauourest not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men.
And afterward he denied and abiured his Master, he was far therefore from
being that immovable rock, which could not be shaken, such an one against
which the gates of hell could not prevail, so then to conclude this point, if
the change and alteration of the word and construction may argue the meaning of
a diverse thing, when otherwise the self same word might have better and
plainlyer declared that so weighty and necessary an article of our faith, as
they make that is of Peter's supremacy, if the blessedness of Peter and the
name be obtained of Christ, and that the same be not only proper to Peter, but
unto all who shall in like manner lay hold upon that rock and profess the
same faith, if the whole course of the dialogue be directed not to know Peter's
opinion alone, but of them all, what they thought, not of Peter, but of our
Savior Christ, and to confirm them in that firm and steadfast faith, they had
in him against all troubles and persecutions, that should after ensue, and with
all to have a public testimony of them all, that they had a better and truer
opinion of him, then the common multitude, if the rock whereon Gods Church must
be founded, must be such an one as cannot be shaken by any force and subtlety
of Satan, and Peter as has appeared, was so weakened at diverse times, that he
was overcome almost for ever. I may well say, that even the words, and
circumstance of the place, does euict that Peter is not made that petra the
rock upon the which the Church is to be built. But yet that this may be
further out of doubt, if we well weigh the assertion of our Romish Catholics,
we shall find it to be contrary to the express words of the Scripture, and
the doctrine of the holy Ghost in other places, yea, and to the analogy and
rules of faith. Saint Paul in the 1. to the Corinthians, 1. Cor.
finding fault with the Corinthians, who were divided by choosing to themselves
sundry doctors and teachers, whom they would hear and follow. Some saying I
am Paul's, another, I am Apollos, another, I am Cephas, and the fourth, I am
Christ's, he flatly sets down, 1. Cor. 3.11.
that fundamentum aliud nemo ponere potest, preter id quod positum est, Iesum
Christum. Other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ. If only Christ be the foundation and no other: If neither Paul,
nor Apollo, nor Cephas, ought to be so accounted, how can they challenge this
prerogative unto Peter, being denied so expressly unto him or unto any other.
Paul affirms, Ephesians. 1.22.
that GOD had made all things subject under Christ's feet, and appointed him
above all things the head of the Church, which is his body, and of what kind
of body that he declares also in the fifth of the same Epistle, of his flesh
and his bones, for says he, Christ nourishes and cherishes his Church, Ephe.
5.30.
because we are members of his body, flesh and bones, wherefore if the Church
be the body of Christ, and God has appointed Christ to be the head thereof,
and that head be of the same nature and substance, of the same flesh and bone,
the rest of the body is: what cause is there to make any other head, except we
should think either that one head not to be sufficient to give life, and to
rule the body, or to be too mighty and of too great rule and authority, and
therefore do adioyne another thereunto, as when two Consuls or Caesares be
created of one place, the one to abridge ye others power and might. But neither
of these inconveniences can be feared in Christ, and therefore we need not to
assign another head to his body. Besides the head of ye Church is that part
of the body which gives life, nourishes and augmenteth the whole body of
the faithful unto eternal life, but who does or can perform this but only
Christ? even as a man cherishes his own flesh, so nourishes he the Church
which consists of his own flesh and bone as the Apostle Paul testifies, he
therefore is the only head. There is the same reason between Christ and his
church, that is between man and wife, as the same Apostle testifies, for as
the husband is the wives head, so Christ is the head of the church, as the
church is in subjection to Christ: so the wives to their husbands. As Christ
loved his church, so wives their husbands. As wives are their husbands flesh:
so is the church the flesh of Christ. So that then, he that is the head of the
church is the husband and spouse thereof. For, therefore he is the head because
he is the husband, but there is but one husband therefore whosoever shall make
any other head of the church then Christ, must also make another husband, if
another husband, then an adulterer and the church an harlot, for one wife
cannot have two bridegromes or husbands, Paul says of the Corinthians, I have
prepared you for one husband, to present you a pure virgin to Christ, and John
Baptist in the Evangelist John says, he is the bridegroom and his Apostles be
the only ministers and frinds of ye bridegroom, they are only the makers of the
marriage between Christ and his church. How can Peter then be accounted as the
head of Gods church, Christ himself being the head and the husband thereof?
Let him therefore be esteemed as a minister, and frinde of the spouse, as
Christ himself has termed him and all the rest of the Apostles, and no
further. And surely it is not lightly to be regarded, that after Christ had
said to Peter, thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church,
whereby they would establish a chiefetie and pre-eminence given him over all
other the Apostles and congregation of God, arising this controversy among
them, which of them should be the greatest, and that even then, when he was
ready to go to suffer, and depart from them, supposing (as it should seem)
after the departure of Christ, some one of them should be chief, and bear rule
over the rest: even then our Savior Christ beats down utterly, that
conceit and imagination of theirs, showing that rule and soueraintie belongs
unto Kings and Princes. The Kings of the Gentiles they reign, they bear rule,
they are called gracious Lords. But ye shall not be so, it shall not be so among
you, whosoever will be the chief among you, let him be your servant, and he
sets himself an example before them, that he came not to have service done
unto him, but to serve, and to give his life for the redemption of many. Hereby
although it were the especial purpose of our Savior Christ to take away that
ambition which reigned in his disciples by reason they dreamed to obtain by
him an earthly and terrestrial kingdom, notwithstanding being so often
occasioned to declare thorough their desire of soueraintie and rule, and
especially before his death and passion, whom after his death he would leave
his deputy and vicegerent of whom they should depend and be governed, it may
give just occasion to think, that as when he was conversant with them in
flesh, he would not give any supremacy or pre-eminence to any one more than to
another, but made them all equal, so also after his ascension he would have
them so continue, especially the reason of Christ being such as is appliable to
the whole course of this life. This strife and contention would not have risen,
if they had known at any time Christ had appointed Peter their chief and
governor, or else might easily have been ended, if answer had been made by
Christ, that Peter was he who should be in his stead after his death. But what
if this doctrine of theirs be contrary to the grounds of our faith, shall we
think then their interpretation to be true, if Peter be the rock whereon the
church is to be built, then must the church also believe in Peter, for the
church cannot be built but by faith and belief, but to believe in Peter is to
ascribe that to the creature, which only is to be yielded unto the creator,
and therefore it cannot want great impiety to give this unto Peter which they
do. Besides the church of God contains the whole company of the faithful,
even from the beginning of the world unto the end, why then if Peter be the
rock of the whole and universal church of Christ, then must the faithful
that were before Peter was born be founded upon Peter and depend on him as
their head, but to affirm that, I think cannot want absurdity, therefore
except you will make even the visible church of God to have had many visible
heads, this their assertion must prove but a vain imagination. If we further
call to mind that which Paul writes of Peter, that he was the Apostle of the
Jews only, and Paul himself the Apostle of the Gentiles, can Peter be
accounted the foundation and head of the universal church, when as to preach
unto the Gentiles belonged not to him? this reason drives Cardinal Poole into
such streightes, that whereas other of his adherents say, Peter was appointed
head of the church here, other immediately after his resurrection, he is
compelled to say, that Peter's supremacy took no place before Paul's
conversion, for that before that Peter could not represent the person of
Christ, and leave twelve Apostles to figure unto us the twelve tribes of
Israel. Wherefore these things being well weighed together, first, that the
Apostle flatly sets down that no man can, or ought to lay any other
foundation then Christ himself, the Corinthians seeking especially to depend
upon some one principally, as their chief teacher, I denying it to be
lawful for them to depend upon Cephas himself, who was Peter. Secondly,
assigning Christ the head, the husband of his body the church, his spouse, his
wife, in which things there can be no communion or fellowship. Further, this
controversy arising so often among his disciples, who should be the chiefest,
and our Savior Christ denying all superiority at all times to any of them,
neither yet giving any signification that Peter should be their chief, no not
after his death, and this their interpretation being such as causes to give
that unto man which is proper to GOD alone, as faith and belief, and to make
diverse bodies, diverse churches, diverse heads, diverse foundations, when the
holy Ghost appoints but one Church, one head, one foundation, and last of
all the Holy Ghost assigning unto Peter, the ministry of circumcision
only, we may justly affirm the exposition of our Romish Clergy, to be
contrary to the express word of GOD and rules of our faith.

I am not ignorant here of their blind subtilties and distinctions, whereby
they would shift of the force of these reasons, in making Christ natiuum and
reale fundamentum: The natural and substantial foundation, but Peter
ministeriale fundamentum, the ministerial foundation here in earth: that is,
that the ministry and office of Peter is appointed of GOD above the function
of all the other Apostles, to be that ministry whereby he will build his
universal Church, and govern it: upon whom, and of whom all other
Churches must hang and depend. Which assertion to be most untrue, that any
principal authority, either for the buylding up of the Church, or government
thereof, was by this place or any other committed unto Peter above the other
Apostles, it may appear by this that none of the Apostles, either in their
writings or doings, has ever acknowledged any such thing, but the contrary,
accounting him but equal to others, giving him no pre-eminence above his
fellows. For proof hereof, what can be more manifest, than that Paul writes
to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.19.
where the Apostle of purpose speaking of the building of the Church, and their
Apostolical function, says, that now they were no more strangers and
forrenners, but citizens with the Saints, and of the household of GOD, and
that they were buylt upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the head corner stone. By this word foundation in this
place, he means undoubtedly the doctrine of the Apostles, and we see
further, that he speaks in general of the Apostles in the plural number,
not attributing any thing to any one of the Apostles, as to a principal, who
should be preferred in this buylding before others: and besides, he has laid
Christ, the head corner stone, upon which the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets must work upon. The same Apostle in the fourth Chapter of the same
Epistle, Ephe. 4.11.12.
describinge what gifts and functions GOD has left to his Church, for the
building thereof he says Christ after his ascension gave some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers, to the
gathering together of the Saints, and buylding of the body of Christ: but to
have appointed or given any general and universal Bishop, or Pastor, to that
end, there is not one word, neither there, nor in the first to the
Corinthians, where the Apostle declares the diversity of gifts and
functions, GOD has given to his Church. 1. Cor. 12.28
Saint John in the one and twenteeth of the Revelation, Apoc. 21.14.
describing heavenly Jerusalem the Church of GOD buylt by the similitude of a
City, he makes that the Wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them
the names of the lambs twelve Apostles. Here we see in this built city of
GOD, nothing is given to Peter above the rest, all are made equal, the
doctrine of all the Apostles is alike, termed by the name of foundations, and
have all share alike in the Walls of the City of GOD What cause is then why
any prerogative should be given to Peter more then to any other. They shall
eat and drink at Gods table in his kingdom, and sit and judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel alike, as appears by Luke, Luke 22.30.
which could not be, if principal power were given to Peter which they
strive for, over the whole Church.

And yet, that this may appear more manifest. Let us mark that Paul writes
in the 15. to the Romans, Romans 15.20.
where he says, that he enforces himself to preach the Gospel, where Christ
had not been preached, and why? least, says he, I should have built upon
an other man's foundation. 1. Cor. 3.10.
And in the first to the Corinthians, he testifies, that according to the
grace of GOD given unto him, as a faithful builder, he had laid the
foundation of the Church of Corinth. If Paul in diverse places did so preach
the Gospel, that he might not build upon an other man's foundation, if the
Corinthians the buylding of GOD, were founded by Paul's ministry, then Peter's
ministry is not necessarily the foundation of all Churches, or else Paul
challenged to himself more then he ought. But if none of these testimonies
were extant, the Epistle to the Galathians were sufficient to convince their
assertion. For it appears there, that diverse false Prophets, and vain
glorious teachers, went about to deface Paul's doctrine, and bring him out of
credit and his disciples, saying that Paul was not so excellent an Apostle as
Peter and James were, and the other Apostles, that were conversant with Christ
while he lived here upon earth, that he was since called to be an Apostle,
therefore the other were rather to be followed and believed than he, and so
forth. Paul understanding and perceiving this, he goes about to prove, that
he is no whit inferior to Peter, James, or any other the Apostles, for that
the Gospel he taught, he received it not of man, neither was he taught it,
but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Gal. 1. and 2. Chap.
After his calling, he went not of many years to Jerusalem, to learn any
thing of the chief Apostles, when he came up to Jerusalem, it was to see
Peter only, and to declare his consent and agreement in preaching of the
Gospel, because of sclaunders, not to learn any thing of them that seemed
to be the chiefest Apostles.

Peter, James, and John, seeing the Gospel of uncircumcision was committed to
him, as the Gospel of circumcision was unto Peter, in that God, which was
mighty in the one, was mighty also in ye other, they required no submission or
obedience at Saint Paul's hands, or to do any homage to any of them, but they
gave unto him, the right hand of fellowship. And further, he was so far
from acknowledging Peter his superior or better. That when he came to Antioche
he withstoode him and rebuked him to his face, for his dissimulation, between
the Jews and Gentiles. If this be well considered, we may well perceive that
Paul accounted not of Peter, as of his head, or chief of the Church, naming
James and John pillars of the Church as well as he, and not yelding to him any
thing above him self.

In the second to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.5.
Paul declares that he thinks himself nothing inferior unto the chiefest
Apostles. Peter, in his Epistles, he never challenges any superiority,
neither by title nor by doctrine, he makes Christ the elect precious and
chief corner stone, and all the faithful living stones of the spiritual
house a like, he claymeth not civil government, or that Kings and Princes
ought to be subject unto him as the Pope does, but commands all Subjects
to be obedient unto their Princes and governors, he terms him self but
compresbyterum, a fellow elder with the rest, and exhorts his fellow
ministers not to be as Lords over Gods heritage, in his whole writing he does
not imperiously command, but humbly exhorts, not to be ouerlong in this, it
cannot be thought, that Paul and Peter, and the rest of the Apostles having so
fully and plentifully taught all things, appertaining to the Church of God,
yea even the least functions, that they would in all their writings have
concealed so great, weighty and necessary point, as this of Peter's supremacy
and one general head under Christ, for the government of his Church, being
such as it is made of the^, that whosoever acknowledges it not, cannot be
saved. Now if this which I have taught by the opinion and judgment of the
Apostles, shall appear also by their practice and dealing toward Peter, what
can be required further for the overthrow of their interpretation. And for a
perfect view hereof, let us but consider the whole order and manner of the
first council holden of the Apostles in the 15. Actor. 15.5.
of the acts: there it is mentioned, that certain variance and dissension
falling out by reason some of the sect of the Phariseis, urged the observation
of circumcision, and other ceremonies of the law, as necessary to salvation,
it was determined that Paul and Barnabas should go up to the Apostles and
Elders at Jerusalem, about this question. At their coming the matter being
declared the Apostles and Elders assembled together to reason of the matter,
after much debating, Peter arose and declared what God had revealed unto him,
concerning this point, meaning at Cornelius conversion. After him arose Paul
and Barnabas, who also told their opinion, and what God had opened unto the^.
Thirdly arises James, he approves the former judgment, confirms it by ye
scriptures, and having done so, gives advise to send their determination in
writing concerning the question, it was taken and approved, and the Apostles
and elders, and the whole congregation sent chosen men, namely Barnabas and
paul, with their letters. First here is to be observed, yt it is not mentioned
that Peter su^moned this Council by his authority, but it is done by the
consent of the Apostles and elders, contrary to that prerogative the Pope
chale^geth to himself. Peter although he spoke first alone, yet follows it
not that he was therefore accounted the cheifest, for neither spoke he only and
often times in great Councels, the lowest and youngest begin first, the eldest
and head of all speaks last. Secondly, in the assemblye after Peter had
opened his mind, and all the rest had don, last of al, not Peter, but James
pronounced the sentence, which belonged to the head and President of the
Council. Thirdly, the Legates and ambassadors which were sent, were not
appointed by Peter, nor sent by his authority, after the manner of the Pope,
but they were chosen by all the Apostles and Elders, and the whole
congregation, and sent by them. Fourthly the style of the letter does argue,
they gave no pre-eminence to Peter above other in this assembly, for thus it
runs: The Apostles, Elders and Brethren send greeting, etc. For as much as
we have heard, etc. It seemed good to us, when we were come together, to send
chosen men to you, etc. it seemed good to the holy ghost and unto us, to lay no
more burden, etc. Thus we see how the whole action is made common to them all
equallye, none named, or preferred before another, in any respect, far
diverse from the Popes determination, and style of his letters, the tenor of
which runs much otherwise. Act. 8.24.
Besides in the eight of the Acts, when the Apostles heard that Samaria had
received the Gospel, the Apostles sent Peter and John to confirm them, which
sending declares plainelye, that they did not acknowledge him as a superior,
and in that he obeieth and follows, he declares himself to be but their
fellow. For be it that Eckius says true, that oftentimes the cheifest of the
company be sent in matters, yet there is no Senate nor council that will send
their chief and governor. And the same Apostle in the 11 Acts, Act. 11.3.
being reproved for going to Cornelius, he excuses and clears himself,
giving a reason of that his doing. And of Paul in the second to the Galathians,
Gal. 2.11.
he was reproved to his face, for that he was worthy of rebuke, wherefore to
conclude, if neither in planting of the church of God, neither in deciding of
controversies in matters of religion, neither in enioyning and commanding
things to be done, neither yet by any title, duty, service or signification
of dealing, Peter either bare himself, or the rest received him as their head
and universal Bishop, but contrariwise both he used him self, and they made
themselves equal in all their doings unto him: I may iustlye conclude that
even the opinion and practice of the Apostles and primitive church, does
manifestly convict the interpretation of the Papists in this place, making
Peter ye rock, foundation, and head of Gods Church to be most untrue. This
point notwithstanding by this I have already said, it be sufficiently proved,
yet for diverse men's further contentation, let us see how the auntiente and
learned Fathers, have expounded this place, whether by this word Petra they
have understood the person of Peter, or him whom Peter confessed, which was
Christ. Chrysostom in the 55 Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Mat.
Homily upon Matthew, expounds Petra to be ye faith and confession. Super hanc
Petram.i. in hac fide and confessione aedificabo ecclesiam, that is, upon this
Faith and Confession I will build my Church, and upon the 32 Psalm, Statuit
pedes nostros super petram id est super fidem, etc that is he has set our
feet upon the rock, that is upon Faith, Chrysostom. super Psalm. 52.
for Faith in Christ may well be called a Rock which cannot be broken,
wherefore when Peter had declared and said, thou art the son of the living
God, Christ immediatelye added, thou art peter, and upon this rock I will build
my church. Thus it is apparent Chrysostom took not the person of Peter to be
that rock here mentioned, but yt which Peter reposed his belief in. Augustine
Aug. 21. de verbis Dom.
in this place writes thus. Super hanc Petram qua^ confessus es, etc. that is,
upon this rock which thou have confessed, upon this Rock which thou have
acknowledged, saying thou art the son of the living God, I will build my
congregation, upon my self I will build my church, upon my self I will build
the, not my self upon thee, for they that would have me^ build upon me^ said, I
hold of Paul, another I hold of Apollo, another I of Cephas which is Peter, but
other which would not be built upon Peter but upon the rock, said I hold of
Christ. Again in another place Super hanc Petram quam confessus est aedificabo
ecclesiam, Idem in Joan. tract. 124.
etc yt is, upon this rock which thou have confessed I will build my church, for
the rock was Christ, upon which fou^datio^ Peter himself was built, for other
foundation then that which is laid, ca^ no man lay, which is Christ Jesus, the
church therefore that is founded on Christ, has taken the keys of the kingdom
of heaven of him. I omit that which he writes also in his book against ye
Jews Pagans, Idem contra Iud. Page and Arti.
and Adrians where he also expounds this place after this manner. By this it
appears how he expounded this rock here mentioned, not to be Peter but
Christ himself. Gregor. missenus says, Tu es Petrus, Greg. Miss. in
tesiim^nijs, delectis ex veteri testamento.
etc. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, he means,
says he, the confession of Christ, for he had said before, thou art the son
of the living God. And Hilarious, Hilar. lib. 4. de Trini.
Petra nihil aliud est qua^ firma et inconcussa discipuli fides. The rock is
nothing else but the strong and assured faith of the Disciple. What can be
plainer then that which Origin writes upon this place. If we confess (says
he) Christ to be the son of God, the Father revealing it unto us, it shall
be said to each one of us, thou art Peter, Orig. tract. in Math.
and upon this Rock will I build my Congregation, every man is Petra that is
a disciple of Christ, upon such a rock all ecclesiastical learning is builte,
if thou think that the whole church is only builte upon Peter, what will thou
say of John the son of thunder, and of the other Apostles. And further
indeed it was spoken to Peter, upon this Rock I will build my Congregation:
Notwithstanding, it is spoken in like manner of all the other Apostles, and to
all faithful and perfect because they are all Peter's, and Rocks, and upon al
them and the Prophets, is Christ's Church built, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against any of them. Wherefore if they will give credit to Origin who
was within 235 years after Christ, that, that which was said to Peter, shall be
said to every Faithful man, making the like confession, and that this which
was spoken to Peter here, was spoken to all the Apostles, and to all Faithful
and perfect men in like manner. Then is here nothing attributed more unto Peter,
then unto any of the other Apostles. Gregory Greg. lib. 4.33. Epist.
was himself Bishop of Rome, and whom our Romish Clergy would have to
challenge this dignity and prerogative, they give unto Peter, he of this place
and diverse others which they use, as most weighty to confirm Peter's and the
Popes Supremacy, infers the quite contrary. For he reasons thus, to Peter
it was said, Love thou me, feed my sheep, Satan has desired to sifte
thee, but I prayed that thy Faith may not fail, thou being converted,
strengthen thy Brethren, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
church, to thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever,
etc. and he concludes in the end, notwithstanding Peter is not called
Universal Bishop. This one man has left sufficient witness behind him to
condemn in Peter, and in all Bishops of Rome, both the name of that dignity
and superiority, and also the authority and jurisdiction which the Pope does
claim unto himself by virtue of this place. For first how sharply and bitterly
writes he against this, that either John the Bishop of Constantinople, or any
other Bishop should claim or term himself to be the universal Bishop of the
whole Church in his Epistles: First in his fourth book he terms this Title
and name, a new, a proud, Greg. lib 4. Epist 32. Ep. 38. Ep. 39.
a pompous name. In his 38 Epistle of the same book, a rash, foolish, perverse
name, a name of error. In the Epistle following, a wicked name, a name of
vanity, a name of Hypocrisy, a name of blasphemy. Lib. 6. epi. 2.
In his sixte book and 2 Epistle, a puff of arrogancy and in the 24 Epistle
of the same Book a superstitious and ungodly name. So far then in his
judgment is it from being agreeable to Gods will, for any Bishop to claim
this name, that he accounts it a most ungodly and impious thing, and not only
the name, of modesty and humility is thus disalowed of him, as some would
bear us in hand, but the very office, authority and jurisdiction that is
claimed thereby, for otherwise ye reasons he uses were of no force, Lib. 4.38.
for in the 38 Epistle of his 40 Book he reasons thus. What answer will thou make unto Christ, at the trial of the last judgment, that go about
under the name of an Universal Bishop to subdue all his members unto thee.
Here he condemns the name, for that he which desires it, goes about to
subdue all the members of Christ unto him. Which in very deed is brought
to pass not by the very name, but by the power signified by the name. His
Comparison in the thirtith Epistle of the same Book, Li. 4.30. Epi.
where he resembles him to Lucifer, that affects the name, cannot condemn
the name only, but the thing also, because it was not Lucifers desire only
to be named God, but also to sit in his seat, and execute his Dominion.
When as in that place he says that John Bishop of Constantinople,
challenging that Title, does Contra Euangelicam Doctrinam against the meaning
of the Gospel, against Saint Peter the Apostle, against the Ordinance of the
Canons, against the faith, against all the Churches of GOD, against GOD
himself, and many other things more in any man's judgment that may be
sufficient, by his authority to disallow the name, and the office, not only
in John the Bishop of Constantinople, but also in any other Bishop that shall
claim it. For that some seek to avoid it, in posting over this whole writing
to be against John the B. of Constantinople, as though Gregory had misliked
this name of universal Bishop in him so ambitiously and greedily seeking for
it, and not if it had been given to his own Sea of Rome, this is but a mere
shift. For thus he says in 32 Epistle, Nullus Romanorum Episcoporum hoc
singularitatis nome^ sibi assumpsit. Greg. Epi. 32
None of the Bishops of Rome ever receued this name of singularity. And again
Nullus predecessoru^ meoru^ hoc tam profano vocabulo vti consensit, None of my
Predecessors ever consented to use this ungodly name, Nos hunc oblatum
honorem nol^mus suscipere, We will not take this honor offered unto us, and in
very deed no more he would, for in his seueth Book he finds fault with
Eulogius the Patriarch of Constantinople, Lib. 7.30.
for terming him in the preface of his Epistle the universal Pope, and for
saying (as you commanded) requiring him to do so no more, and not to use any
such terms. So that he disaloweth that name and authority to be given to
himself as well as to the Bishop of Constantinople. This that Gregory did, to
disallow the authority of Universal Bishop in any, was not only done by
him, but also by diverse other learned and godly Bishops, yea and by Councels.
First, that is clear which Cyprian that godly man and martyr of God writes
in his Oration he made in the Council of Carthage concerning this point, it
remains, says Cyprian, that every one speak of this thing what he
thinks. For there is none of us that makes himself Bishop of Bishops, or
that does by tyrannical fear drive his Fellows to obey of necessity, seeing
every Bishop at his pleasure, has free liberty and power of his own will,
as if he could not be judged of another, neither yet himself judge any other,
let us all wait for the judgment of our savior Christ, who only and alone
has power to make us governors of his Church, and judge of our doing. Thus
Cyprian denies to any to challenge to himself to be Bishop of Bishops, that
is to be universal Bishop, to have power and authority over the rest, to
compel them to obey, and to judge of them he gives free liberty to all
Bishops alike in that, and gives that pre-eminence to Christ alone, whose of
right it is. Pela. Ep. 99
That which Pelagius also writes, who was before Gregory is plain. Let none
of the Patriarchs, says he, at any time use this name of universality,
because if one Patriarch be called universal, the name of Patriarch is thereby
taken away from the other, But let this be far from the Faithful. The
words of pelagius and Gregory be so plain, that Edmundus Rufus writing
against Molinaeus the Lawyer, cannot tell how to avoid them, he is driven to
interpret this word vniuersalis singularis, the universal Bishop, that is
the singular and only Bishop. But God wot, this poor shift will not serve the
turn, for the greek word (...), the Bishop of the whole habitable world
quite overthrows that, for it cannot be expounded the only Bishop. The
disliking of this pre-eminence and power which the Bishop of Rome now
challenges to himself, was not only gaynsayde by their Bishops private
opinions, but even by Councels. ^onc. Carth. ^an. 26.
For in the Council of Carthage it was decreede, that the Bishop of the first
Sea be not called the chief of Priests, or the high Priest or by any other
like name, but only the Bishop of the first Sea, by which name he was
termed, not for any principality or power, he had above the other Patriarchs
but because the Roman Empire was the chief, therefore the Bishop of that sea
was termed by that name, and took the place in Councels at that time, and yet
had no further authority, then the Patriarche of Constantinople, Alexandria,
or Antioche, I omit the Council of Hippo Rhegius, Conc. Hippo cap. 27. Conc.
Africa. cap. 92.
and of Africa, by which it appears too manifestlye, what was the judgment
of the Church at those times, concerning the giving any principal power or
prerogative to the Bishop of Rome above all others. It is plain by the
Historye of times, that they never heald any such Article, that it was of the
necessity of salvation, to believe the whole Church of GOD must be under one
head, one general, of whom they must depend, they would never yield or
consent to any such decree or constitution. It is well known how that Gregory
the first Bishop of Rome of that name called John the Bishop of Constantinople
the forerunner of Antichrist, for ambitiouslye desyring to be supreme head,
Greg. lib. 2 Cap. 194.
and to be called the universal Bishop of the World that was habitable. Half
a score year after, or little more, Boniface the third of that name, obtained
through the help of Phocas the Emperor, whom he had helped unto the
Empire, by killing Mauritius the former Emperor, his wife, his brother, and
his son, with many other, to be named or ordained Pope, or summus Pontifex,
the high Bishop, which authority increased afterward more and more, until it
came to the highest pride. So that apparent it is, that the Churches of God,
for the space of four hundred years, and more after the death of our Savior
Christ, never taught, or received any such doctrine, either out of this place
of Matthew, or any other that Christ has left after his ascension an head of
his universal church here in earth, or appointed an universal Pastor of the
whole congregation under him. Ecclesiastical ambition begat this office
first, and man's constitutions and Traditions has only confirmed the same. This
I trust, I have sufficiently declared according as I promised, both by the
interpretatio^s of the ancient and learned Fathers of this place of Matthew, and
by their general opinion, concerning the appointing of an Universal Bishop
over Gods Church, as also by the practice of that age in that behalf. Wherein
I am the more sparing, because it has been at large declared of others in this
age, that there is no necessitye in this word Petra, in this place to make
Peter the Foundation of the Congregation of Christ, and so consequentlye his
Successoure, but let us grant thus much, that Peter was made that Rock,
that he were the chief, and Prince of the Apostles how does it follow
therefore, that the Bishop of Rome is the Foundation and the chief of all
Bishops. It will be said that the Bishop of Rome is Peter's successor, and
therefore whatsoever prerogative was given unto Peter, was also given to him.
First besides this consequent follows not, not to drive them to prove that
ever Peter was at Rome, which they are not able by any sound proof out of the
Scripture, being great presumptions to the contrary, neither yet by any
agreement of Ecclesiastical writers, not agreeing of the time of his coming
or abode there: I would gladly know why and wherein the Bishop of Rome is
rather accounted Peter's successor, then any other Bishop. If it be because
Peter was at Rome, so was he also at Jerusalem, and at Antioche as appears in
the acts of the Apostles, why should not then the Bishops of Jerusalem and
Antioche be accounted Peter's successors, as well as the Bishop of Rome. If it
be because Peter suffered there, so did Paul also, and surely that is but a
mean reason to make Rome the Sea of Peter's succession, because that city put
him to death. But wherein are the Bishops of Rome his successors, whether in
his Apostleship, or in his Bishoprike, not in the former, for then must they
immediately be called to that office of God. Secondly, their duty must be to
preach to all nations: for both these properties be required to make an
Apostle as may appear Gal. 1. Matthew. 28. Gal. 1. Matthew. ^8.
But neither of these are agreeable to the Bishop of Rome, being neither
immediately called of God, neither executing the office of an Apostle in going
about to preach to all nations, he cannot be his successor in his
Bishopric, for neither does he take upon him the office of a Bishop to be
tied to a certain charge, and besides, how can he be successor to Peter in
that which Peter was not, he was by office an Apostle, not a Bishop. And
further, if we will believe ancient writers, Irenaeus contra Valent.
Peter was never Bishop of Rome, for Irenaeus and Eusebius say, that Paul and
Peter founded the Church of Rome, and that Linus by them was appointed the
first Bishop. Then succeeded him Anacletus, and thirdly Clemens. And Tertullian
Tert. lib. 10. de pres. heret.
names Clemens the first Bishop of Rome, appointed by Peter, as Policarpus was
ye Bishop of Smirna appointed by John. Thus although Tertullian agrees not
with Irenaeus and Eusebius in appointing the first Bishop, yet it is evident,
that neither of them accounted of Peter as of the Bishop of Rome, but as of an
Apostle, who taught there as Paul did also. So that the Pope cannot be Peter's
successor in his Bishopric, because he was never Bishop of Rome. If he
say, he is his successor in his doctrine, if he were able to justify that
it would bear some color. But if the quite contrary be proved, then is
that allegation nothing, and besides that ought to be common to all Bishops,
and therefore by that he can challenge no prerogative.

I might declare at large how far he is from succeeding Peter in many
respects, but that were too large a field to enter in, but even as all those
be not the children of Abraham, which come of Abraham concerning the flesh, but
those that do the works of Abraham, even so those are not to be esteemed the
successors of Peter, or any of the Apostles, which follow them in place or in
name, but those which follow them in their faith and doctrine, which thing if
they can show they do, we will in part grant them to be successors to the
Apostles. I will not stand longer upon this point, I trust that which I have
said shall be sufficient, for the confirmation of the second part part I took in
hand to prove. Now I will hasten unto the third.

There remains then the third part to discuss, which was, what the power
and commission is that was given to Peter in this place, when it is said to
him: To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. which words being spoken
unto Peter and giving him by express words the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven, and the authority of binding and loosing, thereby they have inferred
some special authority and prerogative to have been given to Peter above all
other by our Savior Christ in this place. Wherefore concerning the
interpretation and sense of these words seeing there is no agreement between
us and the church of Rome, in that they say, that hereby Peter was endewed
with special commission above all other the Apostles, and we contrariwise do
affirm that, that which was spoken unto him was spoken to all the rest alike.
For the better examination of this, it shall be necessary for us to consider
these two points: First, unto whom these words were spoken, whether unto
Peter alone, or principally, as the Papists would have it, or unto all in
general. Secondly, what is that power and authority which was given unto
Peter, for in neither of these points do we agree with them. For the first,
that although these words were directed to Peter alone, yet that thereby our
Savior Christ meant not to give him any special privilege or prerogative
above his fellows, but to endew them al with the like authority, first, both
the words and circumstance of the place, and the doctrine of the scriptures in
other places does declare it: and secondly the judgment and opinion of the
ancient and learned fathers, does approve the same. That the whole course and
circumstance of the place does euict this promise and gift of our Savior
Christ, to appertain to them all, it may be apparent by this. First, that the
question of our Savior Christ is propounded to the^ all. Whom do ye say that
I am, and therefore he requires not the opinion of Peter alone, but of them
all, that their knowledge and opinion of him, may better agree, and be more
constant, truer, and perfecter than the opinion of the common people, which
before they had declared unto him. And the answer also Peter made, was not in
his own person alone, but for them all. So says Austine as was alleged of
me before: The Lord asking and saying (says he) Whom do ye say that I the
son of man am? Peter answers: Thou art the son of the living God, one
gave answer for many. The conclusion of the dialogue appertains also unto
all: for in the end Christ forbad not only Peter to tell any body, that he
was Jesus that Christ, but he charged them all to tell that to no man. So that
the beginning of the dialogue, the midst, and the ending, appertaining to
all, why then should any special thing be attributed to any one above others
by these words. Besides that which is spoken here alone to Peter in the
singular number in the 18. Chapter, is spoken to all in the plural number.
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind in earth, shall be bound in Heaven,
and whatsoever ye loose in earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Here equal
authority is given to all in the same words. But let us observe further, that
Christ says here, Dabo, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven,
and so forth. Here the keys are promised but not given. If then Christ when he
performed this promise, gave not any special power to Peter, but endued them
all with the like, shall we imagine here any special thing given him to be
preferred before others, in the 20. of John, John. 20.
where Christ performed this after his resurrection, he committed this power
and authority he promised here unto al equally in these words: Peace be unto
you, as my father sent me, even so send I you, and when he had said that, he
breathed upon them, and they received ye holy Ghost, adding Whose soever sins
ye remit, they are remitted unto the^, and whose soever sins ye retain, they
are retained. Here we see he gives his peace unto them al: he breaths on
them all: they all receive the holy ghost alike: they are al endewed with ye
same power of forgiving and reteining sins. Where is then Peter's prerogative?
especially now when it should specially have bin specified. But what if any
principal authority and power had been given to Peter by Christ here, what
does that belong to the Bishop of Rome: where is Peter's will and testament, by
which he has bequeathed his keys, rather unto him than unto the Bishops of
Jerusalem or Antioche, by what Scripture can they prove that Christ has made
them rather Peter's successors in this authority and commission then other
Bishops. If the keys were promised, and given to Peter alone, and to none of
the other Apostles, how dare they give them unto the Bishops of Rome. There is
not one word in the Scripture of their succession by inheritance. Seeing then
that neither the course of the dialogue, nor yet the authority and function is
other, that is here given, then was given to all the Apostles of Christ,
himself afterward in like manner, and that although some more special and
excellent office was committed to Peter, then to any other Apostle, yet that
the B. of Rome cannot claim that more than any other Bishop, it makes nothing
for the establishing of ye supreme power over the universal Church of God
which the Pope arrogateth unto himself. But let us see what the ancient and
learned fathers think on this point. That which Origin writes is most plain
against them which think any special thing was given to Peter. An soli Petro
dantur claues regni coelorum etc. Do thou think that the keys of the
kingdom were only given to Peter and to no other, neither any other should
receive them? If these words were not common to all men as they are (I will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven) how can al these sayings and
things which are applied to Peter before be common to all men. For Christ thus
spoke in common to them all, Whom do ye say that I am? and Peter answered in
the name of all. Does he not utter the same in plainer words in the 20. of
John saying to all the Apostles, Joan. 20.
and breathing upon them: receive the holy Ghost, whose sins ye forgive,
etc. They were all of like authority with Peter. Thus much Origin, then which
words, what can be more plain. Cyprian Cyp. de simp. praelat.
also in his book de simplicitate Prelatorum against the Nouatians confirms
this. The Lord (says he) says unto Peter, thou art Peter. The Lord after his
resurrection gave unto his Apostles like power, yet to declare the unity, he
disposed the original of unity begins at one. The rest of the Apostles
were even the same that Peter was, endewed with like fellowship both of honor
and power, but the beginning proceeds of unity to declare one Church. Basil
Basil. 23. cap. de vita solit.
also says: Christus Petrum post se suae Ecclesiae pastorem constituit etc.
Christ appointed Peter to be Pastor of his Church after, and so consequently
gives the same power and authority to all Pastors and doctors, a token
whereof is this that all Pastors, do equally bind and lose as they list, as
well as he. Augustine, de Agone Christiano Cap. 32. Cum Petro dicitur pasce
oues meas, omnibus dicitur. When it is said to Peter feed my sheep, Aust. de
Agon. Christ. cap. 31. and cap. 32.
it is said to all. And in the 31. Chapter: Wretched men while in Peter they
understand not Christ which is the rock, and while they will not believe that
the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, are given unto the Church (not unto Peter
alone) they have lost the keys out of their hands, and in another place he
says, the Church which is founded in Christ, Aug. tract. 124. saper
has taken the keys of him, so that not Peter only, but the whole Church
received the keys of him. Beda Beda.
says, the power of bynding and loosing, although it seem to be given only
unto Peter, without doubt this is to be known, that it is given also unto the
other Apostles. Haymo, one of their own doctors well weighing the text
affirms contrary unto them. We must not think, says he, that unto
blessed Peter alone this power was given. but as he for all answered, Thou
art Christ the son of the living God, so in the person of one, all heard,
whatsoever thou shall bind in earth, etc. Cyrill, Cyr. in Joan. li. 3. cap. 20.
Christ gave full power unto the Apostles and unto others that succeeded them
in the Churches. To conclude then, if by the testimonies of the ancient and
learned fathers, Christ gave full and like power to all his Apostles. If the
rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was, endewed all with like honor
and power. If Christ's words were common to all the rest. If all Pastors do
equally bind and loose as well as Peter, then is there no special privilege
given unto Peter above others by this place. Wherefore I trust this first point
is manifest by the circumstance of the place and opinion of ancient writers
that there is no special prerogative or function given unto Peter, that was
not committed to all, and that whatsoever was spoken by Christ here unto Peter
did not belong here unto him only, but to them al in common. Now secondly have
we to consider what was that power and authority that was given unto Peter
here, that was to have the keys of the kingdom of heaven, the authority of
binding and loosing, but herein have we to weigh what is meant and contained
in these words and how far they ought to stretch. For the B. of Rome claims
by right of succession and inheritance whatsoever power and jurisdiction was
given unto Peter, and therefore by the virtue of these words, and promise of
Christ, claims al power and authority, whatsoever may be contained and
included in these speeches. Hereof has he challenged to himself to be above
kings and Princes, to have ye authority of consecrating and deposing them, to
be above all general councels to have fulness of power to expound the
scriptures, to whose determination the Church of God must necessarily stand, to
have authority to dispense with Gods word, to make that lawful which before
was unlawful, to have absolute, and free power to decree whatsoever he likes
of, and that of the church is to be observed as an heavenly Oracle, that he
has power to give heaven, to throw down into hell whom he will, that he
has power to assoyle men's sins, and to deliver them both a pena and culpa,
both from the fault and penalty, and to retain and keep them at his
pleasure, that he may bind and loose above all other Bishops: for he may loose
whom other Bishops bind: he may bind whom other Bishops loose: but whom he
binds or loses can no man assoyle or bind, but only he himself: for
Bulls, pardons, indulgencies, anathematizations and all the rest of such
trishtrash, has been founded upon this power and prerogative he challenges
unto him self by this place, the refutation of which particular points being
too ample a matter to be handled at this time, and besides having sufficiently
both in this second part, and also in the third, declared and proved that no
prerogative is given unto Peter above others by this place, that his ministry
was endewed with no greater power and authority then the ministry of the
rest of the Apostles, it shall be needelesse to deal with them at this present,
only that is needful to show what is meant by the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and the authority of bynding and loosing. By the keys is meant
nothing else here but the preaching of the Gospel, and herein we agree with
Chrysostom, Crysostom.
that says, they are the knowledge of the Scriptures, with Tertullian
Tertullian.
which terms them to be the interpretation of the law, and with Eusebius,
Eusebius.
that they are the word of GOD. and very well may the preaching of the word
be expressed by the Metaphore of a keye. For as by it we are let into the
house, so by the preaching of the word, are we brought into the Church and
household of GOD, and have access to his kingdom. For Christ being the door,
as Saint John testifies, by whom we must enter, if we will be saved, and
the ladder, by which we must ascend up into heaven, as appears by Jacobs
dream, and the preaching of the Gospel, opening and manifesting unto us
Christ, as Paul witnesses, that unto him the least of al Saints was given this
grace, that he should preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of
Christ, and being the means, whereby we are reconciled unto Christ, Paul
tearming his ministry therefore the ministry of reconciliation, the
publishing and preachinge of Christ and his Gospel, may well therefore be
termed a keye. This Metaphore is used of our Savior Christ in the same sense.
Woe be to you interpreters of the law, Luc. 12.52.
for you have taken away the keye of knowledge. Ye entered not in your selves,
and them that came ye forbad, in which words our Savior Christ terms the
true interpretation of the law and preaching of the Gospel, the key of
knowledge. For it was that the Scribes and Pharisees did suppress and
adulterate. It is apparent enough, that the word of God, according to the
sundry effects and properties thereof has sundry names. So for that it
increases and multiplyeth, it is called seed, for that it cutteth the heart,
and deuydeth the flesh from the Spirit, it is called a Sword. For that it
takes us, and encloseth us, and brings us together, it is called a nett. For
that it washes us clean it is called water. For that it enflameth us, it is
called fire. For that it feeds us it is called bread: even so for that it
opens and gives us an entrance into the house, it is called a keye. This
house is the kingdom of heaven: Christ is the door: the word of God is the
keye, and Preachers the keye bearers. So says Chrysostom: Chrysostom. opere
^nperfect. cap. 23.
The keye bearers be the Priests, to whom is committed the teaching of the
word, and of the expounding of the Scriptures: So then, that by the Metaphore
of the keye, the Evangelist should declare that Christ committed unto his
Apostles, the preaching of his word, by which his Church should be gathered
together, and built upon Christ the rock, is no strange speech, but very fit
and significant, to declare that unto us, and hereby also he shows that he
has committed unto them a great office and weighty function, and that he
puts them in chief place and authority. For he has the chiefest
authority in ye house or city to whom the keys are committed, and who has
authority to let out and let in by them. To this end God uses this Metaphore
in the Prophet Esaias, Isa. 22.22.
when he promises to Eliachim the chief power and authority in the King
Ezechias house, saying: with my garments I will cloth him, with my girdle I
will strengthen him, and the keye of the house of David will I lay upon his
shoulder, so he shall open, and no man shall shut. Hereby have we to learn,
that as those to whom this charge is committed to bear the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, ought to have a great care of the well ordering of them, so
we must also with no less carfulness and reverence, embrace and receive
them. The use of these keys is in more particular manner declared by our
Savior Christ, when as he says that whatsoever he binds on earth shall be
bound in heaven, etc. by ye power of binding and losing is meant that which is
expressed by Saint John. Whose sins ye forgive, they are forgiven him, Joan.
20.
and whose sins ye retain, they are retained, for when our sins are
forgiven, we are losed from them, and when they are not forgiven, we remain
bound in them, these things are brought to pass in us by the ministry of his
word, and by the virtue and power thereof. So says Jerome, Hieron. Esai. lib.
6 (...)
whatsoever ye loose in earth, shall be losed in Heaven, the Apostles lose
them by the word of God, and testimonies of the scriptures, and exhortations
unto virtue. And Ambrose, Sins be forgiven by the word of God, the expounder
thereof is the Leuite and Priest. Ambr. de Cain and Abel. cap. 4.
The Prophet Esai prophesying the sending of Christ, says that the Lord had
anointed him that he should preach the Gospel to the poor, that he should
heal the broken hearted and preach deliverance to the Captive, recovering of
sight to the blind, and setting at liberty them that are loosed: so that to
bind and loose, to forgive and retain sins, is a property and effect of
the word of God preached. For that publishes unto us remission of sins,
works in us mortification, delivers us from the power of Satan, and
restores unto us the liberty and freedom of the children of God, which
things be brought to pass, not by the bare publishing and hearing of the
word, but when as by faith we lay hold upon the sweet promises, and great
benefits which be offered us in Christ, which be delivered unto us by his
ministers, as by his Legates, for remission of sins is in the Priest, as in
the messenger, in the word of God as in the instrument, and in the penitent,
as in the receyuer. So that the offering hereof is in the minister, but the
effect and force thereof in the sinner. But for as much as they offer the
merits of Christ, and full pardon to such as have lowly and contrite hearts,
and do unfeignedly repent themselves, pronou^cing unto the same a sure and
undoubted forgiveness of their sins, and hope of everlasting life, therefore
they are said to bind and lose, to retain and forgive sins, not because God
has endued his ministers with this absolute power to forgive and retain them
at their pleasure, as our popish Priests would bear us in hand, for that he
has reserved unto him alone, and it only belongs unto him. Even the very
malicious Scribes and Phariseis knew this, for when as Christ had said unto
the man sick of the Palsy, son thy sins are forgiven, they not
acknowledging him to be God, said among themselves, Marc. 2.5.
this man blasphemeth, who can forgive sins but God only. And God by the
Prophet Esai Esai.
challenges this unto himself, I even I am he that puts away thine
iniquity, even as to create, to alter and change the heart, to destroy body
and soul belongs only unto God, and so also to forgive and retain sins.
The ancient Fathers have judged that the Priest ought to have no right to
challenge any authority to forgive sins. Ambrose Ambr. li. 9. Epist. 76.
says, it is not the Ambassador, it is not the Messenger, but the Lord
himself has saved his people. He remains one, for this cannot be common to
any man with Christ to forgive sins, that is only the office of Christ who
has borne the sins of the world. And Austine, August.
God gave the ministry of forgiving of sins to his servants, but the
power thereof he retained to himself. August. de scalis Paradisi.
So in another place, the office of baptizing God has granted unto many: the
power and authority of forgiving sins, he has reserved to himself alone.
Saint Jerome expounding this place very well declares what power and
commission is given to Gods ministers in this behalf. Hierony.
We read in scriptures that the Leapers are bidden to show themselves unto the
Priest, that if they be Leapers, they should be so made of the Priest, not that
the Priest do make the leaprous or unclean, but that they have knowledge of
the leaprous and clean person, that they are able to judge who is clean or
unclean, even therefore as the Priest makes the clean or unclean, so does
the Bishop here bind and lose, hereby we see that Jerome thought Ministers had
no further power, then to declare them to be lose or bound, even as the Priests
in the time of the law, had no power but to judge and pronounce the man either
clean or unclean, but not to cleanse them, or to make them unclean. So says
Bonauentura, Bonauentura.
they did cleanse because they showed the clean. Peter Lumbard, Pet. Lumb.
one of their own Doctors, says, having well weighed this matter. Christ gave
to priests authority to bind or lose, that is to declare to men they be
bound or lose: What therefore the authority of binding and loosing, the
forgiving and reteining of sins is, that is given to the ministers of God, it
is apparent not to have given full power to absolve and bind of themselves at
their will, but to publish that pardon that God in Christ offers us, which if
we take hold on by faith then we are assoiled, if we contemn it our sins are
retained to our condemnation, and because he has committed the publishing of
forgiveness of sins unto his ministers, therefore his ministers are said to
forgive and retain, not because the power thereof rests in themselves, as
our popish priests would challenge: For therefore have they made the Priest to
hold a consistory, and to be a judge over the sins of the people, and to
drive them to make particular confession of their secret sins unto the
Priest, that they may absolve the^, and enjoin them a penance answerable to
their offense. Howsoever they go about to cloak and color the matter, in very
deed they take upon them that which is proper to God to judge of the weight and
greeuousnesse of sins to appoint and alot to every one a just satisfaction,
to change eternal pains into temporal, to have the disposing of the merits
of Christ, even as the Executors have the disposing of dead men's goods, as
though Christ were not, or knew not after his death, how to bestow them, to
give Heaven and throw down to Hell, whom they will, to rehearse the
particular blasphemies and impieties, which by the keys of heaven, and
authority of binding and loosing they claim, they have run into, although it
were profitable, to consider the abominations of that Church, yet least I
should grow infinite, it shall be sufficient to have but lightlye touched these
things. Thus I trust I have sufficientlye declared, first that God reuealeth
the knowledge of all heavenly things, Secondlye that not Peter, but Christ is
the Rock whereon God does build his Church, and last of all that the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, and the authority of binding and loosing consists in
the preaching of his word. God of his mercy grant unto us, the revealing of
his Christ, and to be builte upon him the true rock, and the opening of the
kingdom of heaven, by the preaching of his word, that we may obtain that
blessedness, which Christ has prepared for them that truly acknowledge and
confess him, To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be al honor and
glory, and power, now and for evermore, Amen.


