THE Second part of Henry the fourth, continuing to his death, and coronation
of Henry the fifth.

With the humors of sir John Falstaff, and swaggering Pistol.

As it has been sundry times publicly acted by the right honorable, the
Lord Chamberlain his servants.

Written by William Shakespeare.

LONDON Printed by V. S. for Andrew Wise, and William Aspley. 1600.

The second part of Henry the fourth, continuing to his death, and coronation
of Henry the fifth.
Enter Rumor painted full of Tongues. OPen your ears; for which of you wi'l
stop
The vent of hearing, when loud Rumor speaks?
I from the Orient to the drooping West,
(Making the wind my poste-horse) still unfold
The acts commenced on this ball of earth,
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
The which in every language I pronounce,
Stuffing the ears of men with false reports,
I speak of peace while covert enmity,
under the smile of safety, wounds the world:
And who but Rumor, who but only I,
Make fearful musters, and prepared defense,
Whiles the big year, swollen with some other grief,
Is thought with child by the stern tyrant War?
And no such matter Rumor is a pipe,
Blown by surmizes, Ieolousies conjectures,
And of so easy, and so plain a stop,
That the blunt monster, with vncounted heads,
The still discordant wau'ring multitude,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
(My well known body) to anothomize
Among my household? why is Rumor here?
I run before King Harries victory,
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury,
Has beaten down young Hot-spurre and his troops*
Quenching the flame of bold rebellion,
Even with the rebels blood. Put what mean I
To speak so true at first* my office is
To noise abroad, that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the wrath of noble Hot-spurs sword,
And that the King before the Douglas rage,
Stoop^ his anointed head as low as death.
This have I rumored through the peasant towns,
Between that royal field of Shrewsbury,
And this worme-eaten hole of ragged stone,
When Hot-spurs father old Northumberland
Lies crafty sick, the posts come trying on,
And not a man of them brings other news,
Than they have learnt of me, from Rumors tongues,
They bring smooth comforts false, worse then true wrongs.
exit Rumors. Enter the Lord Bardolfe at one door. Bard. Who keeps the gate
here ho? where is the Earl?

Porter What shall I say you are?

Bard. Tell thou the Earl,
That the Lord Bardolfe does attend him here.

Porter His Lordship is walked forth into the orchard,
Please it your honor knock but at the gate,
And he himself will answer. Enter the Earl Northumberland*

Bard. Here comes the Earl.

Earl. What news Lord Bardolfe? every minute now
Should be the father of some Stratagem,
The times are wild, contention like a horse,
Full of high feeding, madly has broke loofe,
And bears down all before him.

Bard. Noble Earl,
I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.

Earl Good, and God will.

Bard. As good as heart can wish:
The King is almost wounded to the death,
And in the fortune of my Lord your son,
Prince Harry slain outright, and both the Blunts
Killed by the hand of Douglas, young prince John,
And Westmerland and Stafford fled the field,
And Harry Monmouthes brawne the hulke sir John,
Is prisoner to your son: O such a day!
So fought, so followed, and so fairly won,
Came not till now to dignifie the times
Since Caesar's fortunes.

Earl How is this derived?
Saw you the field? came you from Shrewsbury?

Bar. I spoke with one, my lord, that came from thence, enter Trauers.
A gentleman well bred, and of good name,
That freely rendered me these news for true.

Earl Here comes my servant Trauers who I sent
On tuesday last to listen after news.

Bar. My lord, I ouer-rode him on the way,
And he is furnished with no certainties,
More then he happily may retale from me.

Earl Now Tra^ers, what good tidings comes with you^

Trauers My lord, sir John Vmfreuile turned me back
With joyful tidings* and being better horst,
Out rode me, after him came spurring hard,
A gentleman almost forespent with speed,
That stopped by me to breathe his bloudied horse,
He asked the way to Chester, and of him
I did demand what news from Shrewsbury,
He told me that rebellion had bad luck,
And that young Harrie Percies spur was cold:
With that he gave his able horse the head,
And bending forward, struck his armed heels,
Against the panting sides of his poor jade,
Up to the rowell head, and starting so,
He seemed in running to devour the way,
Staying no longer question.

Earl Ha^ again,
Said he, young Harry Percies spur was cold,
Of Hot-spurre, Cold-spurre, that rebellion
Had met ill luck?

Bard. My lord, I Will tell you what,
If my young Lord your son, have not the day,
Upon mine honor for a silken point,
I Will give my Barony, never talk of it.

Earl Why should that gentleman that rode by Trauers,
Give then such instances of loss?

Bard. Who he?
He was some hilding fellow that had stolen
The horse he rode on, and upon my life
Spoke at a venture. Look, here comes more news. enter Morton.

Earl Yea this man's brow, like to a title leaf,
Foretells the nature of a tragic volume,
So looks the strond, whereon the imperious flood,
Has left a witnest usurpation.
Say Mourton, did thou come from Shrewsbury?

Mour. I ran from Shrewsbury my noble lord,
Where hateful death put on his vgliest mask,
To fright our party.

Earl How does my son and brother?
Thou tremblest, and the whitenes in thy cheek,
Is apter then thy tongue to tell thy arrand,
Even such a man, so faint, so spirritlesse,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe begone,
Drew Priams curtain in the dead of night,
And would have told him, half his Troy was burnt:
But Priam found the fire, ere he, his tongue,
And I, my Percies death ere thou reportst it.
This thou would say, Your son did thus and thus,
Your brother thus: so fought the noble Douglas,
Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds,
But in the end, t^ stop my ear indeed,
Thou have a sigh to blow away this praise,
Ending with brother, son, and all are dead.

Mour. Douglas is living, and your brother yet,
But for my Lord your son:

Earl Why he is dead?
See what a ready tongue Suspicion has!
He that but fears the thing he would not know,
Has by instinct, knowledge from others eyes,
That what he feared is chanced: yet speak Mourton,
Tell thou an Earl, his divination lies,
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace,
And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.

Mour. You are too great to be by me gainsaid,
Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.

Earl Yet for all this, say not that Percie's dead,
I see a strange confession in thine eye,
Thou shakst thy head, and holdst it fear or sin,
To speak a truth: if he be slain,
The tongne offends not that reports his death,
And he does sin that does belie the dead,
Not he which says the dead is not alive,
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
Has but a loosing office, and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a ^ullen bell,
Remembered tolling a departing friend.

Bard. I cannot think, my Lord, your son is dead*

Mour. I am sorry I should force you to believe,
That which I would to God I had not seen,
But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
Rendering faint quittance, wearied, and out-breathd,
To Harry Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
The never daunted Percy to the earth,
From whence with life he never more sprung up.
In few his death, whose spirit lent a fire,
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp,
Being bruted once, took fire and heat away,
From the best temperd courage in his troops,
For from his mett^l was his party steeled,
Which once in him abated, o^ the rest
Turned on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.
And as the thing that's heavy in it self,
Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed:
So did our men, heavy in Hot-spurs loss,
Lend to this weight such lightnosse with their fear,
That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim,
Than did our soldiers aiming at their safety,
Fly from the field: then was that noble Worcester,
So soon taken prisoner, and that furious Scot,
The bloody Douglas whose well laboring sword*
Had three times slain th'appearance of the King,
^an veil his stomach and did grace the shame
Of those that turned their backs, and in his flight,
Stumbling in fear, was took: the sum of all
Is, that the King has won, and has sent out,
A speedy power to encounter you my lord,
Under the conduct of young Lancaster,
And Westmerland: this is the news at full.

Earl For this I shall have time enough to mourn*
In poison there is physic, and these news,
Having been well, that would have made me sick:
Being sick, have (in some measure) made me well:
And as the wretch whose feuer-weakned joints,
Like strengthlesse hinges buckle ^^der life,
Impacient of his fit, breaks lik^ ^ fire
Out of his keepers arms; even so my limbs,
Weakened with grief being ^ow enragde with grief,
Are thrice themselves: hence therefore thou nice crutch,
A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel
Must glove this hand and hence thou sickly co^^e,
Thou art a guard too wanton for the head,
Which princes, flesh^ with conquest, aim to hit:
Now bind my brows (...) iron, and approach
The raggedst hour (...) and Spite dare bring,
To frown upon the (...) Northumberland,
Let heaven kiss earth, now let not Natures hand
Keep the wild flood con^ind, let Order die,
And let this world no longer be a stage,
To feed contention in a lingering act:
But let one spirit of the first borne Cain
Reign in all bosoms, that each heart being set
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead.

Vmfr. This strained passion does you wrong my lord.

Bard. Sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your honor,

Mour. The lives of all your loving accomplices,
Leave on you health, the which if you give ore,
To stormy passion must perforce decay.

Bard. We all that are engaged to this loss,
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas,
That if we wrought out life, it was ten to one,
And yet we venturd for the gain proposde,
Choakt the respect of likely peril feared,
And since we are oreset, venture again:
Come, we will al put forth body and goods.

Mour. It Is more then time, and my most noble lord,
I hear for certain, and dare speak the truth.

North. I knew of this before, but to speak truth,
This present grief had wipte it from my mind,
Go in with me and counsel every man,
The aptest way for safety and revenge,
Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed,
Never so few, and never yet more need. exeunt.

Enter sir John alone, with his page bearing his sword and buckler. John Sir,
you giant, what says the doctor to my water?

Page He said sir, the water it self was a good healthy water, but for the
party that owed it, he might have more diseases then he knew for.


John Men of al sorts take a pride to gird at me: the brain of this foolish
compou^ded clay-man is not able to invent any thing that intends to laughter,
more then I invent, or is inverted on me, I am not only witty in my self, but
the cause that wit is in other men. I do here walk before thee, like a sow that
has ouerwhelmd al her litter but one, if the prince put thee into my service
for any other reason then to set me off, why then I have no judgment thou
horeson mandrake, thou art sitter to be worn in my cap, then to wait at my
heels I was never manned with an agot till now, but I will in-set you, neither
in gold nor silver, but in vile apparel, and send you back again to your
master for a jewel, the ^^uenall the prince your master, whose chin is not yet
fledge, I will sooner have a beard grow in the palm of my hand, then he shall
get one off his cheek, and yet he will not stick to say his face is a face
royal, God may finish it when he will, it is not a hair amiss yet, he may keep
it still at a face royal, for a barber shall never earne sixpence out of it,
and yet heel be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his father was a
batcheler, he may keep his own grace, but he is almost out of mine I can
assure him: what said master Dommelton about the satin for my short cloak and
my sloppes?


Boy. He said sir, you should procure him better assurance then Bardolfe, he
would not take his band and yours, he liked not the security.


sir John Let him be damned like the glutton, pray God his tongue be hotter, a
horeson A chitophella rascal: yea forsooth knave, to bear a gentle man in
hand, and then stand upon security, the horson smoothy-pates do now wear
nothing but hie shoes and bunches of keys at their girdles, and if a man is
through with them in honest taking up, then they must stand upon security, I
had as live they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop it with
security, I looked a should have sent me two and twenty yards of satin (as I am
a true knight,) and he sends me security: well he may sleep in security, for
he has the horn of abundance, and the lightness of his wife shines through
it: where is Bardolf, and yet can not he see though he have his own lantern to
light him.


Boy He Is gone in Smithfield to buy your worship a horse.


sir John I bought him in Paul's, and heel buy me a horse in Smithfield, and I
could get me but a wife in the stews, I were man^d, horsde, and wiu^d.


Enter Lord chief Justice. Boy Sir, here comes the noble man that committed
the prince for striking him about Bardolfe.


sir John Wait close, I will not see him.


Justice What Is he that goes there?


seru. Falsta^fe and't please your lordship.


Just. He that was in question for the rob'ry?


seru. He my Lord, but he has since done good service at Shrewsbury, and (as!
hear,) is now going with some charge to the lord John of ^ancaster.


Just. What to York? call him back again.


seru. Sir John Falstaff.


John Boy, tell him I am deaf.


Boy You must speak louder, my master is deaf.


Just. I am sure he is to the hearing of any thing good, go pluck him by the
elbow, I must speak with him.


seru. Sir John?


Falst. What? a young knave and begging? is there not wars? is there not
employment? does not the King lack subjects? do not the rebels need soldiers,
though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is worse shame to beg then
to be on the worst side, were it worse then the name of Rebellion can tell how
to make it.


seru. You mistake me sir.


John Why sir, did I say you were an honest man, setting my knighthood and my
souldiership aside, I had lied in my throat if I had said so.


seru. I pray you sir then set your knighthood, and your soldiership aside, and
give me leave to tell you, you lie in your throat, if you say I am any other
then an honest man.


John I give thee leave to tell me, so I lay aside that which grows to me, if
thou getst any leave of me, hang me, if thou takst leave, thou were better be
hanged, you hunt cou^ter, hence, auaunt.


seru. Sir, my Lord would speak with you.


Just. Si^ John Falstaff, a word with you.


Falst. My good Lord, God give your lordship good time of day, I am glad to see
your lordship abroad, I heard say your lordship was sick, I hope your
lordship goes abroad by advise, your lordship, though not clean past your
youth, have yet some smack of an aguein you, some relish of the saltnes of time
in you, and I most humbly beseech your lordship to have a reverend care of your
health.


Justice Sir John, I sent for you before your expedition to Shrewsbury.


sir John Andt please your lorship, I hear his majesty is returned with some
discomfort from Wales.


Just. I talk not of his majesty, you would not come when I sent for you.


Falst. And I hear moreover, his highness is fallen into this same horson a
poplexi.


Just. Well, God mend him, I pray you let me speak with you.


Falst. This appoplexi as I take it? is a kind of lethergie, and't please your
lordship, a kind of sleeping in the blood, a horson tingling.


Just. What tell you me of it, be it as it is.


Falst. It has it original from much grief from study* and perturbation of
the brain, I have read the cause of his effects in Galen, it is a kind of
deafenes.


Just. I think you are fallen into the disease, for you hear no^ what I say to
you.


Old. Very well my lord, very well, rather and't please you it is the disease of
not listening the malady of not marking that I am troubled withal.


Just. To punish you by the heels, would amend the attention of your ears,
and I care not if I do become your physician.


Falst. I am as poor as Job my lord, but not so pacient, your Lordship may
minister the potion of imprisonment to me, in respect of poverty, but how I
should be your pacient to follow your prescriptions, the wise may make some
dram of a scruple or indeed a scruple it self.


Just. I sent for you when there were matters against you for your life to come
speak with me.


Falst. As I was then aduisde by my learned counsel in the laws of this land
service, I did not come.


Just. Well, the truth is sir John, you live in great infamy.


Falst. He that buckles himself in my belt cannot live in less.


Just. Your means are very slender, and your waste is great.


Falst. I would it were otherwise, I would my means were greater and my waste
slender.


Just. You have misled the youthful prince.


Falst. The young prince has misled me, I am the fellow with the great belly,
and he my dog.


Just. Well, I am loath to gall a new heald wound, your days service at
Shrewsbury, has a little gilded over your nights exploit on Gadshill, you may
thank th^vnquiet time, for your quiet oreposting that action.


Falst. My lord.


Just. But since all is well, keep it so, wake not a sleeping wolf.


Falst. To wake a wolf, is as bad as smell a fox.


Just. What you are as a candle, the better part, burnt out.


Falst. A wassel candle my lord, al tallow, if I did say of wax, my growth
would approve the truth.


Just. There is not a white hair in your face, but should have his effect of
gravity.


Falst. His effect of grauy, grauie, grauie.


Just. You ^ollow the young prince up and down, like his ill angel.


Falst. Not so my lord, your ill angel is light, but I hope he that looks
upon me will take me without weighing, and yet in some respects I grant I
cannot go. I cannot tell, virtue is of so little regard in these costar-mongers
times, that true valor is turned ^erod, Pregnancie is made a Tapster, and his
quick wit wasted in giving reckonings, all the other gifts appertinent to man,
as the malice of his age shapes the one not worth a goosbery, you that are old
consider not the capacities of us that are young, you do measure the heat of
our livers with the bitterness of your g^lles, and we that are in the vaward
of our youth, I must confess are wagges too.


Lo. Do you set down your name in the scroule of youth, that are written
down* old with all the characters of age? have you not a moist eye, a dry
hand, a yelow cheek, a white beard, a decreasing leg, an increasing belly? is
not your voice broken, your wind short, your chinne double, your wit single,
and every part about you blasted with antiquity, and will you yet call your
self young? fie, fie, fie, sir John.


John My Lord, I was borne about three of the clock in the afternoon, with a
white head, and something a round belly, for my voice, I have lost it with
hallowing, and singing of Anthems: to approve my youth further, I will not:
the truth is, I am only old in judgment and understanding: and he that will
caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him
for the box of the ^e^re that the Prince gave you, he gave it like a rude
Prince, and you took it like a sensible Lord: I have checked him for it, and
the young lion repents, mary not in ashes and sackcloth, but in new silk, and
old sack.


Lord Well, God send the prince a better companion.


John God send the companion a better prince, I cannot rid my hands of him.


Lord Well, the King has seuerd you: I hear you are going with lord John of
Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of Northumberland.


John Yea, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it: but look you pray, all you
that kiss my lady Peace at home, that our armies join not in a hot day, for,
by the Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, and I mean not to sweat
extraordinarily: if it be a hot day, and I brandish any thing but a bottle. I
would I might never spit white again: there is not a dangerous action can peep
out his head* but I am thrust upon it. Well, I cannot last ever, but it was
always yet the trick of our English nation, if they have a good thing, to make
it too common. If ye will needs say I am an old man you should give me rest:
I would to God my name were not so terrible to the enemy as it is, I were
better to be eaten do death with a rust, than to be scoured to nothing with
perpetual motion.


Lord Well, be honest* be honest, and God bless your expedition.


John Will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me forth?


Lord Not a penny, not a penny, you are too impatient to bear crosses: fare
you well: commend me to my coosine Westmerland.


John If I do, fillip me with a three man beetle: A man can no more separate
age and covetousness, than a can part young limbs and lechery, but the gowt
galls the one, and the pox pinches the other, and so both the degrees prevent
my curses, boy.


Boy Sir.


John What money is in my purse?


Boy Seven groates and two pence.


John I can get no remedy against this consumption of the purse, borrowing
only lingers and lingers it out, but the disease is incurable: Go bear this
letter to my lord of Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earl of
Westmerland, and this to old mistress Vrsula, whom I have weekly sworn to
marry since I perceiud the first white hair of my chin: about it, you know
where to find me: a pox of this gowt, or a gowt of this pox, for the one or
the other plays the rogue with my great toe. It Is no matter if I do hault, I
have the wars for my color, and my pension shall seem the more reasonable: a
good wit will make use of any thing; I will turn diseases to commodity.
Exeunt.


Enter the Archbishop, Thomas Mowbray (Earl Marshall) the Lord Hastings,
Fauconbridge, and Bardolfe. Bishop Thus have you heard our cause, and known
our means,
And my most noble friends, I pray you al
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes,
And first Lord Marshall, what say you to it?

Marsh. I well allow the occasion of our arms,
But gladly would be better satisfied,
How in our means we should advance ourselves,
To look with forehead, bold, and big enough,
Upon the power and puissance of the King.

Have. Ou^ (...) musters grow upon the file,
To five and twenty thousand men of choice,
And our supplies live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns
With an incensed fire of injuries.

Bard. The question then Lord Hastings stands thus,
Whether our present five and twenty thousand,
May hold up head without Northumberland.

Have. With him we may.

Bard. Yea mary, there is the point,
But if without him we be thought too feeble,
My judgment is we should not step too far.

Bish. It Is very true lord Bardolfe, for indeed
It was young Hot-spurs cause at Shrewsbury.

Bard. It was my Lord, who lined himself with hope,
Eating the air, and promise of supply,
Flattring himself in project of a power,
Much smaller then the smallest of his thoughts,
And so with great imagination,
Proper to madmen, led his powers to death,
And winking, leapt into destruction.

Have. But by your leave it never yet did hurt,
To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.

Bard. We fortify in paper and in figures,
Using the names of men in steed of men,
Like on that draws the model of an house,
Beyond his power to build it, who (half thorough)
Gives ore, and leaves his part-created cost,
A naked subject to the weeping clouds,
And waste for churlish winters tyranny.

Have. Grant that our hopes (yet likely of fair birth)
Should be still borne, and that we now possessed
The utmost man of expectation,
I think we are so, body strong enough,
Even as we are to equal with the King.

Bard. What, is the King but ^iue and twenty thousand?

Have. To us no more, nay not so much (...) Bardolfe,
For his divisions, as the times do brawle,
And in three heads, one power against the French,
And one against Glendower perforce a third
Must take up us, so is the vnfirme King
In three divided, and his coffers sound
With hollow poverty and emptiness.

Bish. That he should draw his several strengths together,
And come against us in full puissance,
Need not to be dreaded.

Have. If he should do so, French and Welsh he leaves his back vnarmde, they
baying him at the heels, never fear that.

Bar. Who is it like should lead his forces hither?

Have. The Duke of Lancaster and Westmerland:
Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth:
But who is substituted against the French
I have no certain notice.

Bish. Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on?

Have. We are Times subjects, and Time bids be gone. ex.

Enter Hostess of the Tavern, and an Officer or two. Hostess Master Phang,
have you entered the action?


Phang It is entered.


Host. Where Is your yeoman? is it a lusty yeoman? will a stand to it?


Phang Sir, where is Snare?


Host. O Lord I, good master Snare.


Snare Here, here.


Phang Snare, we must arest sir John Falstaff.


Host. Yea good master Snare, I have entered him and all.


Snare It may chance cost some of us our lives, for he will stabbe.


Host. Alas the day, take heed of him, he stabd me in mine own house, most
beastly in good faith, a cares not what mischief he does, if his weapon be
out, he will foyne like any devil, he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.


Phang If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.


Host. No nor I neither, le be at your elbow.


Phang And I but fist him once, and a come but within my view.


Host. I am undone by his going, I warrant you, he is an infinitive thing upon
my score, good master Phang hold him sure, good master Snare let him not
escape, a comes continually to Pie corner (saving your manhoods) to buy a
saddle, and he is indicted to dinner to the Lubbers head in Lumbert street to
master Smooths the silk man, I pray you since my exion is entered, and my case
so openly known to the world, let him be brought in to his answer, a hundred
mark is a long one, for a poor lone woman to bear and I have borne, and
borne, and borne, and have bin fubd off, and fubd off, and fubd off from this
day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on, there is no honesty in
such dealing, unless a woman should be made an ass, and a beast, to bear
every knaves wrong: yonder he comes, and that arrant malmsie-nose knave
Bardolfe with him, do your offices do your offices master Pha^g, and master
Snare, do me, do me, do me your offices.


Enter sir John, and Bardolfe, and the boy. Falst. How now, whose mare's dead?
what is the matter?


Phang I arrest you at the suit of mistress, quickly.


Falst. Away varlets, draw Bardolfe, cut me off the villains head, throw the
queen in the channel.


Host. Throw me in the channel? I Will throw thee in the channel, will thou, will thou, thou bastardly rogue, murder murder, a thou honisuckle villain, will thou kill Gods officers and the Kings? a thou honiseed rogue, thou art a
honiseed, a man queller, and a woman queller.


Falst. Keep them off Bardolfe.


Offic. A reskew, a reskew.


Host. Good people bring a reskew or two, thou wot, wot thou, thou wot, wot ta,
do do thou rogue, do thou hempseed.


Boy Away you scullian, you rampallian, you fustilarian, i will tickle your
catastrophe.


Enter Lord chief justice and his men. Lord What is the matter? keep the
peace here, ho.


Hostess Good my lord be good to me, I beseech you stand to me.


Lord How now sir John, what are you brawling here?
Does this become your place, your time, and business?
You should have bin well on your way to York:
Stand from him fellow wherefore hang'st thou upon him.

Host. O my most worshipful Lord, and't please your grace I am a poor widow
of East^heape, and he is arrested at my suit.


Lord For what sum?


Host. It is more then for some my Lord, it is for all I have, he has eaten me
out of house and home, he has put all my substance into that fat belly of his,
but I will have some of it out again, or I will ride thee a nights like the
mare.


Falst. I think I am as like to ride the mare if I have any vantage of ground
to get up.


Lord How comes this sir John? what man of good temper would endure this
tempest of exclamation, are you not ashamed to enforce a poor widow, to so
rough a course to come by her own.


Falst. What is the gross sum that I owe thee?


Host. Mary if thou were an honest man, thy self and the money too: thou did
swear to me upon a parcel guilt goblet, sitting in my dolphin chamber, at the
round table by a sea cole fire, upon wednesday in Wheeson week, when the
prince broke thy head, for liking his father to a singing man of Winsor, thou
did swear to me the^, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me, and make me
my lady thy wife, can thou deny (...) did not goodwife Keech the butchers
wife come in then and call me gossip Quickly, coming in to borow a mess of
vinegar, telling us she had a good dish of prawnes, whereby thou did desire
to eat some, whereby I told thee they were ill for a green wound, and did
thou not, when she was gone down stayers, desire me, to be no more so
familiarity, with such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me
madam, and did thou not kiss me, and bid me fetch thee thirty shillings, I
put thee now to thy book oath, dome it if thon can.


Falst. My lord this is a poor made^oule, and she says up and down the
town, that her eldest son is like you, she has bin in good case and the
truth is poverty has distracted her, but for these foolish officers, I
beseech you I may have redress against them.


Lo. Sir John sir John, I am well acquainted with your manner of wrenching the
true cause, the false way: it is not a confident brow, nor the throng of words
that come with such more then impudent sawcines from you can thrust me from a
leuel con^ideration: you have as it appears to me practisde upon the easy
yielding spirit of this woman, and made her serve your uses both in purse and
in person.


Host. Yea in truth my Lord.


Lo. Pray thee peace, pay her the debt you owe her, and vnpay the villainy you
have done with her, the one you may do with sterling money, and the other with
current repentance.


Falst. My Lord I will not undergo this snepe without reply, you call honorable
boldness impudent sauciness, if a man will make curtsie and say nothing, he is
virtuous, no my Lord my humble duty remembered, I will not be your s^^er, I say
to you I do desire deliverance from these officers, being upon hasty employment
in the Kings affairs.


Lord You speak as having power to do wrong, but answer in the effect of your
reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.


Falst. Come hither hostess.


Lord Now master Gower, what news. enter a messenger.


Gower The King my Lord, and Harry prince of Wales,
Are near at hand, the rest the paper tells.

Falst. As I am a gentleman!

Host. Faith you said so before.

Falst. As I am a gentleman, come, no more words of it.

Host. By this heaunly ground I tread on, I must be feign to pawn both my
plate, and the tapestry of my dining chambers-


Falst. Glasses glasses is the only drinking, and for thy walls a pretty
slight drollery, or the story of the prodigal, or the Iarman hunting in
waterworke, is worth a thousand of these bed-hangers, and these fly bitten
tapestrie, let it be x. ^ if thou can: come, and twere not for thy humors,
there is not a better wench in England, go wash thy face and draw the action,
come thou must not be in this humor with me, do not know me, come, come, I
know thou wast set on to this.


Host. Pray thee sir John let it be but twenty nobles, in faith I am loath to
pawn my p^^te so God save me law.


Falst. Let it alone, i will make other shift, you will be a fool still.


Host. Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown, I hope you will come to
supper, you will pay me altogether.


Falst. Will I live? go with her, with her, hook on, hook on. exit hostess
and sergeant.


Host. Will you have Doll Tere-sheet meet you at supper.


Falst. No more words, lets have her.


Lord I have heard better news.


Falst. What Is the news my lord?


Lord Where lay the King to night?


Mess. At Billingsgate my Lord.


Falst. I hope my Lord all is well, what is the news my lord?


Lord Come all his forces back?


Mess. No, fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse
Are marched up to my lord of Lancaster,
Against Northumberland, and the Archbishop.

Falst. Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?

Lord You shall have letters of me presently,
Come, go along with me, good master Gower.

Falst. My lord.

Lord What Is the matter?

Falstaff Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?


Gower I must wait upon my good lord here, I thank you good sir John.


Lord Sir John, you loyter here too long,
Being you are to take soldiers up
In Counties as you go.

Falstaff Will you suppe with me master Gower?

Lord What foolish master taught you these manners, sir John?


Falstaff Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool that taught
them me: this is the right fencing grace, my Lord, tap for tap, and so part
fair.


Lord Now the Lord lighten thee, thou art a great fool.


Enter the Prince, Poynes, sir s^^^ Russel, with other. Prince. Before God, I
am exceeding weary.


Poynes Is It come to that? I had thought wearines durst not have attacht one of
so hie blood.


Prince Faith it does me, though it discolors the complexion of my greatness to
acknowledge it: does it not show vildly in me to desire small beer?


Poynes Why a Prince should not be so loosely studied, as to remember so weak
a composition.


Prince Belike then my appetite was not princely got, for by my troth, I do
now remember the poor creature small beer. But indeed these humble
considerations make me out of love with my greatness. What a disgrace is it to
me to remember thy name? or to know thy face to morrow? or to take note how
many pair of silk stockings thou have with these, and those that were thy
peach colored once, or to bear the inventory of thy shirts, as one for
superfluity, and another for use. But that the Tennis court keeper knows
better than I, for it is a low eb of linen with thee when thou keep not
racket there, as thou have not done a great while, because the rest of the low
Countries have eat up thy holland: and God knows whether those that bal out
the ruins of thy linen shall inherit his kingdom: but the Midwines say, the
children are not in the fault whereupon the world increases, and kinreds are
mightily strengthened.


Poynes How ill it follows, after you have labored so hard, you should talk
so ydlely! tell me how many good young princes would do so, their fathers
being so sick, as yours at this time is.


Prince. Shall I tell thee one thing Poynes?


Poynes Yes faith, and let it be an excellent good thing.


Prince It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding then thine.


Poynes. Go to, I stand the push of your one thing that you will tell.


Prince Mary I tell thee it is not meet that I should be sad now my father is
sick, albeit I could tell to thee, as to one it pleases me for fault of a
better to call my friend, I could be sad, and sad indeed too.


Poynes Very hardly, upon such a subject.


Prince By this hand, thou think me as far in the devils book, as thou
and Falstaff, for obduracie and persistancie, let the end try the man, but I
tell thee, my heart bleeds inwardly that my father is so sick, and keeping such
vile company as thou art, has in reason taken from me all ostentation of
sorrow.


Poynes The reason.


Prince What would thou think of me if I should weep?


Poynes I would think thee a most princely hyprocrite.


Prince It would be every man's thought, and thou art a blessed fellow, to
think as every man thinks, never a man's thought in the world, keeps the rode
way better then thine, every man would think me an hypocrite indeed, and
what accites your most worshipful thought to think so?


Poynes Why because you have been so lewd and so much engraffed to Falstaff.


Prince And to thee.


Poyne By this light I am well spoke on, I can hear it with mine own ^ares
the worst that they can say of me is that I am a second brother, and that I am
a proper fellow of my hands, and those two things I confess I cannot help: by
the mass here comes Bardol^e.


Enter Bardolfe and boy. Prince And the boy that I gave Falstaff, a had him
from me Christian, and look if the ^at villain have not transformd him Ape.


Bard. God save your grace.


Prince And yours most noble Bardolfe.


Poynes Come you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be blushing,
wherefore blush you now? what a maidenly man at arms are you become? is it such
a matter to get a pottle-pots maidenhead?


Boy A calls me enough my Lord, through a red lattice, and I could discern no
part of his face from the window* at last I spied his eyes, and me thought he
had made two holes in the ale wives pet^cote and so peept through.


Prince Has not the boy profited?


Bard. Away you horson upright rabble, away.


Boy Away you rascally Altheas dream, away.


Prince Instruct us boy, what dream boy?


Boy Mary my lord, Althear dreampt she was delivered of a firebrand, and
therefore I call him her dream.


Prince A crowns worth of good interpretation there it is boy.


Poines O that this blossom could be kept from cankers* well, there is
sixpence to preserve thee.


Bard. And you do not make him hanged among you, the gallows shall have wrong.


Prince And how does thy master Bardolfe?


Bard. Well my Lord, he heard of your graces coming to town, there is a letter
for you.


Poynes Deliuerd with good respect, and how does the martlemasse your master?


Bard. In bodily health sir.


Poynes Mary the immortal part needs a physician, but that moves not him,
though that be sick, it dies not.


Prince I do allow this Wen to be as familiar with me, as my dog and he holds
his place, for look you how he writes.


Poynes John Falstaff Knight, every man must know that as often as he has
occasion to name himself: even like those that are kin to the King for they
never prick their finger, but they say, there is some of the Kings blood spilt:
how comes that (says he) that takes upon him not to conceive the answer is as
ready as a borrowed cap: I am the Kings poor cousin, sir.


Prince Nay they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from Iaphet, but the
letter, Sir John Falstaff knight, to the son of the king, nearest his
father, Harry prince of Wales, greeting.


Poynes Why this is a certificate.


Prince Peace.
I will imitate the honorable Romans in brevity.

Poynes He sure means breuity in breath, short winded, I commend me to thee,
I commend thee, and, I leave thee, be not too familiar with Poynes, for he
misuses thy favors so much, that he swears thou art to mary his sister Nel,
repent at idle times as thou may, and so farwell.

Thine by yea* and no, which is as much as to say, as thou use him, Jack
Falstaff with my family, John with my brothers and sisters, and sir John with
all Europe.


Poynes My Lord, I Will steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.


Prince That's to make him eat twenty of his words, but do you use me, thus
Ned? must I marry your sister?


Poynes God send the wench no worse fortune, but I never said so.


Prince Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits of the wise
sit in the clouds and mock us, is your master here in London?


Bard. Yea my Lord.


Prince Where sups he? does the old boar feed in the old Frank?


Bard. At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheape.


Prince What company?


Boy. Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.


Prince Sup any women with him?


Boy None my lord, but old mistress Quickly, and mistress Dol Tere-sheet.


Prince What Pagan may that be?


Boy A proper gentlewoman sir, and a kinswoman of my masters.


Prin^e Even such kin as the parish Hei^fors are to the town ^ull, shall we
steal upon them Ned at supper?


Poynes I am your shadow my Lord, i will follow you.


Prince Sir* you boy and Bardolfe, no word to your master that I am yet come
to town; there is for your silence.


Bar. I have no tongue sir.


Boy And for mine sir, I will govern it.


Prince Fare you well: go, this Doll Tere-sheete should be some rode.


Poyns I warrant you, as common as the way between S. Albons and London.


Prince How might we see Falstaff bestow himself to night in his true colors,
and not our selves be seen?


Poynes Put on two letherne ierkins and aprons, and wait upon him at his table
as drawers.


Prince From a god to a bull, a heavy descension, it was Jove's case, from a
pince to a prentise, a low transformation, that shall be mine, for in every
thing the purpose must weigh with the folly, follow me Ned. exeunt.


Enter Northumberland his wife, and the wife to Harry Percie. North. I pray
thee loving wife and gentle daughter,
Give even way unto my rough affairs,
Put not you on the visage of the times,
And be like them to Percy troublesome.

Wife I have given over, I will speak no more,
Do what you will, your wisdom be your guide.

North. Alas sweet wife, my honor is at pawn,
And but my going, nothing can redeem it.

Kate O yet for Gods sake go not to these wars,
The time was father, that you broke your word,
When you were more endeere to it then now,
When your own Percie, when my hearts dear Harry,
Threw many a Northward look, to see his father
Bring up his powers, but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two honors lost, yours* and your sons,
For yours, the God of heaven brighten it,
For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
In the gray vault of heaven, and by his light
Did all the Cheualry of England move
To do brave acts, he was indeed the glass
Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves.

North. Beshrew your heart,
Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me,
With new lamenting ancient ouersights,
But I must go and meet with danger there,
Or it will seek me in an other place,
And find me worse provided.

Wife O fly to Scotland,
Till that the nobles and the armed commons,
Have of their puissance made a little taste.

Kate If they get ground and vantage of the King,
Then join you with them like a ribbe of steel,
To make strength stronger: but for all our loves,
First let them try themselves, so did your son,
He was so suffered, so came I a widow,
And never shall have length of life enough,
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes,
That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven,
For recordation to my noble husband.

North. Come, come* go in with me, it is with my mind,
As with the tide, sweld up unto his height,
That makes a still stand, running neither way,
Feign would I go to meet the Archbishop,
But many thousand reasons hold me back,
I will resolve for Scotland, there am I,
Till time and vantage crave my company. exeunt.

Enter a Drawer or two. Francis What the devil have thou brought there apple
John's? thou know sir John cannot endure an apple John.


Draw. ^as thou say true, the prince once set a dish of apple John's before
him, and told him there were five more sir John's, and putting off his hat,
said, I will now take my leave of these six d^ie, round, old, withered Knights,
it angered him to the heart, but he has forgot that.


Fran. Why then cover and set them down, and see if thou can find out
Sneakes Noise, mistress Tere-sheet would feign hear some music.


Dra. Dispatch, the room where they supt is too hot, they will come in straight.


Fr^ncis Sir, here will be the prince and master Poynes anon, and they will
put on two of our ierkins and aprons, and sir John must not know of it,
Bardolfe has brought word.


Enter Will. Dra. By the mas here will be old vtis, it will be an excellent
stratagem.


Francis I Will see if I can find out Sneake. exit


Enter mistress Quickly, and Doll Tere-sheet. Quickly In Faith sweet heart, me
thinks now you are in an excellent good temperalitie. Your pulsidge beats as
extraordinarily as heart would desire, and your color I warrant you is as red
as any rose, in good truth law: but in faith you have drunk too much cannaries,
and that's a marvelous searching wine, and it perfumes the blood ere one can
say, what is this, how do you now?


Tere. Better then I was: hem.


Qui. Why that's well said, a good heart's worth gold: lo here comes sir John.


enter sir John. sir John When Arthur first in court empty the iourdan and was
a worthy King: how now mistress Doll?


host. Sick of a calm, yea good faith.


Falst. So is all her sect, and they be once in a calm they are sick.


Tere. A pox damn you, you muddie rascal, is that all the comfort you give me?


Falst. You make fat rascals mistress Dol.


Tere. I make them? gluttony, and diseases make, I make them not.


Falst. If the cook help to make the gluttony you help to make the diseases
Doll, we catch of you Doll, we catch of you grant that my poor virtue, grant
that.


Doll Yea joy, our chains and our jewels.


Fa. Your brooches, pearls, and ouches for to serve bravely, is to come
halting off, you know to come off the breach, with his pike bent bravely, and
to surgerie bravely, to venture upon the chargde chambers bravely.


Doll Hang your self, you muddie Cunger, hang your self.


host By my troth this is the old fashion, you two never meet but you fall to
some discord, you are both ygood truth as rue matique as two dry tosts, you
cannot one bear with another co^firmities, what the goodyere one must bear*
and that must ^e you, you are the weaker vessel, as they say* the emptier
vessel.


Dorothy Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogshead? there is a
whole marcha^ts venture of Burdeux stuff in him, you have not seen a hulke
better stuffed in the hold. Come, i will be friends with thee jack, thou art going
to the wars, and whether I shall ever see thee again or no there is no body
cares.


Enter drawer. Dra. Sir, Ancient pistols below, and would speak with you.


Dol Hang him swaggering rascal, let him not come hither it is the
foule-mouthd'st rogue in England.


host. If he swagger, let him not come here, no by my faith I must live among
my neighbors, i will no swaggerers, I am in good name, and same with the very
best: shut the door, there comes no swaggerers here, I have not lived all this
while to have swaggering now, shut the door I pray you.


Fall. Do thou hear hostess?


Host. Pray ye pacify your self sir John, there comes no swaggerers here.


Fall. Do thou hear? it is mine Ancient.


Ho. Tilly fally, sir John, nere tell me: and your ancient swaggrer comes not in
my doors: I was before master Tisicke the debuty the other day, and (as he said
to me) it was no longer ago than wedsday last, I good faith neighbor Quickly,
says he, master Dumb our minister was by then, neighbor Quickly (says he)
receive those that are civil, for (said he) you are in an ill name: now a
said so* I can tell whereupon. For (says he) you are an honest woman, and
well thought on, therefore take heed what ghests you receive, receive (says
he) no swaggering companions: there comes none here: you would bless you to
hear what he said: no, I Will no swaggrers.


Falst. He Is no swaggrer hostess, a tame ch^ter ysaith, you may stroke him as
gently as a puppy greyhound, heel not swagger with a Barbary hen, if her
feathers turn back in any show of resistance, call him up Drawer.


Host. Cheter call you him? I will bar no honest man my house, nor no cheter,
but I do not love swagering by my troth, I am the worse when one says swagger:
feel masters, how I shake, look you, I warrant you.


T^resh. So you do hostess.


Host. Do I? yea in very truth do I, and twere an aspen leaf, I cannot
abide swaggrers.


Enter ancient Pistol, and Bardolfes b^y. Pistol God save you sir John.


Fall. Welcome ancient Pistol, here Pistol, I charge you with a cup of
sack, do you discharge upon mine hostess.


Pist. I will discharge upon her sir John, with two bullets.


Fall. she is pistol proof: sir, you shall not hardely offend her.


Host. Come, I Will drink no proofs, nor no bullets, I Will drink no more than will
do me good, for no man's pleasure, I.


Pist. Then, to you mistress Dorothy, I will charge you.


Doro. Charge me? I scorn you, scuruy companion: what you poor base rascally
cheting lacke-linnen mate? away you mouldie rogue, away, I am meat for your
master.


Pist. I know you mistress Dorothy.


Doro. Away you cutpurse rascal, you filthy boung, away, by this wine I Will
thrust my knife in your mouldie chappes and you play the saucy cuttle with me.
Away you bottle ale rascal, you basket hilt stale iuggler, you. Since when, I
pray you sir: Gods light, with two points on your shoulder? much.


Pist. God let me not live, but I will murder your ruff for this.


sir John No more Pistol, I would not have you go off here, discharge your
self of our company, Pistol.


Host. No, good captain Pistol, not here, sweet captain^.


Doro. Captain, thou abominable damnd cheter, art thou not ashamed to be
called Captain? and Captains were of my mind, they would trunchion you out,
for taking their names upon you, before you have earnd them: you a captain?
you slave, for what? for teareing a poor whoores ruff in a bawdy house: he a
captain! hang him rogue, he lives upon mowldy stewd pr^ins, and dried cakes: a
captain? Gods light these villains will make the word as odious as the word
occupy, which was an excellent good word before it was il sorted, therefore
captains had need look too^t.


Bard. Pray thee go down good Ancient.


Falst. Hark thee hither mistress Dol.


Pist. Not I, I tell thee what corporal Bardolfe, I could tear her, I Will be
reuengde of her.


Bo^ Pray thee go down.


Pist. I Will see her damnd first, to Plutoes damnd lake by this hand to
the infernal deep, with erebus and tortures vile also: hold hook and line, say
I: down, down dogs, down faters have we not Hiren here?


Host. Good captain Peesell be quiet, it is very late in faith, I beseeke you now
aggrauate your choler.


Pist These be good humors indeed, shall pack-horses, and hollow pamperd iades
of Asia which cannot go but thirty mile a day, compare with Caesar's and with
Canibals, and troiant Greeks? nay rather damn them with King Cerbe^us, and
let the Welkin roar, shall we fall foul for toies?


Host. By my troth captain, these are very bitter words.


Bard. Be gone good Ancient, this will grow to a brawle anon.


Pist. Men like dogs give crowns like pins, have we not Hiren here?


Host. A my word Captain, there is none such here, what the goodyeare do you
think I would deny her? for Gods sake be quiet.


Pist. Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis, come gives some sack, si
fortune me tormente sperato me contento, fear we broad sides? no, let the
fiend give fire, give me some sack, and sweet heart, lie thou there, come we to
full points here? and are and caeteraes, no things?


Falst. Pistol, I would be quiet.


Pist. Sweet Knight, I kiss thy neaffe, what, we have seen the seven stars.


Dol. For Gods sake thrust him down stairs, I cannot endure such a fustian
rascal.


Pist Thrust him down stairs, know we not Galloway nagges?


Falst. Quaite him down Bardolfe like a shoue-groat shilling, nay, and a do
nothing but speak nothing, a shall be nothing here.


Bard Come, get you down stairs.


Pist. What shall we have incision? shall we imbrew? then death rock me a
sleep, abridge my doleful days: why then let grieuons ghastly gaping wounds
vntwinde the sisters three, come Atropose I say.


Host. Here Is goodly stuff toward.


Falst. Give me my rapier, boy.


Dol I pray thee Jack, I pray thee do not draw.


Fall. Get you down stairs.


Host. Here Is a goodly tumult, i will forswear keeping house before i will be in these
tirrits and frights, so, murder I warant now, alas, alas, put up your naked
weapons, put up your naked weapons.


Dol. I pray thee Jack be quiet, the rascal's gone, ah you horson little
vliaunt villain you.


Host. Are you not hurt in the groyne? me thought a made a shrewd thrust at your
belly.


Fall. Have you turned him out a doors?


Bar. Yea sir, the rascal's drunk, you have hurt him sir in the shoulder.


Fall. A rascal to brave me?


Dol A you sweet little rogue you, alas poor ape how thou sweatst, come let me
wipe thy face, come on you horsone chops: a rogue, in faith I love thee, thou art
as valorous as Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better
then the nine Worthies, a villain!


Fall. Ah rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a blanket.


Dol Do and thou dare for thy heart, and thou do, i will canuas thee between a
pair of sheets.


Roy The music is come sir. enter music.


Fall. Let them play, play sirs, sit on my knee Doll, a rascal bragging slave!
the rogue fled from me like quicksiluer.


Dol In Faith and thou followdst him like a church, thou horson little tydee
Bartholemew borepigge, when will thou leave sighting a days and foyning a
nights, and begin to patch up thine old body for heaven.


Enter Prince and Poynes. Fall Peace good Doll, do not speak like a deaths
head, do not bid me remember mine end.


Dol Sir, what humour's the prince of?


Fall. A good shallow young fellow, a would have made a good pantler, a would a
chipt bread well.


Dol They say Poine^ has a good wit.


Fall. He a good wit* hang him baboon, his wit's as thick as Tewksbury mustard,
there is no more conceit in him then is in a mallet.


Dol Why does the prince love him so then?


Fall. Because their legs are both of a bigness* and a plays at quoites
well, and eats cunger and fennel, and drinks off candles ends for
slappe-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and iumpes upon
ioynd-stooles, and swears with a good grace, and wears his boots very
smoothe like unto the sign of the Leg, and breeds no bate with telling of
discreet stories, and such other gambole faculties a has that show a weak
mind, and an able body for the which the prince admits him: for the prince
himself is such another, the weight of a hair will turn scales between their
haber de poiz.


Prince Would not this naue of a wheel have his ears cut off?


Poynes Lets beat him before his whore.


Prince Look where the witherd elder has not his poule clawd like a parrot.


Poynes Is it not strange that desire should so many years out live
performance.


Falst* Kiss me Doll,


Prince Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction? what says th'Almanacke to
that?


Poyns And look whether the fiery Trigon his man be not lisping to his master,
old tables, his note book, his counsel keeper?


Falst. Thou do give me ^lattering busses.


Dol By my troth I kiss thee with a most constant heart.


Falst. I am old, I am old.


Dol. I love thee better then I love, ere a scuruy young boy of them all.


Fall. What stuff wilt have a kirtle of? I shall receive money a thursday, shall
have a cap to morrow: a merry song come it grows late, we will to bed, thou^t
forget me when I am gone.


Dol By my troth thou't set me a weeping and thou say so, prove that ever I
dress my self handsome til thy return, well hearken a*th end.


Fall. Some sack Francis.


Prince, Poynes Anon anon sir.


Falst. Ha? a bastard son of the Kings? and art not thou Poynes his brother?


Prince Why thou globe of sinful continents, what a life do thou lead?


Falst. A better then thou, I am a gentleman, thou art a drawer.


Prince Very true sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.


Host. O the Lord preserve thy grace: by my troth welcome to London, now the
Lord bless that sweet face of thine, O Jesus, are you come from Wales?


Falst. Thou horson mad compound of majesty, by this light, flesh, and
corrupt blood, thou art welcome.


Doll How? you fat fool I scorn you.


Poynes My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge, and turn all to a
meriment if you take not the heat.


Prince You horson candlemine you, how vildly did you speak of me now, before
this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman?


Host. Gods blessing of your good heart, and so she is by my troth.


Falst. Did thou hear me?


Prince Yea and you knew me as you did, when you ran away by Gadshil* you
knew I was at your back, and spoke it, on purpose to try my patience.


Falst. No, no, no, not so, I did not think thou wast within hearing.


Prince I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and then I know
how to handle you.


Falst. No abuse Hall a mine honor, no abuse.


Prince Not to dispraise me, and call me pantler and bread-chipper, and I know
not what?


Fall. No abuse Hall.


Poynes No abuse?


Falst No abuse Ned in the world, honest Ned, none, I dispraisde him before the
wicked, that the wicked might not fall in love with thee: in which doing, I
have done the part of a careful f^iend and a true subject, and thy father is
to give me thanks for it, no abuse Hall, none Ned, none, no faith boys none.


Prince See now whether pure fear and entire cowardice, does not make thee
wrong this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us: is she of the wicked, is
thine hostess here of the wicked, or is thy boy of the wicked or honest
Bardolfe whose zeal burns in his nose of the wicked?


Poynes Answer thou dead elm, answer.


Falst. The fiend has pricked down Bardolfe irrecouerable, and his face is
Lucifers privy kitchen, where he does nothing but roast mault-worms, for the boy
there is a good angel about him, but the devil blinds him too.


Prince For the weomen.


Falst. For one of them she is in hell already, and burns poor souls: for
the other I owe her money, and whether she be damnd for that I know not.


Host. No I warrant you.


Falst. No I think thou art not, I think thou art quit for that, mary there
is another indictment upon thee, for suffering flesh to be eaten in thy house
contrary to the law, for the which I think thou will howl.


Host. Al vitlars do so, what is a joint of mutton or two in a whole Lent?


Prince You gentlewoman.


Dol What says your grace?


Fall. His grace says that which his flesh rebels against.


Peyto knockes at door. Host. Who knockes so loud at door? look too'th door
there Francis.


Prince Peyto, how now, what news?


Peyto The King your father is at Westminster,
And there are twenty weak and wearied posts,
Come from the North, and as I came along
I met and ouertooke a dozen captains,
Bareheaded, sweating, knocking at the Tauernes,
And asking every one for sir John Falstaff.

Prince By heaven Poines, I feel me much too blame,
So idely to profane the precious time,
When tempest of commotion like the south.
Borne with black vapor does begin to melt,
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads,
Give me my sword and cloak: Falstaff good night.

exeunt Prince and Poynes. Fall. Now coms in the sweetest morsel of the night,
and we must hence and leave it vnpickt: more knocking at the door, how now,
what is the matter?


Bar. You must away to court sir presently,
A dozen captains stay at door for you.

Fall. Pay the musitions sir, farewell hostess, farewell Dol, you see my good
wenches how men of merrite are sought after, the vndeseruer may sleep, when
the man of action is called on, farewell good wenches, if I be not sent away
post, I will see you again ere I go.


Doll I cannot speak, if my heart be not ready to burst: well sweet Jack, have
a care of thy self.


Fall. Farewell, farewell.


Host. Well, fare thee well, I have known thee these twenty nine years, come
pease-cod time, but an honester, and truer hearted man: well, fare thee well.


Bard. Mistress Tere-sheete.


Host. What Is the matter?


Bard. Bid mistress Tere-sheete come to my master.


Host. O run Doll, run, run good Doll, come, she comes blubberd, yea?
will you come Doll? exeunt


Enter Justice Shallow, and Justice Silens. Sha. Come on, come on, come on,
give me your hand sir, give me your hand sir, an early stirrer, by the Roode:
and how does my good coosin Silence?


Si. Good morrow good coosine Shallow.


Sha. And how does my coosin your bedfellow? and your fairest daughter and
mine, my god-daughter Ellen?


Si. Alas, a black woosel, coosin Shallow.


Sha. By yea, and no sir, I dare say my coosin William is become a good
scholar, he is at Oxford still, is he not?


Si. Indeed sir to my cost.


Sha. A must then to the Innes a court shortly: I was once of Clements Inn,
where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.


Si. You were called Lusty Shallow then, coosin.


Sha. By the mass I was called any thing, and I would have done any thing
indeed too, and roundly too: there was I, and little John Doyt of
Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and Francis Pickebone, and Will Squele
a Cotsole man, you had not four such swinge bucklers in all the Innes a court
again, and I may say to you; we knew where the bona robes were, and had the
best of them all at commandment: then was Jack Falstaff, now sir John, a
boy, and page to Thomas Mowbray duke of Norffolke.


Si. This sir John coosin, that comes hither anon about soldiers?


Sha. The same sir John, the very same, I see him break Skoggins head at the
Court gate, when a was a Crack, not thus high: and the very same day did I
fight with one Samson Stockefish a Fruiterer behind Greyes Inn: Jesus, Jesus,
the mad days that I have spent! and to see how many of my old acquaintance
are dead.


Si. We shall all follow, coosin.


Sha. Certain, it is certain, very sure, very sure, death (as the Psalmist
says) is certain to all all shall die. How a good yoke of bullockes at
Samforth fair?


Si. By my troth I was not there.


Sha. Death is certain: Is old Dooble of your town living yet?


Si. Dead sir.


Sha. Jesus, Jesus, dead! a drew a good bow, and dead? a shot a fine shoot: John
a Gaunt loved him well, and betted much money on his head. Dead? a would have
clapped ith clowt at twelve score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen
and fourteen and a half, that it would have done a man's heart good to see.
How a score of Ewes now?


Si. Thereafter as they be, a score of good ewes may be worth ten pounds.


Sha. And is old Dooble dead?


Si. Here come two of sir John Falstaffes men, as I think.
Enter Bardolfe, and one with him Good morrow honest gentlemen.

Bardolfe I beseech you, which is justice Shallow?

Sha: I am Robart Shallowe, sir, a poor Esquier of this County, and one of
the Kings justices of the peace: what is your good pleasure with me?


Bard: My Captain, sir, commends him to you, my Captain sir John Falstaff, a
tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant Leader.


Sha: He greetes me well, sir, I knew him a good backsword man: how does the
good Knight? may I ask how my Lady his wife does.


Bar. Sir, pardon, a soldier is better accommodate the^ with a wife.


Shall. It is well said infaith sir, and it is well said indeed too, better
accomodated, it is good, yea indeed is it, good phrases are surely, and ever
were, very commendable, accommodated, it comes of accommodo, very good, a good
phrase.


Bar. Pardon sir, I have heard the word, Phrase call you it? by this day I
know not the phrase, but I will maintain the word with my sword to be a
souldierlike word, and a word of exceeding good command by heaven,
accommodated, that is when a man is as they say, accommodated, or when a man is
being whereby, a may be thought to be accommodated, which is an excellent thing.


Enter Falstaff. Just. It is very just, look, here comes good sir John, give
me your good hand, give me your worshippes good hand, by my troth you like
well, and bear your years very well, welcome good sir John.


Falst. I am glad to see you well, good master Robert Shallow, master Soccard
(as I think.)


Shall. No sir John, it is my cosen Scilens in commssion with me.


Falst. Good master Scilens, it well befits you should be of the peace.


Scil. Your good worship is welcome.


Fall. Fie this is hot weather gentlemen, have you provided me here half a
dozen sufficient men?


Shall. Mary have we sir, will you sit?


Fall. Let me see them I beseech you.


Shall. Where Is the roll? where is the roll? where is the roll? let me see, let me
see* let me see, so, so, so, so, so, (so, so) yea mary sir, Rafe Moldy let
them appear as I call, let them do, so, let them do, so, let me see, where is
Moldy?


Moldy Here, and 't please you.


Shall. What think you sir John, a good limbde, fellow, young, strong, and of good
friends.


Fall. Is thy name Mouldie?


Moul. Yea, and 't please you.


Fall. It Is the more time thou were used.


Shall. Ha, ha, ha, most excellent in faith, things that are moldy lack use:
very singular good, infaith well said sir John very well said. John pricks him.


Moul. I was pricked well enough before, and you could have let me alone, my old
dame will be undone now for one to do her husbandry, and her drudgery, you
need not to have pricked me, there are other men fitter to go out then I.


Fall. Go to, peace Moldy, you shall go, Moldy it is time you were spent.


Moul. Spent?


Shall. Peace fellow, peace, stand aside, know you where you are? for the other
sir John: let me see Simon Shadow.


Fall. Yea mary, let me have him to sit under, he is like to be a cold soldiour.


Shall. Where Is Shadow?


Shad. Here sir.


Fall. Shadow, whose son art thou?


Shad. My mothers son sir.


Fall. Thy mothers sonne^ like enough, and thy fathers shadow, so the son of
the female is the shadow of the male: it is often so indeed, but much of the
fathers substance.


Shall. Do you like him sir John?


Fall. Shadow will serve for summer, prick him, for we have a number of shadows
fill up the muster book.


Shall. Thomas Wart.


Fall. Where Is he?


Wart Here sir.


Fall. Is thy name Wart?


Wart Yea sir.


Fall. Thou art a very ragged wart.


Shall. Shall I prick him sir John?


Fall. It were superfluous, for apparel is built upon his back, and the whole
frame stands upon pins* p^icke him no more.


Shall. Ha, ha, ha, you can do it sir, you can do it, I commend you well:
Francis Feeble.


Feeble Here sir.


Shall. What trade art thou Feeble?


Feeble A woman's tailer sir.


Shall. Shall I prick him sir?


F^l. You may, but if he had bin a man's tailer he would a pricked you: will thou
make as many holes in an enemies battle, as thou have done in a woman's
peticoate.


Feeble I will do my good will sir, you can have no more.


Fall. Well said good woman's tailer, well said courageous Feeble, thou will be
as valiant as the wrathful dove, or most magnanimous mouse, prick the woman's
tailer: well M. Shallow, deep M. Shallow.


Feeble I would Wart might have gone sir.


Fall. I would thou were a man's tailer, that thou might mend him and make him
fit to go, I cannot put him to a private soldier, that is the leader of so
many thousands, let that suffice most forcible Feeble.


Feeble It shall suffice sir.


Fall. I am bound to thee reverend Feeble, who is next?


Shall. Peter Bul-calfe o'th green.


Fall. Yea mary, lets see Bul-calfe.


Bull. Here sir.


Eal. Fore God a likely fellow, come prick Bul-calfe til he roar again.


Bull. O Lord, good my lord captain.


Falst. What, do thou roar before thou art pricked?


Bull. O Lord sir, I am a diseased man.


Fall. What disease have thou?


Bull. A horson cold sir, a cough sir, which I cought with ringing in the Kings
affairs upon his coronation day sir.


Fall. Come, thou shall go to the wars in a gown, we will have away thy cold,
and I will take such order that thy friends shall ring for thee. Is here all?


Shall. Here is two more called then your number, you must have but four here
sir, and so I pray you go in with me to dinner.


Fa. Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner: I am glad to see
you, by my troth master Shallow.


Shall. O sir John, do you remember since we lay all night in the windmil in
saint Georges field?


Fall. No more of that master Shallow.


Shall. Ha, it was a merry night, and is lane Night-worke alive?


Falst. She lives master Shallow.


Shall. She never could away with me.


Fa. Never never, she would always say, she could not abide master Shallow.


Sha. By the mass I co^ld anger her too^th heart, she was then a bona roba,
does she hold her own well?


Fall. Old old master Shallow.


Shall. Nay she must be old, she cannot choose but be old, certain she is old, and
had Robin Night-work by old Night-work, before I came to Clements inn.


Scilens That's fifty five year ago.


Shall. Ha cosen Scilens that thou had seen that that this Knight and I have
seen, ha sir John, said I well?


Fall We have heard the chimes at midnight M. Shallow.


Sha. That we have that we have, that we have, in faith sir John we have, our
watch-worde was Hemboies, come lets to dinner, come lets to dinner, Jesus the
days that we have seen, come, come. exeunt.


Bull. Good master corporate Bardolfe, stand my friend, and here is four Harry
tenshillings in french crowns for you, in very truth sir,. I had as live be
hanged sir as go, and yet for mine own part sir I do not care, but rather
because I am unwilling, and for mine own part have a desire to stay with my
friends, else sir I did not care for mine own part so much.


Bard. Go to, stand aside.


Moul. And good M. corporal captain, for my old dames sake stand my friend,
she has no body to do any thing about her when I am gone, and she is old and
cannot help her self, you shall have forty sir.


Bar. Go to, stand aside.


Feeble By my troth I care not, a man can die but once, we owe God a death, i will
nere bear a base mind, and't be my destny: so, and't be not, so, no man's too
good to serue's prince, and let it go which way it will, he that dies this
year is quit for the next.


Bar Well said, thou art a good fellow.


Feeble Faith i will bear no base mind.


Enter Falstaff and the Justices. Fall. Come sir, which men shall I have?


Shall. Four of which you please.


Bar Sir, a word with you, I have three pound to free Moldy and Bulcalfe.


Fall. Go to, well.


Shall. Come sir John, which four will you have?


Fall. Do you choose for me.


Shall. Mary then, Moldy, Bulcalfe, Feeble, and Sadow.


Fall. Moldy and Bulcalfe, for you Moldy stay at home, til you are past
service: and for your part Bulcalfe, grow til you come unto it, I will none of
you.


Shall. Sir John, sir John, do not your self wrong, they are your likeliest
men, and I would have you serude with the best.


Fall. Will you tell me (master Shallow) how to choose a man? care I for the limb,
the thewes, the stature, bulk and big assemblance of a man: give me the spirit
M. Shalow: here is Wart, you see what a ragged appearance it is, a shall charge
you, and discharge you with the motion of a pewterers hammer, come off and on
swifter then he that gibbets on the brewers bucket: and this same half facde
fellow Shadow, give me this man, he presents no mark to the enemy, the fo-man
may with as great aim leuel at the edge of a penknife, and for a retraite how
swiftly will this Feeble the woman's Tailer run off? O give me the spare men,
and spare me the great ones, put me a caliuer into Warts hand Bardolfe.


Bar. Hold Wart, trauers thas, thas, thas.


Fall. Come manage me your caliuer: so, very well, go to, very good, exceeding
good, O give me always a little lean, old chopped Ballde, shot: well said
in faith Wart, thou art a good scab, hold, there is a tester for thee.


Shall. He is not his crafts-master, he does not do it right; I remember at
Mile-end-greene, when I lay at Clements Inn, I was then sir Dagonet in Arthurs
show, there was a little quiver fellow, and a would manage you his piece thus,
and a would about and about, and come you in, and come you in, rah, tah, tah,
would a say, bounce would a say, and away again would a go, and again would a
come: I shall nere see such a fellow.


Fall. These fellows wool do well M. Shallow, God keep you M. Scilens, I will
not use many words with you, fare you well gentlemen both, I thank you, I must a
dosen mile to night: Bardolfe, give the soldiers coats.


Shall. Sir John, the Lord bless you, God prosper your affairs, God send us
peace at your return, visit our house, let our old acquaintance be renewed,
peradventure I will with ye to the court.


Fall. Fore God would you would.


Shall. Go to, I have spoke at a word, God keep you


Fall. Fare you well gentle gentlemen. exit


(...) On Bardolfe, lead the men away, as I return I will fetch off these
justices, I do see the bottom of justice Shallow, Lord, Lord, how subject we
old men are to this vice of lying, this same starved justice has done nothing
but prate to me, of the wildness of his youth, and the feats he has done
about Turne-bull street, and every third word a lie, dewer paid to the hear^r
then the Turks tribute, I do remember him at Clements Inn, like a man made
after supper of a cheese paring, when a was naked, he was for all the world
like a forkt reddi^h with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife, a
was so forlorn, that his demensions to any thick sight were invincible, a was
the very genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkie, and the whores called him
mandrake, a came over in the rereward of the fashion, and sung those tunes to
the ouerschutcht huswiues, that he heard the Car-men whistle, and swear they
were his fancies or his good-nights, and now is this vices dagger become a
squire, and talks as familiarly of John a Gaunt, as if he had bin sworn
brother to him, and i will be sworn a nere saw him but once in the tylt-yard, and
then he burst his head for crowding among the Marshalles men, I saw it and told
John a Gaunt he beat his own name, for you might have thrust him and all his
aparell into an eele-skin, the case of a treble hoboy was a mansion for him a
Court, and now has he land and beefes. Well* i will be acquainted with him if I
return, and t'shal go hard, but i will make him a philosophers two stones to me,
if the young Dase be a bait for the old Pik^, I see no reason in the law of
nature but I may snap at him, till Time shape, and there an end.


Enter the Archbishop, Mowbray, Bardolfe, Hastings, within the forest of
Gaultree. Bish. What is this forest called?

Have. It Is Gaultree forest, and't shall please your grace.

Bishop Here stand, my lords, and send discouerers forth*
To know the numbers of our enemies:

Hastings We have sent forth already.

Bishop It Is well done,
My friends and brethren (in these great aff^ires)
I must acquaint you, that I have received
New dated letters from Northumberland,
Their cold intent, tenure, and substance thus:
Here does he wish his person, with such powers,
As might hold sortance with his quallitie,
The which he could not leuy: whereupon
He is retirde to ripe his growing fortunes,
To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers,
That your attempts may ouer-liue the hazard
And fearful meeting of their opposite.

Mowb. Thus do the hopes we have in him, touch ground,
And dash themselves to pieces. Enter messenger

Hastings Now, what news?

Messenger West of this forest, scarc^ly off a mile,
In goodly form comes on the enemy,
And by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon, or near the rate of thirty thousand.

Mowbray The just proportion that we gave them out,
Let us sway on, and face them in the field.

Bishop What well appointed Leader fronts us here?

Enter Westmerland Mowbray I think it is my lord of Westmerland.

West. Health and fair greeting from our General,
The prince lord John and duke of Lancaster.

Bishop Say on my lord of Westmerland in peace,
What does concern your coming?

We. Then my L. unto your Grace do I in chief address
The substance of my speech: if that rebellion
Came like it self, in base and a abject rowtes,
Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rage,
And countenaunst by boys and beggary.
I say, if damnd commotion so appear,
In his true, native, and most proper shape,
You, reverend father, and these noble Lords,
Had not been here to dress the owgly form
Of base and bloody Insurrection
With your fair Honors. You (lord Archbishop)
Whose Sea is by a civil peace maintainde,
Whose beard the silver hand of Peace has touched,
Whose learning and good letters Peace has tutord,
Whose white inuestments figure innocence,
The Dove, and very blessed spirit of peace.
Wherefore do you so ill translate your self
Out of the speech of peace that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boystrous tongue of war?
Turning your books to graves, your incke to blood,
Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine,
To a loud trumpet, and a point of war?

Bish. Wherefore do I this? so the question stands:
Briefly, to this end we are all diseasde:
The dangers of the daie's but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the earth,
With yet appearing blood, and the examples
Of every minutes instance (present now,)
Has put us in these ill-beseeming arms,
Not to break peace or any branch of it,
But to establish here a peace indeed,
Concurring both in name and quallitie.

West. When ever yet was your appeal denied
Wherein have you been galled by the King?
What peer has been subornde to grate on you?
That you should seal this lawles^e bloody book
Offorgde rebellion with a seal divine,
And consecrate commotions bitter edge.

Bishop My brother General, the common wealth
To brother borne an household cruelty,
I make my quarrel in particular.

West. There is no need of any such redress,
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.

Mowbray why not to him in part, and to us all
That feel the bruises of the days before?
And suffer the condition of these times,
To lay a heavy and unequal hand
Upon our honors.

West. But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our princely general,
To know your griefs, to tell you from his Grace,
That he will give you audience, and wherein
It shall appear that your demands are just,
You shall enjoy them, every thing set off
That might so much as think you enemies.

Mowbray But he has for^de us to compel this offer,
And it proceeds from policy, not love.

West. Mowbray, you ouerweene to take it so:
This offer comes from mercy, not from fear:
For lo, within a ken our army lies:
Upon mine honor, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear:
Our battle is more full of names than yours,
Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
Our armor all as strong* our cause the best:
Then Reason will our hearts should be as good:
Say you not then, our offer is compelld.

Mow. Well, by my will, we shall admit no parlee.

West. That argues but the shame of your offense,
A rotten case abides no handling.

Hastings Has the prince John a full commission,
In very ample virtue of his father,
To hear, and absolutely to determine
Of what conditions we shall stand upon?

West. That is intended in the Generalles name,
I muse you make so slight a question.

Bishop Then take, my lord of Westmerland, this scedule,
For this contains our general grieuances,
Each several article herein redrest.
All members of our cause both here and hence,
That are ensinewed to this action,
Acquitted by a true substantial form,
And present execution of our wills,
To us and our purposes confinde,
We come within our awefull bancks again,
And knit our powers to the arm of peace.

W^st. This will I show the General, please you Lords,
In sight of both our battles we may meet,
At either end in peace, which God so frame,
Or to the place of diffrence call the swords,
Which must decide it. Exit Westmerland.

Bishop My lord, we will do so.

Mou There is a thing within my bosom tells me
That no conditions of our peace can stand.

Hastings Fear you not, that if we can make our peace,
Upon such large terms, and so absolute,
As our conditions shall consist upon,
Our peace shall stand as firm as rockie mountains.

Moub. Yea but our valuation shall be such,
That every slight, and false derived cause,
Yea every idle, nice, and wanton reason,
Shall to the King taste of this action,
That were our royal faiths martires in love,
We shall be winow'd with so rough a wind,
That even our corn shall seem as light as chafe,
And good from bad find no partition.

B^sh. No, no, my lord, note this, the King is weary
Of dainty and such picking greeuances,
For he has found, to end one doubt by death,
Reuiues two greater in the heirs of life:
And therefore will he wipe his tables clean,
And keep no tel^ tale to his memory,
That may repeat, and history his loss,
To new remembrance: for full well he knows,
He cannot so precisely weed this land,
As his misdoubts present occasion,
His foes are so enrooted with his friends,
That plucking to vnfix an enemy,
He does vnfasten so, and shake a friend,
So that this land, like an offensive wife,
That has enragde him on to offer strokes,
As he is striking, holds his infant up,
And hangs resolved correction in the arm,
That was vpreard to execution.

Have. Besides, the King has wasted al his rods,
On late offenders, that he now does lack
The very instruments of chasticement.
So that his power, like to a phanglesse lion,
May offer, but not hold.

Bishop It Is very true,
And therefore be assurde, my good Lord Marshall,
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our peace will like a broken limb united,
Grow stronger for the breaking.

Mow. Be it so, here is returned my lord of Westmerland.

Enter Westmerland. West. The prince is here at hand, pleases your Lordship
To meet his grace just distance tweene our armies.

Enter Prince John and his army. Mow. Your grace of York, in Gods name then
set forward.

Bishop. Before, and greet his grace (my lord) we come.

John You are well incountred here, my cosen Mowbray,
Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop,
And so to you Lord Hastings and to all.
My Lord of York, it better showed with you,
When that your flock assembled by the bell,
Encircled you, to hear with reverence,
Your exposition on the holy text,
That now to see you here, an iron man talking,
Cheering a rowt of rebels with your drum,
Turning the word to sword, and life to death.
That man that sits within a monarchs heart,
And ripens in the sunshine of his favor,
Would he abuse the countenance of the King:
Alack what mischeefes might he set abroach,
In shadow of such greatness? with you Lord bishop
It is even so, who has not heard it spoken,
How deep you were within the books of God,
To us the speaker in his parliament,
To us th'imagine voice of God himself,
The very opener and intelligen^er,
Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven,
And our dull workings? O who shall believe,
But you misuse the reverence of your place,
Imply the countenance and grace of heaven,
As a false favorite does his princes name:
In deeds dishonorable you have taken up,
Under the counterfeited zeal of God,
The subjects of his substitute my father,
And both against the peace of heaven and him,
Have here vpswarmd them.

Bishop Good my Lord of Lancaster,
I am not here against your fathers peace,
But as I told my lord of Westmerland,
The time misordred does in common sense,
Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form,
To hold our safety up: I sent your grace,
The parcells and particulars of our grief,
The which has been with scorn shoued from the court,
Whereon this Hidra, son of war is borne,
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmd asleep,
With grant of our most just, and right desires,
And true obedience of this madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.

Mow If not, we ready are to try our fortunes,
To the last man.

Have. And though we here fall down,
We have supplies to second our attempt,
If they miscarry, theirs shall second them,
And so success of mischief shall be borne,
And heir from heir shall hold his quarrel up,
Whiles England shall have generation.

Prince You are too shallow Hastings, much too shallow,
To ^ound the bottom of the after times.

West. Pleases your grace to answer them directly,
How far fo^th you do like their articles.

Prince I like them all, and do allow them well,
And swear here by the honor of my blood,
My fathers purposes have been mistook,
And some about him have too lauishly,
Wrested his meaning and authority.
My Lord, these griefs shall be with s^^^ed redrest,
Upon my soul they shall, if this may please you,
Discharge your powers unto their several counties,
As we will ours, and here between the armies,
Lets drink together friendly and embrace,
That all their eyes may bea^e those tokens home,
Of our restored love and amity.

Bishop I take your princely word for these redresses,
I give it you, and will maintain my word,
And thereupon I drink unto your grace.

Prince Go Captain, and deliver to the army
This news of peace, let them have pay, and part.
I know it will well please them, hie thee captain.

Bishop To you my noble lord of Westmerland.

West. I pledge your grace, and if you knew what pains,
I have bestowed to breed this present peace,
You would drink freely, but my love to ye
Shall show it self more openly hereafter.

Bishop I do not doubt you.

^^st. I am glad of it,
Health to my Lord, and gentle cousin Mowbray.

Mow. You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am on the sudden something ill.

Bishop. Against ill chances men are ever merry,
But heaviness fore-runnes the good event.

West. Therefore be merry coze, since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus, some good thing comes to morrow.

Bishop Believe me I am passing light in spirit.

Mow. So much the worse if your own rule be true. shout.

Prin. The word of peace is rendered hark how they showt.

Mow. This had bin cheerful after victory.

Bishop A peace is of the nature of a conquest,
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party looser.

Prince Go my lord,
And let our army be discharged too,
And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains
March by us, that we may peruse the men,
We should have coap't withal.

Bishop Go, good Lord Hastings,
And ere they be dismissed, let them march by. enter Westmerland.

Prince I trust Lords we shall lie to night together:
Now coosin, wherefore stands our army still?

West. The Leaders having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off until they hear you speak.

Prince They know their duties. enter Hastings

Hastings My lord, our army is dispersed already,
Like youthful steeres vnyoakt they take their courses,
East, weast, north, south, or like a school broke up,
Each hurries toward his home, and sporting place.

West. Good tidings my lord Hastings, for the which
I do arest thee traitor of high treason,
And you lord Archbishop, and you lord Mowbray,
Of capital treason I attach you both.

Mowbray Is this proceeding just and honorable?

West. Is your assembly so?

Bishop will you thus break your faith?

Prince I pawnde thee none,
I promised you redress of these same grieuances
Whereof you did complain, which by mine honor
I will perform, with a most christian care.
But for you rebels, look to taste the due
Meet for rebellion:
Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence.
Strike up our drums, pursue the scattred stray:
God, and not we, has safely fought to day:
Some guard this traitor to the block of death,
Treasons true bed, and yeelder up of breath.

Alarm Enter Falstaff excursions Fall. what is your name sir, of what condition
are you, and of what place?


Cole. I am a Knight sir, and my name is Coleuile of the Dale.


Fall. well then, Colleuile is your name, a Knight is your degree, and your
place the dale: Coleuile shall be still your name, a traitor your degree, and the
dungeon your place, a place deep enough, so shall you be still Colleuile of the
Dale.


Colle. Are not you sir John Falstaff?


Fall. As good a man as he sir, who ere I am: do ye yield sir, or shall I
sweat for you? if I do sweat, they are the drops of thy lovers, and they
weep for thy death, therefore rowze up fear and trembling, and do observance
to my mercy.


Colle. I think you are sir John Falstaff, and in that thought yield me.


Fall. I have a whole school of tongs in this belly of mine, and not a tongue
of them all speaks any other word but my name and I had but a belly of any
indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in Europe: my womb, my
womb, my womb undoes me, here comes our General.


Enter John Westmerland, and the rest. Retraite (...) The heat is past, follow
no further now,
Call in the powers good coosin Westmerland.
Now Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
When every thing is ended, then you come:
These tardy tricks of yours will on my life
One time or other break some gallows back.

Fall. I would be sorry my lord, but it should be thus: I never knew yet but
Rebuke and Check, was the reward of Valor: do you think me a swallow, an
arrow, or a bullet? have I in my poor and old motion the expedition of
thought? I have speeded hither with the very extremest inch of possibility, I
have foundred ninescore and od posts, and here travel tainted as I am, have
in my pure and immaculate valor, taken sir John Colleuile of the Dale, a (...)
f^rious Knight and valorous enemy,: but what of that (...) and yielded, that I
may justly say with the ho^^^ (...) there cousin, I came, saw, and overcame.


John It was more of his courtesy then your deserving.


Falst. 'I know not, here he is, and here I yield him, and I beseech your grace
let it be bookte with the rest of this days deeds, or by the Lord, I will have
it in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture on the top on it,
(Coleuile kissing my foot) to the which course, if I be enforst, if you do
not all show like guilt two pences to me, and I in the clear sky of Fame,
ore-shine you as much as the full moon does the cindars of the element, (which
show like pinnes heads to her) believe not the word of the noble: therefore
let me have right, and let Desert mount.


Prince Thine's too heavy to mount.


Falst. Let it shine then.


Prince Thines too thick to shine.


Falst. Let it do some thing, my good lord, that may do me good, and call it
what you will.


Prince Is thy name Colleuile?


Col. It is my Lord.


Prince A famous rebel art thou Colleuile.


Falst. And a famous true subject took him.


Col. I am my lord but as my betters are,
That led me hither, had they bin ruled by me,
You should have won them deerer then you have.

Fall. I know not how they sold themselves, but thou like a kind fellow gave
thy self away gratis, and I thank thee for thee. enter Westmerland.


Prince Now, have you left pursuit?


West. Retraite is made, and execution stayed.


Prince Send Colleuile with his confederates
To York to present execution,
Blunt lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
And now dispatch we toward the court my lords,
I hear the King my father is sore sick,
Our news shall go before us to his majesty,
Which cousin you shall bear to comfort him,
And we with sober speed will follow you.

Falst. My Lord, I beseech you give me leave to go through Glostershire, and
when you come to court, stand my good lord in your good report.


Prince Fare you well Falstaff, I, in my condition shall better speak of you
then you deserve.


Fall. I would you had the wit twere better than your dukedom, good says this
same young sober blouded ^oy does not love me, nor a man cannot make him laugh,
but that's no marvel, he drinks no wine, there is never none of these demure
boys come to any proof* for (...) drink does so euer-coole their blood, and
making many (...), that they fall into a kind of male green sickness, and then
when they marry* they give wenches, they are generally fools and cowards,
which some of us should be too but for inflammation a good (...) ^acke has a
two fold operation in it, it ascendes me into the brain, dries me there all
the foolish, and dull and ^rudy vapors which enuirone it, makes it
appreh^nsiue* quick, forg^^^^* full of nimble, fiery, and delectable shapes*
which delivered ore to the voice, the tongue, which is the birth; becomes
excellent wit. The second property of your excellent sher^^s is the warming of
the blood* which before (cold and settled) le^t the liver white and pale, which
is the badge of pu^ilanimitie and cowardice: but the sherris warmes it, and
makes it course from the inwards to the parts extremes, it illumineth the
face, which as a beakon, gives warning to all the rest of this little kingdom
man to anne, and then the vital commoners, and inland petty spirits, muster me
all to their captain, the heart: who great and pufft up with this retinew,
does any deed of courage: and this valor comes of sherris, so that skill in
the weapon is nothing without sack (for that sets it aworke) and learning a
mere whoord of gold kept by a devil, till sack commences it, and sets it in
act and use. Hereof comes it, that Prince Harry is valiant, for the cold blood
he did naturally inherit of his father, he has like lean* steri^e, and bare
land, manured, husbanded and tilld, with excellent endeavor of drinking good
and good store of fertile sherris, that he is become very hot and valiant. If
I had a thousand sons, the first humane principle I would teach them, should
be, to forswear thinpotations, and to addict themselves to sack. How now
Bardolfe?


Enter Bar^olfe. Bar. The army is dis^harged all, and gone.


Fall. Let them go, i will through Glostershire, and there will I visit M. Robert
Shallow Esquire* I have him already tempring between my finger and my thumb,
and shortly will I seal with him come away.


Enter the King, Warwike, Kent, Thomas duke of Clarence, Humphrey of
Gloucester. King Now lords, if God does give successful end,
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors.
We will our youth lead on to higher fields,
And draw no swords but what are sanctified:
Our navy is addressed, our power collected,
Our substitutes in absence well invested,
And every thing lies level to our wish,
Only we want a little personal strength:
And pawse us til these rebels now afoote,
Come underneath the yoke of government.

War. Both which we doubt not, but your majesty
Shall soon enjoy.

King Humphrey my son of Gloucester, where is the prince your brother?

Glo. I think he is gone to hunt, my lord, at Winsor.

King And how accompanied?

Glo. I do not know, my lord.

King Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?

Glo. No, my good lord, he is in presence here.

Clar. What would my lord and father?

Kin Nothing but well to thee Thomas of Clarence,
How chance thou art not with the prince thy brother?
He loves thee and thou do neglect him, Thomas,
Thou have a better place in his affection
Then all thy brothers, cherrish it my boy:
And noble offices thou may effect
Of mediation after I am dead,
Between his greatness and thy other brethren:
Therefore omit him not, blunt not his love,
Nor loose the good advantage of his grace,
By seeming cold, or careless of his will,
For he is gracious if he be obseru'de,
He has a tear for pity, and a hand,
Open as day for meeting charity,
Yet notwithstanding being incenst, he is flint.
As humorous as winter, and as sudden
As flawes congealed in the spring of day:
His temper therefore must be well observed,
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
When you perceive his blood inclind to mirth:
But being moody, give him time and scope,
Till that his passions, like a whale on ground
Confound themselves with working learn this Thomas,
And thou shall prove a sh^lter to thy friends,
A hoope of gold to bind thy brothers in,
That the united vessel of their blood,
(Mingled with venom of suggestion,
As force perforce, the age will power it in,)
Shall never leake, though it do work as strong,
As Aconitum, or rash gunpowder.

Cla. I shall observe him with all care and love.

King Why art thou not at Winsore with him Thomas?

Tho. He i^ not there to day he dines in London.

King And how accompanied?

Tho. With Po^nes and other his continual followers.

King Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds,
And he the noble image of my youth,
Is ouerspread with them, therefore my grief
Stretches it self beyond the hour of death:
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape,
In forms imaginary, th'unguyded days,
And rotten times that you shall look upon,
When I am sleeping with my ancestors:
For when his headstrong riot has no curb,
When rage and hot blood are his counselors,
When means and lavish manners meet together,
Oh with what wings shall his affections she,
Toward fronting peril and opposde decay?

War. My gracious Lord, you look beyond him quite,
The prince but studies his companions,
Like a strange tongue wherein to gain the language:
It Is needful that the most immodest word,
Be looked upon and learnt, which once attaind,
Your highness knows comes to no further use,
But to be known and hated: so, like gross terms,
The prince will in the perfectness of time,
Cast off his followers, and their memory
Shall as a pattern, or a measure live,
By which his grace must mete the lives of other,
Turning past-euils to advantages.

King It Is seldom when the be does leave her comb,
In the dead carrion: who^s here* Westmerland?

Enter Westmerland. West. Health to my sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that that I am to deliver,
Prince John your son does kiss your graces hand.
Mowbray, the Bishop, Scroope, Pastings, and al,
Are brought to the correction of your law:
There is not now a rebels sword vnsheathd,
But Peace puts forth her olive every where,
The manner how this action has bin borne,
Here at more leisure may your highness read,
With every course in his particular.

King O Westmerland, thou art a summer bird,
Which ever in the haunch of winter sings
The lifting up of day: look here is more news. enter Harco^.

Har^. From enemies heavens* keep your majesty,
And when they stand against you* may they fall
As those that I am come to tell you of:
The Earl Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolfe,
With a great power of English, and of Scots,
Are by the shrieue of Yorkshire overthrown,
The manner, and true order of the fight,
This packet, please it you, contains at large.

Ki. And wherefore should these good news make me sick?
Will Fortune never come with both hands full.
But wet her fair words still in foulest terms?
She either gives a stomach, and no food,
Such are the poor in health: or else a feast,
And takes away the stomach, such are the rich
That have abundance, and enjoy it not:
I should rejoice now at this happy news,
And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy,
O me, come near me, now I am much ill.

Hum. Comfort your majesty.

Clar. O my royal father!

West. My sovereign Lord, cheer up your self, look up.

War. Be patient princes, you do know these fits
Are with his highness very ordinary.
Stand from him, give him air, heel straight be well.

Clar. No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs,
Th^incessant care and labor of his mind,
Has wrought the Mure that should confine it in,
So thin that life looks through.

Hum. The people fear me, for they do observe
Vnfather'd heirs, and lothly births of nature,
The seasons change their manners, as the year
Had found some months a sleep, and leapt them over.

Clar. The river has thrice flowed, no ebb between,
And the old folk, (Times doting chronicles,)
Say, it did so a little time before
That our great grandsire Edward, sickt and died.

War. Speak lower, princes, for the King recouers.

Hum. This apoplexi will certain be his end.

King I pray you take me up and bear me hence,
Into some other chamber.
Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends,
Unless some dull and favorable hand
Will whisper music to my weary spirit.

War. Call for the music in the other room.

King Set me the crown upon my pillow here.

Clar. His eye is hollow, and he changes much.

War. Less noise, less noise. Enter Harry

Prince Who saw the duke of Clarence?

Clar. I am here brother, full of heaviness.

Prince How now, rain within doors, and none abroad?
How does the King?

Hum. Exceeding ill.

Prince Heard he the good news yet? tell it him.

Hum. He altered much upon the hearing it,

Prince If he be sick with joy, heel recover without physic.

War. Not so much noise my Lords, sweet prince, speak low, the King your
father is disposde to sleep.

Cla. Let us withdraw into the other room.

War. Wilt please your Grace to go along with us?

Prince No, I will sit and watch here by the King.
Why does the Crown he there upon his pillow,
Being so troublesome a bedfellow?
O polisht perturbation! golden care!
That keepst the ports of Slumber open wide
To many a watchful night, sleep with it now!
Yet not so sound, and half so deeply sweet,
As he whose brow (with homely biggen bound)
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!
When thou do pinch thy bearer, thou do sit
Like a rich armor worn in heat of day,
That scaldst with safty (by his gates of breath)
There lies a dowlny feather which stirs not,
Did he suspire, that light and weightlesse dowlne
Perforce must move my gracious lord my father:
This sleep is sound indeed, this is a sleep,
That from this golden Rigoll has diuorst
So many English Kings, thy deaw from me,
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood,
Which nature, love, and filial tenderness
Shall (O dear father) pay thee plenteously:
My due from thee is this imperial Crown,
Which as immediate from thy place and blood,
Deriues it self to me: lo where it sits,
Which God shall guard, and put the worlds whole strength
Into one giant arm, it shall not force,
This lineal honor from me, this from thee
Will I to mine leave, as it is left to me. exit.

Enter Warwick* Gloucester, Clarence. King Warwick, Gloucester, Clarence.

Clar. Does the King call?

War. What would your Majesty?

King Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?

Cla. We left the prince my brother here my liege, who undertook to sit and
watch by you.

King. The prince of Wales, where is he? let me see him: he is not here.

War. This door is open, he is gone this way.

Hum. He came not through the chamber where we staide.

King Where is the Crown? who took it from my pillow?

War. When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.

King. The Prince has taken it hence go seek him out:
Is he so hasty, that he does suppose my sleep my death?
Find him, my lord of Warwick, chide him hither.
This part of his conioynes with my disease,
And helps to end me: see, sons, what things you are,
How quickly nature falls into revolt,
When gold becomes her object?
For this, the foolish ouer-carefull fathers
Have broke their sleep with thoughts,
Their brains with care, their bones with industry:
For this they have engrossed and pilld up,
The cankred heaps of strange atcheeued gold:
For this they have been thoughtfull to inuest
Their sons with arts and martial exercises,
When like the be toling from every flower,
Our thigh, packt with wax our mouths with honey,
We bring it to the hiue: and like the bees,
Are murdered for our pains, this bitter taste
Yields his engrossements to the ending father,
Now where is he that will not stay so long,
Till his friend sickness hands determind me. Enter Warwick^.

War. My Lord, I found the prince in the next room,
Washing with kindly tears, his gentle cheeks,
With such a deep demeanor in great sorrow,
That tyranny, which never quaft but blood,
Would by beholding him, have washed his knife,
With gentle eie-drops, he is coming hither Enter Harry.

King But wherefore did he take away the crown?
E^ewhere he comes, come hither to me Harry,
Depart the chamber, leave us here alone. exeunt.

Harry I never thought to hear you speak again.

King Thy wish was father (Harry,) to that thought
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee,
Do thou so hunger for mine empty chair,
That thou will needs inuest thee with my honors*
Before thy hour be ripe! O foolish youth,
Thou seekst the greatness that will ouerwhelme thee,
Stay but a little, for my clowd of dignity
Is held from falling with so weak a wind,
That it will quickly drop: my day is dim,
Thou have stolen that, which after some few hours.
Were thine, without offense, and at my death*
Thou have sealed up my expectation,
Thy life did manifest thou lou'dst me not,
And thou will have me die, assurde of it,
Thou hidst a thousand daggers in thy thoughts,
Whom thou have whetted on thy stony heart,
To stab at half an hour of my life.
What, can thou not forbear me half an hour?
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thy self,
And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear,
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead:
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
Be drops of Balm to sanctify thy head,
Only compouud me with forgotten dust.
Give that which gave thee life, unto the worms,
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees,
For now a time is come to mock at Form:
Harry the fifth is crowned, up vanity,
Down royal state, all you sage counsailers, hence,
And to the English Court assemble now
From every region, apes of idleness:
Now neighbor confines, purge you of your scumme
Have you a ruffin that will swear, drink, dance,
Revel the night rob, murder, and commit
The oldest sins, the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more.
England shall double gild his trebble gilt,
England shall give him office honor, might:
For the fifth Harry, from curbd license, plucks
The mussel of restraint, and the wild dog
Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.
O my poor kingdom! sick with civil blows:
When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
What will thou do when riot is thy care?
O thou will be a wilderness again,
Peopled with woolues, thy old inhabitants.

Prince O pardon me, my liege, but for my tears,
The moist impediments unto my speech,
I had forestald this dear and deep rebuke,
Ere you with grief had spoke, and I had heard
The course of it so far: there is your crown:
And he that wears the crown immortally,
Long guard it yours: if I affect it more,
Then as your honor, and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience rise,
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit,
Teaches this prostrate and exterior bending,
God witness with me. When I here came in,
And found no course of breath within your majesty,
How cold it struck my heart! if I do feign,
O let me in my present wildness die,
And never live to show th'incredulous world,
The noble change that I have purposed.
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
And dead almost, my liege, to think you were,
I spoke unto this crown as having fence,
And thus vpbraided it: the care on thee depending,
Has fed upon the body of my father,
Therefore thou best of gold, art worse then gold,
Other less fine, in karrat more precious,
Preserving life in medcine potable:
But thou, most fine, most honored, most renowned,
Have eat thy bearer up: thus my most royal liege,
Accusing it, I put it on my head,
To try with it as, with an enemy,
That had before my face murdered my father,
The quarrel of a true inheritour,
But if it did infect my blood with joy,
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride,
If any rebel or vain spirit of mine,
Did with the least affection of a welcome,
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let God for ever keep it from my head,
And make me as the poorest vassaile is,
That does with aw and terror kneel to it.

King God put in thy mind to take it hence,
That thou might win the more thy fathers love,
Pleading so wisely in excuse of it:
Come hither Harry, sit thou by my bed,
And hear (I think) the very latest counsel
That ever I shall breathe. God knows (my son)
By what bypath, and indirect crookt ways,
I met this crown, and I my self know well,
How troublesome it sat upon my head:
To thee it shall descend with better quiet,
Better opinion, better confirmation,
For all the soil of the atchieuement goes,
With me into the earth, it seemd in me,
But as an honor snatched with boistrous hand,
And I had many living to vpbraide
My gain of it, by their assistances,
Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,
Wounding supposed peace: all these bold fears
Thou see with peril I have answered:
For all my reign has been but as a Scene,
Acting that argument: and now my death
Changes the mood, for what in me was purchased,
Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort.
So thou the garland wearst successively,
Yet though thou standst more sure then I could do,
Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green,
And all thy friends which thou must make thy friends,
Have but their stings and teeth newly taken out:
By whose fell working I was first aduaunst,
And by whose power I well might lodge a fear
To be again displacde: which to avoid,
I cut them off, and had a purpose, now
To lead out many to the Holy Land,
Lest rest, and lying still, might make them look,
Too near unto my state: therefore, my Harry,
Be it thy course to busy giddie minds
With foreign quarrels, that action hence borne out,
May waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so,
That strength of speech is utterly denied me:
How I came by the crown, O God forgive,
And grant it may with thee in true peace live.

Prince You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me,
Then plain and right must my possession be,
Which I with more then with a common pain,
Against all the world will rightfully maintain. enter Lancaster.

King Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.

Lanc. Health, peace and happiness to my royal father.

King Thou bringst me happiness and peace son John,
But health (alack) with youthful wings is flowne
From this bare witherd tru^ke: upon thy sight,
My worldly business makes a period:
Where is my lord of Warwick?

Prince My Lord of Warwick.

King Does any name particular belong
Unto the lodging where I first did swound?

War. It Is called Jerusalem, my noble Lord.

King Laud be to God, even there my life must end.
It has bin prophecide to me many years,
I should not die, but in Jerusalem,
Which vainly I supposde the Holy Land:
But bear me to that chamber, there i will lie, Enter Shallow,
In that Jerusalem shall Harry die. (...) Falstaff, and Bardolfe

Shall. By cock and pie sir, you shall not away to night, what Dauy I say?


Falst. You must excuse me master Robert Shallow.


Shall. I will not excuse you, you shall not be excusde, excuses shall not be
admitted, there is no excuse shall serve, you shall not be excusde: why Dauy.


Dauy Here sir.


Shall. Dauy, Dauy, Dauy, Dauy, let me see Dauy, let me see Dauy, let me see,
yea mary William Cook, bid him come hither, sir John, you shall not be excused.


Dauy Mary sir thus, those precepts can not be served, and again sir, shall we
sow the hade land with wheat?


Shall. With red wheat Dauy, but for William Cook are there no young pigeons?


Dauy Yes sir, here is now the Smiths note for shooing and plow-yrons.


Shall. Let it be cast and paid: sir John, you shall not be excused.


Dauy Now sir, a new lincke to the bucket must needs be had: and sir, do you
mean to stop any of Williams wages, about the sack he lost at Hunkly Fair?


Shall. A shall answer it: some pigeons Dauy, a couple of short legged hens, a
joint of mutton, and any pretty little tinie Kick-shawes, tell william Cook.


Dauy Does the man of war stay all night sir?


Shall. Yea Dauy, I will use him well, a friend in the court is better then a
penie in purse: use his men well Dauy, for they are arrant knaves, and will
backbite.


Dauy No worse then they are back-bitten sir, for they have maruailes foul
linen.


Shall. Well conceited Dauy, about thy business Dauy.


Dauy I beseech you sir to countenance William Visor of Woncote against
Clement Perkes a'th hill.


Sha. There is many complaints Dauy against that Visor, that Visor is an arrant
knave on my knowledge.


Dauy I grant your worship that he is a knave sir: but yet God forbid sir, but
a knave should have some countenance at his friends request, an honest man sir
is able to speak for himself, when a knave is not: I have serude your worship
truly sir this eight years and I cannot once, or twice in a quarter bear out
a knave against an honest man, I have little credit with your worship: the knave
is mine honest friend sir, therefore I beseech you let him be countenaunst.


Shall. Go to I say ^e shall have no wrong, look about Dauy: where are you sir
Io^n? come, come, come, off with your boots, give me your hand master Bardolfe.


Bard. I am glad to see your worship.


Shall I thank thee with my heart kind master Bardolfe, and welcome my tall
fellow, come sir John.


Falst. I Will follow you good master Robert Shallow: Bardolfe, look to our
horses: if I were sawed into quantities, I should make four dozen of such
berded hermites staves as master Shallow: it is a wonderful thing to see the
semblable coherence of his men's spirits, and his, they, by observing him, do
bear themselves like foolish Justices: he, by conuersing with them, is turned
into a lustice-like seruingman, their spirits are so married in conjunction,
with the participation of society, that they flock together in consent, like
so many wild-geese. If I had a suite to master Shallow, I would humor his men
with the imputation, of being near their master: if to his men, I would
curry with master Shallow, that no man could better command his servants. It
is certain, that either wise bearing, or ignorant carriage is caught, as men
take diseases one of another: therefore let men take heed of their company. I
will devise matter enough out of this Shallow, to keep prince Harry in
continual laughter, the wearing out of six fashions, which is four terms,
or two actions, and a shall laugh without interuallums. O it is much that a lie,
with a slight oathe, and a jest, with a sad browe, will do with a fellow that
never had the ach in his shoulders: O you shall see him laugh til his face be
like a wet cloak ill laid up.


Shall. Sir John.


Falst. I come master Shallow. I come master Shallow.


Enter Warwike, duke Humphrey, L. chief Justice, Thomas Clarence, Prince* John
Westmerland. War. How now, my lord chief Justice, whither away?

Just. How does the King?

War. Exceeding well, his cares are now all ended.

Just. I hope not dead.

War. He Is walked the way of nature,
And to our purposes he lives no more.

Just. I would his Majesty had called me with him:
The service that I truly did his life,
Has left me open to all injuries.

War. Indeed I think the young King loves you not.

Just. I know he does not, and do arm my self
To welcome the condition of the time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me,
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.

Enter John, Thomas, and Humphrey. War. Here come the heavy issue of dead
Harry:
O that the living Harry had the temper
Of he, the worst of these three gentlemen!
How many Nobles then should hold their places,
That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort?

Just. O God, I fear all will be ouer-turnd.

John Good morrow coosin Warwick, good morrow.

Prin.ambo Good morrow coosin.

John We meet like men that had forgot to speak.

War. We do remember, but our argument
Is all too heavy to admit much talk.

John Well, peace be with him that has made us heavy.

Just. Peace be with us, lest we be heavier.

Humph. O good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed,
And I dare swear you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your own.

John Though no man be assurde what grace to find,
You stand in coldest expectation,
I am the forier, would twere otherwise.

Cla. Well, you must now speak sir John Falstaff fair,
Which swimmes against your stream of quallitie.

Just. Sweet princes, what I did, I did in honor,
Led by th^impartiall conduct of my soul.
And never shall you see that I will beg
A ragged and forestald remission,
If truth and upright innocence fail me.
I Will to the King my master that is dead,
And tell him who has sent me after him* Enter the Prince and Blu^t

War. Here comes the Prince.

Just. Good morrow, and God save your majesty.

Prince This new and gorgeous garment Majesty
Sits not so easy on me, as you think:
Brothers, you mixed your sadness with some fear,
This is the English, not the Turkish court.
Not Amurath an Amurath succeedes,
But Harry Harry: yet be sad, good brothers,
For by my faith it very well becomes you:
Sorrow so royally in you appears,
That I will deeply put the fashion on,
And wear it in my heart: why then be sad.
But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
Then a joint burden laid upon us all,
For me, by heaven (I bid you be assurde)
I Will be your father, and your brother too,
Let me but bear your love, I Will bear your cares:
Yet weep that Harries dead, and so will I,
But Harry lives, that shall convert those tears
By number into hours of happines^e.

Bro. We hope no otherwise from your majesty.

Prince You al look strangely on me, and you most*
You are I think assurde I love you not.

Just. I am assurde, if I be measurde rightly,
Your majesty has no just cause to hate me.

Prince. No? how might a prince of my great hopes forget,
So great indignities you laid upon me?
What, rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison,
Th*immediate heir of England? was this easy?
May this be washed in lethy and forgotten?

Just. I then did use the person of your father,
The image of his power lay then in me,
And in th'administration of his law,
Whiles I was busy for the common wealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And struck me in my very seat of judgment,
Whereon, as an offender to your father,)
I gave bold way to my authority,
And did commit you: if the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
To have a son set your decrees at naught?
To pluck down Justice from your awful bench?
To trip the course of law and blunt the sword,
That guards the peace and safeue of your person?
Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image,
And mock your workings in a second body?
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours,
Be now the father, and propose a son,
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,
Behold your self so by a son disdained:
And then imagine me taking your part,
And in your power soft silencing your son,
After this cold considerance sentence me,
And as you are a King, speak in your state,
What I have done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my lieges sovereignty.

Prince You are right Justice, and you weigh this well,
Therefore still bear the Balance and the Sword,
And I do wish your honors may increase,
Til you do live to see a son of mine
Offend you, and obey you as I did:
So shall I live to speak my fathers words,
Happy am I that have a man so bold,
That dares do justice on my proper son:
And not less happy, having such a son,
That would deliver up his greatness so,
Into the hands of Justice you did commit me:
For which I do commit into your hand,
Th'vnstained sword that you have used to bear,
With this remembrance, that you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit,
As you have done against me: there is my hand,
You shall be as a father to my youth,
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear*
And I will stoop and humble my intents,
To your well practizde wise directions.
And princes all, believe me I beseech you,
My father is gone wild into his grave:
For in his toomb lie my affections,
And with his spirits sadly I survive,
To mock the expectation of the world,
To frustrate prophecies, and to race out,
Rotten opinion, who has writ me down
After my seeming, the tide of blood in me
Has prowdely slowd in vanity till now:
Now does it turn, and ebb back to the sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of floods,
And flow henceforth in formal majesty.
Now call we our high court of parliament,
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel,
That the great body of our state may go,
In equal rank with the best gouernd Nation,
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be,
As things acqu^inted and familiar to us,
In which you father shall have foremost hand:
Our coronation done, we will accite,
(As I before remembered) all our state,
And (God consigning to my good intents,)
No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,
God shorten Harries happy life one day. exit.

Enter sir John, Shallow, Scilens, Dauy, Bardolfe, page. Shall. Nay you shall
see my orchard, where, in an arbor we will eat a last years pippen of mine
own graffing, with a dish of carrawaies and so forth: come coosin Scilens, and
then to bed.


Falst. Fore God you have here goodly dwelling, and rich.


Shall. Barraine, barraine, barraine, beggars all, beggars all sir John, mary
good air: spread Dauy, spread Dauy, well said Dauy.


Fall. This Dauy serves you for good uses, he is your seruing-man, and your
husband.


Shall. A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet sir John: by the mas I
have drunk too much sack at supper: a good varlet: now sit down, now sit
down, come cousin.


Scilens A sir quoth a, we shall do nothing but eat and make good cheer and
praise God for the merry year, when ^lesh is cheap and females dear, and
lusty laddes roame here and there so merely, and ever among so merrily.


sir John There Is a merry heart, good M. Silens i will give you a health for that
anon.


Shall. Give master Bardolfe some wine, Dauy.


Dauy Sweet sir sit, i will be with you anon, most sweet sir sit, master Page good
master Page sit: proface, what you want in meat, we will have in drink, but you
must bear, the heart's al.


Shall. Be merry master Bardolfe, and my little soldier there, be merry.


Scilens Be merry, be merry, my wife has all, for women are shrowes both short
and tall, it is merry in hal when beards wags all, and welcome merry shrouetide,
be merry, be merry.


Falst. I did not think master Scilens had bin a man of this metal.


Scilens Who I? I have been merry twice and once ere now.


Enter Dauy. Dauy There Is a dish of Lether-coates for you.


Shall. Dauy?


Dauy Your worship: I Will be with you straight, a cup of wine sir.


Scilens A cup of wine that's brisk and fine, and drink unto the leman mine,
and a merry heart liu^^ long a.


Falst. Well said master Scilens.


Scilens And we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet a'th night.


Falst Health and long life to you master Scilens.


Scilens Fill the cup, and let it come, i will pledge you a mile too th bottom.


Shall. Honest Bardolfe, welcome, if thou wantst any thing, and wilt not call,
be shrew thy heart, welcome my little tiny thief, and welcome indeed too, I Will
drink to master Bardolfe, and to all the cabileros about London.


Dauy I hope to see London once ere I die.


Bar. And I might see you there Dauy!


Shall. By the mas you will crack a quarte together, ha will you not master
Bardolfe?


Bar. Yea sir, in a pottle pot.


Sha. By Gods liggens I thank thee, the knave will stick by thee, I can
assure thee that a will not out, a it is true bred!


Bar. And i will stick by him sir. One knockes at door.


Sha. Why there spoke a King: lack nothing, be merry, look who is at door
there ho, who knockes?


Falst. Why now you have done me right.


S^lens Do me right, and dub me Knight, samingo^ist not so?


Falst. It Is so.


Silens Is It so, why then say an old man can do somewhat.


Dauy And t please your worship, there is one Pistol come from the court with
news. enter Pistol.


Falst. From the Court? let him come in, how now Pistol?


Pistol Sir John God save you.


Falst. What wind blew you hither Pistol?


Pistol Not the ill wind which blows no man to good: sweet Knight, thou art
now one of the greatest men in this Realm.


Silens Birlady I think a b^, but goodman Puff of Barson.


Pisto Puff? Puff ith thy teeth, most recreant coward, base* sir John, I am
thy Pistol and thy friend, and helter skelter, have I rode to thee, and tidings
do I bring, and luckie joys, and golden times, and happy news of price.


John I pray thee now deliver them like a man of this world.


Pistol A footre for the world and worldlings base, I speak of Africa and
golden joys.


John O base Assirian Knight! what is thy news? let King Couetua know the
truth thereof.


Scilens And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John.


Pistol Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons? and shall good news be
baffled? then Pistol lay thy head in Furies lap.


Shall. Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.


Pistol Why then lament therefore.


Shall. Give me pardon sir, if sir you come with news from the court, I take it
there is but two ways, either to utter them, or conceal them, I am sir under
the King in some authority.


Pistol Under which King, Besonian? speak, or die.


Shall. Under King Harry.


Pistol Harry the fourth, or fifth?


Shall. Harry the fourth.


Pist A fowtre for thine office: sir John, thy tender lambkin now is King:
Harry the fifts the man: I speak the truth: when Pistol lies, do this, and fig
me, like the bragging spaniard.


Falst. What is the old King dead?


Pistol As nail in door, the things I speak are just.


Fall. Away Bardolfe, saddle my horse, M. Robert Shallow, choose what office
thou will in the land, it is thine: Pistol, I will double charge thee with
dignities.


Bard. O joyful day! I would not take a Knight for my fortune.


Pistol What? I do bring good news.


Falst. Carry master Scilens to bed: master Shallow, my lord Shalow, be what
thou will, I am fortunes steward, get on thy boots, weel ride al night: o sweet
Pistol, away Bardolf, com Pistol, utter more to me, and withal, devise
something to do thy self good, boot, boot master Shallow, I know the young
King is sick for me: let us take any man's horses, the laws of England are at
my commandment, blessed are they that have bin my friends, and woe to my Lord
chief Justice.


Pist. Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also: where is the life that late I
led, say they, why here it is, welcome these pleasant days. exit.


Enter Sincklo and three or four officers. Host. No, thou arrant knave, I
would to God that I might die, that I might have thee hanged, thou have drawn my
shoulder out of joint.


Sincklo The Constables have delivered her over to me, and she shall have
whipping cheer I warrant her, there has been a man or two killed about her.


Whore Nut-hooke, Nut-hooke, you lie, come on, I Will tell thee what, thou damnd
tripe visagde rascal, and the child I go with do miscarry, thou were better
thou had struck thy mother, thou paper-facde villain.


Host. O the Lord, that sir John were come! I would make this a bloody day to
some body: but I pray God the fruit of her womb miscarry.


Sincklo. If it do, you shall have a dozzen of cushions again, you have but
eleven now: come, I charge you both go with me, for the man is dead that you
and Pistol beat amongst you.


Whore I Will tell you what, you thin man in a censor, I will have you as soundly
swingde for this, you blew bottle rogue, you filthy famisht correctioner, if
you be not swingde, I Will forswear half kirtles.


Sinck. Come, come, you she Knight-arrant, come.


Host. O God, that right should thus ouercom might! well, of sufferance comes
^ase.


Whore Come you rogue, come bring me to a justice.


Host. I come, you starude blood-hound.


Whore Goodman death, goodman bones.


Host. Thou Atomy, thou.


Whore Come you thin thing, come you rascal.


Sinck. Very well.


Enter strewers of rushes. 1 More rushes, more rushes. 2 The trumpets have
sounded twice. 3 Twill be two a clock ere they come from the coronation,
dispatch, dispatch.
Trumpets sound, and the King, and his train pass over the stage: after them
enter Falstaff, Shallow, Pistol, Bardolfe, and the Boy. Falst. Stand here by
me master Shallow, I will make the King do you grace, I will leere upon him
as a comes by, and do but mark the countenance that he will give me.


Pist. God bless thy lungs good Knight.


Falst. Come here Pistol, stand behind me. O if I had had time to have made
new liueries: I would have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of you, but
it is no matter, this poor show does better, this does infer the zeal I had
to se^ him.


Pist. It does so.


Falst. It shows my earnestness of affection.


Pist. It does so.


Falst. My devotion.


Pist. It does, it does, it does.


Fall. As it were to ride day and night, and not to deliberate, not to remember,
not to have patience to shift me.


Shall It is best certain: but to stand stained with travail, and sweating with
desire to see him, thinking of nothing else, putting (...) affairs else in
oblivion, as if there were nothing else to be done, but to see him.


Pist. It Is semp^r idem, for, obsque hoc nihil est, it is in every part.


Shall. It Is so indeed.


Pist. My Knight, I will inflame thy noble liver, and make thee rage, thy Dol,
and Helen of thy noble thoughts, is in base durance, and contagious prison,
halde thither by most mechanical, and durtie hand: rowze up revenge from Ebon
den, with fell Alectoesnake, for Doll is in: Pistol speaks naught but truth.


Falst. I will deliver her.


Pist. There roared the sea, and trumpet Clang or sounds.


Enter the King and his train. Falst. God save thy grace King Hall, my royal
Hall.


Pist. The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal ^mpe of feign.


Falst. God save thee, my sweet boy.


King My Lord chief justice, speak to that vain man.


Just. Have you your wits? know you what it is you speak?


Falst. My King my Jove, I speak to thee, my heart.


King I know thee not old man, fall to thy prayers,
How ill white heirs becomes a fool and iester,
I have long dreampt of such a kind of man,
So surfet-sweld, so old, and so profane:
But being awakt, I do despise my dream,
Make less thy body (hence) and more thy grace,
Leave gourmandizing know the grave does gape
For thee, thrice wider then for other men,
Reply not to me with a foole-borne jest,
Presume not that I am the thing I was,
For God does know, so shall the world perceive,
That I have turned away my former self,
So will I those that kept me company:
When thou do hear I am as I have bin,
Approach me, and thou shall be as thou wast,
The tutor and the feeder of my riots:
Till then I banish thee on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
Not to come near our person by ten mile:
For competence of life, I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evils,
And as we hear you do reform your selves,
We will according to your strengths and qualities,
Give you advancement. Be it your charge, my lord,
To see performd the tenure of my word: set on.

John Master Shallow I ow you a thousand pound.


Shall. Yea mary sir John, which I beseech you to let me have home with me.


John That can hardly be, master Shalow: do not you grieve at this, I shall be
sent for in private to him, look you, he must seem thus to the world: fear
not your aduauncements, I will be the man yet that shall make you great.


Shall. I cannot perceive how, unless you give me your dublet, and stuff me
out with straw: I beseech you good sir John let me have five hundred of my
thousand.


John Sir I will be as good as my word, this that you heard was but a color.


Shall. A collor that I fear you will die in sir John.


John Fear no colors, go with me to dinner:
Come lieftenant Pistol, come Bardolfe. Enter Justice and prince John
I shall be sent for soon at night.

Justice Go carry sir John Falstalfe to the Fleet,
Take all his company along with him.

Fall. My lord, my lord.

Just. I cannot now speak, I will hear you soon, take them away. exeunt.

Pist. Si fortuname tormenta spero contenta.

John I like this fair proceeding of the Kings,
He has intent his wonted followers
Shall all be very well provided for,
But all are banished till their conuersations
Appear more wise and modest to the world.

Just. And so they are.

John The King has called his parliament my lord.

Just. He has.

John I will lay ods, that ere this year expire,
We bear our civil swords and native fire,
As far as France, I heard a bird so sing,
Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the King:
Come, will you hence?

Epilogue.
First my fear then my cursie, last my speech. My fear, is your displeasure,
my cursy, my duty, and my speech, to beg your pardons: if you look for a good
speech now, you undo me, for what I have to say is of mine own making, and
what indeed (I should say) will (I doubt) prove mine own marring: but to the
purpose, and so to the venture. Be it known to you, as it is very well, I was
lately here in the end of a displeasing play, to pray your patience for it, and
to promise you a better: I meant indeed to pay you with this, which if like an
il venture it come unluckily home, I break, and you my gentle creditors loose,
here I promisde you I would be, and here I commit my body to your mercies, bate
me some, and I will pay you some, and (as most debtors do) promise you
infinitely: and so I kneel down before you; but indeed, to pray for the
Queen.

If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, will you command me to use my
legs? And yet that were but light payment, to dance out of your debt, but a
good conscience will make any possible satisfaction, and so would I: all the
Gentlewomen here have forgiven me, if the Gentlemen will not, then the
Gentlemen do not agree with the Gentlewomen, which was never seen in such an
assembly.

One word more I beseech you, if you be not too much cloyd with fat meat,
our humble Author will continue the story, with sir John in it, and make you
merry with fair Katharine of France, where (for any thing I know) Falstaff
shall die of a sweat* unless already a be killd with your hard opinions; for
Olde-castle died Martyr, and this is not the man: my tongue is weary, when my
legs are too, I will bid you, good night.

FINIS.

