REASONS MOST HVMBLY OFFERED TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons in Parliament,
by Sr Robert Sharpeigh Knight and Alexander Haitley Esquire, Patentees for
Survey of Sea-coales at Newcastle, etc. by nomination of the late Duke of
Richmond and Lenox, proving the Grant and Patent thereof to be necessary and
profitable to the Commonwealth, the Fee to be but competent and proportionable
to the charge, and no imposition but a mere wages, or quid pro quo,
voluntarily, offered to be paid for the service.
Upon petition to his Majesty of great abuses and deceipts practiced in corrupt
mingling, 13 Iacobi the first petition referred by the King to his learned
Council. Their Certificate of the abuse desired to be reformed, with consent
to pay the fee.
working, and venting of Sea-coales at and near Newcastle, Sunderland, and
Blithe, his Majesty referred the same to the examination of his then learned
Council.

They certified the abuses and deceipts to be verified by the Coale-Merchants,
Woodmongers, and Chandlors of London, who desired reformation thereof by way of
Survey, and freely consented to pay the Surveyors for such reformation, 4 pence
the great Chaldron Newcastle measure, being about 2 pence London measure.

Letters patents 26 Feb. 13 Iacobi, granted.
Hereupon his Majesty by his Letters Patents, dat: 26 Febr: 13 Iacobi, for
remedy of the said abuses, erected an Office of Survey of Coals, and granted
the same to Sir Andrew Boyd Knight.

Oastmen oppose and deny the fact. One third part of base coals mixed and sold
with and for the best, and best price, proved. 1. By proof and decree of the
Star chamber 6 Maij, 16 Jacob.
The Oastmen of Newcastle opposing the Grant, and denying the matter of fact,
the same was by the Lords of the Council referred to a Legal trial in the
Starchamber.

Where accordingly an Information was exhibited against the Oastmen and some
Shippers, and there (upon hearing of the cause) it appeared by oath of above
twenty witnesses, that the Oastmen of Newcastle (being the Coale-merchants
there) did mingle one third part of low prized Coals, of 4 shillings 6 pence,
and 5 shillings the Chaldron, with two third parts of their good Coals of 10
shillings 6 pence, and 11 shillings the Chaldron, and sold them so mingled for
the best Coals, and at the best price: For which fraud and abuse the Oastmen
were (by the decree of that Court, made 6 Maij, 16 Iacobi) censured, fined, and
imprisoned, and their abuses ordered to be published by reading of the same
Decree two several market days at Newcastle, and the Shippers then also
defendants were admonished not to use such fraud thereafter.

By order of the Lords of the Counsel 1 Aug: 20 Iac. Surveyors sent to
Newcastle
The said Patent by consent being afterward re-called, and the new Grant made
and passed unto the Duke of Richmond and Lenox, but not under the great Seal,
by reason of the oppositions of the Oastmen and their Confederates, (who to
maintain their abuses and unjust gain thereby were the sole opposers) and
thereupon the abuses still remaining, and complaints thereof being made to his
Majesty and the Lords of the Council, by Shippers that brought Coals,
Woodmongers and Merchants that bought Coals, and Brewers and others that spent
Coals, the Lords of the Council by order 1 Augusti, 20 Iacobi, appointed
Surveyors to be presently sent to Newcastle to make survey of the Colyary
there, and to prevent the said abuses in what they could, till a further course
might be settled.

2 By the Surveyors return of a plot and book of all the coale-pits and
abuses then found 9 Ianuar: 20 Jacob.
The Surveyors having taken pains therein, did in January following (by a book
and plot of Survey) certify their Lordships in particular, the number of
Coale-pits good and bad, the particular abuses pactised in mingling of bad
Coals with good, and such like; notwithanding, there were sufficient store of
Mines of good Coals to serve all posterity, and at far lower prices, if the
Lords and owners of good Colyaries were not by the Oastmens Charter and
Monopoly debarred from venting their Coals to Ships and Shippers in and by the
River of Tyne, and Port of Newcastle.

3. By the Shippers letters and petition to the Board in March 1623, and their
Lordships letters 15 April, 1623.
XXV Marcij, 21 Iacobi, the Shipmasters then being in the Port of Newcastle, by
their Letters complained to their Owners of London, Alborough, Harwich,
Ipswich, Woodbridge, Colchester, and other Towns, and their owners to the
Lords of the Council, That the said Oastmen, their agents and servants, did
then debar them of a free market, and of their accustomed over-measure, and
did and would enforce them to lade one third part of unsaleable Coals, not
fitting their Markets. Whereupon their Lordships wrote their Honorable Letters
to Newcastle, 15 April following, commanding the Market there to be opened, and
that some should be sent up to attend the Honorable Board, and to answer the
Complaint.

What quantity of coals are given and never entered by the Oastmen and
Shippers confession, and why.
The Oastmen 7 Maij 1623, answering in writing, alleged to their Lordships,
that they (by the covetousness of the Shippers had been forced to give away
12, 16, and sometimes 20 Chaldrons in a Ships lading, and two Chaldrons in a
Keeles lading of 9 or 10 Chaldrons burden. The owners of Ships in their
replication thereunto in writing, showed that such quantities of gift-coales
were allowed in respect of the baseness and deceitful mixture of the Coals
upon that allowance taken and vented. (...).

Inferences from the premises.
Upon due examination of many particulars herein, it was demonstrated to their
Lordships, and may appear as follows.

1. Oastmen do gain by their mixture one sixth part of their whole price, viz.
1400 l. per annum there. And the spending buyers lose above twice so much, and
the reasons why, and manner how.
First, That a third part of low prized Coals being mingled with two third
parts of good Coals, and sold for the full price of good Coals, do cost
above one sixth part of the prices being sold apart: as for example; Two
Chaldrons at 10 shillings per Chaldron, and one chaldron at 5 shillings,
coming but to 25 shillings apart, are sold (being mingled) for 10 shillings
the Chaldron round, viz: for 30 shillings, and being sold for 10 shillings 6
pence, or 11 shillings the Chaldron, the loss is more to the buyer: This sixth
part or above (they venting yearly one hundred and threescore thousand
Chaldrons, or sixteen thousand Tennes, as the Oastmen confess in their said
answer, which at 10 shillings 6 pence yield them fourscore and four thousand
pounds) bring in by this fraud to the Oastmen fourteen thousand pounds per
annum unjust gains: And the Newcastle measure being almost double to London
measure, and the prices also increasing, the subjects loss is at the least
thirty thousand pounds per annum to the buyers and spenders of coals, besides
the making of them oftentimes unserviceable by such mingling and fraud.

2. The Kings loss of custom by the fraudulent packing of the Oastmen and
Shippers to ve^t base coals. The subject much wronged by slate, stone, etc.
passing amongst coals, which the Surveyors do remedy, and the benefit
thereof.
Secondly, That by the Oastmen and Shippers thus combining and masking their
fraud under pretense of over-measure and gift-coales, the King is deceived in
his Customs: which abuses and wrongs both to King and subject, so much and so
continually petitioned against, has been cause of the expense of much money,
and of great pains and labor taken by the prosecutors for reformation, as is
herein specified.

Besides the prevention of the foresaid losses by mixture, to King and subject,
it is by experience found and certified, that by the pains and care of the
Surveyors in looking to the works and workmen, slate, stone, metal, and
unfuellable stuff, is and may be separated and wealed out of the Coals, which
formerly have passed unseparated, and been sold in and with the Coals for ten
or twelve thousand pounds per annum, though worth nothing of themselves: for
since the Surveyors appointed by the Lords, 1 Augusti, 20 Iacobi, above 8000
Chaldrons of slate-stone and unsaleable stuff per annum more then formerly
have been wealed out of Coals by their care and authority given them, being
but a few men. And also since the Patentee has placed and employed a competent
number of officers for that service, like unfuellable stuff has been wealed
out of the coals there, to at least a double proportion of what the Surveyors
appointed by the Board had formerly caused to be cast out as aforesaid.

What base pan-coale-pits have been laid in from work by the Surveyors
vigilance since Aug: 1622, and the prevention of deceiptfull mixture thereby.
And further, touching the prevention of mixture of base and good Coals by the
service of the said Surveyors appointed by the Honorable Board, it shall be
made clear to this honorable House, that at the time of the said Surveyors
coming to Newcastle in September 1622, there were 42 base pan Coale-pits
working, and lately laid in from work, and now when the Patentee came down in
January last, there were but about 12 base pan coale-pits in work, all the
rest being then laid in from work, which whether they may and will be set on
work again, if there shall not be officers continued for prevention, is
humbly left to examination and the grave consideration of this Honorable
House, the small or rather no reformation caused by the foresaid censure and
command of the high Court of Star Chamber being duly considered.

How much the Oastmen and masters of ships have improved their estates by this
fraud.
All which abuses are the greater, in regard they are in a commodity so common
and useful, that people cannot live without the same. And the Oastmen have so
enriched themselves by such abuses, and not by the true gains of their
profession, that some of them are grown to be worth 20000 pound, some 30000
pound, and some 40000 pound, as by depositions and the said Decree appears.
Shipmasters likewise combining with them, make such gain by this fraud, as in
one years trading of servants to their owners, they become part owners of one
eight, one fourth, or one half of their Ship, as was avouched lately by
Newcastle men.

The Surveyors fee but compete^t.
And as touching the Officers fee, it is but competent and proportionable to the
charge laid out for discovering, and which is and must be laid out for
reformation of the abuses, as may appear. For the whole vent of Coals yearly
made in and by the Port of Newcastle, according to the Oastmens foresaid answer
being about sixteen thousand tens, or one hundred and 60. thousand Chaldrons,
for which the fee of 4 pence the Chaldron amounts to about two thousand and
six hundred pounds yearly. What the fee is of 4 pence the chaldro^ for the
whole vent, what to the Surveyors.
Strangers are excepted from payment of the said fee. The whole profit then
which in any probability can by true calculation be conceived yearly to come to
the Surveyors, cannot be above two thousand, or one and twenty hundred pounds
per annu^ at the uttermost; which sum is not the tenth part of what the
Oastmen make by their deceipts, and not a twentieth part of what the
Commonwealth shall gain by the reformation.

42 officers employed in the execution of the office, whose wages amounts to
1300 pound per annum. Money formerly spent in this business by the prosecutors
of the reformation, five thousand pound and what surplusage may remain for the
Grantees, the office and debts being discharged. After many petitions,
propositio^s, and offers, made by complaynants and hearings taken of all
parties, what course the Lords of the Counsel advised and set down, and with
what cautions, limitations, and reservations.
The execution of the office will require 42 persons at least, most of them of
good quality and trust, to be attendant respectively upon their places of
charge at the cole-pits, on the wharfs and water, at the salt-pannes and on
Shipboard, at all tides and times of working and carriage, or lading of Coals,
by night or by day, on land or water, who cannot be well maintained under 1300
pound per annum, and without the said officers, true reformation cannot be made.

The money spent in the discovery of the abuses, suits of Law, touching the
same against the Oastmen, who all this time opposed by practices the
reformation justly desired, and maintaining men in that service of Survey for a
long time by direction of the Lords of the Privy Council, upon their Lordships
order that recompense should be given, has cost 5000 pounds at least, which
how the benefit of the whole fee above the charge of the officers employed will
satisfy, and with what remainder for the Kings intended bounty to the Grantee,
is humbly left to consideration. No benefit having been made, nor fee received
by the prosecutors or officers employed for the service and expenses aforesaid,
since the beginning of this sure, which was above eight years sithence, save
only 7 shillings.

The Lords of the Council upon many petitions, propositions, and offers, made
under the hands of several Companies in London, and other Coast towns traders
in Coals, and many hearings of all parties, and diverse reports upon references
to Honorable Committees of the same Board, finding the greatness of the
abuses and necessity of reformation, and the complainants in this case offering
to lay the charge of the officers fee upon themselves and such like buyers,
without charging the subject in general; as also in the behalf of the town
of Newcastle, Master Warmouth their Solicitor, willingly consenting to any
course for reformation of the said abuses, did by order of that Honorable
Board confirm the said former course of Surveyors as most fitting: adding
thereunto a caution for restraint of mingling good and base coals after they
came from Newcastle, which the Surveyors by officers and wayters to be kept and
attendant at London, also will see there performed. And likewise that the
Surveyors shall make good the Merchants damages for Coals mis-certified: And
that for want of due execution or abuses of survey the Office should be void.

A reference to the Kings learned Council, and their Certificate.
After all which, upon some exceptions made, and referred to the Kings now
Attorney and Solicitor general, and upon their examination thereof, and
direction therein by their Certificate of what they did hold fitting both for
the King and subject in that case.

The Kings Grant made accordingly.
The same Office by Letters Patents bearing date the twentieth day of September
1623, was accordingly passed to the late Duke of Richmond and Lenox, and to
such Patentees as his Lordship did nominate; the other Letters Patents thereof
being surrendered and made void.

The Grant conceived to be good and the fee well raised: and that it is no
imposition.
It is conceived, That the same Grant is good, the Office well erected, and the
Fee well raised, and that the same Fee is no Imposition contrary to the Law,
since great profit by the Officers attendance arises to the Common wealth: In
which case it is reason the Officers should have quid pro quo, somewhat for
their pains. Besides, it is by consent of the greatest traders in and spenders
of Sea-coales, and their voluntary offer not to charge it again upon the
subject buying by retaile.

A conclusive infere^ce and humble submission of and in the premises.
And therefore this Patent being thus made for the good, and at the suit and
offer of the subjects grieved for the suppressing of so great abuses, whereby
such benefit will grow both to King and Subject, as aforesaid, and the
Merchandise and commodity of Coals being bettered and advanced thereby, and
Coals becoming more serviceable and generally useful for all men's provision
of Fuel, whether trade and traffic therein, and thereupon, the Shipping and
Navigators of this Kingdom will be increased or no, and wood preserved; and
whether the Patent in respect of the premises be fit to be maintained and
ratified or no, It is humbly submitted to the consideration and great wisdom
of this Honorable House.

All the particulars herein, and inferences thereupon, shall appear by
proofs, and clear demonstrations out of the same.


