CHRIST, ON HIS THRONE; NOT In POPISH Secrets.

A Prophecy of Christ, against his pretended presence in Popish Secrets; Laid
open in a Sermon preached before his Majesty at WANSTED certain years ago,
and since much enlarged, and (upon request) preached elsewhere.

By RICHARD SHELDON, Doctor in Divinity, his Majesty's Chaplain.

In the Preface whereof, there is also a brief Inquiry made by him, into a
late Sermon styled The Communion of Saints.

The flesh of Christ, because it is in heaven, assuredly it is not on Earth.

Vigil. cont. Eu^ic. lib. 4. cap. 4. LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lowne. 1622

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and virtuous Lady, Philip, wife of the Right
worshipful and Right worthy Sir Anthony Ashley, Knight.
MADAME:
IT has been and is an euer-vsance of Authors, in publishing their works, to
make free choice of some worthy Patron or Patroness: toward these,
acknowledging a duty of Gratitude; In others, admiring and honoring the
luster of those virtues whereon they treat, for some, aduenturing to give
further instruction, and encouragement, in their most approved endeavors; from
all, craving the honor of Patronage; to all, recording (for all Posterities,
so much as may lie in them) a perpetuity of a memorable fame. An honorable
service, which (if of worth) all Worthies have ever accepted graciously and
worthily.

Modest Lady, it is also a modest boldness of Truth especially of Christian
Truth, that she dare knock and crave welcome at the Gates of all those, who are
Lovers of Truth: Great is Truth and ever prevails, ever justified of her own
Children. My self then, who com^ in this Dedication, with a Present of Truth,
do presume a Welcome with her who is a Child of Truth, a Daughter of Religious
Parents (Parents of diverse Children lovers of Truth) all Lovers of Truth; of
that Truth (I say) whereof the beloved Disciple has written, that it abode in
the Lady Elect, himself, her Children, and was also to abide in them for for
ever. A Welcome then, and gracious acceptance I do presume, and assure to my
self, in this my service.

Three words only, of three reasons (omitting others) for this my Dedication.
First, in you, a courteous Modesty (when I name Modesty, I name an assured
Emblem of all virtues) which I have observed in you, but have more fully heard
of you. Secondly, for you, an intended confirmation of your faith in that
Christian Truth whereof you are a Lover, and sincere Professor. Thirdly, from
my self a duty of Gratitude toward you, acknowledging your euerreadynesse
for my good; your often most loving and kind inquiry after the Welfare of those
who are mine, and who, in the obligation of Gratitude, together with my self
are and shall be yours. The God of Truth confirm you in all Truth, bless and
perfect your Right worthy Knight with your self, in all increase and
abundance of temporal and eternal happiness. Amen.

Your worships most devoted in all Christian service, RICHARD SHELDON.

Certain Aduertisements to the Reader.
First Advertisement.
CHristian and courteous Reader, I advertise thee in a few things. First, if
thou be pleased to read, peruse seriously, consider maturely, and then judge
impartially. Remember well, that it is an obscure prophecy which I here
endeavor to explane. If thou conceiuest any more literal and genuine, or
mystical and more likely sense thereof, I pray thee to impart it without envy;
if not, at least give me leave to communicate this unto thee, as both a
probable and approueable sense, until a better, more genuine and certain, be
produced. Sure I am, that it is agreeing to the analogy of faith, and tends to
the beating down of an execrable point of Idolatry daily practiced in the
popish Church.

Second Advertisement.
Secondly, I advertise thee, if thou be a Papist-Protestant, that is, more
Papist than Protestant; or a Protestant-Papist, that is, more Christian than
Papist, yet in part popish (for, by such mongrell meddleis at Mass and at
Sermons, the mystery of iniquity now works powerfully and perfidiously) if
thou be such a one (I say) then this my interpretation will surely at the first
seem to thee altogether incredible, and a very paradox: but if in the
impartial perusing thereof, the same may happen to seem probable to thee, then
bethink thy self what mysteries of iniquity are taught in Babylon; when as a
second mystery thereof being laid open, foretold and fore-condemn'd by Christ,
the same seems so prodigiously incredible.

Third Advertisement.
In the third place I advertise thee, that whereas in page 20. I do call that
Proposition blasphemous, wherein the popish Priest is styled (...) Creatoris
sui, the creator of his Page 20
Creator; and do likewi^^ ^epute for impious, that (if taken properly and
literally) the Priest ore proprio ^onficit corpu^ Saint Hierome, though he use
this phrase in his epistle ad (...) yet most certain it is, that he under
stands not the ^^me literally, but of a mystic^ll making of the Sacram^nt,
called Christ's body. See him in 26. Mat and ad He^^^. q. 2
domini, with his own mouth mak^t^ the body of the Lord; and thereupon is
ca^l^d The Maker of the Lords body, of Christ^ body I advertise thee (I say)
that thou do not think that heerin I specially and principally aimed against
the said Proposition, as it is la^^^y printed in a certain Sermon, styled The
Communion of Saints: and yet, it being there, I cannot well pass by it without
a little inquiry.

Touching which Proposition, that has given (as it is there delivered) very
great offense to many; I my self, finding such variety in the impressions of
the said Sermon, for my own satisfaction have made diligent enquiry concerning
the allowed copy, and for the same have received most certain and assured
instruction, thus: First, that these words, The makers of Christ's body,
together with the other, creatores Creatoris, the creators of their Creator,
were indeed offered in the written Copy by the Author, to have been approved,
but that they were utterly disallowed, and the Author also strictly required to
leave them out; as also diverse other passages (hereafter questioned) which
were likely to give just offense. And lest the Reader might gather some like
sense from other words going before in page 6. touching the Priests power over
page ^
Christ's natural body; these words, They make up the mystical body of Christ
by the holy Ghost (heerin alluding to the Ephesians. 4. 16
Apostles phrase) were expressly required by the R. Doctor, to be added in place
of the former. So careful and wary was the learned and judicious Censurer of
his Copy, had not the Author taken such a wilful liberty to himself, not to
print what he was allowed, but in diverse things what he listed or lusted.

In the second place I am informed, when as (notwithstanding the strict
inhibition) these words, The makers of Christ's body, were thrust into the first
printed Copy, and the Author challenged for it, he promised in the next
impression (which he then had in hand) to give full satisfaction: but in that
impression, in stead of omitting those words, he claps-on a large marginall
Comment of certain annotations familiar with the Papists, though (God wot) not
proving his intent. And heerupon, greater offense being taken than before, and
an ouerture made of calling in his books (in regard of such indirect and
offensive dealing) he yielded in the end to insert by way of parenthesis, for
further explication, these words ( to weet, in a sacramental and mystical
sense). But yet it is to be observed, that he does it not without a pretty
slight: for, immediately after the parenthesis, he adds, They make the
mystical body of Christ; when as he should have said, They make up the
mystical body of Christ; leaving out the word up, as not agreeing to his
oblique purpose and intent

Further, I understand that he being expressly required to leave out the word
only in the sixth page toward the page 6
end thereof, he did it not; but makes our Savior to speak those words ( Do
this in remembrance of me) only to his Apostles; perhaps thereby driving after
the popish sacrificing Facite: when as it is most certain, that these words (
Do this) have reference to the whole mystical action (both of Minister and
people respectively) of blessing, taking, 1. Cor. 11
eating, drinking, etc.

Thus then the Reader may observe, how the Author (like the fish called Cuttle,
hiding it self with his own Sepia suo se atramento occ^^tat.
ink) shuffles up and down, now putting-in the words ( in a sacramental and
mystical sense) now leaving them out; again, in one impression putting-in the
words ( up and only) but in others leaving them out; not knowing (perhaps)
what or whereof he affirms. May not the Author then (in all brotherly love)
or, if need be, his Patron for him, if he have any such, the reverend Nemo
Bishop of Nullibi (with him Conclamatissimus, most conclamed; to others
Occultatissimus, most hid) be desired to come out of his blank, and to appear
in black, for the defense and instruction of his so uncertain and wavering a
Client; that so we, the poor Readers, may understand what may be the meaning
and mystery of such dubious writing?

With the Authors Epistle dedicatory, fronted in such an uncouth manner, we may
be the bolder (as also with the Preface annexed thereunto in some impressions)
for that they both have been so bold as to prease to the Press without any
presenting at all to Authority for their allowance to be printed.

First: may not the Authors discretion or reading be Epist. d^d. live 1.
questioned, for devising the Epithets of Consummatissimus and Conclamatissimus
Pontificum? (thereby intending to honor his Reverend Father in God) which
Epithets are not (so used) to be found in Sidonius, as by the Author he Sid.
Apol. l. 2. ep. 2. l. 7. ep. 7
is cited. I find indeed in Sidonius, in his lib. 2. ep. 2. these words,
Conclamatissimo fontium (the most famous of fountains) and in his epist. 7.
lib. 7. in the inscription thereof, these; Domino Graeco Papa, To the Lord
Greek, Pope: which title Papa, Pope, though in ancient times it was used
promiscuously to Bishops; yet, because the Author imposes no special name
upon his masked Patron, may not I with others conjecture, that he intends
for his Patron that Pope who is now only so called per eminentiam, and
claims to be Conclamatissimus, most conclamed over the whole Church of
Christ.

What spirit of meeknes is in those words of the said Epist. ded. page 2
Epistle? Those to have never tasted of the spirit of goodness, who (as the
Authors phrase is) did cut him for his Sermon; and likewise in those, wherein
he taxes those with intemperate Epist. to the Reader, page 1
maleuolence, who had said that his Sermon was called in; when as (as he there
glories) it was called out? But how may it justly be said of those, that they
had never tasted of the spirit of goodness, or that they had intemperate
maleuolence, for that they reproved that Sermon which was so violently
suspected to favor Papism, and also to be so contrary to the allowed and
approved Copy?

He glories that his Sermon was so fast called out: for my part, I marvel not
thereat; considering how great a number of Personated and Parsonated
(Chameleon-like) Priests, in all habits and shapes, all colors and fashions
save their own) do daily spatiate in Paul's, and walk through Paul's Church*
yard. And will not such disguised Massers, makers of Christ's body (perhaps
having it in their The Sermon, page 6. 7
bosoms or their pockets) creators of their Creator, be ^agre to call out such
a Sermon, wherein their powerful making of Christ's body (ore proprio, with the
Priests own mouth) is so plainly maintained; wherein they may find diverse
Authors (some dubious, some counterfeit) approuingly related for the maintenance
of such erroneus points as to them are grateful? Here they may read of the
barbarous and forged Epistle of Pope Pontian, the counterfeit Liturgies page 7.
2. i^^pr: page 9. 10 Epistele to the Reader.
of Basil and Chrysostom, the most vain and dream* like forged Constitutions
of Clement. How gratefully will they call out, and solace themselves, with that
Sermon, wherein all those are roundly censured to go out of the way, who to
show the doctrine of that Church (the Author means Rome) do blazon the
lives and doctrines of particular men?

Will it not serve them for and in stead of an inter-lude Epist. to the Reader
in the End.
to call out and to read that Sermon, wherein they may find a Minister of the
Church of England praying to Angels? And though he pray in Bernards phrase
(who was carried away with the error of the time) yet they will begin to
conceive, that the Society wherein the Minister lived is not far off from the
approving of Saint- invocation, yea and of transubstantiation also (in regard
of what he writes in his Sermon, page 7.) with such other Willworships as do
ineuitably flow and follow thence-from. Which their conception is but a mere
deception; like to that their pernicious Lie (now vauntingly in print) that the
late most entire and religious Bishop of London, John Doctor King died a
Papist, a reconciled Papist. O the impudent and shameless forehead of such
men! Posuerunt spem suam mendacium, they have made lying to be their Isa. 28.
1. 1. Tim. 3. 13.
hope. So they have ever done, so they yet do, and proficient in peins, and
heerin they will (if I aim not amiss) do worse: for, Papism is well-nigh
arrived ad (...), to the height of her deception.

Further, though it should cost them dear, yet they will call out, and pry into
that Sermon, in the Preface whereof Epist. To the Reader.
they may find a world of warriors (such warriors as have written against the
Tridentine Synod) to be branded with the choice and election of the pleasure of
temporal sin. What? page 3. Heb. 11. 25.
all such warriors that have opposed the Lady Hellen of Trent (whether Royal,
Clerks, or Laickes)? what? all (I say) Lovers of pleasures, more than of God?
and yet all Pacificators Heb. 11 26.
and Interimists (Author-like) aspicientes in remunerationem, aiming at that
reward which God has promised to those that love him? O egregious! such only
lovers of God, who endeavor to join light and darkness, Christ and Belial, God
and Pope, that is, two most opposite religions? It will not be unacceptable to
them, that the Author in his Epistle dedicatorie, page 3, inueigheth so
bitterly against Sermon-haunters: wherein perhaps he would shroud himself, by
pretended opposing the opposers of Church-gouernment. But may he not look
further, and thereby obliquely strike at our Church? A practice not unusual
heertofore (to my knowledge) in some indirect squinters against the doctrine
and discipline of the same.

The Author, in the same place, much complains of a corrupted liver (Oh how
sick, and deadly sick, would he Epist. ded. page 4
make this famous Church to be!) of a corrupted liver, ready to cause the
sound doctrine of our Redeemer to prove loathsome, and none but scrubbers to be
in request. Vah! the sound doctrine of our Redeemer prove loathsome! Out alack!
none but scrubbers in request! The Church of Rome (I know what I write) would
buy it dearly, that there were fewer of such scrubbers, who have scrubbed up so
incessantly and so faithfully the roots of her errors, that the very blood of
her shame is thereby discovered, and by them laid open to the view both of men
and Angels: And heerin I mean such handlers of controversies, preachers and
lecturers, as are approved in the Church of England, and allowed by Authority;
and, to my understanding, the Author leuels, against such, his bitter and tart
nickname scrubbers.

Th^se phrases of the Author (which he was required Ser. pages 1. 10 11. and
4. 5.
to amend) in his Sermon, page 1, The three Saints; page 10, The three first
Saints; page 11, Some are Saints by substantial sanctity, etc. and in page 4.
and 5. The second Saint: Are not these phrases very harsh (if not dangerous) in
so sacred a mystery? Let them be compared with Athanasius his Creed.

It is not to be omitted, that those words ( setting aside the efficacy of
inspired Scripture) which were required with some other to be put in the
allowed Copy (and for which the Author is beholding to his learned Censurer)
were wilfully left out in the first Impression. And though they be put-in into
the second Impression, yet do they alone hardly make good that Saying, The
preaching of L^icks can convert no more, than a good moral sentence out of
Seneca. Surely, if such preaching or teaching as may be His most Excellent
Majesty's religious Meditations: His divine and exquisite Basili^on d^ron: his
other Theological works. Acts 8. 25. 26. ^7. 28. Acts 8. 5.
used by Kings to their Subjects, Generals to their Soldiers, Masters to their
Families, by Scholars for exercise, or such as Christian Authors may deliver in
print (for example, the Lord Plessie Mornay, and others at home) be not able
to convert more, than a good moral sentence out of Seneca; yet I hope the
Author will not dare to deny, but that the teaching or preaching of Priscilla
and Aquila, of Apollo, of the Sea I^en. l. b. 3. c. 12. Doroth. in Synop.
Eunuch of the Queen Candaces, and of the Christians dispersed from Jerusalem,
did convert more, than any the best moral sentence out of Seneca could have
done. Has the Author read in Seneca ought concerning Christ, and salvation by
him? who thus (debasing) compares the teaching of Christian doctrine (though
by Laics) to moral sentences fetched out of Seneca. Yet far be it from me to
allow any other teaching by Laics, then according as I have here expressed.

Should I have written such a Sermon, and have alike entitled it The Communion
of Saints, I should not have dared to tax all the Host of the Lord (from the
days of our Savior) for their neglect of duty in such a service. Let us ponder
his words, By how much the communion of page 21.
Saints has been neglected: for, from the days of our Savior, until this
hour (he reckons to the very time of the clocks stroke for his Sermon) not one
man has been so charitable to the Saints, as to bestow one whole Sermon upon
their Communion (for any thing that I can find) nor any just Treatise (only
some little expositions) except only one Schismatic, who appropriates that
Communion most unjustly to his own separation. Thus the Author. Has he not
forgotten (or else he understands them not) Saint Austines Book de vnitate
Ecclesiae? his exquisite Volume de ciuitate Dei? Cyprian de vnitate Ecclesiae,
or de simplicitate Praelatorum? Gerson de vnitate ecclesiastica? How many
Authors, in their short expositions upon the Apostles Creed, and in their
Comments upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, and upon the 17. of S. John, have
delivered a great deal more substance (touching this Communion of Saints) in a
few words, than the Author has don in this his so vne^en and vnconsonant a
Sermon? Could the Author neither see nor smell, in that sweet field of Doctor
Field, of the Church, many fragrant passages touching this Argument? Marvel,
he could not observe Bellarmine treating (after his fashion) Bellar. tom. 2.
on the Communion of the Saints militant, patient and triumphant. I my self,
within these few years, have heard (in this Church of England) from the mouths
of such D. ^. M. D.
(as the Author would perhaps have reputed scrubbers) very exquisite Sermons on
this Subject. And have not the like been done in all times when and where the
gospel of Christ has flourished?

To conclude, (pretermitting many other points in his epistles, worthy either
of redargution, or requiring interpretation) I do finally note, how in his
epistle to Page 2. line 26
the Reader, he promises thus; we shall search, how far that doctrine (he
means the Trid^ntine) will admit reunion? What? reunion? And may not the
Author here be advised, to think of his own strength; whether this be
feisible by him or no: let him consider, whether he has judgment sufficient
to resolve, discretion to order, ability to bring forth such a Child; he (I
say) who (though he has taken liberty, to have printed (in diverse things)
what he has listed) has notwithstanding (after many travails) brought
forth with a double birth so imperfect an Embryo; according as, in part, it
has been showed, and more might be added.

More Doubts and demaundes I might have proposed; but these may suffice: the
which I desire both the Author and all courteous Readers to take no otherwise
then as so many requests that the Author would be pleased to open and explane
himself more fully.

But, for so much as may concern his pretended Conclamatissimus, most
Conclamed Patron, Let him not take it amiss, if I presume, and conclude
that there must be a latent mystery, and emblem of some foreign object
intended in this riddling dedication. For sure among the Reverend Prelates of
the Church of England, so conspicuous for learning, so solid and sound for
judgment (whose worthy names advance our Church above other Reformed) there
will none be found to favor these dubious, loose and ill sounding positions,
which I have here in part freely and ingenuously noted; and this for no other
end, then to crave the Authors Brotherly explanation: the which I heartily
wish he may perform to his own content and to the Christian satisfaction of
others.

4 Advertisement.
My fourth Advertisement is, that whereas the courteous Reader cannot but
observe my following discourse to be some what tart and pregnant against the
errors of Popery; my advertisement to him is, that he would be pleased to
interpret the same not as proceeding out of any spleen against their persons,
but only out of an unfeigned zeal against their errors and vanities. God is
my witness, that in the bowels of Charity I could wish to my self, for their
salvation, Saint Paul's Anatheme, which he desired to himself, for his
brethren according to the flesh: Ad Romans 9. 1. 2.
And yet I cannot but remember (for I have observed it well) that their Spirit
toward such as my self, has been and is a very gall of bitterness; fury
rather then zeal. Holy Jude. Mat. 7.
Jude has described their Spirits: and our Savior has charged us to beware
of them.

For so much as ma^e concern my zeal against their dotages and supersticions,
I hope the Apostles example after his conversion from Iudaisme confronting and
Confounding the Jews, may abundantly be sufficient for me. And is not this my
zeal an express imitatio^ (without envy be it spoken) of the zeal of all
those holy and blessed Servants and Messengers of God which his Spirit has
raised up (from out of the very Vr of popery, and fornance of Babylon) for the
opposing him and his whom the Lord Jesus shall destroy illustratione aduentus
gloriae suae, with the brightness of his coming, the Glory of his Gospel? The
phrases which I produce ( Antichrist, false prophets, false-anointed-ones,
idelatry, blasphemous, with such like) will not seem harsh, nor ill-sounding
to the Intelligent Reader, who may be instructed in the Scriptures of God, and
who also may be Luther. Call. ^et. Mart. Beza^. M^lan. Others.
pleased to call to mind, what tart phrases the right famous Conuerts from
Popery have used against Babylon; and (to add no more) who lastly will have
in remembrance the many zealous actions, speeches, and writings which Primitive
Christians used against Idolatrous Gentilisme, after their happy conversion
from the same.

And so most humbly referring all my poor endeavors, to the honor of him who
is the one Only God, most Holy and most wise; I remit my self, and this my
w^iting, freely to the ordinary Readers censure, pro libito; but in all due
respect, and humble reverence, to the judgment of my Superious, and of Christ's
holy Church Catholic, pro venerabils placito, for her venerable Placet and
gracious approueance.

Dated this 1. of February. 1622. Thine in Christ Jesus, RICHARD SHELDON.

If therefore they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the Secrets, believe
it not

Mat. 24. 26.
BY the contagion of original sin, all Adams posterity is so darkened and
depraved, spoliata gratuitis, vulnerata in naturalibus, spoiled of the free
gifts of grace, and wounded in all the faculties of nature; that the very
Regenerate, among a mass of other errors, do there show themselves
hardy-confident, where they should be piously-timorous; there, trepidantes
sine timore, trembling without any just cause of fear, where they should be
soberly-vigilant and provident. For example: some pious persons, reading the 24
of S. Mathews gospel, in which the Evangelist, from the mouth of our Savior,
foresoundeth signs in the Sun and Moon; shaking and rentings of the heavens;
fallings of stars from the same; wars, and rumors of wars; unseasonable
inequalities of the air; famines, plagues, pestilences, earthquakes, with
sundry such like, which were to happen before the final consummation of the
world; reading these things (I say) they are with astonishment well-nie
confounded: whereas (because they are but as so many fore-warnings of the Lords
coming, and their redemption) they should be soberly and joyfully vigilant: And
yet these very men perusing some other passages of this 24 chapter, where they
are forewarned of far more dangerous things, to wit, of the arising of
sundry false prophets, of false Christ's (in diverse states and times of the
Church) who were to teach a corporal and secret presence of Christ in Secrets;
How necessary the understanding of this prophecy is.
and, for proof of the same also, were to do great signs and wonders, even to
the seducing of the Elect if it were possible; here they are hardy-confident,
as though this fore charge of Christ little or nothing at all concerned them.
And yet our most gracious Savior (who is saluandorum omnium via, veritas and
vita, the way, life and truth of all those who are to be saved: the way, to
conduct them; the truth, to instruct them; the life, to save them from
perishing) that he might deeply imprint in the minds of his faithful a true
apprehension of such dangers which might arise from such false Prophets, he is
not contented once or twice to have commanded vigilancie against them, but he
does often recommend wariness and watchfulness against them, and their so
powerfully-pernicious doctrines.

For this cause, having in the 23. 24. and 25. verses of Math. 24. 23. 24. 25.
this chapter (though in a generality) foretold the arising of some false
prophets, in the 23. thus; Then if any one shall say unto you, Lo, here is
Christ, lo, there is Christ, believe it not; in the 24. verse, For, there shall
arise false Christ's and false prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very Elect;
In the 25. verse he thundreth out thus, Behold, I have foretold you: behold,
I have told you before. And yet, not content heerwith, he does in the verses
following more particularly express the manner of* their false-teaching of his
presence upon earth, in Secrets; and also redoubles christ's charge.
this charge against them in the 26. thus: If they shall say unto you, Behold,
he is in the desert, go not out; behold, he is in the Secrets, believe it not.
And then, for further confirmation of his so straight a forewarning, he
adjoynes in the A double reason of his charge.
27. and 28. verses a twofould reason for the same: The former in the 27, thus;
For, as the lightning comes from the East, and shines even unto the West: so
shall the coming of the Son of man be: The second reason in the 28. verse,
thus; For, wheresoever the dead body is, there shall the Eagles be gathered
together. This, our most tender and gracious Savior, for the necessary
fore-instruction of his faithful.

To meditate on this whole argument fully, an hours moment will not permit. In
which respect, I will limit my discourse to those words (part of the 26. verse)
which I have read in your religious ears. If therefore they shall say unto
you, Behold, he is in the Penetrals or Secrets, believe it not. This my Text
is mixed; containing a prediction, a The division of the text.
false doctrine or pseudo-christianisme, a charge and direction. The prophecy
and prediction is Christ's: the false doctrine and pseudo-christianisme is of
the pseudo-Christs and false Prophets. The precept and direction is again
Christ's. The first requires faith and belief; the second, dis-beleef and
contempt; the third, duty and obedience. The prediction we have in those words,
If therefore they shall say unto you; the pseudo-christianisme in these,
Behold, he is in the Penetrals or Secrets; the charge and direction in the
rest, believe it not. Of these in order, as God (who once spoke them) shall be
pleased to assist with his grace.

Touching the first, the prediction, I will only suppose four things genuinely
and naturally flowing from the Four brief suppositions. The first.
same. First, that howsoever this prophecy be delivered conditionally with
this conjunction if, If they shall say unto you; yet that the same is absolute,
sure and certain, equivalent with this, When they shall say unto you, or,
Because Christ's prediction though conditionally delivered yet absolutely
certain.
they shall and will say unto you. So that the word If is not used here in
respect of the contingencie of the thing, but rather in regard of the
uncertainty of the time when: for, that such false Prophets (who would so
teach) were infallibly to arise, it is most evident by those words of Christ,
in the 24. verse: For, there shall arise many false Prophets, and false Christ's
(that is, false anointed ones) and shall do great signs and wonders, even to
the seducing of the The second thing which I suppose, is, that by the Pronoun (
they) is designed a multitude, and great troop of false teachers and false
anointed ones, who all should jointly, and at sundry times* and in sundry
places, teach Christ to be here and there, in some secret manner of presence
upon earth. So that we may not here think of one Hacket, one Copinger, as in
England (therein most unfortunate) nor of one George David, as in Germany; but
we must think of an immense troop, even of an exercitus sacerdotum (to use
Gregory's phrase) a Greg. l. 4. ep. 33
whole army of false Prophets and false Christ's (that is, false anointed ones)
who were (to the deception of innumerable) to teach a real, secret presence of
Christ in Penetrals upon earth, before his coming to judgment.

say, say unto you; are comprised all manners of their delivering this their
pseudo-christianisme, whether it be by pen in print, or by tongue in pulpit,
and private conference; commending, and by miracles endeavoring to persuade
and establish this their Pseudo* christianisme of Christ's being in Secrets,
therein to be beheld, adored and worshipped.

you, when they shall say unto you, are understood all those whom these false
Prophets shall endeavor to pervert and seduce: and who else can these be but
the faithful? who being, according to the faith of the Primitive Church,
taught to look for none, nor to think of any corporal presence of Christ upon
earth, in secrets and in holes; Yet these false prophets, turpis quaestus
causa, for filthy lucres sake, and to purchase to themselves names to be
creatores Creatoris sui, creators of their Creator, shall endeavor most
powerfully to seduce them by this error: wherein they shall so far preuail,
that the Elect shall be in hazard to be perverted; The Elect in danger to be
perverted, a point of high unportance.
a circumstance of such importance ( that the Elect shall be in danger to be
seduced) that it does more than most manifestly euince to me, that the signs
which they shall do, shall be both many and very great: and again; that they
shall not deny the true Christ; nor pretend to teach another Christ (for in
such a Case in what danger of seduction would or could the Elect be?) but out
of Christ's Prophecy, doctrine, and in his name, they should endeavor, to teach
a presence of the true Christ himself in secret and in Penetralls. And so
these four things which be so clear, I only suppose, not adding any further
proofs of the same; for he who is ouerdiligent in the proof of clear things,
shows that he has more time then matter, more leisure then Judgment. Only
I advise the Attentive hearers, to bear these things well away, alta reposit a
mente, laid up deeply in their considerations: for thereby they shall be better
able to attain unto the understanding of our discourse following; which as it
is of great dificultie, so it is of great consequence, and importance.

Behold he is in the Secrets.
Concerning this our second part; I observe two points: the doctrine it self;
he is in Secrets, Christ is in Penetralls; The doctrine it self of these
false prophets and their manner of teaching it.
and the manner wherewith it is delivered, with a Behold, behold he is in the
secrets, in the Penetralls. A word only of the manner. This word behold, as
it is ever demonstratiue, specializing some singular thing considerable, or
worthy to be beheld: so in this place, it does specify and specialize a
singular pretended presence of Christ in secrets, in Penetralls, admirable,
wonderful, mysterious; such as requires faith and belief as of a prodigious
personal presence of Christ. And in this respect it is, that Christ gives his
express Charge, against that very thing with the false Prophets do require;
to wit, not to believe (believe it not) that which they with showing of
prodigies and wonders require to be believed as a thing prodigious and
wonderful. They say, behold he is substantially and personally in the
secrets; believe it. Christ rechargeth, and says believe it not; for he is
not in the secrets. They say; Quod non capis, quod non vides, animose firmat
fides, etc. Christus totus sub vtraque specie. That which Sequent. in festo
corp. Christ. missal. Roman.
thou conceiuest not, that which thou see not, A strong faith will confirm,
and make sure to thee: whole Christ is and remains under and in (the secrets
of) both kinds: but Christ says believe it not, believe it not; they profess
that that is an admirable and a most wonderful presence which they commend;
but Christ on the contrary rechargeth that it is vain, pseudo-christian and
fantastical: If therefore; or thus, when therefore they shall say unto you,
Christ is in the secrets, believe it not, regard it not: not for that I deny
that faith is required, that we may believe that true real and Sacramental
presence with Christ has in the true Sacrament; but for that I constantly
affirm, that Christ forbids the belief of any such personal and carnal
presence of himself in the Sacrament, such as The false prophets (behold)
inuites to faith of a prodigious corporal presence.
these false Prophets were to teach. Thus have I sufficiently showed (or rather
I do suppose) that the inuitation of the false prophets in the word behold,
is an inuitation to faith and belief of some prodigious presence, behold he
is in the Penetralls, and Secrets: that is, believe he is in the Penetralls
and Secrets. A mystical hidden secret invisible and mysterious presence of
Christ in Secrets is then that, which these false Prophets were to teach, noted
and expressed in this word Behold. And so we come to the further discussion
of the false doctrine it self.

He is in Secrets.
And first; what we are here to understand, by these The false doctrine it
self.
Secrets, wherein Christ is affirmed to be; and Secondly that these false
prophets were to teach the very true Christ himself (not Antichrist nor any
other pretended Christ) to be in these Secrets.

The first as it is a point of high consequence; so it is of What is to be
understood by the word Secrets. psalm 8
great difficulty. He, who was once pleased to open the tongues of babes and
infants, and from their mouths to perfect his own praise, be pleased so to
prevent, assist and follow me with his grace, that I may speak truly and
religiously, and you may hear accordingly. Though it may seem to some a
nouelty, yet it is most agreeing to the analogy of faith, as I shall make it
appear unto you. It is not such a nouelty, but that Peter Martyr and Plessis
Mornay (though Mart. loci class. 4. loc. 10. Plessis de Sacra. l. 4. c. 9
they have but a few lines heerof) have professedly thus declared this Text;
yea, and some of the ancient Fathers seem much inclining heerunto, as hereafter
shall be showed. Be therefore most attentive, and ponder well the declaration
which by GOD's assistance I shall make: for, though (noua c^da) my
interpretation may seem to some to be new, yet it is not vt noua, set vt
vetustissima astruam, that I Irenae. l. 4. c. 32: Orig. hom. 15. in Mat. Aug.
trac. 59. in Joan. Eus. in vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 45
endeavor thereby to bring-in any new point of faith, but to establish that
which is most venerable, ancient, and truly Apostolical.

And for my more vn-reproueable manner of proceeding heerin, I lay for a
foundation inviolable this Principle or prime assured Rule, received by all
Antiquity, not rejected by any judicious either Pontifician or Protestant, and
for truth as clear as the heavens: to wit, that the sacred Scriptures are ever
literally, according to their An infallible rule for orthodox in^erpretation of
scripture.
plain sense, to be understood and interpreted, idem vt sit sensus mentis, qui
est sonus auris; that the sense of the mind be the same with the sound of the
ear, when as the literal and plain sense of the same is neither against
faith nor good manners, nor seems to affirm any absurdity or impossibility.
Now, to interpret and expound these words (we have in hand) according to their
plain and literal sense, makes nothing against the truth of Christian faith;
but opens a point of Antichristian pseudo-christianisme, aimed at here by our
Savior; neither makes it against good manners, neither contains it any
impossibility: for, it declares that which is in the daily use and practice
of the Antichristian Church; and which also they hold That Christ is in the
Secrets, is the cornerstone of all popish worship.
not only to be possible, but further make it a secondary Cornerstone of all
their irreligious religion. To this are directed, and for this are intended,
the whole mass and troop of their superstitious ceremonies, and lesser orders;
and upon this, as upon a God amongst men ( not sursum, but deorsum babentes
corda, having their hearts not lift up, but cast down) they do rest the very
hope of their salvation. In this respect, happy, yea thrice happy, is that man,
who can die with this God in his mouth, with this Christ in or upon his stomach;
having such a viaticum within himself. Most of the ancient Interpreters of
Saint Mathewes Gospel, such as lived in the purer times of the Church, whilst
this Prophecy of Christ was not fully completed (for, before
transubstantiation was fully decreed, this Con^. general. Lat. sub Innoc. 3
anno 1215
Pseudo-christianisme of Christ's being in Secrets and Penetrals, to be beheld
and adored, was not generally taught nor believed) most, I say, of the ancient
Interpreters understand this Text mystically of the private Conuenticles and
Origin, austen, apud Aqum. in Cate. in Mat. 24
Assemblies of Heretics and Schismatics, challenging to themselves the
spiritual presence of Christ. Which exposition also ( propter conscientiam
reatus, in regard of the guiltiness of their consciences) is very pleasing to
the Rhemists, Rhem. Test. an. (...). in Mat. 24
and all our Romanists: but (with reverence be it spoken) this exposition is a
mistaking, and is convinced to be such, by an instance or two, which
(pretermitting all others) I will deliver.

h^er and there in Deserts, in Secrets, and in Closets (to use the Rhemists
word) to be only understood of the private Their Testament in Mat. 24 This
doctrine of these false prophets is not to be understood of a pretended
spiritual presence
Conuenticles of Heretics and Schismatics, challenging his true Church and
spiritual presence (by teaching of his truth) to be only with them, and
amongst them; then should not our Savior have specified and delivered any
proper condition, and certain property of the universal Antichristian
Synagogue, which was not to be confined within any one Nation; but to be
spread over all Nations and Kingdoms where Christ's Gospel had ^ These. 2
been taught. And yet that our Savior does in this place specify a special
and proper note, a sure and certain mark of the said universal Antichristian
Synagogue, some of the ancient Fathers have expressly taught, and the
Pontificians Chrysostom. in hom. Orig. Hier. Hill. most expressly in cate. apud
Aquin. and can. 25. in Mat.
themselves do generally confess; yea, and the circumstances of the Text, in
the verses precedent and subsequent, do more than manifestly euince: which also
shall hereafter be more clearly proved.

desert, secrets, closets, chambers, and such like; then it would seem, in the
greatest ruff of the Heathnish Roman ten persecutions, to have touched the
Roman Church it self, An invincible reason.
when she was pure and sound in faith, and whilst she made the Cripts and
vaults within the City, the Mount S^ract without, the deserts and fields
abroad, to be the places of her residence, and her chiefest Sanctuaries and
Asyles against the furies of those times. And, in good sooth, I demand of the
Pontificians themselves, whether such an interpretation will not seem most to
concern the Apocal. 12. 6. 14 Viega in apocalip. com. in c. 12 sect. 15.
true Church of Christ, in the times of Antichrists Reign: which, as they
themselves all teach, shall be most glorious, public and universal; when as
the true Church of Christ then (designed by the woman fleeing into the desert)
shall be distressed and obscure, despised, and dispersed here and there up and
down; preaching Christ here and there, in Secrets and in Corners.

I said above, that most of the ancient Interpreters seem Hill. 25. can. in Mat.
to interpret this prophecy of Christ mystically: but so did not that Malleus
Arrianorum, that hammer of the Arrians, S. Hillary, whose words I find to be
these; Et tamen, quia in magna vexatione positi erunt homines, pseudoprophetae
This prophecy of Christ being so obscure, and the popish pseudo-christianism so
vnimaginable, it is not to be marvelled, if the Ancients attained not the same
fully. Chryso. hom. in Mat. 24. and in ca^^n. Aquin. Hill. in Mat. can. 25
tanquam praesentem in Christo opem sint indicaturi, multis in locis Christum
esse atque haberi mentientur; vt in Antichristi famulatum depressos vexatosque
deducant: and ideo subdit, Surge^t enim pseudochristi and pseudoprophetae, etc.
And yet notwithstanding, says he, because men shall then be in great
vexaation, the false Prophets shall make show of a present hope to be had in
Christ; and shall lie and say, Christ is to be had in many places; that so they
may bring into the service of Antichrist those that are so afflicted and vexed:
and therefore it is added, For, there shall arise false Christ's and false
Prophets, etc: thus he. Which pseudo-Christs, false Prophets and false Christ's,
Chrysostom calls ministros Antichristi, the servants and ministers of
Antichrist. Hillarie again adds: Nam pseudoprophetae, de quibus supra dixerat,
nunc in deserto Christum esse dicent, vt homines errore deprauent; nunc in
penetralibus asserent eum esse, vt homines dominantis Antichristi potestate
concludant: sed Dominus se nec loco occultandum, nec a singulis seorsim
contuendum prositetur, sed vbique, and in conspectu omnium praesentem se
futurum esse denun^iat. Vndesequitur, Sicut enim fulgur, etc. For the false
Prophets of whom he had said before they shall say Christ to be in the
desert, that thereby they may deprave by error; now they will say him to be in
Secrets and Penetrals, that they may bring men into the subjection of
Antichrist, reigning and triumphing every where: but our Lord professes, that
he will neither be to be hidden in any place, nor to be seen apart by any;
but he denounces, that he will be every where, and in the sight of all. And
therefore it follows, Mat. 24. 27
For, as the lightning, etc. Thus Hillarie. I add a saying of (...) Mat. 24.
^^. 6
Hierome: In quo ostendit, quod secundus aduent us non in humilitate vt primus,
sed in gloria demonstrandus est: stultamest itaque eum in paruo loco quaerere,
vel in abscondito, qui totius mundi lumen est. Wherein he shows, that his
second coming shall not be in humility as the first, but in glory (and does
not this make against his base being in Secrets, in boxes, in a rats belly,
etc?) It is therefore a foolish thing to seek him either in a little place, or
in the secret, who is the light of the world. Note these words in a little
place. Chrysostom. hom. in 24. Mat. Eus. apud Aqum.
Thus Hierome; in part attaining to the knowledge of the popish
pseudo-christianisme heerin. So Hillarie likewise, and Saint Chrysostom above;
and not unlikely Eusebius cited by Aquinas, in his Catena upon the 17. of S.
Luke.

Here by the way, with your Christian patience, I may not omit to observe what
Maldonat's (a most famous Jesuit or Ignatian) interpretation is on this place.
His father-hood, who in other places is very large, yet gives this text a
very short Cut, thus: Posuit duo, pro omnibus, loca contraria; Maldonat
comment. in Math. 24.
desertum and penetralia, id est conclaue, and intimam maximeque reco^dita^
domus parte^, vt significaret, quacunque, ratione quo cu^que habitu, alius
Christus veniret, illi crede^du^ non esse: vltra de A fever t^^pidation of
Maldonat the Great Ignatia^ commenting upon this place.
deserto, and penetralibus quaerere, sobry non est Interpretis. Christ (says
he) has set down two contrary places for all; to wit the desert and the
penetrals; that is, the parlour and the inmost or most reserved place of the
house; that he might signify, in what manner soever, in what habit soever,
another Christ should come, that he should not be believed; further to seek
and enquire of the desert and penetrals, is not the part of a sober
Interpreter. Thus he* the most of which his words, especially those, in what
manner soever, in what habit soever, and those another Christ, if they were
narrowely sifted, they would make but little for the Popish Gospel, touching
the corporal and substantial presence of Christ in the habits of Bread and
Wine; and the manner of his indivisible, and diuisible presence: diuisible, in
respect of Christ himself; because every part of him is really divided, and
distinguished each from other; indivisible in respect of the place, where the
forms of Bread and wine are; for so Christ is indiuisibly totus in toto etc.
whole Christ, in the whole form of Bread and every part thereof. These I say,
and such like, would make nothing for the Popish Gospel: but I pass by them,
and the others; yet I cannot but note those words of his, where he says, that
it is not the part of a sober Interpreter, to enquire and examine further of
the desert and penetralls, then what his male-donata interpretation, his
illgiuen interpretation, has devised. What is that in Maldonat, but
conscientia imbecillitatis, aut peruersitatis reatus; a very conscience of
weakness, or a guilt of peruersitie? his perverse conscience well observing,
that if these words, in the desert and the penetralls, were duly sifted and
orthodoxally expounded, that then their Popish desert-pilgrimages, their
boxe-Christ adorations, their Eucharist-arkeworships, would thereby be called
in question, be convicted and condemned. But, not regarding this ill-giuen
advice of Mal-donat (by interpretation Ill-giuen) I will by Gods assistance,
with modesty beseeming a Christian, examine these words, and their true
meaning; and thereby euince that Christ by this his prophecy, did specially
aim against the Popish Idolatry of their teaching himself to be in the desert
and Penetrals of Bread and wine, and of worshipping of him in their mystical
deserts, and penetralls: and so we come to declare, what is meant here by these
two words, in Secrets; (or) in Penetrals.

In Penetralibus, in Penetralls, in the Secrets.
I observe first that the word used by Hutter in his Hebrew Math. is Hinneh
Bahhadarim; Bahhadarim (of Cheder) ^agninus in the sauro.
the very Secrets or most Secrets. For this purpose, if we look into
Pagninus in his Treasury, we shall find him affirming Cheder (whence
Bahhadarim) to signify aditum, locum prorsus penetralem; the most retired
part of any place. He adds sunt qui putent etc. There are those, who think
that the Greek word (...) in Matthew 24. is expressed by this word Cheder:
again he adds his reason why the South part of the world is called Cheder;
to wit, because it is not known to us. Further says he, Ben Ezra affirms
that the Star which is in the Region of the South, or the corner thereof is
called Cheder; because those, who dwell in the North cannot, nor do not, see
the same. The said Pagninus also shows there largely, that the Hebrew word
Cheder, The force of the Hebrew word, serves for our purpose.
is used in sacred Scriptures, to signify the most Inmost, and mostretired
part of any place; so Judges the 15. and 1. and 16. 9. and Canti. 3. 4. to
signify the inward part of the bed chamber, to signify the inward places of
the South, not to be seen nor known by us: so, Job 9. 9. and 37. 9. yea
more, to signify the inmost of man's Soul, the secretest part of man's spirit:
so Pro. 24. 4. to signify the inmost secrets of the belly: so Proverbs, 18.
8. the inmost parts of death: so Pro. 7. 27. By which it is most manifest, that
if the force and vigor of the Hebrew word in this place be followed, the
false Prophets, which our Savior here aims at, were to teach a presence of
him, so secret, and invisible, not to be seen, that it was only to be
believed and understood; not sensible, but to be believed; not visible, but
intelligible: and so do the Papists. And if it be objected, that our Savior
used not the Hebrew word but spoke in Syriack, by the Syriack word also our
intent is most manifest; for the Syriack word Batauana may signify the
secretest of the chamber or the very Secret of the bosom; The popish priests
carry Christ in the secrets of the bosom to hou sell there sick.
a secret used by the Popish Priests in England and else where, carrying Christ
in small pixes, in the very Secret of their bosoms to housell their sick
penitents withal. But ceasing to add more, out of the Hebrew or Syriack
wherein I confess I have no knowledge (for what I herin have, I had only out of
Pagninus by the direction of my Reverend Brethren, and learned Friends, Master
Salkile sometimes an Ignatian but now a Religious and learned Convert, in the
Church of England, and also from Master Walker, Parson of Saint John
Evangelist in London) I com, to examine, what is meant by the Greek word used
in this place.

Now the Greek word used in this place, (...) as it makes more effectually and
forcibly for our purpose; so the Greek edition it self cannot be reputed to
be other, then most Autenticall and Canonical by Protestant and Papist. Our
Greek word then here used, is (...). Isocrat. Plutarch, others, usually take
(...) for secret cellars to put victuals in.
Concerning the signification whereof, if we make in quirie into Greek
Authors, we shall find that the same word has only three most used
significations; in all which, the same serves singularly, for our intent and
purpose. For first it may be taken for a secret chamber, or close and locked
parlour; or secondly, for a very Ambry, Buttery, Save, or Cubbord to lay
victuals in; or, thirdly, for a locked Chest, or Cubbord wherein treasury
usually is reserved. The first of these the pontificians will not deny: for
proofs and declarations of the two later, I will not trouble my self with
alleging of the testimonies of diverse Authors. The authority of Stephanus,
and Scaputa (...); in ^n verb^ (...): Scapula (...), L^^icon Gr^^o Latinum
(...) verbo.
after him, with the Lexicon Greco-Latinu^ set forth at Lions in the year
1602. shall suffice. Now Stephanus his words are these; (...) pro (...) passim
obu^um, Tameion for tamicion is every where to be found in the use of Greek
Authors. Now, that the later is taken in the sense we require and affirm,
none so ignorant in the Greeks as to deny. Again he says there, that (...)
is taken pro cella panaria et promptuario, for a Save, Cubbord or Hutch wherein
esculenta et poculenta reconduntur, victuals for eating and drinking are
reserved: and here-hence it is, that in the use of Greek Authors the mas^uline
word (...), is taken for a man-butler; the feminine (...), for a woman buttler.
And thus the sense intended is clear in the v^e of Greek writers; let us add
a word or two of the latin word used in the vulgar edition. This word is
penetralibus, Penetrals: The word penetra^ibus, used in the vulgar edition
signifies that part which is most secret.
the signification whereof every schoole-boie may be able to deliver; to wit,
that it signifies that place or part of place, which is most in wardlie in
ward, most secretly secret; and, if I may so speak, the very penetration of
Secrecy it self; a most apt word to signify the holes and Secrets wherein '
Popish Priests in our Kingdom hide themselves, with their supposed Christ,
from the search of Messengers, commonly called Pursuiuants.

This word penetrale (says Calepine) signifies omnem partem interiorem domus,
vel templi; every more inward part (...). in dictio na^^o.
(not of chamber only) of the house or Temple: here hence it is, that the
father of Eloquence calls those Gods, diuos Ci^^r. 2. de natura^eo^.
Pen^trales, Gods Penetrall, which were worshipped in the Secrets of the
Temples, and in lower vaults. Again; he (...).
calls the hidden and unseen fires, focos Penetrales, Penetrall secret fires,
because most inwardly within, and secret. I shall not need to add more in a
point so clear. By this which has been delivered, most clear it is, that
our Savior intends this his prophecy, against some false-Christs and
false-prophets, who should teach the most The presence of Christ, which these
false prophets were to teach, was to be most secret.
hidden presence of him upon earth that might be imagined; and consequently for
this purpose, as it may be probably affirmed, he directed the pen of the
Hebrew, Greek Arabic and Siriack writers, yea and of the author of the vulgar
edition also, to use those words, which do express and signify, the most
secret manner of presence and being that can or may be thought upon: such as
cannot indeed be conceived, but only believed; believe it not says he,
believe it not. And were there ever any, or can there be any, who have
preached, or may teach, a more mystical presence, a more hidden, secret and
obscure being The Author submits his opinion and interpretation to the Church.
universal.
of Christ, in pixes, boxes, chests, church-arks, and church sanes, then the
Papists at this day do, and for along time have done? let others think what
they please: for my part (submitting my judgment to the censure of Christ's
universal Church) I think, that our Savior in this his prophecy did
specially aim at this point of Popish pseudochristianisme. And to think so, I
am induced by this one Christ in his prophecy aimed at the Popish
pseudochristianisme.
reason, if I had no other, to wit, that seeing the Great and universal
Antichristian Synagogue, was to teach and does teach (to the perdition of
innumerable Souls and high contempt of Christ's Majesty) a carnal, corporal,
continued presence of Christ upon earth (...), in locked closets, in
church-arkes, tabernacles, saues, cubbords, and coffers, there to be beheld
and adored, there to be carried and adorned, there to be truly prayed unto
and inuocated, De cons^^rat: dis^. 2. cap. ^go* Berengarius.
there to be eaten, yea sensibly eaten, as Berengarius his Recantation has
it; may it be thought, that Christ, so provident, loving and al-wise a
shepherd of his Church, would in no place have so detestable and execrable a
practice foreshewed, for the good instruction and safety of his people? Yes,
doubtless. And where, or when may that more conveniently be done, than in this
place, in which so many other properties, signs and badges, of the great
Antichristian Synagogue are described?

A reply with answer.
If it be replied and said, that Christ does indeed in this place foretell a
pretended presence of Christ to be taught by diverse false Prophets; but this
pretended presence is not of Christ himself, but of the great Antichrist, who
shall come in his own name, and deny the true Christ: I answer; How mostidle
and triuiall must this objection needs be in the judgment even of the
Pontificians themselves? who all acknowledge, that Antichrists presence This
prophecy is not to be understood of any hid presence of the great Antichrist
himself. Ribera. viega, in apocal. Bell. l. 3 de Romans pont. c. 6. 7. 8. Alij.
shall be public and glorious; yea, for three years and a half (the whole
time of his durance, as they imagine) most triumphant. And if he be to sit in
the Temple of God, carrying himself as if he were a God, then most certainly
his presence shall not be in Secrets and Penetrals, but even in the very most
eminent view of the whole world. Let it then rest proved, that this Prophecy of
Christ is to be understood of all such false prophets and false anointed ones
of Antichrist, who, to use Hillaries phrase, shall lyingly teach Christ to be
in many places; thereby to draw the vexed and afflicted (he Hill. can. 25. in
Mat. apud Aquin. in cate. in 24. Mat.
means, persecuted Christians) into the service and subjection of Antichrist.
And is not this that very thing which is in their daily practice; the very
cup of abomination, wherewith they inchant and ^ull a-sleep the Princes and
Nations of the earth? And, to conclude this point, is not this their
pseudo-christianisme, of teaching true Christ to be in their (...), in their
Tabernacles, Cup-boords, and Arks, the chiefest bait wherewith they negotiate
the souls of the deceived; the cheifest scar-crowe, whereby they endeavor to
affright theirs from coming to us? for, say they, Behold, we have Christ
truly and in personal presence with us, upon our altars, and in our arks: but
they (meaning all reformed Churches) have naught else but a piece of bare
leauened bread upon their profane communion-tables. Wherein they belly us: for,
the reformed Churches generally do acknowledge a true, real, sacramental
presence of Christ, effectually and really working Christ really present by
real operation, thorough faith in him.
by faith in the worthy receivers. Angels are said truly and really to be, not
only where they definituely are, but also where they effectually work: so
Christ's body is really, not only in the heavens where it is locally present,
but also in the sacred mysteries, by the which it works effectually and
really in the worthy receivers. And so I come to the full declaration of our
second point; to weet, that these false Prophets, pointed at by our Savior,
were not to teach the presence of the great Antichrist, nor of any other
challenging himself to be Christ, and denying the true Christ our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; but of such who were indeed to teach a secret presence and
coming of the true Christ himself upon earth, with a Behold, believe it;
behold, he is in the Secrets.

He is in the Penetrals: he is, that is, Christ is.
If they shall say unto you (or thus) When Mat. 24. v. 27
they shall say unto you; Behold, Christ is in the penetrals or Secrets,
believe it not. For, as the lightning comes from the East, and shines unto
the West: so shall the coming of the Son of man be. Now, as clear as the
heavens it is, that this argument A reason that these false teachers were to
teach the true Christ himself to be in the secrets.
of Christ is to be understood of a true and corporal presence of himself
coming in person: which supposed, then our infinitely-wise Savior (who without
blasphemy cannot be impeacht of impertinent discourse) must needs be thought to
oppose this his public personal presence and coming, against all other
pretended presence and comings of him before the same; and against some hidden
and secret presence or coming of himself, pretended by these false Prophets:
for, if thus he should have spoken only against such Heretics who would
pretend to have alone his spiritual presence (by the teaching of his truth) in
their Conuenticles; then Christ must be thought thus to have argued against
them: If any false Prophets shall challenge my truth to be only taught by
them, and so my spiritual presence to be only with them, believe it not. For,
as the lightning comes out of the East, and shines unto the West: so shall
the coming of the Son of man be public and apparent. And were not such a
manner of arguing most unbefitting the wisdom of Christ? But if we understand
the false doctrine of the false Prophets, accordingly as we have done of their
teaching of Christ himself coming upon the earth, and to be truly and really
(...), in the Secrets and penetrals of Churcharks, chests, or cup-boards, then
our Saviors reason is most agreeing and consequent, thus: When they shall say
unto you, that I am comne, and that I am in such Secrets and Christ opposes
his public personal coming, against a secret personal pretended presence and
coming*
penetrals, believe it not, believe no such coming of me. For, as the
lightning comes out of the East, and shines unto the West: so shall the
coming of the Son of man be public, glorious, manifest; not secret, obscure or
hidden: and until I come in such a sort, look not for me in any other
corpoporall presence whatsoever, And, to meditate a little more on Christ's
similitude, me thinks it is most opposite to what is professed in the popish
Synagogue. Christ will not come till he come as the lightning appearing from
the East to the West. The lightning coms suddenly: but Christ in the popish
Secrets and Penetrals comes expected and looked for at a set Instant, after the
doing of many foolish ceremonies. The lightning, as it comes suddenly, so it
suddenly dis* appears: but Christ, in the popish Secrets, continues and abides
so long as the forms of the consecrated bread and wine remain; which may be
for many years; So in their miraculous Penetrals at Bruxells and Mechline. The
lightning is clearly seen and observed for such: but Christ, in the
Antichristian Secrets, is seen no other than crustulum panis, a wafer or round
cake of bread, So called frequently in Rome.
or a cup of wine. The lightning, as it is one, so in the very same Instant it
is not seen in diverse places: but Christ, in the popish Penetrals, is (to use
Hillaries phrase) taught Hill. in Mat. can. 25
to be in many pla^es; yea (for, Hillary foresaw not, nor presented not, nor
presaged not all) Christ is in one and the same Church in diverse places, in
many Penetrals at once, at one and the same very moment.

An objection.
But, for further clearing of this matter, it is objected thus: This reason of
our Savior in the 27. verse, is purposely brought by him against all such
false Prophets who should teach a secret and hidden coming of him to
judgment; which, the Papists do not: for, they only De consecr. did. 2. c.
Ego Ber^ng. Bell. l. de mist. 1. c. 12
teach a hidden personal presence of him in the Sacrament; not sitting there
as a Judge, but being set there visibly, as in a dish of the accidents, and
species, or forms, of bread and wine; there to be truly, sensibly, eaten and
drunk, seen and handled. here and there, up and down in the desert (that is,
as I bouldly interpret forlorn places) in the Secrets and Penetrals, in closets
(as the Rhemists read it) does euince, that they meant nothing less; except
they may be thought to have affirmed (and did ever any so?) or hereafter to
affirm (and is it likely that any ever will do so?) that like Bishops in their
visitations, or Judges in their circuits, Christ (^emoouing up and down)
should play the Iudgein secret chambers, closets, etc. O the vanity of all
vanities! once but to dream, that the pseudo-christianism of these false
Prophets were so to be interpreted.

A Reply. If they reply, that this reason of our Savior against these false
Prophets, being grounded upon a public coming of his into the world, must be
applied against such false Prophets who were to teach at least some public
coming of him upon earth before his coming to judgment; which the Papists, in
the respect of this their doctrine of transubstantiatiation, do not: for, they
teach not Christ to come into the Sacrament, but to be there, vi conversionis,
by the force of conversion and transubstantiation; D^ euch. l. 3. c. 18
created (as some say) produced (as others; so my Master in Rome) adduced or
brought (as Bellarmine) so that he is there indeed, though not by coming
thither. O the prodigious vanity of this reply! To what shifting holes are
these foxes driven!

here, that Christ is there, that Christ is in the desert (that is, in forlorn
places) that Christ is in the Penetrals, Secrets, Closets, etc. The which, as
it is most true in the popish profession; so it is most certain in their
doctrine, that it may be done without the proper and personal coming of
Christ: for, they teach, that Christ is in the Sacrament by the force of
conversion and transubst^ntiation. creation, as that blasphemous Saying has
it, Discip. de temp. ^e. 111. (...), l^c. 4. in can. (...). See the communion
of Saints, page 7.
The Priest is the creator or maker of his Creater; or by production, as the
like impious (if properly and literally taken) Saying has it, that The Priest
with his mouth conficit corpus Domini, makes the body of the Lord, produces
the body of the Lord. But, supposing that Christ is (as the Papists themselves
do confess) in being, and existent in heaven before and when the ^assing
Priests do consecrate; it is most vnimaginable, unintelligible and incredible,
how he should be anew in the Sactament upon earth, without a coming or
bringing thereto. The which was so well understood by Bellarmine, that (by
force of Bell. l. 3. de ^uch. c. 18
reason and truth, urged thereunto) he acknowledges, that the conversion
wherewith Christ's body is made present in the Sacrament, is to be called
conuersio adductiua, a conversion adductiue, a conversion that brings Christ's
body, and consequently, Christ himself, into the Sacrament. Now, if there be a
bringing of Christ, then there is also a coming of Christ: except it be said,
that Christ is brought against his will; or that it is one Christ which is in
the heavens, and another Christ which is in the Sacrament: neither of which, I
trow, the Papists will dare to affirm. Christ then is there in the Secrets of
bread and wine, and also is there by coming: and so this reason of our Savior
has his force against the same.

Acts 3 Aug. ep. 57. ad Dardan. and in Joan. tract. 31 Orig. hom. 33 in Mat.
truth amongst Christians, professed by evident consequence in the Creed,
taught by Ancients, that Christ after his ascension was to make no other
personal and bodily coming nor appearance upon earth, till his coming to
judgment; It is most clear, that this reason of our Saviors is of force
against al manner of false Prophets whatsoever, who should teach any true
corporal presence of him upon earth, in what habit, site, form, or manner
soever: for, his proof stands in this, that he will never appear corporally
and presentially upon earth, until he com suddenly, publicly and visibly, like
the lightning which shines from the East, and appears unto the West. And
does not this make most evidently against any manner and sort of Christ's
corporal and personal presence upon earth, pretended by any false Prophets
whatsoever; whether it be by coming, or by any other means whatsoever? But
grant, that this first reason, delivered in the 27. verse, be not sufficient
(if taken alone) yet if we adioine it to that which follows in the 28. verse,
Wheresoever the body is, there will the Eagles be gathered together, it will
make it most manifest, that our Savior, after his glorious ascension, never
intended that his body should be corporally and presentially in any place,
otherwise then should be fitting and agreeing to the visible glory and
perspicuous majesty of the same. But, to conclude, howsoever this reason of our
Savior may be taken by some, yet it proves most evidently and certainly,
that the false doctrine and pseudo-christianisme of these false Prophets, of
teaching Christ to be here and there, to be in Secrets and Penetrals, is not
to be understood only of their challenging of his spiritual presence alone to
be with them, and with none but them; but further, of their teaching of some
corporal manner of Christ's presence upon earth: the which is that very thing
for which I specially do her enforce the same.

And so I come to the confirmation of our reason, by our Saviors second
argument, thus; If therefore they shall say unto you, When therefore they shall
say unto you, Behold he is (Christ is) in the penetrals, believe it not: for,
wheresoever verse 28.
the dead body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together. Touching
which argument of our Savior, all interpretations being seriously waigh'd;
that of Chrysostom, Chryso. in Mat. 24.
with other of the ancient and modern Writers, will be found more agreeing to
truth; to wit, that like as the dead body or carcass being openly exposed in
the field, the eagles do gather themselves by a natural instinct and sent, to
feed thereon: so likewise, where he himself should for any time after his
glorious ascension be, he would be in a glorious and conspicuous sort and
presence, in that there should not be wanting multitudes of Angels assisting
and ministering unto him. And so agreeingly to this sense, our Savior
instructs his faithful, thus: When the false prophets shall say unto you
that I am in a hidden and obscure manner in their secrets, and penetrals, as a
companion of Rats and mice, believe it not: for my coming and presence upon
earth, after my glorious ascension, shall never be but conspicuous and
glorious, never without the assisting ministry of glorious Angels. And this
indeed is showed to be so, by such apparitions as are recorded of Acts 7. 9.
him in the Scriptures. Stephen saw him, but it was ( the Heavens being
opened) in the glory of his father: Saul saw him, yet it was in the splendor
of his glory, in arcanis Acts 9. and 2 Cor. 1^.
coelorum, in the palace of Heaven; where he saw such things, which were not
to be uttered. Though the beloved disciple saw him; yet it was upon his
throne, in the midst of Angels and Saints adoring, and worshipping him: so
is Christ always attended on, and ministered unto, by the Glorious Eagles. And
therefore it is most impious, pseudo christianisme, to place him there, or
lyingly to teach him to be there, in such secrets and Penetrals, where he
shall not only be socius murium et soricum; the companion of Rats and Mice,
but also be their food, for them to feed thereon. And so I adioyne my second
reason for this our principal point, in hand.

Math. 24. 34.
which were to happen and to be in use (for the durance of his church) in the
antichristian Synagogue, before his coming to judgment, and the consummation
of the world: But signs, that they may be profitably significant, must be
facill and easy to be understood. Now if all other signs in this Chapter,
concerning the Antichristian Synagogue (their working of miracles, their
seducing many, The popish practice according to the very literal sense.
their persecuting, etc.) be literally to be understood; why then shall not
this their pseudo-christianisme of teaching Christ to be in secrets and
Penetralls, agreeingly to the plain literal sense of the words, be taken and
interpreted?

seeing it is a point of such moment concerning the perdition and salvation of
many Souls. And to add a confirmation to this reason; If these words of
Christ were to be understood mystically against the private conuenticles of
heretics chalenging a spiritual presence of him, by reason of their teaching
of his truth to be only with them and among them (which I have more clearly
disproued above) I cannot for my part see, what certainty, for the faithfull's
instruction, may be gathered out of the same; which yet is the importantest,
amongst all the rest. For as it is most evident, by a never intermitted
experience since Christ's time, that every congregation of All heretics
arrogate Christ's spiritual presence. See August. Epis. 80. ad He^^^^. Greg.
Moral. 19. cap. 29. The purest Churches in time of persecution teach Christ's
spiritual presence in Secrets. The Rhemis^s erroneous position, to their own
consusion.
Heretics and Schismatickes, as it challenges to it self the power and
spiritual presence of Christ, so it obiecteth to all other, the lack of the
same; yea and the most Orthodox Churches of Christ himself, have their ebbes
and flows, and then have been purest when in cripts, deserts, and woods they
have made their assemblies; therefore to preach Christ in this sense to be in
secrets, cannot be a note or property of the Antichristian Synagogue, either
in the fourth or any other degree of property. The Rhemists are most eager to
interpret this false preaching of Christ's presence here and there in Secrets,
and in Penetralls, or in closets (to use their own phrase) of such Heretics,
as should pretend to tie the Catholic Church to some one place or kingdom:
and for this purpose they make upon the 24. of Saint Mathewes Gospel this
marginall note out of Austine (a razour wherewith to cut their own throats)
Whosoever (says Austin) draws Christ or his Church from the communion and
fellowship August. de unit. Eccles. cap. 3.
of all nations christened, to one corner, town, or Country, believe him not:
thus Austine most truly, although not fully (with due respect be it spoken)
attaining the sense of this place. With what reason then are our Pontificians
to be believed, who draw Christ, and the Catholic Church, to one City; to
one Mother City (to use Parsons wise phrase) yea to one man, the Pope; whom
they make in power, and Authority, to be a vice-Christ or an Antichrist, and
vertually to be, and in efficacy to be the whole Catholic Church. Nos per
ecclesiam intelligimus Gre^ser. defenco Bellar Tom. 1. page 1450.
Pontificem Romanum. We, by the Church, vnderstandthe the Pope of Rome, says
Gretser. Which Tyrannical supremacy, and ambitious universality, or
Catholicisme of his, because the Persian Christened Churches do reject; the
Ethiopian detest; the Grecian abhor; the Egyptian loath; the Muscouian
execrate, even as the devil himself; the Arabian scorn; the Armenian
condeme; all reformed Churches hate and accurse; for this cause they are, by
the holy father and his, reputed for Heretics, and Reprobate Schismatics;
by him whose hands Esau-like are against all, as the hands of all ought to be
against him: and so, in true Christian wisdom, and policy are, except where
hypocrisy ouer-aboundes; or else, where God, for some other The yoke of
Popery.
grievous sins, may intend to bring in iugum exactoris, the yoke of the
Exactour and Oppressor upon a stiffenecked people, or generation: and so I
add my third principal reason.

My third reason I deduce, out of the Energie and property of certain other
words, here used by our Savior. I observe the Aduerb Behold, twice repeated:
which, as it is an Aduerb of admiration; so it is always demonstratiue, and
specializing of some singular matter, requiring regard and consideration. John
Baptist, in those words John 1. 36.
of his, Behold the lamb of God, did demonstrate Christ, to his disciples, to
be admired and followed: so these An argument from the energie of certain
words.
false prophetts, by their behold he is in the Penetrals, do inuit the
faithful to behold and believe on Christ, being in a hidden and obscure
manner in such penetrals: and do not the Papists so? I also weigh, the Aduerbs
here and there; which ever do design, some special circumstances of place;
as thoroughoutthe Scriptures is manifest. And if to them we adioine the
specialties of the places (the desert, and the penetrals) with the Pronowne
(he) in the third person, demonstrating a singular person, whereof speech was
made, or intended immediately before; and withal add the Verb Substantive
(is) affirming; together with the Inteiection (in) designing; he is in the
Penetrals) my intent will more manifestly appear, that these false prophets
were to teach, the true Christ himself to be in such penetrals of boxes,
cubbords, arkes, tabernacles, Saues, Promptuaries, and such like.

Again: I observe; he is not, Christ is not, taught by these false prophets
to be in any one only single place or secret alone; but jointly, and at the
same time, he is taught to be here and there; in the deserts, in the Secrets.
They say not, in the Singular number, in penetrali, (...), in some one secret,
one penetral; but, in the secrets, in closets: yea, all readings and
Translations (the Hebrew, Siriack, Arabic, Greek, Latin, English, French
Dutch, etc.) have the word in the Plural number; all of them thereby
demonstrating, that these false-prophets were to teach Christ to be at once and
at one and the same time in diverse Secrets, Penetrals, Closets, Arkes,
Cubbords. Yea, the Arabic word signifies fallacious and deceptious places, in
the Plural number. All which is done with such an infinite confusion in the
Popish Churches, that we may constantly inueigh against them, that not only
according to the number of their temples, and altars, they have multiplied the
the Presences of Christ; but also, that for every person, and professing member
of their Church, they have once (or more often) in the year, Christ corporally,
personally, and substantially present in some secret or secrets of Arks,
Altars, Tabernacles, Cubbords, Closets etc. to be beheld ( behold he is
here, behold he is in this secret, behold he is in that secret) to be
beheld I say, seen and adored. And this is done so punctually by them, that as
the like was never done by any other since Christ his time; so neither is it
imaginable or conceiueable, how any false-prophets for any time to come
shall, may, or can more punctually, fully and compleately, act and perform the
same.

Again: I note and observe that our Savior terms these false-prophets (who
were to teach such a mysterious and prodigious presence of him in Secrets) to
be pseudo-Christs, false-Christs, false-anointed ones: falseanointed ones, I
say. And does not Christ, in this his tearming and appellation of them, design
to us the very Popish massing priests? who (and only who) for their powerful
consecrating and making of him to be so present in Secrets, are
supersticiously anointed in their hands and fingers all over: yea their
altar-stones whereon, their Chalices wherein, their Patins whereupon, Christ is
to be consecrated, and made to be in such secrets, are not to be reputed fit
and apt for the same purpose, except they be first anointed: and, being
anointed, they are so sacred, that the vnanointed hands of the Laick may not
touch them, without great offense. Neither can it be replied and said, that
these false-anointed-ones (mentioned by our Savior in the 24. verse) are those
very Christ's, which shall be pretended to be in Secrets. For it is most
evident by the Text, and Saint Hillaries interpretation, with Thephilact and
others, that these false Christ's are to be the very same with the false
proprets who were to be public, and in public to preach a secret presence of
the true Christ; yea, and for confirmation of the same, were to do such
miracles, that if it were possible the very elect should be in danger to be
seduced, and drawn into error. Thus we observe how all circumstances, and the
energie of all the words concur to our purpose against this point of Popish
pseudo-Christianisme. And so ceasing to add more in this place (whereof more
anon) I com to annect my fourth reason; which is thus.

Antichrist, the Great one himself; or else some other petty false Christ's,
challenging themselves to be the true Christ; such, as Theudas and Judas of
Galilie were of old in Iewrie; and such as George David was of late in
Germany, and Hacket in England; else they must be such, as will falsely teach
of the true Christ himself, that he is in such Secrets and Penetrals. The
first cannot stand. For, the Great This presence cannot be understood of any
petty Antichrists.
Antichrists presence or rather reign and kingdom shall be most public,
visible, and glorious. Neither can the second consist. For, in what danger of
perdition can the Elect be by the preaching of such petty, and most impious
Christlings; such, as George David, and Hacket were? neither did these ever
any wonders. The prophecy then, must of necessity be understood of some
false prophets, who were to teach a secret presence of the true Christ in the
Great Antichristian Synagogue, as I have proved above. And this is also
cleared, by that of our Savior in Saint Luke 17. 22. 23. 24. where he
shows, that these false-prophets would pretend to show the son of man
himself.

To this purpose, Theophilact writes thus; Si venerint inquit Theophil. in 24.
Math.
Impostores etc. Christ says, If Impostors shall come, saying Christ is com,
but is in the desert, or is hid in some house, or in the promptuarie and cellar
of the same; or in the more inward Note these words of Theophilact, more in
ward parts; then, promptuary or cellar. Theophilact fore saw part of this
point of popish pseudo-Christianisme.
places of it; be not deceived; for the coming of Christ shall not need any
one to show the same; for it shall be manifest, unto all; even as the
lightning is: thus he. Which his words I bring not to prove fully my intent
(for Theophilact living before transubstantiation was decreed, and before
Christ's such secret presence in penetrals, was generally taught; no marvel
that he did not fully attain the sense of the prophecy) but, I produce his
saying, for this purpose only, to prove that the false-prophets doctrine is to
be understood of a secret presence of the true Christ himself in secrets, and
in the desert. And so we proceed to our fifth reason: which is the clear
fulfilling of the prophecy, according as we understand it.

Irenaeus excellently) 5. Iren. l. 4. co^ntra haeres^: 43
is as a riddle, or a book sealed: but, being once accomplished, it is no
longer a hidden, but a manifest truth, an open revelation. Now, it is as clear
as the heavens, that this Prophecy of Christ, being understood according to
the plain sense of the words, and accordingly as I have taken the same, is
fully and most clearly accomplished in the Roman Synagogue: of whose religion
it is a prime mystery, To teach Christ to be here and there in the Christ
himself personally taught to be here in the secrets of popish churches, houses,
closets, etc.
Secrets and Penetrals of their Churches, Chapels and Oratories, and to
particularize in some. For this cause they cry out, Behold, he is daily (...),
in the cubbords, arks and tabernacles, of our Churches: Behold, he is, on
every Good Friday and Mandie-thursday, in the Secrets and Penetrals of our
sepulchers: Behold, he is frequently in the Secrets of the bosoms of our
Priests, and of the pixes; yea, and of the pockets also sometimes of our
Priests: Behold, he is day by day in the Secrets of bread and wine, upon our
Altars; and this with such a confusion, that the blind Suppliant, finding
himself in some one Church Christ elevated in diverse places in one church, at
one and the same moment.
where at one and the same time diverse Masses are said, and consequently Christ
in diverse places made and elevated, he cannot well tell to which Altar he
should turn himself: for, if his face be humbly bowed to him upon one altar;
his back, etc. must needs be irreuerently turned toward him upon another
altar; Christ is so up and down, here and there, upon their diverse altars. I
will not say, O sanctas Gentes! O holy Nations! but I bouldly inueigh, O
stultas Gentes! quibus talia nascuntur ab altaribus numina: O most foolish
peoples, who have store of gods so growing and multiplying upon their altars!

Here I cannot omit (it is so agreeing to our purpose) to speak of their
miraculous and prodigious Hosts at Bruxels, See Iac. Suar. his These. quadrag.
ser. 42. in fer. 2. do. pal. The papists miraculous hosts (wherein Christ is
adored) at Bruxels, Mechlin, etc.
Naples, Mechlines, and elsewhere. How evident is it, that this Antichristian
note, Behold, he is (Christ is) in penetrals, is fulfild in them; when as
they pretend to keep Christ in such miraculous Hosts, fast locked up at these
places? where they also do often, with a Behold he is here, Behold, he is in
the Penetrals, inuit their blind and superstitious people to behold and
worship him: at which fond and idolatrous superstition, I my self have been
sometimes a superstitious Suppliant. But, it is a wonder to observe with what
acclamations the ignorant sort, crying misericordia, misericordia, mercy,
mercy, mercy, do The phrenzie of popish Idolatry.
there and then adore and invoke this their Christ. He is there then with
them in Penetrals, beheld, believed, adored and inuocated: and what more can
the false Prophets say or do, then that which these false Prophets do require?

Neither can it ought auail these false Prophets for their teaching of Christ
his corporal presence in such places, that (as they say) upon these their
miraculous Hosts, drops of blood do appear. For, if it be so (which I my A
difficulty concerning the pretended drops of blood in their miraculous hosts
at Bruxels, etc.
self could never perfectly discern) then I demand of the learnedest Ignatian
and Pontifician, whether those dry drops of blood, appearing in those
miraculous Hosts, be true drops of Christ's natural blood, or not. If so (as
many of them say, and also say that every drop of Christ's blood was
hypostatically united to the deity) what then will they say to that true
principle of Divinity, venerable for antiquity, received also by themselves,
that Quod Aqum. 3. q. 5. 2 and 6 a^t. 5
Christus semel assumpsit nunquam dimisit, What Christ once assumpted to
himself (by hypostaticall union) he never left the same. What? will they say
that the same union is dissolved? or will they say, that by the means of the
accidents of bread and wine, they are still united to the dininity? That were a
dream. Or will they say, that like as Christ, because he was ouer-amorous of
Catharine of Siennas Catherine of Sienna her life.
heart (as it is described in her life) did change his own heart with hers,
and for hers; and for that purpose did make and unmake hypostatical unions and
assumptions? so likewise, to satisfy their superstitious humors, is content
to part with some drops of his own precious blood, and to let them hang in the
air for their worshipsfancies to behold, adore and admire? Or will they say,
that these drops were never by hypostaticall union united to the deity?
Whatsoever they say, they are taken in their folly, or put to deny that which
otherwise they generally teach, that Christ's blood, and every drop thereof, was
hypostatically united to the divinity. If they say that these seeming drops of
blood are not true blood indeed; then let them withal admit, that such
mendacious signs are no other than lying wonders of false Prophets: and why
then do they admit their people to adore, worship and invoke, Christin the
same?

Again; to note another of their penetrals, in which they say, Behold, Christ
is. So Luciferian-like and detestable has the pride of some of their holy
Fathers been, that, when they have removed from one place to another, they
command a consecrated Host, that is, true Christ (in their faith) to be put
into a tabernacle or a little arc, made for the purpose; and the same to be
set upon a horse or mules back; and so, like a John praecursor, or a
forerunning Apparitor, to be sent away, and to precede before their sanctities.
O Idolatry of Idelatries! O contempt of Christin the highest degree! An
Idolatry, worse than that of the Mexicans, adoring in a Round of Processions
the flesh and bones of their god Vitzill-puitzil, made to them Boterus his
universal relations. part. 4. l. 1. (...).
of dough, and consecrated with popish-like charms O the impious scorn of
Christ's Majesty! Christ, shut up in a penetrall, is carried before as a vicar
of his own vicar: but his Holiness is publicly mounted, to be adored by all
passers by. Christ is carried before, attended on by the meaner train: but his
Holiness comes after, attended on by Prelates and Nobles. Christ is set on a
mules or horses back: but his Holiness is sometimes mounted on men's shoulders.
Christ is in penetrals, and so called upon by those who may hear and regard the
sound of the little bell crying and sounding out, Behold, he is here: his
Holiness is called upon by all; and, out of the treasury of Christ's merits
(carried in the box) he bestows a blessing of an Indulgence and pardon upon
all. Lo then, how Christ is here in a Penetral; and Antichrist also is here,
but not in a penetrall, but sitting in the Temple, or against the Temple,
carrying himself as if he were a God; yea more, honored 2 Thessalonians. 2
above God, if Christ, whom they pretend to carry in a Penetrall, be their
God: for, most manifest it is, that Christ in such perambulations is less
respected than Christ less respected than the pope.
the Pope.

Further (which passes all admiration) they are not ashamed to teach, that he
is (Christ is) in the penetrall of a dunghill, if a consecrated Host chance
(as it has been Spec. mag. exem.
done) to be cast therein; yea, to be in the Secret or Closet; yea (more) to
be in the very hands of the Coniurer, and Benno card. in vita Greg. 7
by him to be so presented as a sweet smelling sacrifice to Beel-zebub: which
that it has been done, or may be don, their Learned will not deny; and that it
was done by Pope Gregory the seventh, Benno the Cardinal constantly affirms
in his life. Again: he is or may be in the Penetrals of a Fly, if she (as it
has been done) sip of a consecrated chalice. He is in the Penetrall of a mouse
or rat, if they eat of a consecrated Host, which often (and who knows how
often?) has been done. I might be infinite. And are not these idolatrous
fopperies, well-beseeming and worthy of the Antichristian Synagogue? O ye
heavens, be ye desolated; and the gates thereof, be ye astonished. Was there
ever such a transubstantiating of bread and wine into Christ, before The Man of
sin dreamed thereof; and thereby set up his god Maozim to be worshipped in
turrets? and yet they are not ashamed thereof, and yet they are not confounded
nor confused for the same.

Venerable Antiquity, because she knew that the Sacrament of our Lords Supper
was a Sacrament only whilst in use, and then most honorable, religious and
venerable; did for this cause either burn, or cause young children to consume
and eat up, such relickes of the consecrated bread and wine which were left
after the Communion: the later is witnessed by Euagrius; for the former, Euagr.
l. 4. lust. c. 35 I^ch. com. in Leuit.
(...) or Origin is witness upon Leuiticus. But these Christ-m^kers do reserve
him in Penetrals and Chests, (...); and cry out, saying, Behold, he is here,
come and see: Beheld, he is there, go and worship: Come, let us fall down and
kneel before the Lord our Maker. And is not this Idolatry in the highest degree?

Our most drad Soueraign, in that most learned Pre^onition Reg. praemonit. p
48. 49
of his, has in abomination the intolerable adoration of Images used in popish
Churches, though the same The papists flat Idolatry.
adoration be pretended by them to be given to the Images for the Prototyp^ns
sake, that is, for respect to God or to the Saints, whose Images they are. And
there he also most learnedly proves, their same adoration of images and
relics to be impious and idolatrous. But lo here a higher point of
Idolatry: the very adoration of Christ due to him in person, is given to
Christ upon an imagined and mendacious pretended presence of him in the
Penetrals of bread and wine. Lo, he is in the Penetrals, say the false
Prophets: but Christ says, Believe it not. And if they adore, commit they not
in so doing Idolatry in the highest degree? Is not he an Idolater who
worshippeth God in a pebble stone, or in a statue of stone; though God, by the
immensity of his all-presence be in the said statue? Shall not he then be an
Idolater, who shall upon a pretended false presence worship Christ in the
forms of bread and wine, in the Penetrals of a Church-ark or Tabernacle, where
he indeed is not? What is Idolatry, if this be not, To worship and to adore a
nothing of Christ for Christ; to adore bread and wine in stead of Christ?

The Israelites were impious Idolaters, though they worshipped the God of
Israel in the golden Calf, and yet Exodus 32
God by his immensity was in the golden Calf: Idolatrous likewise are these
men, who pretend to adore Christ in penetrals, where he is not; and where he
would not be reputed to be: Believe it not.

Here in this place I cannot pretermit to declare, how aptly this word penetals
(he is in the penetrals) is used for the popish manner of teaching Christ's
being under the Secrets of bread and wine. The popish priests are not so
powerful for the making of their Christ present in the Secrets of bread and
wine, as the popish Divines are witty How Christ is diuisibly and indiuisibly
present in the popish Secrets.
for the opening and declaring of the manner how he is there, to weet, by a
kind of penetration: Totus in toto, and totus in qualibet part; whole Christ
in the Secret of the whole Host, and whole Christ in the Secret of every the
least particle of the Host. But let us consider a-little, how they explicate
this and endeavor to avoid that penetration (of Christ in himself) which I
object unto and against them.

Diverse of the antienter school-sophisters have dared to See Holcot, in 4. q.
3. Biel in 4 did. 1. q. 1. not. 3. and lec. in can. 37
teach; that, if Mass had been celebrated in diverse places at that very time
when Christ suffered, he should have bin crucified in so many places: but this
position little pleases the So my master Vasqu. in Rome.
transubstantiating Theologues of these times, who teach the clean contrary.
Because, say they, though Christ be in the Sacrament most really, truly and
personally, and has his dimensions of quantity, and proportion of parts (to
wit, an arm of such a length, a hand of such a breadth, etc.) in ordine ad se,
in respect of himself or to himself; so that where his head is, there his foot
is not, and so of the rest: yet in respect of the place in which he is, and in
regard of the accidents of bread and wine under which he is, he has no parts
nor dimensions, one without other; but is like the soul of man indiuisibly
totus in toto, and totus in qualibet part, whole Christ indiuisibly in the
Secret of the whole Host, and whole Christ in the secret of every least
particle of the Host: and consequently, Christ being th^re indiuisibly, is
also there impassibly, not subject to any hurt or corruption: the which how can
it be imagined to be, without true penetration of Christ's parts and members
one within another? O most horrible confusion, and fearful commixtion of
Christ! And this is confirmed by that which they secretly teach, yea, which
they publicly read in their Schools (for, so did my Master Gabriel Vasques, in
Rome) to weet, that by reason of Gabriel Vasqu. his paradox touching Christ's
manner of presence.
this indivisible presence of Christ in the Host, when any of their Deuouts
do behold a consecrated Host, they may (as it shall best fit their devotion)
imagine and conceive Christ to be there in what fashion they shall please;
either as a perfect (yea, bloody) man as he was hanging upon the Cross, or as
a young pretty babe as he was in his mothers arms; and this, in what site and
disposition of body as they shall list, either sitting, standing or lying, with
eyes open or shut, with hands closed or open; and so in infinitum, as there may
be different manners and fashions of still and silent gestures in man.

This is their most prodigious position: which is so flat A prodigious position
of popish Theologues
against all truth of Divinity, and light of Philosophy, as it evidently
follows out of that main and vain doctrine of theirs, that Christ is wholly
and truly, after the manner of Bell. de Sacram. euch. l. 4. c. 21. and 22. and
l. 3. c. 4. 5
a spiritual substance, indiuisibly in the whole imagined space and place of
the consecrated Host, and every part or least parcel of the same: so it also
most evidently shows, that Ch^ists body does not only, by the true dimension
of the thicknes Iac. Suar. in his these. quadra. in ser. 42. in ^er. 3. do. pal.
has a comparison of an egg ready for the hatch of a chicken, where nothing
is to be seen but whitenes, etc of Christ in the host. Read this his
Sunilitude; which he calls a fit one.
thereof, penetrate the quantity of the bread and wine (which in their doctrine
remains after consecration) but further also it clearly ^uinceth all the parts
and members of Christ's body to penetrate and co^fusedly to pearce into each
other. And what a fantastical and paradoxicall body have we here? having in
it self, and in respect of it self, all proportions and dimensions of bodily
parts, with their due longitude, latitude and thicknes; but, in respect of the
imagined place, of bread and wine, without all these; and yet withal, in
respect of the said place and imagined space, the de^out meditator may take
Christ's body to be truly in such form and fashion, either as of a perfect
man, or as of a little Child, as shall most agree with his fancy. O Egregions
and Acute Rabbis. These, and of this class, be the worthies, which some
unstable ministers for want of better stuff, use to cite in their Sermons. And
is not this Penetrall (penetrall by penetration) wherein Christ is taught
personally to be and reside, that which our Savior here has in such
detestation; Believe it not? Let others think what they please: I cannot
otherwise resolve, but that it is the very same which he here fore-telles and
condemns, If therefore they shall say unto you behold he is in the Secrets
believe it not.

Against what has been proved, it is thus objected: A difficult objection as
it may seem; yet easily answered.
first, Christ foretells of some Pseudo-Christs and falseprophets, who should
teach him to be present amongst men, and conversant with them, in humane
shape, though in secret clos^ts, or in the desert: but so do not the Papists.
For, they only teach Christ to be (though personally, yet) not in humane
shape, but sacramentally, inuisibly, and indiuisibly, under the forms, and in
the secrets, and penetrals or entrails (if I may so speak) of the bread and
wine.

To this Objection I answer diverse ways; and each of A clear three fould
answer.
them sufficient. First, our Savior (if we insist upon his express words,
and take them literally, as the Papists do those words, this is my body)
speaks nothing at all touching his pretended conversation in humane shape
amongst men: neither does he utter any word, by which the same may be
gathered, but rather, the clean contrary; using the words, penetrals, desert
etc. never so much as mentioning any town, city, or special Kingdom, wherein
they shall pretend Christ to be; nor glancing in any terms or words at any
kind of humane actions (of speech, sight, visible, apparent etc.) which these
false prophets will pretend: but he only foretells his faithful, that they
should be invited to see him in the penetrals; and this not in any
humaneshape, but in some such admirable These false prophets were not to show
Christ in any humane shape.
sort, as would require faith for the perfecting of the said sight of him. And
in this respect it is, that Christ says believe it not: he does not say
believe him not; believe not him; but believe it not; or believe not it: It. So
that, it is a it, a mystical and mysterious it and manner of Christ's being
sacramentally and personally, in such Secrets and penetrals, but not a he, or
a him, of Christ's being there in humane shape. Which being so, that these
falseprophets, were to inuit the faithful, beleeuingly with faith to behold
Christ to be personally in such Secrets; I hope the Papists will not deny but
the same is punctually acted in their Christ, in their Secrets, Closets,
Church-arks, Church-cupbords, tabernacles, etc. Parsons was so well persuaded
Parsons against Reports cap. 10. page 236.
of the truth of this, that Christ is to be beheld, and seen in the Secrets
of Bread and Wine, that with great joy and confidence, he relates out of
Walsingham the answer of King Henry the 3. of England, made to King Lewis of
France, called the Saint: For, whereas King Lewis said, that he had rather
hear many Sermons then many masses; King Henry replied, and said; that, for
his part, he had rather hear many masses then many A conference betwixt King
Henry the 3. of England and King Lewis called the Saint.
Sermons, and withal yields this reason for the same; that he had rather
see his friend then hear any man, though never so eloquently discoursing of
him. Christ then is to be seen in popish penetrals, with a Behold, requiring
faith and admiration.

If they should say and reply that they see him not properly, that cannot be:
for, standing within their own Christ in the popish Secrets v^ conuersions by
the force and Energie of conversion.
principles, that Christ is there vi conuersionis by the virtue of conversion
(as my master Vasques taught in Rome) I dare undertake to show, that in regard
of the dependencie and sustentation which the accidents of bread have from the
body of Christ, and whereby the substance of bread ceases to be, and is turned
into the body of Christ, there is as intime So my Master Vasquez his
dictates, which I have with me.
an union betwixt the accidents of bread and wine and Christ's body, as there is
betwixt man's Soul, and the qualities substantial of the body; yea in a
degree (though of far inferior excellency) of like kind, the accidents of
bread and wine are sustained or sustentated (if I may so speak) by the body
of Christ, as the Humanity The body of Christ sustames the Accidents of bread
and wine.
of Christ is sustained and subsisteth by the divine subsistence: the
difference only is; one is more excellent then the other. Again: in the one,
is supplied a natural subsistence; in the other, a natural inexistence or
inherencie: Now then; as man in regard of outward qualities may be said to be
seen, or the son of God may be said to be seen, although Bellarmine affirms
that by consecration Christ's body is made truly and visibly present. Bellar.
lib. 1. de Miss. cap. 12.. Restat. Salmero. in vita. Bellar. lib. 2. de Euchar.
cap. 24. August. lib. 3. de Trinit. cap. 10. See Bell. lib. 1. De missa. cap. 12
the Godhead, the Soul or humane nature of man be not seen as they are in
themselves: so likewise Christ in their doctrine may be truly said to be
seen, in the forms of bread and wine.

And is it not a frequent saying with them, when Christ is carried in their
Processions, Spectate, Deus venit; Behold, God comes? And was it not a saying
of old, that they would ask of their Children, whether they had (respecting
the elevated Host at Mass) seen God almigh tie upon such or such a day? And
does not Bellarmine seem to confess, that Christ may as truly be said to be
seen in the forms of bread and wine, as the Angels are seen in such forms
and shapes as they take? yea he brings Saint Austines authority for the
same, that young Infants, if they were not otherwise instructed (in respect of
that which is told them, concerning the divine mysteries) would think that
Christ did (when he was conversant upon earth) appear in the forms of bread
and wine.

Pontificians cannot deny, but that for their parts there is a conversation
betwixt themselves and their Christ: for they are presentially with him, they
see him, they handle him, they speak to him, they adore him, they adorn A kind
of true conversation be twixt the Papists, and their Christ.
him, they lo^k him up, they carry him about, they walk to him and with him,
they watch with him and for him, they cloth him, and do all services to him
as to a Christ present, both knowing, seeing, and understanding well what they
do to him.

And further, for their Christ's part there present in A maine reason pretended
for such corporal presence is, that the popish faithful may have comfort
thereby which cannot be without some manner of conversation. See Jacob.
Suarez, Thesauro quadrages. ser. 42. in fer. 3. do. pal.
person, I hope they will not deny, but that he knows himself to be with
them, and in what manner he is with them; so that he hears their prayers,
sees their gestures, wears their ornaments, works by his graces in their
Souls, and does oftentimes many miraculous and prodigious effects and Cures
amongst them. And, is not this a true manner of conversation of such a Christ,
with such his Christians? What is Conversation, but mutual intercourse of
Intelligent and understanding Persons, in actions done with knowledge and
understanding? They understand, what they do to this their Christ: and I hope
this their Christ knows, hears and sees, what is so done by them to him; and
what answerably he does to them. When I was in Rome, and pronounced an
Oration, in the Roman English Church, upon the burning and torturing of Master
Walter Marsh, that worthy Martyr; Amongst other points, I remember one notable
passage: to wit, That Christ being carried in a Pixe in that Procession (where
Master Marsh struck it down) by the hands of a Bishop; their Oration taught
me thus to ^ay thereof See my Motues in the preface. Christ conuerseth and
visits in their processions.
in effect; to wit, that when Christ did visit his faithful, and make
progress amongst them, then the impious and sacrilegious hands of that wicked
man did violently beat and cast him down. Lo then, here is a point of
singular conversation; to wit, visitation, and progress, accknowledged in
their Christ, when he is carried about in their Processions.

If it be here objected, that their Christ does not speak unto them with
vocal words, or sound of mouth; I answer, That is but one point of
conversation; and the same may be supplied by signs, and some motions or
gestures, which the Priests make upon him, and about him: as well as a certain
Gentlewoman at Chichester, some Mistress Brown, wife of master John Brown, uncle
to the now Lord Mountague. Master Manger the priest.
twelve years ago, was wonted by signs to understand what sins a dumb boy of
hers had done; and so to make for him a confession unto the Priest, who usually
gave thereupon absolution to the boy. Howsoever it be, if there want no other
manner of conversation than speech, it can only be said, that the conversation
is lame and defective, and not that there is no conversation at all. And so I
adjoin a third answer.

in penetralibus, in the penetrals, as the Vulgar; in Secrets, as others; in
closets, as the Rhemists (in all which manner of places and secrets, the
Papists do teach Christ to be) notwithstanding, the Hebrew word used by
Hutter in his Hebrew Testament, and the Syriack used by our Savior (as it may
be probably thought) and the Greek word, may properly signify a more secret
place than closet or parlour; the very secret of the bosom; the Secret of a
hutch, cupboard, ambry, arc, tabernacle, chest, or any such like wherein
victuals are put, and wherein treasury is laid up: into all which manners of
Secrets and Penetrals (yea, into pockets sometimes) the Papists do put and place
their Christ; saying, Behold, he is there, behold, he is here; believe it,
though it may seem to be never so admirable, and never so incredible. And
suppose it be only to be understood of closets (a word used by the Rhemists) I
marvel what manner of conversation popish Dames will acknowledge may be
betwixt man and man in their closets. Surely, Christ may there be reputed to
be locked up only like a poenas, house God-ling, or like some delicious pot
of Conserues or Preserues. And so I cease to add any more, for the removing of
this first Objection.

false-prophets who should deny him to be the true Messiah, and should teach
another Christ, against him.

Page 10. and 11
also refuted, by the joint consent of all those who do apply this prophecy to
all Schismatikes and Heretics: all who, as they do acknowledge Christ to be
the true Messiah; so they pretend Christ's spiritual presence to be specially
with them, and deny the same to all others. And surely, if these
false-prophets and Pseudo-Christs were to deny the Lord, and Giver of life,
Jesus, I cannot see in what Math. 24. 24. Not another Christ, but the true
Christ, pretended to be in Secrets.
danger the elect should be, to be seduced. For, if the common Christian will
have in hate and abomination, them who should teach another Christ; surely in a
far more high degree the elect cannot but execrate the same. No, no: this
pseudo-christanisme is a mystery of iniquity. Christ himself must be taught
to be in Penetrals, that thereby the elect (if it were possible) might be
drawn, instead of the true Christ sitting in the glory of his father, to
worship a false Christ a vanity, a dream, and a fancy, in the Secrets and
Penetrals of bread, and wine: and so I add a third Objection, thus;

Pseudo-Christs and false-prophets, which were to come immediately before his
coming to Judgment, and the consummation of the world, and to preach a
presence of Christ then and at that time only. He aymeth not therefore, in
this place at the popish teaching of Christ's being (...) in the secrets of
their Church-Arks, Cupbords, tabernacles, Pixes etc. for, this doctrine of
theirs, has been a long time very public, at least, since the General
council of Con. Latera. cap. Firmiter.
Laterane under Innocent the 3: for, then the doctrine of Transubstantiation
was first decreed, as an article of the Romish Catholic faith. I answer; It
being most certain that this is a mystery of Antichrist, it is also as
certain that the same was to endure for the whole time of his reign. Now then
it is most manifest, that the time of Antichrists Flourish and ruff, was to
begin at that time when the devil was to be let loose: which letting loose,
must needs be upon the very point, or about the accomplishing of the
thousand years, for which the devil was Apoca. 20.
to be bound. Which thousand years of the devils binding (whether beginning
at the time of Christ's birth, or at the time of his passion, or for some time
after when the Gospel was more generally preached) most clear it is, that at
the period of the same 1000. years the Antichristian mystery Platina, in vita
Syluest. 2. Benno card. in vit. Hildebr^di.
did most powerfully work in the days (or thereabouts) of Syluester the 2. a
most notorious Antichrist, a man of Sin, and Son of perdition, if ever any.
And then also, and about that time, the mystery of transubstantiation, and
consequently of Christ being in hidden Secrets and Penetrals there to-bee
seen, adored and worshipped, did begin more generally to be spread abroad, by
false-Christs Conc. ^om. sub Nicol. 2. et sub Greg. 7. Lantfrank, lb. de cor
por. dom.
and false-prophets, to the seducing and perverting of the greatest part of the
Church: and then were the Elect in greatest danger to be perverted, when the
whole Church (welnie) in the days of the Lateran Council did fall into this
apostasy and defection. Which being so, we may not Conc. Lateran. cap. 1.
marvel, that this pseudo-Christanisme does continue, for the whole tunc and
time of Antichrists reign, and the Antichristian empire.

And although Christ seem to some, to speak of this This false teaching of
christ (...) secrets was to be for long time in the world. Amanif^st proof.
Mat. 24. 34.
Pseudo-Christianisme, as though it were to happen immediately before his
coming to judgment; yet most certain it is, that this and most of those
things, which our Savior foretells in that chapter, are so implicately and
intermixtly delivered, that the distinct and certain times of diverse of them
can hardly be distinguished. Only this is most certain, that (to use Christ's
phrase) this Generation (to weet, the state of the Church from his first till
his second coming) should not pass away until all things (there by him
spoken) should be fulfilled and accomplished: but for the certain seasons when
they were to be accomplished, it is not there expressed. Again I answer, that
all those Rhemists on this place, Maldon. Ianson, almost all.
(as many Pontificians do) who apply this Prophecy to the private
Conuenticles of Heretics in any time or age of the Church, to the Donatists,
Arrians, Pelagians, etc. cannot restrain the same to the times that
immediately precede the second coming of Christ, and the consummation of the
world. And so I come to adjoine some certain observations, most clearly
confirming this Prophecy to be fulfilled in the popish pseudo-christianism.

First observe, that these false prophets were to do many First observation.
signs and wonders for the confirmation of this their false doctrine, Lo he
is in the penetrals. Dabunt signa magna, etc. They shall give great signs and
wonders (says Christ) Verse ^4
that, if it were possible, the very Elect should be deceived. And the Apostle
pronounces, that the coming of Antichrist 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8
should be by the operation of Satan, in all power of signs and lying
prodigies, and in all manner of wicked seducement of those who perish. All
which how egregiously it is completed in the Roman Antichristian Synagogue,
Anthony de Padua S. Ant. in sum. hist. p. 3. tit. 24 c. 3.. 2. Bell. lib. 3.
de euch. cap. 8. Liber conform. Spec. mag. exem See Down. de Antichristo.
Pas^h. l. de corp. d^m. c. 14. Bredenbac. l. 7. s^c. collat. ^. 60. spec exem.
verbo eucharis^i.
his hungry Ass leaving hay to go worship Christ in the Secrets; the Assisian
Francis his Cade-Lamb adoring day by day the elevated Host at Mass; the
kneeling of a black horse with one knee only before an Host which was lost
(of one knee only, because the devil was in the said black horse) Paschasius
the Priest his seeing upon the altar Christ in the form of a little child,
with many such like prodigious vanities related by popish Authors, do most
manifestly euince. The Papists glory, that they have miracles and signs for
the confirmation of this their pseudo-christianisme; but this glory is their
confusion; for, if they had not miracles and prodigies for confirmation of the
same, they should not be those false Prophets who^ our Savior here
fore-speaketh of, that they should do great signs and wonders, even to the
seducing of the Elect if it were possible. The signs of them therefore were to
be great, powerful, many: we deny them not, nor them the glory thereof.

false Prophets were, by the means of this their false doctrine, to seduce
many. Seducent multos, says Christ, They shall seduce many. Which Mat. 24. 11
we see so fully accomplished in the Roman Synagogue, that the very Elect are
in great danger and hazard to be led If all be to be seduced but the Elect
(of which there is but a small number) what marvel that there is such a
general Apostasy.
away by their so powerful persuasions.

There is no one point which does more strongly hold and tie the disciples of
the Pope to him and his errors, than this mystery, Behold, he is in the
penetrals; Behold, we have Christ personally and substantially in the Secrets
of our Sacrament. For this cause, if we seek to draw any one of them from that
popish confusion of errors, and Chaos of superstitions wherein they sleep,
what do they most commonly allege for their not-yeelding? Mary, this: You,
you (say they) the Protestants, have taken from us the true and corporal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and would feed us with tropes, signs and
figures only: how then can or shall we forsake true Christ, and come to feed
on your husks of bread and wine, which you only have? Wherein they do
egregiously calumniate us: for, concerning rem sacramenti, the thing of the
Sacrament, and the virtue thereof, and the real conjunction by grace and faith
to Christ, we teach it most constantly, and teach also a real presence of
Christ's body (like that of Angels, which are in place by operation) Calu. in c.
26 Mat. B. Bilson, part. 4. p. 728 729
by the means of the real operation, and effectual efficacy of grace by the
same, working by faith and love in the hearts of the faithful receivers.

to enforce the same: for, so much imports the Saying of our Savior; who,
presently after his Charge, Go not ou^, believe it not, mentions tribulation,
saying; After the tribulation of those days. Whereby he instructs his
Faithful, that the Elect, who would not be drawn to worship their pretended
Christ in secrets, closets, Churcharks, cup-boards, tabernacles, etc. should
for the same sustain great tribulations. The which how egregiously it has been
completed by the Romanists, their persecutions of all times and ages, since
their general Council of Con. Lat. c. 3
Lateran, where the same false doctrine was universally decreed with an
Anatheme and curse against all that should deny the same, does more than
manifestly euince.

Lo, he is here at Bruxels, he If this prophecy be not fulfild in the popish
church, let it be showed where or in what time it has been or may be more
likely fulfilled.
is there at Mechlines, he is there at Rome, he is here at Burgos, he is here
at Naples, he is there upon a horseback, he is here in a locked closet, he is
here upon this altar, he is yonder upon another altar, and where not? Which my
observation is more confirmed, if it be considered withal, that our Savior
speaking of the Secrets, uses the plural number, (...), in the Secrets, in
the Penetrals. Speciallizing and nominating also these secret places wherein
these false Prophets should teach him to be, he never names city, town or
country, or any place fit for conversation; but only Secrets, Penetrals, that
is (as I have proved) boxes, cup-boards, arks, tabernacles, chests, closets,
and such like.

Again: all the showing of this pretended Christ that is done, was to be
accomplished and performed, by the false Prophets and false Priests themselves:
and even so it is acted in the Roman Church. Further: these were to seduce the
known, public, visible Church, all but the Elect: wherein the Romanists do
most reioicingly and triumphingly build and rest themselves, to the high
contempt of all others.

Daniel: Dan. 11. 38 39
There we may read, that Antichrist should for sake the God of his Fathers,
and with gold and silver should worship the god Maozim. Now Maozim, according
to the interpretation of the Learnedest, has a double signification in it; to
weet, Summi roboris, and inhabitatio tabernaculi; Of greatest strength, and the
inhabitation or in-dwelling in a tabernacle. Which does so lively point unto us
the pseudo-Christ of the Papists, whom they pretend to be Christ himself ( God
indeed of greatest strength, and the power of his Father) and whom also they
profess to dwell in their Church-tabernacles, that nothing can be brought
clearer against them, nor nothing with better purpose to confirm the
interpretation of this our Text which we have in hand.

Bellarmine, who labors stoutly to free his holy Father Bellar. lib. 3. de
romans ^ont. c. 14
from worshipping the god Maozim, in his best answer thinks (citing Lyra's
authority for the same) that Maozim signifies fortitude, or of greatest
strength, and a tower withal; so that the god Maozim is in his interpretation,
The God of greatest fortitude in a tower: And if Bellarmine, in stead of the
word tower, had used the word turret, then he had hit the mark, and mentioned
those very turrets which the Papists use to bear their god Maozim in, up An
Host pared with scissers, being too great for the turret wherein it was to be
carried in procession. Doc. Cyp. tratta^o de la missa. page 428
and down in their Processions. Such a manner of turret was that which was used
at Barcelone in Spain, when the Inquisitor Molon was enforced to round and
lessen (with a pair of scissers) a consecrated Host which was to be put into
the same pixe or turret: but, it being too great for the turret, till the
Host was lessened, the Procession was staid, and could not proceed. Some such
like thing happened at Rome in my time in the English Church, when the Procession
was staid, and could not go forth at the time appointed, because he who sang
the high Mass (as A second mass said to provide an Host fit for the pix or
turret, at the English college at Rome.
they call it) that day, had forgotten to make a consecrated Host fit for the
pix and turret wherein it was to be carried up and down in Procession. And so I
end this point; inferring out of all that which has been proved, that the
false Prophets, pseudo-Christs, and false Anointed-ones, of the popish Church
do directly and punctually teach and preach Christ to be up and down, here and
there in the Secrets and Penetrals of their Church-arks and tabernacles; the
(...), the very Secrets at which our Savior here aims, and gives his most
strict charge against the same, Believe it not, believe it not. Which charge of
Christ is our third part: and now in a few words we come to declare the same.

Believe it not.
Elect of dangers which they are to avoid. He it is who works in His, all in
all, to begin and perfect, to desire and perform, to purpose and to do: yet he
does it not in us without us, who notwithstanding can do nothing without him.
For this respect he says, Believe it not, Go not out, Believe it not. But,
whilst our Savior in this place does fore-charge his Faithful, that they
believe it not, we must not so interpret the same, as though with the
supernatural act or habit of faith the same may be believed; no, no: error,
and so pernicious an error as this is, may not be the object of faith. Whereas
therefore he charge, Believe it not, we are thus to take the same; that by no
means we be persuaded of the truth of it, but that we take it (as it is) for
a most pernicious and damnable error, and a highest point of impiety. Believe
it not.

The false Prophets say, Behold this admirable mystery, and believe it;
Believe that Christ is personally totus Miss. rom s^que. Breu. romans in ^e.
corp. christ ^ym.
^ub vtraque specie, wholly under the Secrets of both forms: but, Christ says,
Believe it not. They say, Praestet fides supplementum sensuum defectui: let
faith supply the defect of the senses; believe it: Christ says, These false
Prophets and pseudo-Christs shall indeed so say, but Believe it not. O how
presumptuous is that man who will believe any thing of Christ which he has
not commanded or commended to be believed of him! but more then desperately
presumptuous then is he who (to use Saint Austines Aug. de unit. eccl^s. c. 10
words in like case) will believe ought contra vocem pastoris tam apertam, tam
claram etc. against the voice of the shepherd so clear, so manifest: the
which, no man is so dull that he can justly say, he has not understood it;
yea, and this against the shep-herds voice condemning a point of highest
error, so prodigious and so paradoxicall, that few of the professers of Popery
it self do constantly believe the same.

And so here, upon this occasion, I cannot omit to declare Three sorts of
^opish professers.
unto you what I have by most certain experience (concerning this point)
observed amongst them. I distinguish all the professers of Popery into three
degrees: First, Atheists or semi-Atheists; secondly, zelantes, sed prauae
vitae, zealous papists, but of wicked lives; thirdly, zelantes, sed simplicis
vitae, zealous papists, but of more honest conuersations and lives. The first
(whereof Italy and France is very full) by their irreligious carriage at their
Masses, talking with and courting of dames then and there, their adoring of the
elevated Host but with one knee, or with the sparing and short congie of their
bodies, or with a few short knocks upon their breasts, do euince, that they do
not believe Christ to be there personally, elevated up in the hands of the
Priest.

The second sort, zealous but of wicked lives, do seem most constantly to be
persuaded of the same, and are indeed ever with great violence carried and bent
against all such who believe it not. I could be particular.

The third sort, the more discreet Papist, does indeed Popish professers of
more honest and better conversation cannot attain to a steadfast faith of
Christ in their mass or boxes
endeavor to believe it, and is much perplexed that he or she can not
constantly believe it: but few or none there are of this kind, who are not
day by day molested with thoughts (of misbeleefe or unbelief, as they call
it) that Christ is not truly and personally in the Secrets and Penetrals of
bread and wine; wherefore they pray and they cry day and night, Lord help
our belief. So they serve a God, on whom constantly they cannot believe, and
who gives them no rest, neither by date, nor by night. How true this is I Ie
rem. 16. 13.
will not endeavor to confirm by particulars; it is a secret of the Mystery
of iniq^itie: but, that this is most true, I refer me to the consciences of
the best and most Religious Priests and Pap^sts themselves; and to those who
hearing and taking the Confessions of their flock, do well understand with
what daily and inces^ant doubts, fears, The papists most immane; burning
others for denying that* which the most zealous amongst them do not constantly
believe.
scrupulosities, they are miserably vexed, afflicted, and tormented So is then
the case; the very best of the Popish Church are not constantly persuaded of
the truth of that, for the not believing of which, they have most in humanely
(in their fiery trialls) taken away and consumed to ashes the best of our
churches, the Saints and servants of God, who have offered themselves to their
furies for the testimony of Jesus; Believe it not.

Believe it not.
Most Religious Audience, if my voice were a shrill trumpet, sufficient to
sound in the ears of all within this British Monarchy, I should say unto
them, warranted thereunto by Christ's charge, believe it not though an Angel
from heaven, though all the P^ntifician false-prophets cry out, lo he is here
in the Closet of this Lady (as the use is) lo he is there (in the cellar of
that Merchant (as the manner is) lo he is yonder in the treasury boxes of
that Grandy (as the custom has been and may be) believe it not, believe it
not. It is the Lords charge, worthy of all receiving: it is the Lords charge
necessarily to be received, unless we will be seduced and drawn away, to
the eternal perdition of our Souls. Believe it not says Christ, Believe it
not. And does he not in this charge seem thus to exhort and charge his
Faithful? My first and Prime commandment Exodus 20.
is, Thou shall have no other Gods but me: but if you believe these
false-prophets, then shall you worship another God for me; howsoever they
falsely pretend that they have me, and no other substantially and personally
in their Secrets there to be worshipped and adored, but me; but believe it
not. I say, another God for me; bread and wine for me; according to those
blasphemous old verses, sometimes frequent in the Antichristian Synagogue;
H^lcot. in 4. q. 3.


Constat, in altari carnem de pane creari.
Hic panis deus est, Qui negat hoc, reus est.
Of Bread, is made the flesh of Christ.
This bread is God. Say no, thou lie.
You profess in your Creed, that I am ascended up into Act. 3. August. Tract.
50. in Joan. et epist ad Dardanum.
heaven, and sit there at the right hand of my Father in his Glory; wherein
the heavens shall recceiue me until my coming: but, if you believe these
false-prophets, you will also believe me to be in the secrets of Arks, Pixes,
and Tabernacles; Christ's union with his faithful most effectual, though
Spiritual.
where neither I shall nor will be. For, Cui bono? to what end? whereas the
sum of that communion and conjunction, which is betwixt me and mine, is
Spiritual in the Soul and Spirit; for the effecting whereof what need a
corporal and carnal presence? Therefore believe it not. Again: this
Sacrament is a sacred, significant and working sign: it is a remembrance and a
co^memoratio^ of me: How then I in it, personally? Believe it not. It is
indeed a 1 Cor. 10. 16.
communication of my body; but, in eating of sanctified bread. It is a
participation of my blood; but, in drinking of the hallowed God-christ made
present in the Secrets by these false prophets. Bellar. lib. 3. de Eucharist.
cap. 18.
and blessed wine. But, these false prophets teach a transubstantiating of
bread into me, of wine into me. Yea, they dare thus blaspheme, that Creatura
est factor creatoris sui, the Creature is the maker of his Creator. So then
God must be behoulding to man, for his making (so some call it) for his
creating (so others) for his production (so some) for his adduction and
bringing: so with Bellarmien others term it; but believe them not; believe it
not.

Lastly: if you believe it, then you put your trust in it, and on it, you long
after it, and adhaere to it: then not sursum, but deorsum corda, quaquaversum
corda; then will not your hearts be lift upward, but cast down, or dispersed
up and down, here, and there, euerie-where, where they pretend me to be;
whereas venerable Antiquity cried out in the very sacredst of these mysteries,
Sursum corda, sursum corda, let us lift up, let us lift up our hearts; and the
People of God ever answered, Habemus ad dominum, we have them, we lift them
up unto the Lord, we are not humbly nor meanly intentive to that which is set
upon the table; but we lift up our hearts unto the Lord who sits above in
the Heavens, donec finiantur secula, until the consummation of all generations
and ages. I conclude and sum up all in this short prayer; Dear Savior, as
thou have ben graciously pleased to forewarne us that we believe it not: so be
thou as graciously pleased to strengthen and confirm us that we believe it
not. Blessing, Clarity, Wisdom, Thanksgiving, Honor, Virtue, and Power to
our God, together with the Lamb (that lurketh not in popish secrets, but
sits on the Throne) and to the euer-blessed Spirit, be rendered by us, and
all creature^, from henceforth and for ever, Amen.

Deo vni, trinoque, Gloria.

