A SVRVEY OF THE MIRACLES OF THE CHVRCH of Rome, proving them to be
ANTICHRISTIAN.

WHEREIN ARE examineda^nd refuted the six fundamental Reasons of JOHN FLOOD
Ignatian, published by him in defense of Popish Miracles.

By RICHARD SHELDON Catholic Priest, and sometimes in the Church of Rome Mr.
FLOODS COLLEAGVE.

JEREMY 50. 14. Put your selves in array against Babylon round about: all ye
that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows, for she has sinned
against the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at S. Austens Gate, at the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Earl of Pembrooke, Lord HERBERT of Cardiffe,
Marmion, and S. Quintin; Lord Chamberlain to his Majesty, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE
SVCH is the condition of books (though the lines of them may happily be as
apples of beaten gold,) that like houses without couers, they are not reputed
perfect, unless they bear in their Fronts the Name of some Potent Patron,
whereby they may be shadowed from the blasts of ignorant and malicious
Censurers. Our most Christian and victorious Sovereign, having as another
David with the flint of Gods word, and the sl^nge of his admirable Spirit,
smitten the Golias of Rome in his forehead, wherewith he lies prostrate on the
ground, groueling in the ignominy of his meretricious enormities; has by his
Princely example, drawn diverse of his Worthies to gather up the spoils of his
victories; amongst whom, and behind whom, my self as a soldier postliminio
in praelium reuertens, have (being moved thereunto by the zeal of Gods truth)
undertaken this task, to reveal the Antichristianisme of his Exuuies, I mean
his rotten and ragged miracles. Having finished the Treatise, and bethinking my
self of a Patron, I conceited that the Patronage of such an argument, was
meet for the Emperor himself; and also that his shield would be more then
needful, for the defense of a poor Soldier against a world of Adversaries.
Yet weighing with my self, how his most learned eyes, and victorious hands,
are filled with presents of Books from every hand, and of every argument, I
resolved not to presume in this kind; and yet for my security and safety, I
determined not to depart a latere Principis, whose Princely favor I have
already laid up as a crown upon my heart. To your most Honorable Self
therefore, who for your rare Virtues are honored with the grace of being Comes
Pallatinus a latere; I have presumed to present this my work, and to lay it
into the hands of your most Honorable and Christian Patronage. I nothing doubt
of your Noble admittance of the same, such a Humanity is seated in your Noble
breast, as in a natural Center; and such is the nature of the argument handled,
that it bears this affiance with it self, that it will not be unwelcome to
so Religious and Christian a Peer of the Church.

If I be demanded the Reasons of this my Dedication to your Honor; I sum
them up thus; Love, Opinion, Religion; Love, for I confess ingenuously, the
very first moment I saw your Honor attending upon our Sovereign, your most
Noble aspect did present to my apprehensfull view, true Nobility, adorned with
a Christian (...), and a Panoplie of all virtues, which then like a Lodestone
drew my mind to love and admiration of your most Noble Person, the which some
courteous respects of your Honor to my self have since confirmed. Opinion,
and Fama verax, which reports your Honor to be a worthy Favorer of
learning; an Honorable Mecaenas, to all such as desire your Patronage: a noble
testimony of true Nobility, brought forth in your birth, nourished by your
education, perfected by your affectation and prosecution of all noble studies.
Religion, wherein your Honor by the hand of heaven (for this Donum optimum is
from above, a Patre luminum) appears by imitation, to be another Job;
sincere, upright, and fearing God; siding to no side, but walking via regia,
and via media, before the Christ of our Lord, and Christ our Lord: by which
Christian Collar of virtues, (though your place be most Honorable) I may say
in Agesilaus his words, Conciliasti loco dignitatem.

When I weigh with my self, how his most Excellent Majesty, clothed with the
zeal of the glory of Gods house, after a most learned Premonition with pen,
has in his excellent Declaration pro iure Regio, consecrated himself Pugilem,
a Champion to the wars of the Lord: I cannot but be comforted to think, what
commanders he would find, who like Isadas, holding lance in one hand, and
sword in the other, will be ready ruere in hosts. And would God, the day were
come, that the old Romans wisdom were followed, who resolved to fight against
Philip in Grecia, lest they should be put to defend themselves against him in
Italy: So our Christian Monarch, would be pleased to command the Capitoline
Jove of Rome to be assaulted, who now by himself in his Breefes, and by his
Ignatians furiall books, sends Sentences most furious into this Kingdom, not
to be written with ink but with blood, as his Majesty writes: which his
presumptions, what are they else but incitements to some hellish and furious
Rauillacs? At whose head and Crown does Suarius aim and point in his most
furious book? My pen dreadeth to write, what his Majesty has declared in his
most learned Declaration, touching the same point. And may not Clemency it
self be awaked with such roares, to do such things as appertain to the
severity of justice? Opus alienum, opus eius. What shall we say? Let us pray,
Memento Domine Iacobi tui and omnis mansuetudinis eius. Let his enemies o Lord
be confounded, who project evil to his soul: And grant Lord that the presage
which one Worthington, hearing of the happy* Inauguration of our most gracious
Sovereign, uttered at Valladolid in these words, We are undone, we are undone,
James of Scotland is proclaimed King of England. Let it O Lord prove a true
prophecy, against them and their Jove; let them be undone at home, and abroad;
night and day; sleeping and waking; in themselves, and in their posterities;
who thirst thus after the blood of thy Anointed Ones, and have made thy house
a den of thieves* If peaceable Solomon become Lion, by their traitorous
prouokings, let them impute it to themselves; Sanguis eoru^, supra capita
eorum. And so most humbly leaving my Book under your Honors gracious
protection, I pray most heartily the Lord Jesus to bless your Honor, with an
assured pledge of true happiness in this life, and with fullnes thereof in the
life to come. Amen.

Your Honors most humbly devoted, RICHARD SHELDON.

The Contents of the Treatise Following.
CHAP. I. A Prelude, showing the Popes Psendochristianisme, in respect of his
lying signs and wonders; the same is declared by diverse particulars. Page. 1.
CHAP. II. A second prelude, proving briefly and clearly that miracles in these
latter times, are no certain tokens of the true Church of God. Page. 32. CHAP.
III. A brief Examination of Master Floods Preface, showing the same to be full
fraught with vain bragging and ostentation. Page 43. CHAP. IIII. Shows how
ill Master Floods argument in defense of their miracles, is grounded upon the
opinions of his Adversaries; returns the dint of his argument against his
own Church, and further declares, how many impertinencies, untruths, and
slanders* Master Flood has shuffled up in the same for his best advantage.
Page 50. CHAP. V. Declares how idly Master Flood brings some miracles
(related by the Ancients) to prove their adoration of their Masse-Christ,
relikes, Images to be lawful. Here Master Flood is put in mind of many of
their Churches, vanities and ridiculous fables. Page 65. CHAP. VI. Declares,
how weakly and calumniously M. Floode has joined in his third reason, the
reformed Churches for denying their miracles, with the Pagans, for their
denying the miracles of Christ, his Apostles, and those of the primitive
Church: Page 105. CHAP. VII. Examineth Master Floods fourth reason, grounded
(as he speaks) upon the impiety of us, denying their miracles, but the
imputation is returned upon him and his Church; diverse of his impious
inferences and proofs are discovered, Galeacius his honor is defended; and
imputations of incontinencie justly retorted upon the Adversaries. The history
of Pope Ioane is briefly handled: And Master Flood who obiecteth lies to other,
is found himself to be a Liar, and therein a Disciple of his Grand Master
Bellarmine. Page 119. CHAP. VIII. Discusseth Master Floods fifth reason, (which
he groundeth upon the good and profitable conditions of their miracles) shows
the same to be a vain conceit; examineth further how vainly Master Flood
attributes some certain miracles to Antichrist; examineth also their manner
of conversion of Countries, and the sanctity of their Preachers. And because
Master Flood twitteth the reformed Churches for the allowance of marriage in
Priests, the Author shows largely and clearly even out of Popish
principles, that the marriage of such is lawful, and commendable both before
God and man. Page 156. CHAP. IX. Weighs Master Floods sixth reason, grounded
(as he pretends) upon the providence of God: in this many of his blasphemous
conceits are discovered; Master Whitaker is defended: Some Popish laughing
toys are briefly inserted. Page 214. CHAP. X. In this the Author examineth
those special miracles which the holy Scriptures attribute to Antichrist, and
does fasten them upon the Pope and his Church, showing how he fetches fire
from heaven, and makes the Image of the Beast to speak. Page 225. CHAP. XI.
Examineth all, or most of the Properties and conditions of Antichristian
miracles, recounted in holy Scriptures by Christ and his Prophets; and does
most clearly fasten them all, upon the Pope and his. Page 244. CHAP. XII.
Discusseth a notable prophecy of Christ concerning Antichrist, in the 24. of
S. Mathewes Gospel, and largely shows the same, evidently to be fulfilled
in the Pope and his. Page 251. CHAP. XIII. Examineth a prophecy of Saint Paul,
in the 2. to the Thessallonians, 2. concerning Antichrist and his Church, and
does evidently show the same, to be fulfilled in the Pope and his. Page 266.
CHAP. XIIII. Examineth another Prophecy of Christ in the 7. Chapter of Saint
Mathewes Gospel, and proves the same to be accomplished in the Pope and his
Prophets. Page 278. CHAP. XV. Discusseth another Prophecy of Saint Paul, in
his first to Timothy the 4. and declares the same to be fully completed in
the Pope and his Ministers. Page 282. CHAP. XVI. Contains two additions, the
first of which discovers the Papists, as in their Miracles so in their
Visions (which are usually brought by them for defense of their Religion) to be
Supporters of Antichristianisme: Here it is showed, how diuors of their Visions
contain absurdities against their own principles. And also some few Visions
are added, for the Papists to meditate on, and they are such as are related by
their own Authors. Page 282.
The Second addition shows briefly the idle vanity of a late Pamphlet
written by one I. G. Priest touching the prodigious birth and miraculous death
of his Brother Edmund Gennings executed for Treason together with one Swithune
Wells in Grayse-Inne fields. Page 323.

(...) THE PREFACE to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, my salutation shall be with a few aduertisements and
requests unto thee. First, whereas I often use these phrases, The miracles of
Antichrist, Antichristian miracles, or such like, my meaning is not, to give
unto Antichrist or his Ministers, power to do wonders, which are in se and
substance supernatural: for those be the Mirabilia, which Dominus solu^
facit; the Lord only does, Psalm. 72. 28.
by his immediate power, unto which all his creatures, and the nothing, out of
which his creatures are made, are subject by an obedientiall power or
subjection: but I call the prodigies of Antichrist Miracles, because in the
opinion of the seduced, they are such; and because sacred Scriptures, as
Antiquity has expounded and interpreted, do so term them.

Secondly, I request thee, perusing my twelfth chapter, that thou pass not thy
judgment hastily thereon, until thou have read the whole contents of the
same, and then as thou shall find, s^ judge; whether I have not, at lest very
probably disputed, according to the sense of our Saviors prophecy, and
Context of the Text; give me leave in this, Fungi vice Cotis, to whet the wits
and pens of the more learned, to examine the secrets of that admirable
prophecy of our Lord Jesus, which I there handle: Quicarpet mea edat sua.

Thirdly, if in the prosecution of this argument, I do interlace some
particulars, and use some phrases which may seem tart to the Adversaries
palate, the Reader may not be justly offended thereat: for they do
incessantly, so a buse all Reformed Clergies, and Christian Majesty's, with
their calumnious imputations, that there is no end nor measure of their malice:
and as for phrases, their pens and mouths can hardly find any bad enough for
us. Again, such is the nature of the argument, which I handle in this
Treatise, that it cannot be well prosecuted without Tart terms to the
Adversaries taste. If any other of the Clergy which are Siders to the Popes
faction, do distaste my matter or my style, I shall no more regard their
dislikes, then I will the barking of a currish whelpe. Such hypocrite-Clerkes
what are they else, then the very Scumme of this Church, and the excrements,
which being, neither hot nor cold, God does cast out Apoc. 3. 15.
of his mouth, and would God this Church had, or could spew them out.

And here I defire the Christian Reader to be advertised, that such Conuerts
as come from Rome (if sincere and converted in their souls) are sure to be
beset with diverse sorts of Adversaries: as the Papists and their Siders, the
Semi-Brownists or fiery Pre^cifianists, and their Favorers, and to the hard
censures of all such; sincere and sound Conuerts are certain to be subject:
The first taxing them as not sound, because themselves playing the hypocrites,
and measuring others by their own lasts, do hold them for like dissemblers:
loath they are that any reputed learned or honest, should be thought to be
sincerely, and in truth, converted to the Church of England, or to be well
esteemed of, or provided for by the same.

The other kind, more unkind; tax and reprove such, because in their
preachings and practices, they are firm and zealous for the maintenance of
those articles (Christian and Apostolical) Canons (Goodly and Godly) to which
they have subscribed. Jointly both sorts of them have their eyes set so
narrowly and incessantly upon them and their doings, that the least error they
may commit either in private conversation, or by lapse of tongue (which as the
Apostle delivers, no mortal Iam. 3. 8.
man can perfectly rule or tame) shall be made a mountain: but why write I
this? to curry favor, or to beg indulgence at any man's hands? Absit: no man
without Arrogancy, can assume that of Christ to himself; Quis ex vobis etc.
Who of you can reprove me of sin? yet by the mercies of Christ, such sincere
Conuerts, as England Ioh. 8 4^.
has of late had from Rome, dare in humility say; Quis Ioh. 8 7.
ex Aduersarijs etc. Which of their Auersaries can reprove them of crime? If
they can, we say not to them in those words of Christ; apologizing for the
adulterous woman in S. John; He of you which is without sin, let him cast the
first stone: But we say confidently, have our Adversaries crime or not crime;
let him, her, or them, cast peales of stones against us, if they can justly
prove that we have in any point whatsoever in doctrine or action, criminally
or semi-criminally transgressed against the Laws of God, or against the laws
of this Church and Kingdom; let them not spare us; we only desire that they
would deal honorably; not come behind and stabbe, for that is neither
Knightly nor Gentleman like, but let them accuse plena in Curia. Thus writing
in the defense of sincere and honest Conuerts, my pen tells me, in the
words of the Apostle, Factus sum insipiens etc. I am become foolish; I confess
it: but my Apology shall be the same, the which the Apostle used, Ipsime
coegerunt, They (our Adversary,) have compelled me: But why pass I not by the
calumny? Because it touches the sincerity of our religion, which these by
secret whisperings and surmises, seek to stain and wound: and I verily think
if in any kind of calumny, in this, that of Austin is most true, Qui negligit
famam crudelis est: He who neglects his fame is cruel against himself. I
hope then that we shall not be reputed contentious, if we call any to answer
for their calumnies against us, if they cease not to blemish the integrities of
our Faith, wherein (I doubt not, but that I may speak the like of my brethren)
I never knew what hypocrisy meant: no, no: we leave that for our Church
Papists and Communion-Recusants, we commend that dish as due to such as jointly
subscribe and d^nie etc. subscribe to obtain a Cure, deny to pervert their
Cure.

As for our selves, who in the fear of God have shaken of Iugum Exactoris, the
yoke of the Exactour; we Isa. 9.
have by Gods blessings a double staff of comfort, the one firm as the
everlasting mountains: Our faith and hope is that we are, Filij liberae
Children of her that is free, Gal. 4. 22.
and Liberti Domini, Freemen of the Lord, which liberty the Lord Jesus has
graciously bestowed upon us: from 1. Cor. 7. 22.
whom we pray, and hope for ^uch a good measure of his grace, that we shall not
use this liberty as an occasion of sin; but live more warily, by how much we
are hemmed in with Adversaries on every side, Sed ex his omnibus liberabit nos
Deus.

Another staff or cause of comfort under God to such Conuerts as already are
come, or hereafter may happily come, may be, to think, that we have a Prince
and Sovereign, who doubtless does from his very heart, embrace and love those
Conuerts which are in heart converted. There are also of his Subjects both of
highest and lowest rank of all sorts (I mean such as are sincere Christian
Protestants, and lean to neither side directly nor indirectly) who doubtless
do in their hearts love us, and are very glad when they have occasion to do,
or hear of any good that is done unto us. What need such then care if either
Precisians on the one side, or Popish and Papists on the other, do malign
them, Si Deus nobiscum; (and Dij eius nobiscum) quis contra nos.

But seeing it pleases the Popishly affected, (I mean Church Papists, whether
Laikes or Clerks) to be so uncharitable and so prone to censure us late
Conuerts; as unsound, and yet in hearts Popish; I desire the Reader to give me
leave to Character them out in a word or two in their right colors. What are
they else then very Vipers who desire to bring forth a foreign Monarchy (they
care not what it be, so it be Papal) with the rent and dissolution of their
mothers bowels. Like as the Dogs which have arrows sticking in their
thighs, are never at quiet, till they, may have shaken out the arrows from
their thighs; so they until they may shak off the present Church and
State-gouernment, which like arrows penetrate their remorsed consciences; they
will never be at rest; for this purpose though they frequent sometimes the
Church, they will often withal have secret conference with Ignatians etc. I
have often heard Creswell and Pa^sons (and if I mistake not, Parsons says in
effect as much in his Treatise for mitigation) affirm, that it would not have
been good for our late Sovereign by any severe statutes (as by enforcement to
communion) to have exasperated Church Papists; because (said they) the remorse
and sting of their consciences against which they are compelled both to Church
and communion; would when occasion might be offered, lead them praecipites into
the ruin of the whole. Thus they. But what toleration will work, who sees
not? whenas gracious Conniuencie has made them so insolent? yea then, there,
and by those means it is to be thought they will prove most perfidious where,
when, and by what means, they are most favored. Further I request the Reader,
not to account this voluntary oblation of my Mite, into the box of Gods
Sanctuary, as the effect of an arrogant desire to see my self often in print.
No, no; I consider the diligence of the Adversaries, who are incessantly
clamorous with their pens, against the Tents of the Lord; I consider the
diligence of our Sovereign who as the Imperator Augustus has invited both his
Captains and common Soldiers in praelium Domini; And although he has
performed his part so excellently that as Hircius affirmed of Caesar, for his
Commentaries, his Majesty seems rather to have taken away then to have given
others occasion of writing; yet such seems to be his Princely zeal that he
prizeth as a Sacrifice any service done in this kind; what if by his most
learned pen Golias seem prostratus? his Exuuiae to some seem not taken from
him, I mean the rags of his miracles and rotten superstitions.

Thirdly I considered seriously tanquam Classicum Belli that Clangor of God, by
the mouth of his holy Prophet: Put your selves in array against Babylon, round
about; Ierem. 50. 14.
all ye that bend the bow, shote at her, spare no arrows: for she has sinned
against the Lord. If I amongst the rest of Gods Soldiers obey this his voice;
and shoot against Babylon the best arrows my simple arm can draw out of the
Quiver of Gods book; with the bow of his holy Spirit, this my diligence I
hope shall not turn to my reproach; let them rather be reproached and
reproved, who tumbling as fat as brawnes within their sties, will not shoot
out one arrow in Print, for fear of reproach; and lest they should be put to
defend what they shall commend to press. And what? will they dare to deliver
any thing in Pulpit which they are afraid to commend to the Theater of the
world? As the Press is the worlds Stage, so is the Pulpit Gods Theater and a
Stage for Angels. I see they fear with Arcesila^s, and are worthy to be
rewarded with him; but they have the golden Art of supplanting. For my part
should I foreknow that this Treatise of mine which is sweet in my mouth might
prove bitter in my stomach and belly; yet out it should, my shoulders are of
steel armed for all censures. But to all idle drones if never so elegant (who
are ready with Bonamicus, Lazarus the Patauine to carpe at other men's labors)
as Erasmus said to him, Lazare veni for as; so I to these Bon-amici Lazari
venite for as, My good friends, and Lazars come ye out, show your selves, or
else, as your hands be tied from writing, so let your tongues be tied also
from censuring: or else, be not discontent, if you be reputed by some severe
Censurers like Esops Ass with head ever in manger and yet striking with his
heels. It is not enough to bestow a bimestrian Sermon and the same twice or
thrice to be said over, and then account your selves as worthy to be Censours
over other men's labors: vaevobis, if living of the Gospel and having
diuidents sufficient for two or three worthier then your selves, your tongues
or pens Euangelize no more nor better; no more of this, lest I be twitted as
I was once speaking for the free enlarging and increase of a free benevolence
etc. What? this man comes lately from Rome, and shall he teach us, what we
are to give etc. But for my part I have done, craving pardon if I am ouerbold
in this my free Epistle* whereof the period shall be this: He that follows
Avarice cannot be innocent. Further in all sincerity and humility, I pray for
the Church in general, that such as halt betwixt God and Baal may be removed
e castris Domini: And for my self in particular I humbly beseech our Lord
Jesus that he would be pleased so to assist me (who am the least of all his
Family) with the Graces of his blessed Spirit to the end, that I may never
fall from that Grace in which now I stand. In fide viuo Jesus fily Dei. Amen.

Yours in Christ Jesus Richard Sheldon.

Epigramma de Miraculis Antichristi.
Parturiere diu septem tibi, Romule, montes: ridiculos mures iam peperere suos.
Cuitua non odium, vel cui portenta cachinnum non moueant posthac, is mihi
prodigium est.
VIA-PORTA nou: coll: Ox: olim So.

(...)
A BRIEF PRELVDE, SHOWING THE PSEVDO-CHRISTIANISME OF PAPISTS, in respect of
their lying SIGNS, and WONDERS.
CHAP. I.
ONE Faith, one Baptism, one Ephesians. 4.
Christ, says Saint Paul writing to the Ephesians: by which we are evidently
instructed, that one and the same Faith, does now save the faithful of these
later ages of the Church, which did save those of the primitive times; likewise
as the same Christ, and in the same manner was then, and is now to be believed;
the same baptism, and in the same sort, was then, and is now to be practiced,
and frequented. This Christian axiom, sounds well in the ears of all
reformed Churches, because their total scope and project is, (separating the
pure silver of Christian faith, from the dross of popish superstition) to
reduce all points of religion, and necessary rites of Christian discipline, to
the primitive Antiquity, and prime institution of Christ and his Apostles; But
it is too too harsh in the ears of Papists, who by their additions of many
novelties, and vain traditions to Christian religion, have above measure,
contaminated and corrupted the simplicity of the same: and therefore, being
urged with these their novelties, they are constrained to teach, and
desperately to affirm, that the primitive Church, the Apostles, and f^unders
of the same, did at least, implicitly, tanquam in principijs b^leiue all that,
which they themselves do now explicitly, and expressly believe, upon the
opening and unfolding of their holy Father the Pope: (to whom with their
Angelical Aquinas they Aquinas 2. 2. q. 1. art. 10.
commonly attribute power to order, ordain, stablish and declare the symbol
of faith.) And therefore, to uphold this their paradoxe, diverse of them have
not been ashamed, to apply to the primitive Church, and her times, that of the
Apostle, sapiebat vt paruulus, loquebatur 1. Cor. 13. 11.
vt paruulus, she was wise as a little one, she spoke as a little one, as not
having all points necessary of faith, expressly, and explicitly suggested
unto her; but they forsooth, by virtue of the infallible determinations, and
decisions of their Inerrable Judge the Pope, can speak wisely and believe
perfectly in every particular conclusion the which it shall please their holy
Father to determine; provided it be ex Cathedra, that is with intention and
purpose to teach and instruct the universal Church whereof they make him sole
Head and Vmpire. And although the ancientest Bishops of Rome, and the Primitive
Fathers of the Church did hold some points as doubtful, obscure, and
apocriphall, yet their Romish Father, has such a potency, that sitting in
Cathedra (tanquam ex tripode) he can clear all, and make that to be an
express article of faith, which the auncientest Church, either held for
doubtful or else had no express knowledge nor practice thereof. That in this
vanity, (wherein they do most egregiously please themselves, and upon which,
all Ignatian-papists, build their faith) I do not unjustly impose against
them, it is manifest in a few (amongst innumerable other) clear instances. As
first, their presumptuous Canonizing into the rank of sacred Scriptures,
apocriphall books of errable men, so reputed, and esteemed by venerable
antiquity. Again, their vain presumption in defining their metaphysicall and
paradoxicall transubstantiation, by which, (out of those most venerable and
sacramental words of Christ, this is my body, by an admirable Math. 26. Luke
22.
kind of logic, never heard of nor dreamed of in the ancient Fathers) they
do by transubstantiation place and set their Christ, in such a manner of
being, site, and disposition of body, within the round wafers, which they
consecrate; that I could never as yet hear any one of them dare to affirm, in
what sort Christ is there, whether sitting, standing, or lying; whether prone,
or supine, with his face upward, or downward; whether like Ianus bifrons
double-fore-headed, or with as many faces, as there be imaginary parts in the
wafer: This only, by the way, I give the Reader to understand, that when their
famous Vasquez public Reader of divinity Vasquez his chimericall conceit
touching transsubstantiation.
in the Ignatian schools at Rome was treating of the manner of Christ's being
in their sacrament, he did then, and there (not without admiration and
astonishment to my self) deliver, that look howsoever, and in what sort, and
manner soever, the devout Receiver, will imagine Christ to be there, whether as
standing upright, or as sitting or like as hanging upon a cross, he shall so
have him truly and realy: his reason was, because Christ, is in the sacrament
in like sort as man's soul is in his body, totus in toto and totus in qualibet
part, whole Christ in every part of the wafer and whole Christ in the whole
wafer; so that although the whole face of Christ be in the whole wafer, and in
every part of the wafer, and the feet of Christ be in the whole wafer, and in
every part of the wafer, yet it is (said he) in the power of the Receiver, to
imagine the face, to be in one part, the hands in an other, the breast in the
third, and the rest in other parts, in such sort, as might best serve for his
devotion. And that this doctrine was there publicly delivered, I call the
heavens to witness; but what need I, so to do? when this their superstitious
divinity, is so frequently taught, and delivered in their meditations and
pulpits: and it is so agreeing to that their principle, that Christ is wholly
in every part, and wholly in the whole wafer; that by necessary consequence it
follows thereout, as the intelligent Reader will easily observe.

Further a third instance I adioyne of their doting and fatuouse indulgences,
which are so far from being founded and grounded in any express practice of
the primitive Church; that the acutest of themselves confess, and acknowledge;
that they were only implicitly delivered, in those words to Peter, whatsoever
thou Math. 16.
shall bind, shall be bound; and whatsoever thou shall loose, shall be loosed:
which words, being by their inerrable Judge expounded, for their indulgences;
thereupon they have coined according to their divinity, a new article of faith.
By all which, with infinite more instances, it is as clear as the very
heavens, that they do believe many things as necessary points of religion,
which the ancient Church never dreamed of. And when upon this point they are
urged and told (as Christ taxing the Jews errors spoke to them) that ab
initio non erat sic, from the beginning it was not so. Abraham non fecit sic;
Math. 19. 8.
Christ, his Apostles, the primitive Church, did not so; then they recurre to
their rotten sanctuary: that although the primitive Church did not so
expressly, yet they did so implicitly, although they did not so believe in
express terms, yet they did so believe (in principijs) in those principles,
and premises, out of which their Holy father by his unerring Spirit, has
deducted these new conclusions, and upon whose declaration, we receive and
believe them, as the very Oracles of God. But how is this divinity confronted
by the Apostle, Galat: 1. 8. 9.
who has denounced an Anatheme to him, whosoever shall deliver as matter of
faith (for so the Apostle must be understood) beside what was then delivered?
how can the Pontficians show me, any commandment of God, by which I am bound
to believe new articles of faith, which were not expressly believed, and
received in the Apostles times, and primitive Church? by what This is catholic
faith and profession, which the Apostles have delivered, Martyrs have
confirmed, and which the faithful hitherto do keep. Vigil: against Eutich.
principles, can they euince, that the faith which was sufficient for the
Apostles, and their immediate scholars, is not sufficient for the faithful of
this time? by what scripture, or authority of any ancient Father can they
show, that the Pope can deliver new Articles of faith touching manners, which
were not believed in the primitive Church? surely by none: and yet they
travail egerly therein; but their issue being fruitless, and they not being
able to be delivered of a masculine child, to defend this their paradoxe, they
recurre and run to that vain and fond bulwark of all Heretics, and false
Prophets; miracles forsooth, prodigyes, visions and wonders must be devised,
there they rest, there they triumph and sing: but before the victory; as
easily I (by Gods assistance) will make it manifest in this my discourse, rest
they, triumph they, insult they never so much.

The manner of the Papists urging of their miracles, prodigyes and visions, is
so peculiar, and essential to Antichristianisme, and to the great Patriarch of
the same, the man of sin and son of perdition; that I suppose there are no
passages of sacred Scripture, which do more clearly euince popery to be
Antichristianisme, and the Pope to be the man of sin, then that they so
egregiously insult for their false prodigyes, and triumph for their lying
visions; that if it were possible, they would Matthew: 24. Marc. 13.
draw the very elect into errors and heresies, were they not vpheld by the
hand of him, qui nouit qui sunt cius, 2. Timoth: 2.
who knows his, and were they not taught by his voice Ioh: 10.
and fortified by his holy inspirations to flee from the hearing of any Alien
in matters concerning faith, religion, and worship of God: but being by his
holy word and spirit sufficiently instructed; whenever they hear the sound
of any errors broched from Rome, (though for continuance, they might have a
thousand years of age; used in times of error, ignorance and superstitious
darkness,) yet if that of Christ, Ab initio non erat sic, from the beginning it
was not so, in the Apostles time it was not, in certain ages after it was not
so; may Matthew: 19 8.
justly be opposed against them, they dare constantly avouch such customs to
be not christian but heretical; not antiquities, but long inserted novelties;
not able to prescribe against Christ his truth, though they come adorned and
furnished with as many portents, wonders, and signs, as the man of sin and
his ministers, described by the Apostle, shall by the great power and virtue 2 Thessalonians: 2.
of Satan, be able to work.

Admirers of visions, Prodigye-deuisers, and wonderworkers, even such as should
falsely profess Christ, were foretold both by Christ and by his Apostles.
First, if we ask the time, they were most to abound, yea as it were to swarm
toward, and in the latter times: which Matthew: 24. 2 Thessalonians: 2. Apocal: 13.
manner of dealing, with daily advantage, and new increment in that kind, is
so lively to be found amongst the Popish, that I dare boldly ashrme it, and
will stand to justify it, (notwithstanding the infinity of fables rejected by
themselves in their old legends and portesses) that in respect of their
glorying in visions and miracles, there is no comparison to be made betwixt the
former times and these: so that in them, and in their congregation, it is most
evident, that the nearer they approach, to the later or latest times, the more
they abound with their lying visions, prodigyes, wonders: And if they
themselves, be not the men that should falsely ptofesse Christ and gloriously
vaunt in miracles, and prodigyes; let them show unto us, point out unto us,
some others that teach here and there is Christ, (by tying Christ's faith and
religion to some one See; or by pretending and preaching, some real presence
of Christ upon earth) let them (I say) show some manner of men, who glory in
the name of Christ, (though most falsely) and yet do prodigyes, wonders,
miracles, for confirmation of their errors, and heresies: as clear as the
heavens it is, that there is no sect which does, so absolutely rest and confide
in their miracles and wonders, as themselves: and to them it does agree so
properly, even 4to modo, that there was never yet any popish Doctor, who has
written in defense of their heresies and errors, who challenges not miracles
and visions, as peculiar to themselves, and as frequent in their Church alone;
making the same as a sure note of true Christianisme, amongst themselves.
Wherefore else, does Bristow in his motives and demands? mountanouse Hill in
his quartron of reasons; without all reason, truth or honesty, wholly
quartered out of Bristowes motives, and Gasper Vlenbergius his causes?
wherefore else, does Bellarmine in his notes of the Church? Stapleton, Coster,
Baronius, Coccius, Sanders, and all other whatsoever writers for that sect, so
triumph upon their miracles, and visions? they have them therefore, and we
willingly yield them unto them; for otherwise, we should not esteem them as
ministers of him, who without compere or equal, sitting, (that is, ruling 2.
These. 2.
and governing) in the Temple (the visible externe house) of God was to come in
all power, signs, and lying wonders, (mark the words, observe the mystery) I
say it, and repeat it again; who was to come, and to sit in the temple of God,
not showing a few miracles, not weak wonders, not with small power, but in all
power, signs, and lying wonders, was to bear himself, as in the steed and
place of God; was also, to contend with the elect, yea to overcome the Saints;
was to persecute and afflict those who embracing the charity of truth, that
is, the love of Christ, who is the way, life, and truth, should refuse to
accept, or Ioh: 14 6.
admit of any other means for salvation, but the name of Christ, which only
is given for our salvation, as the holy Scripture delivers. If it be
demanded, whether Act: 4.
these sincere professors of Christ, which were to be afflicted by the man of
sin, and his manciples, were to oppose miracles, against their miracles; and
wonders, Exodus: 7. 19. and 8. 6. 7.
against their wonders; as Moses did against the Egyptians. To this answering I
suppose, agreeing to sacred Scriptures, that either they were to work none at
all, or else so few, that in comparison of those which should be wrought by the
Antichristian synagogue, they would seem none at all: and this is clearly
gathered out of Matthew. 24. 24. Marc. 13. 12.
holy Scriptures (agreeing to the sense of ancient Fathers) where it is said,
that the prodigyes and wonders of these Pseudochrists, should be so many, and
so great, that if it were possible, the very elect should be perverted: which
fear of perverting the elect, how should it take place, if they should have
miracle, for miracle; vision for vision; wonder for wonder, to oppose against
these pseudochrists and false prophets? Clear therefore it is, that multitudes
of wonders, and great wonders were to be toward, and in the later times
peculiar to him, who should sit in the temple of God bearing himself for a
Vice-God; even as Paul the 5. with blasphemous impudency now does: suffering
himself to be termed in certain Theses of divinity (defended by a Dominican
Friar called Caraffa at Naples) by the name Vice-Deus, Vice-God: whose
blasphemy herein is intolerable: as alike is that of his Burghesian Family;
for the eternizing of which, those arrogant Nephew-Cardinalls of him, are not
afraid to have ingraued in their cupps and plate this poesy, AETERNITATI
BVRGHESIANAE DICATVM, Consecrated to the Burghesian Eternity. Is not this more
blasphemous then Constantius his Numen, divinity, for which religious
antiquity so much condemned him? But we may not forsooth deny eternity to the
Family of a Vice-God; to whose predecessor (Gregory the 13.) Stapleton was
not ashamed to give, Numen, a Divinity, Godhead. And truly, seeing they will
needs have Eternity, Numen, Divinity, Godhead, Omnipotency; seeing they
alone will needs sit in the temple of God, ouer-ruling all, commanding all;
seeing they will needs have wonders and prodigies, and in great store and
frequencie: for my part I will never deny them unto them, and I doubt not, but
withal easily to prove that they have lost charitatem veritatis, the charity
2 Thessalonians: 2.
of truth, for which God has given them over to strong illusions to believe
these errors and lies.

Saint Gregory worthily discourses to this purpose, In exposit. Job, lib. 34
cap 3. and apud Pateriu^ in 2. ad Thessal.
whose speech, although it be large, yet I will not omit to set down a great
part thereof. Terribili ordine dispositionis occultae etc. By the terrible
order of secret providence (says he) before the old enemy appear in that
damned man Antichrist, whom he shall assume, the signs of virtues shall be
taken from the holy Church; for prophecy shall be hid, the grace of curing
shall be taken away; the virtue of longer abstinence shall be diminished, words
of doctrine shall cease, and the prodigies of miracles shall be removed: the
which notwithstanding, the divine disposition shall not utterly take away, but
shall not so openly, and so frequently show them as in former times. And a
little after; therefore for the greatest part, signs of miracles and virtues,
shall be withdrawn from the faithful in the holy Church: And then the old
enemy shall in that damned man Antichrist, appear, conspicuous against them,
by many prodigies; that by how much he is puffed up with his signs, by so much
with greater praise, he may be overcome by the faithful (for although signs
shall not altogether be wanting to the faithful in that conflict;
notwithstanding, his shall be so great, (note these words) that ours will seem
few, or none at all) whose virtue shall be stronger then all his signs,
spurning with the heel of inward constancy against all that which is so
terribly showed by him; but the malignant enemy shall by so much use greater
immanitie against them, (behold the Roman practice) by how much he shall
grieve to see himself despised in the midst of his shining miracles; therefore
he will wholly recollect himself for their destruction, and will kindle up all
the reprobates with one mind, and like cruelty, to the destruction of the
faithful: And so the proud loftiness of Antichrist, over reprobate minds,
shall be raised up with the fast (how clear is this in the son of perdition
sitting at Rome?) and pomp of secular glory, so that, a sinful man, and yet
despising to be esteemed as a man, (that is a pure man only) will lyingly
affirm himself to be a God over men; (observe these words, a God over men)
(whereupon the Apostle Paul says,) so that he will sit in the temple of God
showing himself, as if he were a God. thus far Saint Gregory with much more
to like purpose. And although this Father in this place, do seem to teach
that Antichrist shall directly and expressly extol himself above God, (which
none of the Popes have yet done, as some Papists may object, and that therefore
this Antichrist here described by Gregory cannot be the Pope), For my part I
thus resolve the doubt, that all the Fathers discourse may most fitly be
applied to the Popes unmeasurable extolling himself above the laws of God,
challenging power to dispense in all vows and oaths; challenging power, to
annexe to base creatures more spiritual efficacy against sins and wicked
Spirits, then he himself, and his do give to the Sacraments of Christ:
challenging the very name of Vice-god, challenging all that honor and
adoration, For the Popes insolent pride, read the dictates of Gregor. 7. in
Baron. anno 1175.
which is upon earth given unto him; for that he is a Vice-God, a
God*substitute upon earth, sitting in the temple of God. But setting this
circumstance at this present aside, by this Fathers whole discourse, agreeing
to sacred Scriptures and his judgment, it is manifest, that to abound with
miracles and wonders against that Church, which has few, or no miracles (in
comparison) shall profess Christ, and only Christ, is an evident sign of
Antichristianisme; the which, how fitly it squareth to the Romanists, no man
cannot but see, whose eyes the 2. Cor: 4.
God of this world has not blinded.

To proceed; Concerning the time, when the miracles of false prophets were to
be most flush, and like shoales to flee abroad: the revelation of Saint John
has Apoc: 13. v. 2. 11. 13. 14.
it so clear, that nothing can be more clearly or lively expressed: For
there, the Prophet delivers the great power, authority, miracles, and
wonders of the Beast, and of the false Prophet, having two horns like the
lamb Miracles ceased for most part, in the time of Aust: See August. de vera
relig. Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. cap. 2. hom. 6. Greg. hom. 29. in Euang.
(which must be toward the later times of the Church, after the substraction
of miracles from the true Church, which has passed long ago) to work great
prodigies and wonders; pretending the very power and place of the lamb, as
Popes do; yet speaking like the dragon, denouncing, proclayming blood, ruin,
fire, sword, proditions, perditions, against all such, as shall deny his
monarchical Papacy; against all such, as shall refuse that power, by which he
challenges authority to dispose of kingdoms, and depose Kings, for the
salvation of souls: and this he does (as if it were with the horns of the
lamb) pretend; thereby cloaking and covering his ambitious, lofty, and
fastuous spirit. And if your holy Father the Pope, do not (pretending the two
horns of the lamb) work prodigies, and wonders sitting in the temple of God,
then bring me, o ye Pontificians, some one man, that ever did it, or that is
likely to do it in any other sort and manner then the Pope now does it. Deny
it if you can, that he has spoken like the Dragon, when as, by his bloody
sentences, he has in all Christian kingdoms Apoc. 6. and 13.
that ever were, at one time or other, taken peace from the earth, the proper
work of the Dragon: and to press you further, was there ever yet any man, who
has deceived the dwellers upon earth, by those miracles which he had power to
do in the sight of the Beast, but the Bishop of Rome; who in his profane
legends (though termed by their Genitours and forefathers, Aureae Legendae,
Golden Legends) of doting Metaphrastes, fabulous Lippoman, lying and voraginous
Iacobus, superstitious Antonine, confuse Vincentius, has so cloyed the
dwellers upon earth, with delusions, lies, and impostures, that for very shame,
they have pared out of their Portesses and Breuiaries many and sundry of their
fabulous histories: and for the derisions and outcries of Christians against
them, have exploded no small members of their Golden Legends. May I not fitly
use against them those words of the Apostle, what fruit was there in those
things whereof you are now ashamed? with which you Rom: 6. 21.
are now confounded? and worthily confounded, to consider, that your
Progenitors, your Pillars of the inerrable Church, should set forth Legends,
yea golden Legends, written by Bishops, Archbishops; authorized by public
authority, read in your public services, concerning miracles that never were,
and of men that never were living upon the face of the earth. Your Didimus
Verdicus Claudius Espencaeus tells us, that your Legends ^spencae. in 2 a^
Timoth. and like digress lib 2. cap. 11.
and Portesses were full of fables, as any stable could be fu^l of dung; and I
dare constantly say, more full of vanities and lies then the stable of Augias
was of dung, for that, by thousands of oxen might in time be purged, but the
whole congregation of Roman Repurgers have not as yet been able to cleanse your
Legends, which have filled and deceived the whole world: yea so fresh is the
reviuing of their delusions, that I dare boldly say, that all their old
Legends, have not any more vain, more pernicious, then some that have been of
late, and a fresh published by themselves. In this place, I mention only that
of Catharine of Sienna. She forsooth and Life of Cathar: of Sienna.
Christ Jesus, by an admirable kind of permutation, did enter change their
hearts; so that Christ, had the heart of Catharine, and Catharine that of
Christ. Oh you ignorant and desperately superstitious Pontificians! observe you
not? understand you not? that this miraculous chaffering of hearts, subuerteth
a very Principle of Christian religion, (received also by your selves) which
is, that (quod Christus semel assumpsit nunquam dimisit) what Christ did once
assume (to wit by hypostaticall union) he never left the same: tell us then, I
beseech you, did he not assume his carnal and corporal heart, as a principal
member of his body? was it not conjoined, and united mediately or immediately
by hypostaticall union to his divinity? I know you cannot nor will not deny
it. Well then, for Catharines sake did he demisse, and leave his own heart, to
enterchange for hers? if so, then you must needs admit, that Christ for
Catharines sake, did suffer a partial kind of death, Christ changes his
heart for Catharines.
by separating his soul from his own heart, which was the principallest part
of his body, and the chiefest and immediatest seat of life; unless, you will
be so desperately mad, as withal to affirm, that Christ also did
enterchange souls with Catharine, either partly or wholly, and so give her a
living heart, and take in liew thereof her living heart: and surely, if the
hearts enterchanged, betwixt Christ and Catharine, were but dead hearts, and
had not so much, as a vegetative or a sensitive soul in them: for what purpose
then, can your senseless souls, and witless hearts dream, that Christ
should be so enamoured, with a dead heart of Catharine, as to give her his own
living for it? what? was he overtaken with some corrupt passion of love, to
long after a dead heart? has he so forgotten his love and respect to his
mother, as to esteem more of a piece of dead flesh from Catharine, then of
that heart which he took from her sacred womb? the which also, because heavy
in the garden even to death deserved not to be cast off. Christ himself
confesses, that his corporal presence, was a kind of let and hinderance to
his Apostles, that the Paraclet and Comforter could not come unto them until
he was departed. Ioh 16. 7.
And yet now forsooth, he cannot sufficiently love Catharine spiritually,
embrace Catharine fully, unless he make a carnal and corporal permutation
of heart with her; and take hers for his: When I read in Baronius, Quer^ Baron.
anno to 28 ^^ 5.
that fantastical relation of his, how the vergin Mary visited Fulbert in his
sickness, and gave him her breasts to suck (perhaps then there escaped some
drops of milk from Fubbertus his lips, he being not accustomed to suck, and
are those, which are kept in a siluer-image of the virgin Mary, in her Church
at Rhemes, and are there worshipped) much comforting him thereby; I thought
Baronius should have gained the whetstone, but now the case is otherwise, for
surely of all prodigies this commutation of hearts, betwixt a young Damsel
and God, is most exceeding all credit. Surely, we might justly esteem our
selves as bewitched, if we should not think, that the Pontificians are deluded
by strong illusions, foretold by the Apostle to believe such lies. Do they not
give the world, just cause to make like account of this their Catharines
marks, and signs, in her hands, head, feet, and side? like those of the holy
maid of Lisbo, by whom, how the holy Father, Jews Granatensis her Ghostly
Father; and Sixtus Quintus, the Ghostly Father of their Catholic Church,
together with the Spanish King, his Prelates, his Priests, and his invincible
Armado, were mocked and deluded, the year 88 is not ignorant; and yet let them
deny it if they can, but that they held her in admirable veneration, setting
up, and worshipping her pictures, in public places, yea in Churches esteeming
of her, as of another Catharine of Sienna, like another Asissian Saint Frances;
(for he also had the signs and marks of a crucified Saint; walking, not
hanging, living, not dying, in deception, not in verity.) But after 88. when
her blessings and prophecies proved to be vanities, then the Spanish Sages, and
Romes Ghostly Father well observed how they were overtaken in their follies,
(but had they prevailed, as they might according to the chance of wars if God
had not withstood them, she had been a Canonized Saint, ere this) and then were
they ashamed to see themselves so deluded by an Hipocrite-woman: and
doubtless, had some like occasions happened, they had not been so long
deceived by their Asissian Frances, and Catharine of Sienna: but the time was
then not come for the more open revealing of the man of sin; and for the
stronger deception of those, who had forsaken the charity of truth, who
therefore deserved so to be deceived, God permitting the same. And
notwithstanding, I dare tell them by the way for their comfort that there are
diverse of their religious black Friars who believe not their Francis (who was
a white-Fryer) his signs, and marks: as on the other side, diverse of the
white Friars, disciples of Francis, believe not, regard not the signs and
marks of Catharine, who was a black Nun. This I deliver both out of my own
experience, and very credible relation of those who are very well acquainted
with the dispositions of Monks and Friars: And if it be answered, that these
Friars do so, out of emulation, and bitterness against each other, not
because they hold the histories to be doubtful; be it so for this time; but
by this their answer, every man may Ioh. 13. 35.
evidently know, that such envious Friars are not the disciples of Christ; but
of him, who is the Parent of discord, and by whose envy death entered into the
world, and so consequently of the Archministers of him; amongst whom not a few,
(Tyranizing like Lions as it is Langius. Platina, alij.
written of Boniface 8.) have indeauoured to cast their terror and fear upon
the whole world.

Secondly, I observe, these men (that shall work such wonders and prodigies)
to be described both by our Savior, and by his Apostles, that they shall be
false-Prophets and false-Christs, preaching the doctrines of devils; the which
how to the very hair, it is fulfilled by the Pontificians, I do hereafter
declare. Christ speaking of the dangers which his Elect should suffer toward
the consummation of the world, says thus. Then if any man Mat. 24. 23 etc.
Mark. 13.
shall say, lo here is Christ, or there; believe it not; for there shall arise
false-Christs, and false-Prophets, and shall show great signs, and wonders,
insomuch (that if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect: behold I
have told you before, wherefore, if they shall say unto you, be hold he is
(that is Christ is) in the desert, go not forth; behold he is in the secret
penetralls, believe it not; for as the lightning comes out of the East, and
shines even unto the west, so shall also the coming of the son of man be:
For, wheresoever the carkase is, there will the Eagles be gathered together.
This prophecy and premonition of Christ, I handle largely in my twelfth
chapter whitherto I refer the Reader where he shall find the same largely
and clearly examined.

To proceed on; I said before, that these pseudoprophets (which is an other
mark of them) were to teach the doctrines of Devils, according to that of the
Apostle, Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later ^. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
3.
times, some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences
scared with a hot iron. By which property of false-prophets, concurring with
the former mentioned above, it is more then manifest, who are specified,
especially, if we ponder those words of the Apostle, that such should forbid
marriage, and command men to abstain from meats, which God has created to
be received with thanksgiving, of those, who did know, and believe the truth:
The Papists, would feign cast off this imputation of speudo-prophetisme from
themselves, and lay it upon the Eucratites, and Manicheyes. but howsoever these
old Heretics might so affirm, clear it is, that herein they are their
children, upon whom also, the prediction of the Apostle more justly lights,
in respect of the circumstance of time; for they, not the Manicheyes and
Eucratites, come in the later times: and although the Manicheyes, who did allow
marriage in their ordinary Professors, but disauow it in their elect and
choice Professors; yet notwithstanding they urged not single life with that
vehemency, and tyranny as these holy Fathers do. And truly there is one
circumstance in this their doctrine of Devils, and answerable practice, which
seriously weighed will make any man detest them herein. It is this:
notwithstanding, when they train up their young men in their Colleges and
seminaries, they do well understand (I speak both what I know, and also upon
most assured relation, and testimonies not to be refused, and God is my
witness, that I lie not) and observe by the continual conflict, in which they
are often foiled, at least, with impure and morosous cogitations, delectations
and desires, that their young scholars have not the gift of continency; yet
they will not only suffer, but further also, even persuade them to vow
chastity, and continency, and afterward hold themselves in that state in which
by reason of their continual lapses they are doubtfully to incur eternal
damnation. And this they do in a certain show of hypocrisy, thereby to
purchase countenance and credit of their mysteries: a very trick of
Antichrist, as it has been long ago observed by the ancient Fathers, so
Hipolitus, so Hierome upon Daniell, Hipol. orat. de consummat. mundi. Hierom.
in comment. super dan. Damasc. lib. 4. fidei orthodox. Liran in Dan. Hierom. in
1. ad Timeth. 4.
so John Damascene, so Liranus expressly, Simulans primo castitatem
Antichristus postea in omnem libidinem ruet: Antichrist dissembling at the
first chastity, he shall after rush headlong into all luxury. And this is so
clear that our later Pontificians cannot deny, but that Antichrist shall
dissemble and pretend chastity, thereby to purchase credit. And as clear I
suppose, that there was never yet any man, who ever has dreamed, that
Antichrist should have a wife: either therefore he will pretend chastity, or
glory in impudency: but surely chastity he will pretend, and so greatly
glory therein, that by that means (to speak with Ribera) he will think all
his other vices Libertis Apoc. cap. 13. s^ct. 5.
may be covered; and be himself by only opinion of chaslitie, be mounted up
to the Monarchy of the world. Courteous Reader, do thou not think, that
this Ignatian forgot himself, when he wrote thus that by only opinion of
chastity, Antichrist should purchase empire of the world, which, how it
squareth with the Popes it is most facile to declare, if a man would but stand
to move that sink. By the way in a word or two, too too fresh is the memory of
the impurities of Clement the 8. and yet seldom was he seen to say Mass but
he would weep: The impurities of Sixius Quintus I would leave willingly to
the relation of some Ignatians, if they would vouchsafe to catalogue them: as
for two Gregory's, the 13. and 14. supernacaneous it were; to commend to the
world their virginities, their Nephews shall do it for them: Paulius 5. who
now reigns is thought through disposition of nature not to be ouerpropense
that way; but if he be not, his purpured brethren for him are drowned up, even
in crimine pessimo: witness that accident which happened not long ago in
Rome, when diverse young youths, (young succubyes) were burned, but the Sea
hereafter.
purpured (Incubyes) escaped. Believe it courteous Reader the abominations
which are committed by those purpured Fathers, and the Supreme Fathers of that
Synagogue are so detestable, that they pass all narration either of modest or
immodest pen: and if our ignorant Pontificians in England, be not acquainted
with this, or think that I do of purpose aggrauate; God is my witness I do
not so. But the true cause, that they are so unacquainted with Romes impurities
and impudicities is, that all their Seminary-Priests, Monks, Jesuits
whatsoever, have ever most strict charge given unto them before they return
into England not to speak of anything, which in any respect, may turn to the
dishonor of the Pope, or his purpured brethren. Again, for most part they are
so cloystered up, that they have little conversation with those that know the
lives and conuersations of Cardinals, both intus and in cute; and yet the
College is not so even builded but that some stones stand further out, then
the rest and so consequently are of better intelligence. And the detestably
impure, proud, and luxurious lives of Popes, and Cardinals; is indeed the
cheifest cause, why Italy so swarmeth with Atheists, and why few ingenuous
Christians entering into it, are ever perverted or drawn to their heresies and
Idolatries. I except such youths, as are corrupted in the Fry, or never look
without their Seminary-mewes, or else such scioppyes, as for Ceres and Bacchus,
are content to serve Pluto. And thus much by the way of their Of this matter
the Reader may find more in the eight Chapter.
doctrine of Devils, and of their devilish practice of forbidding marriage,
under pretense of greater chastity, and Antichristian purity, (I call it
Antichristian purity because it is, the immediate root and cause of all
impuritie, flatly repugnant to the ordinance of God, nature, and the laws of
Grace) tying men by laws and vows, to that which their own consciences tell
them they cannot keep, and observe. And for this respect I here conclude that
both this doctrine and their practice thereof must needs be from the Devil.

But to discourse more in General, that this mark of teaching doctrines of
Devils, can by no means, be applied to the reformed Churches, it is thus to
be manifested. Because all that they teach, as necessary to be believed; is
positiuely, truly, and really contained, in the sacred Scriptures, and symbol
of the Apostles, as they have been expounded by the most Ancient, and
Catholic Church, and therefore by no ways, can their doctrines be called of
Devils; unless the Ancient, and Catholic Church, may be apeached of such a
crime. But the Papists, through the presumptions of their Popes have made many
additaments to faith, of which some for special respects are called doctrines
of Devils; and all in general, for that, either they are devised by
suggestions of Devils, or approved by them. The which is clearly declared
thus; because they wanting testimonies of sacred Scriptures for most of these
their heretical patches and additaments; they do often return unto the dead,
scraping thence, what horrible testimonies they can get; contrary to the
instruction of Christ, who to damned Dives, desirous to go to his living
brethren, and to instruct them that they might avoid that danger, into which
he was fallen, answered thus; they have Luke 16.
Moses and the Prophets whom if they would not believe, neither would they
believe, though any should arise from the dead: yea Papists themselves are so
eager, to take testimonies for their heresies, that they can be contented, yea
glad, if the Devils (whom they know to be such) do speak in their behalf.
Witness Robert Chambers, who produces for a great miracle, and a worthy
testimony of their religious worship of the vergin Mary at* Sichem; how
certain Devils going out of one Birus cried out thus, live our Lady of
Sichem, live our Lady of Sichem; not thus; live the mother of Christ; but thus,
live our Lady of Sichem; which Lady of Sichem, we willingly leave to the
Devils, and such Papists as Chambers, who glory in such consorts of their
superstitious worship. We for our parts only, will ever call blessed and
happy, Like testimony Coster beggeth from the Devil touching the worshipping
of Images Coster dom 3. in Quadrag.
that blessed Virgin who reigns and ever shall reign with her Son in
everlasting glory, not their Loretto or Sichem Ladies. Again, wi^^esse Tilman
Bredenbachius who seeking testimony from the Devils for his religion, relates
how the Devils at a certain place called dimpna, testified that upon the
command of their great Lord Beelzebub, they all went to honor the funerals of
Martin Luther. Ah ye besotted Pontificians! how are ye delighted with such
delusions, Adlegem and ad testimonium, to the law and the testimony, thence
tell us, Isa. 8.
what manner of man Luther was; there contending, neither Caietane your Popes
Legate, nor Cocleus your great Theologue, were able to stand out, with that
worthy man and of most happy memory: but to the devils you will recurre, and
from them you will needs have testimony against that learned man.

Again, witness that detestable and usual practice of Popish Priests, when
they take upon them to exorcise the devils with their sacrament, (God knows
I belie them not) with their Christ in a pixe. For then, they do ever seem to
constrain the devils whom they exorcise, first of all to confess, that
Christ himself, is in that very host truly and really; and this they do
forsooth, lest the standers by should be scandalized to observe afterward in
the course of their exorcismes, how little esteem The story of Magdalen de la
Crux exorcised at Corduba is worth not^^g, she sometimes spoke like the devil,
sometime like Christ, yea in the person of Christ. She consecrated an host,
which many adored for Christ, to such madness were the Cordubans come. Delrius
mag. disq. cites Ribad. lib. 5. vita Ignat. cap. 10.
and regard, the exorcised devils make of that their Christ, and how
contemptuously and scornefully the devils do carry themselves,
notwithstanding the presence of that their Christ. Herein I appeal to the
consciences of diverse Priests, who know this that I write to be most true. In
steed of many particulars, which might be related in this kind, hear one of
holy Dibdale for them all. This Dibdale exorcising of Sara Williams, one of the
Minian Energumenisses (which were often coniured by holy Weston, alias Edmunds,
and diverse others, at Denhamhouse, and elsewhere) did to this effect speak to
the devil in the foresaid Sara. What do thou say to the blessed sacrament
of the Altar? Oh, says the devil, it is the very body of Christ, cut it, and
thou shall see it bleed. thus the devil to Dibdale; but herein he lied, for
all that cut it, see it not bleed; witness that Inquisitour and Friar, who
being at Saragossa in Spain to put a certain consecrated host into a pixe,
to be carried up and down in The great devil exorcised in France, demanded
whether Christ's body were in the host, answered it was because he was there.
procession, and finding it too great for the pixe, with a pair of sissers he
pared the host, and fitted it for the same; but the host did not then bleed,
only the audacious Friar, for such paring and rounding of their Christ, was
sharply rebuked by other Inquisitors, and for a certain time removed from his
Inquisitorship.

Again, the same Dibdale did thus demand of the same Sara Williams her devil.
What think thou of the blessed Virgin Mary? to which the devil answered,
with an Oh, Oh, she had no original sin. I had not a bit of her, neither
within, nor without: but, what would the whole rabble of the black Friars with
their Saint Antonine Archbishop of Florence, with Aquinas their Angelical
Doctor, have said to this devil, if they had heard him Anton. part. 1. tital.
8. Aquin. 3. part.
so constantly affirm the Virgins conception without original sin? surely
they would have made less esteem of the devils Oracle, then they did of
Brigetts revelations for that purpose; they would (as they do) have produced
visions, against visions, illustrations against illustrations, and have set
Catharine against Briget. yea Bernard also should have entered into the listes,
to have confronted against Brigetts dreams, and Sara Williams devils oracle.

Another demand, made to Sara Williams devil I may not here pretermit; he was
demanded forsooth, what was the cause that Campians girdle, which was by nature
so contemptible, should so torment and afflict him; to this the devil with
admiration and veneration cries out thus; Tyburne and Jerusalem know the
cause thereof, they can tell you. Sundry like fopperies of Westons (alias
Edmundes) and other popish Priests questions to oppressed persons I could
produce, more worthy of laughter and contempt then observation: but by no
devil, was that holy father, with his consorts more deluded, then with
Mainyes, of whose visions and illustrations whilst I was among the
Pontificians, I heard diverse vanities related unto me by a grave Priest, and an
eyewitness thereof, who is yet living, and whose name I do purposely
conceal; who has often told me, that he has been even ashamed of himself,
to consider how both Weston, Dibdale, and himself, and diverse others, were
deluded by this Mainye; and amongst many of their delusions, none is worthyer
of laughter; then that Mainye would sometimes pretend, that the Virgin Mary
with a great company of Saints and Angels, did appear unto him in the
chamber: at which his words, presently grave Father Edmunds, with his Priests,
would not only ducke, but even prostrate themselves to the ground, and there
adore Mainyes imaginations. At an other time, would Mainye pretend, that all
the deadly sins did present themselves unto him in most ugly shapes, and then
forsooth, with no small horror, would some of the standers-by tremble; then
would they knock their breasts; then holy Edmundes begins to inueigh against
sin, especially against pride (appearing like a Peacocke) with which (if ever
any man living upon earth) he was most egregiously, in all hypocrisy and
dissimulation, infected, tainted, corrupted. But the whole proceedings of
Edmundes and his Priests, with their Minions and Energumenisses, is largely,
and learnedly set down, and confuted by Doctor Harsenet the worthy Bishop of
Chichester, and therefore I cease to relate any more of these Ignatian fables,
referring the Reader to the same Book.

As the popish Exorcists, do ever seek testimonies from their indiueled
persons, for confirmation of their Such a kind of conflict and coniu^ing, is
used by the coniurers themselves. See Austen de ciuit. Dei, lib. 10. cap 9 and
none of the Pontificians can deny, but that Magicians can command the devils
in like sort. read Victoria in lus prelection of Magic. q. 6.
heresies; even so, that counterfeit and seeming conflict and warfare, which
passes betwixt the Devils and their Exorcistes; the Exorcist coniuring, the
devils trembling; the Exorcist commanding, the devil obeying, (not to depart,
not to go out of the possessed) but to wander up and down, (like a come aloft
Iacanapes) within the lists of the possessed body, sometimes in the face, then
in the tongue, after in the throat, anon in the great toe, by and by, in those
parts, which a modest pen may not mention, (and yet there, and then, will the
holy Exorcists fingers sign with their crosses, to drive the devil thence)
all these their dealings I say, do ever tend to this project, that the
standers-by, may be persuaded of some point of popery, or of the Priests power
over the devils; which their power is so great and powerful, that as yet
neither Edmunds, Campian, Sherwin, powerful Cornelius, of old: and of late
Wodward, Kempe, Warmington, Colington, Hill, Walpole, Father Thomas, with
diverse others, could ever clear any one, either possessed person, or seeming
so to be. Witness their sundry and late attempts in Hampshire, in London, in
the Clinke, in Bread street; yea the holy Dame Lucia at Barbican, at Hygate,
in her Spittell-nunrye, has been with her Ignatians and Ignatianed Priests,
and her Nuns, very forward in this kind; but her assaults have proved
nothing else but towe and powder. for neither she nor her champions have been
able to deliver any, or to clear any. This is only the comfort, which such
poor souls, and hypocrites receive from them, whether it be here in England,
or at Sichem, or at Loretto, or Sancta Croce in Jerusalem at Rome, that they
are, or seem most cruelly to be tormented, and afflicted; and this especially
in their holiest places and sanctuaries; as at Loretto, at Sichem; where it
seems the devils, if any be there, have greatest power, because there they
do most afflict the possessed, there they do most scorn the Exorcists, there
they do most blaspheme against their religion; and yet there will they not
out, despising, scorning, deriding, their nails, their crosses, their
relics, their lies, their trumperies. That I speak truth herein, there was
of late an Eye*example, a man of worshipful Mr. Bluett.
estate, and fair revenues, who either was, or seemed to be indiueled. Alas
poor man, how often has he been exorcised in this Kingdom, by Francis Kempe,
by Philip Wodwarde, by sundry others, but especially by Mr Warmington? who has
often promised, that he would make the devil speak in Mr ^luett: and as this
wretched man, has had many sweating combats here in England, so it were
lamentable to relate, the tormentings, true or seeming, which he has had at
Loretto, Sichem, Lile, and elsewhere, beyond the seas; and all the consolation
which he has found, is to return worse, (as though the Popish Sanctuaries
added strength to his devils) and farther from hope of deliverance, then when
he went. And yet our Popish Thrasonicall Priests will bragg and boast, that
they can like a tennis-ball, or like a dog in a sheet, toss and canuase a
devil in a possessed woman, and drive him from tongue to toe, from toe to
finger, to her great affliction, and their own small ease.

Being in Spain, in the company of Robert Parsons, I have more then once
heard the man impudently affirm, and desperately promise, that he would
undertake, The like brag^ others have made most vainly, wherein they show
themselves ministers of that King which is termed by Daniel Impudens facie, and
has os blasphemum, Reuelat.
to make the devil speak in any Bishop, Archbishop, or Arch heretic in
England, and yet the man was so full of spiritual magnanimity, that after he
had Caualier-like ranged up and down this kingdom for a short while, for fear
of Tyburne he voyded the kingdom: A great oversight surely in the man, that
being here, he attempted no such matter; for surely if he had been so
powerful, he might at the very bar have had store of Arch heretics (so
esteemed by him) upon whom he might have showed his coniuring power. But that
the courteous Reader may well conceive what credit is to be given to these
Exorcists, and their cobats with their devils, I will here relate a true
history. A certain Fryer-Priest there was in Italy, who undertook to
exorcise a young maid, either seeming, or indeed possessed: but such was this
Friars manner of exorcising her, that not once, not twice, but very often, even
day by day, he would so well accord with the maid, that he would have carnal
knowledge of her body, and yet by no mean, could she agree with the Friar,
or endure him, when he would take flagellum Daemonu^, the devils scourge (a
book of their exorcismes) into his hands: for then would she so roar, and
make such ugly faces against him, as if Michael the Archangell had been
combatting with her: and if any here ask, how it came to pass, that the
devil in this young maid, did not reveal the sins of this Friar? mary thus
the case stood. The Friar would ever have to do with the maid after his
exorcising, and coniuring of her; and before he would undertake to conjure her
again, he would be assured to go to confession, and cry peccaui: the which he
did exceeding often, as I have been most credibly informed from A notable
cousening trick of a Friar with an Energumenisse.
the mouth of his ghostly Father, who is reputed a wise and grave man, who
though he often did absolve his Friar, yet deserves to be excused, because it
is a position of diverse Pontifician Casuistes, that a Penitent must be still
absolved, as often as he shall come, though still with the same sins: and
this especially, if there may arise the least suspicion of the sin, by the
Priests denying absolution to the Penitent: Now the case passing thus, betwixt
the Friar and the maid, to the deception of many: The attentive Reader may
well perceive what manner of confession that is, which will please the devil,
and what manner of collusions, pass oftentimes betwixt these men and their
Energumenisses; as is justly to be thought did pass betwixt Dibdale and his
Sara, whom he would often carry a horse back behind him, from place to
place, as also some others then did deal with their minions: which thing the
Pontificians (though to their great shame) cannot deny. And why might not
Dibdale carry Sara Williams behind him, as well as the younger Garnet,
executed some years since, was accustomed to carry a woman as his wife, up
and down Suffex? It is a world to observe how certain Pontifician souls,
especially feminine, dare not present themselves, where any person is
exorcised, before they have been at confession; but to such persons, I would
commend this general rule to ponder upon, that commonly (especially in Italy)
the greatest Coniurers, and to whom such a Province is committed, are notorious
sinners, and of the worst spirits, and most rebellious dispositions.

Another circumstance, whereby we may evidently gather, that the devils have a
great hand in popish doctrines, rites, and ceremonies, is this; that the
devils themselves (a thing which cannot be denied) are pleased, and delighted
with the very same and selfe-things, which are most sacred amongst the
Pontificians: as for example, their Agnus-deies, their holy water, their blessed
incense, their palms, their wax candles, their crosses, and often crossings,
(their crossings and often crosses I say, for otherwise the sign of the cross
used in Baptism, and as a ceremony, I cannot see how it should be
superstitious, or magical) their stoles, maniples, vestments, yea their
consecrated hosts, and sacred Eucharists; with which, that the devils
themselves are pleased, and honored, no man can deny, who has ever heard of
the practices of coniurers; who has ever read, the sundry enchantments of
witches, sorcerers; who has ever seen the instruments of them, which they use
in their mysteries: for they use even popish stoles, maniples, vestiments,
candles, holy water, consecrated oils, etc. I know what the learned
Pontificians will pretend to answer to these things, they will say forsooth,
that the devil does emulate Gods honor; true, in such worships The devil is
delighted with the sacredst things that are in Popery.
as he himself deuiseth; but how is it imagineable he should emulate Gods
honor, in using and respecting those things, which the Popish Church, with
bell, book and candle, with all her sacred breath, breathing, and invocating
the H: Ghost upon them, does especially ordeyne, appoint, and prescribe, to be
used against the virtue, power, illusions, and enchantments of the devils. This
is that mystery of iniquity, which I desire the learnedest Dowists to
unfold; and to show, how the devils can desire to be honored, reverenced and
worshipped, by such things; and themselves to reverence and regard such things*
as by their Church, with all her power, are blessed and prescribed against
them. I challenge all the Adversaries to show if they can, that the devils
were delighted and pleased, with the very sacrifices of God in the old
Testament; or by any such things, as were blessed by Moses or Aaron; or that
now they are pleased with any thing of religion, which the reformed churches
deliver, and as they deliver, teach, and prescribe them.

Furthermore, the devils concurring to the maintenance of popish doctrine and
practices, in nothing does appear more clearly, then in their damnable
doctrine of equivocation, which is nothing else, but flatlying, whereof the
devil is principal Parent and Author, for he was a murderer and a liar from
the beginning, says the Ioh: 8.
Gospel. Here I desire the Reader, to give me leave to relate two equiuocating
tricks of two Ignatian Priests, one worthy of detestation, the other of
laughter.

There was in the County of Northumberland, a fiery and furious little Priest,
well known to my self, and diverse others in Rome. This Person attempting with
violence to have oppressed a young maid, which came to him to confession, was
rejected by her, and upon her outcry, his Clerk (which was in the next room,
and A notorious perjury of an Ignatian Pr^est.
attending to help him to mass) comes in with haste, finds him struggling
with the maid; upon which sight and accident both the maid and his clerk
fell into such a detestation of him, that by one of them he was discovered to
the Magistrate, and was thereupon presently taken: being taken, with solemn
oath he denies himself to be a Priest (like as one Komes an Ignatian Priest
in the Clinke did the like with solemn oath to the last Lord of Canterbury)
but afterward being convicted to be a Priest, by one that dwelt near, and had
known him in Rome, he to excuse himself, said that he did equivocate, and
that when he denied himself to be a Priest, he meant he was not Priest of
Baall, and so this holy Ignatian, (who never ascended into the Sicomore tree to
behold Christ, with sincere Zacheus to repent;) thought his credit sufficiently
salued. This wicked wretch, not long after was banished, by virtue of that
gracious proclamation, which was published presently after the discovery of the
powder treason. Being banished his first entertainment was to be a Ghostly
Father for strangers at Nostredame du Hall near Brussells; from thence, he was
preferred to be Ghostly Father in the Camp amongst the Spaniards, where he
profited so well, that thence he has recollected himself to Louayne to
Saint-Iohns mount, where he lately plaide the youngster under Father Talbot,
hoping after his nouice*ship to be Ignatianed. Where willingly I leave him,
wishing that he may still there continue.

The other true tale is of one Thomas Cornford, concerning whom, the courteous
Reader may observe, that at his examination, before my Lords Grace of
Canterbury, taken the 25. of June 1612* he did first give unto him self the
name of John Underwood, and so subscribed it; affirming, that he was a married
man; and that he had married the daughter of one Robinson, in Irkingburge,
where his wife also, then, at the time of his examination remained: he added
also, that he had been married unto her twelve years, and that, he had by
her, six children: and being examined, about his going to mistress Vaux; his
answer was, that being, himself was by condition a Farmer, he went to
Mistress Vaux, to entreat her, to move the Lord Vaux; that he himself, might
be Tenant to his Lordship, for a certain house and land, lying in Irkingburge,
where his wife Robinsons daughter remained. This being in effect, the substance
of his answer, at the first of his examinations, he acknowledged and
subscribed unto the same, by the name of John Underwood.

But my Lords Grace, upon some occasion of business, putting this man off for
a time, he, either upon some remorse of conscience, or fearing, lest his
condition and estate, might, by some other means be discovered, does of
himself offer, to manifest unto his Grace, his condition and profession; unto
which, as it were upon a second examination he is admitted: where, he first,
acknowledges himself for the space of six year, to have been brought up in
the College of Rome; and that there, he took the orders of Priesthood,
according to the manner of that Church; and that from thence, some 12. years
since, he was sent by mission into England: where by Father Garnet, he was
admitted into the society of Jesus: he acknowledges also, that his name was
Thomas Cornford, and so subscribed the same the second time; after, that
before, he had subsigned by the name of John Underwood.

The Reader will here expect, to understand how this ingenious and Saint-like
Ignatian, did conciliate and accord, such contrary sayings of his; surely thus
he performed his part, and demonstrated himself a worthy Rabby in the
Ignatian Academie of equiuocating, cogging, lying: whereas he affirmed
himself, to be a married man; his meaning was, that his wise was his
breuiarie; and that he had been married unto it, twelve years; as for his
children, which he had by Robinsons daughter, those were his ghostly and
spiritual children. But yet, the wily man (being demanded thereof) could not
well show, how his wife the Breuiarie, became Robinsons daughter: and here
being at a stand, he was helped out by his Grace that in probability, his
Breuiarie was Robinsons daughter, because it might be, that the Printers name,
who printed it was Robinson. The reason, why he called himself a Farmer, was
because he was so to God, according to that text, Read rationem villicationis
tuae: Give an account of thy Farmership. And the reason, why he said, that he
went to Mistress Vaux, to take a farm of the Lord Vaux; was, because he was
ready, to do them any service, for their salvation, and for the spiritual
tilling of their souls. Whereas he had denied himself, to have been beyond
the seas; his answer was, that he spoke that, with intention, that he had bin
there, but not, that he was bound, to tell his Grace so much. Thus in effect
with much like stuff passed the Holy Ignatians examination; out of which, the
intelligent Reader may clearly infer, how egregiously these men, show
themselves, to be impes of him, who was (mendax ab initio, a liar from the
beginning) and yet forsooth, these men, and none but these, (if, it may so
please the Gods) are only sincere, holy, Christian, Apostolical. For my part I
cannot but think, that Father Thomas, since his engrafting into Ignatianisme,
and Garnetisme, became an Equiuocater; for in Rome, he was possessed, with
such a doultish kind of simplicity, that it is a kind of miracle, that he
should so easily have been transformed into another man: well it may be
observed herehence, how efficacious the Garnetian Academie has been for
training youth in lying, cogging, equiuocating.

A SECOND PRELVDE SHOWING BRIEFLY THAT miracles are not certain tokens of a
true RELIGION.
CHAP. II.
NOtwithstanding, for further confirmation of this truth, I will (by Gods
assistance) show that miracles are not certain and infallible tokens of a true
religion, especially after the establishment of Christian religion in the
world, and that there is no other sure and certain Anchor for truth but the
infallible word of God, by which, and according to which all miracles which may
happen are to be examined, with which if they agree they may be approved, if
otherwise they are to be rejected and detested as the Devils own inventions;
for as a worthy man says, all truth is to be suspected, which the authority of
sacred Scriptures does not confirm; without which (to speak with Saint
Hierome) whatsoever is brought, it is as easily contemned, as it is brought.
Agreeingly to which, Saint Austen disputing against the Donatists, contendeth
August. de unit. Eccles. cap. 16.
most earnestly, that therefore this thing or that thing is not to be held for
true, because Pontius or Donatus have miracles, have visions; or because
Catholics have miracles, have visions, in the Catholic Church: in which
discourse enlarging himself, and showing out of scriptures, that
false-phophets were to do miracles he adds thus. Nonne legimus etc. Do we
not read, that even of the Lord God himself, many were heard in the high
places of Jury; which high places notwithstanding, did so greatly displease
God, that such Kings as did not subvert them, were blamed, and such Kings as
did overthrow them, were greatly praised? and a little after; Exaudinntur ergo
etc. Therefore many are heard and by diverse means, not only Christian
Catholics, but even Panymes, Heretics, and Jews, given to diners
superstitions, but they are heard either of seducing Spirits, (who
notwithstanding can do nothing, but what they are permitted by God, secretly
disposing what is to be given to every one) or of God himself, either for a
punishment of their malice; or for asolace of their misery, or for awarning to
seek everlasting salvation. And a little after: Quaecunque miracula Note.
etc. What miracles soever are done in the Catholic Church, they are therefore
to be approved because done in it, but not therefore is the Catholic Church
manifested, because they are done in it. Thus he. Now come our Papists
Aliquando etc. Sometimes great deception is made by Priests in feigned miracles
for game which ought to be rooted out as these were by Daniel Lira. in Dan.
(which will only be Catholics) and say that therefore their miracles are true
because they are done in their Catholic Church, which reason if it may hold,
then all those fond lies and imaginations, must be believed which their golden
Legends relate, and if they grant any to be false, and delusory which are done
by men in their Catholic Church, then it will needs follow, that the credit
of all the rest will be cracked, according to the general and true saying; A
lying man deserves not to be believed, although he tell the truth; and that of
their Cannon law, he who is found once evil, is always presumed to be evil
in the same kind of ill. But how deuysing, and cousening in miracles
concerns Popish Catholics, let Canus speak, Nostriautem plerique etc. Very
many of ours, Canus de locis lib. 11. cap. 6.
either follow their affections, or of set purpose do so feign many things,
that I am not only ashamed of them, but they also greatly vex me. Thus he;
with much to like purpose, where he adds somewhat which is little for the
credit of those dialogues which are commonly attributed to Gregory the Great.
Again Leonard Aretine, does justly tax this abuse of his brethren the
Pontificians, he charge them with deuysing of dreams, visions, fantasies,
and miracles, (which were never done) to deceive and make gain of their simple
Auditory. Does not Antony a Saint of their Church, and Archbishop of Florence
peremptorily tax the visions and dreams of some devised to prove the Virgin
Maryes immaculate conception? And if this had not been the practice of
Pontificians even to the deprauation of their seruicebookes, Breuiaries, etc.
would Pius the 5. have acknowledged Pius in pr^fat. Breuiar. Rom: reformat.
corruption in the Breuiaries, to the eternal ignominy of his Church? Ask
venerable Bede what a lie was devised and fathered upon Melito, to prove the
Virgin Beda: in retract. in Act. Apost.
Maryes corporal assumption? the Rhemists themselves, have taken up the lie,
and though they observe the credit of Melito to be casheered, yet they have
devised Annot^^. in 1. act. Apost.
a new trick to corrupt Dionyse who notwithstanding is counterfeit. Is it not
clear as the heavens, that for very shame they have exploded diverse of their
old Monks fictions out of their Legends? surceasing therefore, to add any
thing more for confirming of this just imputation against them that their
Church has been a Forger in her miracles, visions, and prodigies; I make this
inference, that seeing she has been found false so often, she deserves not
credit, although she should tell truth.

Saint Austen in his book of the city of God, so little August. 10. lib.
deciuit. cap. 16.
esteems of miracles, though wrought by Angels, against Christian truth,
that against them he boldly pronounces See Origin. contra Celsum. lib. 1.
thus: If (says Saint Austen) those Angels, which desire sacrifice to be done
to themselves, should by wonderful facts, move the minds of men, and those
who do forbid the same, and do command sacrifices only to be done to God,
should not vouchsafe to do those visible miracles, truly then, not by sense of
body, but by reason of the mind, their authority were to be preferred. This
doctrine of Austen is confirmed by the like of Saint Chrysostom, who
expounding those words of Christ, if you shall have faith as Chrysist. supra
ill^a Math. si (...). it is fidom vt granum.
a mustard seed etc. says thus: where as these things are not now done in the
Church, may we think therefore that Christians are void of faith, God auert
it that we should speak such bad things of the people of God: Justifying
faith is present, and not wanting, but the faith of miracles has ceased. Thus
there. But if Chrysostom, be the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew as
it is commonly cited by the Pontificians, and is of great authority, then he
goes further; for he writes thus, speaking of the later times. Wherefore, if
a man should long to know where the Chrysist. homil. 49. in Math. operis imperf.
true Church is in the midst of so great confusion, whither shall he return
but to the Scriptures? heretofore also by signs, the true and false-Christians
were known; how this? False Christians indeed, either could not do the
signs as true Christians did, or else could not do such as true Christians
did; but the miracles they did, were vain, causing wonder, but having no
profit, as we have often expounded, but true Christians did perfect signs,
having always some profit, and by these things were known true and false
Christians, but now the working of signs is altogether taken away, but it is
rather found, that fained things are done, with those who are false Christians;
but even as Peter expounds it in Clement, the power of doing full and perfect
signs, is to be given to Antichrist: Thus far there, with much more to like
purpose; showing that the only Anchor in time of confusion, and
Antichristianisme, are the Scriptures, not miracles, not wonders as our
Antichristians would now have; resting for those things, which the reformed
Churches condemn, upon traditions forged, and miracles feigned. But yet in
this later part of Chrysostomes discourse, (being thereunto urged by the force
of truth) the Rhemists themselves do concur; who upon the Epistle Annotat. in
2. ad These. 2. verse. 9. and in Apoc. cap. 13. verse. 3. in marg.
to the Thessalonians write thus. Satan whose power to hurt is abridged by
Christ; shall then be let loose; and shall then assist Antichrist in all manner
of signs, wonders, and false miracles, whereby many shall be seduced, not
only Jews: Thus there. And again upon the Apocalypse, they affirm the like:
by all which it is most manifest, that the working of miracles, and wonders can
be no certain argument, for truth, seeing that both Heretics and
Schismatikes, yea Antichrist, and his Ministers shall have full power to do
the same: the which yet I further strengthen with the authority of Ignatius
and Iustine. Ignatius Ignat epist. ad Hieronem.
has thus: Quisquis dixerit etc. Whosoever shall speak beside those things
which are appointed, although he may seem worthy of credit, although he may
fast, although he may keep virginity, although he may do signs, although he
may prophecy, let him be esteemed of thee, as a Wolf under a sheep skin,
endeavoring the corruption of the sheep. Thus Ignatius: agreeing to whom
Iustine affirms, that Justin. ad Orthodox. q. 5.
if any miracles be done in the conuenticles of Heretics, that their errors
may not thereby be more confi^med, then if any man would teach the impi^ty of
Gentiles to be grateful to God, because he causes his sun to rise on them,
and does sprinkle them, with dew from heaven. According to all which Austen in
his treatise upon Saint John calls the miracles August. tract. 13 and 14. in
Ioh
and visions of the Donatistes, mere Fables, and the Donatistes who gloried
and triumphed in them, mirabiliarios, mirabiliarians, as the Pontificians now
do in their prodigies deserving like name.

Doctor Stapleton a late Achilles of the Popish Sinagogue, will not deny, but
that Heretics shall and will S^ ^plet prompe moral. in 24. ^^minic. diuis 4.
do miracles, especially in the later times of the Church; and this virtue he
ascribes confidently and peculiarly to Antichrist, and his Ministers; which
Ministers he would gladly make the reformed Churches of these times to be; but
the good man speaks it faintly, as it were against his own conscience, as it
may be observed in part of his words, which are these: The deception made by
Antichrist, and heretics, which are his forerunners, shall be so great in
signs and wonders, that the very strongest in faith shall be in hazard*
unless they shall beware of this, which is foretold: especially because such,
before the coming of Antichrist, shall be much more bitter then the former,
even as at this day we see, for so great, and such, are the heresies of these
times, that deservedly they ought to seem the very next to Antichrist, the
which also we have in a certain Oration of this argument, endeavored (what?
have thou only endeavored?) to show. What say thou Stapleton, art thou so
constant, that the precursors of Antichrist, and the next heretics before him,
shall work miracles and wonders? why then do thou, even in this place, deny
them (whom thou call Antichrists precursors) to work any miracles, as thy
brethren the Dowists do also in their Annotations upon the second Epistle to
the Thessalonians? why do thou speak so Annotat. 2. chap. v. 9.
faintly, that thou have endeavored to show, that the heretics of these times
are the immediate precursours of Antichrist? was not thy Oration of set purpose
labored, with all thy wit and eloquence, to prove the same? why then, do
thou not speak more confidently, according to thy presumptuous spirit there?
but I tell thy Dowistes for thee confidently, that thou have endeavored it so
well in that Oration, that my self (as small a scholar as I am) dare
undertake to retort all thy demonstrations, against the popish synagogue and
the Antichrist of the same; who although he be already the man of sin, and
son of perdition, working prodigies, and wonders in his ministers; yet he
has not as yet put on Panopliam Antichristi, the whole complete armor of the
most damnable Antichrist, which he will then do, when in his synagogue, his
universal, absolute* monarchical, and direct tyrannte, over all and in all;
spiritualls and temporalls; subjects and Sovereigns; Faith and discipline
shall be decreed; I say direct, because indirect he already most arrogantly
assumeth; but when the malice of those men of sin, and children of perdition,
shall be complete and consummate; then also, not only by desire, by liking, by
sentence, but even by brief, by decree, by definition, he shall assume and
challenge direct Monarchy of the world; which misery how fast it higheth on, I
leave to some other place and time to be debated and discussed; that it is not
already completed, I am sure there wants no good will in Popes, no desire in
their Canonists, no good affection in their State-Ignatians.

The authorities, which I have produced out of Fathers, agreeing to the holy
Scriptures do euince, that miracles and wonders, are not infallible tokens of
truth; but for further illustration of this point, I will make the same clear
by reason. My reason is an express conclusion of their famous Victoria, and it
is this: Eadem opera etc. The same works, or the like, are done by Art
Magic, Victoria relect. 12 de Magia. q 4. propos. 1.
and by Graces freely given; and thus it is proved; for to Graces (gratis
datis) freely given, it belongs to cast out devils, to take up serpents, to
restore health, to speak with tongues, as is manifest in the last of Mark,
and first to the Corinthians 12. but these things are done by the Magicians,
therefore the same works are common to both. thus far he: how truly in every
respect, ipse viderit, let him look to it: it is sufficient for me, that their
so famous a Praelectour, does teach that by Arts Magic, the same works are
done, which are done by the gift of working miracles. And yet the Louanian
Professor Stapleton aduentureth Prompt. m^ral in Dominic. 24. post pent.
diuisi 4
further, and herein I desire his Duacene-successours to desend him from
error, thus he teaches: Although the miracles, which the false prophets shall
do, be true prodigies (quoad actus supernaturales) in respect of the
supernatural actions themselves; notwitstanding they shall be but lying,
because they shall serve for a lie; certainly, for the greater proof of the
faithful, not only Antichrist himself, and his immediate precursours, but
all heretics, like as the Magicians (God permitting them) may be able to do
miracles. thus he. This Doctor speaks most truly of miracles to be done by
Gods permission, both by Heretics and Magicians; but I cannot but marvel at
his Divinity, where he teaches, that the actions and acts themselves of such
prodigies, should be supernatural; surely his head was supernatural, when he
dreamed such divinity; for I never yet read any learned Christian, who durst
teach that the prodigious acts of Magicians, or Heretics, except they be
extraordinarily endewed with a miraculous faith, and do them by the immediate
power of God, should be in themselves (that is in their substance and nature)
surpassing the bounds, limits, and force of natural causes: for I never
learned otherwise, no not in Rome, but that all miraculous works done by
Magicians and Heretics, were ever done, by the secret, hidden, quick and
speedy application of natural causes; the virtues of which are well known to
Satan, who is the chief and principal Agent in such mysteries. And the truth
of this is grounded upon this principle, that no creature whatsoever, can
create; now if either good or bad Angels, could produce any things, which were
in substance, essence, or nature, supernatural, then they might create; and
although they would pretend to use natural causes for such effects, they
should do nothing; for betwixt a supernatural effect, action, and operation,
and a natural cause, there is no proportion, but infinite disproportion; and
it is only God, who by his omnipotent power can use any creatures, by their
subjected and obedientiall power to him, to the effecting of whatsoever he
shall please: therefore, good and bad Angels, Heretics and Magicians, all
they do in these their prodigies, is by secret application, and means of
natural causes, God in his good pleasure, permitting them so to do, for the
deception of those, who deserve to be deceived. But leaving Stapletons
supernatural acts, to be defended either by his Duacenes, or some Ignatians,
which are by his will to succeed him in See my motives under the title of
dangerous Spirits.
his Library at their first College in Oxford. I do out of the Adversaries
mouth euince, that heretics, devils, magicians, may do works supernatural,
therefore according to their own position, to do such things, can be no
certain proof of true Religion, and true Preachers: we must rather recurre ad
lege^ and ad testimonium, to the law and testament, as God himself has
instructed Isaiae 8. Ioh. 5. 39.
and commanded us. And if I would here stand to enlarge my discourse, I could
easily show, that ancient Magicians and Panymes have wrought as prodigious
works for confirmation of their erroneous rites, as Pontificians have done for
proof of their superstitions; and this in as clear, open, and public a
manner, yea more certain. For popish miracles have certain properties, making
them of less credit then those of the Panymes: as for example, they are
seldom or never seen to be done, by any indifferent witnesses, but are
commonly first done, then spoken of; few there are, which see the evils from
which their persons pretend to be delivered; but fewer see their deliverance.
At Sichem, Loretto, Nostre dame du hall, and elsewhere at their miracle-stages,
a man may live many a year, before he shall see any one miracle done in
public view, and sight of the Church: but many forsooth, come from far
places, pretending deliverance, and these commonly are poor, are commonly
women, and some such creatures; and their deliverances be commonly from some
infirmities, which the devils may perform, and this lightly always upon
their vows: in which kind, if one by chance or physic recover, for a
hundred who perish, by and by as it were with sound of trumpet, there must be a
miracle, a prodigy: truly, their follies and vanities herein, with an
indifferent and an impartial eye being considered, will either procure
laughter, or compassion, they are so many, so manifold.

But in all brevity, I will parallel a few of their prodigies, with the
Panymes wonders: They forsooth pretend, that a certain wooden Crucifixe spoke
thus to their Angelical Doctor Aquinas, been scripsisti de me Thoma, thou have
written well of me Thomas, (well perhaps because he taught, and constantly
taught, that it must be adored with adoration of latria, the very same
wherewith Christ is to be adored) what reward do thou Aquinas part. 3. q. ^5
art. 3. 4.
desire? to which he replied, none other but thy self. But Valerius tells us
of a more certain speech of the image Valerius lib. 1. cap. 8.
of Fortune, made not to one but to many of the Dames of Rome, when they did
dedicate it: rite me consecrastis, rite me vidistis: Ye Matrons, you have
rightly consecrated See Austen 10. de ciuit. relating miracles of heathens like
these of Papists.
me, you have rightly seen me. They much glory, how the house of Loretto was
first carried by the hands of Angels into Dalmatia, thence over the Adriatike
Sea into Italy; where it was first placed in a most dangerous wood, (where
innumerable Pilgrims visiting the same lost their lives, as likewise going to
Sichem not long ago, many were both spoiled and lost their lives, so potent
Patronesses be their wooden Images) but afterward the second time, it
removed to a piece of land, which belonged to two brothers, who seeing the
great gain by offerings and donations which came to that place, began to
contend about the same, each of them desirous to make it proper to himself:
upon which contention, as Turseline reports, the holy house removed it self
from that ground, and placed it self in the midst of a common high way,
where now it stands, and is with divine worship honored and adored. Thus
they fable of their house of Loretto. All which notwithstanding if it were
true, there is no more done, then what may be acted by devils and magicians:
For their own Cannon law, as it is expounded by Turrecremate Driedo,
Turrecremat. Driedo apul Victoriam rel^ct. de mag^^.
and Victoria, has in the chapter, Episcopus, causa 26. q. 1. that the devils
are able, to carry bodies up and down in the air, (visibly or invisibly as
the Cannon must be interpreted): and therefore, by their ministry, this might
be done, if God would so permit. But the obscure natale, and birth, as I may so
speak, of that house, makes me absolutely to judge, that it is wholly
spurious. for were it true and sound, how is it possible, that the Historians
of those times should not specially, and with all circumstances deliver the
first and happy happening of such a blessing? to me such a doubtful and
obscure beginning is an evident argument of bastardie.

To proceed, they vainly deliver, how Christ took Catharine of Siennaes heart
from her, and gave her his own. So Clement in his Itinerarie, reports how
Simon Clement. in Itiner^ri^.
Magus took the proper figure and face from one Fraustianus, and gave him his
own. They teach I cannot tell how often, and how frequent changes they have of
their Eucharist by stabbs, by blows, into true flesh, into blood, and
sometimes into the form of a young child (which is mendacious and does not in
truth show Christ as he is, for Christ now is no child:) But who is ignorant
how many transformations the old Panymes had made by their Godds and Goddesses,
and related with as good credit as these of the Pontisicians? And yet perhaps
our Pontisicians have more Gods then the Painims, because the number of their
Patrons, which they make as Petty gods, do surpass the number of Gods
worshipped by the Pagans, which may easily be believed, if we do but call to
mind how Trithemius a black Monk does reckon unto us diverse thousands of his
order for Saints, and consequently for divine Patrons, and Demi* Gods. But to
conclude this my Prelude, and to leave of further adding of any authority from
man, for confirmation of what I have said, I adioyne that which Moses
delivers in Gods name in his book of Deuteronomie, the thirteenth Chapter,
verse. 1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer Verses 1. 2. 3.
of dreams (and give thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign and the wonder
which he has told come to pass) saying let us go after other gods, which
thou have not known, and let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken unto the
words of the Prophet, or unto that dreamer of dreams; For the Lord your God
proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart and
with all your soul. Thus God by the pen of Moses. And so I come to join and
enter into the lists with Mr. Flodd.

CHAP. III. Wherein is examined Mr. FLOODS petty Preface.
Mr. John Flodd in his Purgatories triumph to Sir Edward Hobby chap. 5. page
143. numb. 25.
SOme of your writers seeing our relations to be autenticall, as none can be
more, have not brazen faces to deny the stories, yet their heart and tongue is
no less impious, not fearing to affirm that these miracles are miracles of
the devil, and Antichrists lying wonders: which fancy though I find it not
in your book, yet I will seek to confute it, knowing it to be one of the
false notes your Ministers often sing unto you.

Six arguments occur unto me, which show the vanity of the conceit, and how
inexcusable Protestants are, who reject our miracles upon this silly fancy.

ANSWER.
Mr. Flodd, you having answered, as your self thought, sufficiently, (though
God wot very slenderly and in iugulum proprium) such reasons, as Sir Edward
Hobby had alleged against your Lipsian vanities and prodigies, out of an
overplus of your learning, you marshall as in battellaray, six arguments,
against such ministers (as you say) who admitting your narrations to be true,
sing notwithstanding, that your miracles are no other then the Miracles of the
Devil, and Antichrists lying wonders. When I had read this your vaunting
proposal of six arguments, and observed how like a fludde you made
precipitate have to enter into a dispute of this kind, and found with all that
Sir Edward had passed by your arguments with a scornful nodd, not deigning
them so much as a look; I, who am not unacquainted with the boasting
ostentation of Popish spirits, when any of their books or pamphlets pass
unanswered, thought it my part being moved with zeal of Gods truth, to cast my
small mite into Gods box, and to enter into the lists with you, and so to
renew our old acquaintance which both at Rome, S. Omers, and elsewhere, has
been seasoned with diverse disputes, concerning sundry objects: and now again
if it please you, let us make trial of our forces, what each of us can say for
his assertion: I ingenuouslie confess that I am one of those Priests or
Ministers who do sing this note, that your miracles are no other then the
Devils miracles and the lying prodigies of Antichrist, which by Gods
assistance in this my discourse and answer to your six arguments; I will make
most manifest. I purpose to examine your reasons, as they lie sentence after
sentence: In the vewing of which I am sorry to observe so many false
imputations, slight impertinences, heinous blasphemies, shufled up together;
that there are hardly any lines (if examined by the level of sacred Scripture
and moral truth) will pass for current.

And to dig up, not your fountain but your puddle a capite; where like a
flud, you calumniously ouerflowe, in the petty preface to your six reasons,
speaking thus; some of your writers seeing our relations to be Autenticall etc.
which of our writers I beseech you do hold your relations to be autenticall?
Why name you not them? if you had said some of our Preachers, I would have let
it pass, observing it to be too true, that in the Church of England there are
some secret Iamnes and Mambres, who covertly resist the truth, and equivocate
for your purpose. But you pointing at Writers I cannot divine whom you should
mean, especially that you speak thus indefinitely without any rescription or
limitation, that they see your relations to be autenticall, which is equivalent
with this all your relations to be autenticall; had you said some of your
relations or narrations to have been true, at lest in some part, you might
have found those, who would have so auerred with you, for otherwise, your
Sinagogue should not be that Apostating Church, which is to do signs and
wonders, if it were possible even to the deception of the Elect. This then your
first outlashing what shall call it a lying ostentation of an Ignatian? I will
not. Let the reader only observe what your forehead is, to begin thus. But
when you add of your own (as none can be more) may I not here justly thwart
you thus? Imperet tibi Dominus, The Lord rebuke thee. What? no relations more
autenticall? Apage sis: I would have thought, that all humane relations should
have attended as handmaides, and not have stalked cheek by iole with the
everlasting records of sacred Scriptures: I pray you Sir be contented, that
they may rest in the lowest degree of humane authority; your Sichem, Lile,
Arras, Laure^tane and Hallensian relations, have hardly humane credit even with
diverse of your own Priests, Friars, and Monks, yet Inhabitants of Babylon: I
call your selves to witness herein that I lie not; diverse of your Priests are
doubtful what credit to give unto them; yet they admit and esteem of them,
tanquam pias frauds ad faciendum populum, as pious frauds to persuade the
people. Some five years since, at my second visiting of Sichems Sanctuary, I
did in great earnest with a kind of coniuring, in Gods Of like, Viues speaks
ap^d Espen. lib. (...). 1. cap. 11.
name importune a person of no small note there, what he truly found touching
the miracles, which were said to be done in that place: his answer was
(charging me to conceal his secret, which I will do by Gods assistance by
concealing of his name) that for his part, he had seen nothing for the time
he was there, neither did he give credit to any of the former relations: And
knew I (said he) how to live elsewhere, I would not abide here: thus he, though
doubtless in profession a rank Papist, but magna est veritas and preualet:
Truth is great and preuailes. As for Hall, this I can boldly affirm, that none
of those quarters are less credulous of the incredible narrations there, then
the Inhabitants themselves. Ludunt alios, nummos vt lucrentur.

And Lipsius who professes to write such things, which at the command of the
Archbishops of Meclines, had been examined by the Bishop of Anwerpe Miraeus,
and such other relations as he received from his Countreyman Numan etc. is he
able, to bring but one eye witness, as Miraeus, Homas, Numan or any like? who
beheld the doing of any such miracles? no, they are lucifugae, nightbirds; for
my part, I confess ingenuouslie, though in my often travails in those
Countries, I was very inqui^itiue, yet could I never meet with one man or
woman, who could affirm himself to have been an Eyewitness, of any one
miracle, done either at Sichem, or at Hall; and yet now, such are the times,
that the great incredulity of the powerful working of that Image should
according to S. Paul's rule (non fidelibus sed infidelibus 1. Cor. 14.
etc tongues are signs not for the faithful but for the incredulous) seem to
require, some miracle to be done in their open sight, and not all to be related
only, (as they are) upon hear say, and from dead witnesses.

For my part, when I read in Lipsius (which also so happened) how the
miraculous Image was found out, I ^ip^ius Diua S^^. cap. 3. and 4.
dare not give any credit to the same, as to a miracle. Thus it was; the
picture, first was found by a poor shepherd, who for the taking up of the
same was prodigiouslie affrighted; but being set up into the old tree again,
(from which Dagon-like it was cast down) it was again taken away, the second
time and is not yet known how or by whom, and is as yet still missing. The
people thereabouts, notwithstanding repaired for the space of six years to
the place, where the Picture stood, craving help, (O prodigious throne of
great Juno!) and Sichems numen sell etc. and is stolen away not yet restored.
obtained the same; at last one of the Senators of Sichem (A Senator like as
if one of our Country Laborers, or Rustickes should be so termed) set up an
other new picture of wood in room of the former, upon the same old rotten
tree, where it also now stands, and is there adored and worshipped. When I
think seriously, of this manner of substituting, of one picture for another,
and by so grave a person as a Senator of Sichem, I cannot but suspect some
legerdemaine. What Mr. Flodd? the poor shepherd, took up, out of a religious
devotion, the poor picture which lay basely upon the ground, with purpose to
carry it home (for says Lipsius, paruaerat and prinato cultui opportuna, it
was a pretty little one and fit for Ibidem cap 3.
private worship) and to make thereof a domestical Penate; and yet he is
prodigiouslie affrighted, from his so godly an attempt? And yet notwithstanding
about the year 1580 the same Image perished, uncertain by what way, or
means, save only that there is suspicion that thieves took the same and
committed the crime. Observe a prodigy! A religious and devout Orator is
affrighted, because he would have taken home, the Goddess to have worshipped
her and yet the same Goddess, is in despite stolen away by (they cannot tell
whom) Thieves, Robbers, Malefactors, and no reuengfull numen punishes Predones
them for such a sacrilege? O fatuas Gentes, quibus talia rapiuntur ab
arboribus numina, O fatuous people, whose gods are thus stolen from trees! When
I think, of these lipsian vanities, I do not marvel, that in the very front
of this Chapter, he prefixeth this sentence: Miracula diuina consideranda sunt,
non discutienda, divine miracles are to be considered Lips^us seems to
mistrust the credit of his miracles.
and admired, not to be discussed* as if he should say, Ye Protestants! you
must not examine these miracles I write, you must only admire and consider
them, for otherwise, in vain you shall read them. What is this lipsian caveat,
but trepidatio cordis ex causae imbecillitate, a trembling of his heart, out of
an imbecillitie of the cause? This considered, and much more, which might be
added in this, and like causes; what reason has Mr. Flodd, to give so great
autentikenesse to their narrations, as none can be more? yea and to add
further; that they have not brazen Mr. Flud ibide^.
faces to deny the stories, yet their heart, and tongue, is no less impious,
not fearing to affirm; that these miracles, are miracles of the Devil, and
Antichrists lying wonders. Heus tu, bona verba! good words Sir! how free their
hearts and tongues are, from impiety, for calling your miracles Antichrists
lying wonders, the dissoluing of your six philosophical arguments, which (you
said truly) occurred not as second or after-considerations, but as dreaming
impressions, to your conceitfull apprehension; and the opposing of sundry
arguments taken out of sacred Scripture against them, shall by Gods assistance
make manifestly to appear: and further how inexcusably guilty you are, and
wedded to the papal fleece which give credit, to so deuelish and Antichristian
narrations, and how your six occurrent arguments wherewith you seek to
confute (as you speak) our silly fancies, shall prove impious Beast which had
two horns like to a Lamb, and spoke like a Dragon: Edetque Signa magna adeo
vt faciat ignem e Coelo discendere in conspectu hominum, and seducet Incolas
Apoc. 13.
Terrae propter signa quae datum est ei vt faciat in conspectu Bestiae: In
which places as we see this Traffic of Miracles is plainly called, Operatio
Satanae, and a seduction of those who must perish. By these I do appeal unto
the divine light of your Lordships conscience, whither you do not think that
we ought to content our selves with Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, following
Christ's own precept Scrutamini Scripturas, to search the Scriptures, for the
doctrine of Salvation, and to contemn this ridiculous and impious profession
of pretended Miracles: I appeal to your Lordship, as you will be answerable to
him who has said of that light which he has given you: Est lux vera quae
illuminat omnem hominem venientem in mundum, Whether you do not think that
those who in this Sunshine of Gods word; would ground their belief upon
Miracles, do not justly merit that answer of Christ to the Scribes and
Pharisees, demanding miracles, Generatio mala and adultera signum quaerit, and
whither you Lordship do not hold all those who believe such poor and childish
conceits be not justly given over to themselves as the Apostle says; vt
credant mendacio qui non crediderunt veritati.

So I will conclude this point of Miracles and Idolatrous worship with two
short observations, first for that exterior splendour and show of Religion by
so many pilgrimages, holy days and festival euenings and others devout like
exercises which do blind simple people, I say it is the common mark and mask
both of Idolatrous service, the very pretended zeal and holy pretext of Balaam
when he came to sacrifice upon the mount of Balaac, did bewray his Treachery,
he cried to build him seven altars, while as Abraham who was so faithful and
sincere a sacrificer, that the Spirit of God does honor him with this
Testimony, Abraham believed the Lord, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness: the first father of all the faithful when he went unto the
mount to offer his son Isaac, he did content himself with one Altar,
knowing how it is one Altar only that does please God, and what is that? and
what is the sacrifice? the Altar of our heart providing it be in
vprightesnesse and faith, the immolation of contrite and faithful prayers, as
the Prophet David says (contrary to Balaam, who would have no less then seven
Altars) Quoniam si voluisses sacrificium dedissem, vtique holocaustis non
delectaberis, Sacrificium Deo est spiritus contribulatus: So that it is
ordinary to false worship to cloak and cover their devotion with more specious
shows then are commanded by the word, or used by simple or true Professors,
because as the Italian says, Per coprir un gran mal bisognia un gran mantello,
there is need of a side cloak to hide a great evil. Secondly I say, of such
opinion maintained of miracles and popular credulity, as it was in Gentilisme
said by Numa Pompillius, Patres consilio valere decet, populo superuacanea est
calliditas: The fathers of states should be wise, and subtle, but the people
simple: so it is now said in Christian superstitions, that ignorance is the
mother of Devotion, and that Apocrypha speech of Esdra, Hac narrabis Populo,
and has abscondes, holden for good Scripture, it is the special Stratagem
whereby the devil does lead men into the snares of idolatry to cry for
miracles, and to depend upon them: They have been only ordained by God to beat
and break down the hardness of infidelity in the first plantation of the
faith, Moses and Aaron were strong in miracles, but the Israelites did no
sooner come to the borders of Canaan, then they lost the light of their fiery
pillar which conveyed them to it; they had no sooner passed Jordan, then the
Manna ceased to rain down food upon them. These extraordinary things were
to comfort and confirm them in the wilderness, the unspeakable wisdom of
God knows that a custom of miracles working, were to make us vilipend his
most glorious miracles: So as we must say that as he had been a senseless
Jew, who would have refused to go forward into Canaan, because he wanted the
pillar to convey him, and the Manna to feed him, even so must we esteem him
a foolish Christian, who being entered into the clear light of Christ's Gospel,
because he sees not the power of miracles which in the beginning of that
Christian Progress was granted to Saint Peter and Paul, for conducting of the
first believers through the wilderness of Gentilisme, or of Pharisaicall pride,
and for comforting them to reject stoutly the yoke of their spiritual
Pharaoh, because of this he will refuse to be guided by the Arc of Gods word,
wherein are comprehended the whole mysteries of his law; and without the which
there is no way to the heavenly Canaan, certain he must be counted more then
mad.

CHAP. IIII. The impeietie of Papal Indulgences, the open Pollution of the
caelibate, and other pregnant vices of Rome, against the credit of all
Christian profession.
I Come next to speak of that which I did observe touching Indulgence, and
dispensation, wherein I need not to be tedious and longsome, the case being so
notorious, only summarily and truly relate to your Lordship, of things which
I did see, three or four, that did most specially offend me. There can be no
more said concerning this abuse now adays, then our fore beeres have said many
years ago, Omnia venalia Rome: and certainly no less; if we should speak
uprightly: That is to say Rome is a common staple of Pardons for all the sins
and crimes that can be committed, and those sold at so high a rate, which is
the reason why one should think the Camera de Componendis, within Saint Peter
Palace one of the richest houses in Christendom. This moved a fine jest in a
certain German, who having some dispensation to purchase at Rome, which he
looked to have granted to him gratis, but finding an ordinance on the back of
it for payment of one hundred Ducats, took a pen and blotted out the date
wherein was said Datum Romae, putting in the place of it Emptu^ Romae swearing,
that because they had liberty of Conscience in Germany, that he would rather
take it upon his liberty, then buy it so dearly. I did see their diverse
Monasteries or Conuentuall houses of religious persons, wherein live great
numbers, which houses be no way endued with rents nor provided, but only
referred to voluntary charity: for help whereof, the Pope does grant them
some privileged Altars, with extraordinary Indulgences, and a peculiar
Festival day, upon the which, thither the whole people resorteth, but chiefly
profligat and debaushed persons: as, Whoores, Bawdes, idle Rascals,
Charlatanes Coosoners, who for the offer of some gross alms, bring back with
them so many Pardons of sins, so many soul Masses by redemption from
Purgatory: enduring which time of the Visitation of this Altar, the people
entering at one door, and issuing out at an other, all the day long, without
intermission, there is no other voice to be heard at the first port, but
calling out aloud, Fate vnabellissima diuotione: Make, Sirs, a brave devotion;
by the which is meant* to give a sat Offering Conferring this voice with that
which is to be heard in their Camera de componendis, it resembles in my ears
that cry of the two Daughters of the Horse-leech, mentioned in the Proverbs of
Solomon, Duae sunt sanquisugae filiae quae semper clamant affer, affer: all
which devotion consists in the multitude of those who bought the Pardons,
being so under the name of Religious exercise, a Trade of abominable impiety:
for while I was curious to ask the Priests of those Altars, upon the
importance of their privileges; I did receive no other answer, but what was
once granted by the Pope was absolutely good and effectual for all. Again, I
saw this, which fell forth during my being there: The Duke of Neuers came
there in great and glorious state, extraordinar Ambassador from the French King
to the Pope, who, according to the custom of that Seat, with such personages,
did grant him Indulgences very large and bountiful, that one would have
thought the ports of hell was not able to prevail against them: and when the
Dukes Medalls and Beads came to be blessed upon the Popes Altar, according to
the form, there was no famous Whore in Rome who had not also numbers put in
for her, saying, (which I have heard with mine ears) The French Indulgences
should procure them both English and Spanish money. This kind of Merchandise
and public sale of sins is used in so lewd and vile a manner, that the most
simple man in the world would count it to be a scuruie ridiculous invention of
insatiable avarice. During my being at Rome, there happened to dye there a rich
Venetian Merchant, who left in Legacy a good sum of money to that Church,
standing upon the Monte di Trinita, for celebration of his Funerals, and
services for his soul, the same day which was appointed for those Funeral
Offices, I did find my self soon in the morning upon that Mount, because it
is a fresh and delectable walk, when a number of Friars, with great Torches,
coming to enter into the Church, was demanded of a Gentleman of Rome, who was
beside me, whither they did go? to whom one of them did answer, Andiamo
cauare del purgatorio Lanima di quel mercadante Venetiano chimorse laltro
iorno: which is to say, translated sincerely we go to hale out of Purgatory the
soul of that Venecian Merchant, who died the last day. The Gentleman replied
in bitter speech against the Pope, calling him Cuillione, and Morbidotto, which
be ignominious and conte^ptible words, because (says he) he does not keep
in Purgatory to the worlds end all those wretched souls of Venice, who do so
disturb the Apostolic Seat: for it was in the mean time of those late
broils betwixt the Pope and the Venetians. Can any jest in the world be more
worthy of derision? then this or any thing more like the pitiful Idolatry of
the Gentiles, where the Priests made the sensles people to think there was no
way to make their gods propitious, but by their rich Offerings. This sort of
doing is so frequent there, that we see no other business: and if it be true
which they hold, Quel che fa sua santita e fatto, that which the Popes
Holiness does, is done, certain all those of those Countries must be in
heaven before their feet be cold, as we say, because the most wicked and
godless among them never departe^ this life, but laden with Pardons. And this
far I think is enough to prove, that the abuse is not only authorized, but
as it were married with Religion, seeing upon the means thereof they do found
Cloystrall societies. And this only speaking de facto, for to reason Quo iure,
these are practiced, it is Theological, always the most learned among them
have said to me touching the Popes power, Il nostro signore e dio soptala
terra, Our Lord the Pope he is God upon earth, he may dispense what he will:
Yea (say they) if the question were to marry the King of Spain to an
heretical Princess, the Pope will first dispense him to marry his own
Sister. Is not this to go above the power of God, who has said of his holy
Law, that a jot thereof shall not perish nor be changed? Well, to urge
Theological Arguments I will not, but I remit your Lordship to search the
Scriptures, to see who it is there that does sit in the Church of God, and
exalt Dan. 11. 2. These. 2.
himself above all that is called God. And now I appeal to the divine light
of your Lordships conscience, whether you do not think that the contemplation
of so gross things; first, such Ethnicke Idolatry, that while Paul and
Barnabas being alive, did tear their clothes, and run upon the people,
because they would have adored them, saying, they were but men like unto
themselves. Now so much adoration must be done to the Statues of their dead
bodies, that one shall not enter within Saint Peter's Church at Rome, but we
must kneel to salute him where he sits in brass, we must lay our head under
his feet, and kiss every one of his ^oes severally. Then such impious and
base avarice in this trade of Purgatory and Indulgences, that in their Camera
de Componendis there sits Simon Magus, under the name of Simon Peter, making
sale of the Spirit of God for money, of the mercies of God, of remission of
sins, and the Kingdom of heaven, and that with such insatiable hands, that
if ever I, who came from a remote Country to honor the Apostolical Seat,
would give him largely for dispensation, he would willingly embrace it, as who
knows what I did pretend: to be the more assured, I appeal to your Lordships
conscience, whether you think those were not sufficient to breed doubts of
Religion in any man, in whom God has left a spark of his fear, or one grain
of right knowledge. Assuredly they moved me to great jealousy, and they were
to me (as the first sight of the Angel was to the poor Ass of Balaam) terror
albeit (I confess sincerely) the strong opinion which I had drunken so long
before, and the plausible show of things, did for a while violently hold me
into the same way, as Balaam did force his Ass to go on, after the first
sight of the Angel.

But when I begun to look upon the manners of the The Manners of Rome.
people, and to consider what were the faults which were so ordinarily and
easily pardoned (which is the third thing in number of those which I most
narrowly observed) what shall I say? I know not how to speak the truth, and
therewith to provide that my pen be not slandered for contumelies and
Philippicke passions, always I shall so limitate my self, that I shall not
blot so grave a purpose with an humor of railing or shamelessness: In the day
of visitation and punishment, I shall begin at my sanctuary, says the Lord,
and wherefore is this? because Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, as the
Prelates be, so are the people, the example of the Rulers makes the manners of
the multitude, as the Spirit of God does testify by the Prophet Daniel,
Egressa est Dan. 11.
iniquitas a Senioribus and ab ijs qui videbantur regere populum: Iniquity
has gone out from the Elders and those who seemed to govern the people: For
this cause in a just censure of the manners of Rome, it cannot be avoided,
first to look upon the Court, wherein is to be seen such fastuous and
intolerable pomp, and such a degree of glory as has never been usurped by
any earthly Monarch, to behold the majesty of the Papal carriage, borne one
men's shoulders, auro fulgens and smaragdis, shining amidst gold and Jewels,
those who bear him treading upon fine cloth, wherewith the Church pauement is
covered, accompanied with a fearful guard, the thundering of Canons, the
sound of trumpets, and all sorts of musical instruments: at whose presence,
numbers of Princes, stately Ambassadors, great parsonages, and multitudes of
people do fall to the ground, saluting him holy, holy, as if he would not
only be Christ's Vicar upon earth, but also emulator of his divine glory in the
Heavens, and be worshipped like that glorious Lamb, before whom numbers do
fall down to cry holy, holy, holy, that upon the sight thereof I was indeed
amassed, as if it had been a vision, and demanding a French Gentleman (who had
newly also arrived with me, and was a zealous Papist) how he did esteem of
that which he had seen; he answered me in the terms of (be God) that he
thought it far different from the carriage of him who said, Regnum meum non
est de hoc mundo, and who said to his Disciples, Exemplum de di vobis vt
quemadmodum ego feci it a and vos faciatis, which answer I have many times
since thought to be as pertinent, as if the holy Spirit had inspired it into
him: For if the kingdom of the world be called the kingdom of sin and what
reason had Mr. Flud to frame his first argument, out of the uncertainty of his
Adversaries opinions? Judge ye etc.

But put case Mr. Flud, that our Divines were concerning this point of your
Popes being Antichrist equally divided, or just so as you affirm they are;
what? would the same make their doctrine of the Popes being Antichrist, to be
only a fancy? See then how you may be whipped with your own rodd: Are you a
Rabbie in Iezreel and dispute so? what then will become of the feast of
Conception, instituted in the honor of the immaculate and unspotted Conception
of the ever blessed Virgin Mary? Are not there many of your Doctors, who
affirm, yea affirm not without the reproching of others with the note of
error, heresy, etc. that the blessed Virgin was not conceived in original
sin? And are there not against them others, who peremptorily affirm, that
she was conceived in original sin? this being so, shall your feast of
Conception, which is endowed with so many Papal indulgences, be a fancy? God
forbid.

Again, what will become of your making, adoring, and worshipping of the Image
of God the Father, as he Abul. in deuteronomy. Duar. alij. Bell. de Imag. lib. 2 cap.
8. Nic. act. 5. 6.
is in the Deity himself? Are there not many of your Divines, who condemn
the same? Does not Bellarmine affirm it to be in opinione, in opinion? Did not
your second General Nicene Sinod condemn, and inhibit the same? what then,
shall your general making thereof, and adoring the same, be a fancy? God
forbid it; for if so, it would prove not only a fancy, but a most damnable
impiety, as in truth it is.

Further, what then Gentle Sir, will betide the inerrable Rule of your Faith,
the vnappellable Judge of all controversies? Is it not a dogmaticall position
affirmed by your Canonists, delivered by most of your Scholastickes,
peremptorily maintained by all the learned Ignatians, the Goliasses of these
days, that the Pope is the absolute and vnerrable Judge of faith, that he is
above a General Council, that he alone may with some provincial Council
Gerson de Auferibilit. Patae Conc: Constant. and Basil. omnes pene Anuq.
define faith? And yet is there not a whole army of your Divine, both of this
time, and of former ages, who resolutely deny the same? who teach your Popes to
be subject, yea corrigibly subject to a General Council, and that defining
without approuance, and consent of the same, he may err even in matters of
faith, deceive and be deceived. Call to mind, what the Counsels of Pisa,
Basil, Constance, yea and the 8. General Sinod, have decreed; what the
Sorbone of Paris have done and taught concerning your Popes ouerhaughty
presumptions in this kind? may I now say to you? now judge ye whether all the
Romish faith, which depends upon the Inerrability of this Judge be not a
fancy, a dream a lie?

Lastly, to pretermit diverse other instances; what will you say to your
Ignatianed disciples here in England? who peremptorily refuse to take the oath
of Allegiance, concerning the auowing or disauowing of which, what a general
division is there in your learned Clergy of England? It is to be suspected that
the Ignatians and Ignatianed, when they take the Oath of allegiance do
egregioushe equivocate.
The Candidate Martyrs are tooth and nail against it, diverse of your learned
Confessors are for it; nay I boldly affirm it, the learned of your Clergy
in England are for it, at lest to tolerate the taking of it in the Laity! this
uncertainty considered, shall I retort upon you thus? and say now judge ye,
whether they who refuse the Oath refuse it, not upon a fancy? God forbid I
should do so; no no, they refuse it not upon a fancy in your opinions, but
upon that grounded resolution according to your principles, that the Pope is an
absolute Monarch and Christ's Vicar upon earth, to command ye to deprive
Princes if they prove Irregular and will not be at his beck and ordering.

These things which I have here produced, if you compare them in your own
weights and balance, with your now judge ye, you will easily observe, how
idle your inference is, but let us observe how you flourish it.

Mr. FLOOD.
Now be you judge, whether one may with a safe conscience, upon a fancy, or
upon a confessed uncertain conjecture, deny the broadseale of God, despise his
hand writing, which the eyes and all senses of body testify to be his?
Asubiect, that should condemn the Kings warrant or his command, under the
broadseale, what Jury would acquit him, of the plea that he had a fancy, or a
conjecture that it was counterfeit? To give to the Devil, the works that sense
and reason judge to be Gods, is the most heinous sin, which may be, which
the Jews did commit Athanas. tract. in illud se quis dixerit.
when they said of Christ, in Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils does he cast
out Devils: Math. 13.
A sin never to be pardoned in this world, nor in the next. Is it wisdom to
aduentare to commit such a sin, upon a conjecture! If conjectures might
suffice, the Pharisees could have alleged diverse for their blasphemy against
Christ: Reason teaches, that such smoakes must vanish away, at the shining of
clear truth, that fearful surmises yield to the evidence of sense. This then
is the first reason, to prove them inexcusable that they have but a coniectur
all defense, of so bainous a crime.

ANSWER.
Here is a deal of impertinent tautologie, flourished over with a few
thetoricall withered flowers, fitter for the fire then to be answered with
pen: I have already showed and euinced, that we give no such warrant upon a
fancy or conjecture, as you pretend and repeat so often, for lack of better
substance: we hold it, if not as a point of faith, yet at lest as a
Theological conclusion, certain and assured, that your Pope is the self
Antichrist: and by Gods assistance I will euince that his miracles are not Gods
but Satan's, signed with his counterfeit seal. But by the way, now I must tell
you, that in the beginning, middle, and end of this your reason, you flourish
with such an idle kind of eloquence, that you seem to me, as if you were
predicating in your chair, to your blind ^bedients at S. Omers. I cannot but
smile, to observe your elegancies; Sir, where I pray you, have you learned,
that point of divinity, that the eyes and all the senses M. (...).
of the body, are capable to apprehend, to be judicious, or indicative of Gods
handwriting, of Gods broadseale? and to be able to distinguish the same, from
Satan's mendacious prodigies? I had thought, this had been the office of
faith, or of some gift of the holy Ghost, not of the senses; But seeing you
talk so much of senses, and the evidence of all senses, did all Lipsius his
senses, or all your senses or any others senses, (whom you know) ever evidently
feel and perceive the hand writing of God at Sichem? or the broadseale of the
Goddess at Hall, Loretto, Montserratto? no, no; not all your senses, nor all
the senses of any man living, had ever evidence of those your pretended Gods
handwritings. All your evidence has been by hearing, that so both your faith,
Lipsius his faith, and the faith of all the multitude might be ex auditu,
according to that of the Apostle, fides ex auditu, faith, comes by hearing,
hearing by the word of God; so your Epist. ad Romans 10.
faith comes by hearing, your hearing from the words of men, dead men,
Fullanos, unknown, indiuidualls, indiuidua vaga.

You say, that sense and reason testifies your miracles to be Gods works;
again, that fearful surmises must give place to the evidence of sense, what
M. Flud, were you in your senses, when you wrote thus? perhaps in some musing
rapt hands under arme-pits, as your wont is.

To confirm this your elegancie, you tell us, that no Jury would acquit that
subject, who upon a surmise should deny the Kings broadseale, whereby you seem
to put his Majesty of Great Britain in mind, how vndefensibly guilty, your
Ignatianed disciples are, who upon a bare arrogant precept of the Pope, without
any lest instruction, refuse to give him assurance by oath, of their temporal
allegiance, against all papal pretenses and presumptions in that kind? Ah M.
Flud, I fear, your mystery in this kind, is too too damnable; is it not
this? yes, certainly it is: James of Great Britain The Pa^ist Ignatian
doct^^ne and practice is agreeing to that of the old Friars of whom W^clif lib.
de f^ndamen. leg. Aug. cap. 36.
(whom God of his infinite mercy, vouchsafe to protect, as the apple of his eye
for the confusion of Antichrist) is not (in rei veritate) King of Great
Britain; but only in (opinione hominum haereticorum) in the opinion of men
heretics; whose opinion, whose election, whose confirmation because they are
iure, in law excommunicates is iure (nulla) in law none: so that this their
King reigns only precario, at our Holy Fathers pleasure; to him therefore we
may not yield or swear obedience, but dependantly from the Pope; he now
forbids us to swear, therefore without peril of eternal damnation we may
not swear. M. Flud this is the mystery; answer me is there any of your
disciples who would refuse to swear allegiance to his Majesty, were this
clause added, so long as his Holiness shall allow and permit him for King? no
there is not one, no not one; evident then it is to all senses that our most
Gracious Sovereign reigns in your opinions, precario, tanquam homo Papae, ad
nutum and beneplacitum Pontificis; as at his Holiness pleasure, benevolence,
and goodliking. This is the damnable doctrine you teach; what project you would
thereout make, who cannot judge, that remembers the 5. of November? Is not
this to deny the Kings broadseale? nay, is not this to deny him to be King?
for take away from him, the natural, absolute, and sacred allegiance of
subjects, and wherein shall his kingly dignity consist? What Jury will then
acquit you? Ah times! when as such as you are, and your disciples, shall dare
to shroude themselves etc* shall dare to pass in betwixt wickets and great
Gates, Exulent vtinam Egiptij ne pereant Christiani. For now the Transalpine
detestable and most deuelish Art of poisoning is on foot, who? or what? can be
sure? so long as so many whom prudent Jealousy must suspect, are, and range,
intra castra Christianorum, in the midst of Christians, what security can
therebe, if the Lord of heaven do not miraculouslie protect? Aspice dowine de
sede sanctatua and protege Christum tuum. To proceed: whilst you preconize
thus fondly, of the evidence of your miracles to all senses, you play the
Divine as pithily to make the denying of these your broadseales, to be the
most heinous sin that can be committed. It cannot be denied Sir but to
blaspheme the works of God, as the Scribes and Pharisees did, those of our
Savior, is a most heinous offense; so likewise for you to compare your vain
trumperies to the admirable works of our Savior is a greiuous sin, not
excusable. But call to mind Sir, that rule of law qui semel inuenitur malus
semper presumitur In regul. Iuris.
malus in eodem genere mali, He who is once found to be evil (that is
deliberately and maliciously evil) is always presumed to be evil, in the
same kind of ill; If this be an axiom vnrefusable, applauded by your
Ciuilians, admitted by your Canonists? what then may we presume of your
Church, who has often been found purposely playing false-play with her
prodigies? Are you not ashamed of your voraginous Jacob? voluminous Vincent?
E^^enc. lib. 1. digress. cap. 11. produces the complaints of diverse of your
own Bishops and Doctors. Agobert lindam: Viues.
fabulous Metaphrast? for diverse of their fabulous narrations? That ancient
Genouyse Legend, written by your voraginous Prelate, for the excellency of it
called aurea legenda, the Golden Legend; how many copper Fables are in it, now
exploded by your selves? Remember that rule, whereof I now put you in mind;
have not your own Popes found such fabulous stuff in your Portesses, that for
shame they have rased them out? witness your famous Sorbonist Espencaeus;
witness the whole world which sees the Fables rased out; where then is your
forehead, that you dare to compare your forged vanities, with the most
venerable miracles of our Savior? as I said before, so now again with the
Archangels words imperet tibi Dominus, the Lord rebuke thee. You Epist. Iudae
will reply and say, these corruptions, have crept into other Churches; but the
Roman has been vncontaminate. What? Rome vncorrupt? which pretends S.
Peter's body to be in more places? Rome vncorrupt? The Roman Church her fal^e
fingers
which glories in Constantines Baptisterie? where you pretend Constantine was
cured of a corporal leprosy? Rome vncorrupt? which tells us of a great
horrible Dragon, a Dragon (as your Legend says) so malicious for Leg. Silu.
Constantines conversion to Christianity, that out of hate thereof he did day
after day, destroy with his venomous breath 300. men, (marvel that Constantine
himself, that women and children escaped) and yet this prodigious beast, by
Siluester (having two Priests accompanying him) had his chappes tied up with a
small thread, and so was starued and destroyed. Rome vncorrupt? when as in it,
is allowed and read the Frantiscan prodigious book Your Roman Darling
allows sermones discipul^ your sp^cula exemplo^um in which are innumerable
fantastic lies and dotages.
of conformities; in which how many vanities are there, which you the
Ignatians, the Dominicans, and all your learned smile at? witness that
admirable miracle of the spider, which Friar Francis drunk up in the Chalice,
and which came out of his shinnebone, he after Mass rubbing the same.
Witness Father Francis his large Sermon, at Eugubium to the devout Wolf with
much like trumperie in the same to be read and found even to the astonishment
of the Reader. Rome vncorrupt? which shows the pictures that bowed and did
reverence to the dead body of Pope Formosus when it was brought into Saint
Peter's Church, your Baronius is not ashamed to approve the fable. Rome
vncorrupt? whose Ignatian cheifetaines (Aquauiua himself) now approve unto the
world, a mendacious Legend of Ignatius his miracles, amongst which at this
present, I glaunce only at that blasphemous one, where you make the mystery
of the blessed Trinity, to be revealed unto him, in that very form and
fashion, in which you have pourtraited and drawn the same in your Church of
the English College An impious fiction of t^^ Ignat^^^s and blasphemous
against ^he most sa^^ed Trinity.
at Rome? to wit, The father is painted in the form of a very old
hoareheaded-man: the son is drawn out as nailed upon a cross; which cross
the Father holds before him; having the form of a dove expressing the holy
Ghost drawn upon his b^est, over the top of the cross: and even in this
sort and fashion, as your Ribadinera has caused it to be expressed in the
miraculous pictures of Ignatius his life, was the mystery of the holy Does not
C^ster publish most id^e dotages in his Postilles? and yet in Rome under your
Popes nose he is read and approved.
Trinity revealed unto him; Ah blasphemy of all blasphemies; does the
infinite majesty of God, Trine and one, so reside, and represent it self upon
the eternal Throne? what? was this the secret of the most glorious Godhead
which was revealed to S. Ignatius? Doubtless some like Hobgobbline as deceived
their Francis in a Cherubicall Crucifixe, beguiled also (if it be not a
fiction) your holy Ignatius, eager and hungry after some vision.

Rome not corrupt? when as the Roman Predicant Friars, have been so impudent,
as publicly to preachin Chap. 1.
pulpit, that there grew such amorous love betwixt Christ and Catharine of
Sienna his sweet Spousesse, that there was a true enterchange of hearts betwixt
them? which impious vanity of theirs I have already refuted.

I could particularize in sundry like instances, but these are sufficient, to
show how inexcusable M. Flud is, who dares to compare their trash with the
most venerable miracles of Christ. Is it not true, that if one untruth could be
found in the Gospel the whole credit thereof were at an end? what credit then,
may we give to your Roman Church, which has played falsefingers so often? It
was foretold by S. John, that your Adulterous Mother, should have her mouth
full of blasphemies which Apoc. 13 6.
to her confusion we now observe. And so ceasing to add any more about this
your first reason, I note by the way, another vnreuerent, if not sacrilegious
speech of yours, when you thus write. If conjectures would suffice, the
Pharisees, could have alleged diverse for their blasphemy against Christ. And
is not this a Jolly Ignatian, who rather then he will seem not to have
sufficiently refuted us, will yield coniecturall proofs to the Pharisees
against Christ? Sir, bethink your self of those conjectures against Christ,
and I dare assure you, that the Jews will account themselves beholding unto
you for the same. But let us now come to your second reason, and examine
whether there be more modesty or pith in it then in your first, thus you frame
it.

CHAP. V. Wherein is examined Mr. Floods second reason showing him to pervert
the Fathers meanings.
Mr. FLOOD.
THe second reason is, that Protestants have no more reason to condemn these
as Antichrists wonders, then the miracles reported by ancient Authors, long
before Antichrist appeared, according to their own account: For those ancient
miracles, are thunder claps, that shake the foundation of your Gospel, no
less then ours of this present age.

Call to mind the points of our faith you most impugn in your letter, you
shall find most famous miracles to confirm them, recorded by most grave and
learned Fathers: What Lipsius of Louayne, did ever write wonders either more
for number, or greater for quantity, done at the shrine of any Saint, then
those, that Saint Austen in his 22. book of his City of God has registered,
as most certainly wrought by the relics of Saint Stephen Plurimi conficiendi
sunt libri nec tamen omnia colligi poterunt lib 22. de ciuit. cap. 8.
? Read that book Sir, and I dare say, that you will there find either
miracles that may convert your heart to some fear of God, or else matter for
senseless infidelity to drive away melancholy fits with loud laughing. You
may behold histories as incredible to humane reason, and yet no less
seriously told by Saint Austen, then these are, of our blessed Ladies in both
her chappells, which Lipsius does recount.

ANSWER.
This your reason flowing a comparatis, is void of reason: for whilst you in
the beginning thereof are in your generals, first you tell us like miles
gloriosus, that such miracles as are recounted by ancient Fathers before
Antichrist appeared; even according to our own account, do like to yours of
these times shake the foundation of our Gospel. Secondly you brauingly inuit
Sir Edward to call to mind how such articles of yours as he impugneth, were
confirmed by most famous miracles. Thirdly, you elegantly flourish with a
demand, what Lipsius of Lonayne did ever etc. These be bragging flourishes,
your proof in particular is; first pretended out of Saint Austen thus, who in
his 22. book of his City of God (say you) has registered wonders as great for
number, and quantity, as certainly wrought by the relics of Saint Stephen,
as ever any Lipsius of Louayne did write done at the shrine of any Saint.
Having added thus out of Austen, as if you had got the victory you inuit Sir
Edward, not without most bitter taunts to the reading of the same; you tell him
of loud laughing and melancholy fits; and you your self may be told justly,
culpa carere oportet qui in alium paratus est dicere.

To this your reason, which is not worth one blew point, to the matter we have
in hand: First I deny your proposition; for the miracles related by the
ancient Fathers, and yours, differ genere generalissimo: your proof out of
Saint Austen serves not your turn. First, what if I should say that all you
bring out of that book is none of Saint Austens? can you euince the contrary?
no assuredly, you cannot; For if you object and say that the said book has
been reputed for S. Austens for many hundreths of years before this age, I
grant it: And were not (I beseech you) these books, to wit; of Questions upon
the old and new Testament; the book of 83. Questions; the book de fide ad
Petrum; the book de mirabilibus sacrae Scripturae; the book de vera and falsa
penitentia; the books de moribus Ecclesiae; de salutaribus documentis; the
book called Hypognosticon; his manuale, his Soliloquia, with his book de
visitatione infirmorum, with sundry other books, epistles very many, Sermons
innumerable, reputed to be that Fathers for many hundreths of years before
this age; and yet are they not now cashired from being his some by one, some by
another as either by Baronius, Bellarmine, Turrian, Posseuine, Sixtus S^nensis,
Remists, Louanists, etc. If these your Champions, may cashire so many of his
works, because in them there are some things found not beseeming, or
contrary to Austen; why then may not some contrarieties which are to be found
in this book from other of that Father be a just cause to call the credit of
it in question?

But I deny not the book to be his; yet if I should affirm that he is
corrupted by some false-fingers in this Chapter you cite, and some others, I
should not want reason for so saying; for does not Vines in his Preface
protest, that there was such corruption in the manuscripts he had, that he
could not know the true reading of Austen, but diuinando and coniecturis, by
deuining and conjectures? And if you now in this light of the Gospel, dare by
command of a Council, corrupt, not only the ancient Fathers, but even your
own late Authors, by adding and taking away words, sentences, yea whole
paragraphes, and chapters? Why may not we think the same Spirit to have been
and reigned in your cloystered Viues says there is no doubt but that in th^s
8. chapter of the 22. book many things have been added by those who wi^^ their
filthy hands have defiled all the writings of noble Authors, Viues annot. in
22. lib. August. deciuit. cap. 8.
ones, when they might do the same without any touch of infamy? What? could
they set forth whole books and many in the name of that Father? and could
they not corrupt by interlacing or paring out a few lines? for my part I am
induced to think that this Father is corrupted in this place, if some of his
Epistles and his book of retractations be his, see after.

But I will admit the book to be S. Austens, and that the words and sentences
cited by you are all his: He relates, that there were diverse miracles done at
the memory of S. Stephen; what of this? nay more, suppose that he had
affirmed, which he does not, that the said miracles were done by the relics
of S. Stephen; shall this shake the foundation of our Gospel? might not God
use the relics of S. Stephen to work miracles, in that sort, and as he did,
use the Napkin of Paul? the shadow of Peter? the bones of Elizeus, which the
holy Scripture In the 9. chapter of the ^2. bo^ke he affirms that he knows
not whether such miracles are done by God himself by his Angels, or by the
Martyrs. Act. 5 15.
recounteth? We are of S. Stephens faith, we honor his memory, and have a day
for the same, (as those Christians had) we are nothing envious, that God
should do miracles by the bones and ashes of his servant whose honorable
remembrance we celebrate in our Churches; therefore for you to prove that we
despite the miracles done at S. Steephens memory, i^, opus cui impar Achilles,
you cannot ever do it. No, no Sir, had we been with S. Austen, we would not
have refused to have assembled with him at the blessed memory of that Saint,
there to have praised and magnified his Lord and Master, for whose testimony
he was stoned. Sir, we ingenuouslie acknowledge, that it was a godly custom
of the ancient Christians there to assemble for divine worship of God, where
the memories of his servants were; there they prayed, there they praised, there
they professed even to the astonishment of the Infidels: and where is it more
likely, that God should put forth his arm to do signs and wonders, so long
as the same were behoufull and necessary for the planting of his Church, then
at such places, and such assemblies, where his name was so christianly and
religiously called upon, and his son Jesus* so constantly professed? I said
Sir, that had we been with S. Austen we would willingly have associated our
selves with him, yet wicked and sinful it were to do the like now with you in
Rome, either at S. Peter's in your Vaticane, or at S. Paul's without gates, or
at S. Stephens memory upon one of your hills where you assemble your selves,
putting (I boldly write what I have observed) more confidence in the
intercession and prayers of those Saints, then in the mediation of Jesus: so
did not S. Austen, so did not his people.

Further had we now S. Stephens body with us, or the body of the blessed
Apostle, or of the ever blessed virgin Mary, we would not refuse to make our
assemblies at them, by them, or nigh to them, for the love we bear to them,
whose ashes they are; for the hope we have of their resurrection at the last
day; but rather then we would abuse them as you do; by committing open
idolatry in adoring and worshipping of them, as you do; in putting any trust
or confidence in them for blessings, for deliverances as you impiouslie do;
we would do with them, as Luther, wished had been done with all other
Luther. sermon. do Cruce.
relics before corruption came in; to wit bury them low in the ground, but
decently, as becomes the dust and ashes of Gods servants; wherein, we should
not want the warrant of God himself, who lest the Jews should commit
Idolatry with Moses his body, has so Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
disposed of the same, that even until this day locus est ignotus, Jud. Epist.
the place is unknown where it was buried. The Devil contended with Michaell
for it, and about it, for what end think ye, but only that the Jews might
have so abused it, as you now do the bodies and relics of Gods servants?
Saint Anthony the Eremite, (whose life S. Athanasius as you deliver did write)
would approve our doing herein: He knowing how superstitiouslie the Egyptians
were given to worship the dead bodies, of such Athanas. in vita Anton.
as they honored living, gave most straight charge, that his body should so
carefully be buried, that it might not be abused after his death by any such
superstitious uses, as were then growing up. What would that blessed man have
said, had he known the detestable practices, which Yet we find in your forged
Legends that your Saints have commanded their bodies to be religiously buried
and to be honored after burial. Roberts the Monk executed at Tiburn, the
night before gloried that he should after death be honored as a Saint.
are now afoote amongst the Papists? who are not content to repair to the
places, where such things remain, but they must further and above carry about
them, some small pieces of earth and dust, thereby hoping for assured
deliverances from all dangers, making the same their hope and refuge. I know
diverse of their Popish herein England, and elsewhere, who continually wear
about them little pretty carved wodden Images, made of the wood of that tree
whereon their Sichimesse Image stood (from which it fell, to which it was
fastened again, and from which it was last of all lost or stolen, and as not
yet heard of) yea, they set up those pretty babes in some places of their
gardens and orchards, and to them do make daily pilgrimages, yea they do vow
pilgrimages, thereby hoping for many blessings.

O fatuas Gentes, quibus talia numina. To conclude, this is the sum of that
which may be answered to that unto which you direct Sir Edward in S. Austen;
first, we acknowledge that at the memory, of S. Steephen many miracles were
done in confirmation of Christian religion; Secondly we grant there was an
honorable remembrance of that Saint; Thirdly we deny that those miracles were
done to prove intercession or prayers to that Saint; no, no; there is no
mention made of intercession or prayers to him; but, put case, M. Flud, that it
might be thought in those times, that some of those miracles were obtained by
the prayers of that Saint (I do not say the prayers of living to that Saint)
to God, what could you infer thereout, but an extraordinary blessing which
may not be drawn into an ordinary example?

But Mr. Flud, admit we grant all you desire (which yet by no means I may)
that the Christians of those times did pray to S. Stephen, and did think they
received some benefits by such their prayers, must this their action, be a
necessary example for us, that we may or ought to do like? Can such a
practice make it an absolute Rule of manners, according to the analogy of
faith to all future ages? Must the private practice of some primitive Churches,
tie all the universal Church, and this for all ages? If so; what then will
become of your Church, which out of an opinion of liberty, does not administer
the sacrament to the Laity under both kinds, which the ancient Church ever
did, out of an opinion of necessity grounded upon Christ's command and
institution? Why then does not your Church minister the sacrament of the
Eucharist to Infants newly baptized, as the ancient Church did, out of an
opinion of necessity for their salvation? Why then does not your Church
continue profestiuall night* Vigills, which Antiquity both approved and
required?

Time was in the old Law, when it was not only behoueful, but also necessary
for such as were strucke^ with serpents, if they would be cured, to behold the
brazen Serpent; but afterward when the same was abused superstitiously, call
to mind how good King Ezechias 2 Reg: 18.
was commended for destroying and abolishing the same. Again, time was when it
was not unlawful to eat of such meats, as had been offered to Idols; but
afterward 1 Cor: 8.
when the same eating was grown scandalous, and a sign distinctiue, then the
same became abominable. So likewise, although we put case and admit, that the
Christians did recurre unto the memories of Saints in former times, hoping to
be aided by their intercessions ^oth not Saint Austen lib. de Ciuit 8. cap. 27.
relate a custom used by some Christians at Martyrs tombs with yet as he, so we
reject: but you in steed thereof have brought in more vain, which Viues there
reproves.
to God; yet now the case is so altered, by reason of a sea of abominations,
and detestable idolatry, which thereby has ouer-flowen the whole Church, that
there is very just cause to command such a practice and custom to surcease;
and herein, there should not want the warrant of the Church of Rome her self,
who in diverse like cases has so proceeded: some instances I have already set
down, and more I could produce. These things I write, supposing what is
related out of S. Austen be truly his; but so often as I consider what he
writes in his 7. Retractations, I can hardly so think; for there
interpreting, in what sense he had in his former works denied the ordinary
working of miracles in the Church, 7. Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 14.
he says thus; And this I have said, because not such great ones, nor all such
are done now, not because there are non^ done even now. He would never have
written thus sparingly of miracles, if there had been so many done at the
memory of one Saint, especially so many as your marginall note, cited out of
that Father, promises, Plurimi conficiendi sunt libri nec tamen omnia colligi
poterunt. Flod. ex August.
which note does not accord with the first lines of this Chapter, so that
either the text or margin must needs be corrupted.

Mr. FLOOD.
You cannot endure the adoration of the divine Sacrament, which you
blasphemously call a Let: page 54.
breaden Idol, in a shauelings hand. Saint Chrysostom writes, Lib. 6. de sa
cerd. cap. 4.
that a certain venerable old man, to whom many mysteries were revealed, had
told, that in the time of sacrifice, he once beheld a multitude of Angels,
with shining garments, compassing the wonderful table round about, who with
reverence in honor of him, who lies thereon, bowed their heads, as soldiers
do in presence of their King. And though these blessed Spirits, be not ever
seen, yet the majesty of him, that is daily sacrificed is such, Quod credere
abunde licet vel ex tanto illo sacrificio quod tum peragitur.
says S. Chrysostom, that we may believe they are in this humble manner
continually present. Now Sir Edward, you may send your Ministers to preach to
these Papists, and bid them as you bid Let: page 106.
us very gravely, leave their duckes, and luckes, and apish toys, and serve
God in spirit and truth.

ANSWER.
Here Mr. Flud imposes against us two points; the one that we cannot endure
the adoration of the divine Sacrament: the other, that we blasphemously call it
a breaden Idol etc. Against us he frames his argument out of Chrysostom,
which done he comes out with a vain Io triumpho, bidding Sir Edward to send
etc.

Concerning the first, I answer thus. First, if we did either believe, as they
teach, that Christ's body and blood were in the sacrament (ex vi sacramenti)
truly, naturally, and substantially; yea that whole Christ perfect God and man
were, as they deliver, in perfect shape and humane form, (ex vi
concomitantiae) by necessary concomitancie, under the forms of bread and
wine, then might we adore and worship him, though not principally placed there
for that end. Or secondly, if we did believe, as they do, concerning the
adoration of images, to wit, that the same adoration and worship may be given
to the image respectively, for the persons sake, as is to be given to the
Prototypon or person whom it represents; then doubtless we would adore and
worship this divine image, being certainly instructed according to the
doctrine of the Fathers of the second Nicene Council, and sense of holy
scriptures, that it is the Sinod. Nic. 2. act. 6.
liuelyest and perfect image, sign and representation, which the Son of God
left with his Church of that his most dreadful sacrifice upon the Cross, by
which we What we adore in the Sacrament.
were redeemed; the which so often as we have in remembrance by celebrating
the divine mysteries, we do in the use of them, worship and adore, with prone
bodies and prostrate heart^, the same sacrifice of our redemption, that is our
Redeemer himself.

But we holding their first position to have been forged in their Synagogue,
when their God making-transsubstantiation some thousand years after Christ was
hatched; and accounting their second to be no other than a heathenish and
pagan-like point of Sophistry, we dare not imitate their doings. Yet their
Reuerences (who incessantly taunt with obloquies the Church of England with
imputation of irreligiositie in this kind) may understand, that as we
Christianly and religiously use and worship the holy Sacrament of Baptism, so
we do reverence this venerable mystery of the Lords Supper; yea and at, and in
the mystery we use religious adoration and divine worship, not to the Elements
as they do not to Christ corporally and carnally present as they philosophize;
but to use the words of the Fathers of the first Nicene general Council, We
are not (humiliter intenti Con Nic. in actibus.
proposito pani ac calici, sed fide intelligimus situm in illa mensa aguum
tollentem peccat a mundi) basely intentive to the bread and cup that is
proposed, but by faith, we understand the lamb of God, who takes away the
sins of the world to be laid upon that Table. How placed upon that table? in
grace, virtue, efficacy, and by a sanctifying power; in like sort as the same
Council teaches, a heavenly fire, the sanctification of the Holy Ghost, the
very power of God to be in baptism; which manner of speaking I find
reverently alleged and approved, by the most learned and reverend Jewel of
the Church of England, whom I read citing those most Reverend Nicaene Fathers
thus: Baptism Jewel art. 5.
must be considered not with our bodily eyes, but with the eyes of our mind,
thou see the water, think thou of the power of God, that in the water is
hidden; think thou that the water is full of heavenly fire, and of the
sanctification of the Holy Ghost* Thus he truly cites the judgment of those
most learned Sages: So it is, that we by faith considering the power of Christ
^orking in and by his divine mysteries, do by faith with prone hearts, yea and
religious outward worship adore Christ, as present in efficacy, power, and
virtue of sanctification, though he be personally distant, as far as the
highest heavens are from the sacramental table. And in this manner of
declaring I speak more confidently, because that most learned Jewel writes
thus; Doubtless it is our duties to J^w. art. 8. page 404.
adore the body of God in the word of God, in the sacrament of baptism, in
the mysteries of Christ's body and blood. And the ground of this is that, which
Mounsieur Plessis affirms Pless. aga: m^sse lib. 4. cap. 6.
orthodoxly, to wit, that the Sacraments are made instruments of the Holy Ghost
for our souls food. To declare the same more particularly in this mystery,
we are to understand that the Son of God, who by a personal conjunction has
united humane nature to himself, has also been pleased to make a sacramental
respect, relation, conjunction, yea vnton, (if I may so speak of bread and
wine, which we religiously use according to his institution in the divine
mysteries) to himself both God and man: so that when we religiously use them
in the mysteries, we do not take Christ as absent in his Divinity, or as
absent in the eff^cacie of his Sacraments, but powerfully working in them and
by them, sanctifying our souls, consigning, sealing, and ratifying his
promises unto us. Herehence it is, that whilst we religiously use his
Sacraments, and with a Christian faith consider these things, we cannot but
with reverent and religious demeanor The reason of our kneeling when we
receive the Sacrament.
and carriage, both inward and outward take the same, and yield divine worship
to him* whose invisible hand is here efficaciously working and effecting the
salvation of our sonles: so that in the actual and present use of these holy
signs and symboles, we do believe and confess, that Christ Jesus both God
and man, is really, truly, and effectually working in us, yea united to our
souls by faith and religious use of his sacred symboles and Sacraments. And is
not this that (I need not cite any Doctors of the Church of England, whose
doctrine is most clear in this point) which Calvin plainly delivers Calvin.
lib. 4. Institut: cap. 17.
thus: In sacra sua coena etc. He commands me in his sacred Supper, under the
symboles of bread and wine, to receive his body and blood: I nothing doubt but
that he truly reaches unto me the same, and I truly receive the same, thus he
in his Institutions.

And upon the sixth and twentieth of S. Matthew, he Calvin. in 26. Matthew.
ingenuously acknowledges, that our souls are fed with the substance of his
flesh, so that we are made one with him.

Thus we religiously and christianly believe and practice, notwithstanding we
are not afraid to call the practice See Isa: Caussab: ad Card: P^ron: obseruat.
5. Respon: Reg: what our Church holds.
of Papists, a wicked superstition to a breaden Idol. For if by consent of all
Learned, that is to be reputed an Idol, which being but a creature has divine
worship and adoration given unto it, then your bread and wine proposed, which
are creatures in themselves, and so called by the Ancients after consecration,
being adored with Iren. lib. 4. c. 34. Theodoret. dialog. A^ij.
divine adoration and worship, cannot but be reputed an Idol. We would not
account your Sacrament an Idol, if you taught the same to be only an Image
representative, and in efficacy exhibitiue of Christ absent, but because you
make it an Image contentiue of Christ substantially, and naturally present, it
being not so; this your image must needs be Imago inanis, a vain Image, which
as your Bellarmine delivers, is properly an Idol if adored and worshipped, as
yours is. You Mr. Flud (that Bellar. lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 5. Lactant. Arnol.
Orig: Eusebius. and Theodoret. August. de Ciuit. lib. 7. Maximus Tirius sermon. 38.
Di^ Chrysostom. orat. 12. Exodus: 32.
are learned, as I take it in the Ancients) cannot but have observed, how the
Fathers call the Images and Statues of the Heathens, Idols, because they gave
unto the same, being but Creatures, divine adoration and worship; and yet
notwithstanding they were persuaded, that (quaedam numina habit abant in illis)
certain Deities did inhabit the same; yea some of them were persuaded as the
Israelites of their golden Calfe, that the Lord God of heaven and earth did
inhabit and reside in their Statues.

So you vainly teach and believe, that (sanctissimum numen) that Christ Jesus
does corpoally reside and inhabit in your bread and wine, making an Idol
thereof; in which respect, we desire your patience not to be offended if we
call the same your Clerks handy work; and your Priests mouth work a breaden
Idol, you adoring the creature for the Creator. For should we otherwise
esteem of any thing which the hand and mouth of a Creature can make, which the
mouth and stomach of a Creature can unmake as you all teach. And which (if we
believe ancient Rabanus) the power nutritive does Rab. apud Wald. lib. 2. de
sacra. cap. 29. Orig: hom. 15. in Math. Jsichius in Leuit.
convert into nourishment of the body; if Origin, the power digestive does cast
in secessum into the privy. which daily experience tells that the thief can
steal, the fire consume, the mouse eat, should I say we otherwise esteem of
this then as of a Creature, you might rather esteem us for idiotizing Idols,
then reasonable creatures. But to you, and yours, who are so full of your
imputation of madness to others, may we not say as Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom.
57. in Genesis
to Laban; O excellentem insipientiam etc. O excellent folly such are your
Gods, that any man may steal them! Or in like sort as God by the mouth of
Jeremy, reproved the Babilonians, O excellentem etc. so we you; O excellent
madness, such are your Gods that a man may make them. But o most
superexcellent impiety, such are your Gods Isichius in Leuit.
as they may be burned! By this you may see M. Flud how little reason, you have
to say, we blaspheme, when as we call your bread and wine, or as you speak
your divine sacrament, being adored, a breaden Idol. Remember Number. 21.
Sir, how the brazen Serpent which was made by Gods special appointment, yea
and religiously used by his command, yet afterward came to be abused to be
made an Idol, so that the religious King Ezechias destroyed and burned the
same: Call to mind what Damascene 2. Reg. 18.
delivers* how certain Christians committed Idolatry in worshipping the
Image of Christ: In Epiphanius you may read (related also by your Bellarmine)
how Damas. lib. de* haees. Bell lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 16.
Carpocrates was reputed an Idolater, for worshipping of Christ's Image. As
these were accounted Idolaters for adoring of the Image of Christ, and the
Images of Christ so adored (I say so adored, for God auert that I should
account the Image it self to be an Idol but rather a worthy remembrance) no
other then Idols, even so you, (if you did imitate Christ's institution in your
sacramental action which you do not) are worthily reputed to commit Idolatry
in giving divine worship to that, which ought to have no other then a
religious and reverent use, which we most willingly yield unto the same, as by
practice of our Church may and does appear most clearly.

To proceed, when you come to prove that your divine sacrament ought to be
adored, through penury of sacred Scripture, and some direct command of the
ancient Church, you run to a vision related by S. Chrysostom and that by a
hearsay; you indeed telling the tale, deliver the same as though Saint
Chrysostom had heard it from the venerable visioners mouth but it was not so;
he heard only (quendam) a certain one some one (he names him not) that
reported it of an other old man; and this if you would not have read so in
Chrysostom himself, you might have so found him cited by your Bellarmine, so
that this tale comes to Chrysostom Bell. de Euchar: lib. 2. cap. 22.
by a third Person, not by the Illightened Saint himself. For my part, as I
find you to relate this with false fingers; so I doubt not but some false Lad
has abused that Father; For who will once imagine, that so learned and
profound a Prelate, woule relate such a tale upon a hearsay? But, put the case
to be so, and the vision to be true; do you not think that the glorious
spirits have that illuminated sharpness of eie-sight, that they always do
(wheresoever they be) behold the face of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost?
always behold the face of the Son both God and man? What marvel then, if
they adore the son, whom they behold powerfully and divinely working upon the
mystical table, being in his divine essence God head and Person present, yea
his very humanity is not there absent to the blessed spirits, whose spiritual
eyes require no corporal presence, nor luminous space to behold what they see,
but always and every where, they behold the divine face, yea and the humane face
of Christ also, God and man, from which they are never absent, But Chrysostom
says; they bow their heads in reverence of him who lies thereon. O well
instanced, for, yet now at last we have the manner of sit^ and disposition of
their Christ's body, upon the Altar; the perplexed knot is now untied, Christ
lies forsooth; but why resolves he not, whether he lie prone or supine? with
what proportion of his parts and members? whether Christ's head be where his toe
is? whether his elbowes be where his knee is? and so throughout as your
Vasquez, and most of your Scholastickes do deliver.

But it is obseruable in this vision, how these Papists as M. Flud calls
them, do but only ducke like Soldiers in presence of their Emperor, Ah Sir!
where is that prone adoration befitting Angels in the presence of their You
should do well to tell the Spanish Gallants that will not kneel to your
Eucharist God how a certain soldier adoring the same let fall his cloak into
the mire and yet it was not bemired Spect. Exemp verbo Eucharist. Exe^. 9.
God? especially God elevated? that is presented purposely to be adored? Surely
they are like, unto the Spanish, Italian, and French Gallants, whereof many
hold it sufficient to bow their heads and to scrape a little with their
legs, when your God is elevated in your Mass* Or else they might have a
Papalike privilege, whose fashion is, often only to bow when others adore at
the presence of your God: I think with your good leave we may imagine, that
these your Angell-Papists had feet for else it cannot be well conceited, how
they should bow their heads, for if they had no other then heads and breasts,
it cannot be imagined that the bowing of their heads was any other, then the
hanging down of their heads somewhat sullenly in their bosoms: It may be you
will grant they had legs, but kneeled not because they soared and hung in the
air about the altar, or in that they had no fit subject, nor cushions to
kneel upon; be it as you please, your Visioner was not his Craftsman (though
he had many revelations) in this one so to mistake.

Out of this one mystery, and once revealed, and to one, your Chrysostom
goes on to infer thus; that we may believe, like blessed Spirits though they
be not ever seen, to be in like humble manner continually present, and this
for the Majesty of him who is daily sacrificed: What Sir* must we understand
this your Chrysostomes inference only of your Masse-time, when your Christ is
sacrificed? or else also, whenever your Christ is closely locked up in your
Church Tabernacles? If your counterfeit Chrysostomes reason of majesty hold for
masse-time, why may not reason of necessity serve for other times, when your
God has need of Attendants, to defend him from Rats, Mise? yea and sometimes
from such Persons as he was who of late broke some and took some of your Gods,
from the Tabernacle of the Benedictine English Monks in Loreyne: you cannot be
ignorant, but that such an accident happened; The person who did the same has
since ingenuously confessed unto me, with many obtestations and execrations
against himself, if he spoke not truth, to wit; that he himself being
doubtful about the truth of the Sacrament, your Transubstantiation, and real
presence; did the same: praying most earnestly and heartily, that God would be
pleased for the satisfying of his conscience to show some miracle either upon
him or against him, he desiring nothing more, then assurance of truth, and he
had this resolution; that if God had then showed some token upon your
Sacrament, he had stayde with you: but seeing nothing was done notwithstanding
such his usage of your Sacrament (whereof your Monks can best relate the
manner by reason of such broken and scattered pieces as we^e left behind) he
resolved finally to return back again to the Church of England, where he
now lives soberly and Christianly and tells no news of any attendant or
defendant Angels; surely had there been any he had smarted for it. This your
counterfeit Chrysostom tells Lib. 6. de Sacerd.
us, that (per id tempus etc.) at the time of the sacrifice Angels do sit with
the Priest yea Potestatum etc. The whole Order of the Powers does move clamours
and shoutings etc. That the place is full of quires of Angels etc. If this be
so, surely heaven must needs be very naked and empty of Angels, and blessed
Spirits; or else there are not so many Quires and troops of Angels attendant
upon your millions of Altars as this your Author vainly pretends. Besides,
if these your Angels do familiarly asside and sit down at the sacrificing
altar, with the Priest, how comes it to pass that your said Chrysostom says
that Angelividentes etc. The Angels beholding (your sacrifice) are surprised
with honor, and dare not fre^ly look upon the same in respect of the
brightness which thereout shines? What coherence is here familiarly to asside
with the Priest? and yet so overtaken with horror and dread that they dare not
freely behold the same? What Sir? the blessed Angell^, who ever behold the
eternal Majesty of God? who intuitiuely contemplate the divine essence and
Gods face, do these conceive such horror and dread of your sacramental Gods
that they dare not (libere intueri) freely behold the same (propter emicantem
inde splendorem) for the splendor arising therefrom? O blasphemous voice of
vanity, your best defense for your forged Author, must be he does
hyperbolize. Vnumquodque est quid in suo genere, sic vos in Ignatiano, so he
that corrupted Chrysostom. But seeing you are delighted with such a tale, to
make it as a foundation of your bread-worship I will give a short glance at a
few tales nay true histories which shall fit your purpose, and show your
Romanists vanity in their bread worship and transubstantiating divinity.
Where were these your Papist Angels, that none of them did smite in sunder
that lewd Priest, who being carried to punishment, did in Rome as he passed by a
Bakers shop say over all the bread that was in the same those alpotent five
words, by which he consecrated all the bread, that was there? you have heard
what perplexity fell to the Romanists thereupon.

Not long since, there was in these parts a pair of The Papists sacrament* god
has needed the attendance of Papist-Angells.
counterfeit Friars now returned again to you; of which two, the Julian one,
related to me often, that in the Carmelitane Cenobies some mad Friars would (to
quit themselves of drinking sour wine) go and use the words of consecration
over the barrells and vessels in which it was, which done; knowledge being
taken thereof, in a secret manner, all the same must be reputed sacred and
consecrated A notable trick of Carmelite Monks.
so that it might not be used or touched. The truth of this tale, be with the
Author of it Julius; but if it were true, marvel that no one of all the
powerful Attendants Order did avenge so damnable Impiety. Perhaps those
blessed Spirits, were pleased to be present at such a dreadful sacrifice and
did excite applauding clamours for so divine a work, to have a new consecrated
God within a hogshead; a kind numen never thought on before: What? were all
these Angels keeping centinell in Italy, when as not long ago in Scotland the
Ape of a great Princess, caught out of the hands of a Priest at Sacrifice your
sacrament, and eat it: for which the Ape had surely died, had not the
Princess interceded for his life.

You bid Sir Edward send some of his Ministers to preach to these Papists
Angels: nay rather in good carnest The negligence of M. Floods Papist-angells.
we advise you to persuade some of them to look better to their charge then
they have done heretofore; Tell them of their often negligence heretofore
committed, by suffering the Sacrament to fall to the ground in Germany, France,
Spain, and England; you cannot forget, but that it fell to ground in the
English Church at Rome; you cannot but have heard, how a fly fell into a Liber
Conformit.
consecrated chalice, like unto that Spider of Friar Francis; only the
difference was, that of Friar Francis was A flic-heretike.
drunk up by the Friar and came out of his shin-bone, he rubbing the same, the
other though pursued hotly yet escaped; had she been caught she had been
burnt for an Heretic.

Put them in mind of their error, that they suffered the people Romanists in
Germany, to trample with their feet such their sacrament Gods as were made
and consecrated by married Priests: And how negligent they were, to suffer
Gregory the 7. that helbrand of Civil Benno Cardinal. in vita Hildebr*
commotion, and wars, throughout all Christendom, to take the sacrament God,
and to cast the same into the fire.

Demand of them where they were, when that worthy Christian Master Walter
Marshe, did in Rome strike the sacrament-God out of the Bishops hand as he
carried the same in public procession, through the streets; for My motives
preface. Pope Adrian a good Papist-Angell for their God. Adrian. quodl. 3. page
63.
which he suffered death most constantly.

Bid them be very vigilant against Heretics that they catch none of the
sacrament, lest that you be put to such a plunge which Adrian your Pope
allows, to wit, rather to cast the same into the privy, then to suffer it to
come into the hands of Heretics.

If they will not be vigilant against Heretics (as they have not been) at
lest let them be careful against Coniurers and Nigromancers, or else conjure
them to tell you, Con Later. can. 20. Con. Brac. 3.
how it comes to pass, that the Devils themselves are delighted to have
your sacrament God presented and offered unto them, in their most detestable
sacrifices and ceremonies.

Charge them with horrible negligence, for suffering the sacrament-god which
Alphonsus King of Arragon carried about him for his defense, to be
transubstantiated by corruption into worms.

To conclude this point, and to pretermit many tales of like kind, which might
be added; I think your order apointing certain Deacons with flyeflaps to
drive away flies when your Pope celebrateth, were very superfluous Constitut.
lib. 8. cap. 12. Turrian Durant.
if there were such Quires of Angels, attending upon your sacrament-god:
Clement whom you make Author of this flyeflap ceremony seems not to have
been of your faith herein.

Mr. Flud page 146. number. 28.
The sight of the bleeding wafercake at Bruxells, seems to have made your
ears glowe, Let. page 106.
but what stories of like miracles might you read, were you conversant in
ancient Ecclesiastical histories? A miracle done by Saint Basil in this
kind, to omit others, a grave Cyrus Theodor. Prod^^mus. who lived ann 440. in
Epigram D. Basilij.
Author abone 1200. years ago wrote in verse, which one thus turned into
English:

Beholding bread and in the cup red wine,
The lew did laugh at mysteries divine:
Which when Saint Basil saw, both kinds of food
Reached out, which straight turned into flesh and blood.
ANSWER.
If Sir Edwardes ears did glowe to hear the fond narrations of your wafercake
at Bruxells, his Christian zeal therein is to be commended, and the impudency
of Fablers with very spite to be reproved; who still M^torran. lib. 10 hist.
Belg. ad* An. 1581.
harp upon the same lying stringe already exploded by public proclamation of
the Senate of Bruxells. I perceive Sir, you are willing upon an old hearesay to
take up the fable to which none can give testimony by a clear sight say.
There be who in time of their blind zeal were at Bruxells, where also they
made as diligent scrutinie and inquiry after the prodigious Wafer-cake as
possibly might be, and yet they could not understand any one good circumstance
for the certainty thereof; only cer^a^e doubtful rumors, as many, and as
contrary, as were the Relators. I have observed one essential circumstance of
all your miracles, your Mirabilists seem to play boo peep and alls hid in
their miracles. And as I have heard of some, who have been said every morning
to find gold in their old shoes, until they made that their good fortune
known (for thereupon the^r kind Robbin left them) even so you have miracles,
wonders, cures, restitutions, resuscitations in your Churches, Chappells*
hills, woods, valleys, vaults: until you made your good fortune known and
gloried therein (as in a note of your Church you do) whereupon presently, all
is past away as a blast of wind.

Many were the prodigies, and sundry were the Oracles which were of old done
and delivered by Apollo, Juno, etc. but no sooner appeared Christ, but the
Oracles ceased, wonders vanished, yea the very presence of a Chrysostom. lib. 4.
contra Gentes.
Christian: more; the vicinitie or neighboring only of a Saints dead body,
was able to stop their mouths, and to bind their hands; such is the case of
your Mirabilists and Oraclists, they can do no wonder in the presence of a true
Christian, they can deliver no Oracle, their mouths are stopped, their hands
are bound. How unlike are these of yours to those of Christ and his Apostles,
which were done in the sight and face of the Adversary, yea upon the enemy
himself, so that there could be no exceptions against them.

Sir, your hearsay of the wafer-cake, the bleeding thereof, and miracles done
thereby, is like your hearesay when you write thus: That you have heard, how
those Purgat. trium. page 138.
potent and pious Princes, the Archduke and his Lady, did (producing witnesses
of the same) show your miraculous A notorious untruth of M. Flod.
Creature John Clement cured at your Ladies of Sichem (as Lipsius does report)
unto the R: Honorable Earl of Hartford when he was there in Embassage for his
Majesty: y^^ you add, that it was very probable, thus Sir Edward was then
present at the same sight, he attending upon the Earl in the same Embassage:
but I think Sir Edwards Nick-Groome in his Purgatories knell, has curryed you
well Page: 236.
and handsomely for this Ignatian like ouer-reaching. I will not here relate
the answer or the letter which the R: Honorable Earl wrote to refute this
vanity of Mr. Flud; I rather refer the Reader to that Book, and wish him to
read the chapter wherein the Lipsian miracles are morterized. For my part I
must confess, I never read a more fit kind of refutation of Lipsian
prodigies, for Purg Knel. cap: 5.
Nick-Grome has curryed them, even so as a lade ought to be dealt withal.

You proceed, and tell Sir Edward very wisely thus, that if he were acquainted
in ancient Ecclesiastical histories, what might he not find of like kind
with your Lipssan miracles? Now the Vicar of St. Fools be your Ghostly Father.
If Sir Edward might find, why do not you relate some autenticall one? why tell
you us only of an Epigram written I cannot tell by whom? fetched out of the
grave of oblivion? why may not we make this Epigr^^ (filium populi) a bastard
as well as your ancient Amphilochius (out of whom Harding and who else not of
your side have fetched arguments for private mass etc.) is now found to be a
very Spurye of some idle Monk, by your own Cheifetaines?

Your Rabbis of Babylon have raked out of all corners, whatsoever obscure
Manuscripts they could get, and have obtruded the same unto the world under the
title of Bibliotheca Sanctorum Patrum, when as in many it is forged Fathers
no other then Pseudotheca Falsariorum. You are not ignorant sir, how your
Roman Papacy has her cheifest corner stones from out of certain Decretall
Epistles, which as yet stand in your Canon Law, and are very venerable in your
Church. And yet of these your Champion Bellarmine (non audet affirmare
indubitatas esse) dare Bell de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 14.
not affirm them to be of undoubted truth for their Authors. Some of them he
in plain terms accounts supposititious: many of your learned Doctors
affirm the same, yet in secret propter metum Purpuratorum: Contius that Con^:
in cap. Septuaginta, did. 16. This point excellently handled by Mr. R^ynold
against Heart.
your famous Canonist has more constantly discarded them as bastardly Impes as
indeed they are. If these books of so long credit in your Church, are now
found to be spurious, what shall we think of this your lame and heavy
Prodromus, which comes out so long after the Fair?

But to show some pretty tricks of this your Falsarie; How silly is he in his
invention? he seems to affirm that Basil did reach out mysteries divine,
when the Jew had laughed at the same, and that presently they were turned into
flesh. Your Durantus does out of Amphilochius Durant. deritib: lib. 2. page 556.
and this Cirus relate this prodigy far otherwise, and in commendation of
the Jew, but he speaks nothing of the Jews laughing at the mysteries, but
affirms how he coming in to behold the Christians fashion, observed
(Infantom partiri in manibus Basilij) An Infant to be divided in Basills
hands. (O vanity! Christ as an Infant is now become the Eucharistioall
sacrifice of the Cross) which after he had seen, he approached himself
amongst other Christians, and there was given to him an Host, which was truly
made flesh, part whereof he carried home, told to his wife all he had seen,
and so he and his whole family became Christian. How do these reports accord?
compare them M Flud, and you shall find, that the testimonies do not agree;
your Epigrammatist tells us not what manner of flesh it was, but Durant does;
that it was made truly flesh. Durant tells us, that he carried relics, (cuius
seruans reliquias) part of that he took home to his wife, which your relation
has not; he had surely a strong stomach to eat a piece of Christ's flesh in
the form of flesh, and to carry part of it home with him; perhaps it was
either sodd, baked or roasted; pity that the host did not appear in the
form of the Infant which S. Basil divided, that so he might have carried home
with him a little Babe for his wife to play withal.

This tale of yours is related also by counterfeit Amphilochius; Amphilo. vita
Basil.
what if out of him your Cirus Prodromus too^e ^he same? then down to the
ground falls the credit thereof. And as I think, the credit thereof cannot be
great, though Prodromus be the first Author of it. For all the narration
depends upon the Jews honesty, who affirmed himself to have seen such and
such things. A weak ground for you M. Flud to build so principal a point of
faith thereon: and unworthily is he termed a grave Author, who upon so slight
a testimony, A feigned tale of a Jew.
would commend to all posterity so prodigious a narration. Your grave Author
should have done well to have told us from whom he had the tale; again in
particular to have declared, whether the flesh were a piece of dead flesh, such
as is sold in the shambles, or whether it were a living lump. Again of what
part of man it seemed to be, whether a piece of a leg arm, face, o^ thigh.
etc. so prodigious a miracle deserved a more particular enarration then is made
by your Author.

But having done with the Author I demand of you M. Flud, whether this flesh
were Christ's flesh or not; if so, then it was personally united to the God
head; if not, then your poor Jew had neither Christ's true flesh, nor a true
Sacrament of his flesh, as is too too manifest: the latter to affirm were
mere vanity, the former blasphemous impiety. But you who dally thus
profanely with metamorphizing of Christ's flesh, call to mind what the Adam of
all your Scholastikes, Alexander Hales Alexand. Hal: part 4. q. 53. apud
Suar^m. Mark the Heresiarch caused blood to appear in the cup. Iren. cont.
here is. lib. 1. c. 9. Suarez in 3. Tho. disput. 62. sect. 2. How the devil may
deceive according to the opinion of the Scholastikes in 1. part. Aquin.
affirms, that by the operation of the devil (a bold devil who dare so
presume with your God) there sometimes appears flesh in the Sacrament. Yea
and that of your grand Suarez, to wit, that the devil dare be so bold with
your Sacrament as to touch it, and carry it from one place to another. And to
abide within the principles of your scholastike Divines, is there any thing
here related by you, which might not have been done by the power of Satan;
either by transfusion of species into the air, or by casting some cloudy or
aerie resemblance; or else by corrupting and deceiving the fantasies of the
beholders?

Further it seems admirable to me, how Basil so grave and learned a Father,
would think of doing so strange a miracle, and yet not once invocate the name
of God, but only reach out the mysteries, and so (vi extensionis) The Laickes
of old touched the Sacrament, now for fear of destruction they must not touch
your Altar. clothes. Cap. vestiment. de Cons. did. 1.
by the force of an extension or reaching them out only to metamorphize them.
Again, it seems strange, how he reached both the kinds of foodes together,
perhaps one in the one hand, and the other in the other hand, that ^o both
hands might be full with a god, or two gods at the same time. And if he reached
out both the foods, he did surely reach them out to some who were ready to
receive the same, which condemns your halfe-communion, in that you do
contrary to Christ's institution, deny the Cup to the Laity, reaching to them
but one of the foods only. But how did he reach out both to a Jew laughing and
scorning? perhaps the Jew laughed not at first, but at the second, or else he
laughed at both, because both were given at once? and did it beseem Basil to
give the holy mysteries to a Jew laughing? etc. You tell us that you omit
diverse others of like kind, perhaps Johan. D^acon: vita Greg. lib. 2. cap. 41.
that former tale of S. Gregory and the Bakers wife; or else perhaps the tale
when a fellow had stolen away a pixe, in which your Sacrament-God was, and how
he to hide the same thrust it into his breeches, whereupon his breeches became
all bloody; you will not admit I trow that he was so be blooded with the blood
of your Sacrament-God: fie, fie, so to say were too unseemly, and deserves a
save reverence before the tale can be mannerly told. You mean withal perhaps
the Sacrament, which fell in Rome upon the ground and left an impression in the
hard stones of the same: over which there is made a small grate of iron, and
through it superstitious women thrust their beads, to touch the same
impression in the stones, and having so done, do often most fondly busse and
rebusse their beads.

You should not have left out the tale of the woman, which threw your Sacrament
God to the Swine, and how the Swine adored the same; and when she roasted
Speculum exemp. in discip* verbo Eucharistia.
it how blood issued thereout, and how when she (to conceal her offense) went
and hid the sacrament in the ground, she prevailed not, for whithersoeuer she
went blood followed her from the same: whereupon she was moved to repentance,
and did afterward great penance all her lifetime for her so grievous a
sin. I have done with this your miracle, yet I cannot but propose one
question to you; the pretended blood of the Sacrament-God at Bruxells, is it
true blood of Christ or not? if so; then it must be living, being personally
united to your God, how then does the fresh color thereof decay, and it
appear like dead blood? if it be not the true blood of Christ, what then do
you therein Their Sacrament Christ become an Ignatian and can equivocate
adore? or, does it beseem Christ, so to delude and equivocate by making show
of that which is not? How vain are these men, they neither adore Gods blood,
nor the sacrament of his blood, but a forged resemblance of his blood.

Mr. FLOD page: 146. number: 28.
Our miracles, that concern the keeping of Christ's Image with honorable
esteem, seems to you to confirm Idolatry; but what say you of that
miracle, which Eusebius reports Lib. 3. ^ist. cap. 14.
of the image of Christ, erected by the woman which was cured of her flux, by
the touch of his garment? under which a strange herb growing, as soon as it
touched the hemme of the garment of the Image, it had virtue to cure all
diseases.

ANSWER.
Now we are to come to oppose against the fondest point of idolatry, which is
in Popery: for although in their Mass, abominable idolatry is committed, yet
because The idolatry of Papists most horrible.
in it they pr^tend to have Christ totally and personally present, they may
seem to have some pretenced excuse for their impiety therein. But for their
worshipping and adoring Pictures with divine worship, to wit, the Image of the
Trinity with (I conceive horror to write it) the self same adoration,
wherewith the most glorious and dreadful Trinity it self is to be adored,
Aquinas in 3. q. 25. Thom^st. pene omnes. Vasquez Valent. Suarez.
their impiety herein is most inexcusably fond. For as they all pretend, they
give the adoration of the prototipon and thing it self to the image, because
the image does represent the thing it self. O profound Divinity! as though
the consideration of representing, were more then a mere relation, a nothing,
(a part re^) but is only when it is thought on; and howsoever it be thought
upon, it is infinitely far inferior in dignity, then the divine Persons it
does represent: and so in no respect to The ground of popish Idolatry about
Images founded upon a relation.
have the same adoration with the persons themselves. But Mr. Flud wipeth his
mouth, and would seem to conclude all their worshipping of Images in an
honorable esteem of them; for so be his words: Our miracles that concern the
keeping of Christ's image with honorable esteem. But I demand of you in good
earnest Mr. Fl^d, is your adoration of the Pictures of GOD (cultu latriae)
Cultus latriae.
with the worship of servitude and service? the worshipping of the Images of
the blessed Virgin Marye (cultu hyperduliae Cultus hyperduliae. Cultus duliae.
) with the worship of high service? the worshipping of the pictures of Saints
(cultu duliae) with the worship of service, only an honorable esteem? The
least of these cannot be less then a serviceable esteem: there must needs
then be more than an honorable regard: for honoramus cuius seruitium
aspernamur, we honor those whose service we disdain. He who shall read what
your Aquin part. 3. Bellarm: lib. 2. de Imag.
Angelical Aquinas, Bellarmine, Vasquez, Suarez, Valentia, and most of your
learned Doctors do resolutely deliver in this case, cannot be so purblinded as
not to find, but that your Church gives more than an honorable esteem to
your Images. An honorable esteem or regard to the images of Christ
pourtraited or drawn according to truth, was never denied by any Oxthodoxe
Christian of the reformed Churches. Our practice is clear in this point, for
we keep such if they be without circumstance of superstitious use or
signification, with due regard. I except only such humorous Precisians whom
Majesty has excellently described to be no other then Protestants run out
of their wits. These indeed cannot endure the sight of a Picture representing
Christ crucified; I my self not long since having in my Parlour the picture of
Christ upon the Cross drawn i^ paper, together with the pictures of his most
excellent Majesty, our Queen, our late Prince Henry, Prince Charles etc. I
was by diverse reputed not to be a sound Protestant for having the same picture
of Christ. To my face a Minister (in practice very uncomfortable to the orders
of the Church) made a scornful demand whose picture that of Christ should
be. But leaving them, I demand of you M. Flud, is your religious creeping to a
wooden Crucifixe upon Good-Fridayes with fixed and prone countenance, prostrate
bodies, three several genuslexions, and religious kissing of the same; Is this
(I say) only an honorable esteem? that it is not so, may appear by the three
several inuitations which your Priest makes to the people, when he
uncovers the Crusifixe which is to be adored. The fashion of your Romanist
Church is to keep your Images all the year uncovered in their faces at lest,
but in lent you veyle them for most part thereof with red or white; but after
passion Sunday, you cover them with black veiles especially your Crucifixes,
that you are to adore (herein you imitate both Grecians and Romans, Polidor.
lib. 2. cap. 23.
these ever covering their Images, those having them always naked etc.) Now
upon your Good Friday the Priest standing at the left end of your Altar, and
beginning to uncover the same, makes three gradations with his hands and three
with his feet and at three several times The Papists superstition on Good
friday.
does uncover it; but at each uncovering, he sings aaloud unto the people
and Clergy thus: (Ecce lignum Crucis) Behold the wood of the Cross; the
Clergy and People falling or kneeling prostrate upon the ground, answer and
sing aloud (venite adoremus) Come let us adore: This is done three several
times; and so presently follows the creeping to the Cross, laid upon a fair
cushion with a linen cloth thereupon; to which cross the Priest first
creeps, he only having charge, before he does the same to pull off his shoes
because the place is holy in which the wodden Crucifixe lodges. This being
your practice answereable to your doctrine, with what face M. Flud do you call
this your doing an honorable esteem only? Well said Polidore of your Churches
practice Polid. lib. 6. cap. 13.
about Images, haec pars pietatis eo ventum est vt parum differat ab impietate.
This part of piety is come to that pass that it little differs from
impiety. So he, though in profession a zealous Papist.

But that we may the better answer your argument, out of Eusebius, and
distinguish the use of Images, we are to consider three principal ends which
may be Three principal ends of Images.
made of them.

The first end that they may be thankful remembrances of those to whom we
are in duty bound.

The second, that they may be as moral or historical instructions to the
beholder.

The third, to have them for religious worship and adoration.

Touching the first I see no cause why it should be reproved, it being
practiced by all nations, toward their Sovereigns and Magistrates, both
living and departed; only it is expedient, that great care be had, that the
pictures be drawn (especially in Persons and matters of religion) according
to the very truth of the history, not as it is now practiced in Popery,
according to the Painters fancy: whereof we have amongst them a very late and
fresh example to their shame and confusion. It is not unknown to England how
upon the death of the Archpowder-Traytor Garnet, there was a pretended
miraculous straw carried up and down with his face made miraculously upon it;
The same was seen, and reseene; viewed, and reuiewed by diverse of all
professions; high, and low; and for ought that I could ever hear, it could not
be very perfectly discerned by any: I am assured many notorious Papists have
affirmed as much, yea the Great Gage of Bently (a man full of faith in their
Church) looking upon it very carefully could Diverse zealous Papists of very
good rank amongst them have told me that the face in the straw was so
obseure that they could very hardly discern it.
not perceive it. But what followed? The strawye face was carried over into
Flaunders, where it so mounted in clearenesse, that at Mountes and elsewhere,
some shes Painteresses looking in their monasteries through (...) Ignatian
spectacles have drawn the face most gloriously* as adorned with shining
celestial beams round about it; with a crown upon the head, a Cherub upon
the chinne, a star on the forehead, all the proportion of the face clear and
perfect. Out of this one learn their false-dealing in all; what may future
ages beholding so glorious a face conjecture thereout, else, but a notorious
and prodigious Ignatian likelye. Fie upon such impudent dealing frons
meretricis facta est vobis, nescitis erubescore, An impudent ingraued lie of
the Ignatians.
you are become impudent and cannot blush, and dare Rome approve these things
even in the face of the Adversary?

But to your argument out of Eusebius, all the Phenician woman did in the
erecting of that brassie Image of Christ before her doors, was nothing else,
but to make a grateful remembrance and monument to her Deliverer; wherein she
was not to be condemned, as neither some other Christians, which did the like.
You might have observed this out of Eusebius, who censuring this woman's
Eusebius lib. 7. hist. cap. ^8.
fact writes thus: It is not to be marvelled, that Ethnikes receiving some
benefits from our savior, did such things; for we have seen the pictures of
Peter and Paul, and Christ drawn in colors, and kept by some: which seems
to me, to have been observed out of an heathenish custom, by which they were
accustomed so to honor those, whom they thought worthy of honor, and reputed
for their deliuerers; so Eusebius passes his judgment; And that the laudable
Christian woman did not adore or worship it, is apparent for that she placed
the same before her doors; and that the After christians did not worship nor
adore the same, it is also clear by that which Nicephorus has, to Niceph.
lib. 10. cap. 30.
wit, that it was so neglected standing (sub dio) open to wind and weather,
that it was so defaced, that there was no resemblance nor show in it, whose it
should be: had they been then of your now Roman faith, they would have
erected some Church or Chapel over the same, and the miraculous herb, with
far more reason, then you have done lately at Hall, Sichem, Lile,
Montserratto, Garganum, Arras (and where not*) for some of your feigned Dioses.
As for the herb whereof Eusebius makes mention, though some give little
credit to the same; Bodin. method. histor. Ioh. 9. 6.
I see no great reason why it should be denied; For Christ who did open the
eyes of the blind with earth and spittle, might also if it pleased him, impart
power to a simple herb to work like admirable effects: But as the blind man
cured would have hardly been thought to have had his eyes, at lest the eyes of
his understanding opened, if he should have adored with divine worship the
earth and spittle, wherewith his eyes were opened; so likewise would the
Christians of Phenicia have been thought infatuated with the Spirit of
Paganism, if they should have adored the herb or Image, for the cures done
thereby. Did the Christians adore Peter's shadow? Act. 5. 15. and 19. 12.
did they worship Paul's napkines? because cures were done thereby? What Sir?
may all those Creatures be worshipped by which God does bestow his benefits?
then undoubtedly the Sun, and Moon, the other If religious worship may be
given to Creatures by which God works miracles, then also some kind of
worship may be given to the Sun and Moon etc.
Planets and heavenly Orbs may be worshipped, with some kind of worship, by
which God does cumulate benefits upon mankind. The heathenish sacrifices and
superstitions were all founded upon this principle; yea those who now in the
Indies worship the Devil; the reason is, because by him they receive some
benefits: In sum Sir, as no kind of worship can be without superstition, if
given to creatures by which God imparteth natural benefits; so neither may any
be given to such creatures, by which God is pleased to work any supernatural
effects, as he does in case of miracles.

Thus is all you have produced out of Eusebius clearly refuted, and retorted
upon your own head.

Now to speak a word or two concerning those ends of Images which I mentioned
before.

Touching the first I see no reason to condemneit, the Sea Calvin lib.
institut. cap. 3. de lege in exemp. 2. precept. number. 34. 35.
same agreeing with the practice of the best and most reformed Churches.

Concerning the second end for moral and historical instruction, I do not
consider any intrinsecall malice in the same, yet considering the pronenesse of
men's hearts to superstition, whereof Saint Austen discourses August. in Psalm:
113.
very excellently; I cannot but account it a point of great danger to have the
same drawn or set up in the house of God, where Gods worship and adoration is
only to be given to himself: the ground whereof is that which very truth
extorteth out of Aquinas whose words are these: Aquin. 2. 2. q. 97. art: 4. ad
3.
de ratione diuinae excellentiae etc. It is the nature of the divine
Excellency, that it be singular and incommunicable, and therefore it is all one
to do any thing against the divine Reverence, and to communicate divine
Reverence to another, thus he: So that the placing of Pictures and Images as
religious objects in Gods house, especially, if placed as upon altars; cannot
be without danger of having divine reverence given unto them.

Our Adversaries object against us the authority of Gregory the Great, who in
his Epistle to Serenus reproves him for defacing of certain Images, which the
people did adore; but if his authority be good against the Greg: epist. lib.
7. epist. 54. Aug. in Psalm. 113. Arno^: contra Gent: Lactan: F^rm: institut.
Epiphan. in epist. ad Ioh. Hieroselimit.
defacers of images, then it must be also current and sound against the
worshippers of Images, for he is as earnest against them as either Serenus,
Austen, Athanasius, Arnobius, Lactantius, or as Epiphanius, who in like sort as
Serenus, pulled down another Image placed in a place of prayer, imitating
therein the holy zeal of good King Ezechias.

You tell us that Images are the Idiots books; I doubt not but historical
Images may be allowed in some places for the simple and learned to look upon;
if they be such pictures, as are drawn according to the truth of history not
according to the Painters fancy, otherwise they will lead into error; as for
example, what do your people learn by having the sacred Trinity pourtraited
and drawn as you do? I could tell you of diverse of your English-papists, who
thereby were fallen into the very heresy of the Anthropomorphytes; and when I
told them of their error, they could very hardly be drawn from it, thinking
it to be the faith of the Roman Catholic Church, by whose authority such
pictures were allowed.

What I pray you, may your Simples learn by observing how you trick up with
gowns and kirtles; with crowns and garlands; with bracelets, chains, and
ringes, some of your Goddesses in your Churches and chappells? will they not
think that your Saints are so attired in the heavens? that the soil is cold?
and whereas The vain attiring of Popish Pictures.
they observe how some of your Saintesses have gowns and kirtells made of such
Dames refuses, as an honest woman would hardly wear; yea to see the Queen of
heaven so attired; will they not think that heaven is very poor; either
having no silks, or else wanting Tailors to make new gowns for the Queen her
self? Again, what may your Ignorants learn, when they shall behold our
Savior pictured as in Saint Andrews Church at Bourdeauz as ascending up into
the heavens upon the back of an Eagle? will they not infer that he mounted
not up to the heavens by his own power, but rather by the help of an Eagle
one of the living Creatures which are attending about the throne as we have it
described in the Revelation of Saint Apocal. 4. 7.
John?

As concerning the third end of Images to wit adoration, I have in a few words
already showed the iniquity of the same: M. Flud himself dares not to call
the child by its own name, but gives it only the name of honorable
esteem. But here I add further that the Bishops of Rome shall have this
special privilege, to Polid. lib. 2. de I^uent. cap. 23. citat. Plutar. in
vi^a Numa. and Clement. Macro: lib. 1. Satur^al: cap.
have brought the adoration of Images into the Church. That so Rome popish may
be like to Rome heathenish in all things. Rome at first had no pictures at all
in their Temples, Numa his decree forbidding the same; after they came in as
monuments only of the worthies, as when Hercules overcame Gerion. This being
obtained, in short process of time, by cunning of the Archflamines and false
Priests they came to be worshipped: Even so in Rome Christian, at beginning no
pictures were to befound in Churches, as is clearly to be gathered out of
Origin disputing against Celsus: It may be Orig. contra Ce^sum. lib. 7. versus
Finem.
thought they crept in to be in some credit not long before the time of
Gregory the Great, and shortly after, within less then an age, that which he
detested, came to be good by public decree, of his Successors; especially in
the time of Baniface the 3. who set open the Pantheon of Pagans in Rome, and in
it, instead of the Images of false Gods; set up the Images of all Saints,
making the Image of the blessed Virgin to be chief; so that the Temple which
in time of Pagamsme was called Pantheon, that is, the Temple of all Gods, is
now also called the Pantheon, the temple of all Saints and Martyrs. Again,
whereas by reason of the abuse of Images, diverse Counsels Sinod. Constantinop.
sub Leo: and Constant. the later had 338. Bishops at it.
were assembled both in East and West for redressing of the same; as your
adoration of Images has this privilege, to have been condemned by the first
General Council that was assembled about them, and by others that followed
both in East and West: So have your Popes Constantine, Gregory 2. and 3.
Zachary, Stephen, Adrian, with others this prerogative, that for the adoration
and worshipping of Images they have prevailed against Counsels General,
against Emperors both of East and west; yea in the times of Charles the Great,
though all Churches of the West were against them, yet they prevailed; yea and
if what some Greek Authors do relate be true, not without many lying
prodigies to confirm the same: yea Bellarmine is not ashamed to confess, that
then the Roman Empire was taken away Bell lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 12.
from the Emperor, by which S. Paul's prediction according to the Fathers
exposition was in part fulfilled, that the Roman Empire which let the
coming of Antichrist, should be taken away and so that man of sin 2. Thessal.
2. Austen. Tertul. Hierom. alij.
come to be revealed.

I here observe, how our Adversaries to infringe and diminish the authority of
one of those Counsels which did condemn the worshipping of Images, do
obiectagainst it the wicked life of Constantine Copronymus, by whose command it
was assembled: Admit we grant he was a wicked man, according as some Authors
report of him, yet for wickedness especially in Lucifers sin he came
behind a Pope of yours called Constantine; who was tooth and nail for
adoration of Images, who also was the first that would suffer an Emperor to
kiss his feet; he came also far behind that Monster of cruelty Irene the
Empress, who not content with the regencie of the Empire under her Son
Constantine, but aiming at all, and proiecting marriage with Charles the
Emperor, she most barbarously murdered her own Son Constantine the young
Emperor; whose impiety the heavens and earth seemed to detest by Ecclipses
and Earthquakes: and yet this glorious Dame was the chiefest Establisher of
adoration of Images; under whom, and by whose command the profane Nicene
Council approved the worshipping of Images, though in a far more Conc. Nis:
Idolo: sub. Irene.
moderate sort then you now either teach or practice* Let not then the wicked
life of Constantine, be more hurtful to our cause, then the barbarous
Immanitie of your Irene, the luciferian pride of your Constantine be against
yours, no nor let not Henry the eights vices (a note often song by yours) be
more prejudicial to our Churches then those of Gregory the 13. Clement the 7.
and Sixtus the 5. to yours; you cannot justly lay any such imputations of vice
to any of our Sovereigns or Prelates, which indeed established Christian
religion and reformation amongst us; as we can to your Kings, Emperors, Popes,
Purpurates, and Prelates. As for Henry the 8. we are not tied to defend him in
all points, he was for his faith more yours then ours: as it evidently
appears by the Statute of his six Articles which are part of the very
substance and marrow of Popery. Had he been as he should, he would never to
the eternal perdition of innumerable Souls have so disposed of Church
livings, and impropriations; he would never have put to death some worthy
Christians as he did, those I mean who professed the Gospel of Christ and
denied your Popes supremacy.

Mr. FLVD. page: 146. number. 28.
No less wonderful is the miracle recorded by De passione Imag. Saluat. in
Berito alleged by the second Nicene Council act. 4.
S. Athanasins, and by Lib: 1. de gloria Mart: cap. 22.
Gregorius Turonensis of two images of Christ, which upon violence offered by
the Jews unto them, did miraculously bleed. These and innumerable other most
autenticall miracles, wrought and written for the confirmation of the chiefest
points of our Catholic faith, before the supposed Antichrist was in the world,
do manifestly confute the wicked blasphemy, by which you would make our
Catholic miracles to be his.

ANSWER.
You go on and say thus; No less wonderful is the miracle recorded by S.
Athanasius. What Mr. Flud? have you wilfully stumbled into like error with
that, which with so foul mouth you censured falsely in a learned Knight in your
proiected overthrow? and for which in Page 134. Triumph Page: 36.
your Purgatories triumph, you spend much battologie to prove him either guilty
of ignorance, or of intended fraud to deceive the Reader. Yea in your Triumph
you Page 34. v. 7.
speak thus unseemly and untruly in print, and would It was well said by one,
a Knight a liar deserves to have his spurrs struck off from his heels.
make him culpable of that which in a Knight is most dishonorable. How gross
then is either your ignorance, who by profession are a Padre in Iesreel; or
else how inexcusable is your Ignatian-like fraud, to deceive the Reader by
citing under the name of that Grand Athanasius of Alexandria (for to no other
can your agnomination of Saint be fitted, and him I know you mean a Treatise,
which your own learned men do discard as not his; and out of which the miracle
cited by your holy Fathers of the second Nicene is reputed as a matter lately
happened? if lately, then some hundreths of yee^^ after the Patriarch Athanasius
his death. And the narration is so barbarous and legend-like, that it may not
without great wrong be attributed to so learned and eloquent a Father. I
entreat your learning to tell me what distance of time your Chronologists make
betwixt the time of Athanasius the Great of Alexandria, and the Empire of
Constan: called the Elder, whose wives name was Irene? If you cast your account
rightly, you shall find no less than 400 years distance betwixt Great
Athanas of Alexandria, and the Empire of Constant: and Irene. Your Legendarie
fondly and contrary to the truth of History, makes this Irene wife to
Constantine, whereas she was only daughter in law to Constantine the Elder by
marriage of his son Leo, and mother to Constantine the younger; but a
barbarous and most inhumane mother. She reigned with her son Constantine
when the second Nicene Pseudosynode was celebrated in the 8 year of their
Empire: so that the Bishops of that Pseudosynode relating this miracle as
lately happened in Beritum, it is to be presumed that the same either happened, or
was feigned to have happened, in some of those former years, in which Irene the
Empress reigned with her son Constantine, according as your Legendaries
title pretends. And to confirm what I have said, we may not think that
Baronius Baron in Annot. in Martirolog. Roman. Noue^. 9.
would have forgone such a narration, as the work of Great Athanasius, but
that he saw such repugnancies in it, that it could not stand, and yet as loath
to forgo it wholly, he would feign find a Father for it in some Bishop in
Siria. Alas good Sir, what Bishop in Siria could be so ignorant, as not to know
that Irene was not wife to any of the Constantines, as your Legendarie
pretends? Further refutation of this fable shall not need, only I request The
tale of the Image crucified at Beritum most idle.
the judicious Papist to read the tale it self, and he will find such
improbabilities, nay such impossibilities in it, (as especially how the Image,
so great a one, should be forgot by the Christian who left the house; and
again how it should continue unespied by the Jew that dwelt in the house,
until it was espied by one of his neighbors) I say he will find such
impossibility in it, that he will never give credit to the same.

What you add out of Gregory Turonensis, it is not worth a rush, the Author
is very fabulous. But put case M. Flud we admit both your tales and miracles,
what can you infer thereout against us? what if Christ for the confusion of
that incredulous and perfidious Nation, when out of hate to him and his sacred
Person, they did abuse either his Sacramental image, that is the sacrament of
his body, or else any other Image of his, which Christians of those times
might make and keep only as monuments and remembrances of their deliverer?
what I say if Christ did show some prodigious miracles against them? was this
any thing to confirm your idolatrous worship of images? It is one thing Sir to
have a picture of Christ burnt or defaced in despite of Christ, or to be
defaced in despite of Idolatry committed upon the same, whereby Christ is
dishonored. Good King Ezechias burnt and defaced the brazen Serpent The
different end for which Jews and Christians deface popish Images.
in hate of the Idolatry, which was committed by it, and his fact was pious;
but had he done the same in contempt of God who commanded, or Moses who caused
the Serpent to have been made, his sin had been without excuse.

Your selves may in your vain practice give an example. When you cause a vomit
(in which it is doubtful whether the sacramental species be decayed or not)
to be burnt: if you should do the same in contempt of The host being vomited,
was burnt at Aus^re in France about the year 1526 The like done in the Roman
College of the English.
your Sacrament-God, your sacrilege should be horrible, but doing the same
lest your Sacrament-God should continue in the vomit, you count it a point of
religion. Many such like examples might be produced out of your own practice
in burning old worme-eaten Images, Agnus Deies, in which, by long wearing in
sweating bosoms vermin may breed: in all these you think you commit no
sacrilege, because your intention and end is pious as you think. Burbon
ransackt Rome. The Goths did the like. The Turks may perhaps do the like;
but assuredly Christian Princes shall do the like. Their ends were diverse,
whereout it follows, that their actions are different, commendable in some,
culpable in other. Even so the Jew he burns and defaceth the images or
sacraments of Christ; we likewise burn your images, not all, but such as have
been special objects of idolatry: but here is the difference, the Jew does
what he does out of hate and contempt of Christ, we out of love to Christ and
hate of idolatry: the Jew because he would not have Christ glorified; we,
because we will not have Christ dishonored by your idolatrous worships, but
him only honored, exalted, glorified. To whom only, with Father and Holy
Spirit, be all honor and glory given, both now and in secula seculorum. Amen.

And so I will end with this reason, not fearing to tell you, that all your
shutting up thereof is nothing else but an Italian brag with a few elegant
terms. You challenge to your self all authentical miracles, such as were
done before the supposed Antichrist: they are rather ours, kind Sir, for we
only strive for Antiquity, rejecting your Novelties, and therefore in all
right the miracles of antiquity are ours, and these of novelty yours, who are
the Nouelists and servants to the Beast, started up in the room of the decayed
Roman Empire. And so let us come to your third reason, which you thus frame
without all reason.

CHAP. VI. Wherein is examined Mr. FLOODS third Reason.
Mr. FLOD page: 149. number: 29.
AND hence is declared a third reason, that your spite against our miracles,
forces your Doctors to join against ancient Christians, and Catholic
Fathers, with Infidells and Heretics, and to deny and deride the same
miracles they did.

ANSWER.
This your glorious Mayor is a forcelesse charge, and though it be third in
order, a mystical number and a number of perfection, yet it is far weaker
than any of your former, I repulse it with a denial, let us see your proof.

Mr. FLVD, page and number same.
Your Osiander Cent: 4. page 326. Diaboli simulata fuga voluerunt vulgi
superstitionem confirmar^.
says, that the Devils vanishing away at the name of Christ and sign of the
Cross, made by Julian, frighted by his sudden appearance, in a fearful
shape was counterfeit, to bring the superstitious worship of the same, as
though it had force to drive away devils, wherein he does shake hands with
Iulians Magicians, who likewise would have it a voluntary, not forced flight
of that memorable miracle of the buried Corpse of the Martyr Babylas, and of the
Devils forced confession, that he could not give answer in his Idol, by
reason of Babylas being so near, which S. Chrysostom Lib. 4. contra Gentes.
so much urges against the Infidells. The same Author with whom your Cent. 4.
column. 1446.
Centurists join, says Cent. 4 p. 377. Respensum hand dubie ide^ a Satana
datum, vt paulatim cultum Idololatricu^ reliquiarum in Ecclesiam in vehere^.
that it was an answer given by the devil, without doubt to bring into the
Church the idolatrous worship of relics.

ANSWER.
SIR, your proof is a mere calumniation, you cannot justly join Osiander and
the Centurists with the Heathens, who derided the miracles of Christiaus:
suppose you could prove that they had derided them, yet because they do it not
(eadem mente and eadem ratione) upon the same motive and reason, you may not
justly join them together. Some of your own Papists deny the miracles done at
Sichem, so do also the Heretics (as you call them) what, will you join these
together? Some of your own more moderate Brethren, I mean Ignatians of your
own order, do censure many of your selves to be busy Statists; so likewise
do most Seculars, The Devil dissembleth with crosses, sometimes seems to
fear them, sometimes is pleased with them. It is pretty to think how he held
both S. Edmund. his hands that he could not make the sign of the Cross. vita
Edw:
and well nigh all other Regulars amongst you. What will you join these
together? they do it not (eadem mente nor eadem ratione) upon the same motive
or same reason; the former out of pity, the other out of envy, to speak to
your palate and taste. What if the Centurists do affirm as you relate them?
will you become a Patron for Satan, as though he could not equivocate? That
Satan can dissemble, even with crosses, is so notorious a thing, as if you were
not wholly ignorant in Histories, you could not deny it. Does he not
dissemble, when Inchaunters and Coniurers in their most detestable exercismes,
do please him with Crosses in the air, upon the ground, upon wodden or leaden
tables? Yea he can dissemble even with the Sacrament. God himself; read your
G^and Laterane Council for this purpose.

The devil (God permitting) can doubtless for some Conc. Later. can. 20.
wicked purpose fly the sign of the Cross as affrighted therewith; which
utterly overthrows Bellarmines resolution, who determines that (ex instituto
Dei, and ex opere operato, signu^ crucis valet contra damonem) that the sign
Bellarm: lib. 2. de Imag. cap 30.
of the Cross by the very institution of God, and as their phrase is, ex opere
operato, by the very force of the sign, is of Bellarmines eigthth Sacrament.
power against the Devil to drive him away. The which, besides that it is
manifestly found not to be so by the Coniurers and Inchaunters; the same also
brings in to the Bell: vbi supra. Existimo. and. Dices. Perhaps Reg^lus his
Ass wa^ taught this doctrine of Bellarmine, for it made the sign of the
Cross with his foot against the Devil that would have entered into him.
Vinc. lib. 10. hist. cap. 29.
Popish Church an eighth Sacrament (for here is Gods institution, a visible
sign, a spiritual effect ex opere operato.) It is also against his own
resolution in this Chapter, where he affirms, that the sign of the Cross
has not an infallible effect against the Devil. Let this be numbered amongst
one of Bellarmines contradictions, and the former amongst his blasphemies.

But admit we grant that your Histories are true, and that Satan's flight at
the sign of the Cross made by Julian was enforced; what if God for the
confusion of that Apostata, and for the glory of the Cross, which Julian out
of spite and hate of Christ despised, did put that terror into Satan by the
sign of the Cross, that he was affrighted therewith? I think Sir there is no
Orthodox Christian who will deny, but that God might do it for such an end,
and so Nazianzen is to be interpreted. Nay I tell you more Mr. Flud, the Church
of England is no enemy to the sign of the Cross, for she commands the
same religiously to be used in the administration of the sacrament of Baptism,
neither shall you find any of the learned and Orthodoxe Divines of the church
of England to condemn the ancient Orthodox Christians use of the Cross in
testimony of Christ against infidells, but your magical abuses thereof. As,
for that which you cite out of S. Chrysostom touching the body of Babilas
Martyr, I answer for the Centurists as before; yet for my part I cannot but
think, that as that learned Father relates it, his silence was enforced. What
hereout can you infer? adoration of relics? a notorious vanity; O! you
will argue a contrario thus; The Devil was put to silence by the presence of
the blessed Martyr Babylas his body, ergo we may adore and worship his and all
other relikes. Did S. Chrysostom make this inference? no Sir, he referred all
the glory to Christ, for whose testimony he suffered, and so do we. But
should we according to your principles worship such creatures, napkins,
shadows and bodies, by which God is pleased sometimes to work miracles, we
should be turned from the Creator to the creature we should adore the Sun
and Moon, the Planets etc. the which how heinous a sin it is, S. Paul will
teach you in his Epistle to the Romans. Ad Rom: cap. 1.


I have satisfied your reason; yet before I leave you, I must tell you of one
trick of L^gerdemaine. You say that the Devil vanished away at the name of
Christ and sign of the Cross etc. I think Sir, if you search into the
Nazianz. orat: 1. in Iulia.
history, you shall not find that Julian did invocate or call upon the name
of Christ, when he made the sign of the Cross; but if you can so find it,
your argument for the Cross will be of less force; for my part I think no
Orthodoxe Christian can deny, but that the name of Jesus and Christ, used
faithfully and without any superstitious end or circumstance, is terrible to
Satan, whatsoever some say to the contrary.

Mr. Flud page same, number. 30.
But what need I speak of particular miracles, in general of all the miracles
done at there likes and by the intercession of Martyrs, which were so many as
Theodoret o writes, their Lib 8. aduersus Gracos.
Temples over the world, no less in the primitive Church, then now, were full
of tables and pictures of hands, feet, ^ies, heads, and other parts of the
body, hung up as tokens of miraculous cures, obtained by the Martyrs
intercessions: These miracles Theodoret urges against Infidells, whereof Saint
Chrysostom says Sententiae nostrae abunde side^ faciunt quotidiana quae a
^^ar^yribus eduntur miracula. Lib. ^. contra Gentes.
that the miracles done by Martyrs do suffice abundantly, to witness the
truth of Christianity.

ANSWER.
Here M. Flood you flinch, for (qui agit in generalibus agit dolose) he who
pleads in generals pleads deceitfully: If you will speak adrem, you must
urge particulars, not only the things themselves but most principally the end
and circumstance of the miracles; to wit, that they were done for to confirm
those questions which are now controuerted betwixt you and us: No doubt, but
See them.
that both Theodoret and Chrysostom do relate miracles for the same end for
which they were; to wit, for the proof and confirmation of Christianity; that
is, faith in Jesus Christ and obedience to his laws; not any immoderate
honoring or superstitious invocation of Saints, or adoration of their relikes:
that is your inference only etc.

Do you think Sir, that the Church of England is so ignorant, as not to
acknowledge that the infinite wisdom of God, is not tied to any of his
creatures, but that he may work miracles when he shall please, and by whom,
and what he shall please? Apud cum non est impossible Luke 1. 37.
omne verbum; no word, no thing is impossible with him. It rests you to
prove those miracles related by Theodoret (who I doubt not, ouer-reacht in
some) and those expressly set down by Chrysostom, were they expressly for
this end, to prove adoration of relics, and invocation of Saints. What if you
can prove out of Theodoret that the miracles were done by intercession of
Saints, not to Saints? (This I say if Theodoret be not corrupted) what will you
infer thereout? not your intended purpose; to bind the present Church to
practice the like, under judgment of damnation.

What Si^, if miracles be done in any Church will you thereupon infer, that
all circumstances of the said miracles, Churches particular have erred.
are to be admitted? that all rites, and customs, all laws and doctrines, of
such Churches, are to be allowed and approved? beware what you do.

In the Jewish Synagogue, even in Christ's time, was there not a pond, at which
by an ordinary course admirable Ioh. 5.
cures were effected? will you thereout infer that all rites, and worships
used at the same season, in that Church were approueable, and allowed? you
cannot do it justly.

Again, what say you now to the Greek Church? especially, that of the
Muscouites? wherein their Demygod Saint Nicholas works so many miracles? Will
you deny them? you cannot, standing in your own principles; will you thereupon
have all their rites, ceremonies, decrees, and dogmaticall doctrines approved?
beware what you do: you cannot be so ignorant, as not to know, that the same
Churches and Bishops thereof, in which these miracles are done, detest your
Church of Rome and the Latin faith, even as they detest the Devil himself.
Call to mind what miracles are recounted (with as great credit as any of
yours) to have been done in the Greek Church even when she was at odds with
your Roman darling, and would by no means acknowledge subjection to the same?

Read Saint Luke and there you shall find one doing Cap. 9.
miracles in the name of Jesus; who, notwithstanding adhered not to Jesus.

Think of that which venerable Bede approuingly Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 25.
relates, when the Britons in the controversy of Easter opposed against
Augustine, the authority of their Father Columba; whose power was great in
working miracles. Does not Wilfrid reply to this effect, For as much as
concerns your Father Columba, and his Disciples, whose holiness you profess
to imitate, and to follow his rules and precepts, confirmed from God by
wonders; I may answer thus; that at the last day, many who shall say unto him,
Lord have we not Luc. 7.
prophesied in thy name, and cast out Devils and done many wonders? he shall
say unto them, depart from me ye worke^^ of iniquity I know you not. By which
it is evident in this The Council of Cabilon. can. vlt. condemns the custom
of women singing in Churches apud Espenc. lib. 1. digress. cap. 11. perhaps
your Battel-Presidents in Sussex knew not this or regarded it not when they
suffered a wanton Less Mistress S. to sing in their Quire. Hist. Socrat. lib.
7. cap. 17.
your Wilfrids judgment, with Augustine, and Bid; that though miracles be
done by any Church or Bishop, that thereupon may not be inferred a justifying
of all such practices and customs as may be used and allowed in such a Church
or congregation. God (sir) is able to distinguish the silver from the dross,
and does not always for a small intermixtion of dross reject the silver, but
is pleased to pass by some errors for ends best known to his infinite
wisdom. You cannot but have heard, or read when a certain Jew desired to be
baptized by a Nonatian Bishop, how presently upon the instant of baptizing, all
the water vanished away: This was not done to confirm any jot of nouatianisme;
but, whereas the Jew had been baptized before, as was afterward known; God
would not have his Sacrament of baptism, though ministered by an Heretic, to
be profaned by damnable iteration of the same.

To proceed, I observe those words of yours speaking of Martyrs, their temples
over the whole world, no less in the primitive Church then now, were full of
tables, and pictures of hands, feet, heads, eyes, and other parts of the
body, hung up as tokens of miraculous cures. Pretermitting that this your
fashion came, not by any imitation from the Jewish Church, but from the
heathens; brought first Polydor. lib. 2. de Invent. cap. 23.
into Italy by Hercules, as Polydore relates out of Macrobius.

I do observe two vanities in you: First, whereas you say that your Temples
now are no less full of tablets etc. then those of the primitive days, you
have committed a gross error against your own Church. For if you look into
the ancient Fathers cited by me often in this treatise chap: 2. and 8. you
shall find that such an ouer-plus of miracles in temples in the last age,
which is ours; is an evident argument of the Antichristian Sinagogue.

Secondly, I observe an other vanity, when you glory for the multitude of
your tablets of hands etc. A^ most vain shift of Antichrists Sinagogue! dare
yo^ thus brag in the presence and view of your Adversaries? do we not know
sir, that whereas one (if any) waxen arm, hand, eye, foot, head etc. is hung
up in toke^ of some pretensed cure, that there are scores, nay hundreths, which
hang up as oblations, and vows for desired cures, not obtained, but expected
and hoped for? I convent your conscience herein, whether this be not true: The
lying vanity of Popish Tablets.
yea it is most certain, lippis and tonsoribus notissi^^. Which of your
Pilgrims, having himself, or any of his friends any disease, or infirmity,
does not offer up some one of those tablets! and do you use to take them down
if you hear not of their miraculous curing? your conscience and all the world
knows you do not. What marvel then, you have such multitude of tablets etc.
Be it your privilege, among some prodigies you shall and must have many lying
wonders: And as Erasmus merrily twitted your abuses, tell us not only of your
cures, but also of your whole multitudes, which vow and pilgrim it, without
any good at all.

About some 19. years since, I took ship at Genere in Italy, to pass to
Alicant in Spain; the ship was great, the number of Passengers about some 300.
when we came into the golfe of Marsiles, for some 7. or 8. nights together,
through the extremity of most tempestuous weather, we were in great danger to
have perished; but when the tempest was past, and a great calm expected,
(which the Mariners presaged, by a light vaporous A pretty devise of a Friar.
fire hanging about the top of the mast, and it did so happen) and that the
third day after we were becalmed; A certain Dominican Friar a man of great
credit in Spain; conferred with the Captain and chief Passengers of the ship
about a vow to be made for our safe arrival at Alicant. It was concluded by
all, as with one Brother of Baldwine the Ignatian.
voice (though my self thought it needless as I could Master Baldwine who was
then in my company) thus; that one by lot should be chosen to go the
pilgrimage vowed to the Lady of Mountserratto; and that to the charges thereof,
every one should contribute a portion as he should think meet, both for the
expenses of the Pilgrim, and for a great votary candle of wax there to After
the vow made we wandered up and down for diverse days neither master nor
mariner gessing where we were.
be offered: All was done, whereupon after some seven or eight days further
wandering up and down the gulf, at last we light upon a small creek in the
Island of Maiorica, where our ship was lodged for some six weeks: But my
self, M. Baldwine, and diverse others left the ship and on foot passed over
the Island to the City of Maiorica, where next morning we took bote for
Peninsula in Spain, where we arrived the next day about three of the clock
in the afternoon; the ship remaining still with a creek in her tail, but
after some six weeks it arrived whether beaten and much wasted at Allicant.
Thus was the manner of our vow made wilily by the Friar, when we were past
danger, thus was the manner of deliverance by our vow; and I doubt not but
that as yet a great wax candle as a monument of the same remains in the
Ladies Chapple at Montserratto in Spain; And this you may add, M. Flud to
make up your number of tokens of miraculous and wonderful deliverances. And
here concluding, I tell you that if a Congregation of your Cardinals could
resolve (Good news for your order if it had been accepted) to Paulus the 3.
that all houses of Conuentuall Monks ought to have been dissolved, for abuses
committed in them, then assuredly the Churches reformed have done singularly
well, in defacing your Tablets and pictures, the rotten remnants of most
damnable impiety, considering what impious superstitions have been cloaked by
them, and are yet where the light of the Gospel shines not.

M. Flood page 148. number. 30.
Of those miracles (I say) M. Robert Abbots Demonst. 1. de Ant: cap. 11. page
223.
blusheth not to write, that the primitive practice was superstitious, and
those miracles the froth of the ancient Church, of which says he, the
Babilonian Venus was bred, that afterward brake forth into all manner of
abominable fornication: Thus they reject the miracles by which Christianity
was bred in men's hearts, many Countries converted to Christ, the Church of God
enlarged over the earth, which Church they must grant was a Venus, bred of some
and froth. What writing is intemperate if this be sober? What can be blasphemy
against the holy Ghost if this be not? To assign the miracles, by which the
world was made Christian, to the Devil, making his some and froth the seed of
Christianity?

ANSWER.
For as much as concerns your injurious calumniating M. Abbots that learned
Doctor, and now very Reverend Bishop of Salisbury, I nothing doubt, but that
he will out of a Christian magnanimity spernere se sperni. As for his saying,
if it be arightly understood, I cannot see but that it is warrantable: He does
not impeach any of the ancient autenticall miracles, for so much as they tend
to the proof of Christianity, and glory of Christ; but in these respects, and
circumstances, precisely and expressly; either first, for their doubtfullnesse
and uncertainty; or secondly, because some immoderate zeal of the vulgar was
intermixed therewith; or thirdly, for some in direct consequences, which were
superstitiously August de ciuit. lib. 8. cap. 14. and 26. Espenc. de Christ*
mediatore cap. 12.
inferred thereout: The Platonists indeed (as S. Ansten proves) gave not
only a divine worship to the one chief and supreme God, whom they professed
to be the cause of all other things; but also they did acknowledge under this
God and from this God, certain degrees of Creatures, which they did worship
with a kind of divine worship; as those spiritual Creatures and Substances
which we call Angels; and also the souls of such their worthies, as were
departed from humane couersation and were assumpted into the number of their
Gods. Now this Platonicall doctrine having ouer-spread those parts and
provinces where Christianity first began; The vulgar and unlearned of such as
were converted to Christianity, by reason of their former inueterate customs
(agreeing as they thought to truth and reason) were prone and inclinable, to
give a divine kind of honor, to such worthy Christians, as being departed out
of this mortal life, by so glorious sufferings for the testimony of Christ,
were assumpted to the celestial paradise of his Glory; In which point if they
were somewhat carried astray by humane affection, shall it be counted so heinous
an offense to impute the same unto them? we charge them not with any high point
of superstition, but of that which is termed by your gloss (quando traditioni
humana religionis nomen applicatur) when Gloss. apud Aquinat. 22 q. 93. art. 1.
corp.
the name of religion is given to humane tradition, as this their practice, and
religious ouerwening of humane creatures, was grounded upon man's tradition; and
that such an ouer-diligence in worshipping of Creatures may be reputed
superstition, I infer out of your Angelicalls doctrine Aquin. ibidem.
thus. Alto modo potest contingere falsitas in exteriori, ex part colentis
etc. In another manner (says he) falsitie (that is of religion) may happen in
outward sort, from the part of him who worshippeth, and this especially in the
common worship, which by the Ministers of the Church is exhibited in the Person
of the whole Church* for even as he should be accounted a falsary, who should
propose as from another, those things which were not committed unto him; even
so, he incurreth the vice of falsitie, or false dealing, who as on the
Churches part, gives worship to God, against the manner of worship appointed
of the Church, by divine authority, and acoustomed in the Church; whereupon
Ambrose says, he is unworthy, who otherwise celebrateth the mystery then as
Christ d^liuered; thus Aquinas: out of which discourse, I evidently infer,
that all such manner of worship, is to be esteemed and reputed vicious in the
Church, which is not commended to the Church, by divine authority from Christ
or his Apostles, as it is more then assured that this willworshippe of those
Christians was not: as neither your Masse*celebrating (to note this by the Let
your mass be compared with Christ's institution and there will be found no
show of paritie betwixt them.
way) is any whit agreeing with that which Chirst delivered, and therefore
therein both in your Aquinas and Saint Ambrose his judgment, you do very
unworthily.

And why I pray you Sir, should you be so eager against M. Abbots? or so nicely
scrupulous as to be afraid to think, that any superstition might creep into
any of the ancient Churches? In this to press you to the purpose; what think
you of that custom of the Ancients, who out of an opinion of necessity to
Salvation, did distribute unto infants instantly as they were baptized Innoc.
Epist. Decret.
the Sacrament of the Eucharist? Did not Innocentius Pope the head of the
Church, decree and command the same? did not Saint Austen approve it? yea this
custom August. lib. 1. contra Iulia: lib. 1. de p^ccat. m^r. and remis. cap.
20. Cipr. de lapsis.
did so universally infect the whole Church that it is yet on foot amongst
the Grecians. Secondly was it not a point of superstition (I argue to you) for
the Ancients, out of an opinion of necessity, to distribute to the Laity the
Sacrament in both kind? you now do censure the same as heretical
superstition; therefore standing Both these customs the Church of Rome does
now Anathematize.
within your principles in the Ancients it could be no less then superstitious
folly out of their ignorance. Again, the Ancients allowed and required the
Laity, receiving the Sacrament of our Lords body, to take the same into their
hands, but he who should now require the same, should be reputed blasphemously
irreligious, or sacrilegious: you know that your Popes have commanded, You may
read in diverse cap. de consec. where your Laikes are inhibited out of fear of
Gods heavy judgment to touch Corporalls, Patines, etc. Auth^r: op: imperf. hem
49. cited by Aquin. 22. q. 98. art. 4. Contra.
that no Lay person presume to touch your Patines and Chalices with their
hands, much less the Lords body; Ergo the Ancient Church was irreligious in
so vnreuerent handling and delivering the Lords body, or else you are over
superstitious in your needless, and will-curiositie.

Again, does not the Author (operis imperfecti) upon Matthew make mention, how
certain superstitious people did carry pieces of the Gospel about their
necks, by the same hoping to be delivered from dangers, this was tolerated in
some private Churches.

Further the Ancients, yea the Fathers of the second Nicene Council, were in
your opinion over superstitious, in that they durst not make nor suffer to be
made the Pictures of God the Father, of the Deity, or the blessed Trinity,
yea as Auentine reports, your Boniface the Auent: lib. 7. hist. page 462.
eight, did condemn to the fire as Anthropomorphites some for painting the
Trinity in the form of an old man, a young man; and a Dove. But you have
cast off that fear, for you have hardly either Church or Chapel, in which
some such pictures are not to be seen and adored.

Again, did not S. Paul himself err in your judgment, 1 Timoth: 5. 9.
when he charged, that a Widow should not be admitted, before she were (60
annorum) threescore years old; and gives a reason of his command, danger and
peril of incontinencie; but your Church is so ouer-prudent above and against
the Apostle, that she not only admits Widows, but she also receives
girls, maids, yea corrupt ones also, after they have passed fifteen years
of age, whereupon follow those enormou^ impieties wherewith your Church is
repleat even to the astonishment of the heavens.

Again, you cannot but grant that a great part, yea the greatest part of your
representative Church, to wit, the Great Counsels of Basil and Constance, did
err in their very dogmaticall decrees and decretorie processes; what Sir?
might such assemblies so err, and yet no small error at least of material
superstition creep into some of the Ancient Churches, before that general
Counsels could be assembled, for the clearing and deciding of doubts?

Does not our Savior in his seven Epistles sent to the seven Churches of
Asia (by which as Antitypes, all Apoc: 2. and 3.
future Churches are expressed, as both the ancient and modern learned
Expositors of the same do affirm) fore signify, the declinations of some
particular Churches, which must make way for the general apostacy and
defection; and if, as S. Paul the Apostle affirms, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the mystery of iniquitte did work in his times, what marvel if some ages
after, some foame and frothe of superstition might grow upon some particular
Churches, by reason of the many mutations, changes of Prelates, which then
through persecution happened? Which foame and froth might afterward, as a
superstitious sperme, breed your Babylonian Venus when the time of the general
apostacy was complete.

You proceed, and impeach that very learned Doctor, and our Church, that we
blasphemously impute to the Devil those miracles, by which the world was made
Christian. The blasphemy shall be yours Mr. Flud, having forgotten that, which
every child amongst us knows, to wit, that the world was converted by the
word of God powerfully preached; which word conteyneth the doctrine and
history of our Savior Jesus. You leaving these fountains of life, and
seeking after dry cisterns of humane authority and fallible narrations,
Eymeric. direct. Inquisit. 2. part. q. 9. Johannes de S. Au^emaro his Gospel.
what do you else, then blaspheme? As Johannes de Parma brought in a new
Euangile, called by your Predecessors (Euangelium aeternum) the everlasting
Gospel, which was no other than Abbot Ioachims dreaming dotages; so now
Johannes de S^ Audemare, will tell us of a new Euangile, by which the world was
converted; which is no other then a pack of humane inventions (for most part)
and fallible narrations cashired by many of their own ingenuous and moderate
Papists.

CHAP. VII. Wherein is examined Mr. FLVDS fourth Reason.
Mr. FLVD, page 148. number. 31.
THE fourth reason is the impiety of this devise, which I touched before. For
this conceit does much impair both the love of God in his servants, and his
fear in his enemies, seeing neither the one may expect from him miraculous
helps, nor the other dread extraordinary punishments: The Devil only in this
Age must rule the roste, and be thought the Author of all wonders. If God, when
Heretics blaspheme his Mother, and play with her nose, strike their tongues
out of their heads, and their best noses from their faces, heresy teaches
them to turn their hearts, that want tongues, and their faces without noses
against heaven, and call the Author of that miracle Devil. So that if
Atheists can keep themselves friends with the Devil, they need not by this
doctrine greatly fear Gods miraculous power.

ANSWER.
In this reasonlesse reason, Mr. Flud taxes our Church with impiety, for
attributing the prodigies of their Synagogue to Satan. who would think then
that this Sophy in this his reason should incur gross impieties? His proof
that we commit impiety, he frames thus; Because our imputing their prodigies
to Satan does impair Gods love in his servants, and fear in his enemies; does
make his providence to be defective, that neither one may expect miraculous
helps, nor the other dread extraordinary punishments; this is the substance of
his triuiall proof: which ended, he runs round and round about with his
elegant skirmishes, hurting not so much as any man's nose, but showing the
idleness of his own heart in so triuiall a pen.

He objects impiety to us, but I advise him to look unto it that his proofs
against us fall not out to be blasphemous impieties. for

First, is it not a point of high tempting impiety, to bind the hands of God
to the ordinary acting of miraculous Mr Flods first point of blasphemy.
helps, and sending extraordinary punishments; or else his providence must be
thought defective, and the love or fear of his servants impaired? I think
Sir, the holy Scriptures, which are (ratio omnis veritatis) the ground of all
truth; and the Ancient Fathers do teach it to be a point of tempting
infidelity, for any man to expect, as a necessary office of Gods providence,
miraculous helps or punishments? What was the Israelites Exodus 32.
sin in the desert? was it not a murmuring for Gods ordinary providence
toward them, wherewith they were not contented, and their earnest craving and
expecting some miraculous helps? which their craving and expecting, the holy
Scriptures term lust and concupiscence, but your Ignatian Divinity, Christian
love. This their lustful desire God did hear, and granted their requests, he
sent them water out of the rock^, Quails in great plenty; but what followed,
(dum adhuc escae.) whilst the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God fell
upon them, and the chief of them were consumed: so is GOD pleased with such as
are eager after miraculous helps.

Those blessed Martyrs of God cast into the fiery furnace, were not acquainted
with your Ignatian Divinity, Dan: 3. 16. 17.
but the Tyrant was, who iumping in your doctrine, said thus, Who is God, that
shall be able to deliver you out of my hands? But those blessed servants
replied not saying, we As we are to pray that we be not led into temptation,
so the sin of Achas and others may teach us that we ought not to tempt God.
Isa. 7. It is the devils Divinity to tempt God. Matthew: 4.
must expect some miraculous deliverance from our God, or else his providence
is defective, and our love will be impaired toward him; but thus, (Non
oportet nos etc.) We may not answer thee in this point, Behold our God whom we
worship is able to deliver us out of the furnace of fire, and out of thy hands
O King, but if he will not, be it known to thee, O King, that we worship not
thy Gods, neither do we adore the Golden Statue thou have erected. Does this
their answer sort with your Divinity? no God wot. Many like instances out of
holy writ might be produced, but I am more then assured that you cannot justly
produce the example of any one Saint, who would have thought Gods providence
defective, or that his love to God ought justly to be impaired, if in time and
occasion of great dangers, God should not send him some miraculous help. I go
on with your impieties.

Secondly, is it not a point of impiety, for a sinful Second blasphemy of M.
Flod.
wretch to reprove that manner of providence, which God has prescribed for
himself toward, his Church, after the planting of the same? Now if we ask the
Ancient Fathers, and the Scriptures, they will tell us that after the planting
of the Church, and establishing the Gospel (which I hope is accomplished
before these times) the ordinary use of miracles should cease. Hear August.
de ver^ Relig. cap. 25. Gregor. hom 29. in Euang. Chrysostom. Alij.
S. Austen for this purpose most excellently; Since the Catholic Church has
been diffused over the whole world, neither are those miraculous things,
permitted to endure until our times, lest the mind should always seek
visible things, and by the custom of them, mankind should wax cold, at the
new appearance whereof, it was all on fire. thus he So that you Mr. Flud,
requiring miracles now in these times as necessary (to avoid defect in Gods
providence) to conserve love and fear in men's hearts, seem to be one of those
prodigious ones, which S. Austen twitteth, who will not believe, credente
mundo, the whole world believing. Like Lib. 22. de Ciuit. 8.
to what I have cited out of S. Austen, you may find in Gregory, Chrysostom,
Aquinas, others. yea your Bellar de notis Eccl^s cap. 14. Nota 11.
Bellarm^ne Gregor. apud P^ter in 2. ad Thessal. 2 and lib. 27 moral. 11.
laying his chiefest foundation for his Note of his Church by miracles,
affirms thus directly, Miracula sunt necessaria ad nouam fidem vel
extraordinari am missione^ persuadendam. Miracles are necessary to persuade a
new faith, or an extraordinary Mission. If this Bellarmi^ian foundation be
true, take you heed jest your over eager contention for your miracles, put this
persuasion in your Readers mind, that you persuade necessity of miracle,
because your Faith is new and your Mission extraordinary, out of order. Which
conceit (I ingenuously confess) the very reading of this your reason at first
glimpse did put into my mind, ^hilest I was yours, and wholly yours in my
ignorance.

Thirdly, is it not a point of highest impiety, to give by so pretended an
occasion inducements for Christians Mr. Fluds hird blasphemy.
to fall into despair even then, whenas most special co^forts shall be most
needful? Now that this your doctrine Temptation tries and examine h^ Christian
B^sil hom. (...) annos Call to mind the practice of Da^^d in the de^. Joh upon
the dunghill. Ios^h in prison. D^uid, Jeremi^, Is^y, etc. none of, them
challenged as a necess^rie point of Gods help miraculous deliverances. Apoc.
13. 10.
so does, I make it thus manifest. This your doctrine does require, yea
challenge from God, if he will not have his providence reputed defective, then
to send greatest miraculous deliverances to his friends, and seue^est
extraordinary punishments to his enemies, in the time of Antichrist, and even
when he shall be in his greatest ruff Whereas the holy Scriptures in that time
do especially require from the servants of Christ (fidem and pati^ntiam) faith
and patience. Hic est fides etc. Here (says the book of Revelation pointing
at the days of Antichrist) is the faith and patience of the Saints, that is,
in these times, their faith and patience is tried and exercised. Here they must
not glory in the faith of miracles, but in the faith of expectation and hope.
Here they must not look for present miraculous helps, but with patience bear
whatsoever that cruel Tyrant shall impose upon them. Does not Gregory the
Great say, that Greg: lib. 32. Mor. cap 12. related approuingly by Bell: lib. 3
de Pont. cap. 15.
in those times etiam tortores ipsorum Sanctorum Martyru^ tunc prodigia and
signa facturos. Yea (says he) the executioners and tormenters of the holy
Martyrs shall do prodigies and signs. How? even in the very sight and
presence of the tormented. But we stand not upon Gregory's authority, but we
produce unto you, that of our Savior himself, that in the days of
Antichrist, the false Prophets Math: 24.
shall do so many signs and wonders, that if it were possible the very elect
(that is, all the elect, both learned and unlearned, high and low, simple and
prudent) should be in danger to be seduced and drawn away by them. We produce
that of the Apostle, that the coming of Antichrist 2 Thessal: 2.
shall be with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. We point you to the
Revelation, where Antichrist and his Apoc: 13. 12. 13. 14.
false Prophets, are described to do so many signs, prodigies and wonders,
that thereby the whole earth shall admire after the beast etc. This being the
case of those times according to the tenent of sacred Scrip^ures, and joint
consent of Ancient Fathers, how blasphemous is Mr. Fluds Divinity to persuade
Christians in the time of Antichrists ruff (before hi destruction by the
breath of Christ's mouth) to look for many miraculous helps and deliverances?
Yea, how blaspherrous is his impure Mr. Flods 4. blasphemy.
mouth, who as it were in express terms to confront against Christ, yea and
to give etc. to the sacred Scriptures, he dares thus to write, that Antichrist
and his, Flud page 152. number: 30.
shall do no other then a few toys, and trifles which God shall permit him to
do to try the constancy of his faithful. And so let this be your fifth
blasphemy (that so you may have above a mess in the first service) to wit,
that Mr. Fl^d fifth blasphemy.
for so much as lies in you, you make way for Antichrist, and are one of his
John Precursors. For what do you else then make way for Antichrist, by taking
away one of his chiefest marks and Characters, by which he is to be known
according to the express tenent of Scriptures, and sense of all the Ancient
Church? And if the true Christians should (when Antichrist shall be in his
glory) have power to oppose miracle against miracle, so that for number and
greatness of miracles they might contend with Antichrist, and his false
Prophets, as Moses did with the Egiptian Magicians: if this shall Exodus: 7. and
8.
be so Sir, then I beseech you what great danger should the Elect be in, to be
seduced by his signs, prodigies and lying wonders? in as much danger surely as
Moses and the Israelites were, when his Serpent devoured the Serpents of the
Magicians; or when he did such prodigies, that the very Magicians themselves
confessed the finger of God to be with Moses against them. But leaving these
impiety, justly reto^ted upon your own Fatherhood, let us trace you in your
elegant footsteps.

How idle is that you add, that if this be so, then the Devil shall rule all
the roast: Not so good Sir, for although S. Paul say, Antichrists coming shall
be in omni 2 Thessal: 2.
potentia, in all power, his meaning is not, that God shall leave to have a
careful providence over his Elect. He granted and permitted power to Satan
over and against Job. He granted to Antiochus, over and against the Church of
the Jews; yet the Devil did not rule the roste in those times. Think of
those, and take them for resemblances of the powerful times of Antichrist; who
was powerfully, and above measure to vex the bodies of Gods servants; but God
shall so inwardly illustrate with faith and patience, the hearts of his said
servants, that they shall not be daunted with all the fiery darts of
Antichrist, and his. Non collidentur quia Dominus supponit manum, they shall
not be broken for God will bear them up. To proceed. It may seem lost labor
to answer your brauing eloquence, when you go on thus; If God when Heretics
blaspheme his mother etc. If you understand Sir, that the Reformed Churches do
approve any to blaspheme the euer-blessed Virgin Marie, the mother of our Lord
Jesus, your calumniation is most impudent: for my part I know none such, should
I know them I would exec^ate their communion; and (to confess ingenuously the
inward of my Soul) I little regard any of The most holy Mother of Christ
always to be blessed by us and all Generations.
those fond Disciplinarians, who speak coldly of her, or of her due blessed
praises. Sir, you may understand, that the Orthodoxe of the Church of England,
do with honorable remembrance make mention of her in their public
assemblies, as desirous to be accounted children of those generations, which
(according to her own glorious prophecy) were to call her Blessed. We adore
Luc. 1. 48. Epiph. here is. 79. contra Collirid.
only (to speak with ancient Epiphanius) the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, est
tamen in honor apud nos Maria, Notwithstanding Mary is in honor with us. We
are not ignorant that it is (maximum scelus honor Creatoris impendere
Creaturae) the greatest wickedness, to give the honor of the Creator to the
Creature: we therefore dare not adore her with divine worship, neither dare
we associate her as a secondarie Mediatrisse with her son, in the work of
our redemption; but we place and honor her as amongst the redeemed ones:
amongst them; and above all them calling her blessed, for those great things,
which the Lord respecting her lowliness or humility has done unto her; and
for this both the lips and heart of my house shall ever call her blessed.

But if you make us to blaspheme the mother of Christ, because we permit, yea
allow, yea in some cases command, the wooden Images or statues of her which you
set up and abominably adore, to be defaced, and removed; we cannot but marvel
at your impudency. Do not you rather blaspheme, who after the corporal
assumption of her, believed in your Church, do yet Juno or Pallas-like furnish
her with many wodden noses upon earth? and those so furious ones as she does
strike out and off, both tongues and noses of those, who dare but play with
them: What is blasphemy if this be not? What is religion if our defacing of
such idolatrous puppets be not? Sir, we deny not, but that the blessed Virgin
Mary's pictures may according to the truth of history be drawn and kept with
a civil due respect and use, but such as are adored by you we reject as
Idols, and we deface them, as being subjects whereon the mighty majesty of
God is blasphemed, and the reverence of his mother dishonored. Durst your
Adrian Pope command, that your sacrament-god, Adrian. quodlibet. 3. page 63.
should be rather cast into the privy then suffered to fall into the hands of
Heretics who would abuse the God; why then, may not lawful authority command
such Statues or Images to be defaced or removed, by which the infinite
majesty of God is blasphemed, and the reverence of his blessed mother
dishonored? You sir, that are so grand a Theologue, and dare gravely in writing
call the wooden noses of Schem, Hall, etc. the noses of the ever blessea Virgin,
look you to your blasphemy, for what you speak so gravely, your blind
Obedients believe grossly, to wit, that the ever blessed Virgin Monster-like
has many noses, one at Sichem, another at Hall etc. but leaving you to the
meditation and adoration of them; for your pains in this your discourse, we
will leave you the nose of John Swickius and Risselman his tongue (if you can
tell where they are) as fit to make re^ikes of as many, which you worship and
adore.

But if Swickius had his nose whift off and Risselman his tongue stroke out,
what else may we therein observe, but first, Gods just judgment in suffering
you to be deluded by some miracles and signs of the beast? Secondly, to have
the faith of his servants to be tried? and also I fit M. Floods tale with
mother out of Spec. verbo Imago ex 7 when two Soldiers were strangly punished
for casting a none at an Image and striking of Christ's arm, at which blow
blood emaned and the virgins picture pulled it self in pieces and rent her stony
garments for horror of the fact. Vinc. Bellnac. lib. 7. cap. 110. Motives page
79 Gregor. 3. lib. ep 30.
such wicked laddes as you describe those to have been, to have their just
guerdon and reward, not so much for their blasphemy as for their other sins;
And yet for my part I cannot but think, that those lewd Soldiers did exceed
in their sacrilegious insultations (as being perhaps indu^d with some
disciplinarian Spirit) even against the Person of the blessed virgin her self.
Howsoever it happened it makes nothing for you against us, we do not allow any
so to do in your Churches, and kingdoms where such idolatry by authority is
allowed and commanded. But show us M. Flood, where any one of our Church
removing and defacing your Idol's, by the command of authority has sustained
any hurt? so much as a fingers ach; but I put you in mind in my Motives, how
it fared with some of your Worke-men at Dow^y who being appointed to trim up
and remove a ce^taine Statue etc. were very strangely smit from heaven?
tormenta paucorum exempla sint omnium. Yea ancient Gregory relates, how
prodigiouslie some were punished with death, who being by papal authority
commanded, dug up bones of Saints (which slept in rest) that they might be
worshipped with your superstitious manner of translation and adoring.

M. Flood page 149. number. 31.
Our Adversaries themselves, namely M. Chrashaw Jesuits Gospel.
do confess, that such is the Athcisme and profaneness of men, that never
since the planting of the Gospel miracles were more needful, might they be
expected Why may they not be expected if they be so needful? Is Gods power
or his love less to mankind since Luthers preaching? If his providence never
fails his children in so weighty affair as marriage, as the same M. Crashaw
Life of Galeacius cap. 21.
says, why should they think, the same defectine in working miracles, so
necessary to maintain his religion, against profaneness? why should God be
bound, under pain of being thought Antichrist, not to work miracles?

ANSWER.
What M. Crashaw may write in this particular we cannot but approve, seeing
that it is agreeing to that prophetical saying of our Savior speaking of the
later times which are these; That charity should wax cold, iniquity Math.
24. 12. Luc. 18. 8.
abound, and faith should be so scarce that the Son of man coming should
hardly find any upon earth: Whereout, although human reason would infer as
you do concerning miracles, yet seeing it has not pleased his infinite
Wisdom so to determine, we wretched worms who are not of his Council, dare
not presume to think to the contrary. We leave that to your presumptuous
Redhats and their Grandsire, who not content to be of the Lords-councell will
challenge to have upon earth the same Consistory with him, yea and by
dispensings, addititions and diminutions to amend what in his Laws may be
thought defective and amiss.

And if you look back into former ages you shall find, how not long after
the planting of the Gospel, the whole Christian world was most extremely
corrupt, as Saint Ciprian, Saluianus, and Eusebius do deliver. And Cipria. lib.
de lapsis, Saluian. lib. de prouid. Eusebius. hist. lib 8. cap. 1.
yet the Fathers of those times did not expect, that God by extraordinary
miraculous punishments, should reform the same: They judge rather how God
(celests censura iacentem fidem, and pene dormientem er exit) by a heavenly
censure, did awake the faith lulled and almost asleep; which heavenly censure
they interpret to be those tragical Ciprian.
persecutions, which Diocletian, Decius, and others raised in the Church.
Again, when at aftertimes in your Church, the same was welny overwhelmed with
monstruos impieties, did God send miraculous helps, prodigies etc. no, he sent
amongst you the Spirit of schism, and division, as the many schisms in your
Church can witness: He sent amongst you, the Barbarian sword, which well-ny
devoured you: He sent among you, a dreadful Spirit of dissension, betwixt
Popes, and Emperors; Papalls, and Imperialls; Guelphes and Gibelines; Sinod,
and Sinod; Counsels, and Counsels; so he tamed your impieties. And surely,
if prodigies and punishments may be thought necessary, where may they be
thought more needfully to fall then upon your Papal Caucasus and purpured
Olimpus? The scarlet Fathers whereof, do so exceed in those sins, which
cry vengeance from heaven, that no tongue can be able to express them: which
one of your great Clerks and learned Cardinals seriously considering brake
forth into that dreadful speech, that the Church was come to that Your
learned Nonus homo describes well the present State of the Papacy.
pass, that it seemed worthy to be ruled only by Reprobates. The like sayings
full of dread I have heard from others, lamenting, the most lamentable
condition of the Roman Hellen.

Sir, if you will consider how your man of sin, has been the chiefest
source and cause, from whom all tragical calamities have light upon the
Church, you might easily judge, that if Gods providence do require
extraordinary miraculous punishments for the revenging of sin, they should be
thought worthily to begin from the heads of your house.

What has divided the East Churches from the west? the South from the West?
but that most ambitious supremacy of your Popes, and the necessary dependency
from them?

Who is that wicked (Paterfamilias) Master of the Family. Luc. 12. 45.
whereof our Savior speaks and threatens to R^mes ambitious corruptions.
put his portion with the Hypocrites, but your holy Father of Rome who for the
establishing of his dictates like a Iouian Dictatour, has smitten with his
thunderboult of excommunications and Anathemes, at one time or other most of
the Orthodoxe Churches of the world?

Who but your holy Father, has ruinated the Empires both of East and West? and
instead thereof, has reared an effeminate Papacy? By his means have the
MENARDVS Prince of Tirol was wont to call the Popes, effeminate Antichrists and
prodigious Eunuchs. Auent. lib. 7. bist B^ior: page 444.
proud Solimans entered into the East Empire; yea and your Holies dividing of
the west Empire, has made way for the said Turks to ruinate Hungary,
Transiluania, and to pluck the feathers off from the German Eagle. What is he,
who has set Christian Princes so together that they have not been able to
withstand the common enemy? and who is he who yet shall be Author of
greater commotions, by which the Tyrant of the East (if God defend not) shall
have a gappe made him to overrun the remainder of Christendom? Is not this
he, your Pope? Oh that Christian Princes, would open their eyes! O that they
would brandish their swords, to abate the Pride of this Capitoline Jove, and
bring him into order! This and no other is the last of the Roman Bell. lib. 3.
de Pont. cap. 15. This agrees to that of Saint Ambrose Antichrist shall
restore the Roman liberty under his own name Ambros. in epist. ad These.
Emperors; Hear how Bellarmine to his own confusion hitteth the mark; Erit
Antichristus supremum and vltimum caput Impiorum, and est vltimus Rex qui
imperium Romanum tenebit tamen sine nomine Imperatoris; Antichrist shall be the
chiefest and last head of the impious, he is the last King who shall hold the
Roman Empire but without the name of Emperor. Thus he most truly; but of
this elsewhere. Happy, yea thrice-happy then are such Princes into whose hearts
God shall put to make this whore desolate, and to consume her flesh with fire;
For till she be ruinated, the mystery of iniquity will be still on foot,
and thereby consequently an infinity of all manner of miseries will ouerwhelme
the Christian world.

Again, who but your Pope has cut in sunder the very heart strings of the
Church? who has ruinated the Prelacies and Clergies? Surely his dividing of
Bishoprics, Archbishoprickes; his granting commendaes; his desolating of
Parish churches; his impropriating and appropriating of Churches tithes: what
has it wrought, but the ruin of the Church in very many? and this he did, to
cherish the locusts of Monks, Friars, and Nuns, fit manciples for his own
turn. It is imputed to King How pernicious to the Church Popes have been ask
Pelagius in Planct. lib. 2.
Henry the 8. the granting of Parsonages and impropriations to the Laity; it
cannot be denied but he did so; but who led him the dance? who else but your
Holyone who had taken before from the ordinary Pastors and Curates, the
principal Tithes bestowing the same upon his Abbey-locusts; and had reserved
the other for such as did attend the Cure; but it was not so ab initio; it was
brought in by the man of sin, and is now held on foot by men of sin, who
sacrilegiouslie keep the Churches tithes to the eternal perdition of their
own Souls, and the ruin of their Posterity; my hearty prayer shall ever
be, that such impropriations may be to the unjust usurpers of them, as thorns
in their sides to compel them to restitution, or else as cankers in their
wealths to consume the same.

There are M. Flood wellny innumerable other instances, by which the
Atheistical impieties of your Popes and Romanists might be discovered; and yet
God has Bellarmine said of him that sine penitentia descendit in infernum: he
dying without repentance went into hell: such is the end of all their sons of
perdition: I defend not Sixtus yet I durst to undertake to show that all things
considered he was better then a hundredth of other their Popes.
not often avenged them by miraculous punishments; you can easily call to mind
what manner of prodigy was in the judgment of your Ignatian Society that holy
one Sixtus the 5. but I pretermit to speak of him; or those prodigious
impieties, which your society objects against him; by that which I have said
the judicious Reader may observe, how idle that inference of yours is, when you
thus write; Is Gods power or his love less toward mankind since Luthers
preaching? this your (is) is so idle, that it is fit for you to put again up
into your budget and rescrue it for your blind Obedients at Saint Omers. I say
before that God had not often nor ordinarily avenged your holy Sires impieties,
yet it cannot be denied, but that God has sometimes avenged them with his
furious rod. I could out of your own Authors, put you in mind of
disastrous ends of some of your Popes your Bonifacies, your Beneaicts, your
Siluesiers, G^nebra. Plat. Baron.
Anastasies, Iulies, Alexanders, Sabinian, John's, Paul's, and your Gregory's
and ^ famous Peter Aleisius son of Paul the 3. was met withal.

What think you of that prodigy from heaven which Glaber relates thus in
effect; one Fulco an Earl of Glaber. lib. 2. hist cap. 4. The temple of S.
Idoc with the sacred things in it were quite burnt Au^nt. lib 7 hist. p^g. 495.
Gaunt, had built a Church, for the sacring of which there must be sent (belike
no Bishop of France was holy enough) a special Legate alatere from your Pope
John of that time: what followed? he came, he consecrated the same; which done
instantly (the day having been very fair and bright-shining before) there
arose such a tempest, as though heaven and earth would have rent in sunder by
which your new sacred Church was ouerturned, and by the Devils ministry
execrated, defaced.

Call to mind, what prodigious punishments happened Gregor epist 30. lib. 3
mentioned above. You cannot but have heard how a late Papist Monarch was
consumed to death with lyce, a just gu^rdon either for his ^u^ury, or his ^ury
against Gods Saints you know whom I mean a Grand friend of yours and the tale
is true.
to those who by command of your Popes and Prelates did dig about the body of
S, Laurence; as likewise to those, who out of superstitious purpose, did dig
about some Saints bodies in Saint Paul's Church; without the City of Rome;
felt they not Gods reuengfull hand, smiting them with sudden death? Think of
that judgment, which happened to the workmen at Doway when upon command they
were to remove one of our Dioses made of stone, I have related the same in my
Motives.

And concerning the ends of some of your late Cheeftaines, I think you shall
not have any cause to rejoice either in Allens end, Parsons, Sanders, Garnets,
or Holts; with some other such like; but enough of this kind. And so here I
would end with a scorn to all the rest which follows in this division saving
that you provoke me justly by your gybing at Master Crashaw for affirming
truly that God is never wanting to his servants in the affair of marriage;
and further by your reproachful scorning, that famous Galeacius, for his
keeping of two maid servants in his house, for his daily attendance, whereof
you affirm, that it is one of the greatest miracles, which our Gospel did
ever beget, that Galeacius should keep such flax in his house, and converse
so many years together domestically with them, and yet abstain from scorching
of them. Wherein I first tax that your rash judgment, you having forgotten
that of our Savior, Nelite iudicare and non iudicabimini etc. Judge not Matthew:
7. 1.
and ye shall not be judged. This your headlong censure, puts me in mind
of as wicked a one, which ye used against that most Reverend man and Martyr of
God, Bishop Craumer, as if he should have poisoned himself, and this you say to
take away credit from a very credible Triumph page 14^. number. 22. Fox his Acts
and Monum:
relation, which is that your cruel fire, could not burn the heart of that
blessed man, when it was cast into the same.

A like you calumniate, when you make Mr. Mason a Fulsarie, as though he had
cited some vnautentike records touching the Ordinations of the Bishops of the
Church of England; but Mr. Flud I may tell you, that formy satisfaction when I
came to the Church of England, I saw them by the appointment of the Lord of
Canterbury his Grace in Mr. Costines office near the D. Commons. Where also
of late, certain of your Priests of the Clinke, did diligently view, pervse
and consider the same, that so for the time to come, you may (if it please you
with your Mr. Fitzherbert, D: Smith, and some others) leave to harp any longer
of that lying stringe, as though there were no true ordination in the Church of
England. I dare boldly make profer, to enter into dispute with you or any of
your side, and undertake The Ordination of Bishops in the Church of England
more Orthodoxe then that of the Popes.
to show that the Ordination used in the Church of England is more Orthodoxe
and sound, then the Ordination of your Popes themselves in your Roman See is,
or has been of later times; and yet neither will I, nor can I deny but that
there is in your Church true Ordination and Priesthood, howsoever most
egregiously infected with your superstitions. But not to add more of this;
seeing you idly tell us of so great a miracle done in our Church in the person
of Galeacius, give me leave to tell you truly and to purpose, of some such
kind of miracles done in your Church which you would fasten so willingly upon
us. You enforce us Mr. Flud to discover some of your miracles. Are there not
great miracles begotten by your Ignatian Gospel here in England, that your
Priests with jolly Dames should be shut up in secret places, (I mean such
places as your Priests are The Ignatians and their Favorites forbear not in
particulars and by name to personate, though falsely. We therefore are to be
excused if containing our selves in generals, do not nominate any in
particular.
hid in, whilst the Messenger is searching your houses) and yet there should
be no burning, nor scorching of such flax? Is it not a great miracle, that
your Priests should sit in secret chambers hearing the Confessions of their
female Penitents, and yet all be well, no flax scorched? Is it not a great
miracle, that Priests should whilst their fair Females are confessing upon
their knees, behold, look, meditate, feel with their hands their fair necks;
stroke their vermilion cheeks of such their Penitents, should take their hands
into theirs and daily with them, and yet be no scorching or burning of such
flax? Is it not a miracle, that some of your devoted Priests, should desire to
behold the length, thicknes etc. of some of their fine Dames feet, and legs,
and yet there be no scorching? Is it not a miracle that your Priests should
stand nigh to the bedds of their Ghostly Popish miracles in M Flods phrase.
children, and etc. and yet there be no scorching? Is it not a miracle, that a
Priest of yours should (others also intend it) in the time of a search, run
into the bed where one of your fair Females lay, so to avoid the search, and
yet there be no scorching fire and flax being so near together? Is it not a
miracle that some very chief Ignatians and Ignatianed amongst you, should
often do and speak things very unseemly, and yet they never scorch nor burn
any of that flane wherewith they are daily conversant? I could go on with many
like demands; but concluding all in one, Is it not a miracle, that so many of
your Priests, Ignatians and Monks feeding here in England daintily, arrayed
gallantly, lodging softly, should be very domestically and privily conversant
with Ladies, Dames, Matrones, Maids of all sorts, and yet none of all these be
scorched? Surely it is a grand miracle, so accounted of by Allen, Parsons,
Creswell and others, whom I have heard glory of the miraculous chastity of
their Priests, attributing the miracle to the blood of Christ, whereof they
daily drink, which is (say they) (Vinum germinans Virgins) wine breeding
Virgins. Zach: 9. 17.
But I dare confidently affirm, both by what I know, and by what I have most
credibly heard, that there are many of these wine virgins, who do often more
or less, do, say, speak and move unseemly matters. I appeal to their
consciences, whether this that I say to their charge be not true.

Thus in a little you have heard of your English Martyrs chastities, but should
I pass over into your hotter Climates, in steed of miracles we should have
prodigies. What? can you deny but that it is a prodigy, that those Religious
once should not scorch any, who at Naples, Millayne, Venice, yea Rome do
sometimes, not without Tramontane prodigies in M. Flods phrase.
conniuencie of their Superiors, (who had rather they should do so then
within their Cloisters burn in abominable Sodomie, whereto they are most
prone) leave their habits, and search after home or prostituted Courtisans,
with them to satisfy their lusts, and so return to their Arkes again?
Perhaps you will answer, these scorch not but rather return scorched, whereby
they set on fire nefando igne, the greatest part of the new grown flane of
their own cloisters and houses; be it so, for so it is.

Is it not a prodigy, that in your English Colleges both in Spain and Italy
there should he such stains Criminis possimi? it is rather a prodigy that at
Dowaye where Commons are so short, there should be scorching A greater miracle
that at Rhemes in the prime planting of your Seminary there should have been
any scorching: was there none? Ah miracle of the Ignatian Chastity?

It was not a prodigy in Italy in Romulus his City, whenas within less then
these two decades of years, a dozen and upwards of fair boys were found
guilty Criminis pessimi: but with whom? (oh Miralce) with the purpured
Red-hatts. Some two of the boys, if I misremember not, suffered for their sins
and for the sins of the Fathers, but the Purpured ones escaped. Concerning
whom, a certain Father Confessarie, (who ingenuously and very dexterously
found by confession of the youths who were their Abusers) spoke thus boldly to
the Pope (seeming desirous to reform so abominable abuse) Padre Santo, e
bisogna di cominciare da casa vostra. Holy Father, it is needful to begin with
your own house. Which answer upon further declaration of the mystery so
daunted his Holiness, that thereupon his tongue was mute from further
inueighing against the same, and his hands bound from doing further justice,
and so some of the delinquent boys were not further looked into, but escaped.
Oh Mr. Flud, should I add further to speak of the innumerable
Brothell-houses, which you have in the midst of your Cities in Rome, Venice,
Naples, Millaine, Auenion, etc? If I should add how your Scarlet-Ones, your
Bishops, Mountsegniours, do caroche up and down in the open streets and to
their Vineyards the Paradises of their pleasures, I should put the Reader to
cry out aloude, Miracle upon miracle, Prodigy upon prodigy. These, these are
those whereof the blessed Apostle speaks, Maculae conuinantes Epist: Iudae 11.
sine timore, Spotts feasting without fear. And would God they would content
themselves with natural courses, and not fall without fear into those
damnable and unnatural abuses, whereof the Apostle writes so dreadfully
Epist: ad Rom: cap. 1. 26. 27.
in the first to the Romans. Could your Romanists object any like matters
against any of the late Reformers of the Church of England, would they be
silent? No God wot; and therefore they idly twitt us with this imputation, that
some Monks, Friars, Priests, Nuns, who come from their deformed Synagogue do
betake themselves to the honorable state of Wedlock, despising those idle
vows of theirs, which they made in the time of their incredulity and
ignorance. This is the greatest bullbegger they seem to object against such
Conuerts as come from them; concerning which the Reader may observe hereafter
in this my discourse, how This handled fully in my eight Chapter.
justifiable and laudable both in the sight of God and men this their carriage
is.

And here at the ending of this discourse, I crave pardon of the Reader for
that I have (though in terms modest) discovered some little of their
Sodomiticall filth. We are thereunto justly provoked by the impudency of some
of them, who stick not even by name to traduce and calumniate some worthies of
the reformed Churches. They cannot blame me, if they call to mind, what
themselves and their Predecessors have and do daily very opprobriously object
against Calvin, Luther, Beza, etc. yea if they call to mind, how themselves
most shamefully and impudently endeavor to blemish the credits of some great
Persons; I will not particularize, lest I should be thought to thirst after the
occasions and inducements of blood. There are Dames of high rank, and Nobles
of like condition, who if they knew how they are traduced by the Ignatians and
Ignatianed in this kind, they would have little heart to show them or their
Favorites any favor at all, either direct, or indirect. But God in whose
hands the hearts of Princes are, and who stands in the midst of the Gods,
in the very midst of Magistrates ouerseeing and indging The Ignatians have
are ^lued rule and order, where they can to convey Lay-Iesuits into the Courts
of Princes: and it is certain as the practice of popery now is, that an
Ignatian-Papist cannot certainly be discovered but by refusing to take the
Sacraments or derly and ordinarily.
them, be mercifully pleased to direct and awake those, whom it most
concerns. For should these Proteus-like Transcendents, which now are so bold
as to run over all the Predicaments, prevail, (which God auerte) we may
expect not Marian, but Neronian times, fire and faggot should be our laureall
Guerdon. For if now they never sleep from attempting disloyal cruelties; we
shall be then most assured to taste of their fierce immanities, and yet when
their fury is spent, and we chastised and corrected, our heavenly and
merciful Father will be pleased to cast the rod of his fury into endless
punishment; grant refreshing here present for a time, and after everlasting
peace shall be restored, as I most humbly pray and confidently hope.

Mr. FLOD page: 142. number: 32.
Were this true, we might pardon the same Mr. Crashawe for saying Jesuits
Gospel, page 30. 31.
that we always paint Christ in our Churches as a Child, but the Virgin is a
woman and commanding Mother; that we say, that all the miracles be Hers, as
though he being a child, could not, or in the presence of his Mother would not
work miracles. He might add with as great truth, that we say that he dare
not, for she being a shrew will rappe him on the fingers, did he stretch out
his hand to do any miracle before her. But though these be senseless
slanders, yet were your Protestant fancy concerning miracles true the B:
Virgin Marie, might seem to have reason, to hold Christ's hands from doing any
miracles, whilst he is a child, lest you make him Antichrist when he comes
to be a man: She is wise to work all the miracles her self, whom her Sex
may warrant from being thought the man of sin: Yet blessed Virgin be not over
bold with miracels, lest they give us a Pope Marie to be Antichrist, as they
have done a Pope Ioane.

ANSWER.
I think the judicious Reader having perused this your Comedian like vagarie,
will not think of an Ignatian Theologue, but of some Comicall Poet lately come
from acting in the Black Friars.

If Mr. Crashawe (for I have not his Book by me) say as you relate him, he is
doubtless to be understood of such Tablets, in which you for most part jointly
draw Christ with his Mother, having him ever in her arms as a little child:
If he say that you ever paint her as a commanding mother, he might so say and
truly, for your such manner of painting him and her does put him in mind of
the law of nature, which ever commands children, especially such young ones,
to be obedient to Parents. Also Mr. Crashaw (I doubt not) spoke according to
the apprehension, which your ordinary people make of such your manner of
painting the mother and the son. Again, he cannot but have read, those
superstitious and phantastike kind of meditations, which some of your Friars
etc. have made upon those words of the Evangelist, Jesus autem descendit in
Nazaret, and ibi erat subditus illis. But Jesus went down with them unto
Nazaret, and there was subject to them.

Further, if Mr. Crashaw affirm, that you teach that all the miracles done in
your Church are Hers, he means that you call them hers, because obtained by
her mediation and intercession. Wherein he mistaketh you Orat: Arch. Patra. in
Sess: 10. Con. ^ater. sub Leo 1. Osorius Diez. Alij.
not; for do not your Divines teach it, and your Concionists preach it, as an
elegant divine Scripturian conceit, that the Virgin Marye is the same betwixt
Christ and his Church, as the neck is between the head and the body; so
that, as no defluence or influence passes from the head to the body, but by
the neck; so neither are any graces or spiritual influences granted from
Christ to his Church, but they pass by the hands of his Mothers intercessions:
Does not your practice approve the same? For whenever any of your Friars,
Monks, or Priests do publicly preach to the people, do they not always
premit (but pretermit the Lords prayer) the Aue Marie to the blessed Virgin
Marie, thereby to obtain both present graces for that time, and future graces
for the time to come, by her prayers and intercessions? Do not you say as much
but a few lines after? When you making no exception of miracles, do
indefinitely Number: 33.
affirm, that the miracles of your Church are done at her request, but by his
(that is, her Sons) power, so that your self now affirm, what you reproved
in Mr. Crashawe.

Your other Comedian like arguing in this division, sauoureth not a iott of a
Divine; but I must needs tell you; first, that howsoever you paint the Mother
and her Son, for so much as you give to the Creature, that which is due to
the Creator, you commit horrible Idolatry therein. Secondly, your manner of
writing is Pagau-like, blasphemous, when as you make colors drawn and
shadowed in Tablets, to be Christ and his Mother, let your sense be what it may
be, your manner of phrase is heathenish, fit to lead your blind Obedients to
that horrible superstition which is so frequent in your Temples, to praise,
adore and invocate your siluerd and gilded Gods, as Balthazar did his silver
and golden Gods; and as long as you this do, it mattereth not three blew Dan:
5. 4.
points, whether your prodigies be done by such your Mother, or her painted
Son, or not, they are over the lying wonders of Antichrist, and are
seducements for that Idolatry, which S. John in the Revelation does express
and point at, and does declare to have been practiced Apoc: 9. 20.
most especially at that time, when the Great Star fell from heaven (which is
your Pope) and the Locusts out of the bottomless pit (which are your Friars
and Monks) ouerswarmed the whole earth: for even at their appearing, and in
the time of their flourishing, the worshipping of Idols of Gold and Saint John
in the 9. of his Revelation points expressly at Popish Idolatry.
Silver, the works of men's hands began to be most rife in you Sinagogue;
then began especially adoration of devils by sorcery; then followed murders
for the maintenance of your Popes supremacy; then were on foot fornications
and adulteries by reason of your Popes unnecessary and sinful laws for his
Clergies Celibacy; then was theft reputed religion, when as your law less men
of sin (encouraged thereunto by the writings of your Mendicants as Alexander
of Hales, Aquinas etc.) did rob the Pastors of their greater tithes, by
appropriating them to the use of his manciples which now (I will not say his
manciples but herein his disciples) men of large consciences do hold to the
ruin and perdition of their souls: with which letargie of sacrilege they lie
so inchaunted that they will not be cured, charm the Charmer never so wisely;
nay which is more, the poor Vicar-Incumbents have not this favor from the
Impropriatists (at the same rents) to farm the parsonage-tithes, as Laikes do.

Your conclusion, with a gravity beseeming your leuity, does advise the
Picture virgin not to be ouerbold with miracles, lest she be reputed a
Pope-Marie Antichrist, as there has been a Pope Ioane Antichrist. Sir, pardon
me herein if I say that you seem like to Walihams calfe that went nine miles
to suck a cow, and when he came thither the Cow proved a Bull; perhaps in
your Caluish meditation you thought for your pains in aduertising the
Picture-mother to have sucked her dug as your Fulbert is reported by your
Baronius to have done, but you are mistaken for you have light upon a Bull,
which with his horns will shake in pieces the mount of your Holy Fathers
Supremacy. You were not well advised M. Flud to stir this puddle of Pope
Ioane, whereout the ignominy of your vnerrable See is so lively discovered.

You, with your Lipsius glory for your Hallian and Sichem miracles; your
Turseline tells us of the prodigious translation of your Loretto-house, from
Bethleem, by many stoppes and stays of the same by the way: But Sir I (who am
none of the Great Clerks) dare to challenge you or any of yours in this, that
standing within your own principles (touching the credit of humane history)
there is far more reason for us, to believe that there was a Papisse Ioane,
then you should believe the remouall of the house wherein Christ was nourished
in his infancy, from Bethlehem to Loretto, or for you to believe the miracles
reported to have been done at Hall, or Sichem.

What M. Flood? shall a history of Popisse-Ioane be carried by your own
Authors for diverse hundreths of years together? shall the same be related,
without any express contradiction of any Historian for those hundreths of
years? shall the same be received with consent of Peoples and Nations? shall
there be public Monuments thereof in streets, as at Rome? in a glorious
Cathedral Church, as at Sienna? where your eyes might have seen (when you and
I traveled thorough that City) amongst the Image rank of Popes the very
Femall picture, and portraict of Pope Ioane; what? shall all these things be so
with much more, and yet the same The history of Pope Ioane briefly examined, I
wish the Reader if he desire fully to be satisfied in this tale of Pope Ioane
to read M. Cooks book written purposely of the same subject.
narration not be true? durst your own Authors, to the everlasting ignominy of
Peter's See, have devised such a tale? no, no; the verity of the thing enforced
them thereunto; and doubtless had not God awaked some of his Servants to have
revealed other ignominies of your Roman Hellen, this very tale would have
run on still for current: For you cannot be ignorant, how the same tale was
not flatly gainsaid by any of yours, until it was objected to your shame by
some of the reformed Churches; then, and not before, did your Onuphrius,
Baronius and others exercase the very quintessence of their wits, to take
credit from the history. Their denial of the history, rests upon some few
general heads of arguments which I with the Readers patience will briefly lay
down and by Gods help fully confute.

Their first head is, because some Authors about those times, and some
presently after, have not related the same, ergo it was not so: What an idle
ergo is this? what reason have you to think, that all Historians were so
vntender of your Romane-darlinges credit, as to relate such an eternal
ignominy of their dear Mother? Let us argue a simili thus? John Chattle, as
it is presumed by the instigation of some of your Order, attempted the
murdering (with stroke of a knife) of King Henry the 4. of France, how many of
your Order, or of your devout friends, will be forward to commend the same to
posterity?

Again, will all acobine Predicants, be eager to commend to future ages how a
Iacobine Friar did treacherously murder his dread Lord and Sovereign? Do all
your Popish H^storians, relate the nefand and execrable ends of some of your
Popes? as John the 12. Boniface the 8. Anastasius, Benedict, Gregory 7.
Sabiman, Siluester etc. The presumptuons arrogancy of your Pope Alexander the
3. who at Saint M^rkes Church door in This of Alexander and Frederike is
painted in the Popes vatican Paliace in Rome.
V^nice; did in the face of the whole City tread and trample upon Frederick
the Emperors neck: do all your Historians relate it? the same indeed is
reported by some, and it is drawn out in pictures at Venice and yet your grand
Baronius would willingly bring the same into doubt, as he does this of Pope
Ioane. Your Garnet, Tesmond, Hall, with other of their accomplices attempted, the
blowing up by Gunpouder of our dread Sovereign, his gracious Queen, the
Princes, and Princess of their bodies, together with all the worthies and
honors o^ our Kingdom: how many be there trow ye of your Order or of your
deuoutes, that will commend to posterity their most hellish attempts? the
process made against the Traitors and the just execution and judgment of
them?

By infinite like instances which might be produced it may easily appear how
idle the first ground of your arguments is. Some of the Historians
Syn-Chronists of the same times with your Ioane, durst not; most of them, out
of a dear love to your Darling would not do it: and it is a petty wonder,
that any one (veridicus) Telltroth could be found, who had the heart to commit
to posterity, so infamous and prodigious a note of ignominy to your Church:
and doubtless both love of truth, and evidence of truth persuaded them to make
public so great a paradoxe as it might then seem; and this I hold to be the
reason why some of them relate it somewhat frearefully, and some of them would
seem willing to cast some mists of doubt upon the tale, thereby to salve your
vnerrable Sees sore and wound, but it may not be.

Your second general defense, or head of arguments is; because, some
succeeding Popes, after this supposed Ioane, had very hateful Adversaries in
the Empire; marvel, that none objected the same to those Popes. To this I
answer, as Grammar School Boys are wont to do when their fellows boult out
any stollid and blockish arguments; Nunquam tam stolidum argumentum audiui, I
never heard a more blockish reason. Sir, those Adversaries of your Popes, were
enemies to their Persons not to your Church; In the obiecting of this
ignominy, they should have rather stained their Darling-mother-Church, then
the Popes, and have bewraied their ownenest; what sir? did those Adversaries
object all other criminous ignominies of precedent Popes such as your self
cannot deny? Had your Ioanes Child lived whereof she was delivered
processioning to Saint John Lateranes; perhaps some might have objected to his
confusion so spurious a birth? or had your Ioane been mounted to your See from
out of some of the great Roman Families; then some one might have objected the
same to their shame; but as she was delivered of a spurious child, so for any
thing can be said to the contrary, she was also a spurious Ioane her self: so
that there was not any of her stock, which might have been twitted with her
ignominy; so that the discovering of the same by your own Historians, should
have brought no greater profit to your Church, then shame, by revealing their
dear Mothers turpitude. Does not your Bergomensis and some others relating the
History affirm, that in respect of the most shameful turpitude of the tale,
she was not numbered in the Catalogue of your Popes, as Paris lib. de potest.
Papae. Plat. in vitis Genebrard. Chronic. Baren. Annalls.
in like sort your famous Ioannes Parisiensis says of Ciriacus Pope, and your
Platina, Genebrard, and Baronius deliver of some others, the point is clear, I
go on.

A third ground of your defense is the impossibility or unlikelihood of the
tale, why unlikely? In respect of her wickedness? not so; for John the 23.
Siluester the 2. Boniface the 8. Alexander the 6. John the 12. Sergius,
Sabinian, with diverse other most wicked Popes (of your own approving) for
wickedness of life have by many degrees surpassed her: Why impossible? In
respect of her sex? Alac good sir, might not she as well live in the habit of
a man undiscovered, as your Euphrasina, Mariana, Melania, with some others
whereof your Legendists How diverse women have lived as men in the habits of
men, See Raderu, in V^ridario 1. p. annotat in Apolinar. Epist. Petri Anti^ch.
apud B^r^: Ann. 1054.
make mention; being women, live for many years together in Monasteries with
your Monks undiscovered. Why might not the same happen in the Church of Rome
as well as in the Church of Constantinople, as by yours has been objected
against the same? because they admitted Eunuchs to Episcopacy.

The likeliest matter to have discovered her sex might have been want of a
beard: but your Church had taken order for that before, for your Mass Priests
and Monks used to be shaven.

Again, Physicians will tell you, and that truly, that as there be ways to
procure the growing of hair where nature had not determined the same, so
likewise there are ways to hinder the growing of hair where nature had
otherwise appointed it: whereof your Papisse Ioane being so singularly
instructed in all humane literature could not be ignorant; and it is to be
presumed that she having resolved to live in that sort; she used her most
cunning means to conceal her sex, both to avoid punishment due to such
dissembling being against the law of God; as also to purchase those honors at
which she aimed; and which by her excellent learning she knew she was reputed
and reported to have deserved. Add to this, that there be women who by nature
appear Semibarbatae, half bearded, upon whom the Italian prouer begoeth Da
donna barbata i huomo raso dio mi guarda, From a bearded woman, and a shaven
man, God deliver me. Why might not your Ioane be of some such constitution? Why
might not she, beardlesse by nature, live in Rome amongst breadlesse by Art;
as well as some of your mincing women of late years, being of the age of
thirty (pretending to be younger) pass the searches at our Ports and live in
Flaunders in the habit of men? as though they were men amongst bearded men? The
case is clear: some of your Gallant Maids which come to you to be Nuns,
know well how to case themselves in the habit of Gallant youngsters; Ipsae
viderint, whether any of them did scorch, or be scorched, as your phrase is
against Galeacius.

A fourth ground of your reasons, arises out of some contrarieties which are
in Authors, touching the time of this Ioanes sitting. What of this? they are
all generally agreed, that she sat betwixt Lee the 4. and Benedict the 3. the
year of our Lord 855. or 856. or the reabouts. Shall their variety concerning
the time of her Papacy overthrow the truth of the history? beware of that: For
how familiar a thing is it in your Historians and Cronologists, to vary in the
setting down of the order and sittings of your Popes? shall such variance make
the matter doubtful? if so; what then will become of the succession of your
Rocks? whereon your Church is builded? What will become of Saint Peter's being
and dying at Rome, (whereon your Papal supremacy is founded) concerning which
Authors are so diverse and so various? The Septuaginta-Translatours Sir, and
others, do they not differ in the account of the worlds age some hundredth of
years? what shall we therefore play the Atheists, and either deny Moses
credit, or the worlds creation?

Concerning the birth, life, and death of our Savior, is there no variance in
Authors? shall we therefore blaspheme, and call the truth of Christianity in
doubt? Touching the death of the ever blessed Virgin Mary, is there not great
variety and contrariety in Authors? what? shall we therefore say she is not
dead? we may not; for then your practice touching her corporal assumption
after her death would be found superstitious.

Thus by the way I have refuted in a few words your grounds for your denial
of Popisse Ioane. In the conclusion hereof I will advertise you, that if you
will needs deny the history to take up (and to content your self therewith)
that answer, which your Onuphrius makes: Onuph: Annot. in Plat. in Pap: Ioh. 8.
you have great reason to listen unto him (though he be a very fresh writer
within less then an age) for he amongst your Authors denying this history is
the Bell-weather. He thus says and proves out of Luitprandus Luitprand.
Ticin: lib. 6. cap. 6. 7.
(an ancient Historian and an obedient child of the Church of Rome) how that
John the 8 was a most notorious, luxurious, and impudike Person, who not
contenting himself like a common Bull to abuse other men's wives, he further
kept in his Serralls apart for his lecherous use, three most impudent
Strumpets, Rainera, The best popish defense can be made concerning Pope-Ioane.
Anna, and Stephana. (Onuphrius guilefully to make his tale seem more current
calls one of them Ioane) with whom he lived in most detestable sort; in hate
whereof, for his effeminatenesse the Romans termed him by the name of Ioane.
And so was the fair child named and a Pope-Ioane devised. This is your
Onuphrius conjecture, and the same seems more likely, because Auentine a
Auent. hisi. lib. 4 page 285.
no great Favorite of Popes seems so to have coniectured, save only that
Auentine calls the Strumpet Theodora. For my part though I refuse Auentines
coniecturall authority herein; as your men do reject him in a world of his
other narrations, yet I advertise you Master Floode to stick unto it, for of
all your defenses it seems most likely; and yet I ingenuously confess I am
somewhat doubtful whether I should so advise you or not: For in very truth it
seems more infamous for your Church, to have had such a Pope-Iohn then such a
Pope-Ioane as the Historians relate. In the first there should have been a
succession in a Person most abominable; In the other no succession but only as
it were a See-vacancy, an Interregnum, In the first the keys of David; should
have been in the hands of a lewd Beast and Monster; in the other the keys
and all power should for a time have resided in the Church, for whose use and
good it is, and there should have been only a material error, in the choice
of one sex for another; and that for a short time only: But I will leave you
to your choice betake you to which answer you will: I must see what follows
whether it be as idle as your former, or worse.

Mr. FLVD, page 130. number. 33.
But is it not a miracle think you, that men endewed with reason, should let
such lewd lies pass to the Print? Do we never paint Christ as perfect man
redeeming the world upon the Cross, and judging the same by fire? Are not
these pictures frequent in our Churches? And when Christ is presented in the
Virgins arms, she is painted not as a commanding, but as a mother adoring her
Son, that by her countenance one may see, that whilst her breasts gave him
suck^, her heart did offer him the frankincense of prayer, as to her God; do
we not make the miracles of our Church rather his then hers, done at her
request, but by his power? which miracles she does ask not for her own
honor, but for his, to establish in men's hearts, that faith Miracula martires
faciunt vel potius illis orantibus Deus vt fides illa proficiat quae eos non
deos esse nostros, sed vnum Deum nobiscum habere credimus. Aug: lib. 22. de
Ciuit: cap. 10.
which does believe, that not she but He is God, and she only honorable for
his sake, and saved by his blood; holy by his grace, glorious by his mercy,
powerful by his hand; why should we not think, that the devil does hate this
faith? H^w can any Christian think, that the Devils do miracles to confirm
so pious doctrines?

ANSWER.
Tracing you here Mr. Flud, I might justly harrow you over with a few lines;
but your calumniating of our whole Church for the fault of a few (if it were a
fault) does give me just occasion to put you in mind of some of your holy
Fathers, and your own calumnious and lying dealings. You demand thus, Is it
not a miracle, that men endewed with reason, should let such lewd lies pass to
the Print? Soft and fair Sir; If Mr. Crashawe do so interpret himself, as I
have insinuated he may, then there is no lewd lie in his saying, but a loud
truth, committed to Print for your confusion. But say it is a mistaking of a
private man, allowed by some inconsiderate Censour, what of this? will you
scoffingly call it a miracle? what a miracle? nay what a prodigy? Nay what
prodigies then are daily acted in your Church, not by private ones only, but
even by your Vice Gods after consultation had with their Purpured and Scarlet
creatures in their Consistorian Synods? And to touch one of innumerable, what a
lewd fable is that of your S. Catharine, Breuiar: Rom: in F^st. Cathar.
whom your Holy Ones feign to have suffered martyrdom under Maxentius the
Tyrant at Alexandria; whom also you describe to have confounded by her
disputing fifty Philosophers sent from that Tyrant to convert her? Further
that she converted to the Christian Faith, Porphirye General Master of the
War, and Faustina the Empress, with innumerable others; that she being
adjudged to be broken upon wheels, by her prayers brake the wheels in pieces;
by which an infinite number of people were converted to the Christian faith.
These things, with some like, are yet remaining in this your tale; I call it
not a tale, because I do not think that the like, or as great, may not have
been done by some Martyrs, for the confirmation of Christian Religion; but I
do call this a fable, because it is not supported with any sufficient
witness, and seems to have been scraped (though cunningly) out of her old
idle Legend-life and Martyrdom, in which there are so many fooleries, that
impudency it self has been ashamed of them. None of your Holy Fathers as
yet Breuiar: Pij 5. iussu editum.
have been able to legitimate the Child; indeed your Pius 5. in his
castigation of your Breuiarie, caused Eusebius his seventh book of his
History and the 26 chapter Eusebius. lib. 7. cap: 26.
to be prefixed before the fable, by which he would have fastened the bastard
upon Eusebius; but diligent scrutinie being made, it was found that Eusebius
would none of it, which perhaps is the cause that in your later Editions of
your Breuiaries, Eusebius is left out; So that now the babe remains without a
Father; bestirre your self Mr. Flud, persuade some of your Fathers to name the
child; at least some Hermaphroditian Padre etc. or else the child is like to
remain to your deceased pious Vice-God, to be Godfather to it; or else if you
rather please, to your voraginous Jacob in his Golden Legend. How idle now is
your insultation against us for Mr. Crashawes private oversight, if it be so?

But leaving your Holy Ones of Rome, to their such kind of miracles, let us
consider a little whether any of your Scarlet Grand-Ones of the same, do work
such miracles; which of them does not? To pretermit others, Bellar: Prefat: in
Contro: de Sanct: Beatitudine.
your grand Clerk Bellarmine what a loud and lewd lie (amongst many others
of like nature) does he commit, to print against the reformed Churches,
especially against Calum, thus: Nefas est enim apud eos, Episcopum creari nisi
vnius saltem vxoris virum. It is a wickedness not to be spoken of amongst
them, to have a Bishop made, who is not at least the husband of one wife. The
impudency of this lewd and loud lie, I refer to be censured by the eye of
the whole world, which cannot but observe, that unmarried men are made Bishops
in the reformed See the harmony of Confessions.
Churches; yea and in some of them, if there be any preeminence or precellencie
given for such respect, it is given to the unmarried. Mr. Flud, the Churches
reformed are well pleased that your Synagoguists and the head of them, should
simulare castitatem, dissemble chastity; it is one of the Notes of Antichrist,
as I declare elsewhere. But call to mind, what some of your own Authors have
reported long ago of your Priests and people, to wit, that the people of
Parishes would hardly admit unmarried Priests to be their Pastors, for fear of
their assaulting and attempting of their wives etc. How the case now stands
in your popish Kingdoms, you cannot be ignorant, and what might be added more
in this case I willingly pretermit.

Now to you Mr. Flud, let us consider whether you can do so great a miracle as
to make a lie, and to print Triumph page 99. number: 10.
the same. In your Purgatories Triumph thus you write; Of these four words,
Hoc est corpus meum, containing not above fourteen letters (they conteyne
sixteen) you have devised above four times forty expositions 200 Expositions
of those four words, printed ann: 1577. apud Bell: de Euchar: lib. 1. cap. 8.
so different as the Authors of the one damn the Favorites of the other to
hell. thus you there. If some Parsonian N. D. had the calculating of this your
saying, he might find more lies then lines. Your lines are few, but your lies
come very nigh to two hundred. You seem to charge the Church of England (for
to us you speak) to have 200 contrary expositions, for which etc. where was
your for head Mr. Flud, when you wrote thus? will you say (though you write to
us) yet you mean all the several Protestant Churches, whether they be
Lutheran, Caluinian, etc? Admit you did so, yet I dare boldly charge you, that
in so saying you have at lest made and printed You Mr. Flud, that object such
contrarieties to us about the Sacrament, may read your own ignominy in that
kind well expressed by Licentiat. Boxhornius lib. 2. harmo: Eucharistica, and
by others, Willet, etc.
150 miracles, if to make and print lies, be to do and make miracles. I am
assured you cannot find out half a hundred of several reformed Churches, who
do condemn each other to hell for any articles, much less for their several
expositions upon these few words etc. If you be your craftsmaster show us the
Authors, or Churches, which do thus condemn each others to hell, or else look
to it, that your self be not condemned to hell for this your shamefullying.

But to press you further, where was your forehead when you did so egregiously
belie Bellarmine himself, making him the Parent of your conceit? All that
Bellarmine writes, is this: Nuper etc. anno 1577. prodijt libellus Bellar:
lib. 1. de Euchar: cap. 8.
in quo ducentae numerantur hereticoru^ etc. Of late there came forth a libell,
in which there are numbered 200 either expositions, or deprauations of these
words, This is my body, notwithstanding the chiefest are only nine, whereof
three are grounded upon the Pronoune HOC This; two in the verb Est, Is. Three
in the Noune Corpus, Body. One in the Pronoune Meum, Mine. Thus Bellarmine
commenteth upon his own Note. By which it appears Mr: Flud, that your lying
is malicious; for Bellarmine affirming that only nine of these 200 expositions
are principal, what probability is there, that for sundry of other the Petty
ones, that the Authors of them should condemn such as should deny them even
to hell for such their denial.

Again, seeing Bellarmine terms the book a Libell, (which wanting name
wants also authority) with what face can you out of a namelesse Libell lay
so heavy an imputation upon all the Reformed Churches? I tell you truly Mr.
Flud, you may be ashamed of such your dealing, I advise you not to learn your
Ladies this your Churches A. B. C; Learn rather of some of your Ladies, how
many letters there may be in these words, Hoc est corpus meum: Your Fatherhood
says, there is not Triumph page 99 number: 10. Mr. Fluds skill in numbering.
above fourteen (such is your skill in numbering) and yet I think that some of
your Ladies, out of that little skill they have in reading their Latin
Primmer, will find out sixteen; but if you speak them fair they will
perhaps read for est, e^ with a tittle over it, lest you should also be found
lying in so slight a point. Perhaps you did number only fourteen, that so both
your lying fourteen, and your four times forty, might begin with the letter
F which is the first letter of your name etc. I will leave to add any thing
more in this place concerning your lying, wherein your Becans, Gretsers,
Campians, Parsons, etc. are so well nurtured, that they seem all of them in
their writings to contend for the whetstone. But let us go on.

After calumniating, you Thraso-like brag thus against Mr. Crashawe; Do we
never paint Christ etc? Yes Sir, you do it, and too often (against the decree
of the Elibertine Elibert: Con: Can: 36.
Council) unless you did the same for better uses. what and if you paint the
Virgin Marye sometime as you talk? what of this? was there ever any heresy so
detestable, which had not some intermixion of good with bad? You go on Sir,
and tell us that you make the miracles of your Church to be rather Christ's then
his Mothers. It is true Sir, we deny it not, but we are beholding unto you,
when you tell us in what sense you grant the same, for you add thus, done at
her request, but by his power. Well fare your heart Sir, here is plain
dealing; whereas in the working of miracles three Attributes of God do seem
specially to concur, his Wisdom, his Goodness, and his Power; his wisdom,
by which the miracles are conveniently and orderly done; his goodness, by
which he is moved to do them, and to do them profitably for the good of his
creatures; his power, by which he is able to do them. The latter you leave to
Christ, and the other two, at least originally, you attribute to his mother,
saying, done by his power, but at her request. And whereas Goodness tastes
best to wretched creatures, and is most powerful with man, you attribute unto
her especially, Goodness; thereby to induce your Blinde-Obedients, to cast
their greatest confidence upon her, and to say and sing unto her; Salve Regind
Matter misericordiae, vita, dulcedo, and spes nostra etc. All hail Queen
mother of mercy, our life, our sweetness and our hope etc. Herein Mr. Flud you
seem Turseline-like to long after Biells lesson, where he resolves, how God
the Biell lect: 8. in Can: Missa.
Father dividing his goods, keeping Justice for himself, gave Mercy to the
Virgin Marye, etc. You have found power for the Son, but what office shall
the Holy Ghost have in the working of miracles? Let us if it please you hear
your full division; If the miracles be done at the Virgins request, what part
and office has the Holy Ghost? doubtless his office is by inspiration to
purchase the Virgins motion, that she may say to her Son, fiat, let it be
done.

After your boasting and calumniating, you go on pretending great modesty,
for thus you add; which There is a glorious vision of brother Lee, who saw all
those who would have ascended up to heaven by the red ladder, on the top of
which Christ sat, to fall down, some at the third step, some at the fourth:
but those who ascended up the white ladder, on the top of which the Virgin
Marye sat, they entered heaven without any difficulty. related in Spec. ex 7.
verbo Iudicium Dei ex Chron: Lat: Mino lib. 6. cap. 17. and Gall. lib. 2. cap.
26.
miracles she does ask, not for her own honor, but for his, to establish in
men's hearts that faith, which does believe, that not she, but he is God; and
she only honorable for his sake, and saved by his blood, holy by his grace,
glorious by his mercy, powerful by his hand, why should we not think that
the Devil does hate this faith? thus you. Would God your words and your
practice would consort. Put case you make her not a God, but how can you excuse
it but that you make her a Goddess? Do you not yield unto her attributes
befitting a Goddess, to redeem, to save, to protect, to defend, to rule, to
command all earthly creatures? How can you say she was saved by Christ his
blood, seeing that in your doctrine (whatsoever the black Friars teach to the
contrary) she never contracted original sin, nor committed actual; you
should rather say she was preserved from sin by his Grace, rather then saved
by his Blood. How can you say, that she is only glorious by his mercies, whenas
your Apud Valent. in 3. Thom. Valent. Disp. 1. q. 2. de vnio: duar: not: puncto
8. See Salmeron in Euang. and Act: tractat: 6.
Doctors teach that she merited at least, ex congruo, out of a congruitie, to
be the Mother of God, and Christ's incarnation. Mr. Flud, if your faith were no
other then you have set down, is it not to be maruey led that we who have the
same faith herein with you, cannot with that faith do the same miracles as you
do? surely there is somewhat in it. It is said (and truly) that Sorcerers and
such like, as your Spanish Saluadores do pretend (being demanded how they do
their cures etc.) that they do the same by saying the Lords Prayer, Creed, etc.
But let it be replied unto them, that others saying the like prayers, can not
do the like cures; they will presently answer you, that though they say the
prayers, yet they say them not with like faith, nor have not that strong
Confidence in the Paternoster as they have; Even so it fares betwixt you and
us, for although we believe that Christ is God, and not his Mother, that she
is honorable for his sake, saved by his blood, holy by his grace, glorious by
his mercy, powerful by his hand, yet this faith in us works no miracles, the
reason is we have not so strong faith as you Baltazar-like, to praise and
adore wodden and siluered Ladies, at Loretto, Sichem, Hall, etc. as you do,
and thus goes the game of miracles away from us, and you have them, for which
we envy you not. And so let us come to your fifth argument.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein is examined Mr. FLOODS fifth Reason.
Mr. FLVD, page 150. number: 34.
AND this is our fifth argument to prove our miracles true, that they are
beneficial both to the body and soul of men, which therefore without
blasphemy, may not be given from God to the Devil. Those wicked Spirits, do
seek in their works, to make themselves (mirabiles, non vtiles) as S. Austen
says, wonderful not beneficial unto men; they desire to amaze and astonish,
rather then to relieve, and help senses.

ANSWER.
The force of this your argument consists in this, to wit, that the Devils and
Antichrists miracles shall be only wonderful, and not profitable or
beneficial as yours are. But the edge of this your reason is made blunt by
your Rhemists, who in their Annotations upon the Epistle Raemist. in 2 Thessalonians.
2.
to the Thessalonians write thus, Satan whose power to hurt is abridged by
Christ, shall then be let loose, and shall assist Antichrist in all manner of
signs, wonders, and false miracles, whereby many shall be seduced, not only
Jews: thus they, being euicted even by truth it self so to write. Now if
Antichrist as they say shall be powerful in all manner of signs, why does
your Fatherhood to the aduantaging of his and your cause restrain his power to
the working of some small trifles. Chrysostom or the Author upon Saint
Matthew, is so Hom. 49. in Math. Operis imperfect.
confident that he dares to write, that in the Antichristian days, power of
working miracles shall be taken away from the true Christians, and that the
same shall be granted to the false Christians, in whom, and amongst whom, the
Devil shall have such great power permitted unto him, (vt faciat signa vtilia
vt iam Christi ministros non per hoc cognoscamus quod signa vtilia faciant, sed
quia haec signa omnino non faciant) that he may do signs profitable, so that
then we may not know the Ministers of Christ, by doing of such signs, but that
they do not any such at all. Saint Gregory says, that the miracles Greg.
lib. 34. in Job. cap. 3. apud Pater: in 2. ad Thessal. 2.
of Antichrist shall be (tanta) so great that those of ours shall seem few or
none at all. And in another place he writes thus, nunc enim fideles nostri
etc. For now our faithful, suffering perverse things do wonders; but then the
Ministers of this man shall even then, when they inflict perverse things, do
wonders: Let us consider therefore, how great the trial of man's mind shall
then be, whenas the godly See how in the title and your own men's argument to
the 25. chap. of S. Greg. his 33. book upon Job Antichrist is said to do so
many miracles that by many he shall be taken for Christ.
Martyr shall submit his body to torments; and yet before his eyes the very
Executioner shall do signs: Whose inward virtue may not then be shaken, from
the very bottom of his thoughts? whenas he, who tormenteth with stripes does
also shine with signs and wonders? Thus Gregory, with much like matter, which
might be produced; wherein he is not dissonant, from all the Ancients;
according to that of Christ, that Antichrist and his, shall do so many, and so
great signs, that if it were possible the very elect should be deceived. But
if Antichrist and his, shall do no signs profitable, the danger of the elect
to be deceived by them would not be so great, but seeing that Math. 24. 24.
according to our Saviors prediction the Devils will labor by all means
possible, by such signs to deceive the elect, it is not to be imagined, but
that they will have some of those signs, which are aptest to deceive, See
Stapleton in Dom. 20. post Pent. loc. 5.
to wit signs profitable and beneficial.

Whereas you say, that it is blasphemy to ascribe to the Devil your miracles,
which are beneficial both to body and soul; I cannot think but that your
Adversary reading the same, will smile at such your vain begging of the
question. Nay sir, though we deny them to be beneficial to your souls, which
are seduced thereby, notwithstanding we cannot but account them profitable to
our souls; which by them are instructed to take your holy Father for that man
of sin, who was foretold should come in the power and efficacy of such
signs. By which you may observe how fond your Remists annotation is, in which
they write thus: They that In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
now follow the simplest and grossest Heretics that ever were, without seeing
miracles, would then much more follow this great Seducer working miracles. This
great Seducer then must work miracles such as are aptest to deceive, to wit,
profitable.

And to add a little more of this kind, I advise you Master Floode to call to
mind, first how the Devil in times of Heathnish ignorance is reported by
Liuie, Elian, Apollonius Tianeus, and others, to have done many profitable
signs; Secondly, how under the new Testament, the same Satan is by Gods
permission to transform himself into an Angel of light, by doing or
pretending 2. Cor. 11. 14.
to do works of light, works beneficial, works profitable, works beseeming
(in the opinion of the Seduced) Antichrist and his in the opinion of the
seduced shall do miracles beseem^ng God himself.
even God himself; What? may he be able to do some works of light, even for
the time of those 1000. years in which he is bound? and shall it be thought,
that his power will be less in the time of Antichrist when he shall be set at
liberty, and when (as the Scripture says) he shall show great rage? knowing
his time to be Apoc. 12. 12.
but short.

If it be an opinion received by all Divines, that the power of wicked Angels
is so great that they can apply (corporales causas ad producendos corporales
effectus) corporal causes to produce corporal effects. Why shall it be
denied but that they may do by such means, God permitting the same, some
beneficial and profitable effects? Ask Aquinas and he will tell you, that
Magicians (per Aquin. 1. q. 110. art. 4. ad 12.
priuatos contractus) by private contracts, can do (mira and miracula quoad
nos) as to us, wonders and miracles; and I think it was never denied by any
sound Philosopher or Divine, but that the Magicians do, or may do sometimes
profitable wonders and beneficial effects: and yet notwithstanding howsoever
the same may seem profitable to man, doubtless Satan's project is thereby to
hurt both body and soul, if not at the present, yet in the end and winding up
of the matter.

Mr. Floode page 151. number. 34.
Such are miracles which Antichrist shall work, as making the picture of a
beast speak, bringing down fire from heaven, feigning himself dead and
rising again. For neither is the Antichrists miracles in M. Floodes opinion.
Devil so courteous toward mankind, that he will bestow benefits on their
bodies, nor God so hard as to let him entrappe their Souls by so strange
illusions, as multitudes of such miraculous helps and benefits are.

ANSWER.
What manner of miracles Antichrist and his ministers shall work, the
Scriptures with the Ancient Sages of the Church, have sufficiently declared
unto us; It pleases you following Bellarmines tracke, to cast a mist of error
before your Readers eyes, by putting him in mind of three kinds of miracles,
which (as you pretend most vainly) shall be proper to Antichrist; even 4.
modo; so that by them as by a special badge he may be known. The first
miracle is that he shall make the picture of a beast to speak; Secondly, he
shall bring down fire from heaven; Thirdly, he shall feign himself dead and
rise again. To answer you and show the most childish vanity of your conceits.

Touching the first, I challenge your fingers of legerdemaine, for where (I
beseech you Sir) have you read that Antichrist shall make the picture of a
beast to speak? We read indeed, that the second beast which rose out of the
earth, (by which all with one consent understand Antichrist as he pretends to
be a spiritual Monarch) shall cause the inhahitants of the earth to make the
image of the beast which arose out of the sea, and which is described Apoc. 13.
14. 15 ibidem v. 2. 3.
in the beginning of the chapter to have had seven heads and ten horns,
being in body like a Leopard, in feet like to a Bear, and in mouth like to a
Lion; and further that the said second Beast should give to the Image of this
first beast both life and speech, and should command all the inhabitants of the
earth to adore the same. This being so, I do now demand in good earnest of
your Fatherhood, of which of the Ancients have you learned this your literal
theology, that there should in very deed arise such a beast, out of the Sea
having seven heads, ten horns, and in body, feet, mouth, representing a
Leoparde, a Bear, a Lion? Again, of which of them have you learned, that
there should arise a pretty less beast out of the earth with two horns (like
unto a lamb) upon his head? which of the ancients ever taught you that such
two beasts should in such shapes and and forms succeed each other, and in the
same shapes and forms be adored, and worshipped by the inhabitants of the
earth? Sir, bethink your self, what time the inhabitants of the earth shall
have to assemble themselves to the place where this picture shall be erected,
that they may come and worship the same? A Iubily of three years and a half
will hardly serve the turn: Again, bethink your self how great this picture
shall be, which the Inhabitants of the earth shall be caused to make, greater
surely then the cabbage, for seething of which (as the idle fable goes) a 1000.
workmen were a whole year in providing a caldron. Bethink your The Papists
literal divinity touching the Beasts Image.
self what ado there will be to raise up and set up this picture, greater
doubtless, then your Pope Sixtus the 5. had, to rear his Pyramid before Saint
Peter's Church in Rome. Bethink your self how the devout feminine sex will
dare to appear before a God of so monstrous, so fearful shape. Bethink your
self how many sheep lambs etc. are to be provided for a Bell that has so
many mouths. Consider how the elect may be in danger to be seduced by such
abominable Idolatry, which the very sense of men will seem to detest?
Idolatry more vain then that of the Calecutians, which adore their God in the
shape and form of a Cat, and equal with that by which they adore and worship
the Devil in a most horrible dreadful shape.

Answer sir I pray you; you and yours, which talk Ignatians most fond in
their literal interpretation of the two beasts, they regard not what they
either say or write so they may clear their holy Father from being Antichrist.
so much of the madness of others may it not justly be replied unto you.
Insanitis si ita dicatis, you are mad if you so understand the Evangelist and
Prophet, that such beasts shall arise in the very property of form and shape
as the Prophet does describe them and rule the world. What then else are these
Beasts thus arising, but types, signs, and forms representing two different
Empires, rules, or forms of government, each succeeding other? What else does
the beast arising out of the earth portend by his lambe-like horns but
Antichrist, who pretending the lambs power (that lambs which takes away the
sins of the world etc.) shall set up a form of government; which shall not
be the same of the first beast; but an Image-representation of the same; one in
manner, form, and effect like unto the first? To this interpretation the very
context and consent of Scriptures do enforce us; you will none of it, because
it pearceth your holy Fathers sides; who has indeed pretending It is clear
as noone days, that Antichrist must pretend the lambs horns, that is his
power, to wit, to be his Vicar; for so we ^re of necessity to understand the
same.
the lambs power (deny it if you dare and say if you dare that he is not the
lambs general Vicar) substituted a Papal Monarchical Government; which is
not the same with the first beast; and yet is so perfect an ^mage of the same,
that both for place, manner, form, effect, ending, and rising up it does in
all respects punctually, represent it. But leaving the examination of the same
to an other occasion; by what has been said you may easily understand, how
idle your conceit is, in telling your Reader that one of Antichrists miracles
shall be to make a picture to speak; why said you not that he should also give
life unto it; that so it might walk up and down, and be thereby as a fit
Monarch and Emperor to rule according to your literal theology in this
place? Perhaps you thought not of it, or else you were willing to pass by it,
to wit, that Antichrist should give life to the Image (as Saint John speaks)
of the Beast; and this, because your Crucifixes, which have used to speak and
nod to your Saints had not life in them; but why did you not call to mind the
Cherubicall Angel, which in the form of a Crucifixe, spoke to Saint Francis?
or why did you not think of Saint Francis his Wolf at Eugubium, with whom
your Saint made so long a discourse? or why did you forget Saint Anthonies
Satyr which ^ould him of a generation of Satyrs, which hoped for salvation
and desired his prayers? Oh Master Floode what a gallant Giant-like monster god
befitting Antichrists idolatry, would the Image of the beast (arising out of
the Sea) be, if besides speech which you and yours give him, he might also have
life given unto him as the Prophet speaks; that so he might walk and stalk
up and down, and sit in his throne of Majesty; he would surely put down your
Saint Christopher were he far huger then your Idle Legendists, and your and
our most profane Stageists make him. But I let pass to speak any more of
this miracle; I hasten to your second, yet I must not forget to tell you of
your trick of legerdemaine; when you put in this place, picture for image; the
fraud is peculiarly yours, you could not be ignorant that in our common use of
speech, the word Image is, and may be taken for any manner of representation of
another thing; but the acception of picture is more strict, ever signifiing a
representation made by the Painter or Drawer. Your fraud was to deceive your
Reader, to make him think of some picture or Statue and to cause him to
mistake the Prophet when he says, that the second beast shall cause the Image
of the first to speak. But I leave you here in this; giving the Reader this
aduertisment only that according to the old proverb he who would eat with an
Ignatian had ne^de of a long spoone.

Concerning the second miracle, you attribute to Antichrist, Antichrists second
miracle.
which is fetching fire from heaven, whether you understand the same literally
or improperly, and by a metaphore, the bean is broake upon your holy Fathers
head and crown; If you understand the same literally, then not only Antichrist
himself but his minister have already brought fire from heaven. Concerning
Antichrist himself, I will here only relate how twice he fetched fire from
heaven. First, when your Holy Hildebrand Gregory the 7. accursed such as took
part with their Emperor, Auent. lib. 5. annal. Lar^n: page 362.
then by virtue of that curse a certain Bishop was stricken dead with a fiery
thunderboult from heaven Again was it not fire from heaven whenas certain
fiery torches did miraculously appear over your most holy Pope Innocent
celebrating Mass before Lotharius the Emperor? Touching the like miraculous
bringing of fire from heaven by Antichrists ministers, I refer the Sea my
Tenth Chapter.
Reader to what I shall fully in many examples add of the same, in my reasons
following taken out of my first ground of reasons.

Your third miracle which you here fasten upon Antichrist, Antichrists third
miracles.
is, of his feigning himself dead and rising up again; For my part, I marvel
whence you fetch this miracle; what sir out of the Revelation? where the
Prophet says, that he saw one of the heads of the first Beast, Apoc. 13. 3.
as it were wounded or slain to death; And does this wounding or being slain
to death, signify a feigning only? does a deadly wound seem to you no other
then a dissembling? Again, how idle is your conceit? for by the interpretation
of almost all, yea your own Authors also, Antichrist is signified by the
second beast; which arises out of the earth, and not by the beast arising out
of the Sea, much less by any one of his heads, but lest of all by that head
which was wounded even to death. No sir, your Antichrist comes after the
seventh head, and is the Eight, (not as head, because his government is not the
very same with the first Beasts, or the heads thereof but as an Image thereof)
Eight I say in form of government, and yet he is also of the seven, because he
exercises the very power of the seven, and yet is the Eight, and is that Eight
of whom these words of Bellarmine are most truly and perfectly verifyed; Erit
Antichristus Bellar. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 15.
etc. Antichrist shall be the last and supreamest head of the Impious, and is
the last King which shall hold the Roman Empire, and yet without the name of
Roman Emperor. Surely Bellarmine hitteth the mark aright. Who, I pray you,
has now absolute command over the Roman Empire, and State without taking the
name of Roman Emperor? your Holy Father: Who took the Imperial Government
of the Roman State without the name of Roman Emperor presently after the
fall of the seventh head? your holy Father. S. John tells us five of the heads
were fallen in his time, and that the sixth then was. (which I hope you will not
deny but that it is fallen before this) and that the seventh was shortly to
come, and to last but for a short time. Which seventh cannot be your Papacy,
it must then of necessity be a short Roman Imperialtie or Empire which
followed upon the destruction of the sixth; which can be no other then that of
the Goths, which followed instantly upon the destruction of the sixth that
which was in S. John's time. Now let us ask all your Historians who succeeded
in Romes government without the name of Emperor after the destruction of the
Goths and Lombards, and they will all tell you that your holy Roman (Pater
Patriae) Father of the Church. Now that this your Holy Father has in Rome, in
the Roman Empire and over the Roman Empire, Regal, Imperial, and Sacerdotall
power, his triple Tiare and Crown Rocca his Scholia in S. Gregor: eiusque
Parentum Imagine dedicated to Clem: 8
does euince the same; the interpretation of which I will here add out of
Angelus Rocca their famous Scholiast upon S. Gregory, his words are these:
Illud autem scitu dignum videtur, quod Tiara tribus Coronis etc. But it seems
worthy to be known, that the Tiare adorned with three Crowns, representing
(to wit) Regal, Imperial, Sacerdotall power, (that is, plenarie and
universal power over the whole Popes Turbant interpreted by R^cca.
world) was not in use before Boniface the 8. Pope, who was of the most Noble
Caietane Family. thus Rocca. By which it is as clear as noone days that the
Pope of Rome, who cannot be the seventh head is the eight, having Regal,
Sacerdotall, and Imperial power, over the whole world without the name of
Roman Emperor.

Whereas you go on idly, and tell us of the Devils want of courtesy to
mankind, your self should have been more courteous to have spared your speech
in this kind, which is already sufficiently answered. You seem ouer-hardie to
charge God with hardness, if he should suffer mankind to be intrapped in
their souls with multitudes of beneficial helps; what makes you Sir thus
blasphemously presumptuous? have not the Scriptures most expressly expressed,
that God will suffer such as have not hearkened to the charity of truth, to be
intrapped, 2 Thessal: 2.
and seduced by strong illusions? Has not the spirit of God foretold, that
(vniuersa terra admirabitur post ^estiam) Apoc: 13. 14.
the whole earth will admire after the Beast, and that the false Prophet shall
deceive them, who dwell upon the earth by the means of those miracles, which
he has power to do in the sight of the Beast? Has not Christ himself
foretold, that many shall be deceived, the Elect shall be in hazard, that if
the times were not shortened all Matthew: 24.
flesh should not be saved? Which being so clearly true, and agreeing to Gods
just providence; what mattereth it whether the deceptions and illusions be
altogether by strange prodigies of wonder; or partly by them, and partly by
some beneficial miracles of help and profit? And if God permit Antichrist and
his, to do the greatest signs (to bring down fire from heaven) which are
most powerful to seduce, why may ^^ not be permitted to do the less? You see
(unless your Hellen have made you stark blind) that the Scriptures do
foretell a general apostacy and defection to be effected by signs, what
blasphemous idleness then is it in you, to say that Mr. Flods blasphemeth.
God will not be so hard to mankind, as to suffer it to be entrapped with
multitudes of beneficial helps. He suffers it to be entrapped, yea and the
Elect to be in hazard; which cannot be without miracles of high nature and
profitable, great and many, etc.

Mr. FLVD. page: and number. ibid.
Now the miracles of the Blessed Virgin and other, wherewith God does daily
adorn our Churches, are suitable to such as Christ wrought, and have still been
done by Saints in all ages since, as casting out of devils, healing incurable
diseases, delivering from dreadful dangers, and the like, which either deforme
or afflict mankind; some punishments laid upon blasphemers excepted, which are
so few, as they may seem a drop or two of gull in a sea of honnie; which is a
sign they proceed from a boundless Ocean of goodness, through the sweet
conduit of the intercession of his blessed mother. Yet the benefits which by
these miracles come to men's souls are greater when by them some are converted
from heresy, others reclaimed from bad life, many persuaded to frequent
Sacraments, to make sorrowful confession of their sins, restore things
unjustly taken, satisfy for wrongs offered, spend much time in prayer, to be
bountiful to the poor, finally to give themselves to heroical exercise of
Christian virtues, which things Catholics do daily behold, and have cause
therein to glorify God.

ANSWER.
The more I read in you, the more boasting I observe of your multitudes of
miracles, a fashion familiar to Antichrist and his, so not to the Apostles and
primitive Christians; if the disciples once gloried for their power Luc. 10. 20.
of miracles they were not approved but reproved by Christ.

How and in what sort your miracles are done, you have taught us already; by
the Virgins intercession, and Christ's power. Here you again add, they
proceed from a boundless Ocean of goodness through the sweet conduit of the
intercession of his blessed Mother. In that you honor the Mother of our Lord
Jesus, with the title of Blessed, we gladly approve the same; but whereas you
make her asweet conduit, by whose intercessions Christ bestows his benefits
upon mankind, because therein you want warrant and commission for your so
saying, we dare not join with you. We are taught by the Apostle, that Christ
our high Priest is ever at the right hand of his Father (interpellans pro
nobis) making intercession ad Rom: 8. 34. ad Hebr. 7. 25.
for us. Why then do you obtrude unto us another Mediatresse? Do you this,
because he has so prescribed? How superstitiously you teach concerning the
Virgins Mediatorship. See Orat. Steph. Archiepisc. Patrac. in Con. Later. sub
Leo 10. Sess. 10.
show us the warrant and we will obey. Do you this because she will be ready
to receive some desperate wretches which Christ her Son will reject? if you
say so, then you make her, not Christ, the boundless Ocean of goodness,
seeing he refuses some, she receives all. But tell me, those that come to
her, must they not of necessity come with prone hearts and humbled Spirits?
You cannot, nor dare not say otherwise: if so, what need then of going to her,
seeing there stands an everlasting invitation of Christ himself recorded in
S. Matthew: 11. 28
Matthew, Venite ad me etc. Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will refresh you. I dare undertake, that it is as clear and as certain
a truth as any is in the Gospel, that Christ does not, nor will not reject any
who comes unto him in humility of spirit, without which it is a mere
vanity even in your Gospel, to go either to Him or to his Mother. What
needless devotion then is this of yours to the Virgin, when as you may in full
assurance of faith appear before Christ himself, Hebr: 10. 22.
he requiring and commanding the same?

You compare your miracles with those of Christ and his Apostles, wherein you
show your selves to be of Antichrist, for both he and his shall do the same,
pretending Matthew: 24.
the name of Christ and power of the Lamb. Your profound Divines, who are not
ashamed in diverse Apoc: 13.
points to assimilate Antichrist with Christ, why do they in this point of
likeness of miracles refuse to do the same? What else is it, but (conscientia
imbecillitatis) a conscience of your own bad cause, knowing that the
multitudes of your miracles are an argument of the multitude of your novelties;
for standing within your own grounds, miracles are necessary for the
confirmation of novelties, but not for further establishment of received
truths, data infidelibus, given to the incredulous, says the Apostle, not to
the faithful. 1 Cor: 14. 22.


Whilst you are talking of the multitudes of your beneficial miracles, you
except (as I take it to answer an objection by the way) some few punishments
laid upon blasphemers, which are so few (say you) that they may seem as a drop
or two of gall in a sea of honey; well said you few, for they are so few that
you cannot mention any one autenticall related as laid upon any one for the
opposing against your superstitions. We are able to relate many, and those
autentically, out of your own Authors, concerning dreadful punishments and
most scelerate ends, which have befallen your most holy Pontifies. But let them
pass; and so I leave you to meditate upon the clemency of your Virgin Mother
made of wood at Sichem, who when she was stolen away, and is not yet to be
found, did not lay any reuengefull punishment upon such as stole her away; a
good cause why, she had eyes which could not see, and hands she had but such
as could not strike, as King David sings of the Idols of the Gentiles. God
grant Mr. Flud that true Christians never receive hurt from your holy Fathers
bloody fingers, until they be hurt by the wodden fingers of your Goddess at
Sichem, and we shall nothing fear what you and your Factionists, (I mean not
only your Ignatianed and the Church-Papists, but all those that side with
them, as etc.) may project for the ruin of this Church and Kingdom.

To proceed, touching the spiritual benefits arising to men's Souls from your
miracles, of which you are pleased to make so long a beadrole: I for my part
could wish it were true as you write, both for the good of your people as also
for our good and no small benefit, who are enforced often to have commerce with
them. But God wot Mr. Flud it is far otherwise; and that truth may stand in
the mouth of two or three witnesses, compare that which I shall here write in
general terms, with those imputations which Mr. Copley has truly and
ingenuously laid upon your congregation, and especially Mr. Copley in his
Doctr. Obseruat. chap. 11. and elsewhere.
upon the Cheefetaines of the same. If your miracles are so powerful to
convert sinners, how comes it to pass, that at the very Mart. Fair of such
wares (Roma Sancta) holy Rome, sin does more vnmeasurably abound, then at, or
in any other Popish Church or Kingdom. What? is it necessary that an
ouerflowing of pride, envy, hatred, malice, injustice, rapine, murder,
simonie, incest, Sodomie, should take her beginning from Rome? Has it not been
a cry of all times, a voice of all ages (Roma altera Babylon, Roma matter
fornicationis) Mysterium iniq^itatis.
Rome another Babylon, Rome the mother of Fornications? And although your
Seminarists who now come from Rome to pervert souls, are wonted to speak and
ple^d much for the sanctity of that place; the truth is, they are so taught,
nay they are commanded and coniured with promises to protest, that they will
never here discover in England what they may have heard of their Holy Fathers
turpitudes, his Purpured Brethrens enormities, their Clergies and Prelates
abominable irreligiositie, their Monks, Friars, and Ignatians impurities, and
hypocrisies. For the experience that I made in your Congregation, I found the
old saw to be verified, to wit, the higher a man climeth in your
Ecclesiastical dignities, the worse the man is; so that it seems your Chair
of Sanctity, to be the very Seat of pestilence, the nee^er unto which any may
approach, the worse he Psalm: 1.
shall be.

You cannot be ignorant Mr. Flud, how the Historians of old, and your own,
have described the ornaments of Rome, of your Consistories, Serralls,
Conclaues, Nunryes, Brothell-houses; witness Mantuan, V^bstota est lupa^ar.
Mantuan.
Iouius, Sabellicus, Paris, Clemangis, Dantes, Petrarcha, Sauanarole, Auentine,
Grotshead, Ferus, Espencaus, and who See Auent: lib. 5. page 346.
else not? Yea Bernard that excellent man, who, though dazeled with the mistes
of the time (non vidit omnia) saw not all things, yet he so lively described
and proclaimed the mystery of iniquity, that in delineating Romes and the
Romish Clergies enormities, he comes behind none. thus in former days. But
should Rome now be searched, with no nearer and narrower a scrutinie, then was
used here in England at the dissoluing of your male and female Sodomites, good
God, what abominations would be found within her penetralls? Some say that your
now Holy Father Paul the V, is not tainted crimine pessimo; be it so; but who
clears him from the crime of Avarice? the which whosoever follows cannot be
innocent. Who can free him from the sin of Impatience and most wrathful
outrageous anger, which works not the justice of God? Who can defend him from
an high point of Luciferian pride, who dares to the provoking of heavens
vengeance, suffer his Nephews to have their plate engraued with this and like
posie, Burghesianae Aeternitati dicatum. Consecrated to the Burghesian
Eternity? Who dares to permit any, to give unto him the name of a Vice-God?
Who dares to have the title of Pontifician Omnipotency given unto him?
himself to be styled Paulus Quintus Optimus, Maximus, Sanctissimus, Aeternus,
Omnipotens, Vice-Deus. What think you Mr. Flud? Paulus the V. mounted upon
men's shoulders, having his triple crowned Regnu^ upon his head, is acclaimed
unto by people upon their knees, with the said Title and Epithets of Divinity?
May not we that are grosser-headed Tramontanes, imagine and conceit that he is
adored as a God amongst you? What Luciferian pride in him a man of sin, to
admit, yea to delight in the same? These your acclamations given to a sinful
wretch do far pass those which were given to the Son of God, when he
entered into Jerusalem some five days before his passion; those were as
public protestations of his true Divinity; and these of yours are as
applaudings of your Vice Gods forged Deity and yet si Dijs placet, you do not
honor him as a God sitting in the Temple.

Further, who can excuse him for his most shameful dilapidating of S. Peter's
Patrimony? his impudent profusing of Church livings, upon his Nephews and
kindred? of which he has made no less then five Cardinals, a very monster and
Portent in your Church. Pius the V. was so Saintly at his entrance into the
Papacy, that by no means he could be induced to create any one of his kindred
Cardinal, for which Marphorius blasphemously applied that unto him, (Qui
propter nos homines, and propter nostram salutem descendit de coelis) who for
us men and for our salvation came down from heaven. But not long after being
changed by the working of the chair of Pestilence, and making one of his
kindred a Cardinal, your said foule-mouthed Marphorius applied unto him, that
which follows in the Creed: (Incarnatus est and homo factus est) He became
fleshly incarnate, and was made man, that is, like unto his Predecessors men
of sin, and sons of perdition. But this your Paul surpasses them all (so
does your chair of Pestilence make the Insidents (proficere in peius) to prove
worse and worse) for he has made diverse Cardinals of his own blood, and
upon him who bears the name Burghesius, Nonus Homo fine.
(of his exhaust and spent Family) he has heaped such a world of wealth, that
it passes all measure; Him he makes as it were the neck betwixt himself
the Head, and the Church the body; so that no Church can be provided of a
Pastor, but through his hands. Whereupon it follows, that there is an
infinity of Concurrents (at Rome where the Mart is kept) of such as seek to
chaffare for some Church-liuing; (non vt dentur digniori) Not that the same may
be given to the more worthy; for present pay carries all away, and so goes the
game, whereof you Mr. Flud cannot be ignorant; and such a one is your Optimus
Sanctissimus Vice-Deus: to him and his you may sing, Gloria Patri, and
nepotibus in secula seculorum.

I have touched briefly some of your holy Fathers virtues, I will pretermit
many others as his rashness, effeminatenesse, inconstancy etc. yet may I not
let pass his Iudas-like sin who by a kiss betrayed his Master. When your
holy Provincial Garnet his Brethren, and Garnet. Tesmond. Gerrard. Holdcorne.
Cate^by. Percy.
their Associates, were about their powder barrells and billets in Westminsters
vault; with which they intended (if the heavens had not let them) to have
blown up our Caesar, his progeny, and all his worthies; this most detestable
plot of them was not unknown to your Jove of Rome: yet then, he (to dazell the
eyes of our State-gouernours) must send forsooth a Brief, by which he charge
most strictly all Roman Catholics in this Island; not to attempt any thing
against his Majesty our most dread Sovereign; and to whom must this breife be
especially commended (as obtained by It was colourably directed to Blackwell
intended for Garnet.
his procuring) to Garnet forsooth; even one of the chiefest Architects of the
Powder project? O treachery of treacheries, and most perfidious treachery!
Orcus it self may be astonished thereat: and notwithstanding all this, even
yet dare some, (abusing Clemency and virtue of affability, and integrity her
self which is prone to judge the best of all) to suggest, to speak in the
behalf of the suspected Confederates of such Infernal locusts, yea to use as
instruments Church-Papists and communion Recusants, for what further proiects,
future times and occasions may make easy. O Lord be pleased to open the eyes
of those who sit at the stern, Give them, yea engraue and imprint in their
souls a resolution never to give credit to any promessos or Iuramentos
whatsoever made by the Ignatianed or their disciples. Be pleased o Lord to
grant, that our Lion may defend and exalt the glory of the Cross, that he may
sleep and rest in security; in security yet apertis oculis; dormiat
vigilans, let him sleep o Lord waking and vigilant, with his eyes open against
the Machauilian policies of these times; Cadant a latere, cadant a dextris,
let them fall both at the left hand and at the right hand which intend ill to
Sion, and let all who pray for the peace of Jerusalem say Amen.

I could add much more in this place, concerning the enormities of Rome and
your serralls; but I willingly omit so to do; whereby you may understand Mr.
Flood with what great reason I was moved to wish, that your miracles would
work some good conuersions in the Cheeftaines of your Church; especially at
that place, where the Mart of your miracles is kept; and in such other places
where like Markets are kept, as at Brussells, Louaine, Doway, S. Omers, Arras,
Seuill etc. I will not enter into particulars concerning such places, your own
consciences are best witnesses, what pernicious proiects, what calumnious
detractions, what odious imputations, what abominable hipocrisies, are there on
foot; I only say that the standing Stationers, and Assistants at your miracle
markets and miracle forges, are for most part of lewdest life, and wickedst
behavior, so powerful are your miracles for the working of sanctity in the
beholders.

To proceed; you tell us Master Floode of diverse converted from heresy (you
term Christianity heresy) to your Catholic faith: Alac, what pity that
those Laddes were not converted who stole away the Sichimite Lady-image? can
you tell us any news of their conversion after so many years, since the
pretty Goddess was stolen away? what marvel, that none were converted by some
miracles for the defacing of your Idols here in England? O that Margaret Iesop
that Brusfells-lasse, or lame Clement had lived sanctified lives, upon their
miraculous pretenced recuring! You have heard I am assured of Ginkes, who at
the time of the sweating sickness was condemned at Oxford, your Ignatians and
ignatianed, have proclaimed every where, that for the wrongs then offered unto
this your sanctified Ginkes (who gave testimony to your Popery) God sent that
grievous punishment which took both Bell and Barham away; happy it had been,
if that your roling Ginkes had lived upon so miraculous a deliverance a more
sanctified life then he did at Rhemes, where how vainly he lived you cannot
but have heard. What? did Master Newtons late vision, which he has pretended
to have had at Staunford against the Oath of Allegiance, any whit transform
that man into a more sanctified course of life, then he lived upon the very
point when he was honored by the heavens with so gracious a vision? Of what
nature that idle vision was the Reader may find in Master Widrington, who
handles the same, Disputat. Theologica de Iuram. Fidelitatis. cap. 10.
and does in part discover the vanity thereof; I my self had examined the
same from top to toe above two years since, and showed every part and
parcel thereof to be merely vain, yea most of it and the manner of it, to be
flat repugnant to popish principles, which treatise ere this had seen light
had it not been that Master Newton the Visioner was reputed by those that sit
at the stern of this Kingdom to be fitter for Bedlam then to have any answer
made to his phantasticke dream.

The rest which follows in this division, is either wholly ostentatiue or
wholly impertinent. That many are persuaded by these your miracles to frequent
your sacraments, and to go often to confession I do not marvel thereat, for
one superstition leads to another; and none are more tainted with sin (and
so had need to frequent confession) then such of yours, as are greatest
listeners of miracles; they being for most part, such as the Apostle speaks
of; Men lovers of their own selves, 2. Tim. 3.
Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, Truce Breakers, False, accusers,
incontinent, sierce, Despisers of those that are good, heady, Traitors,
high-minded, Lovers of pleasures more then Lovers of God, having a form of
godliness but denying the power thereof; Thus the Apostle: In which Catalogue
(if the present occasion would permit me) I durst undertake to show by former
and late^ examples, that none can be found more culpable then your Thrice-holy
fathers and their purpured brethren. The very first (to pretermit all the rest)
where the Apostle says that they shall be men lovers of themselves, in whom is
the prophecy fulfilled if not in your Popes, who are so wedded to their
wills, judgments and commandes, that none may or dare gainsay them? who are
so wedded to their own lusts, that for the exalting of their Allied they will
turn all topsie turuie? who are so eager to pleasure themselves, that for
their taste they must have weekly fish, herbs, and fruits brought wellny from
all places of Italy: for their clothing, their softell arraiments can be had:
and have continually such magnificent attendance as is far unbefitting holy
Peter's Successor; years would fail me for the declaring of their
superfluous selfe-louing vanities in this kind, and would God that by
imitation, this Canker had not spread it self further.

Whereas you add, that yours by means of such miracles are moved to restore
things unlawfully taken, and to satisfy for wrongs offered, I can hardly
contain my self from laughter; Sir, whatsoever some of your simple Deuoutes
may do, yet I am more then most assured that this manner of doctrine, is not
less practiced by any then by your Ignatians and their Favorites the
Ignatianed, which are as Stationers where this miracle-monging is. Call to
mind Sir, the wrongs which your holy brethren the Ignatians and their
Favorites have done, by the way of deffamation, and traitorous stratagemes to
Popes, Kings, and kingdoms; to Churches, Colleges, Seminaries; Universities,
Sorbones, and Academies; to religious orders of all sorts; to Prelates and
other Clergy of all degrees; and having done such wrongs and being charged
therewith most justly, have your miracles ever persuaded them to do any
satisfaction or to make restitution? no God wot.

Consider what your Ignatian spirit is, concerning the Ignatians make no
conscience to restore fame, Is it not less wrong for a man to have his life
taken away by poison then his good name by calumny where and when thee cannot
answer for himself? Restitution of debts secret to Heretics is not needful,
says the Ignatian.
restitution of goods purloyned by your devoted sisters and humbled Penitents,
from their Husbands; you cannot but have heard that, whereof England, France,
Germany, Spain, Italy is full, some examples I have added.

But here by the way because you talk so much of restitution of goods, I would
have the Reader to observe, that the Ignatians do procure for such their
Priests as be sent into Countries which they call heretical, one special
faculty, from their holy Father, by which they have power to compound with
their Penitents, for all secret restitutions due to heretics; I my self had
the faculty granted under these words, (facultas componendi super
restitutiones occultas debitas hereticis) Afacultie, to compound for such
secret restitutions, as are due to Heretics. by which your manner of
proceeding, it may easily appear what care you have of restitution, when you
can make any benefit by compounding.

Mr. Floode page 152. number. 35.
But a greater fruit reaped from our miracles, and a clearer sign that they
are of God, is the conversion of Infidells; many Countreies partly by this
means, partly by the good life of our religious Preachers of Gods word, have
been in this age won to Christ, to the increase of the Christian name. These
miracles have been so clear, and the fruit of them so manifest, that some
learned Protestants, Philip: Nicl^l. de regno Christi lib. 1. page 312. 313.
^14. Iesuitae licet Idololatrae sin^ tamen p^ssunt per nomen Christi magnas
virtutes condere apud Judos.
herein not unlike to the Magicians of Egypt, acknowledged both in the
miracles, and conversion the finger of God. But they add that such miracles
Iesuitae in prima Indoris conuersi nesese Luthoranos vel Euangelicos prebent
ibidem page 53.
are done in confirmation of the Protostant Gospel, which the Jesuits preach
in those Countries.

ANSWER.
Here Master Floode you go on in general terms which is not without some
intention of fraud; Perhaps you mean the west part of the world, called
America, containing Peru, Brasile etc, which some abusiuely call the west
Indies: if you intend these, hear for, answer; Victoria relect. 5 de Indis
quinta propositio in examinatione Titult Hispanoru^.
what your famous and very learned protector Victoria writes of the same:
thus he concludes; Quinta conclusio, The sift conclusion; To me it does not
sufficiently appear, whether the Christian faith has been as yet
sufficiently proposed, and showed to those Barbarous people, so that they were
bound under pain of new sin to believe the same; This I say because (as it
is manifest by the second proposition) they are not bound to believe, unless
faith be proposed with probable persuasion; But I hear of no miracles, nor
signs; neither do I see any such religious examples of life; nay rather I see
It is affirmed as most certain of those Christians who first found the Indians
that they used such cruel ie upon the Inhabitants that they called Jesus Christ
the God of cruelty etc. Diez with more to like effect sermon. in Dom. de
passione part. 1. See Acosta lib. de pr^cura. Jud. salu.
many crimes and scandalls, and many impicties; wherefore, it does not appear,
that Christian religion has been so conveniently and godly preached unto
them; so that they are bound to accept of the same: Thus this famous
Prelectour, by which it is evident, that howsoever the Spanish; and Papal
Emperor, have drawn them into their subjection, they have not done the same
by the power of miracles and integrity of life; but only by dint of sword;
which did so immanely and barbarously make havoc of them; to the destruction
of some millions of them, that no tongue is able to express the immanitie of
their doings. I do here profess ingenuouslie, that whilst I lived a Romanist
reading the outrageous cruelties, which those most barbarous Spaniards, did
then and there commit against those wretches, I could not contain from tears,
having these or like considerations offering themselves to my mind. Does it
not appertain to the just judgment of God to avenge such immane cruelties?
have not Christian Princes just occasion, to wage war against that Nation for
making such havoc of mankind even against the law of nature her self? Can
these men be endewed with the spirit of God, who thus tyrannize like Furies of
hell? Are these the special deuoutes of the Mass? Are these the chief
pillours of transsubstantiation? do these challenge the defense of the same to
be their peculiar glorie^ thus then; And be it so, let thein glory in their
impieties? let immanitie, impiety, idolatry, and treachery run thus ever
handy pandie together under a brauing robe. But let great Britain be
thankful yea ever thankful to the great God of heaven, who in 88. delivered
her from the like immanitie (as the Barbarians suffered) which their then
imperious Commander the Duke of Medina threatened against her: it is well
known, that he intended a total and utter subversion of all: what they do
now project and aim at, I cannot say; yet I will be so bold out of my tender
love to my Country, to write what I have heard some of them beforehand,
purposing and consulting to project in these our halcyonian times of peace and
prosperity; It were mere stupidity once to think that the Pope and his
Confederates do not incessantly expect an occasion for the subversion of this
Kingdom.
which I do the rather because I doubt not, but that our enemies do desire
nothing more, then that we should sleep in security the which by this one
instance may appear; when of late by just command there was a general
reuewing and refurnishing of armor in this Kingdom, and trayning of men, how
did the bristles of some corrouce and grow testie? Ex subitaneis cognostitur
habitus; A habitods known by sudden actions; but now I will to what I
observed in my travails.

Wheresoever and whenever I heard (as I have done often) some, no small ones,
of those Countries, and of those Courts, debate upon eighty eights overthrow;
they ever resolved that Elizabeth living (so they termed that renowned Queens
reign) there was no such like attempt to be made, but she being dead, then if
variety of Competitours (which they hoped for) did bring confusion, it would
be good fishing; otherwise if their follow a Successor peaceably to the Crown
(as by the gracious providence of God happened, in our present most dread
Sovereign, to their feared confusion, and our unspeakable comfort) then they
resolved, that all means possible were to be used that Peace (whereof they
stood The mysteric of the Pope and his confederates against this kingdom.
in great need; a Renowned Queen having brought them upon their knees) might
be concluded, which being made, men by the secret endeavors of Priests and
Religious (who might be sent hither with more security then before) we must
draw (said they) if not wholly, yet at least to be our indirect favorers and
friends, some of the Commanders, and those who cannot be won by pretense of
Religion, must be purchased by gifts and large promises. But above all we must
labor to shake hands with some of those, to whom the care of the Navy, the
Ports, and Sea coasts is committed, that if any such like attempt hereafter be
thought upon, by the Pope or his Catholic Majesty, we may find some
favorites; till this be done (said they) it is in vain to think of Englands
conversion, so they termed her intended conquest and subversion. Thus and in
like sort, they then proiected: which my sterie of iniquity whether it be now
on foore or not, I cannot say, Love causes jealousy; and where fraud has ever
been found, treachery may be suspected. I cannot say that Carrochings and
Feastings; entercoursings and complyings; fauourings and giuings, have any such
intent, but Danai metuendi etiam dona ferentes. I will not say there are gifts
or giuers, but if there be, (ex vno disce omnes) by one learn all. When I was
prisoner in Newgate for profession of Popery, the then Seniour Deu Pedro sent
unto the prison, a pretty, nay a petty diuident of five pounds to be delivered
It is more then to be feared that gifts may balance and turn English Needels
from the North pole to the South, etc.
among the Priests that were there; it was sent by one Richard Pilson an
Englishman, and one of the Presidiarie Soldiers of Dunkerke; a man familiarly
known to me in former times at the same place. This man (not knowing that I
had taken the oath of Allegiance) told me that his Lords pleasure was, that if
any Priest there had taken the Oath of Allegiance, he was to have no part
thereof; which afterward I found to be true, for division was made, and I not
minded. The Diuisioner, which was Freeman the Ignatian, and the other Priests,
thought that I knew nothing of the grand Present; but afterward, understanding
that I knew both of the money, and of the circumstances wherewith it was to be
divided; they fearing lest I would make the partiality known to the State,
gave me a part, and also caused Pilson to deny what he had before ingenuously
told me. Thus much I write by the way, by which we may infer, at what, and at
whom they do or would Highly to be commended is that honorable Person, who of
late refused a Jewel of great value.
aim in their gifts, and what they do project by them.

Munera magna dabit fallat fallax vt in hamo; Et piscatorem piscis amare
potest? Concerning the miracles which your Indian letters mention (of which you
specially intend, as I gather by your marginall note) I answer; that your
Ignatians have been so bold of late years to write at home, so many fond and
fabulous things of their Holy Father, that they deserve no credit for such
narrations as they fetch from so far of. Again you, who of late have so
gloriously boasted of your miraculous child, whereof I my self being amongst
you could learn no certainty: You again, who have most impudently endeavored
to gull so judicious and learned a Nation as this is, with a stramineous
miraculous face of the chief Powder Plot Artchitect Garnet. You who have
obtruded unto us so See my second addition in the end of this book, about
^^nings.
many papers of forged miracles, do you now come out with your Indian wonders?
We cannot believe you. Call to mind that rule of the Law, Qui semel est malus
semper presu^^tur malus in eodem genere mal^. He who is found once ill (that
is, habitually ill) is always prefumed to be ill, in the same kind of evil,
unless the contrary dee evidently appear. Call to mind, how gloriously you
boasted within these few years of the Great Sophy of Persia his conversion, by
one of your order? Call to mind, how even in the faces of your Adversaries,
that your holy Father Edmundes (a proud contentious arrogant head of faction)
did with other Priests, publish most fabulous tales concerning the exorcismes
and deliverances Confession of Mr. Tirrell Priest upon oath. The examinations
of Sara Williams, Anne Smith, Friswod Williams, recorded in the Court records
of high commission, etc.
of some possessed lasles, Maryes and Fiddesses etc? Know you not, that the
possessed ones have discovered their forgerie upon oath and deposition? And if
it were not so, there are yet Priests living amongst you, (whom I will not
name) who laugh in their sleeves at those fables, and those merriments whereof
themselves were eye witnesses, they profess ingenuously that they liked not
your Father Edmunds proceedings, though for fear they durst not speak against
them.

Demurre with due consideration, upon those miraculous and prodigious
narrations, which the famous Friar Sebastian Michaelis, together with his
brother The admirable history of Jews the Magician, and Magd^len, by
Sebastian Mich.
Domptius have published in France, to the everlasting confusion of Popery,
concerning the conversion of Magdalene, obtained by the diligence and prayers
of the Papist-Deuill Verrine. Papist-Deuill I call him, because the Devil gave
himself the name of Verrine, and because all his elegant and Fryer-like
discourses, tended to make Magdalene a Roman Papist Convert. Such Verrines,
were fit to be sent to Iapan, Sina, Ormus, etc. to forward your harvest there,
for I dare assure you that such your prodigious narrations are idle here, for
they do greatly confirm us in our opinions, that your Holy Father is the
Antichrist, and son of perdition, whereof 2 Thessal: 2.
S. Paul speaks. How our Church esteems of Friar Sebastians narrations, you
may understand by this: Our most judicious and learned Sovereign, has in his
wisdom (with the good liking of his most learned Archbishop of Canterbury)
caused Friar Sebastians book, to be translated into our English vulgar tongue,
by reading of the same to auert his people from Popery; and it is translated
so ingenuously without the adding of any annotations or caueats, (for the book
of it self gives advantage enough against Popery) save only, that a
judicious and exquisite Scholar in all points for his years, has prefixed
before the Translation, the reasons and end of the same. Demurre upon this Mr.
Flud seriously, and then your self cannot but yield, what little reason we
have to regard your narrations, which come from so far as Iapan, Sina, etc.

You glory here much of the sanctity of your preachers and their holy
conversation (their justice I hope is more abounding then that of Holt, Garnet,
Gerrard, Parsons, Creswel, Walpole, Warneford, etc.) and you twit us with idle
life and sole faith. Sir, our faith is so clothed (I speak not of the
Precisians and Sectaries, neither of those that are in aperto or in secret
such,) with good works, that I dare boldly say standing within the limits of
modesty, many of our men are in no degree inferior to yours: I do suppose
verily sir, that if his most excellent Majesty should offer for one Church
and Minister permitted in Rome, or Naples, or Millain, or Madrid, to permit
two, both Churches and Priests in his City of London; your holy Father and the
Spanish monarch would not, nor durst not admit of the same. Tell me in good
earnest sir, dare your Spanish Monarch permit in Spain such access of his
subjects into the house of our English Ambassadors there, to see our men's
lives, and hear their doctrines as is daily tolerated in some places where
his Ambassadors are.

Perhaps when you twit us with single faith naked of good works; you mean
such works as building of Churches, Chapels, Hospitalls, Colleges, etc.
There are sir, who dare undertake to show that (due proportion of time and
place being observed) there have been as many such good works done since
reformation as before; the task I leave to them: this I note only by the
way, that the dilapidations used by King Henry, and the wicked appropriating of
impropriations have cooled the devotions of a great many, so to observe such
sacrilegious havoc, made of Testaments and Wills of our ancient Kings,
Priests, Nobles, and all other our predecessors; but as in the Statute
containing six Popish articles, (which your Popish called the whip with six
strings) he was led awry with humane spirit and worldly policy: so likewise in
this dilapidating and ill appropriating of Church estates; but caveat emptor
and possessor, lest their possession turn to their utter ruin. Let them
meditate upon that of Solomon, It is a snare to the man Prou. 20. 25.
who deuoureth that which is holy, and to make inquiry after vows. A snare
which will doubtless ensnare their souls into eternal perdition unless they
make restitution, and restore unto God that which is his.

The miracles you speak of, and the fruits of them (say you) have been so
clear, that some learned Protestants have acknowledged the finger of God in
them. You tell us of learned Protestants, yet you point us only to one in your
margin, and him I take it of no extraordinary note and fame in our Churches;
but what if he say as you quote him? has not your Coster said Coster contro. 2.
as much of the Nouatians? It is said (says he) that some of the Nouatians did
miracles in time past, but that was done for testimony of the Catholic
faith, amongst infidels, but not for strengthening of their errors, as he who
in the ninth of S. Luke cast out Devils in Christ's name: thus he with more to
like purpose. Again have not your Remists explaned the same more clearly in
these words? miracles are wrought sometimes by the name Remists annot. in 9.
marti. v. 38.
of Jesus (whatsoever the men be) when it is for the proof of a truth or for
the glory of God, etc. Again a little after; and so also heretics may do
miracles among the Heathen to prove any article of the Christian faith. Thus
they; compare now this of your men with that which the learned Protestant
writes, for he teaches no more but that your miracles are done (if done at
all) in confirmation of some true points of Christian religion for the glory of
Christ's name.

For further clearing of this point, I desire the Christian Reader to consider
with me, how that the Ignatian and Popish Preachers, do at the first of their
preaching endeavor, or seem to endeavor to lay for the foundation and first
corner stone Christ Jesus, whom they teach and proach to be the only Messiah,
and that by faith in him, and true repentance; with observation of his
commandments, salvation is only to be purchased; and upon this ground work
they endeavor to overthrow all contrary worships of Jews, Infidels, and
Gentiles; And so long as they rest here, their manner of preaching is Christian
and Apostolical, for confirmation of which preaching to the Pagans, if God be
pleased to show some miracles, it is not much to be marvelled at: But having by
such manner of preaching converted some to be christians, then they deliver
their own Additaments to this foundation; not of hay and stubble, but of
brambles and briars, then talk they of Indulgences, praying to Saints, Popes
supremacy, worshipping of Images, with a thousand vanities; and that we may
better conceive this their practice with the Infidels, I will in some instances
show their manner of proceeding here in England.

When they assault any they do not at first inuit them to adoration and
worshipping of Images, or kneeling to the Cross; nay rather if occasion of
speech of them be offered, they will profess and protest, that they The she
manner used by Popish Priests to make their new Proselytes
do not adore them, but that they have them only before them in their
Oratories and Churches, as memorialls and remembrances of Christ and his
Saints; but being fully converted, then they impart unto them the mystery of
adoration of Images; yet in nice terms, at first, to wit, that they adore and
worship them not for themselue, but for God and the Saints whom they represent.
Again, they do not at first teach to their new conuerts (especially if men
of some good estate or discretion) the Popes absolute, and unlimited power over
Princes and kingdoms, to depose or dispose of them; no, no, that is a point
reserved, until they be of age fit for solid meat, and when they do teach
the same, it is done very circumspectly, as that Sussex Ignatian, G. ^.
whom I mention in my motives who denied me absolution, because I held that the
Pope had not power to depose Princes, yet the same equiuocating Padre, the same
day, after Masses were ended, we sitting at Table I proposing the question unto
him, before the gentleman of the house, his wife and some servants, whether the
Pope had power to depose Princes, made this direct answer that he could not,
nor would not affirm so much; they were not as then capable of that solid
meat; but since as I hear they have embraced it.

Again, when they tell their new conuerts, that their sins cannot be
forgiven without a Priests absolution, do they acquaint them with the mystery
of their Indulgences? no assuredly; such excrements they leave for solid meat
and their postpasts. So likewise (to contract much in brief) at their first
dealing with new conuerts, they avoid as much as is in them to debate those
questions, which are controuerted betwixt them and us, and for that their maine
fundamental point of their Popish Gospel, to wit their Popes Inerrability and
Infallibility of judgment in matters of faith: do we think that they impart
it to their new conuerts? no, no, they rather teach him to be subject to
general Councels; and that in their Church no point of faith is, or can be
declared without the consent of a general Council; thus they for the most
part do deal with most of those, whom they seduce to their side; first
persuade, and then teach as Tertullian of old wrote of the heretics of his
time: All which considered, their practice being answerable amongst the
Infidels, it is not to be marvelled if God (who has his elect in all places
best known to himself) does for the confirmation of some fundamental points
of Christian religion (which they at first truly deliver) effect and work
some miracles, whereby his elect out of the thickets of Idolatry may be called
to the Pastor of their Souls. And so I end this discourse with a notable
saying of S. Ciprian. To prophecy, to cast out devils, and to do other great
wonders upon earth, is a high and Ciprian de simp. Prelat sieve de unit.
Ecclesiae.
a wonderful thing, yet he who is found to have all these, does not therefore
obtain eternal salvation, except he walke-in the observation of a just and
upright way. Thus he Which I desire you to consider Master Flud, and so I come
to examine what follows in your reason.

Master Floode page 152. number. 35.
I think sobriety will smile at the Protestants felicity in this point, who
may sit by the fireside, or lie quiet in their warme-beds, whilst the Iosuits
go into barbarous Countries, to work miracles, to prove forsooth their
Gospel, that Friars may marry Nuns; and be saved by idle life in sole faith.
I should think it more probable, that Luther in his nights conference with the
Devil, De missa Angul.
did convert and make him a friend to Christ, that now he will be content to
work miracles, to glorify and extol his name.

ANSWER.
Nay rather Master Floode, sobriety cannot contain from Vatinian-like
laughter, at your Ignatian felicity in bragging and calumniating; Of your
bragging, we have already given some touches, a few words here. Whereas you
glory of your Jesuits going into barbarous Countries; I pray you sir, though
they go into barbarous Countries, yet they go not like Mendicants or without
scrip and having only staves in their hands and sandalls upon their feet; no,
no, sir, they go plentifully furnished, with all manner of necessaries,
favorably countenanced, and very honorably provided for, by those Merchants
Portugalls, or Spaniards, who conduct I have heard some of yours glory of the
great and honorable entertainments yours have there, and they spoke by
experience.
them into those Countries; not to by corners or deserts, but to principal or
royal Cities, or chief towns of the same; where their wants cannot be great
but rather none at all. Their manner of proceeding in those Countries, is not
unlike unto that of their brethren here in England; amongst whom you shall
hardly find one of threescore, that will reside in a man's house of mean note;
No Sir, honorable houses are fit residences for your men, and services of
esteem (the reconciling of Ladies, Nobles, Noblesses, and other Persons of
worth) but if there be any work of hazard, of labor, or of mean sort, that
your brethren use to put over to some Secular Priests, their Pendants and
Creatures, which either reside near unto them or with them at their pleasures,
to go, come, or stay as they shall appoint.

Whereas you talk of sitting by the fire, or sleeping in warm beds, I dare
boldly say, number for number; the same is more practiced by your Priests and
Ignatians, then by our Ministers, except some few disordered ones; the reason
whereof first is, their never intermitted diligence in preaching, which cannot
be performed without much study and labor, whereas few of yours take care for
Sermons; their ordinary taskes being to hear some pretty tales at
confessions, to mumble up their offices, and to say their Masses. For sleeping
in warm beds, I dare undertake you surpass for time most of our Ministers;
and to speak more specially of you Ignatians, what else is your manner of
living, then a mere philosophical (I will not say Epicurian) sum of
contentment?

All your rules, orders, government, disciplines, tend to this end, that you
may enjoy your contents; free The Ignatians hard and austere lives.
from sorrow or grief; for this end your apparel is convenient, warm,
sweet and soft; your diet sweet, of the best, wholesome not without often
varieties of dishes, pasts, postpasts, antepasts; you ordinarily feed thrice a
day, in the Summer you have your afternoones collations; For sleep you have
seven hours and a half in winter; more upon your recreation days, and
ordinarily eight hours in Summer: if you were restrained from walking abroad,
(considering the pleasantness of your Orchards and Gardens) the same were
tolerable; but it is not so, for you have your often parambulations abroad,
through cities; and into the pleasantest fields and vineyardes; For your
studies and exercises you have your competency of books, and all other
convenient helps; In time of sickness, what do you, or can you want, which
art or nature may afford? In brief, your whole manner of living, is a sum
of philosophical content. And this I take to be the cause, why you do not
willingly permit any (no hardly of your priuates) to enter into the secretter
rooms of your most neete and daintily ordered houses; lest they should observe
in you, too great an Epicurian like care: I do assure my self, that there are
very few Ministers in England, who would not gladly be content to be so well
provided for as you Ignatians are; they might have been all of them
sufficiently provided for (without that competencie of means which our
Benificelesse precisians prate of) had not your holy Father the lawless Outlaw
when he domineired in this Kingdom divided the Tithes of Parishes bestowing
the best and fattest of them upon his serviceable locusts etc.

Perhaps you will make answer and say, that though you have all these worldly
contents, yet you use them moderately, and do also contain from voluptuous
pleasures of the flesh. What your moderation is, all those know who know you;
how moderate (I pray you) was your holy Padre Gerrard, who reuelled it lustily
in Sir Euerard Digbies house whilst the poor Knight himself, was mewed up to
meditate his weeke-contemplation of your vain exercises? What your
voluptuousness is it would appear, if particulars might be produced; would
God too many of your popish Monks, Friars etc. were not acquainted with that
nefand position of your Italian Cynedes who have not been ashamed publicly and
in print to commend and extol unnatural pleasures, which a modest pen
cannot so much as touch, before the holy State of matrimony which God has
instituted and approved? If you would seriously consider, what voluptuous
abuses are committed in many of your Congregations, you would have little cause
to twit our Church for that she christianlie allows and approves with the
Apostle, Marriage to be a thing honorable in all, yea in Friars and Nuns,
coming to the truth, and shaking off the bonds of blindness, wherein they had
superstitiously enthralled themselves.

Much has been said by the learned of our Churches, in defense of such
marriages, yet considering how universal the calumniation is, even by those
Priests, Dames, Matrones, Maids, Youths, (who are guilty Criminis pessimi,)
and further considering that some Protestants for some politic respects, do
not greatly arride or approve of such marriages, I have purposed in this place
with the Readers patience, in all possible brevity, to show the lawfulness of
such marriages, even out of popish principles, and their dogmaticall Tenants.
For clearing of this truth, I am first to prefixe some suppositions, and out of
them to make my inferences.

First, I suppose as a truth confessed by them all, or Aquinas 2. 2. q. 88.
art. 11. Alij omnes. Canon. Apost. Can. 5. Gratian: causa 26. q. 2. cap. Sors
did: 31. cap. Quoniam. Durand: de Conc: Celebr. Aquinas vbi supra art: 2.
Orders; as Presbytery, Decanrie, Subdeaconrie, either before the taking, or
after the taking of the same: but that concerning the vow of chastity either
from Christ himself, or his Apostles, there is no other order then the order
of Counsel; which is of this nature, according to the doctrine of all
Pontificians, (no one Doctor excepted) that the use, acceptance, and
admittance of the same, is merely of free choice and election, not out of
necessity. Thus they constantly deliver concerning Evangelical Counsels,
which they distinguish into a threefold number, Obedience, Poverty, Chastity;
of all which their doctrine is with the Apostle, Preceptum 1 Cor: 7. 25.
Domini non habent, sed solum consilium. That they have no precept of the Lord,
but only his Counsel. thus they.

Secondly, I do suppose, that as the son of God Paradise made an everlasting
ordinance approving and commending the same. This is a truth confessed by all
sides, howsoever some popish Authors may sometimes seem to deny it, in that
they would seem to fasten sinful impurities upon the state of marriage it
self, but being called in question for the same, they cry peccaui, yea they
will revile you if you seem to lay such an imputation upon them and their
Church.

Thirdly, I suppose that which the Adversaries themselves Historians,
Canonists, Divines; to wit, that the inhibition and restrayning of marriage in
some Persons; first by precept and law only, after by vow and promise, was
brought into the Western Church, by the ordinance and command of the Bishops
of Rome; I say Western Church, for the East Churches would never Disi: 31.
cap. Al^ter. Can. 13. apud Gratian. did. 37. cap. Quoniam. Gloss. in cap. Cu^
in preterito. did. 84.
admit of the same, as it is evident by a Cannon of the Council in Trullo
flatly decreeing against it. Now it was brought into the Western Church thus
under a show of godliness, the first shadow of it we find in Siricius Pope
commanding the same. The like in Calixtus, and after them in Gregory the
first; but these prevailed not to make their commands universally received. But
when Gregory the seventh (that Hildebrand who trampled upon the Crowns of
Emperors, who exalted him self above all that upon earth is called God) came
presently upon the thousand year; he indeed prevailed more for the promise of
single life in such as came to the Clergy, then all his Predecessors could
before; and yet Auentine hist: Boior. lib. 5. page: 355. and p. 346. alias.
not so universally, but that he was stoutly gainesayd by many Prelates,
innumerable Priests, and the greatest part of the Laity, who were grown to
have that persuasion of their Clergies incontinencie, that they would hardly
admit any unmarried Priests, to be their Pastors; thinking otherwise, that
their wives, daughters, servants would hardly live in safeguard from their
letcherous assaults. So that then in this supposition, it rests inviolably
true, so true that there is no gainesaying it, that some Popes with their
Italian Synodes, or some provincial Counsels of other Countries, have
endeavored to establish the promise and vow of single life in their Clergy,
notwithsttanding there was never yet any I mean a true general Council; the
Hellen of Trent is not worth naming, being in truth not General.
General Council, which by Canon decreed the same. Yea more, never yet any
Provincial Papal Synod, (observe this) which has dared to decree the same,
as a special institution of Christ himself, or of any of his Apostles; they
make it only an ecclesiastical institution, or ordinance of their own. And
in this point I am so confident, that I am assured no Adversary can prove the
contrary.

Fourthly, I suppose, how with joint voice and loud Canonists, Historians;
Divines, Fathers, Bishops, Priests, L^ikes (yea even those who themselves lived
unmarried) have proclaimed to the world a confluence of heastly impurities,
sodomiticall abominations, sacrilegious villainies, nefand buggeries, to have
overflowed and overwhelmed their Clergy and their whole Church, occasioned and
following by reason of the more stricter observing the said law of single life.
For the proof of this point, I dare undertake to bring more then a Jury of
their own Classical Authors. Such is the fruit of the unprofitable and
pernicious tree planted Matthew: 7. 16.
by the Papal hand.

Fifthly, I suppose as a doctrine taught and received by Aquin: 2. 2. q. 88.
Summista and Canonistae omnes.
obligatiue, by binding the conscience or pleasing to God, which is made of a
thing unprofitable or vain, or which hinders a greater good, and that in all
such cases, dispensation or commutation and changing of such vows is lawful;
yea and in case that a vow is unprofitable or vain, dispensation by a
Superior is not absolutely necessary, but only for declaration sake, and to
remove scandal, otherwise such vows in themselves are merely Aquin: vbi sup:
ar 2. ad 5. and 12.
idle, vain, and of (...) and are securely to be broken, faith Aqai^ns (...)
be had.

Sixthly, I suppose, (...) a (...) and good dispensation, Popes have dispensed
with some religious professed Votaries upon temporal respects.
or a good and effectual commucation of any vows, it is sufficient if there
be a just cause. This is the general doctrine of them all yea their resolute
Ignatian Sa resolves (...) Ad dispenfandum sufficit putari causam esse
rattonabilem. To dispense it is sufficient, if the cause be Sa his Aphorisms,
verbo, Dispensatio.
thought to be reasonable.

Seventhly, I suppose, that whereas all Pontificians do agree, that vows and
oaths may be dissolved, yet See Azor: his Institutions lib. 11. Tom. 2.
their Scholastike Disputations; yet generally the learned of them do hold,
that there is only a declaration, no relaxation or release; and their reason
and ground of this is very strong; for otherwise (say they) it cannot be
avoided, but that the Pope shall be thought to have power to dispense in the
Commandments of the first Table, to which the obligation of vows and oaths
do appertain. Thus they; and this is a point, which the Reader must carry
well in his mind; for if their dispensations be no other then declarations,
that vows Nota been.
and oaths bind not in such cases, by reason of some alteration either of
matter or person, or circumstance of matter and person, then such dispensations
are not acts See Sa Aphor: verbo, Vot^. Irritatio 9.
of jurisdiction and power, but rather are effects and acts of knowledge; which
are sooner to be found in a learned Priest, then in an ignorant Prelate; out
of which supposition it may be clearly inferred, that in case diverse learned
men shall declare, that such and such vows, or oaths do not bind the makers
of them, but rather that they are hurtful, unprofitable, pernicious, that then
the consciences of such Vowers or Swearers shall be assecured, if they keep
not the same; when their Bishops and Superiors be maliciously bent, and will
not grant any dispensation or relaxation for the same.

Eighthly, I suppose as a truth manifest, taught in express Sa. verbo Vote. 33.
Alij.
which is necessary upon command, before that which is voluntary, and upon
free election.

Ninthly, I suppose that, which (though not delivered

Tenthly, I suppose, that which is expressly delivered Sa. vbi supra 7. and 13.
bound therewith, ratify, confirm, and approve the same; yet upon a better
consideration he may persuade himself that he is not bound thereunto, but is
as free as if he had never vowed the same.

Eleuenthly, I suppose that he or she who voweth any Sa vbi supra 4. and 18.
Aquin vbi sup 2. ad 3.
ex vi vots, by the force of the vow, and as it is obligatorie before God;
howsoever by humane authority, they may be compelled thereunto. This is a
truth manifest in it self confessed by them all.

Twelfthly, I suppose, that which is delivered by Sa, Azor: Nauare Tolet: m^es.
only to be understood, of that which is physically and naturally impossible,
as if one Icarus-like should vow he would fly to Rome; but also of that which
is morally impossible, as for example, if a man should vow, he would upon his
knees creep to Rome from Paris; or that he would never commit sin at all;
or if a woman should make a vow that she would never speak an idle word; Or
if a man that is by nature hasty, should make a vow that he would never speak
one hasty word: These vows, and all of like nature, are in themselves void,
as being of such things as are morally impossible.

Thirteenthly, I suppose, as an evident truth delivered Tollet pronounces
Tollet. lib. 4. cap. 18.
resolutely, When the matter of the Vow is contrary to those things in which
the Inferior is bound to obey the Superior, as the Child the Parent,
presently the vows are void, unless they be approved by the Superiors.

Fourteenthly I suppose, that which is defended by most of the Adversaries; to
wit, that it is not a verbal vowing of the mouth, which binds any man before
God, but that further there is required an express intention of him that
voweth if not to bind himself yet at Sa: verbo voto 6 Aquinas 2. 2. q. 88. 3.
ad 3. and art. 1. per totum alias.
lest an intention to vow, and make a promise; So that he who shall with his
mouth utter words of a vow, if he had neither intention to vow, nor to bind
himself; he is not bound before God, howsoever he may be compelled by
authority of man to observe the same, which he seemed to vow and promise.

These things thus supposed as clearly maintained by the Adversaries, I do
out of them deduct certain consequences (agreeing to the rule and analogy of
faith) which do approve and commend the marriages of such Friars, Nuns, or
Priests, who converted from Popery, shall adioyne themselves to the reformed
Churches.

Out of the first, second, third, and fourth suppositions Canon Apost. 5.
Athanas epist. ad Dracentium. See Brigets Reuelat. lib. 7. reuelat. cap. 10.
and Greg. lib. 3. epist. 34.
Priests etc. in the primitive Church were indifferently married, and that
there is no order nor command from Christ, or from his Apostles, touching the
vow or promise of single life in Clergymen; and further, that the same was
brought into the Church by the Bishops of Rome by degrees; First, by law and
command only, that such as took orders should lead single lives; afterward,
(because the same law was not well observed by diverse Greg. lib. 1. Indict. 9.
epist. 42. Auentine says that the forbidding of marriage in Priests was
reputed by many Prelates etc. a pestiferous heresy, Auent. lib. 5. page 355.
after they had taken orders) it was devised by the Bishops of Rome (whereof
we have example in Gregory the first) that none should be admitted to sacred
Orders of Subdeaconship who would not at the taking of the same, promise to
live single lives; and weighing further, that to the very astonishment of the
heavens, and the provoking of Gods wrath against mankind, (by the means of
the said laws and vows (there have followed such Seas of most abominable and
nefand sins in their Church; I should think him or her, sinfully wicked, who
pondering that of the Apostle that the Church 2. Cor. 10. 8.
has no power given her but (in aedificationem) for edifying, shall not
account the holy Father of Rome most desperately malicious, who knowing what
nefand abominations are practiced by his Clergy, by means of his said
enforced laws and vows, will not revoke the same, and leave the point of
marriage in the Clergies free choice, as Christ and his Apostles left the same.
For is Aquinas 12. q. 96. 3. 4.
it not an axiom in divinity, a principle in philosophy, that any humane
law, whatsoever which is made for the benefit of souls, and avoiding of sin,
or injustice: if the same law prove afterward to be pernicious, that it ought
to be removed and revoked? I dare undertake there was never yet Lawgiuer, who
does not approve this; only the Outlaw of Rome because he must (according to
Daniels prophecy simulare castitatem) dissemble chastity; he will not do it in
this: Answer me directly Master Floode: are there not innumerable
Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons in your Church, some enacted by General
Counsels? some decreed by your Popes, which notwithstanding upon some
inconveniences arising in the keeping of them, have grown out of use, and have
become (nullae) none, of no force? how many of the Ecclesiastical Canons of
the Nicene, Constantinopolitane, Sardike, Laterane, and other Counsels have
been cashired either by express order, or conniuency of your Popes? what;
shall inconveniences remove laws established by supreme and universal
authority? and shall not such a confluence of most abominable impurities,
cause your holy Father to remove an unnecessary Law of his own hatching and
bringing forth? How have I heard your great Statesman Parsons in presence of
some of the Spanish (muy Poderosos seniores) most mighty Seniours, inueigh
most bitterly against some of the ancient laws of this Kingdom, especially
that, concerning trial by a Iewry of twelve, for some inconveniences which his
Fatherhood conceived to be in it? whereupon he in his book of reformation, upon
Englands conversion, did Dictatour-like decree an amendment of the same;
especially in that point, because in case of trial for life and death, amongst
us in England no man is permitted to have his Advocate or Counceler, though in
all other civil causes, so much is allowed. But this we must leave to the
Lawyers (whom it concerns) who are to defend the equity of their Laws: this
I observe and infer, if Parsons thought a law of so great antiquity, (he
constantly affirmed the same to have been brought in by William the Conqueror,
for the ruinating and subversion of the English) worthy either of correction,
or remoueall, for some temporal inconveniences arising Apud Eneam Siluiu^ de
Gestis Conc. Basil. Multisaluarentur in Sacerdotio coniugato qui in sterili
damnantur. See Panor. cap. Cum olim de Cleric. coning.
thereout? why shall not the loss of innumerable souls (for as one of your
own said, multisaluarentur etc. Many would be saved in a married Priesthood
who are damned in a barren Presbiteracie) be a sufficient cause to remove so
unnecessary and wicked a Law? which as it is cause of eternal perdition to
many; so I boldly and constantly affirm it is cause of sin in wellny all,
who undergo the same; and this I confidently set down, both in respect of what
I know by experience; and what I have heard from diverse others, who have been
intimely acquainted Hieron: in dan. Lyran. Hipol: de consum.
with your votaries. But be it as it will, I doubt not but that of some
ancients speaking of Antichrist must be accomplished in your Pope; Simulabit
castitatem vt plurimos decipiat; He will dissemble chastity, that he may
deceive very many; which case standing thus, the Pope continuing obstinate in
his tyrannical enforcing of such a law, I wish Pontifician Priests and others
to call to mind, that doctrinall and resolute position, which is Sa. verbo
lex. See Azor. Tom. 4. lib. 5. Siluest.
generally taught by all their Divines, Canonists, and Summists, to wit; that
lex humana etc. a humane law binds not in conscience, when it is either
unjust, or it is unprofitable, or when it is not for the common good, or when
it brings great hurt, or when it is very hard to be kept, for thou it is
reputed in the law to be impossible; thus they, so that if the Pope and his
Ministers shall still continue in their tyrannical enforcing of such laws,
they may be condemned and contemned; yea further, who may justly condemn
those, which take orders in that Church, if at the taking of the same, they do
use some amphibologicall equivocation or mental reservation (such as his
Ignatian Proctours do teach their blind Obedients to use toward their
Sovereigns and his lawful Magistrates) thereby to delude, and deceive such
tyrannical proceeding, for what is it else then (art artem fallere) by honest
Art to deceive that wicked man's practice?

Secondly I infer out of the 5. 6. and 7. suppositions; Where necessity
urges, dispensation is excusable, where utility moves dispensation is
laudable; profit I say common, not private. Bernard. de cons. lib. 3.
good; and in special if hurtful to the spiritual good of the Vower; the
same may be for such respects dispensed withal or changed: And as we have it
in the sixth supposition, It is sufficient for a dispensation or change, if the
cause be thought and reputed lawful: and further as we have it in the seventh
supposition, this dispensation is rather to be called a declaration of the
inualidity or nullitie of the vow, then a relaxation or release of the
obligation of the same; So that if the Prelate or Superior be wilfully bent;
that he will not dispense (as he is bound and ought, otherwise he sins
greatly) then the declaration of learned men, touching the unprofitableness,
hurtfulnesse etc. of such a vow shall be sufficient, for clearing and
appeasing the conscience of such votaries. Now what shall we think to be a
just cause for a dispensation of a vow, if that may not be so reputed, which
Popes, Prelates, Synodes, Doctors, the general voice, and noice of all people
do repute to be such; as they do in this case of Nuns and Priests marrying?
What? said not that your pious Pius the second thus? That as marriage was taken
away from Priests upon certain Pius apud Plat.
reasons so there were more reasons to have the same restored to them again.
This said your Pope upon consideration of the horrible enormities committed in
yout Church: which saying of his has been received with applause of deuines,
Canonists, Princes, Emperors, and the voice See Fricius lib. 4. de Eccles. in
Apologia pro matr. sacerdes.
of all people. Much might be said in this kind but the matter is clear, I go
on.

Thirdly, out of the eight supposition thus I do most (melius est nubere quam
vri) It is better to marry then to burn, and thus 1 Cor. 7. 9.
Qui non continet nubat; He or she who contains not let him or her marry; The
Apostle does not say he that cannot contain let him marry; but thus, he that
does not contain let him marry; that is who having made trial of himself or
of her self, and finds by daily experience either of often lapses or else of
morosous desires (which is burning) let such a one marry: and this is the very
case August. de virgin. cap. 34 Cyprian. ep. 11. lib. 1 Bern. in sermon. ad
Clerum. de conuers.
whereof S. Austen, Cyprian, Bernard, and some others have spoken; inueighing
and exlaiming against such as made pretenced vows and kept them not; affirming
that it was better for them to marry. And here I answer an objection by the
way which may be thus made: By our first vow in Baptism we are bound to keep
all after promises or vows; which we may make either to God or man. It is true
indeed, in such vows and promises that are just, and in such things that a
man has liberty to vow; now in case a man or a woman cannot contain or has
not the gift of chastity (which is evident they have not if they do not
contain) then they It is impossible for him to contain who has not the gift
of continency
have not liberty to vow; for in such cases the law of God prescribes and
commands marriage; rejecting such sinful vows which the votaries cannot
observe, but are by them more and more enthralled in the bondage of sin.

If they reply and say, it was indeed in the votaries free choice, whether he
would vow or not; but having vowed, he is absolutely tied to the performance
of the same, and is no more at his own liberty: I answer thus cleerlie, and
return the argument against themselves: If there may be no error in vowing,
then down falls My faculty for dispensations, etc. was delivered in these
words. Facultas, etc. A faculty to dispense with all vows and oaths;
excepting those of perpetual chast^ty and religion. After was added power to
dispense in simple vows of chastity, etc. 1. Tim. 5. 11.
to the ground all their pretensed power of dispensing and changing of vows;
and if there may happen error in other vows, why not in the vows of chastity,
where presumption of vowing is most frequent? (sed victoria rarissima) but the
victory most rare and seldom? If our Pontificians could show us out of the word
of God, that a promiscuous and indifferent liberty of vowing chastity were
allowable in all sorts of people, then they should say somewhat to that
purpose; but concerning this we may take a scantling out of that which S. Paul
orders touching younger widows: (which all the adversaries generally
understand of vowing Nuns) that they are not in any case to be accepted or
admitted before they be threescore yeereold, (a competent and sufficient time
for trial and probation) wholly to dedicate themselves to God by renouncing of
the world. O Mr. Flud what defense can you make for your Churches admitting
Boys, and Girls, to vow before they come to six times three years old. How
expressly is their practice against the holy Apostles ordinance? He will have
none admitted before they be threescore year old, and after long trial; you
admit young girls of fourteen years of age, and are not ashamed to permit
them to profess after a years probation; yea more then this, (for the
consummating of your impiety in this kind) though such younger probationers in
the year of their trial do find themselves continually buffeted with
temptations on all sides; yea and oftentime to be most vnconsolablie afflicted,
yet rather then such shall depart from you, if they may prove beneficial to
your Monasteries, or at least for avoiding of scandal, they shall have strange
encouragements given them, to continue in that wicked course, whereby their
Souls are very likely eternally to perish.

Fourthly, out of the ninth supposition, I evidently

Standing within the obligation and nature of a vow, what difference can be
found betwixt that which is simple, and that which is solemn? Your Celestine
affirms, Extra: qui cleriti.
that a simple vow binds no less before God then a solemn one does: The
sum is, neither simple nor solemn vow pleases God, which is begun with sin;
prosecuted and consummated with sin; and if such please not God, assuredly
they cannot bind the conscience of any man: For (to use Caluins words, si in
humanis Lib. iustitut. cap. devotis.
contractibus etc. If in humane contracts, those only promises do bind us,
in which those to whom we promise will have us bound, it is absurd, that we
should be enforced to perform those things which God does not require at our
hands: thus he. Now clear it is, that God does not require, nor never will
require continency or chastity from those, to whom he has not given the gift
thereof; and that he gives not the gift thereof to all it is evident by that
of the Apostle vnusquisque etc. Every one receives 1. Cor 7 7 37. See S Hi^rum
in cap 19. Math. S. Chrys^st.
his proper gift from God one after this sort an other after that manner. Now
Master Flood, put case that diverse of your Monks, Friars, and Nuns, have
vowed chastity; and yet afterward by a lamentable experience find that they
have not the gift thereof, but do incessantly burn (as it is certain some of
your own Ignatians do) what will you have such to do? will you transuert the
words of the Apostle, and say let them rather burn, then marry? if you should
so say, you should show your self to be but a very simple Theologue. Perhaps
you will reply and say, that although God do not give the efficacious and
congruous gift of continency to all that vowed; so that infallibly they shall
thereby contain: notwithstanding, he gives them all, or profsereth to them
all, sufficient grace, whereby they may be able to contain; so that they have
a posse to contain, although they shall not thereby effectually contain. If
thus you answer, I ask of you, where have It is the ungracious v^ice of the
unprofitable servant; that God reapeth where he sows not, and gathers
where he has not strawed Math. 25. 24.
you learned of such a dallying of God with his Graces, toward your votaries?
Whence learned you to impose so blasphemous an immanitie and cruelty upon God,
that he will require a real performance, and an effectual effect of
continency in your Priests, and yet gives them not an efficacious gift of
continency to perform the same? but only a posse, a power, a possibility;
which infallibly, shall never take effect: let this be recorded, as one
amongst the rest of your blasphemous positions.

Fifthly I deduce, out of the tenth and eleventh suppo, The ends of popish
votaries vowings.
and naught; fot it is upon an erroneous judgment and opinion in most of them,
that holy Orders and the vow of chastirie are so annexed together, by Christ's
institution, that they cannot be severed: or that matrimonial estate of life
is so impure and unclean, that it cannot well consort with Priestly purity:
or else upon an apprehension, that thereby they shall be more honorable and
regardable to their Laity: or with some such like respects; all which are
mere phansies and sinful vanities. Again, your Priests by the vowing and
performance of unnecessary vows, do approve the Popes tyrannical and
Antichristian Supremacy, which is no less, then a point of impiety against
Christ. So that whenever it shall please him to open their eyes, that they
may see the errors in which they formerly walked; doubtless they are no more
tied to such vows then all archers are tied to Robbinhoods laws of archerie;
and less then S. Paul being converted was to the ceremonial laws of the
Jews. I do not by this reprove those who coming from Rome do live in single
life: but I constantly maintain, that if they do continue still in single
life, by virtue of their erroneous vow, founded upon Papal superstitious
command; they do therein greiuouslie transgress: by which I infer how idly
politic, He partaketh with sin that does by act or practice maintain a law
of sin.
that Doctor was, who advised a Priest (who was converted from the Church of
Rome) thus; that as he ever tendered his credit, he should not marry: which
his idle counsel did make so deep an impression in the Conuerts mind (the
Doctor was then in a place of great note) that whereas before, he was
doubtful whether to marry or not; he resolved fully to make use of his
Christian liberty; and to enter into that course of life; being not a little
scandalized at the Doctors advise, as in like sort another Priest, was at the
censure of some other, who greatly reproved him for that even at the same
time, when he was converted, he entered into the holy state of matrimony.

Further to touch some other special ends, and motives, which move your
religious to vow; they are doubtless vain and superstitious: the superstition
of which being opened unto them, the inualidity of their vows is thereby also
opened; so that they may for some honest ends, as to make use of their
christian liberty, to procreate children, to shake off Antichrists yoke, etc.
lawfully and freely enter into the state of matrimony.

How idle an end is that, whereby you make a single life to be more
satisfactorious for sins, then the other?

How vain that, that no man entering into the estate of marriage, can so
carefully look to the charge of souls as those which are unmarried?

How pernicious an end is that, and most injurious to Christ's death and
passion? (which is indeed the chiefest end, all your votaries aim at) by which
you teach them, that by means of a solemn profession of your vows; they are
made as clear and free from all their sins, as the child or Adult Person
which is presently taken See Azor: instit. tom. 2. lib. 12. cap. 5.
from the font of Baptism. This is a high point of your superstition, to
equalize your solemn vowe-profession, with the Sacrament of Baptism. Yea some
of your Doctors grant that, to this your own pretended tradition of solemn
vowing, which they deny to baptism; to wit, that so often as a professed
Person shall renew in his or her mind their former profession ratifying and
approving the same, they are thereby anew expiated, and made clear from all
their sins; so potent a lauer, and sacrament it is. By the which it is most
clear, that all your professors have their vows grounded upon most
superstitious ends.

Let us now make application to some of your Religious, especially your Nuns.
The Apostle decrees, that younger women and widows should marry, and that
the Juniores viduas nubere volo. 1 Timoth. 5.
Church shall admit none into the number of Church-widowes, (you and yours
commonly interpret this of your vowing Nuns) before the age of threescore.
This is the Apostles special decree; wisely weighing how rare the gift of
continency is, especially to widows. Compare now this together with your
presumptuous doctrine, who to draw young boys and girls to make profession of
chastity, before they can conceive what chastity is, yea to make profession
of chastity, when as some of them, know themselves to be luxuriously unchaste;
do gilde over your Vows of profession, with such incomparable perfection,
that you equalize it with Baptism. But this your end being so pernicious; the
motives and inducements so superstitious, who can doubt, but such (to whom God
shall be pleased to reveal his truth) as have made in your Church
superstitious Vows, but that they are as free from them, and the All your
Authors confess vna voce, that vows made for a sinful end are not to be kept.
obligation of them before God, as if they had never made them? for they are
(ipso iure, iure diuino nullae) even by Gods own law, of no force and
validity, and so in all laws ought to be (nullae) void and none, and of no
force.

Sixthly, out of the twelfth Supposition I evidently impossible, it little
mattereth: as also it is no matter whether the impossibility be apparent or
not; it is sufficient that the conscience of the Votarie, tells him, by his
often conflicts, falls and foyles, that he has not the gift of continency.
Neither shall it help you to answer and say, that such have the gift of
continency, in a remote power, possibility, or sufficiency, to be able to
keep it, though infallibly they shall never thereby actually and effectually
keep it: for this your answer besides that it is blasphemous against the
goodness and wisdom of God, so it is also idle in it self. For, what would
you think of that man, who should make a Clock, with wheels, bars, hammer,
bell, hand, and all other parts and instruments belonging to the same, and yet
he should so place and order them together, that they should infallibly never
strike? would you think him wise, if he should say he had made a Clock, which
had a posse, a sufficient ableness to strike, though infallibly it should
never strike, as being disorderly placed? Or what would you think of such a
ones wisdom, if he should be offended, that the Clock did never strike? Make
you application Mr. Flud, and see how blasphemously you speak, and write of
God. He gives, (for so you all generally teach) to all Monks, Priests and
Nuns, such sufficiency of grace, whereby they may be able to conteyne, yet
he so proffereth these his graces, in such circumstances of time, in such
condition of place, or in such proportion to others, or in such disposition of
the body or mind of them, to whom the graces are proffered, that infallibly
they shall not, nor will not effectually and actually conteyne therewith, no
not one of all them, to whom grace only sufficient is offered.

Again; what would you think of the wisdom, justice, and goodness of that
Magistrate, which should command some Citizen, to a needless piece of work?
for example, to go and keep sentinel in a time of no danger, and should for
that purpose, furnish him with Musket, and all other things belonging to that
charge; yet should keep his doors shut up so fast, that the poor Citizen
could not possibly stir abroad. Would you commend his wisdom, goodness or
justice, if afterward he should tell the Citizen, that he gave him a Musket
etc. wherewith to keep sentinel? he gave him a sufficiency to do it, and
therefore because he did not effectually and actually perform so much, he
shall be punished for so treasonable an offense? make you the application Mr.
Flud. God gives all your Votaries a remote sufficiency, and power, to be able
to conteyne, and yet does not so congruously, and effectually move and excite
them, that they shall and will actually and really conteyne; and yet he
damneth them to everlasting punishment, because they do not actually and
effectually conteyne, which they never can do without his efficacious grace,
which notwitstanding he denies unto them. I tell you Mr. Flud, that though
the windows of heaven were opened to shower down graces upon your Votaries,
yet if God by his special hand actually excite not their wills and minds, to
make use, and to take hold of such graces, they are like unto the Citizen which
is commanded to keep Sentinel, and yet has his doors so shut upon him, that
he cannot possibly stir abroad. Perhaps you will answer, that when the graces
be offered and proffered, the will is able to make use of them, and by them
actually to conteyne; beware of that Mr. Flud, for it is deep Pelagianisme so
to affirm; and to make the use and application of grace to be from man's will,
and not effectually and efficaciously from grace it self.

Seventhly, out of the thirteenth Supposition I evidently Seventh Inference.
infer; that seeing all are servants to Christ, and under his obedience, it
cannot be, that any may be admitted to vow any thing, which is against his
command, Now his command is rather to marry then to burn: his express
precept is that those which conteyne not must marry: and that only those are
to conteyne, which have the gift thereof. But he who finds by a long
continued experience that he can not get it (as an infinity of your Priests,
Friars and Nuns, do) such a one doubtless is to look upon Gods express
command; and not to tie himself with any private law of Vow, for performance
of that, for which he wants strength and ability.

Lastly, out of the foureteenth supposition, I do most clearly infer, that
all such, who at the taking of Orders Eight Inference.
in the Papal Church, do vow with their mouths only, and have no intention
to bind themselves therewith; that all such are free from keeping of such
verbal promises; howsoever whilst they live in those Churches, they shall be
compelled to the keeping of the same. Now that many so do in that Church, it
may easily be supposed, considering the frequencie of their doctrine and
practice of equivocation; especially in the point when violence is offered
against a man's liberty; or else See Azor.
an unjust question is proposed to be answered, as in this case both do
happen. This being so; all those, who have so deceived by their own art, the
Pope and his Officers, are doubtless no more tied to single life, then any
other thing, whereof they never made any promise or vow at all. And in the
Reformed Churches, if any should disrepute a Convert for marrying upon or after
his conversion, such a one shows himself either to be a politic Christian,
or an unconstant Neutrall. Gods cause needs no unchristian policy, to bolster
up the same. If it be said that the Papists are scandalized therewith; alac,
what is there in the reformed Churches wherewith they are not scandalized? But
we must say of them as Christ said of the Scribes and Pharisees, Coeci Matthew:
13. 14.
sunt and duces coecorum; and so I end this discourse with those two excellent
axioms of Law, Turpevotum quod scelere impletur. Dishonest is that vow which
is kept with crime. Again, In malis promissis rescinde sidem. In bad promises
break thy fidelity. Keep them not, neither with Judge: 11. Mar: 6. Act: 23.
Iepthe, Herod, nor those, which vowed to kill S. Paul.

Thus Mr. Flud I have cleared out of your own principles the lawfulness of
marriage in your Votaries; if occasion do require it, I doubt not but that
according to the analogy of faith, I shall be able to defend these, to
strengthen and enlarge them. Out of which you may easily judge, how idle your
calumniation is in obiecting against us that we allow your Professionists being
converted to marry. Let us see what follows.

Mr. FLVD. ibidem.
That Friars may marry Nuns, and be saved by idle life in sole faith. etc.

ANSWER.
Your idle girde at marrying we have largely answered already; now to your
other two calumnies of idle life and sole faith. Touching the first, let
Luthers, Melancthons, Bezaes, Caluins, Peter Martyrs labors which they did
undergo being converted, be compared with those of them, whilst they lived in
Popery, and they will seem as a handful to a heap.

As touching the doctrine of sole faith, you do egregiously Ignatianize, that
is, calumniate; for all the Churches reformed do give the Anatheme to all
those, who teach sole faith, that is faith justifying to be void of the fruit
of good works. Yea your self being a Rabbie cannot be ignorant, how your
Tridentine Synod gives Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can: 28.
the Anatheme to us, because we teach, and constantly teach, that true faith,
justifying faith cannot be void of good works.

After you have generally twitted the reformed Churches for receiving of Monks
and Friars, then you begin particularly to dispute thus gravely against Martin
Luther. I should think it more probable, that Luther in his nights conference
with the Devil, did convert and make him a friend to Christ, that now he will
be content to work miracles, to glorify and extol his name. thus you argue
for want of better matter. Wherein Mr. Flud, you behave your self like a
wrangling Lawyer, who cares not what he says, so he may thereby disadvantage
his Adversaries cause. You call it a nights conference, when as that worthy man
delivers it as a nights conflict, by which the Devil endeavored to draw him
to despair; and withal declares by what arguments (even the chiefest grounds
for your massing sacrifice) he did repulse his wicked suggestions. And can you
think it to be an argument of reprobation, if a man be assaulted by Satan, Who
like a roaring Lion goes about seeking whom 1 Pet: 5. Matthew: 4.
he may devour? Was not the Son of God assaulted by Satan? Did he not
assault him with arguments taken out of Scripture, to move him to presumption?
And might not the Devil also produce arguments either true or false, thereby
to have led Luther into despair? Christ repulsed him by reasons; so also did
Luther; which reasons you must stick too, or else your Mass will to the
ground. But with what face do you produce Luthers conference with the Devil,
when as your Dominican Friars have published to the view of the world, how the
Devil called Verrine, did in a possessed person, labor by all means possible
to persuade Magdalene to become a Popish Convert? With what forehead do you
object this unto us, whenas the Superior of the Nuns of Brussells, does
bring ten wicked Devils, Robert Chambers page 214.
which were cast out of one Catherine Buis by virtue of the Image-Lady at
Sichem, to cry out thus unto her, with a redoubled note, Viue nostre Dame du
Sichem: Viue nostre Dame du Sichem: Live our Lady of Sichem, Our Lady of
Sichem live. Here you have Satan with your selves, join in one manner of
worship to that Image-Ladie of Sichem, calling her their Lady. Are not you
ashamed to impose thus against us, when as your Denham Deuill-dalliances,
conferences and dispute, both by night and day, are so learnedly published by
the Bishop of Chichester? What mean you so to calumniate Luther, whenas in
diverse of your Saints legends, it is to be found, how the Vita Elzearij
comitis, vita Hilarionis, Antonij etc.
Devil did assault them with conferences at their departing out of the world?
you might Master Flood, if malice had not blinded you, have considered, that,
that worthy man, would never have published this dispute to the world, if he
had taken the same to have been a friendly conference: you should rather
commend his humility, for laying open his infirmities to the world, and Satan's
wiles; that others by his wisdom, patience, and constancy, might in like
cases know how to behave themselves. And to answer a further instance, which
many of yours urge against that man; as you cannot think those texts of
Scripture, which Satan brought against Math. 4.
Christ to be warrantable in that sense, in which they were brought by him, so
howsoever Satan did produce true reasons and arguments to have moved Luther to
despair, although the same are not good in that sense they were brought
against him; yet they are good, and sufficient in their true and natural
sense, against the idolatrous communion of your Church, and your Massing
sacrifice; and so your calumniation falls to the ground, as likewise the
pedantlike inference of yours. When you shall prove that your miracles and
prodigies, turn to the direct glory of Christ, (otherwise then that they are
inducements to us to abhor Antichrist) rather then to the honor of the
Image-Ladies and Roode-Lordes, Creature-gods, which have eyes and see not,
hands and smite not; in whom there is no spirit of life, then you might be
thought to speak to purpose; till that time we will esteem them as they are,
Antichrists Characters and signs; now let us examine the last and worst of all
yours reasons.

CHAP. IX. Wherein is examined Master Floods 6. reason.
Master Floode page 152. number. 36.
MY sixth and last reason is, the providence of God, most desirous of the
salvation of mankind, not permitting them to be tempted above their power 1.
Cor. 10.
much less will he lend his infinite power to Satan, to tempt men Jacob. 1.
Deus intentator malorum.
that they may be damned. Some few toies and trifles, God does permit to try
the constancy of his faithful, as were the miracles the Donatists did brag
of, August. de vnitate Eccles. cap. 16.
strange visions that their sacred sisters saw sleeping, or dreamed of waking:
Those which Antichrist shall work are greater, yet the vanity of such signs,
a constant faith with competent diligence may easily discover; but the
Catholic miracles are great, many, and most witnessed, as has been proved.
Such I say they are, that our Adversaries in the end, are forced to grant that
they are true miracles, done by Gods own hand, which no power under his
omnipotency can work.

ANSWER.
This your last reason has so many ignorances and fond applications in it,
that I marvel you were not ashamed to commit it to the press; you ground it
upon Gods providence toward mankind, most desirous of the salvation thereof;
so that he does not permit the same to be tempted above its power. To show the
vanity of this discouse, let me ask you what you mean when you say that God
is most desirous etc. do you mean by (most desirous) Gods efficacious will,
and by mankind all people and nations of the world? if so (as so you must and
do) then how blasphemous are you, to make God so impotent, that he does not
bring that to pass, whereof he is most desirous, and has an efficacious will
to do? concerning the other part, how vainly do you apply that of Saint Paul
to mankind, which the Apostle specially intends of the faithful; yea and if
you will understand the same of Gods aid, and succor 1. Cor. 10.
against final temptations, it is only to be understood of the elect.

How ignorant a Rabbie in divinity are you, to affirm, that God does not give
over any into a reprobate sense? that he does not permit any to be enthralled
even in the bondage and slavery of sin? how unacquainted are you with sacred
Scriptures, which often inculcate the contrary? When you say that God much
less will lend his infinite power to Satan to tempt men, that they may be
damned; I marvel, that you a Divine know not how to speak like a Divine: God
cannot lend his infinite power unless he lend himself. Surely you are
confident of the excellency of your miracles, that you think they cannot be
done by Satan, God permitting; unless God lend his infinite power in a
peculiar and proper sort for Satan to work thereby. God works with all his
creatures intimely and immediately with a general concurse; and more is not
needful, for the effecting of any of your prodigies. When you said that God
will not lend his power to Satan to tempt men whereby they may be damned;
against whom do you dispute? you beat the air; and fight with your own
shadow. Some ignorants there may be, who may teach that God purposely without
any prescience of any sin at all has ordained some for damnation, and does
appoint Satan of purpose to tempt such, that they may be damned. There may be
some such perverse Divines, as I doubt there are; but what of these? all Gods
Churches do detest them; all the whole current of sacred Scripture does
condemn them; and all honest minded people, which cannot endure Gods infinite
justice, and goodness to be blasphemed, do hate and execrate them. For my
self, I say (Perfecto odio oderam illos) with David, I hate them as Psalm. 139.
22.
the Lords enemies with a full and perfect hate.

But that you may consider, upon how sandy a ground you have builded this your
last reason; call to mind how your own Remists translate Saint Paul writing to
the Thessalonians of Antichrist, and his miracles; thus they 2. ad These. 2. v.
9. 10. 11. 12.
there read; whose coming is according to the operation of Satan, in all power
and lying signs and wonders. And in all seducing of iniquity to them that
perish, for that they have not received the charity of the truth; that they
might be saved: Therefore, God will send them the operation of error, that
they may believe lying, that all may be judged, which have not believed the
truth, but have consented to iniquity: thus they translate the Apostle. Where
now is your forehead Master Flood, who write the flat contradictorie of this?
and dare twit Gods providence, that he will not permit such things, whereof the
holy Apostle so clearly pronounces? and so I observe how idly you apply that
of Saint James Deus intentator malorum, God is no tempter of Iam. 1. ^
evil; for though God do tolerate and permit these things, yet he is not the
Tempter, but Satan, Antichrist and his Ministers.

Further the Reader may observe, how toyishly you come in with your toies and
trifles, and tell us a tale out of Saint Austen, of the Donatists dreams and
visions; Newtons vision and fantastic delusion.
you should rather have told us of Master Newtons vision at Staunford, against
the Oath of allegiance, of which your Gatehouse Candidates were so iocond, that
they consulted whether it were not meet to send the same to a Person of very
great and high note, thereby to make him a popish Convert. But lest you should
be taken after tripping, to halt altogether, you confess a little after, that
Antichrists miracles indeed shall be greater, notwithstanding they shall be
such that the vanity thereof a constant faith with competent diligence may
easily discover. It is the Mat 24. 24. 2 Thessal. 2. Apocal. 13.
truest sentence of yours, in your whole book: Antichrists miracles indeed
shall be greater, and such as may be discovered; for already, (though they be
great, strong, many, as che scriptures speak) yet they are discovered; and by
them the man of sin is revealed. And he who will be pleased to read but what
your own men Canus, Espencaeus, Lyra, Baronius, Halensis, with diverse others,
yea Popes, have delivered concerning some of your lying signs, and wonders,
whereof your legends and Portesses have been full, will easily discover
Antichrists paws to be in them: I dare undertake out of your own legends and
popish Authors, to discover diverse hundreths of miracles, which you your
selves will acknowledge either in part, or wholly, to be forged, or else such
as by themselves will appear whose brattes they are.

Whereas you add insulting lie, that your Catholic miracles are many, and
great, and most witnessed; we ingenuously See S Gregory in Job lib. 33. cap
25. lib. 34. cap. 3.
confess it in part, for so the holy Scriptures have delivered, that those of
Antichrist shall be such; but when you add that your adversaries do confess,
that they are done by Gods own hand, before we can yield thereunto, we must
needs examine your proof which thus follows.

Mr. FLVD, page 153. number. 37.
Now their last refuge is, that which your great Champion master Whitaker
betakes himself Whitaker de Eccles. p. 348. nen ignoro vera miracula non nisi
diuina visieri posse.
unto, to wit, that true miracles which none but God can do, though known to
be such Ex neutro genere miraculotam, sufficiens testim^nium aut certum argumen
tum c^lligitur.
do not demonstrate the truth of religion, be gives this desperate reason,
Constat deum non modo veris sed and falsis doctoribus vim tribuere hutusmodi
miracula fa^endi, non tamen quo c^nfirmet eorum falsa dogm it a sed quo tentet
eos ad quos mittantur
to wit that God does give power to work true miracles to false teachers, not
to confirm their false opinions (says he) but to tempt those to whom they
are sent. Can any doctrine be more dreadful or harsh in a Christians ear then
this? How can any man know, that God does not allow that doctrine, which false
Prophets say he does allow, and show his broad seal for their saying? But this
master Whitaker cannot deny, but that Catholics in the day of judgment may
have that plea, which a learned and ancient Father thought invincible, which he
sets down for our comfort in these words. Ricard. de Sancto victore lib. 1. de
Trinit. c. 2 domine si error est quod eredin. us a te decepti sumus.
O Lord, if it be an error which we believe, we are deceived by thee, for thou
have confirmed these things unto us, with such signs and wonders, which could
not be done but by thee: Protestants will grant that we are deceived by God, by
the wonders and miracles which our teachers say, that he wrought and works by
them, to confirm this truth, yet say they we must be damned.

ANSWER.
When you have but an inch granted, you will take an ell; you may be ashamed of
your impertinencies. But to answer your inference; That very learned and
reverend Clarke Master Whitaker (as I gather out of your marginall notes, for I
have not his book) says only that God may work some true miracles, by false
teachers, though not to confirm their doctrine, but only to prove and make
trial of his servants; you translate his word tentet, tempt, whereas it is
evident, he has it here for to try or prove. Now master Flud if master
Whitaker must be put to his purgation for this his saying; what then will
become of Moses, who says in express terms thus, even as much as master
Whitaker does if not more: Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1. 2. 3. etc.
If (says Moses) there shall arise in the midst of thee a Prophet or a
dreamer of dreams, and shall tell thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or
wonder come to pass, whereof be speaks to thee; saying let us go after
other Gods (which thou have not known) and let us serve them. Thou shall not
hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or dreamer rf dreams; for the Lord
your God tempts you, to know whether you love the Lord your God withal your
heart and withal your soul. Thus Moses speaking the same which master
Whitaker does. Now cry out against Moses, master Flud, and say unto him; can
any doctrine be more dreadful and harsh in a Christian man's ear then this?
what harshnesse or dread sir, if God be pleased for the trial of his elect (he
still upholding them) to permit some false Prophet to do some great miracles;
which to them may seem and appear a true miracle, though indeed it be not
above the extraordinary course of nature?

Call to mind what I have already cited out of your own Remists; who
ingenuously confess, that some false Prophets may do some true miracles for
confirmation of some Catholic point of doctrine; which when they do, will
they not say further, and brag, that such miracles are done also for the
confirmation of their errors, and false doctrines? And is not this the daily
practice of yours? so voluminous Coccius, so great Bellarmine, so Stapleton so
Bristow with his Pedanty, D. Hill, who quartered his idle reasons, wholly out
of Bristowes Motives and Vlenbergius his causes, so that most superstitious
Costerus worthily and wittily was termed by majesty foulemouthed and
shameless Coster.

Call to mind how Stapleton that undaunted Pillar of your Synagogue speaking of
Antichrists miracles has these words: Et sivera sint prodigia, quoad actus
supernaturales, Promptua moral. in dom 24. post pent. loco 4.
etc. Although the miracles be true, in respect of the supernatural actions,
notwithstanding they shall be no other thenlying; because they shall serve
alye: Certainly for the greater trial of the faithful; (For therefore
heresies must be, that 1 Cor. 11.
those who are tried may be manifest) not only Antichrist himself and his
ministers, but all sorts of heretics (God permitting) shall be able to do
miracles as well, and no otherwise then the magicians did. And Stapleton not
content with his own bare assertion, draws authority to the same out of S.
Austen, who discoursing upon those words of S. Matthew (there shall arise false
Prophets) has much for this purpose. Admonet haec dominus, etc. Our Lord does
admonish these things, that we may understand that certain August lib. 83.
questionu^ q. 79.
wicked men shall do also certain miracles, such as the Saints cannot do;
and yet they are not to be thought to be of better place with God. And a
little after, whereas therefore the Magicians do certain things which the
Saints never do, they are done for a different end, and upon a diverse title;
for they do these things seeking their own glory, these do seeking the glory
of God. And those do as it were by certain private contracts and benefits,
granted from the powers in their kind; For it is oftentimes granted by divine
law unto the Devils, that they may perform some things (even by that private
right of miracles) to those, whom according to their demerits they have subdued
unto themselves, but these by a public administration by the command of him to
whom every creature is subject. Out of all which the judicious reader may
observe, how impertinent Master Fluds exclamations are; as likewise he may
easily discern, how impertinentlie he alleges the saying of Richard de
Sancto victore. Who speaks only of those miracles which were done by Christ,
his Apostles, and other saints, for confirmation of the chiefest points of
Christian religion; not for defense of any Popish novelties; and yet neither is
this his saying (if meant of other miracles) so victorious, that it may
prevail against truth delivered in sacred writ: for that indeed is the
touchstone which must try all visions, dreams, miracles, and signs whether
they be sound or not, for whatsoever are not according and agreeing with the
same, must and ought to be cashiered, and exploded.

Those words of yours when you speak thus; Protestants will grant that we are
deceived by God, etc. are very obscure and dark, perhaps you mean strictly;
then as the words sound we do ingenuouslie grant that by Gods secret
permission the efficacy of error does work in your Churches; in which miracles
are done for the deceiving of such who have not believed the truth, nor
received the charity of truth; and yet we do not say you are deceived by God,
as though he rejoiced in your perdition, but you are deceived by Satan, who
has such power permitted unto him, to work upon the children of misbeliefe.
We most humbly pray that God would be pleased to illustrate your
understandings, in the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and to take away from
you these dark scales of error and illusion.

Mr. FLVD, page 154. number: 37.
The best is, we firmly believe, God is not Satan, nor a tempter of men; much
less will he work miracles to deceive them: lest of all, lend the devils his
omnipotency to draw such as desire to serve and love him for ever to hell. This
is our comfort grounded upon an infinite goodness, which is so great that we
cannot envy you the mirth you take in reading our miracles, and rosting your
Grabs by the fire side, to drive away your melancholy fits: God send you
greater comfort in the next world and that you may not there eat sour crabs,
and worse meat Caput^spidum suget. I^b. 10.
with Infidels, deriding the miracles of Christ, in that dreadful fire that
has no end.

ANSWER.
The vpshot of your reasons if it be your best refuge as you seem to speak
thus; The best is we firmly believe God is not Satan etc. If this be your
best, then it will prove no better, then the knowledge which the Devil
himself has, and yet trembles; What if God lend not Satan his omnipotent
power, yet he grants to this deceitful Behemoth so great power, as none upon
earth can be compared with it; it is great enough to deceive your Holy Father,
his Purpurats, and all other of your congregation, who are so sharply set upon
miracles, that they seem to dote upon them; yea and you do in many of your
legends, recommend such fooleries, that no man reading of them can abstain
from laughter, so that if we sit by the fire, and laughed at your miracles, as
you vainly, scoff at Sir Edward, you may thank your selves for the same in
your publishing of such risible stuff.

For example, will not Sobriety it self (to use your own phrase) laugh and
smile, to hear out of your book of Confor: of one Friar Francis who drank a
spider in a chalice and presently rubbing his shinne-bone, after Mass the
Spider came thereout.

Who can contain from laughter to read how A^idius Bishop of Bisontium was
upon holy Thursday carried upon the Devils back in the form of an Ethiopian
from Bisontium to Rome and how he carried with him to the Pope one of his
slippers which the Ethiopian-deuill had taken from him then and at that time
when he had persuaded the Pope to commit fornication; and how the Bishop having
done his message to the Pope and moved him to repentance, said Mass in his
steed, was carried again to Bisontium by Saturday Easter eve upon the Devils
back. Speculum out of Sigebert in Chronolog. ad annum 411.

Who can abstain from laughter to hear Seuerinus Se^er. vi^a Hyacinth.
relating how a young maid praying for her calfe (that was newly dead so that
the Butcher was fleying of it) unto the Polonian Saint Hyacinthus so soon as
she returned from prayer the calfe revived.

Who can hold from laughing, to hear Costerus relate very gravely in his
Postills in Dom. 3. Quadrag. how a young maid being of five years old was
possessed with a Devil because she ate milk contrary to her Fathers
command; and how when the Devil was cast out at Saint Peter's in Rome he cried
out aloud thus, This girl shall suffer no other purgatory in the next life
then this she has suffered from me.

Who can abstain from laughing to hear the same Cester ibidem.
Coster relating how a Devil promised to cease from tempting a certain
Eremite if he would swear to him that he would never bow his knee to a
certain Image of the virgin Mary?

Who will not laugh to hear of such often sweating, bleeding, weeping, bowing,
nodding and speaking of your Images?

Who will not smile to hear when your Sacrament Downham de Antich.
god was lost in a meadow, how it was found by a light from heaven, and by the
adoration and worshipping of beasts and horses about it, all kneeling upon both
knees, saving only one black horse, which was possessed by a Devil, and was
a thieves horse, he would only bend one knee?

Who can do other then laugh to hear how the virgin Maryes Statue fearing the
Tartars cried pitifully to Saint Hyacinth to carry it over Boristhenes to
Craconia which he did? Seuerin. lib. de mira. Hyac. 1. cap. 13.

Who will not laugh heartily, to read, what your S. Dunstane found raking in
the ashes of Saint Editha? Again, how he held the Devil by the nose, with a
pair of tongues until he cried Oh! as in like sort, who can read without
laughing how your Saint Dominike, made the Devil appearing unto him in the
form of an Ape, to hold his candle until the Deuill-ape burnt his fingers?

None I think can do other then laugh, to hear how the Devil himself was
carried out in your holy Parisian Genouefaes closestole; as likewise, who
smileth Legend. Genesis
not to think, how holy Martin putting his finger into the mouth of a
possessed Person, the Devil was so tormented therewith, that he having no
other passage, was glad to flee away at the fundament conduit.

Would not Melancholy it self laugh, to hear how S. Francis stood preaching
to the beasts and fowls of the field, they standing very demurely and listening
to his doctrine? To hear how gravely he disputed with the Wolf at Engubium?
How he made a league or truce betwixt the people of Engubium, and that
religious and intelligent Wolf? To hear how he brought his Cade-Lambe with
him to Mass, and how the same did ever pronely adore and worship at the time
of elevation? Bellarmines Ass left hay but once and came and worshipped, but
S. Francis his Cade-Lambe worshipped and adored daily their Masse-Lambe.

Who can do other then laugh to read in your Speculo Exemp: how certain
Monks were roasted like geese upon spitts in Purgatory? Or who conteyneth from
laughing to hear how that when the people would not hear your S. Anthony
preach, he went to the Sea, preached to the fishes, and how some of the fishes
spoke to him, others bowed, all heard devoutly. as Sedul: the Apologist for
your book of Conformities, relates.

May we not smile to think, how the Irish Patriarch S. Patricke, made a
sheep to bleat in the belly of the fellow that had stolen the same? I should
make no end if I should seek to add more of this kind; these are sufficient,
to give the judicious Reader to understand with what reason many of your
miracles are rather to be derided then admired.

To proceed, howsoever your simpering modesty tells us, that you desire to
serve and love God, yet your words are but wind, so long as you set up your
Bethell calves, and leave the worship which God has prescribed, devising so
abominable a one, as surpasses for impiety all which as yet have been heard
of, fitly compared to that of the Mexicans, who adored their God in the form
of paste. Boter.

For your conclusion, which is an Ignatian-like prayer, mixed with the gall of
your malice, I cannot tell whether you deserve thanks or not. We rather
advertise you to take heed lest by your subiecting your self to that (Caput
Aspidum) Triple Crowned Monarch, who sits in the Temple of God, bearing
himself as if he were God, you enthrall your soul in the guilt of eternal
perdition. As for us, who lay no other foundation for our salvation, then Jesus
Christ; wherein we may transgress his most holy precepts, we are most heartily
sorry, and do with prostrate souls, beseech his goodness, that he will be
pleased, so to illustrate our understandings, and to correct our affections,
that we may more and more increase in his faith, and always do those things,
which are most acceptable in his sight. Amen.

CHAP. X. Wherein is examined the special miracles of Antichrist.
Certain reasons showing Popish miracles to be Antichristian.

Having thus showed the imbecillitie of your reasons, I refer what I have
done to the judicious Reader. Yet for further confirmation of the Truth, I will
by Gods assistance, add certain reasons out of holy Scripture, to prove the
very contradictorie of your proposition, to wit, that your Popish miracles are
no other then Antichrists lying wonders. But before I deliver my reasons, I am
to prefixe some few Suppositions, which our Adversaries themselves cannot deny.

I suppose first that the furest and certainest way, to find out the nature of
Antichristian miracles, is to search the Scriptures, and there to examine what
those qualities and properties are, which they do fasten and attribute to the
miracles of Antichrist and his Ministers.

Secondly, I suppose, that in most places of holy (ex adiunctis) by
circumstance of the places, and context of Scripture, in which the miracles of
Antichrist and his, are in general terms delivered.

Thirdly, I suppose, out of the consent of all, whether

I suppose fourthly, that in the very obscurest passages has a careful eye to
other parts of Scripture, and the analogy of faith; as also to examine
carefully and diligently, the autenticall Histories of those times, in which
the principal part of the vision is accomplished. As for example, in the
thirteenth of the Revelation, we have the arising up of two beasts described;
The first out of the Sea, with diverse heads and horns and Diademes upon the
same: The second out of the Earth, having two hores like the Lamb, with other
particulars, describing him to be rather a pretended spiritual Governor, than
a Temporal Monarch. Now we have in Apoc: 13. 12, 14, 15.
this same 13. Chapter in the 12 and other verses, it most clearly described,
that this second Beast is so linked, and joined to the first, that they seem
both to make but one total, complete and monarchical Government, the one
being subsidiarie and helping to the other: and this is delivered by most of
the Pontificians, who will have Antichrist himself to be signified by the
first, by the other, either a multitude of his false Prophets, or else some one
most notorious and immediate Precursor of his, as Viega with diverse others. By
which it is most Viega in Apoc.
clear, even by the confession of the Adversaries, that by these two Beasts,
is signified, the whole Antichristian Government, both in head and members,
which also seems to be delivered by the Prophet himself; who Apoc: 17. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, etc.
declaring how the Beast was described by the Angel that appeared unto him,
makes mention of one only Beast, including and containing the latter in the
former. Now that we may come to know, what manner of false Prophet, or false
Prophets are signified by the second Beast, working miracles and prodigies, for
the service of the first Beast; we are to search what manner of Government,
Rule, and Monarchy; and where, in what place, and what time is signified by
the first, that had heads and Diademes upon it: the which we may very easily
perform, seeing it pleased God by his Angel, to interpret the same unto his
Prophet S. John. By whose interpretation, together with that which Pontificians
themselves do deliver, we may easily come to know what Government or
Monarchy is described by the first: which being known, the understanding of
the other will be facill and easy; the examining of which, I refer till anon.
These things thus supposed, I come to my reasons, which I ground upon three
several heads or foundations.

The first shall be out of the very specialties of Antichrists miracles,
described in S. John.

The second head shall be out of certain qualities and conditions, which the
holy Scriptures do fasten upon Antichristian miracles.

The third shall be out of some clear circumstances of holy Scripture, by
which we are pointed both to Antichrist and his miracles; which performed, the
Courteous Reader may not expect more in this place concerning this argument;
and withal he may understand that we are not chiefly to prove the Pope to be
Antichrist by his miracles, but that truth being otherwise euicted and
convinced, we confirm the same position by the Antichristianisme of his
miracles.

I might add a fourth head of such places as point us to Antichrist, but make
no mention of his miracles; but of them hereafter if occasion require, some of
them I have examined in my first Prelude.

Out of the first ground, thus I argue. First reason.


Whosoever in himself, and in his Ministers has done those special miracles,
which S. John describes in the thirteenth Chapter of his Prophecy, he has
in himself and in his Ministers done Antichristian miracles. But the Pope of
Rome, both in himself and in his Ministers has done those miracles described
by S. John verses 13. 15.
in the 13 of his Prophecy, Ergo the Pope of Rome in himself, and in his
ministers has done Antichristian Miracles.

The Mayor or first proposition, I suppose as manifest, confessed by all,
gainesaid by none.

The second or Minor, thus I prove.

The miracles described by S. John in the 13 chapter of his Prophecy, and in
the 13 and 15 verses, are two. The one, to make fire to come down from heaven
upon earth, in the sight of men. The other, that he should give life to the
Image of the Beast, so that the Beast should speak: But the Pope of Rome and
his, have done these two, Ergo. That the Pope and his, have done these two,
thus I make it manifest. And to begin with the first, which is to make fire to
come down from heaven upon earth, in the sight of men. If we understand this
according to the plain sense of the words (as probably we must) like as
Elias caused fire 1 Reg: 18. 38. 2 Reg: 1. 12.
to come down from heaven, against the false Prophets; upon and against the
fifty servants; then clear it is, that the Pope and his, have caused fire to
come from heaven. For what else then fire from heaven, when Constantine the
Pope making trial of the Archbishop of Rauennas Caution at S. Peter's memory,
the same was scorched and made as black as a burnt cole?

What other then fire from heaven, were those torches which gave light from out
of the clouds to Zachary Pope as he iourneyed to Rauenna?

What else then fire from heaven was that which burnt Tilman: lib. 2. Sac.
Collat. cap: 26.
the house of a Lutheran Matrone, because she commanded an oven to be heated
upon the day of the Virgin Mary's assumption?

What else then fire from heaven, when as to show the force of Excommunication,
bread has been excommunicated, and thereupon scorched and made black as a
dead burnt cole, as we may read in your Speculo exemplorum? What other then
fire from heaven, was and is the miraculous Arras Candle? What else then fire
from heaven, was that splendent light (like unto that of your young Saint
Bently in Rome) which appeared to a Monk attending at Mass? Like was that
when your Specul. v. fletus ex. 5.
Sacrament-god skipt from a mules back hanged in the air with resplendant and
fiery beams over it and round about it. What else then Fire from heaven, was
that, Spec. v. Euchar. ex. 26.
when a certain Bishop being excommunicate by your Pope, for taking part with
Henry the 4. he was as Auentine reports from the mouth of another, stricken
with Auent. lib. 5.
a thunderbolt from heaven? What else then fire from heaven, consumed the
sacrifice of those boys at Apamea, when they setting bread upon a stone, and
imitating the Priest in saying the Allpotent transsubstantiating five words,
their bread was suddenly consumed with fire? as Bredenbachius relates.

What other then fire from heaven; when your Saint Edmunds candle was so
strangely lighted by his prayers to the Virgin Mary?

What other then fire from heaven, is that your Saint Liadan. lib. 2. de fug.
Ido: cap: 1. See Spec: ex: ^: Imag exem. 8. and 9.
Authonies fire, whereof you draw signs and shadows upon your Churches
walls, to keep Passers by from fouling of them? An example of this fire see in
Lindanus.

A glorious and resplendant Fire it was from heaven, which to show the sanctity
of the Pope Eugenius, and the Baron. an: 1145. ^: 24.
holiness of yout Mass, shined over and upon his head whilst he celebrated
Mass; yea the Armenian Legates saw doves (that is Angell-doues) from the fire
and in the fire ascending up and down upon your holy Fathers head.

Torches of fire, and from heaven were those, which appeared whilst your holy
Innocent celebrated Mass in the presence of Lotharius the Emperor. Was it not
fire from heaven, which so gloriously shined upon the bodies of those, who
were slain by the Albigians near to the town Lauallis at a place called
Mountioy, the sight Mons Gaudij.
whereof greatly amazed the beholders as Altisiodore relates?

From heaven surely came that fire, which pointed out in a meddow your
Sacrament Eucharist-god; which had been lost by a careless Priest, as he went
to housell a sick person. Other such like I could relate, these are sufficient
to show, that Popes and their Ministers, have How powerful is their
excommunication? whenas coming only from an Abbot it can cast a crow for
stealing a ring into a horrible and languishing fever not to be cured but by
absolution. Spec. exem. Excommunicat. exem. 4.
caused fire to come down from heaven; and this if we understand the same in
the literal sense, and as the words sound: but if we understand the same
words in a mystical sense, and do by fire according to use of Scriptures,
and fittest application mean, either the fire of vengeance and revenge by
excommunication; or else the fire of heavenly gifts and graces, in this sense
also; it is most evidently clear, that both the Pope and his do in the
opinion of men make fire to come down from heaven. What other then such a
mystical fire from heaven, is their thunderbolt of excommunication? by which
they dethrone and cast down even to hell, whom they please? What else then
mystical fire from heaven, are those graces and blessings which the Pope, yea
every Priest can fetch from heaven, by saying certain prayers appointed Oration
ad bened cendum quodcunque.
in your Ritualls? yea they are so powerful, that they can call down, and
pray down the Graces and presence of the holy Ghost upon what Creatures soever
they shall please: witness your Pontifical and Rituall books.

These things which I have here delivered are very true, and you cannot deny
them, out of which it follows by most clear consequence, that in the sight
and opinion of the men of your Church, the Pope and his, do make fire come
from heaven, whether we understand the same mystically or literally; and so
we see the first Antichristian miracle accomplished in your Church. Now to the
second.

Before I declare my second argument, I note that the Prophet himself, does
not call Antichrists making the image of the beast to speak, either a miracle,
or a wonder, neither do I think it is to be esteemed as a miracle in strict
terms, and strict manner of speaking; unless we may call it a moral miracle,
that is a miraculous effecting of that, which was morally impossibly by
wonderful restoring of a collapsed and decayed estate, but speaking of the
same as most do we will call it a miracle.

This Antichristian miracle then, is described by the Prophet in the fifteenth
verse thus, to wit; that he Apoc. 13.
shall give life or breath to the Image of the Beast; so that the Image of the
Beast, should speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Image
of the beast should be killed. Here the Pontificians especially their great
Augustine Bellarmine, do triumphantly infer, that seeing never any Pope did
make any Image of a Beast Bell. lib. de. Pont. 3. cap. 15.
to speak; or propose any such Image to be worshipped, that consequently their
Pope cannot be Antichrist. But weighing this their triumphant inference (before
the victory) I cannot but exclaim and call the very heavens to witness
against their wilful obstinacy and impudency herein, who here will rest and
insist upon the plain and literal sense of the words, understanding them as
they sound, whereas the whole context of Scripture, together with their own
principles must of necessity enforce them, to some mystical and figurative
interpretation of the words: for to dispute out of their own grounds, must
not the Image of the beast be the same (at least genere in kind) in show,
resemblance, and representation, which the beast it self is in verity and
truth of the thing? Now is it not a confessed truth by themselves, (clearly
also to be euinced out of Scripture) that by the beast, with so many heads and
horns, with Diademes upon them, are signified some manners of State, Rule,
Government or Monarchy? if so; then most assuredly, the Image representative,
and significatiue of such a beast, must be some state, government, Empire or
Monarchy, in semblance and show representing the same: to say that the Image
should be representative, in the nature of other Pictures, or statues, such as
hang upon walls, or are placed in public places, is merely a vanity. How
improbable and morally impossible, that the whole world should be brought to
adore a picture of such a beast, whether it be massy of silver and gold, or
drawn in colors? Consider Master Floode, the form of such an Image, it must
be made with seven heads, ten horns, with Diademes upon them; Apoc. 13.
1. 2. 3
in the forehead must be written the name of blasphemy; in body it must be like
a Leopard, in feet like to a bear, in mouth showing a Lion; this is the goodly
Image after which the whole world must wonder, and which it must adore; for the
holy Ghost says expressly, that he who makes this image, will cause and
compel the first Beast to be worshipped, and an image of the Beast which was
wounded to be made and to be worshipped. Now most evident it is, that the first
beast whereof the image is to be made, is of this and more monstrous
proportion, then I have described. Further (to speak according to their own
principles) is it not a likely thing, that Antichrist who (as they say) shall
be an utter enemy to all Idolatry, who shall worship no God publicly, save
only the God Maozim in secret; that he should set up, so ill favored, so ill
shaped, and so monstrous an Image, compelling all to worship the same? and the
Refusers thereof, to be slain? is this agreeing to your own principles M.
Floode, or is it likely to agree with Antichrists policy, pride, hypocrisy?
fie fie upon such fictions.

Further, if this be to be understood literallie of the making of some image
representing the first beast, a Leopard, Lion, and Bear, why then does the
false Prophet with two horns, cause the inhabitants of the earth (meaning all
under his obeisance) to make the same? why rather does he not require
Image-makers, Painters, or Statuaeries? belike the Image was so massy and
huge, greater then that of Nebuchodonozor, so that the Inhabitants Dan. 3.
of the earth must be required to make the same; And if it be so massy, yea if
it be a material Image, how is it possible, it should be carried up and down
from one Kingdom to another; so that in three years and a half, the whole
world may worship the same? If it be to be carried, Master Flood, prophecy
unto us the manner, whether like your Pope upon men's shoulders, or like your
Loretto goddess, transported miraculouslie by the hands of Angels. Perhaps
you will answer and say, that though the Massic-image or principal picture it
self, be reared up in one place, yet the Inhabitants of the earth shall be
enforced every one of them, to have some pretty Images, and representations of
the same. Be it as it will, I pray you to rest merry with your conceit of your
material Image, for my part I profess ingenuously I am tired to be put to
dispute against these your vanities.

The true meaning therefore of this place is thus; to wit that the second Beast
which has two horns like the Lamb, that is pretends by a twofold power of
jurisdiction Claues Potestatis and S^ientiae.
and doctrine, to be the Lambs (that is Christ's) vicar; shall cause and
compel the in habitants of the earth, to make some kind of Rule, Government,
Monarchy, Empire, like to the first, whereof it is an image ^^ representation.
Now it rests to be proved whether the Popes have done this or not: the which
because it is a point manifest, and (in confesso) confessed I will dispatch it
in a word or two. What the Image-state, or Image-Empire is, we shall easily
know if we can first find what the first State and Monarchy was, signified by
the first Beast, arising out of the sea: the nature and property whereof it
pleased the Angel to declare to S. John in the 17: of his prophecy, where
agreeing to the interpretation Apoc. 17.
of all ancient and modern Interpreters whether Pontifician or of the reformed
Churches; by the Beast is signified a State, Rule, and Monarchy, which was
Roman, having her chiefest show, glory, and pomp in Rome, taking
denomination from the same, signified by the name of Babylon the great: which
is so clearly delivered by the Angel to Saint John, that he does as it were
with finger demonstrate so much; saying, the woman which thou saw (sitting
upon the scarlet colored beast) is that great Apoc. 17. 18.
City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth. Which great City, who of
the ancient or modern learned, did enterpret to be other then Rome? So then we
have it proved and confessed, that a State and Government of Rome and in Rome
is signified by the first Beast; now we are to examine, when the States and
Governments signified by the first Beast were ended, so that the first Beast
became dumb, being wounded or destroyed; for it is most clear that the first
States and Rules must remove and give place, before the second which are the
Images of the former, can succeed into their room. Of whom shall we learn
this? marry from the Angel himself; who in the 17. Chapter describing the
durance of the Verse. 10. 11.
Beast, in seven Kings, that is seven governments each succeeding other,
speaks thus: And there are seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the
other is not yet come, and when he comes he must continue but a short space.
And the beast that was and is not he is the eight and is of the seven, and
goes into perdition; thus the Angel. To consider unto what shifts the
Pontificians are here put, it would make the Sumners Ass to break his halter;
some of them say, that by these five Kings are to be understood those five
Roman Emperors, who after Nero held the Empire to wit Vespasia^, Titus, Galba,
Otho, Vitellius, by the one that was when S. John wrote, Domitian, by him that
was to come shortly after, and to continue but a short time, Nerua Traiaenus.
The vanity of this conceit needs no refutation; Viegas relates it as the
opinion of Victorinus and utterly rejects it; yet himself, as if he were
hired to play the Popes fool, produces a far worse, which might make (to
use Master Fluds phrase) sobriety it self to smile. The grand Clarke after he
had (being thereunto enforced by evidence of truth) confessed, that by Babylon
and by the woman is signified Rome it self, and Romes Government; yea and for
further clearing of this same, shows that the Angel by the seven hills did
understand those hills, on which Rome stands to wit Palatine, Quirinall,
Auentine, Coelian, Viminall, Esquiline, Ianicular; yea, and that by these
seven hills seven Kings are signified; yet afterward coming to declare what
manner of Kings these seven are, he says, that by the seven kings are
signified the seven ages of the worldt he first from Adam to Noah, the Viegas
inter, pretation of the 7. Kings.
second from Noah to Abraham, the third from Abraham to Moses, the fourth from
Moses to David, the fifth from David to Christ, the sixth from Christ to
Antichrist, the seventh from Antichrist until the end of the world. Thus he:
what coherence courteous Reader betwixt the seven hills, on which Rome stands,
and the seven ages of the world, whereof five were welnigh past before the
walls of Rome were thought on? so that Rome could not well stand upon five of
them which were ruinated before her foundation stones were laid. I will not
loose time to dispute against this their idle conceit, common amongst them.

Yet I cannot (wishing my pen were able as a trumpet to sound in the ears of
all Christians) but observe, how Viegas the grand Ignatian, commenting upon the
17 of Viegas sect. 2.
Revelation, does most impiously blaspheme against Christ himself. This
profound Clerk, having showed in the beginning of the chapter, how by the
seven heads are signified (Omnes Reges Impij and Idosolatrae) all the impious
and idolatrous Kings; Toward the latter end of the Chapter, he dares to say,
that under the signification of the sixth King, Christ is signified. Now if by
the Angels interpretation, the seven Heads, Hills, and Kings, signify the
same things; what blasphemy for Viegas, to bring in Christ under the
signification either of Heads, Hills, or Kings? What is Antichristian Theology
if this be not? Who ever yet read in the Ancients, but that by the heads,
hills, and Kings in this place, such senses were to be gathered, which might
better fit Antichrist, then Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior: And who (that is
in his senses) can otherwise interpret these heads, hills, and Kings; then of
such as shall be serviceable to the Beast? who bears them, and of whom they
are parts and members? With what for head then, can they interpret Christ, and
his government by Christian Kings and Emperors, to be signified by the sixth
King? And if I mistake it not, there is a mere impossibility in it, for how
does the Angel say to S. John, that the sixth was when he wrote? Were there
then Christian Kings and Emperors, who ruled under Christ, and professed his
Regal authority? not any God wot. I am wearied in tracing of their follies;
let us then consider, what the true meaning of the Prophecy is, as it shall
please God to assist with his grace.

By clear consequence then of the Prophecy, agreeing to that which is
recounted in ancient and autenticall Histories, we are enforced by evidence of
truth, to interpret the seven Kings (signified by seven Hills of Rome) for
seven kinds and sorts of Governments; whereof five, to wit, of Kings, of
Consulls, of Dictatours, of Decemvires, of Tribunes, were past; the sixth, of
Emperors was then; the seventh, to wit, the usurped Regal rule of the Goshes,
was to succeed, but to continue for a short time. This being so, then by
inevitable consequence it is must needs follow, that the next Rome-Gouernment,
which succeeded the Imperial (which was and ruled whilst S. John wrote) and
the seventh, that of the Goths and Longobardes, but wounded etc. must be the
Antichristian government, after which we inquire. Here I demand in good
earnest of the Pontificians, what form of Rome-Gouernment succeeded the
Imperial, and that of the Goths, and by whose means? What? was it not
Papal? was it not by the Popes authority and power, pretending for the
effecting of the same, the Lambs Vicarian power? Of long time they pretended
an idle donation of Constantine, but the same being found to be (Palea) trash
and ille gitimate; the Anchor they afterward ever stuck unto, the horns they
ever leaned unto, are the Lambs, that is, the double power of the Lamb, of
government and doctrine for these horns and in respect of them it is, that
their Divines, Canonists, Friars, Ignatians, Monks, Summists do all (plenis
b^ccis concrepare Papae suprematum) with open mouths proclaim the Popes
absolute Imperial Government; as Roman; in Rome and which cannot be severed
from Rome: so that the Lambs horns, that is, the Lambs power is so fixed and
fastened to Rome, that it may not be removed thence. For this is a decree
amongst them more inviolable, then any Persian or Median law, that whosoever is
Bishop of Rome has the Lambs horns, the Lambs power, and no other Bishop
whatsoever can wear the same horns, have the Lambs power, no not though the
whole multitude of Christians would endeavor the same; so that the Lambs
horns are the Popes, and none but his. Now that the Pope did give life to the
image of the Beast after the sixth and seventh head; and after the Beast was
wounded, either by the Goths and Vandalls, or by the Henry's and Frederikes
(if we should so interpret) it is confessed, and thus it may be made manifest.

First, in that he has by his double pretended Vicarian power of the Lamb,
brought himself and his Papal Seat to that Imperial and Monarchical form
of Government, According to B^ronins judgment no Prince
which for extent and absolute manner of command, passes those of old Rome,
of the first Beast, and ought to be styled a Monarch but the Pope. Ad ann.
1097. n: 30. 31.
his heads: yea he causes all those to be killed, which will not worship this
his supremacy, which is no other then a very Image and representation of Romes
former government: so lively, that they may both seem to have been spit out
of the Dragons mouth at the same time. But if we will not interpret the Pope
by his pretended Vicarian power, to have made the Image of the first beast to
speak in himself, and in his own Papal Imperial government; then secondly
we may understand it thus, that he makes an Image of the first beast to
speak, in such seeming Image-Emperours, as he has substituted upon the
wounding of the beast in one of his heads; I said Image-Emperours; for they
are no other then Images and shadows of Imperial dignity; for so much as
concerns Roman Emperial dignity or the command over Rome: I said truly they
are no other then Images, and shadows for so much as concerns Romes
sovereignty. For what are these Emperors else then Homines Papae, The Popes
liege men? are they not to be destituted at his pleasure; and to be instituted
at his pleasure? so that none of them can speak Romanus Augustus, until they
shall have renounced all right and title to Rome, and to Saint Peter's
Patrimony, as they speak. But for my part I cannot think that the Popes making
of the Image of the Beast to speak, is to be understood thus; for there are
some strong reasons against it, which yet are for the former. First, the
Prophet says, that the Apoc. 13.
False-prophet should cause all to be killed, who would not worship the Image
of the beast; the which as it has been plentifully accomplished, upon such as
have denied his Supremacy and Papal government: so we do not find that he
has been so careful to cause any to be killed for denying the dignity of his
nominall Emperors. It is apparent he keeps them up only to cloak his
Antichristianisme, which was not to appear before the remoouing of the
Imperial dignity from Rome; so that Apoc. 13. 15.
he labors still tooth and nail to uphold some nominall Emperors, lest the
ignominy of his Antichristianisme, should be more lively discovered. Apoc. 13.
16.


Secondly we find, that all both great and small, free and bound, are to
profess subjection to the Image of the Beast; the which as it was never
fulfilled touching subjection to his nominall Emperors either of the Franckes
or Germans; so it is most fully completed in the Roman Image-monarchie of
the Pope where it is an Article of faith, that all Creatures are bound under
pain of forfetting Bonif. vnam sanctam, de maioritate and obedientia.
salvation, to be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

Thirdly we find, that the ten Kings, which had not received power in the
Prophets time, but were to receive the same presently upon the dissolution of
the beast; we find I say, that these ten Kings were to give their power unto
the beast, whose wound was healed, and whose Image was made, until the words
of God were fulfilled. Now as this has never been accomplished toward their
nominall Emperors, who have scarsly in Germany, (for without Germany they are
sans terre) a few free commonwealths at their command; so it has been most
perfectly completed in the Roman Papal State, where just at the very time,
when the Pope made the Image of the beast to speak in his Papal government;
those ten Kings, which came out of the same Empire with him upon the
dissolution of the heads, gave their power unto him; subiecting their thrones
and their kingdoms to his command. And this exposition seems more clear, if
we do withal consider, that these Kings which were at the first her deuoutes,
were afterward to fall into so great disliking of her, that they would by
degrees make her desolate, eat her flesh, and in the end consume her with
fire; the which how in part it is already performed, the conditions of
England, Denmark, Sweueland, Scotland etc. do declare and make manifest: For
as the Countries with their Sovereigns, were at the first together with all
other kingdoms of the west subjected to the Pope; so now they are become his
fatal enemies. And here we are not (for further confirmation) to leave
unconsidered, how the subjection to the Pope when he made the Image of the
Beast to speak, was so universal that all kinreds and Nations were subject to
his power, as it is described in the 13. of the Revelation, yea they were with
him to fight against the lamb and to overcome the lamb, that is to take away
as it were from open view and knowledge the true and entire profession of
Christianity; which accordingly happened, as it is manifest; and the Papists
themselves do glory, that all Kings and kinreds, all Nations and Kingdoms,
were then subject at lest, to the Pope, when he first came to make more
special use of his universal Supremacy; which was upon the decay of the
beast, as is most manifest. And as his extent grew then on by degrees to be
universal; so by degrees as by experience it is evident, it hasteneth to be
confined within Saint Peter's pretensed Patrimony; Lord Jesus say Amen.

There is a third special miracle, which some Pontificians would gladly for
the clearing of the Pope ascribe to Antichrist; It is, that Antichrist should
feign himself dead, and by the Art of the Devil should raise himself up
again, which as yet say they none of the Popes have done; ergo they are not
Antichrist. Alas good Sirs, into what plunges are you driven? your Viegas with
many other of yours, does for very incongruitie of the miracle relect the same,
and how filly the conceit is, it thus appears: For first, the Prophet does
not say that the Beast was wounded, but that one of his heads was (quasi
occisum) as it were slain, by which we must of necessity understand, one of
the Kings, and Kingly governments expounded in the 17. of the Revelation, to
have been so near utter overthrowing, that it seemed dead; and yet was raised
again. Does not your vulgar reading expressly say, (plaga mortis eius curata)
the wound of death was cured; that is, a mortal wound was cured; but it says
not, he was revived after he was dead. Again, how incongruous is your
Bellarmine, and your Rabbis in their declaration? who say, that Antichrist
shall feign himself dead, and yet should be raised up, by the power of the
Devil? What Sirs? if Antichrist do but counterfeit, and dissemblingly shut
his eyes, what need shall he then have of the Devils Art, to raise him up
again? Again, what falsaries are those, who say Antichrist counterfeits his
wound, when as the holy Ghost says expressly, that one of the Beasts heads was
as it were slain? that the wound was (plaga mortis) a mortal wound, that the
wound was cured? And all the world admired after the beast? but seeing our
Adversaries, would needs hereout draw an argument, to clear their Pope; let
us endeavor out of the true meaning of the same, to show him to be Antichrist:
For clearing of which:

We must understand according to the exposition of the Angel himself to S.
John in the 17. Chapter, by the head, which was wounded, one of the seven
Kings; and so by comparing the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. verses of the 13. Chapter,
with the 8. and 11. verses of the 17. Chapter, we shall clearly find, that
the King or kingly state wounded, must probably be that, under which Saint
John wrote his prophecy; which being so, I do in good earnest demand of the
Pontificians, by what Rome-gouernment succeeding after the Emperial was the
wound cured? wounded as the 7. but recured as the eighth? for so says the holy
Ghost; And the beast that was, and is not, Apoc. 17. 11.
even he is the eight, and is of the seven, and goes into perdition. Now I
demand in good earnest, what Rome-gouernment, other then that of the Emperors,
has been wounded as it were to death, and yet recured again? what mortal
wound can be better thought upon (then either that of the Goths and
Longobardes? or that of the Henry's, and Frederikes) if we think of that of the
Goths and Longobardes, clear it is the wound was cured by the Popes, by their
means and procurations, and for their own good and their reviving again.

But what if a man would leave the former, and understand this wounding, of
those wounds, which your If we make the Pope the seventh head then we are to
take him ruling Rome with his intermixed horns of the Lamb at Constatines
relinquishing the same.
Papal Rome-gouernment received from the Henry's and Frederikes, in your
Alexanders and Gregory's, and make them the 7. head? for then were your Popes
brought so low upon their knees, that they seemed dead, yet (see the Fate of
Rome for reigning) on a sudden they were so revived, raised up, and their
deadly wounds healed, that one of them, Gregory the 7. made Henry the 4.
dance his leisure three days and nights bareheaded and barefooted at Canusium:
the other Alexander the 3. set his foot upon the neck of Frederike
Barbarossa, in the sight of all Venice at Saint Marks Church door; and
thereupon it was that the whole world admired after the Beast, that was and is
not; that was the eight and is of the seven, Apoc. 17. 8.
and yet is not, because six of his heads are quite abolished; and yet is in
the seventh and in the eight. For my part I refer this to be censured by the
more learned, I have called Antichrist both of the seven and the eight: of the
seven because in his Papal-spirituall Monarchy, whilst the Goths ruled, he
next succeeded the Imperial, in which he was wounded afterward; but his
wound being cured, he so trampled down the Henry's and Frederikes, and all
succeeding Emperors, that he joined the Scepter and the keys together. And
whereas before he pretended by virtue of the lambs horns, that is Christ's
Vicarian power, to be absolute and supreme in spiritualls, he was so revived
and animated by the curing of his deadly wounds; that since he has challenged
an absolute Monarchy both in spiritualls and temporalls; so that by this
means we have an eighth Beast (Antichrist in his perfection) which was of the
Gregory dares to call him that challenges to be universal Bishop Antichrist
Greg. epist. 76. lib. 4.
seven; of the seven for his spiritual Supremacy and universal Episcopacie
in spiritualls in time of the Goths: Eighth for his Monarchical and Imperial
Papacy in temporalls; In the first he pretends, and pretended like the lamb
with the lambs power; In the second he roareth like the Dragon, his lambe-like
pretenses sound in all their pulpits; his Dragon-like roares, have filled all
Kingdoms and provinces; so that he has fought against the Saints, and for a
time has overcome them. These points though clear in themselves, yet Apoc.
13. 7.
may seem dark and obscure unto us; but let the Intelligent Reader compare
this my discourse, with the Events of things, and accordingly judge. That which
I have here briefly set done, I shall (if God please, and occasion do require
it) more amply declare and confirm; and so I come to my second ground of my
reasons, which is the general qualities, and properties of Antichristian
miracles, delivered in the holy Scriptures; out of which I argue thus.

CHAP. XI. Wherein is examined the general properties of Antichrists miracles.
FIrst, out of the greatness and quantirie of them, they Mathewes Math. 24.
24. Mark. 13. 22.
Gospel and other passages of Scripture; and the joint voice of the Ancients
do deliver as much. Now which of the Pontifician, can or will deny their
miracles to be many? which of them does not exult and insult against us for the
greatness of them? does not Master Floode here, both for number and
excellency compare them, with those of the primitive Church? this point is
clear; I go on.

Secondly, I argue out of another condition of Antichristian (mendaeia and
falsa) lying and false. The miracles of Antichrist are called in Scripture
mendacia, lying, not because all of them shall be fictious or forged; nor
because all of them shall indeed tend to the persuasion of lies; but also in
this respect they are called mendacia, mendacious, lying, because many of them
shall be counterfeit; for Antichrist and See Bellar. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 15. 2
Thessal. 2. 10.
his, amongst many great miracles they shall do, shall also pretend many false
and counterfeit ones, (in fallacia erroris) in the deception of error, says
the Apostle. And I suppose, there is no Pontifician will deny this; so
likewise no ingenuous Pontifician can deny, but that there is store of
mendacious and counterfeit miracles related by the Legendaries of their Church.
Many are the wonders See Canus Lec: lib. 11. cap. 6. Lira in Dan.
which are recounted in the book of Franciscan Conformities: but how many of
these are derided, and scorned by many learned of that Church? Great are the
miracles and many, which our late Ignatians do father upon their Founder
Ignatius Loiola; but small esteem The great superstitious Vicount of Sussex
reading the tale of S. Francis his preaching to the Wolf at Engubium laughed
heartily at the same.
is made of them, either by the Benedictines, or by White or Black Friars, and
by their superstitious Allies, in name the Iesuattes. I my self have heard
diverse laughing at the Ignatians policy, who so long after the day, begin to
set Ignatins his miracles upon the stage; the reason doubtless is, lest if
they had produced them sooner, some might have been found living who knew the
Soldier, and could have reproved their forgeries. The matter is plain, I need
not stand upon it, for there would be no end if any should stand to relate an
infinity of lying narrations, which many of themselves deride.

Thirdly, I argue out of the effect of Antichristian miracles, many shall be
seduced by them, yea the Matthew: 24.
very elect if it were possible, and that for them the whole Mar. 13. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 10. Apoc. 13.
world should admire after the Beast, the which how it is accomplished in the
Roman Synagogue, (where there is such a confluence of people of all Nations
after their miracles; where all the world admireth the Roman Papacy, for the
number and greatness of their miracles) who sees not, who observes not?

Fourthly, I argue out of the manner, by which the Antichristian false Prophets
do their miracles, to wit, Many says Christ (speaking of them) shall come in
my Matthew: 24. 5. 23. 24. Marc: 13. 6. 21. 22. Luc: 17. 22. 23.
name, to wit, as pretending his faith, his power: for by no means it can be
understood, in that sort as the Pontificians commonly expound it; that is, that
many shall come in the name of Christ pretending themselves to be Christ, and
denying Christ himself. For if such a thing were prophesied by Christ, how
could his infinite wisdom have added, that the very elect should be in great
danger to be seduced by them? What? are the elect such inconstant reeds, to be
shaken with that which every common Christian at the first sound would
abhor, hate and detest? No, no sir, Antichrist and his shall come in the name
of Christ, pretending his doctrine; they shall make an apostacy from Christ,
yet not profess the same by denying Christ, their working shall be as the
Apostle terms it (mysterium iniquitatis) a mystery 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 10. See
Apoc: 7. 5.
of iniquity (in fallacia erroris) in the deception of error. Now manifest it
is, that the miracles done in the Pontifician Church, are pretended to be done
in the name of Christ, and therefore it is, that so many are seduced by them;
therefore it is, that when some Christians of the reformed Churches do hear
of the same, they do as it were in some sort begin to stagger, to hear that
Rome does flourish with the glory of miracles, which they pretend to be done
only in the name of Christ. This indeed is a dangerous block, at which the
very Elect might be in danger to stumble; were they not vpheld by him who has
promised that no man shall take his sheep Ioh: 10. 28.
out of his hands.

Fifthly, I argue out of an universality of Antichristian the whole world must
admire after Apoc: 13. 13.
them; they must be done (in conspectu hominum) in the fight of men and view of
the world. Now the same is punctually performed, or pretended to be performed
by the Pontificians; who have in all such Countries as obey their Pope, some
Miracle-Sanctuaries; as for example, at Burgis, Compostella, Montserrato in
Spain; at Lile, Sichem, Arras, Mechline, Hall in the Low Countries; at Rhemes,
Shallon in France: And in England, time was, we had the Ladies of Ipswich,
Walsingham, etc. It boots not to add of other Countries, the point is clear.

Sixthly, I argue out of the specialtie of the Ministers Matthew: 24. 24. Mar.
13. 22. Luc: 17. 2 Thessalonians: 2. Apoc: 9. 13.
but they are to be his special Deuoutes, and as it were sworn slaves. Now in
Popery it is most clear, that their Miraculists, are Monks, Friars, Abbots
or Bishops, such as are by a more special bond and link more then ordinary
people or Priests, tied fast in slavery and subjection to the Sea of Rome.
This point is clear, so clear, that I undertake there is not any of their
Church (if zealous) who will dare to attribute the ordinary working of
miracles to any that are not, at least in profession devoted to their Holy
Father. For this cause they cannot endure to hear that Ignatius the blessed
Martyr and Patriarch of Constantinople, did any miracles, because he did oppose
against the Popes, arrogating jurisdiction over the Churches of Bulgarie.

Seventhly, I argue out of the circumstance of the The time is pointed out unto
us in holy Scriptures, at 2 Thessalonians: 2. Apoc. 13 and 17.
the dissolution of the Roman Empire, and at the setting up, and in the time of
another Monarchical Rome Government in steed thereof; which, that it is now
accomplished, See above in my first ground of reasons.
who sees not? The Roman Emperor being a mere Nominall, a very shadow of
the Imperial dignity resting in the Bishop of Rome, who is his absolute Lord,
the Emperor his Substitute; the Pope the Liege, the Emperor the Liegeman; and
has in the opinion of the Pope, his Purpuratts, and other, no more
Sovereignty in Rome, then the King of Spain has.

And hereout arises another consideration of time, to wit, that at the very
time when Antichrist his ministers shall do many and great miracles, then the
true Christians shall work either none at all, or else so few, that in
comparison of the great multitudes, that Antichrist See above saepe. and Greg.
lib. 33 and 34. mor. in Job.
christ and his shall do, they will seem none at all. Now clear it is, that
the Popish Church abounds with wonders, and does with insultation twit and
reprove the reformed Churches for want of the same; and this is a very express
Antithesis or opposition, which is to be betwixt the true Christians and the
false in the time of Antichrist, Chrys^st. vel Author. imperf. in Mat. hom. 49.
Greg. sapissime.
the false shall exult in their miracles, which to the true servants of Christ
shall be matter of trial and probation. and hereout,

Eighthly, I argue thus. In the time of Antichrist such Apec: 13. 2 Thessalonians: 2.
and false Prophets shall egregiously exult. Contrariwise, the true Christians
shall recurre only unto the Scriptures, rest only upon Christ's promises and
assurance of their faith, according as S. John says, Hic est fides and
patientia Sanctorum: Here Saints must use their Apoc. 13. 10.
faith and patience. This is now clearly accomplished in the Popish Synagogue,
the disciples whereof are greedy and most eager after miracles; which appears
by their most tedious Pilgrimages. Contrariwise, those of the reformed
Churches, are very well contented to want the same, relying only upon the
assurance of their faith in Christ and his promises, delivered in sacred
Scriptures, and confirmed by such miracles as are there recommended. and so
hereout,

Ninthly, I argue, that in Antichrists time, those that (fascinations erroris)
2 Thessal:
by the spirit of error, they would be ashamed to be so ouer-credulous of
every tale that is told them. I confess ingenuously, when I was amongst them,
and was ouer-zelous for all doctrinall points of Popery, yet I should
sometimes be amazed, to observe such an ouer-credulitie in many of them; such
an admiring after new wonders; and I was not sometimes without trouble of
mind, and some scruple, to consider how both men and women, otherwise of
honest conversation and zealous profession in that kind, would give credit to
such trifles, as I knew in my knowledge and reading, to be mee^ ^a^ities and
fables, and so reputed of, by their great Clerks. When I considered these
things, then I could not divine from what Spirit such illusions might arise, to
observe the best and most zealous of that profession to be commonly most
inueigled in that kind; but now I observe it was no other then what S. Paul
has foretold, that God should permit such to believe 2 Thessalonians: 2. 11. Apoc: 13.
3.
lies; and that as S. John has foretold, they should admire after the Beast
and his wonders.

I could here add very many particulars, especially of English Papists who are
most prone and inclinable to believe any tale that is told them of any of their
martyrs, witness the fabulous narration of the shining face of Friar Buckley,
upon London Bridge; as also of the miraculous stopping and staying of the horse
that drew the hurdle, witness the prodigious standing of a pixe with an
host-Christ in it, upon a table in a Chamber, A purseuant searching the chamber
round about, and yet could not see the God. Witness the glorious end of
mistrisse Line taken in Fetter lane and executed some 15. years since.
Witness their many miraculous escapes of some of their Priests, as they
pretend; witness Doctor Norris his impassible Agnus Dei that the fire would
not touch, etc.

Thus I have clearly (though briefly) fastened all the general qualities and
conditions of Antichristian miracles recounted in holy Scriptures upon the
Popish, so entirely and fast, that I dare undertake neither you master Flud
nor any other shall be able to remove them. I undertake further that all other
circumstances of the same recounted in Scripture will easily and with great
facility be justly applied to your Popish miracles. And so I come to examine
some special passages of sacred Scripture, by which as by a line of truth, we
are led to the finding out of Antichristian miracles; and excepting two I will
especially examine some that are not much looked into by others; all I cannot
stand to examine, yet this I confidently add, there is not any one passage of
Scripture in which there is mention made of Antichrist or of his ministers,
which may not be applied and fitly be laid upon the Pope and his, and so
consequently all the adjuncts and properties of them, will in like sort adhere
to him and his.

CHAP. XII. Wherein is examined a Prophecy of Christ in the four and twentieth
of S. Matthew.
THE first place I produce out of S. Matthew, where Mat. 24 26.
it is most expressly foretold by our Savior, that the Antichristian false
Prophets, which should do great signs and wonders, should also teach Christ
to be (in penetralibus) in penetralls, in secrets: the which prophecy as it is
most fitly and necessarily fulfilled in the Pope and his Prophets, so by
inevitable consequence it follows that their miracles are those, which are
foretold by Christ and his Apostles, to be Great, Many, Mendacious,
Antichristian.

Now for clearing of this place, and to prove that it does punctually concern
the Papists; I must entreat the Reader to bear with my prolixitie: I confess
ingenuously I do herein undertake a hard province. And Pet. mart l^c. Class.
4: lec: 10.
although no man (that I know) has with any examination so commented upon this
Text, as I understand and take it; yet Peter Martyr, Calvin, and Mousieur
Plessis, Calvin.
do give a touch and glance at the same, so sensing it as I do. And herein I
hope that I shall not be censured by any ingenious Christian of nouelty: for
although my Pless. de Sacrament. lib. 4. cap. 9.
such sensing of this place seem new, yet so long as it is (secundum rationem
fidei) according to the analogy of faith: so long as it is for the confirmation
of a received point of faith, and against idolatry; it cannot but be well
accepted of. I confess that it is new, (noua cudo sed vt vetera astruam) but
for the strengthening of a most ancient truth: let it at least be taken as an
occasion to move the learned, more narrowly to examine and sift this place; let
my reasons be weighed and censured as they shall be found by the vnpreiudicate
Reader.

For the declaration of this point that the Papists are here pointed at by
Christ, for their teaching of him (according to their transubstantiating
divinity) to be in secrets, penetralls, chests Tabernacles, etc. I am to make a
supposition out of S. Austen, which is received by them all; to wit, that the
sacred Scriptures are ever literally to be understood; according to the plain
and ordinary sense of the words, whenever the same does not contain any
absurdity, nor imply any impossibility, as the literal understanding of this
place does not; but clearly declares unto us, a Popish practice daily acted in
their Churches.

The ancient expositors of S. Mathews Gospel, either the primo primi, or
secundo primi, as I may so call them, who lived in the purer times of the
Church; Because in their days this prophecy of Christ was not complete (for
before transubstantiation was hatched, the secret and mystical presence of
Christ in secrets, and private chambers, was not preached nor believed) do
understand this text mystically, of the private conuenticles and assemblies of
heretics, and schismatickes, pretending Christ's Church to be with them; which
yet cannot stand, for this one or two instances if there were no other in this
passage: first, our Savior should not then have delivered any special
property and condition of the great Antichristian Synagogue, which was to be
universal, not to be confined within any one kingdom, which yet that he does;
all, yea all, and of all sides do ingenuously confess.

Again, if the prophecy were so to be interpreted, of the mystical and
spiritual presence of Christ in private places, then it would most of all
concern the true Church of Christ; which in the time of Antichrist according
Apoc. 12. 6. and 13. 7.
to the sense of all and of all sides, is to fly into the desert, to live
obscurely and hiddenly as welnigh overcome; yea it would most nearly have
touched the Roman Church her self, in the days of her purity, when she made
the mount Soract without, and the Cripts within Eusebius. hist. vita Siluestri.
the City, to be her chiefest Sanctuary, and Assyle against the fury of those
times.

There are some, who think that our Savior did in this his prediction point
at Theudas mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, or Judas the Galilean or such
like; Acts 5. 36. 37.
but their mistaking is not worthy of confutation, for besides that Theudas was
at least twenty years before Christ's preaching; so all circumstances of the
text do euince, that the prophecy cannot be interpreted of any so base and
contemptible leaders: no no, Christ points unto us Antichrist the great and
his false Prophets.

Here by the Readers patience, I will show how Maldonat the grand Ignatian
shuffleth this text over with a very short cut; as though he were surprised
(examining the same) with some fit of a feare-feauer, his words upon it are
these, and only these, Posuit duo pro omnibus etc. Christ put (says he) or
mentioned only two contrary places for all, the desert, and the Penetralls;
that is, the inwardest and most retired part of the house, that he might
signify in what manner soever, in what habit soever, in what place soever
another Christ should come, he should not be believed; further to examine and
search of the desert, and Penetralls it is not the part of a sober Interpreter.
Thus Maldonat: most of which his words, especially those, in what habit soever,
in what place soever, in what manner soever, if they were thoroughly examined;
they would make little for the Popish Gospel of Christ, under the habit of
bread in a mystical manner, but real in their Boxes, Pixes, Eucharist-arkes:
but omitting them all, I especially observe those words of his, It is not the
part of a sober Interpreter to examine more of the desert and Penetralls, then
his Father-hood bestowed upon us. What he feared, I will by Gods assistance
perform; which done the reader may easily observe, that this devise of
Maldonat was (ex conscientia imbecillitatis) from a conscience of his own
weak cause; he wilily observing, that if the same text, were narrowly sifted,
and examined, it would utterly overthrow their desert-pilgrimages,
pixc-adorations, his box and Eucharist-worshippes. For clearing of this point,
we are diligently to examine, what is the genuine and natural sense of the
word (penetralibus) secrets, in this place.

The latin word, according to their vulgar edition signifies (as also
Maldonat confesses) intimam maximeque reconditam domus partem, the most
inward, and retired part of a house; but seeing Saint Mathewes Gospel was
first written in Hebrew (which edition is either lost or of doubtful
authority) and after, it was translated into the Greek tongue, either by
Saint Matthew, or Saint James, or Saint John as the ancients herein are diversely
conceited: Let us consider diligently what is the native signification of the
Greek word used in this place. (...) then (...).
which is the Greek word, has in Authors diverse significations; yet taken in
any of them in this place, it Stephanus in These. Scapula in dict.
makes against the Papists Idolatry. For it is indifferently taken to signify
either first, a secret closset or close and locked parlour; or secondly, a very
hutch, chest or ampere, such as victuals are usually put in and preserved; or
thirdly, a coffer, Arc or box, such as treasure is laid up and conserved in:
this is clear; because as the learned know; that of Stephanus is most true
((...) pro (...) passim See Stephanus his Thesaurus and his Greek Concord:
obuium) (...) for (...) is every where to be found and very common in Greek
Authors; now that the later word is taken in the three significations above
mentioned by me, it is very manifest; and so as clear, that the first is used
in the same significations; and so in this place (...) (in penetralibus) in
penetralls, in secrets, may be taken in any of those significations; but
doubtless it is most clear, that the very signification intended by Christ,
is, that which we see now most agree with the accomplishment of the Prophecy
amongst the Papists; who in the three significations of the word, do teach
Christ to be amongst them; either as a spiritual food and viction, in their
tabernacles, amperes ^iutches; or as a mystery in their locked closets private
Chappells; or as a treasury said up in boxes, borne in pixes. carried about
them as most rich ornaments and treasures. And to think, that Christ in this
place did aim at this their Pseud^christianisme, I am induced thereunto, by
this one reason if there were no other; that seeing the pseudochristian
Synagogue, was to teach and does teach (to the perdition of innumerable souls
and high contempt of Gods Majesty) a corporal, carnal presence of Christ
upon earth in Arkes, secret clossets, boxes, coffers, there to be eaten; yea
sensibly to be eaten, as Berongorius his recantation has it: It cannot be
thought, but that Christ would in some place foretell the same; and no where
more likely, then in that very place, in which so many other properties,
practices, and conditions of the great Antichrist and his are foretold, as in
this Christ answers his disciples question concerning his own coming made
verse. 3. See Luc. 17. 22. 23. Closets are in the sense and use of all nations
not any places for any conversation, but to preserve and keep any daintiest
necessaries for man's use, they are reputed secret storchouses.


My first reason that these words of Christ are literally to be understood,
against some who would pretend to teach a secret corporal presence of Christ
himself (not another Christ) upon earth; I frame out of a double reason of
Christ himself, which he makes against them. First, believe them not (says
Christ) if any shall say behold he is in the penetralls, in the secrets (or as
the Remists interpret it, in closets.) For at the lightening comes out of the
East, and shines into the west, so also shall the coming of the son of man
be; thus argues Christ: now as clear as the very heavens it is, that this of
Christ is to be understood of Christ's corporal, and real coming in person to
judgment: which granted, then our infinitely wise Savior, (who without
blasphemy may not be impeached of an impertinent discourse) must needs be
thought to oppose this his public coming in person against some secret, real
presence of him, before that time, pretended by the false Prophets. For if he
should have spoken this only against the private Conuenticles of Heretics and
Schismatikes, pretending his Church, and spiritual or mystical presence to be
amongst them; then shall he be thought thus to argue: If any false Prophet,
shall teach you any false doctrine, or seek to draw you to any private
Conuenticle, believe them not, for my coming at the latter day to judgment
shall not be secret, but public, in glory; like as the lightning which shines
from the East, and appears unto the West: and shall such manner of arguing
beseem the infinite wisdom of the Father? who dare say so? but understanding
the same as the truth, and the Text requires, then is the reason most divine,
befitting the infinite wisdom of God, thus. If any shall teach you, that I am
in any secret place, or desert, here or there, for you to make pilgrimage unto
me, or to worship and adore me in your private closets, or in the retiredst,
and most private part of the house, (my house is the Church or Temple) believe
them not; for I shall not be corporally and presentially (thus I interpret
according to Christ's ordinary power and providence) present upon earth, until
like as the lightning appears from the East unto the West, so also I shall
appear in Glory and Majesty, filling with glory the heavens even from East
to West.

And this exposition as consequent, is confirmed by the comparison or second
reason, which our Savior makes against the false Prophets, thus: Wheresoever
the dead body is, there will the Eagles be gathered together. Matthew: 24. 28.
Touching which saying of our Savior, all interpretations being seriously
weighed; that of Chrysostom with Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
many of the Ancient and modern writers, will be agreeing unto the truth, to
wit, that like as the dead body being openly exposed in the fields, the Eagles
by natural instinct do repair to the same to prey thereon; so likewise where
he himself should be in presence, there should not be wanting multitudes of
Angels, assisting and ministering unto him, and by spiritual contemplation
feeding on him: So that our Savior argues thus, If any false Prophets shall
teach, that I shall be obscurely in some hidden manner upon earth, in Coffer,
Celler, or Desert, believe them not; for like as the carcass is never without
Eagles, so for hereafter my presence after my ascension, shall never be without
multitudes of Angels, assisting and ministering unto me. And surely if we
Act: 7. and 9. 2 Cor: 12. Apoc: 1. and 2. and saepe.
search the Scriptures we shall find, that those extraordinary apparitions,
which our Savior made after his ascension, to some upon earth, were never but
of himself, as in glory; never without the presence and attendance of Angels.
And so I come to another reason of this my exposition.

My second Reason I make thus: Our Savior in this Behold I have told you
before. Matthew: 24. 25.
happen before his coming to judgment, and by which they should be armed
against the wyles and tyrannies of Antichrist. Now signs that they may be
according to their nature and kind, significant, they must be facill and easy
to be understood, and must be taken as they sound, unless it be otherwise
expressed. And for this cause, as all other signs in this chapter, delivered
by our Savior, are literally to be understood (as the Pontificians themselves
do interpret them) so neither is there any reason, why this passage should not
be also literally understood, it being of so great consequence, as concerns
the perdition and salvation of many souls.

And to add a confirmation to this reason; if these words of Christ were only
to be understood mystically, against the assemblies of Heretics and
Schismatikes, challenging Christ's Church, and spiritual presence to be only
with them; I cannot see for my part, what certainty for the faithfulls
instruction, might be gathered out of this sign, which yet is the importanst
of all the rest. For, is it not most evident by a never intermitted experience
since Christ's time, that every several Congregation of Heretics or
Schismatikes, as it challenges to it self, the power and mystical presence
of Christ, so it obiecteth to all other, the lack of the same? yea and the
most Orthodoxe Church of Christ it self, has her ebbs and flows; and then
was she purest, when in criptts, desorts, secret woods, and holes she made
her assemblies. Therefore to preach Christ present in secrets, in this sense,
cannot be a note, property, or sign of the great Antichristian Synagogue, as
by all it is supposed and granted to be, and is by the faithful to be taken
according to Christ's forewarning.

A third reason I deduce, out of the energie and property of certain words
here used by our Savior. I observe Behold, thrice repeated, which as it is an
Aduerbe of Admiration, so it is always demonstratiue of some singular matter
worthy admiration, worthy belief, as is clear throughout the Scriptures: So
that, as S. John Baptist pointing the son of God to his disciples, said,
Behold the Lamb of God, see the Lamb of God, Ioh: 1. 36.
etc. so these false Prophets, do pretend to inuit their disciples and
followers to behold and see Christ in the deserts, secrets, closets, etc. which
is egregiously acted by the Papists. I observe also, the Aduerbs here and
there, which ever do design some special circumstances of place, as through
the Scriptures it is apparent; and if to them we adioyne the specialties of the
places, in the secrets, in the desert, the force of the Preposition in, and the
verb substantive is, (He is in the desert, He is in the penetralls) my intent
will more easily appear, that the false Prophets do pretend some secret
corporal presence of Christ, requiring faith and belief, and sigh also, with
beholding of him; which is clearly con firmed by our Saviors doubled precept
and charge, believe them not and go not out; as if he should say, the false
prophets will inuit you both to go out and to behold, and to believe, that
is, to see me in that secret manner as they shall preach, and yet also to
believe the hidden mystery of my presence which they teach: but look to it,
behold I have foretold you, neither go out to see me in any mystical or
hidden form or shape, nor yet believe their mysterious divinity teaching my
carnal presence tending and leading to Idolatry.

My fourth reason, that this prophecy is thus literally penetralls, secrets,
boxes, closets, etc. A prophecy until it be fulfilled, is as a riddle, or a
book sealed; but once fulfilled it is no longer a hidden, but a manifest
truth. Now that it is completed in the Roman Synagogue, it is over manifest:
For this cause they cry out daily; Behold he is in the Tabernacles of our
Churches; Behold he is in the Penetrals and secrets of our Sepulchers; Behold
he is in our Eucharist-arks; and miraculous Hosts at Meclines, at Brussels,
etc. Behold he is in our locked Coffers, and arkes; borne upon the backs of
white ambling Palfreyes, preceding our Holy Father when he makes his
remoucalls: Behold he is in our secret Chapels, locked Coffers, private
closets; you must behold (cry they) the outward accidents, but believe the
inward mystery; the true and corporal presence of Christ; you must see and
believe, behold and admire.

And for the further clearing of this matter, and to confirm Al circumstances
of the prophecy fulfilled in the Papists.
that this point is fulfilled in the Roman congregation, I add some few
observations concerning diverse other, yea most circumstances of this prophecy.

First I observe, that these false prophets were for the confirmation of this
their Pseudo-Christianisme, to do many signs and wonders; so says Christ
(Dabunt signa and prodigia magna) they shall give great signs and prodigies;
Mat. 24 25.
So do the Papists; the case is clear. I proceed.

Secondly I observe, they should seduce many, so says Christ (seducent multos)
they shall seduce and deceive many; Mat. 24 11.
which is most fully accomplished in the Roman Synagogue; in which no one
point of doctrine, does more tie and bind their disciples, then this point;
Behold he is in the Penetrals, he is in our Church-tabernacles; For this
cause, if any man would endeavor to draw them from that confusion of errors,
they will ordinarily object thus; Alack you have taken from us Christ's true
corporal presence, and would feed us only with tropes and figures; how then
shall we come to you? how can we forsake Christ truly and corporally
present, and feed only upon your bread and wine, which you only have? Thus
they, and yet they do herein egregiously calumniate our Sacraments. For, for
as much as does concern (rem Sacramenti) the virtue and efficacy of the
Sacrament of grace, and of real communion of Christ by grace; we teach and
believe Christ's real presence, only we deny his carnal fleshly presence, and
their transsubstantiatiue divinity.

There have been heretofore some as Judas and Theudas; as Simon and Menander,
who called themselves Christ: and the Helcesaeans, as Theoderet writes of
them, taught two Christ's, the one in heaven, the other upon earth; and England
(in this most unhappy) has seen a most wretched Hacket, making himself
Christ; but these or few of these except Simo^, did any wonders or prodigies
for confirmation of their impieties; and further they no sooner appeared, but
they vanished away; together with their disciples: But this Graund Antichrist,
and his here spoken of, were so to prevail, that the world was to be
shortened, lest by their seducements, no flesh should be saved, Mat. 24. 24.
the very elect being in hazard to be withdrawn from Christ by them.

Thirdly I note, that these false prophets, were to seduce Go not out, Believe
it not, mentions tribulation, saying thus; after the tribulation of those
days, and Verse 29.
in the 21. verse before, aiming at the tribulation in these days, at least in
figure; he protests that the tribulation of them should be so great, as the
like had not been since the beginning of the world. Whereby he instructs his
faithful; that the elect who would not be drawn to believe their
speudo-Christ to be in secrets, closets, deserts, should for the same suffer
great tribulation; the which how it has been performed by the Romanists; the
Bohemian, French, English, Italian and Spanish Fire-immanities, with their
French, English and Dutch Masacres, acted or intended; do evidently complain,
and proclaim.

Fourthly I note, and gather out of our Saviors be here and there, up and
down, that is, in many hidden and secret places at once, and at the self same
time: which as it was never performed by any other; so it is punctually acted
by the Papists; who at the self same time do preach Christ to be in so many
places here and there even in one Church, that it is not possible for any of
their worshippers, if he will adore any one, but that he must at the same
time turn his back upon three or four other Christ's elevated here and there,
in the corners and Chapels of their Church; or reserved in the tabernacles of
their Church.

Further, it is not unworthy of observing, that our Savior specialising and
nominating the places in which these false prophets should teach his presence
to be; he never mentions City, Town, nor villages; but only the secrets,
Penetrals, closets, deserts; instructing us, that the presence which these false
prophets would teach of him, should be mysterious, mystical, and not such as
is joined with conversation amongst men. By all which, and more that might be
said, it is as clear as noone days, that whether we interpret the words
((...) in penetralibus) for in the secret closets, or for storehouses, or of
chests and cubbards, or for boxes and chests, to lay up treasure in, or for
arks or cellars; in all these significations, they do touch the Papists, who
in all these manners of places and secrets, do proclaim their Pseudo-Christ
to be, either as a spectacle to be beheld, or as a secret to be believed and
admired, or as a treasure to be sought after and visited, or as a Christ-God
to be adored and worshipped, with vows, sacrifices, inuocations, pilgrimages.
And so I conclude these my proofs; yet before I pass from this argument, I am
to answer some few objections, which may be made against this exposition; I
will answer only the chiefest, the rest will fall of themselves.

First it is objected, that our Savior in this prophecy, First objection
does foretell of some false prophets, which should come and deny him to be
the Messiah, and should teach another Christ:

This objection falls easily, by all that which I have Schismatickes and
Heretics, because they pretend Christ's Church, and spiritualll presence to be
only with them. For it is most evident, that all such have contended to have
Christ's true Church with them, and the true Church of that Christ who suffered
under Pontius Pilate, Christ Jesus our only Lord and Savior. Let Theophilact
in this point speak for all: Si venerint inquit Impostores, etc. Christ
Theophilact. in 24. Matthew.
says if Impostoures shall come, saying Christ is come, but is in the desert,
or is hid in some house, or in the promptuaries of the same, or in the more
inward places of it, be not deceived, for the coming of Christ, shall not
need any one to show the same, for it shall be manifest unto all, even as the
lightening is. Thus Theophylact agreeingly to our Saviors reasons, against the
false prophets in the 27. and 28. verses, which I have examined here before in
my first reason, and to that I refer my Reader. And in S. Luke our Savior
says, that the false prophets shall pretend to show the son of man. See S.
Luke 17. ver. 22. 23. 24.

Secondly it is objected thus; Christ fore prophesies Second objection.
of some false Preachers, who should teach him to be present amongst men, as
conuersing with them, in humane shape, though in secret, in clossets, or abroad
in the desert, but this makes nothing at all against the Papists, who teach
Christ only under the form of bread and wine (not in humane shape) to be
present in their boxes, clossets, penetrals: To this I answer diverse ways,
and each of them sufficient.

First, our Savior (to insist upon his express words) First Answer.
speaks nothing at all, touching his pretended conversation in humane shape
amongst men; neither does he utter any words, by which the same may be
gathered; he only foretells his faithful, that they should be invited by
certain false prophets, to behold him as present in penetrals, secrets or
closets, and this as we evidently gather in some admirable sort; requiring
faith. (Believe them not, says Christ) now I hope the Papists will not deny,
but that all this is fulfilled with their Christ in their Secrets, Closets and
Tabernacles; whereof Parsons was so Parsons against Reports of the right hon.
L. Cook. chap. 10. page 236.
well persuaded, that reioycingly he relates out of Walfingham, the answer of
King Henry the third of England, to King Lewis of France, called the Saint: For
whereas King Lewis said, he had rather hear many Sermons, then many Masses;
King Henry replied and said, that for his part, he had rather hear many
Masses, then many Sermons; and yields this reason, that he had rather see
his friend, then hear any man, though never so eloquently discoursing of him:
then I hope Christ is to be seen in the Popish Penetrals, though with a
behold, requiring belief and admiration.

Secondly, I answer; touching conversation; that Second Answer.
the Pontificians cannot deny, but for their parts there is conversation
betwixt themselves, and this their Christ; for they are presentially with him,
they see him, they handle him, they speak to him, they adorn him, they lock
him up, and carry him about, they walk to him, they watch with him and for
him, they cloth him and bear him; and they do all services to him, as to a
Christ present.

As for their Christ's part, I hope they will not deny, but that he knows
himself to be with them; that he hears them and their prayers, he sees
them and their gestures; he wears their ornaments and clothings, he does
secretly work with his graces in their souls, and does oftentimes many
miraculous and prodigious effects, and cures amongst them: is not this a kind
of conversation? yes doubtless, because it is of an Intelligent pretended
Christ, with his intelligent and understanding Deuoutes. If it be objected,
that their Christ does not speak unto them with vocal words, or sound of
mouth; alac, that is but one point of conversation, and the same may be
supplied by signs, and some motions and gestures, which the Priests make upon
him or about him, as well as a certain Gentlewoman at Chichester, was Mist. ^.
wonted by signs to understand, what sins a dumb boy of hers had done, and
so make for him a confession unto the Priest, who gave thereupon the boy his
absolution. M. Mang.
Howsoever it be, if there want no other point of conversation, then speech, it
can only be said, that the conversation is manke and defective, with a mute
Christ, but not; that it is none at all.

If they should say, they see him not properly, that cannot be; for standing
within their own principles; I dare undertake to show, that there is as intime
and entire a union betwixt the accidents of bread and wine, and Christ's body;
as there is betwixt man's soul and his body; so that as properly, and as
truly, as a man may be said to be seen by his outward shape, (although his
soul or his humane nature be not seen) so properly and truly may Christ in
their doctrine be said to be seen in the forms of bread and wine.

Thirdly, I answer, that although some readings have, Third answer.
that these false prophets should teach Christ to be in Paenetrals, as the
vulgar; and Closets, as the Remists; or private The Remists interpret closets.
I desire of them to know what humane conversation is used in closets, if they
cannot tell, let them but ask their Dames and Ladies for what purposes they
have closets: surely for their Penates, preserues, conserues, but by no means
for men to have any conversation with them, or with their Attendants. Matthew 24.
v. 3. Luke 17. 22. 23. 24.
Chambers; as other, in all which manner of places, the Papists teach Christ to
be: notwithstanding the Greek word used by the Translatour, does properly
signify a hutche, or ampire to put victuals in; or a chest to lock treasure
in, into which places if they would needs thrust Christ (as they do) what
conversation may be imagined to be had there, I refer to the Papists
themselves to consider: and so I shut up this discourse, making the application
of it thus: I having proved, that the Pope and his are the false prophets, of
which our Savior in this place does foretell: it follows by evident
consequence, that the miracles here spoken of, are also his and theirs, and so
consequently, devilish Antichristian; the contradictory proposition of that
which Mr. Flua delivers, and so the Christian Reader may observe, what
excellent divinity may be gathered out of this prophecy of Christ, by which he
answers the demand of his Disciples, concerning his coming, and the signs
thereof, by which his divine answer we have found out both the Popish
Psendo-Christianisme, in their teaching of Christ, to be in Penetrals and
Closets, and in their vaunting of their many, and great prodigious miracles

CHAP. XIII. Wherein is examined a prophecy of S. Paul.
THe second place, shall be that of S. Paul to the Thessalonians, where the
Apostle affirms in express 2. Thessal. 2.
terms, that he who shall extol himself above all that is called God, (the
Apostle says, not above all that is God, but above all that is called God) as
the Bishop of Rome does, that he, who should sit in the Temple of God; bearing
himself as if he were a God, (that is, challenging by usurping Tyranny,
absolute government of the same, and worship and adoration in the same) as the
Pope does; that he, who shall come upon the destruction of the Roman Empire
(as S. John speaks) as the Pope Austin. Chrysostom Hierom. Tertul. and alij.
of Rome does, that to him and his Ministers, shall be given all the power of
Satan, to work lying signs and wonders, for the seducing of such as perish.

This place is a clear prophecy concerning Antichrist and his and their
miracles, the place also is well known, having been discussed by sundry
Divines, who do generally apply the same to the Pope and his. A word or two,
how every jot and title of this Apostolical prediction fitteth his Holiness.

First of all, This Adversary is to come presently upon the desolation and
ruin of the Roman Empire, according to the common opinion of the ancient
Fathers, and Hiero. q. 11. ad algas. A^gust. de Ciuit. lib 20. cap 19. Tertull.
lib. de resurrectione Carnis alij plerique.
to succeed in the Latin or Rome-Gouernment. Behold then the Popes first
Mornarch of Rome, when the Roman Empire was dissolved into diverse Kingdoms:
Behold him acknowledged by the Canonists, professed by the Ignatians, believed
by the Papists, to have been for these 1000. years well-nie sole and only the
absolute independent Monarch of Rome, which is now accounted as part of Peter's
Patrimony; no part nor member neither head, nor arm of the Empire. Behold the
8. Monarch (which both Pontificians and Protestants interpret for Antichrist)
succeeding the seven in the same place; and like unto them in the manner of
beginning, and in form of government. I said in the same place, for all the
seven Kings being all heads of one Beast, are to rule and reign in the same
place: Clear it is that the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and
seventh did rule and reside in Italy, yea in Rome it self; there also must
the eight rule, presently upon the destruction of the former; which that the
Pope does and has Did. 63. cap. Ego Lodo: Adri^ in epist. ad Fred.
done he himself does glory thereof, and we willingly yield unto him that he
is (vltimus Rex Romanorum) the last King of the Romans, without the name of
Emperor.

Secondly, this mirabilist, must be a man of sin; If Man of sin.
a man of sin for his private conversation, the heavens themselves will
witness, what Portents and Prodigies for wickedness that meretricious See did
bear and bolster at and after the time of the dissolution of the Empire; (and
inimici nostri sunt testes) and our enemies themselves will be witnesses,
Baronius, Platina, Genebrard, Bellarmine, others.

But if he be called a man of sin, because by his wicked laws, and
tyrannical government, he should occasion sin in others, good God, what
nefand sins has his law for celibacy brought into their Church? What most
abominable Regicides, rebellions, treasons, civil commotions, prophanations of
Churches, ruin of Kingdoms, has the arrogant Supremacy of this Capitoline
Jove both in spiritualls and temporalls, brought into the Christian
commonwealth? Who can express the inundation of corruption, and presumption,
which his Dallila of indulgences, has bred in the Church of God? What tongue
can express the enormity of simony, of all sorts, which has overwhelmed the
Church by reason of their most vain pompous and magni^icent eleuating of their
Servants, and their purpured brethren, together with their carnal, and for
most part sottish Nephews? And what may we not think he may attempt by his
wicked laws, whenas Bellarmine their great Achilles dares thus to write? yea
in his book of recognitions (which should be the best but is the worst he ever
made) to wit, that the authority of the Pope is so great, Bellar. lib. 4. de
Pont. cap. 5. lib recog in recog lib. de Pont. cap 19. Isa. 5 20.
that though he command by his laws any things, that are vices, as virtues;
yet the whole Church is bound to obey the voice of their Pastor, and to
receive the laws as laws of virtues, thus he; incurring the malediction of
the Prophet accursing those who call evil good, and good evil.

By this we may justly infer, that as this B^atissimus Pater is the man of
sin, so is he also the son of perdition, because by his most sinful
laws, and superstitious commandes, he is cause of perdition to innumerable of
his own Congregation. I do not say all of his congregation, but I speak of
those which are formally his; subject to the Pope as he is Pope, and drinking
of the cup of his abominations. For it being so, that in his Church there yet
sounds that confession of Saint Peter, Math. 16. 16.
Tues Christus filius Deivius; Thou art Christ, the son of the living God; and
also that in it, there are the holy Scriptures (though not without many
corruptions) in it there is the Apostles Creed (though in some Articles
peruersly interpreted) in it the Sacrament of Baptism, (though not without
many superstitious circumstances) for substance thereof truly administered; In
it there are many Priests, and Preachers, who though in other points do teach
the Doctrines of that Church, yet they do oftentimes in the vehemency of
spirit, in their Sermons deliver, that salvation is only to be had by faith
in Jesus Christ, that no man is or can be without corruption of sin; with
many such doctrines to like purpose. It is not a thing impossible, yea it is
morally probable, that God has of his Elect in the very thickets of that
idolatrous Congregation, who being led by Gods spirit do willingly embrace
that only which is sound, and for the rest do groan under the burden of
humane traditions, herein not unlike to those seven thousand, or many of them,
of whom God spoke to the Prophet Elias, 1. Reg 19. 18.
Reliqui mihi etc. I have reserved to my self seven thousand who have not
bowed themselves to Baal.

To proceed, this man of sin, must exalt himself Exalt himself. Verse. 4.
above all that is called Good (The Apostle does not say all noted before that
is God, but that is called God) Now that the Bishop of Rome, is (supremum in
terris Numen) the supreme power or divinity upon earth, not only to direct
earthly Gods, and such as are called Gods upon earth (as Princes, Emperors,
Magistrates etc.) but further Psalm. 82. 1. 6. Exodus 22. 28. Ioh. 10. 34.
also by a coercitiue power, to punish them, to root up and to plant, to build
and to destroy; It is a very prime Principle and a most fundamental Article of
their Church. The Apostle says he must exalt himself above all that is called
God: which the Pope so singularly acts that I dare undertake, there is none
of all his Presidiaries shall be ever able, to show, that this his arrogant,
absolute, and unbounded Supremacy in temporalls and spiritualls, over Kings
and kingdoms, was yet ever given unto him by any general humane consent, no
not of his own Church, before he had exalted himself thereunto: no nor since
he has exalted himself. It is well known how Gregory the 7. was the first,
who ^oared out those ambitious Dictates of his own invention, by Verse. 4.
Dictat. Greg. 7. apud Bar: ann. 1175.
which he exalts himself above all that is called God upon earth, whose
spirit, those who have succeeded after him in the Panacy (as much as has lain
in them) they have imitated, and do as occasion requires put in practice. A
most honorable and gainefull merchandise doubtless, to be so universal a
Dictator over the whole world, that he shall be able to unking whom he shall
please, and to dispose of the Kingdoms of the world to whomsoever he shall
judge meet, that is, take from those who will not adore him, and give to those
who fall down Math. 4.
and worship him; as of late he attempted (ex plenitudine Bulla. Pij Quinti.
potestatis) out of the fullness of his power, to have deprived our most famous
Queen both of life and Kingdom, and to have given her Kingdom unto that
Monarch, who fell down and worshipped for it. And doubtless, our now dread
SOVEREIGN, (whom the Lord of heaven and earth be pleased ever to defend and
protect as the apple of his eye) may look for no other from Romes-Pope, and
his deuoutes, if God by his mighty arm do not cross their perfidious plots
and designements; I say plots and designements, for who will think, but that
both the Lion and the Bear sleep with their eyes open, expecting ever when
they may devour and how they may devour. Thus then it rests clear that the
Pope has exalted himself above all that is called God or worshipped.

To proceed he sits in the temple of God, showing himself as if he were
God (so do the Remists read this 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
place): By which words what else can fitly be understood, but that he shall
assume unto himself as God (that is, in Gods steed) the absolute and
independent government of the temple of God? that is the universal Catholic
Church? ouertopping all, by an unbounded Supremacy, and vnexhausted
dependancie: so that of this Jove (omnia sint plena and de plenitudine eius
omnes accipiant) In the Roman Synagogue the Pope is all in all for power and
jurisdiction Con: Later. Sess. 10. Bell. de Pont. lib. 1. cap. 9.
all must be full, and receive from his fullness. All which is so precisely and
punctually the state of his holiness; that there is no power nor jurisdiction
in their Church, which is not from him; and is so dependantly at his pleasure,
that he may with or without cause, take the same from whom he shall please
validly and effectually. For he is a Jove amongst them, a very absolute
Monarch, subject only to God.

But, I note the words of the Apostle, that he must Bear himself and show
himself.
show himself, and bear himself as God; which is most punctually performed
by the Pope for this his unbounded supremacy, and unlimited Independancie; is
assumed by the Popes themselves: For howsoever the Ancient Church for orders
sake did account him to be the first Bishop in (ordine) order, at least of the
West, yet I dare All those ceremonies, which are for adoration, acclamation,
etc. and for deportatio^s of his Holiness upon men's shoulders are by his own
approu^ng or appointment. See Lib. 1. Ceremon: sect. 5.
undertake there was never any Council or Father of the first six hundred
years, that gave him any degree or sort of that Supremacy and unlimited
independancy which he now challenges, (he now challenges I say) For though
most of his Parasites, both Canonists, Monks, Friars, and Ignatians, do give
him as much as he desires, yet (I speak what I know) there are very many of
the learned of that Church, which do groan and sigh to think of this his
arrogant presumption, and both for his challenge and practice, but yet they
dare not say Domine cur ita facis; Lord why do thou so?

I note again, the Apostle says he shall show himself as a God ((...)) as if
he were a God, that is he shall not bear himself for God who made heaven and
earth but for a Vicarian God, a God substitute, an Antichrist, or a
Vice-Christ. Clear it is as noone days, that Antichrist shall not bear
himself for the absolute and one only God, who made heaven and earth; for if
so, where is then mention made of such apparate and order for public
sacrifices, as are beseeming to such a one, bearing himself as God himself?
If so, how then shall he Dan: 11. 38. 39. Matthew: 24.
worship the God, Maozim with Gold and silver and precious stones? If so, what
danger should the elect be in, to be seduced by him, if he shall deny both the
God of heaven and Jesus Christ his only Son? If so, why and how according to
the Pontificians, shall he cause an image of the Beast like a Leopard, Bear,
and Lion to be made and worshipped? If so, how can his coming be a mystery?
How in fallacia erroris, in deceiueablenes of error?

Further I observe the word of the Apostle, that he sits; if this we
understand of absolute government, as it is most probable, then I have spoken
thereof already; but if we take the same literally, so also the Pope sits as
God, as a God; I have beheld him with mine own eyes, often sitting under his
Throne in the material Temples of Rome, God like, as a God, having as great
outward adoration given unto him, not only by the people but by the purpured
brethren, by the Priests and others who assist at the altar, as is given by
them unto Christ, whom they believe and adore as presentially there present,
the difference only is they adore their Sacrament-Christ, as true Christ, their
Pope-Christ, as a Vice-Christ; Antichrist, a Christ-substitute.

The Apostle says, The Temple of God, which we must not so understand, that he
shall sit in the Temple of God and yet not defile and profane the same: for
how is it possible that Autichrist should fit in the Temple of 1 Machab. 1. 52
Joseph. li^. Antiquit. lib. de Bell: Iudaico saepissime
God against God, and yet not profane it? But as the Temple of Jerusalem, was
called Gods Temple, and the Temple of God, though most impiously profaned
first by Antiochus, and after by Caius: so shall the visible Church in which
Antichrist shall sit, be still called the Temple of God, though most impiously
and sacrilegiously profaned by him; yea so profaned by him with such
abominations, that doubtless whosoever shall therein partake with him shall
for the same perish eternally. And so we may see how idle that bragging
instance See Chrysostom. Theodor. Ambr: Oecumen: Aquinas, and others in 2 Thessalonians:
2.
of the Papists is; when they object unto us, that we make the Pope to be
Antichrist, and yet to sit in the Church of God, and (so say they) we make
their Church to be the Church of God; but how vain (I say) is this instance?
we confess indeed, that their Church is the Church of God, but profaned, yea
impiously, sacrilegiously, profaned: so that all who partake formallie and
willingly with the Pope, in his prophanations, shall eternally perish. I said
formally and willingly, for I doubt not to affirm, but that there are very
many, who groan after a reformation of that Church, and hope for a redemption,
making welnigh as small account of many of their Tridentine Decrees as I do.
That there are many such in Popish kingdoms, I refer my self to the Ignatians,
and other Professionists consciences, who know how many there are in their
Churches, which can never be settled in their mind, without continual
doubtings, concerning diverse points of popery; as adoration of their
Sacrament, adoration of Images, use of Indulgences, praying to Saints,
Justification of works; the Popes unbounded Supremacy worshipping of relikes
sacrifice propitiatory for the dead, Transsubstantiation etc.

To proceed, this man of ^mne must bear himself as a God, in the temple;
which argues that he will challenge and assume unto himself, some Godlike and
divine worship; the which, that we may understand how it is acted by the Pope,
we are to consider how the true Lord, and true God is honored by his Saints
and Servants in the temple.

The holy Prophet declares the same thus; Omnes Apoc. 7. 11. 12.
autem Angeli etc. But all the Angels stood in sight of the Throne, and of the
Elders, and of the four living creatures, and fell down before the throne,
upon their faces and worshipped God, saying Amen; Blessing, and Clarity, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving and Honor, and Power, and Fortitude, be to our God
for ever and ever. Thus the Prophet; and is there any one jot of this honor and
adoration which is not given to Romes-vice-God by the Papists, and by The Pope
making a Cardinal says, Creote etc. or thus: Sis frater nester and Princeps
Orbi
his creatures the Purpured? They when they first acknowledge him, (I mean the
Cardinals) for their holy Father and Pope, do they not the same by adoration?
he sitting in a chair, they one after one adoring: for until their adoration
be finished and completed, he is not complete Pope, by adoration he is made
Pope, and being made he is adored. And for as much as is contained in the 12
verse, do they not fully yield unto him every point thereof? What general
acclamations are made to him, by all in the Temple, and of that Temple? calling
him, Beatissimus, Sanctissimus, Diuinissimus, Supremum in terris Numen, most
Blessed, most Holy, most Divine, the supreamest Numen upon earth: and in like
Benedictio. Blessing.
sort, his Holiness, his Sanctity, his most Holy Holiness, etc. he has
then Benediction, Blessing etc.

As for Charity, Glory, or Magnificence, which is the second attribute given
to God by his Saints and Servants; Claritas. Claritie.
do they not yield the same to their Holy Father? What glory? then at that
time, and in that place, where the Lord of heaven is pretended to be
worshipped, to have him borne upon men's shoulders, and so mounted even in S.
Peter's Church, until he come to the Throne, where his Majesty is to sit,
there to be worshipped with adorations, genuflexions, and acclamations: Live
Holy Father, Live most Holy Father?

What Claritie, by making and creating Kings, to give Kingly authority, where
none was before? What glory, Suar: lib. 3. c. 23. teaches that the Pope has
power to chastise Kings even with death, and he makes this doctrine an article
of faith.
to deprive Kings of that Regaltie and those Crowns which the hand of heaven
had set upon their heads? What claritie, to be able to create, yea to create
Princes over the wholeworld, which he does in creating Cardinals, making them his
Brethren and Princes over the world? What Claritie, as a Monarch to summon all
Counsels? as a supreme Head, to sit and govern all Counsels, General and
Provincial? to make or unmake them? dissolve or confirm them as he shall
think good? What Claritie, to be a Monarch-Exlex, Outlaw, to make laws Outlaw.
for all, great and small, high and low, and to be tied to none himself? This
Claritie was not unthought upon by the Bishop of Modrusium, when he sang thus
in the Council of Laterane, to a iouiall and a Iuuenall Pope Leo the 10: Ecce
venit Leo de Tribu Judah radix David etc. Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah
is come, We have Cone. Later. Sess. 6. in ^rat: Ep. Modrus.
expected thee a Savior, O most blessed Leo. thus there, with more like stuff.

The third Attribute, given to God by his Saints, is Sapientia. Wisdom.
Wisdom; touching which, who is ignorant that the Papists make the Pope, the
fountain of all Christian wisdom? the Rock, Pillar, and Fountain of
Inerrabilitie in the whole Church, whether it be for articles of doctrine and
profession, or laws of discipline? Yea Bellarmine and most of the Ignatians,
give unto their Holy Father this Inerrabilitie, not only as he is Pope, and as
he teaches Bella^: de Pont: lib. 4. cap. 6. Alb Pighius lib. 4. hierar. c. 8.
their whole Church; but further also, that as he is a private Person he
cannot be an Heretic: and for this purpose I will here insert a true tale.
There was in Rome a Courtier, who upon an occasion affirmed, that the Pope
might err in faith; being a man of great note, he was convented before some
Cardinals to answer for himself, to whom he affirmed as much as before;
whereupon the Cardinals replied unto him, and said, that he was an Heretic
for so saying; to whom the Courtier thus answered for himself; Pope Paul being
at dinner, said in my hearing, that he did believe, he should recover Placentia
before he died, and yet he did not, and so I am assured he erred in faith; O
said the Cardinals, we thought you had meant the Pope might err in the
Christian faith; no truly, replied the Courtier, I could not so think, for,
for ought that I can see, I cannot say whether the Pope or any of his
Cardinals have any jot thereof at all or not. And this his last answer is
doubtless best; for a man who has lived amongst them, will hardly by their
lives judge, that they have any faith at all, whether christian or moral.

Thanksgiving, is the fourth Attribute given to God by Gratiarum actio.
Thanksgiving.
his Saints wherein how egregiously the Papists do flatter their Pope, their
Epistles S^nodicall and Dedicatorie; their Orations and acclamations
Gratulatorie, do euince. Do they not acknowledge him, to take away the sins
The arrogance of the Pope, requiring acclamations of Thanksgiving, when England
was reconciled to him by Card. Poole. Aemilius lib. 7. post medium.
of whole Kingdoms? Let us call to mind, how Cardinal Poole the Popes
Legate, did under King Philip and Queen Marie, reconcile this Kingdom of
England to Rome; whereupon there followed and were required great Gratulatorie
acclamations of Thanksgiving unto his Holiness. Is it not recorded how the
Cecillian Legates, with a pitiful miserere, did cry to his Holiness, Qui
tollis peccata mundi miserere nostri etc. Thou who take away the sins of
the world have mercy upon us; Thou that take away the sins of the world
give unto us peace? Do not Kings, Emperors, Patriarchs, Primates,
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Generals, Absolute and Vicarian, with
grateful acknowledgment, confess him to be their Holy Father, their Patron,
Protector, and that they do all (ex plenitudine eius accipere) receive from
his fulness? The case is clear. I pass on.

The fifth Attribute of praise given to God, is Honor; Honor. Honor.
the which being coincident with some of the former already handled, I pass it
over as clear.

The sixth is Power. And is not this given unto him, Potestas. Power.
whenas their Decretall article of Boniface stands amongst them in absolute
force as a point of faith, Subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae Creaturae
definimus, declaramus, De maiorit. and Obed. cap. Vnam Sanctam.
pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. We defiae, we pronounce, we
declare, that it is altogether necessary to salvation, that every humane
creature be subject to the Bishop of Rome. How universal is his power and
jurisdiction? For charge mounting up to the heavens, commanding Angels. For
blessing, piercing Purgatory, and delivering souls. Yea according to their
own principles, in his absolute power he is able to deliver all souls out of
Purgatory flames, and Antonine affirms Anton: part. 3. titul: 22. cap. 5.
the like: pity, his charity is not as absolute as his power. For
punishment, penetrating hell it self, coniuring, commanding the Devils by his
Exercists; augmenting and increasing their pains and torments in infinitum,
Flagellu^ Daemo.
if they prove refractarious. For glory, heaven seems beholding to his power;
for his Canonizing and Sainting, (with the unspeakable Charges of those who
desire it) Saints and Saintesses: as of late Spain did their Didacus; Polonia,
Hyacinthus; and the whole multitude of Ignatians having already procured their
Father Ignatius to be Beated and Beatified, do continually expect They expect
the same for their Zauerius Gonzaga.
and desire to have him Sainted and Canonized, that as now they say, Beati
Ignati orapro nobis, Blessed Ignatius pray for us; so then they may say, Sancte
Ignati ora pro nobis, Saint Ignatius pray for us.

The seventh Attribute is Fortitude, the which that it Fortitudo. Fortitude.
is given to the Popes by the Romanists, who can doubt, who has heard of that
fundamental article of their Church, by which they make the very Persons of
their Popes, to be that very Rock upon which their Church is Bell: de Pent,
lib. 1. cap. 10. Matthew: 16.
built; and against which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail: so now as there is
no power upon earth which may be compared with that of Leuiatban, and the Gates
of Hell; so neither is there any Fortitude which may be compared with that of
their Popes; which has been so forcible, that it has by reason of the Popes
most arrogant Supremacy, beaten from it most of the Churches of the world.
For, for this cause, and for this Papal Fortitude, the Persian Christened
Churches do reject the Communion of Rome; the Ethiopian do detest it; the
Muscouian execrate it even as they doethe Devil himself; the Arabian condemn
it; the Armenian scorn it; all Reformed Churches of Sueueland, Denmark,
Norway, Low Countries, France, Germany, Scotland, Ireland, England, do refuse
and accurse it. And though for this cause, the Papal Fortitude has often
thundered out her Anathemes and Excommunications against them, notwithstanding
by Gods blessings, they stand, grow, and increase, maugre the spite and force
of this Roman Rock.

Thus I have briefly showed, (omitting an infinity of particulars to confirm
the same) how all the divine Attributes, given by the creatures to the Creator,
are in a kind of imitation given by their Papists to their Creator the Pope,
of whom they are begotten, and from whom they take their name. And as they give
him these Attributes, so they have not been afraid to give unto him the name of
God; so their Extrauagant boldly, Dominus Extrauag. Cum inter Joh: 22. Glossa.
Deus noster, Our Lord God. Caraffa in his Theses more mincingly terming their
now Pope Paul the 5. Vice-Deus, Vice-God; and as they give him this honor, so
they do believe that he shall have it (in secula seculoru^) for ever and ever,
until the end of the world; for they do make his Seat to be Sedem aeternam,
an everlasting Bell: de Pont: lib. 4. cap. 4. Matthew: 16.
Seat, against which the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail.

So then, to sum up all this, the Papists song unto their Pope, sitting in
the Temple of God, upon his Throne, in the presence of his Elders and living
creatures, thus it is: Benedictio etc. Blessing, Claritie, Wisdom,
Thanksgiving, Honor, Power, and Fortitude, to our God for ever and ever: This
man then sitting in the Temple of God, is honored as God; if then He and his,
do signs and wonders, doubtless they must be such, whereof the Apostle
speaks, and so consequently, 2 Thessalonians: 2.
mendacious, Antichristian.

CHAP. XIIII. Wherein is examined another prophecy of Christ in the seventh of
Matthew.
THE third place is that of Saint Matthew, Many will say to me in that day:
Lord, Lord, have we not Mat. 7. 12. 13.
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works?

And then I will profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from me ye
workers of iniquity.

That all these things here spoken, by these false prophets, are uttered and
acted now by the Popish Monks, Friars, etc. No man can be ignorant, who daily
hears them chaunting out their doing of wonders, and casting out of devils in
the name of Christ, and by the power of Christ.

Two things rest to be proved; first, whether they be operarij iniquitatis,
the workers of iniquity here spoken of. Secondly, whether it be probable that
our Savior in this place, do aim at Antichristian false prophets, or rather
at some true Prophets and teachers, who teach his doctrine truly, confirming
the same by miracles, and yet live very wickedly.

Concerning the first, that the Popish mirabilists, are workers of Iniquity, I
refer the Reader to what I have said already: but that they are the special
workers of iniquity, here mentioned by our Savior, it may thus appear:
first, because our Savior in this place seems most to reprove the iniquity
of sacrilegious injustice: now what greater iniquity of injustice amongst the
Preachers and Prophets, then the iniquity of symony: which makes such a
general inundation in all Popish Churches, that there is hardly a man to be
found, who receives any benefice, dignity, etc. at lest from the Holy Romae
omnia venalia D^us ipse Diabolus ipse. See Tax. came. Apostal. See Nonus Homo
his orat. to Christ: Prin. most truly describing this kind of iniquity. Acts
8. 23.
Fathers hands, or his Deputy-nephewes, Cameriers, or other Substitutes (non
numerata pecunia) paying not for the same. Again who has enacted all those
Laws, which are so nigh and cousin germans to Symony: but the Holy Father, and
his mirabilists? Again, which of all their Popes do ever enter into the
Papacy, without diverse contracts of bargains, bets, lays, promises, etc. and
is not this (Iniquitas maxima) the greatest iniquity that may be, which makes
their hearts and minds (as Simons was) full of gall and bitterness, that is,
of envy and malice, the bitterest weed of iniquity which can grow in the heart
of man.

Secondly, our Savior also in this place, seems specially to reprove the
iniquity of fraud and deception, as if he should say unto the false prophets;
you glory in your miracles and wonders as done in my name, and for my glory:
but it is far otherwise, for by them you practice a highest point of
iniquity; to wit, by fraud and deception, to draw my faithful to the base
worship and servitude of Creatures, and thereby seeking your own glory, to
inthrall them in the bondage of your own traditions. This is fully completed
in the Popish Church.

Thirdly, if our Savior do by these words, workers of iniquity, comprehend
workers of all manner of wickedness; then let us ask the great Favorers, and
Pillars of Rome what manner of wickedness it is which does not reign amongst
them. Let us ask Cornelius Mus, Bishop of Bitontum, in his Oration to the
Tridentine Fathers: the great Parisian Clerks, as Clemangis, Genebrard, and
Bernardus sermon. 33. in Cant. lib. de co^siderat. sepe Albert in Ioh. 10
Auentine sepissime. lib. 5. and 7. hist. Alij apertissime. How the Popes are
(as Simon Magus) chaind in obligatione iniquitatu, Marcelius 2. Pope
pronounces thus; I see not (says he) how those who hold this high place can
be saved. Onuph. in vit. Mart. 2.
Espensaeus; their Analists, as Baronius, Auentine; their Theologues, as
Holcot, Albertus, with diverse others; especially Saint Bernard the (Didimus
veridicus) Tell-troth, who so deploreth the most loathsome, and most incurable
diseases in the Church, as it will astonish a man to read him. See his Sermon
upon the conversion of Saint Paul, his protestations and lamentations in the
Council of Rhemes, especially his 66. Sermon upon the Canticles: where he
delineateth the abominable turpitudes of the Roman See and Clergy; and so
clear it is as nothing can be clearer, that since Bernards time, they have so
profited in peius; that if ever, that of one of theirs were found true, it is
now punctually true, to wit, that their Church is come to that perfection of
virtue, that it seems worthy to be ruled, and governed only by reprobates.

Touching the second, our Savior in this place, aymeth and points at
Antichristian prophets, I prove it thus: First, because without doubt in the
12. and 13. verses (which are so connexed by a continued discourse to the 15.
and 16. verses) he means the same false prophets which he does in these: now
that in these, he intends Antichristian false prophets it is confessed
Pontif. paene omnes. See Staplet^ in Promtu. Moral. and Cathel.
by the adversaries; who are most eager to fasten the same imputation, not upon
any of their own, but upon such whom they call Heretics, and whom they make
Antichristian, at least as forerunners of Antichrist.

Secondly our Savior professes, that he will say unto them at the day of
Judgment, that he never knew them: the which as it is easily understood of
Antichristian false prophets, who nether in life, nor in doctrine were ever
approved by Christ: So it is hardly to be applied to such true Prophets which
preach his truth sincerely, and confirm the same by miracles, though their
life and conversation be wicked: what? will not Christ? nor never did Christ
acknowledge his doctrine and miracles in wicked persons? Observe how he
speaks of true teachers and wicked livers. Super Cathedram Moysis, etc. Upon
the chair of Moses there sat Scribes and Pharisees, do what they say; but
do not what they do.

Thirdly I suppose, the Papists must needs so interpret this place; for in so
long a continuance of their Church (whereof they so greatly glory) I do not
think, they will name any one of their Church, who has done wonders in the
name of Christ, and cast out devils in his name, whom they will profess to be
(operarium iniquitatis) Matthew. 23. 2.
a worker of iniquity. No, it is abundantly sufficient in their Church, that
their Jove may canonize any one for a Saint, if it can be proved that he did
wonders, and cast out Devils in the name of Christ: let them name but one if
they can, whom their Pope and his has neglected to account and esteem as holy
and Saintly, if he have prophesied in Christ's name, done wonders and cast out
devils in the same, they cannot do it. Let this therefore remain, as an
unremovable cognizance to the Pope and his Prophets, that they are (operarij
iniquitatis) workers of iniquity: and although they preach Matthew. 7. 13.
in the pretensed name of Christ, though in the same they cast out devils, and
do many wonders; yet notwithstanding their miracles are to be accounted
Antichristian, and their casting out of devils a Satanical conspiracy, And so
concluding this discourse, I would God were pleased to give them grace to
apprehend (and by it to amend) that terrible denouncement which is threatened
against such as they are, Ecce ego ad prophetas, Behold (says the Ier. 23. 32.
Lord) I am against those prophets, who dream alye, and show the same; and
have seduced my people in their lie and in their miracles, when I had not sent
them, nor had commanded them, says the Lord.

CHAP. XV. Wherein is examined a second prophecy of S. Paul.
THe fourth place is taken out of S. Paul's prophecy to Timothy thus.

Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
3.
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of Devils.

Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot iron:

Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving, of them which believe and know the
truth.

This holy prophecy, which is so express and so clear, may thus clearly be
fastened upon the Pontifician Church.

The circumstance of time in those words (in the latter times) most evidently
thus: for if the Pontificians themselves do apply this prophecy only to the
Manichees, Encratites, Patritians, who were many hundreds of Remists in 1. Tim.
4. in their Annotat. Pontificij omnes.
years before these times, and of whom there is now hardly any shadow in the
Churches; much rather in respect of more laternesse of time, it may be applied
to the Popish Church in Gregory the seuenths time, when marriage in Priests was
more strictly forbid then ever before; for the inhibitions made against Priests
marriage by Siricius and Calixtus, were but flea-bitings, in comparison of the
thundering commands, which Gregory the seventh roared out.

I say, that the Pontificians did apply the prophecy only to the Manichees,
Encratites, Tatianites, Patritians, and such like of old; which their
application I cannot see how it will iumpe with those, who understand this
prophecy of the times of Antichrist, as some do. Guilliaudus makes the
argument to the fourth chapter thus, Guilliaudus in Epist. ad Timoth. in cap.
4. Argument.
(Errores Antichristi predicit the Apostle foretells the errors of
Antichrist.) Thus he: how agreeingly to his own gloss after, I refer to
some Burgundian to answer for him; yet doubtless his argument is very true;
for for howsoever the Encratites and Manichees did forbid marriage in some
sort, as Antichrist and his do: notwithstanding there are some circumstances of
the text, which cannot so fitly be applied to those ancient Heretics: as
first, the circumstance of time, In the latter times, by which words, the
Apostle doubtless aims at the times 2. Thessal. 2.
of the Apostasy and defection, mentioned by himself in the second to the
Thessalonians.

Secondly, the Apostle says, that those who shall teach these doctrines, shall
therein attend to Seducing Spirits, insinuating thereby, that they shall be led
to the same by pretense of visions, miracles and prodigies, done by spirits of
error, the Devils themselves: which is egregiously acted by the Pontisicians,
who do not ground this their inhibition against marriage and eating of meats,
upon the word of God, but rather upon such visions, miracles and wonders, as
they pretend for the same: we do not read that the Encratites and Patritians
were so attentive after visions and miracles, or did so glory in them, as the
Pontificians now do; yea, they are so shameless oftentimes, as to move their
pretended possessed persons, or See first chapter above.
(as they pretend) the Devils in them, to deride the marriage of Priests.

The note of lying hypocrisy, with seared consciences, howsoever it may be
imputed to those ancient Heretics; yet verily, it cannot be doubted, but that
the Pontifician Leaders and Commanders do herein surpass them: what else does
searing of conscience denote and design, then a most obstinate and obfirmed
resolution in their doctrins? which in the Popes and theirs is so past all
measure, as the world can witness; that although their own more temperate
Professors, Cardinals, Emperors and Caesar's, Kings and Potentates, Princes
and Magistrates, Prelates and Priests, the Laity of all sorts, do (considering
the horrible enormities of their votaries) require, that the Law of Celibacie
be removed, and the use of marriage be left indifferent, notwithstanding
most of their more perverse Popes: (yea, all of them at lest, to avoid
scandal, and to preserve the dignity of their Church) are so wedded to the
Darling, that the knot is indissoluble; so be their consciences seared with the
hot iron of obstinacy and impudency, that they weigh not, though an infinity
of souls perish through their unnecessary law of vowed Celibacy. Neither do
they regard what the Christian world inueigheth against them: assuredly, that
of Epiphanius is fulfilled, They reject marriage not lust, Epiphanius aduersus
Origenist. here is 42.
for sanctity is not in honor with them, but hypocrisy. Further, what may we
more fitly understand by their speaking lies in hypocrisy, then a professed
dissembling of greater sanctity, both for chastity and abstinence, then is
amongst them, in which sense; good God, how punctually are the Papist-leaders
and Teachers noted by the Apostle? how patly and in every respect, does he
point at the Ignatians? who professing greater sanctity then others, do far
come behind all others (at lest in the point of abstinence) in that Church,
there being no Order nor Degree of the Roman Church, which keeps less
fasting and abstinence then the Ignatians do, their special promises are for
obedience to their Superiors and Generals, and by them, by a secret vow, to
go whithersoeuer he shall command, and to do whatsoever he shall command:
Videant Reges.

The Apostle says, that these false Teachers were to depart from the faith,
which as it is fulfilled in the ancient heretics, so more absolutely in the
Roman Popes; whose Clem. Alex. 3. Stromat. Tertul. de monogamia. Athan. Epist.
ad Dracont. Chryso. in 1. ad Timoth. hom. 10. Hieron. against Iouinian Con.
Aney. ^an. 9. Gangr. 4. ad Hebr. 1. 3.
departure from the faith in this point, appears thus: For whereas it is
clear as the very heavens, that in the Apostles time, and for long after,
marriage was as a thing good, godly, Christian, allowed and permitted in the
Clergy: so that it was honorable in all, according to the Apostles doctrine;
They have in a pretended show of more sanctity (but in truth in very
hypocrisy) imposed: First, the Law of Celibacie upon their Clergy: Secondly,
the vow of Celibacie upon them; as though that married Clerks were unfit to
administer at the Altar, or to preach the word of God, and that marriage in
them were not honorable or allowable: the which what is it else, then a mere
departure from the faith, first received, first established? Let us ask S.
Chrysostom what the ancient Church, nay, what the Apostle thought of marriage
in Priests? Cuius rei gratia, etc. For what cause does the Apostle Chrysostemus
in Titum. hom. 2. See him hom. 10. in 1. ad Tim.
mention these manner of men? (to wit married) he does intend utterly to stop
the mouths of Heretics, who condemn marriage showing the same to be without
fault, yea, the same to be so precious a thing, that with it any man may be
promoted to the throne of Episcopacie. And in his tenth homily upon the first
to Timothy, speaking of marriage in Priests, he has these express words:
Licet enim eam rem honest ac Chrysostom. in illa verba; Sed mansuetum etc.
licite capere si quis velit. It is lawful for any man if he will lawfully and
honestly to take the same thing: meaning marriage, yea marriage in Bishops: For
in the same place he speaks according to the Apostles intent of Bishops: See
him, and the like is to be observed in many of the Ancients, declaring the
practice of the Church in this kind: yea their holy Briget takes and
receives the Briget. lib. 7. Revel. cap. 10. circa medium.
same as a divine revelation from the Virgin Maryes own mouth, part of which
revelation the Reader may find in the Appendix here following: in the second
part of the sixteenth Chapter.

It rests to be showed and proved, whether the Papists do deliver the same
doctrines of Devils, which the Apostle here condemns; which that they do,
for the first point I thus make manifest. To insist upon the Apostles express
words, he says only, that the Heretics should forbid marriage etc. which
that the Popes and Papists do, it is a case as manifest as noone days: And
their evasion of this imputation is not worth a rush. For they answer that the
Apostle intends only such Heretics as do forbid marriage, because of
natural uncleanness in the same. Their instance is most vain; nay rather the
Apostle purposely abstaineth from mentioning any such circumstance of the
heresy, that so in his prophecy, he might as well inuolue those Heretics
which would teach marriage to be unclean to the Users and Practisers of it,
against pretensed commandes; as also those who would condemn it as unclean in
it self. If the Apostle had intended the Manicheyes only, or such like, he
might easily have expressed the circumstance of their heresy; but he did not
so; aiming doubtless at all those, who should forbid and inhibit marriage in
those, and to them, to whom God had commended or allowed it; and therefore he
uses rather the words forbid, as if he should say these Heretics will
disaprooue of marriage in respect of their own commandes in those, and to
those, to whom they shall forbid the same.

And if the Papists do seriously bethink themselves they shall find, that
the ancient Manicheyes do iumpe with them in this their heresy about marriage
in their August. epist. 74
Clergy; for as the Papists do allow marriage in their Laickes, but utterly
forbid it in their Clerks; so did the Manicheyes allow marriage in their
ordinary Professors, whom they did call (Auditores) Hearers, but utterly
forbid and reprove the same in their special ones, whom they called Electi,
their chosen and Elects. So that here we have the Papists expressly iumping with
the Manicheyes in this point.

I note specially, that the Apostle says they shall forbid marriage, by which,
he evidently insinuates, that the holy Spirits intention is, to note and aim
at such Governors and Rulers of the Church, who should against Genes. 1. 22.
the Apostles and Gods ordinance, lay their command upon celibacy and single
life forbidding marriage. Now this is the very self thing, which the Bishops
of Rome have done. For upon that (concerning which the 1. Cor. 7.
Apostle had no precept but only counsel) they have laid their imperious
commandes in their clergy, forbidding them to marry, yea and against their
own principles, have laid a precept upon a Counsel; commanding and requiring
most strictly all those, who take orders to vow chastity; which according to
their own principles God left in counsel and free election, and which the
Apostle had only power to counsel and persuade.

Their pretensed ground of this their doing, to wit, because celibacy and
single life is in perfection surpassing matrimonial state, is vain: for we
are not to consider celibacie and single life and matrimonial state as they
are in speculation; but as they are in action, practice, and use; and so
considered, clear it is, that celibacy or single life is not to be preferred
before matrimonial state in him or her, who have not the gift of continency,
nay rather in them it is wicked and damnable, though laudable and highly to be
commended in those, who have the gift: So that the perfection of either of
these two states of life, is from the mind, according to that of most learned
Nazianzene: Men's est etc. It is the mind which gives Greg. Naz. in Epitaph.
Sor. Gorgonia.
perfection either to marriage or to virginity. And so to conclude this point,
celibacy or single life with continual burning is a damnable state; marriage
with continency is holy and honorable in all: And so it rests proved
concerning the first point (the other part I remit to some other occasion) of
these false-prophets doctrine, that every circumstance and part thereof is very
aptly and punctually applied to the Papists and their Popes; whereby it also
follows, that if they do miracles for confirmation of the said points, that
the same are lying, mendacious, Antichristian; which is the proposition I have
endeauored in all this treatise to prove and declare; and have by Gods Grace
brought to this issue; that in the question I have satisfied my own judgment
and conscience; and I do most heartily pray, that the same may tend to the
profit and good of Gods Church; and to the confusion of her Enemies, which are
more wise in their generation then the children of light are in their kind.

CHAP. XVI. An Appendix touching the vanity of certain Popish miraculous
visions which are usually brought by Papists for defense of their Religion, but
being examined are found to be against the same.
IT is an old and a true saying, he shall need a long spoone who must eat
with the Devil, and therefore to great purpose the Apostle calls his
workings and practices with men Astutias, crafts, subtelties, deceits, the 2.
Cor. 2. 11.
which will more easily appear if we do but observe what manner of men he
has deceived, and in what sort he has deceived them; to wit, by Fables of
visions, fictions of miracles, and strange prodigies; of which their itching
ears have been ouercredulous, listening and longing after them even with a
kind of greediness.

Secondly if we consider in what time, to wit, when the vigilancie of the
Pastors began to slack and they began to slumber, then the Devil began to
sow his cockell and Math. 13. 25.
darnell where good wheat had been sowed before, even in the Lords field,
where he himself had cast his seed before. And lest the Pontificians should
be thought now of late only to have entered into these kinds of courses I
will (having already spoken sufficiently of miracles) take pains in this
place as in an Appendix, to show in a few examples how their Progenitors have
endeavored to draw Ancient and venerable men into these Iusts, and to impose
Fables of visions upon them, thereby the more to countenance the bad cause,
which they have undertaken to maintain.

First I will begin with a Fable, which is somewhat corruptly cited out of
venerable Bede, and is produced for proof of their Purgatory flashes, but the
Christian Reader will upon the scanning of it find it to be but a fiction,
yea and the Pontificians themselves must so account thereof, unless they will
go contrary to their own religion. I will not afford to set down with all
those solemn words, with which Costerus that famous Ignatian, does cite out of
Bid, in substance it is thus; One Drietelmus Coster dominica 5. post pentec.
Bed. lib. 5. histo. Aug. cap. 13. Coster has the very like history dom. 3.
post. pasca. out of Boniface Arch. mogunt. ep. ad Cadelburg.
a married man, suddenly falls upon an evening into a trance (dyed in the
evening and was revived in the morning, says Coster) who told afterward
strange things to the standers by: He says that at first he was carried by a
beautiful Angel, toward the East; where he first sees a place full of many
souls, one while tormented with extreme cold, another while plunged into most
accensed and kindled fire; thence he is carried a little further, where he
observes many fiery bals arising out of a horrible depth, which balls he
interpreted to be souls, tormented by the devils in hell fire; and whilst he
was beholding these horrors, with great astonishment, his good Angel leaves
him; in whose absence, he observes the diuils to laugh, (I never read in true
divinity, that Devils had leisure in their torments to laugh, but of such
stuff their Legends are full) and to cast souls up and down like wilde-fire
bals; they approached also unto him, but durst not touch him: Then presently
like a resplendent star, appears unto him his good Angel, and carrying him
further into the East, shows unto him a place, glorious for light, pleasant
for flowers: in which were diverse souls full of joy, and walking in white
garments. Secondly, he shows unto him a place of greater joy and happiness,
in comparison of which, the former seemed but as a spark: Now Drietelmus
having seen all that he was to see, and being to return again to his body,
and to relate unto others, what he had seen, the Angel expounds unto him
his vision, which is thus: the first place is purgatory, where all those are
punished, which have not fully satisfied (O vanity of vanities! who can ever
fully satisfy Gods justice, though in Purgatory?) for their sins, and these
shall be all saved at the day of judgment.

The second place, is hell, out of which no man (the delivery of Traianes soul
by Gregory, was not yet heard of by Bid) can ever be delivered, which is once
cast into it; In the third place (here I will use Costers words only) Full of
sweet flowers are received those souls, who have lived here well and godly;
and are not of this perfection, that Coster. ibidem.
they may presently go up into the highest heaven, al which also at length,
after the last judgment had by God, shall come to eternal glory: but those
who are perfect in all there words, thoughts, and works, (and who are those,
holy Coster? are there any of your Ignatians such?) they presently, shall be
admitted to that most glorious state of the blessed, so soon as their soul
goes out of their body; and this is the place which thou saw a far off,
do thou now go, and take thy body, and be careful how thou carriest thy
self for hereafter. Thus far profound Costerus out of Bid; who if he had
been more circumspect, he would not have inserted (as he does many like, into
his dunsticall Homilies, for most part stolen out of others) this vision so
presuiudiciall to his own religion. For who is so blockish, that does not here
out observe four places? who so blind as not to see here a double heaven of
the Papists? a twofold state of their blessed? further who in those words
(they C^ster his four places for souls departed; and his two heavens.
are not yet of that perfection to come into the bighest heaven) does not
observe that their Saints in the first heaven may merit, and by good work
obtain greater perfection? who observes not also, that wise Costorus has a
heaven, in which the blessed do not see God? again who notes not, that this
vision supposes, that in this mortal life, men may be perfect, in all their
words, works and thoughts? and so presently after death, mount up into the
highest heaven? the which position, (with diverse others) as it is contrary to
their doctrine, by which they teach, no man to be void of venial sins; so it
is expressly against Gods word, affirming, that the just man falls seven times
a day and rises again; it is also Prou. 24. 16.
most opposite to that of Saint James, who teaches that we all do offend in
many things; but these men perfect in Jacob. 3. 2.
all their works, yea thoughts and words, are free from all sin, and so need
not so much, as to ask forgiveness of their daily trespasses, as they are
commanded in our Lords Prayer: much more might be observed in this vision
contradicting their own principles both in Philosophy and Divinity. But I
will add no more, but only tell them, that this vision carries with it not
any whit the more credit, because holy Briget has the like in her Briget lib.
4. reuelat. cap. 7.
revelations; she delivers forsooth a double variety of places for souls
damned, and a triple variety of places for the souls to be purged: but
because her narration is long, and it were too too prolixe, to trouble this
short Treatise, with so impertinent and heretical fables and baubles; I will
only point the Reader to the place, where he may see them. Notwithstanding I
will not omit in this place, to adioyne some of that illuminated Saintesses
visions, considering that her revelations be of late reprinted at Antwerpe,
with Paul the fifthes privilege: but he has so dealt with Brigett, that she
has not bin privileged from false fingers; and therefore in diverse things,
she is made to speak diversely, from what she did in her former Editions; so
plays the illuminate vice-God, with the illuminated spousesse of Christ.

Brigett in the fourth Book of her revelations tells us, how the Virgin
Mary appeared to her, declaring Brig. li. 4. c. 139.
with how many gracious favors, she would cherish Gregory Ibidem cap. 139.
140. 141. 142. 143.
the eleventh (a Pope profane, worldly, impure, disobedient, carnal, if
Brigets own revelations be of credit) and in the vpshot, the Virgin tells
Brigett, that she would pray to her son, vt ipse dignetur misereri and vnire
spiritum suum sanctum, cum interno sanguine cordis eiusdem Gregorij Papae) that
he would vouchsafe, to have mercy, and to unite his holy Spirit with the
internal blood of the heart of the said Gregory Pope: belike here is some
hypostatical union thought upon, betwixt Gregory the Popes blood and the holy
Ghost. For I beseech the Pontificians to tell me, what new union could the
Virgin pray for, betwixt Gregory's blood, and the holy Ghost, except union
hypostaticall? ah vain, and detestable impieties! And here I cannot omit to
set down what Gallonius records of renowned Philippe Nerius, the Galloni. in
vita ad ann. 1595.
founder of the congregation of the Oratory in Rome: This man forsooth, being
to be bowelled after his death, (if he was a Saint like Sauerius, why might
not his guts be kept for relikes, as well as the rest of his body?) the
Physicians found that two of his breast ribs the 4. and the fifth were broken
and yet so reared up in bending, that in their height, they exceeded the
bigness of a man's fist; a divine remedy (say these wise Physicians without
doubt) Gallon. ibidem.
that so, the Holy Fathers heart, might have room to leap, and move up and
down in the love of God: hear his words, habuit ea initium, a nimia diuini
amoris vi, summoque cordis eius ardore, quo inter contemplandum, vel maxim
afficiebatur. The same (to wit the breaking of his ribs) took beginning from
the too too great force of divine love, and very great heat of his heart, with
which he was specially affected in time of his contemplation. And to make this
more credible, This oath of these Physicians is as desperate as that of
Baronius, page following.
and the miracle more wonderful, he brings out certain Physicians, not only
to affirm, but even by word and writing with sacred oath, to confirm the
same, that the breaking of the said Fathers ribbs happened unto him diuinitus,
divinely by miracle; and that for diverse causes; (primo, ne contemplationi
vacans, ex diuini caloris vi, abunda^tiaque repentina morte extingueretur:
deinde, vt cor ardentissimos amoris aestus sustinens, angustiorem locum sibi
acquireret: tum, vt pulmones, facilius and praeter consuetudinem, dilatarent
se: postremo, vt beneficio loci angustioris, tantum noui aeris, pulmones ad cor
deferrent, quantum ad illud refrigerandum satis esset.) First, lest giving
himself to contemplation, by the force and abundance of divine love, he
should by sudden death be extinguished; (marvel how The blasphemy of this
man is intolerable, as likewise that of Turseline, who says that when a
brother put his finger into a hole nigh Sauerius his heart, there issued out
blood and water. Tursel. vita Sauer: lib. 6. cap. 4.
the Virgin Marie and S. Paul escaped death, if their ribbs were not broken,
and raised up.) secondly, that the heart susteyning the most ardent heats of
love might obtain a more ample place: thirdly, that the lights, might above
custom, more dilate themselves: lastly, that by the help (how many
tautologies of miracles be here?) of a more large place, the lights might be
able to bring so much fresh air to the heart, as should be needful to
refresh the same. What miraculous stuff have we here not only affirmed, but
by sacred oath confirmed? not by one, but by two Physicians? where was their
reverence of the ever dreadful name of God, so rashly to profane it? but they
may seem excusable, because perhaps they were feed, and by fees they live. But
inexcusable needs must purpured Baronius be, who with oath affirmed, Gallon. in
vita ann. 1550.
that this his Holy Father Philip Nerius upon a certain night, as he was
walking, and falling into a certain ditch, was presently caught by the hairs
of his head by an Angel, and so delivered. How prodigal was Baronius of his
oath, absolutely to swear a thing to be true, which he could no otherwise
know, but by the telling of his Holy Father Nerius? In like sort wastfull of
their oaths were Cardinal Tarrusius, with diverse others, who with sacred oath
affirmed, that this holy Father was borne up on high in the air, when he
elevated the host; and yet they could have no other knowledge thereof, then by
Philips own relation, because it so seemed to him. I will not trouble my
self, to glaunce at any more vanities, so plentifully described in that Book
of Nerius his life. His esteem is so little in some popish Countries (the
Ignatians secretly opposing against him, with a holy emulation, ad maiore^
Ribad. in vita Ignatu^.
Dei gloriam, and to the greater glory of their Ignatius, who was lifted up
into the air; who had the mystery of the Trinity revealed to his
understanding (like M. Newton) who had Christ appearing unto him in the form
of a little child, not in, but over the hoaste) that I would hold it but lost
labor, for any man to travail much against his prodigious miracles; who was
also so saintly, and so specially elevated, and abstracted in time of Mass,
that he had no help to keep himself from abstractions and eleuations of his
soul; nisi in vnam itiam rem incubuisset, vt animum a diuinis auocaret.
Unless he did wholly give himself Galonius in vita ann. 1551.
to call away his mind from divine matters? what a holy man was this? he must
be distracted with sin, lest he be abstracted by grace. He was another
brother Didacus, What a Philip was this, who was able by his sense of smelling,
to distinguish and discern vices and virtues? Galon: in vita. Stapleton.
Pro^piua:
of whom Stapleton writes, that he could never hear God named, but he would
presently be abstracted in his soul (I marvel how often this Didacus thought
upon God; I marvel also, that Gods Spirit should be so confounded by the name
of God) and elevated into some ecstasis of mind; wherefore (says Stapleton)
his brethren durst never mention God unto him, if they minded to have any
conference with him: pity, for by this means they could never talk with
their Saint of GOD.

For another vision of like nature, for their private mass, I will look back
into some corrupt antiquity, (that the Reader may observe, how of old the
mystery of iniquity began to work) it is cited by noble Harding, Harding
artic. 1.
in his answer to the challenge of Bishop Jewel; and by him is falsely
fathered upon Amphilochius: it is thus briefly. (intermitting a multitude of
Mr. Hardings solemn words) Saint Basil forsooth, (not content, nor fully
satisfied with the institution of Christ, nor with the Liturgies of S. James or
S. Peter) had a pange of devotion come upon him, wherewith he desired, to
celebrate the divine mysteries, proprijs sermouibus, with his own proper
words: for which purpose presently upon his prayers, that the holy Ghost might
better fill him, and fortify him, he was for six days in a Trance (in all
which time it is a wonder, that there is no mention of his filling with the
Holy Ghost, nor of any Vision he saw) the six days being ended, and the
seventh come, Basil began to minister to God, (that was to say Mass, says
Harding) and began to write etc. (what before his Vision?) but on a night, our
Lord and his Apostles came in a Vision to Basil, and laid bread upon the Altar
to be consecrated; and stirring up Basil, said unto him: secundum
postulationem tuam, repleatur os tuum laud, according to thy desire let thy
mouth be filled with praise: Basil is not able to abide the vision, (tell me,
wise Mr. Harding how he does abide it at the Altar?) highes him to the Altar,
and there begins his Mass. Repleatur os meaum laud etc. let my mouth be
filled with praise etc. and post finem orationum, exaltauit panem, sine
intermissione orans, and dicens, respice Domine Jesus, etc. and after the end of
prayers, he lifted up the bread (what Mr. Harding bread after elevation and
consecration?) without intermission, praying and saying, look down upon us
Lord Jesus Christ out of thy holy Tabernacle, and come to sanctify us that
sit above with thy Father, and art here invisibly present with us;
vouchsafe with thy mighty hand to deliver unto us, and by us to all thy people,
Sancta, sanctis, Holy things, to the Holy; to which the people answered, One
holy, One our Lord Jesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, in glory of God the
Father, Amen. How many things are here worthy observing against the
Pontificians, if the History were true? As first, that the host is called
bread after consecration? that it is not adored neither by Basil, nor by the
people, and with such other like. Afterward, Doctor Harding comes to speak
thus. Now let us consider what follows most appertayning to our purpose
(observe it well courteous Reader) Et diuidens panem in tres parts, vnam
quidem communicauit timore multo; alter a^ autem reseruanit consepelire secum;
tertiam vere, imposuit columbae aureae, quae pependit super altar. And
dividing the bread into three parts, one he received with great fear; the
second he kept to bury with himself; the third he put into the siluer-Doue
which hanged over the Altar. But what do we hear? surely enough to euince Mr.
Hardings miracle for a fable; or else down must his Transsubstantiation. For,
is it imaginable, that S. Basil, a man of rare wisdom, and singular
sanctity, should be so presumptuously madd, if he did believe their
Transsubstantiation, their corporal and carnal presence of Christ in the
bread, to offer to bury, (consepelire secum) and to interre together with his
own carkase, so precious a lewell, the glory of heaven, his very God?
(although they write in Bennets life, that he doted so much, as to cause such a
thing to be done) who (I say) can imagine this, that once thinks of S. Basills
wisdom and piety? so that we see, that part of the Vision, which the profound
Doctor thought made most for himself, does utterly subvert his
Transsubstantiation, and by necessary consequence his priuare Mass, for which
he purposely brings it, and falsely fathereth it upon Amphilochius. For
Baronius himself, with other Pontificians, deny the life to have bin written
by Amphilochius Bishop of Iconiam.

Touching the prohibition of marriage in their Priests, I must needs adioyne a
Vision out of their illuminated S. Briget; the same is well worthy
consideration, it does so clearly discover unto us, the Papists Manicheisme.
Lib. 7. reuelat. cap. 10. circa medium.
Virgo Maria sic loquitur etc. The Virgin Marie speaks thus to Brigett; After
Christ instituted this new Sacrament of the Euchrist, and ascended up into
heaven, then that Quod antiquissimum etc. That which is most ancient is most
true. Tertull: de prescript.
ancient law was yet kept, that Christian Priests did live in carnal
matrimony; and notwithstanding, many of them were the friends of God, because
they did believe with simple purity, that the same did please God, to wit,
that Christian Priests might keep wives and live in matrimony; as the same in
the old time of the Jews, had pleased him in the Priests of the Jews: and
this was so observed by Christian Priests for many years: but this ancient
custom and observation, did seem very hateful and abominable to the whole
heavenly Court, and to me who did bear his body etc. And therefore God himself
by the infusion of his holy Spirit, into the heart of the Pope, who then ruled
the Church, did give another Law, concerning this, more grateful and
acceptable unto himself, infusing Christ was wise as a little one, the Pope as
a perfect one.
into the heart of the Pope, that he should ordain throughout the universal
Church, that Priests who should have so worthy an office, as to consecrate this
precious Sacrament, should by no means live in the contaminous and carnal
matrimonial delectatio^, and after it is added, That no Pope may permit Priests
to live in marriage, and great punishment is is threatened against it: and after
it is added again thus; that if S. Gregory himself had appointed such a thing,
he should never Ibidem.
have obtained mercy at Gods hands, unless before his death, be should with
humility have revoked the sentence.

What a do we have in this vision? first, that the ancient Law of marriage, was
observed and kept for many years by such Christian Priests, as pleased God,
living in it: by which it is evident, that the Christian marrying of Christian
Priests, was more ancient then popish continency: Secondly I observe, that this
Law of Priests marrying was altered, because the Popes God did infuse into the
hearts of The Popes for bidding of marriage the doctrine of devils. 1. Tim. 4.
if we believe Briget.
Popes to change and alter the same: but what was the cause? marry, hear flat
Manicheisme; because (says the vision) Priests should not live (in
matrimonials contaminosa delectatione) in matrimonial contaminous and polluted
delectation: for which the virgin said, that the law of marriage, for Priests,
was hateful, both to her self, to her son, and to all the heavenly Court;
yea so hateful, that toward the conclusion of the vision thus it follows,
Nullus Papa potest, etc. No Pope may permit marriage to Priests under pain of
damnation.

What stuff is here? Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? I desire the
Readers to contain their laughter, the Popes power is curbed and limited, and
that from heaven: yea, and Gregory the Saint is so curbed, that if he should
offer to dispense with Priests to be married, he should infallibly, (unless
he would revoke his Law) be damned: away with this doctrine of Devils, so
contrary to the Popes absolute power, which may dispense in vows, so
contradictorious to Brigets own narration: the Saintesse acknowledges, that
in the Primitive Church, Priests lived in marriage, and that living in it, they
were the friends of God, because they did believe with simple purity, that they
might so do: but afterward, the case was altered upon secret revelation in
the Popes heart, (well says she, secret revelation, for the Pope had no such
revelation from the Scriptures nor the ancient Church) who commanded Priests
not to marry, nor live in marriage: after which Law, it is not, in the holy
Fathers power to grant marriage, or the use of marriage to any Priest, unless
he will be damned, which may not happen, in the men of sin and children of
perdition.

Sometimes when I have thought with my self of the strange paradoxes, which
are in these revelations of Briget, I have wondered how men of judgment should
give credit to the same, if the strong illusions of Satan did not powerfully
work in them: foolish is that, where Christ tells Briget, that he is Trinus
and vnus, Three and one. And little for the Popes credit is that, where Christ
himself describes the Pope to be worse then Lucifer, more unjust then
Pilate, more immane then Judas more abominable then the Jews themselves: how
vain is that, in the title of the first chapter of the book, of the heavenly
Emperor, which has thus, that God ordained the world to be ruled with a
double power, to wit, Ecclefiasticall and Laicall, which are principally
designed in Peter and Paul; but in the chapter it self, good God? how fondly
is Christ brought thus speaking? Ego autem habui duos optimos famulos, vnus
eoxam erat Clericus, alter Laieus, etc. I had two excellent servants, one of
them was a Clerk, the other a Laicke, the first was Peter my Apostle, having
the office of a Clerk, the second was my Apostle Paul, as a Laick: what an
excellent inference may heereout be inferred for the Popes power to govern the
whole Church as a Clerk? and the whole world as a Laike? For Peter and Paul
(say they) both died at Rome, who then shall be their Successor but the
Bishop of Rome? which being so, I marvel why Briget in her extrauagant
revelations, and in her heavenly Emperor, touching a certain Prince that was
to be deprined of his kingdom, does not send the admonition to the Pope, but
to the Princes Cap. 80. cap. 61.
of the Kingdom, that they should take arms against their Prince and deprive
him: why is there no mention made of the Pope, if he be chief vmpire in all
such affairs? some will perhaps object, that such fooleries as these, either
are not in Brigets revelations, or else that they are not authorized by the
Roman Church: but let such understand, that they are both in Briget, and that
her book also is authorized, as a book of divine revelations. One thing
amongst someothers, the late Answer plan Edition has scraped out: In the
fifth of six revelations (which were set before the book of revelations, after
the approbatorie Epistle of Cardinal Turrecremate, with subsignation of the
Scribe and Notary) it was thus written: Sicut Johannes Euangelista etc. Even as
John the Evangelist wrote those things which before saw were to come from my
Spirit, so Matthias thy Father, and Ghostly Father, (whom I have made a master)
from the same Spirit understands, and writes the spiritual truth of sacred
Scripture: Again, presently after the prologue thus it is written. Benedictus
Deus aquo hic liber inspiratus est immediate, and diuinitus reuelatus. Blessed
be God, from who^ this book was immediately inspired, and divinely revealed.
By which you may see of what authority her revelations are, when both she and
her master Matthias were both immediately inspired from God himself. See Lib.
6. revelationum, chap. 89. for the said purpose. This which I have delivered
out of Briget, I have found written in that Edition of hers, which was printed
at Nuremberg the year 15 17. by the great care and diligence of the Fathers of
her Original Monastery in Zuasthenes, in which is added a curse, both at the
beginning and ending of the same Edition, against all other revelations,
pretended to be of Briget, and which are not contained in that book.

Further, I will with patience of the Reader, add yet one other prodigy
touching the merits and power of Saints, for the aiding of souls in purgatory,
this is, of their prodigious Christine, whose wondrous life wholly to relate,
were (oleum and operam perdere) but lost labor. Surius 23. Iunij Thom. Cant.
in vita Christina. Carthus. lib. 4. de nouiss. Tilmanus lib. 8. collat. cap. 7
It is at large described, by Surius, by Cantiprat: by Dionyse the Carthusian.
Tilman Bredenbach has as much of it as concerns our purpose, and yet neither
will I trifle the time so much, as to write at large, what Tilman has;
pretermitting therefore the birth of this Cbristine, and the circumstances of
her education, she at length became such a delightful, and so enamoured a
Spousesse of Jesus Christ the son of God, that Tilman dares thus to write,
that although her virtues were not much known, yet Christ took great pleasure
in her: so that he applies that of Isay the Prophet to Christ (touching the
knot of love, betwixt Christine and him. Gloriatur apud Isaiam Dominus,
secretum meum mihi; est enim, verecundus amator Dominus, The Lord does glory
thus by the Prophet Isay, my secret to me; for the Lord is a bashefull Isay
24. 16.
or blushing lover (says superstitious Tilman) Demurre (courteous Reader) upon
this wise conceit of Bredenbach, my secret to me, and the Lord is a shamefast,
or bashful Lover; This Christine being by excess of contemplation brought to
her end, and carried into the Church to be buried, she remained for the space
of part of the mass (which was song for her) quiet and at rest: a little after
she begins to move in the coffine, and so strongly, that instantly, with a
kind of horror of all earthly things, she mounteth from under the hearse where
she lay, up to one of the beams of the Church, where she abides quiet until
Mass was done: in the mean while, all who were present (except her Sister) at
such an uncouth and horrible sight, were run away: Mass being done, the
Priest commands Christine to come down; she obeys his command, goes home
and eats with her Sister some meat, by which she was greatly refreshed;
then she reuealeth part of that, which she had seen in her trance; out of
which, I partly observe, how that when she was before God, it was put to her
choice, whether she would stay in glory still with him, or else return again
into the world (ibique in corpore mortali, absque illius detrimento poenas
perferre, ijsque omnes illas animas, quas in locis purgatorijs miserabatur,
liberare ac eripere) and there in a mortal body without any detriment of the
same, suffer pains, by them to deliver, and save all those souls, which she
with great pity, had seen in the pains of purgatory. And withal, with her
good example to move sinners to amendment of life and repentance. The Saintesse
accepts of the condition to return to her body, and to become a
Satisfactresse and Deliueresse for those Souls, which she saw in Purgatory:
which she performed so fully, that she would oftentimes, stand naked, in hard
frozen waters, she would often torment and afflict her self upon wheels and
gibbets of execution, she would often cast her self into hoate burning
fornaces and ouens: and yet never in any of these (like the three Dan. 3. 22.
children in the Babilonian furnace) sustain any corporal damage: and yet
notwithstanding, satisfy for the souls in Purgatory. As for giving example of
good life and repentance, she performed it so well, that she would often for
very horror of men and the smell of them, flee from their conversation: she
would often clime up to the tops of houses, Churches, and trees, hanging upon
the twigges thereof; and like a bird skipping from one bough to another; in
which places, she would be in such vehement and fiery panges of devotion, that
her whole flesh would melt (marvel she melted not away) and soften; and be
so foulded up together, like a soft ball of wax of around sphericall form; in
which manner of prodigious living, she continued unto her death, if you please
to believe Tilman Bredenbachius, Cantipratensis, Surius the Cart husian, and
others. Courteous Reader, what shall I say? or how may I sufficiently declaime
against the follies of these men? who will give credit to such impi^^^^s and
abominations? Familiar was the Devil in those Countries where the twelve
cubited man (as Iacobus a Voragine measures his length) or the twelue-footed
man (as he is measured by Petru^de Natalibus) went (as their lying Legend has)
to speak with the Devil, and to become his servant: and in the end served him
a long while, until Christ in the shape of a child, appeared unto him; if it
please you to believe their Records or our Comedians, who sometimes are
pleased, so to act this fable and superstitious Legend. But surely we may
think, that the Devil was more familiar amongst them, where Christine could,
and did hoppe up and down from twigge to twigge, could, and did, cast her
self into hoate burning fornaces, and heated ouens, and yet sustain no
damage; and who are those, who believe these things? Papists; and those, who
only (if it may so please the Gods) would be counted Catholic, Orthodoxe,
Christian; but are in truth Cacolike, Pseudodoxe, Antichristian. And so here I
leave them to their lying Legends; yet before I end, I will take pains out of
their own Authors, to add some few Visions, which are egregiously against
themselees; and are most likely to carry truth with them.

Certain visions and predictions against POPERY.
PHilip Commineus a grave Author, and of worthy credit, shall relate the
first; This man writes how one Hierome Zananorole, a famous Preacher in
Florence; did foretell the coming of Charles King of France into Commi. in
vita Carol. lib. 8. cap. 25. and 52.
Italy; and how he should safely arrive thither, and return with victory;
notwithstanding the small number of his Soldiers, in comparison of the enemies
and the infinite opposition which was to be made against him. And withal he
foretold, that because he did not reform the Church, according as appertained
to his office; that therefore, God would severely punish him; which Commineus
interprets to have been fulfilled, in that he presently lost, by sudden
death, his Heir apparent, the Dolphine of France; and himself also soon
after, ended, with a most miserable and wretched death. I begin with this
Vision, because it agrees with another of Christ himself to Briget;
commanding her his Lib. 6. reuelat. cap. 26.
Spousesse to write to a certain King to reform the Church; which says
Christ had so far gone from him, that except his mother had made intercession
for it; there would have been no hope of mercy: but the king was (as Briget
delivers Christ's commandment) to Ibidem.
gather together wise and spiritual men, such as had his spirit; and with them
to consult, how the wall of his Church might be reedified: this divine vision,
I relate, that the Pontificians may remember, that the reformation of the
Church belongs to the temporal Magistrate, having wise, and spiritual men,
(not only their Nothing more execrable in the sight of God, nothing more
pernicious to religion then imposition of hands upon the unworthy. Lib. 4.
Reuelat. cap. 140. 141. 142. 143.
Bishops) associated and joined in Council with him. Great is the charge of
Kings to do this, and great and immense is their danger, if they neglect it;
who in nothing can neglect it more, then if they suffer livings or imposition
of hands to be laid upon the unworthy. And may we not think, that such a
reformation, would have been acceptable to Christ, if performed upon Gregory
the eleventh, against whom, Christ revealed so many dreadful threatenings to
Briget; So, justly, may we not think that a reformation would now become the
Roman Synagogue; when not only the Personal sins of Popes and Cardinals,
are become most abominable; but the very state, office, and function of that
See, (and yet it is not at the highest, until she shall by decree of her
Council have obtained absolute, direct Monarchy, in all temporalls and
spiritualls) is become most execrable: so that, ratione officij, by the reason
of their office and Papacy, all Popes are become children of perdition and
destruction: not only because destroying others; but also because by reason of
their office, they are as men destroyed themselves. And here (to salute Paul
the 5. by the way) was there ever any time, in which that See was in worse
condition? no surely, never worse in respect of pride; which now is so great,
and intolerable, in that See, that Paul the fifth is not content, with all
other Popes at their first entrance to make unto himself a new triple and
monarchical crown, but he further suffers and permits his Nephew
Cardinals, and other his kindred, to have engraven in their vessels of silver
and gold this too too ambicious poesy; Eternitati Burghesianae dicatum;
Dedicated, to the Burghesian Eternity: He can also be content to have his
papal power, called the Pontificious omnipotency; and himself a most severe
Challenger, and Pursuer of the same; yea, a (Vicedeus) Vice-god. Never worse in
respect of covetousness, with which virtue this most holy one of Rome, is so
overtaken; that he is thought not to come behind Sixtus the 5. nor John the
22. for his avarice. Never worse, in respect of those worst sins which cry
for vengeance from heaven; at which this holy Father can greatly and
manifouldly wink, in his purpured Cardinals: witness, that late accident,
when no less then 15. boys the purpured brethrens Ganymedes, were discovered;
whereof two were burnt, the rest escaped but the purpured Incubyes were never
called in question. Never worse, in respect of corrupt affection to his carnal
kindred, whereof, he has above the wont of carnal Popes cardanalized diverse,
to the boulstering up of the Burghesian faction, and eternity. Never worse, in
respect of presumption of spirit, witness that his bold attempt against the
Venetians, which in the end, turned to his confusion: witness, that his
imperious command, and headlong censure, without any instruction at all against
the oath of Allegiance, which, if it were to the full looked into, might
greatly weaken his power in this Kingdom, otherwise it will infallibly
increase it, to the ruin of this Church. Never worse, in respect of bloody
attempts, against Christian Princes: witness, that never to be forgotten,
never to be sufficiently deplored and detested powder treason: (which
notwithstanding beyond the seas, I have heard called and approved, as a Roman
zeal, zeal of holy mother the Church) of his special Minions, and dearest
manciples, with more then hellish fury attempting the same, to the utter ruin
of this Kingdom. And yet, notwithstanding all these Papal ornaments, of such
detestable vices, he forsooth, and he only must be the Vicar of Christ, he
only a Vicegod, he only an vnerrable Judge in all controversies of faith, and
religion. But who ^^n doubt? but that he is in the same esteem before heavens
consistory, as Annas and Caiphas were, after they had rejected, and crucified
Christ? as Innocent the 4. was? concerning whom Matthew of Paris writes a very
Par. in Henrico 3.
strange vision, (worthy of the holy Fathers noting) made unto a certain
Cardinal, whose name that Author of purpose concealed: In effect it was thus,
that Innocent the fourth was presented before the seat of Gods majesty; and
was there accused by a glorious woman, who carried the form of a temple in her
hand, upon which, this word CHVRCH was written: and when Innocent cast himself
down prostrate, to beg mercy; the Matrone more instantly urged against him,
and accused him of three things; Prime cum in terris etc. First Two prodigious
visions.
whereas God had founded his Church free upon earth, he had made her a
handmaide. Secondly, the Church was founded to be a salvation for sinners, but
this man has made it a Sanctuary for Bankers. Thirdly, the Church was founded
in firmness of Faith, Justice, and Truth: but this man, has made Faith and
Manners to decay, has taken away Justice, and darkened Truth: Give me
therefore (says the Matrone) just judgment against him. To which things when
Innocent was not able to reply, he was taken away: whose end, of what sort
afterward it was, his desperate life may speak. But more clearly it
appears in the Vision of the Bishop of Lincoln, who summoned him to
judgment; concerning which, Ralph of Chester writes, that the very night, in
which Innocent died, there was heard a voice in the Popes Court summoning him
thus: Veni Miser ad iudicium Dei, Come thou Miser to the judgment of God: and
most fitly did the name Miser agree unto him, who to his servants and
favorites, being round about him, and deploring his death spoke thus; Why
weep you, you wretches and misers? do I not leave you all rich? that else
do you desire, or require? and so breathed out his corrupt soul.

This vision shows how tyrannically Popes have oppressed the Temple of God,
in which they sit, exalting themselves, but doubtless the patience of God will
at last strike home, and then how great the blow shall be against them, let us
hear their Briget (rather then the Prophet and Evangelist) declaring the same.
Roma est quasi ager, etc. Rome (says Christ) ^ as a field ouergrowne with
cockle and darnell; therefore it must first be Lib 4. Reuelat. cap. 57.
purged with a sharp iron, then cleansed with fire, and afterward ploughed
with a yoke of oxen: therefore I will deal with it, as he does who remoueth
plants (how then is Rome the eternal See of the Church?) into another place:
for such a punishment is due to that City, as if the Judge should say, Flay off
the whole skin, draw all the blood out of the flesh and cut all the flesh
into pieces, and so break the bones, that all the marrow may fall out: thus
their Briget, and Spousesse of Christ; how much to their content, let
themselves demurre. But we have a more firm prophetical speech which
warranteth us, that the purpured whore (by which the Roman Church is denoted)
which sits upon Apoc. 17.
many waters, governs many peoples, shall be desolated and ruinated, by such
Princes as had first drunk of the cup of her whoredoms: and this is so clear
a truth touching Romes destruction by such Kings, that the Pontificians
themselves cannot deny it; only they would shift it off from themselves and
their Popes, and lay it upon some one singular man, who shall reign three
years and a half and then destroy Rome, and with fire consume it: wisely
indeed, Antichrist reigning three years and a half, shall cause many
peoples, Kings, and kingdoms to drink of the cup of his whoredoms, and yet
the same kings and kingdoms within the space of the same three years and a
half, shall utterly desolate and ruinate Antichrist and his Antichristian
kingdom. Surely the Pontificians thus aduocating for their Po^^^ are to be
pitied; for if they should not so say, of necessary it would follow that they
were servants of the man of sin, and son of perdition. The cause which
makes them so eagerly to contend, for this their Roman supreme Monarchy, is,
because they account the very pith and marrow of religion, to consist in the
continued succession of Bishops in that See: wherein their glorying is but
vain: for I dare bind my self to show, that there is a better and a less
interrupted succession, in the Churches of England, then can be showed in the
Roman Church. Alas, for them, it is enough if they can show Church-walls,
Idoll-Bishops, and dumb Ptelates, (and yet for forsaking the communion of
such, they will condemn us as heretics and Schismatics) This folly the saying
of a grave father redargueth, non ille de ecclesia, etc. He does Ambros. lib.
6. in lutam.
not seem to go out of the Church, who corporally goes out; but he who
leaves the foundations of Ecclesiastical truth; we went from them in body,
but they from us in mind, we went from them in place, but they from us in
faith; we left with them the foundations of the walls, they left with us the
foundation of Scriptures. Which agrees well with that Prophecy which by some
is cited as of Hildegard but by others is delivered out of Hylarie, it is thus.
Vnum vos moneo, canete Orat. contra. Auxent. See another prophecy of
Hildegardis related in my motives out of Theodorick. nieme page 49.
Antichristum, etc. One thing I admonish you, beware of Antichrist; you are not
well affected with the love of walls, you do ill worship the Church in couers,
and buildings: you do ill under these pretend the name of peace: Is it
doubtful, that Antichrist shall sit in these? Mountains, and woods, and
lakes, and prisons, are more safe to me: for in these Prophets remaining, have
by the spirit of God prophesied. This prophecy seems well for the Papists
who glory so much (intemplo Domini) in the Temple of the Lord, the Roman
Church, the external succession, and yet but rotten, broken, often interrupted
by Schisms, as the Ponficians themselves cannot deny.

Another prophecy and vision I have for the Papists Lib. Reuelat. 6. cap. 72.
to delight themselves withal, it is taken out of their Briget, who brings
Christ speaking thus unto her. Filius dei loquitur, etc. The son of God
speaks to Briget. There are two spots in my Church, one is that few are
absolved without paying of money, the second is that Parish Priests dare not
absolve sinners from all their secret sins, but affirming that themselves
cannot absolve them, in certain cases reserved to Bishops; they do send such
sinners to the Bishops, who are so long in examining and discussing, until
such secret sins come to be made manifest: wherefore those who have zeal of
souls, must wholsomly oppose against such things; least their souls through
shame or obduration do die in mortal sins. This vision makes but little
for the Roman abuses in reserving cases; which is grown so intolerable,
especially since the Tridentine decrees, that it cannot sufficiently be
detested: the Collegiates and fellows of Jesus society have lost nothing by
such reseruations; for thereby (having greater privileges then others have)
they make increment in their wealth, by marchandizing of souls: the which how
well they perform, setting aside some other examples, the courteous reader may
observe by two fresh ones. Not long since, the mother of Cardinal A pair of
Ignatians deluded.
Sforsa being like to die, did, through the mediation and intercession of an
Ignatian her gostly Father bestow upon the Ignatians College a 1000 Crowns,
and gave her schedule for the same: the ghostly father having gotten the bill,
higheth him home, (looking for thanks) shows it to his fellow-fathers, who
considering the bill, found that it was not specified in the same, what manner
of crowns should be paid unto them: they therefore persuade the ghostly
merchant to return unto the Lady, and to entreat that the crowns might be
specified to be French crowns, and of gold, but in returning such was the
Fathers luck, that he meets with Cardinal Sforsa (his mother through
weakness being not to be spoken withal) who cunningly insinuates himself
into the Fathers business, which hearing he seems to applaude the same, and
to like very well of the suite: with which words the good Father was so ^ulled,
that he delivered the former bill to the Cardinal, desiring him to procure his
Mother to make of ordinary Crowns, Crowns of gold: the Cardinal no sooner
got the bill, but with an Ignatian trick of equivocation he rent it, and so
the Ignatian lost his errand.

The like happened in Naples; there was a Noble Woman of great substance, much
addicted to the Ignatians; who upon special entreaty of her Ghostly Father an
Ignatian, gave unto them toward their buildings a 1000 Crowns, with which
bill the Ignatian going home, he is commanded by his Superiors, to return
unto her again, and to entreat of her, that she would make that 1000 Crowns,
to be 1500: the good Lady hearing his request, was somewhat amated therewith;
but loathe to offend, tells the Father, that if he will stay until her
Steward come home, she will take care, that he might have his desire;
whereupon the good Father delivers back again unto her the bill, which she
takes; but upon the return of her man, and some consultation had with him,
she altreth her mind, and sends the bill of a 1000 Crowns which she had
received from the Ignatian, unto a certain Congregation of Theatines, which
was then arising in Naples: and so the good Ignatians nose was wyped of his
gold, and the poor Theatines their Antagonists very well contented therewith.
Some such other forfeitures upon their adventures, might be delivered; they
adventure so much, that it is no marvel if they often loose their adventures.
Their adventures in this kind, are very frequent, and great; as England,
Genoua, Rome, Venice, Flanders, very well know. But leaving them to their
gainefull trade, I will return to the Vision, which me thinks clearly
checketh the horrible abuses of the Pontifician Bishops, in the reseruations of
their cases: their metaphysicall defenses of these their dealings this place
serves not to handle: only, agreeing to the instruction of this Vision, there
have not as yet risen up amongst them any zealous reprouers and reprehenders of
these Pontifician abuses; and therefore those two spots (which our Savior so
greatly condemned) remain still in their Church, to the destruction Did. 40.
Cap. Si Papa.
and perishing of many souls: but of this no marvel, for it is agreeing to
their Canon, Si Papa. If the Pope should lead innumerable souls to hell, yet
no man may judge his fact, nor condemn his proceedings: which yet was not
observed by the Prelates of the French church, in the time of King Hugh, when
as at a Synod gathered Sinod. Rhem. sub Hugone.
at Rhemes, they did by the mouth of their famous, eloquent, and learned
speaker Arnulphus, condemn the Pope in diverse things, and resolutely
determine, that the Pope himself, if he would not hear the Church, might be
reputed as an Ethnike and Publicane.

Days and years would fail me, if I should stand to recount all visions,
which might be produced against themselves out of their own Authors. I have
heard some learned wish, that a mass of their visions might be published
together, to the reproving of their folly, and reducement of many to the Church
of God: I concur, in part only, in judgment with such. For I think that
such a course might perhaps be profitable with the judicious and intelligent
Papists, if they would take this as a principle with them, that, that Religion
cannot be of God, which needs to be supported and borne up with lies and
fictions; which are of such a dangerous consequence in matters of religion,
that as a holy Father has said, If but one lie only, could be found in the
holy Scriptures, it would be sufficient to discredit the whole. But as for
their superstitious Idiots, who are delighted with nothing more, then such
vanities, I suppose by tried experience, that little fruit would be gathered
thereby. Such a work (to publish such a mass of fooleries) would be exceeding
laborious to the Author; all which may well be supplied, if painful and
zealous Ministers, would with discretion and choice, eftsoons publish some of
their fooleries in Pulpit; I said with choice and discretion; because I would
wish that such things should be cited out of their own Authors, who are full
fraught therewith; and not taken out of such trifling Pamphlets, as Plutoes
travails, and such like. I heartily wish that such Preachers, at least
Doctors, who live amongst Popish or Semipopish people, would be more careful
what imputations they lay against them. They are exceedingly scandalized, when
any lies or such doctrine as they teach not, is imputed to them. A famous
Predicant of a Funeral erred egregiously in this kind within this year etc.
I was ashamed to hear him etc.

And here I cannot by the way but marvel, with what wisdom any man dare
presume to license, under the shadow of Majesty, such stuff, which although
in part true, yet for substance is vain. But let the courteous and christian
Reader be persuaded, that we need not to devise any thing in this kind
against our Adversaries, their works are so replenished with such fooleries,
against their own principles of Religion; that a scholar shall find it a
harder matter to relate them all, then to confute them; the first being
impossible, the second most facill and easy.

And here concluding, I give the Reader to understand, that although lying
signs, wonders, and prodigies in sholes and multitudes, are signs and marks
of Antichristianisme, especially in these later timer; nevertheless the mighty
hand of God does never so forsake his Church, (to leave altogether the rodds of
sinners upon the shoulders of his servants) but that sometimes, he does with
miraculous deliverances assist them: but this he does apparently, openly,
clearly, even in the sights, and to the confusion of their Adversaries; whenas
all their miracles, prodigies, wonders, are secret, hidden, from a far of, by
hearsay. For how else, but by the mighty hand of God, was the Church of
Bohemia, protected and defended in the time of King Sigismund, and Pope Martin?
who labored and proiected by the utmost of their powers, the ruin of that
Christian flock? For my part I dare compare those holy wars, of those
Christians, with those of the Machabies: yea, if we had them fully and
perfectly recounted unto us, we should find them to equallize, if not to
excel their victories: what can we think, but that the right hand of God did
powerfully aid them, when their Judas Machabeus, renowned Johannes Trosnoue
surnamed Zisca, did eleven several times, notwithstanding their huge forces,
foil and overthrow them? Was it done by means of humane strength? no, no, our
Adversaries will tell us the contrary. And to particularize in some, does not
Pope Aeneas Syluius cap. 48.
Pius the 2. in his History of Bohemia tell us, that when a threefold potent
Army, was gathered against these poor Christians, (a very handful of
soldiers) one out of all Saxony, and the Territories thereunto adjoining; the
second out of rich and warlike Franconia; the third out of Bauyre, Sueuia, and
the Provinces of the Rheyne, with valiant Captains appointed over them, did in
three several parts, with all violence assault those poor Christians,
intending their utter ruin: does not (I say) Pope Pius the second tell us,
that presently upon the sight of the Christians, (without doubt Gods terror
being in them) they did flee before them; yea (says Pius) non visum hostem
fugerunt, before they saw the enemy, they fled, and flew so hard, that they
ceased not to flee, until the Christians ceased to pursue them; by occasion
whereof their bag and baggage was left to the Christians, and an happy
occasion also given them to make spoil of many popish towns, and to impose
tributes upon them.

Thus in effect Pope Pius, who yet relates unto, us a more potent deliverance
of those Christians; for when upon such a shameful overthrow, the Papists were
ashamed; the Pope and Emperor together, gathered another greater (the
greatness whereof you may infer, because it had four thousand horse in it)
army, and then again therewith assaulted them; but Julian the Cardinal, who
was general for the Pope, over the whole Army, had no sooner entered into the
limits of those Christians, but presently (totis castris trepidatum est, and
priusqua^ hostis vllus in conspectu daretur, faeda fuga coepta) There fell a
dread and trembling over the whole Camp, and before any enemy was to be seen,
a filthy flight was begun. Who did this, but the Lord of hosts? like as of
old he did in the Camps of the Madianites, and Amalakites in the behalf Iud.
7.
of his people. And this flight (notwithstanding all, that the Cardinal could
do) gave great spoil, and left infinite riches to the oppressed Christians;
and so ill was there success against that people of God, that cessatum est a
bellis, there was a cessation of war, and by Popish cunning they did
afterward seek to subvert them. That these things, which I have written be
true, touching these Christians deliverances; inimici nostri sune iudices: Our
very enemies are Judges and witnesses.

And may we not admire the like providence of God, toward the Christians in
France, especially at Rochel, when God in his sweet providence, caused the
Sea to yield unto them, upon their shores (like as he did Manna in the desert)
abundance of fish, when as through extreme want, they were well nigh the point
to have surrendered? who else but GOD has discovered and brought to light,
diverse desperate attempts against our late Sovereign of happy memory? whose
finger else, but Gods, did confront against the Spanish ostentation, and Romes
curses in 88. Whose provident arm else, but Gods did bring to naught the
powder-vndermining which was carried so warily and charily; sealed with so many
Sacramental oaths, and protestations; that had not God revealed it, England
had been blown up, in her ruins. But why do I stand to recount these
miraculous deliverances of God? what? to make them necessary arguments of the
truth, of our holy religion? No, no: but to confront against the Adversaries,
and to show unto them that our deliverances, have been mighty and public;
even in the sight of the enemy, but their miracles are always in huggermugger,
brought from far off, and believed by hear say.

There he other more infallible marks of true religion, propounded in sacred
Scripture, the which I dare constantly challenge, as more specially to be found
amongst the reformed Churches, then amongst the Popish: as first, a great token
of a true Church it is, to have in it those, who with great zeal and
sincerity, are desirous to hear the word of God; according to that of Christ,
Oues meae vocem meam audiunt; My sheape hear John 10.
my voice: Christ says not, my sheep have heard, or shall hear my voice; but
thus, in the present tence: My sheep hear my voice, denoting thereby unto us;
that to hear the word of God, ought to be the daily, and never intermitted
work of Christians: in which, how far the Popish congregations, are
surpassed by the Christian Churches, no man can so well tell, as he who has
been amongst both: for my part I must needs confess that the zeal of
Christians herein, is incomparably more, then the devotion of Papists.

Again, in this says Christ all men shall know that you are John 13. 35. See
Delrius his Pref. in Mag. disquisit. discoursing upon the hate their order
finds.
my Disciples, if you love one another: How well this precept is observed
amongst the Pontificians, the must bitter oppositions betwixt Scotists and
Thomists; the enormous emulations and most horrible detractions in the Court of
Rome, betwixt Popes and Cardinals; the never ceasing calumnious contentions
betwixt Friars, white and black; betwixt Monks white and black; betwixt all
Monks, Friars, and the Ignatians; betwixt Ignatians, and the Seculars; do
clearly euince and demonstrate: God is my witness that I speak out of my
conscience, what I have observed; as for mutual love and charity, there are
more signs to be found in the Protestants of the reformed Churches, (when I
name Protestants, I mean the Zelous-ones not Semi-popish-ones, not
Semi-Atheists) then can be showed amongst the Papists.

Again, patience and meekness (if sincere, unfeigned) is an admirable sign
of true Christian religion. Now let all the Pontificians and Ignatians lay
their heads together, and give me one instance of such Christian patience
practiced in their Churches; as I will show practiced by this Church, State,
and Kingdom of England: I mean that incomparable patience, meekness, and
spirit of compassion, by which the Papists were tolerated to breathe in this
Kingdom, upon discovery of the Powder Treason: Had the like attempt been
acted in any of the Popish dominions; fire and reuengeful sword, would have
massacred not only the Actors and Abbettours, but even all those, who by
suspicion, might have been thought to have had any knowledge, consent, or
approuance of the same. And herein I dare speak what I know, that many Papists
(though otherwise, I dare say for them, innocent in the fact) did thereupon
expect utter ruin to themselves and their religion: yea did not the Arch
Traitor Garnet himself presage so much to his order, if the plot should
happen to be discovered. Therefore let it stand proved, that the Church of
England is guided and directed by the Spirit of God, which could in such a
sudden, show it self so merciful and meek, against such who with
sangnefreddo cold blood, as the Italian phrase is, would make bon-fires with us
if we were in their powers: and yet notwithstanding, great-fauourers and
receivers of Ignatians there are, where the Foxes lie and lodge (who would have
laughed if Westminster had been ouerturned) and who as yet, shadowed under
pufft wings tiffiny, and fardingals, do (as may be doubted) plot some like
enterprises, to the ruin of this Church and Kingdom; but beware of security,
O ye Christian Brittans! beware of security.

Again, humility is laid as a groundwork for Christian religion, to be built
upon; by which, humility, and poverty of spirit (not outward base garments,
coules, weeds, girdles, in not sparing of the flesh) to use the Apostles
phrase, is to be understood: now this poverty of spirit, Coloss. 2. 23.
must be especially regarded toward God; whereof, the Papists are so deprived,
that their very doctrine in one respect, leads them to that pride, and
presumption of spirit, which Christ detested in the Pharisee. Let all their
Catechismes be searched, and they will define unto you, that the sin of
presumption is, when a man looks for salvation without merits (their own
merits they mean) by which doctrine, it is as clear as noone days, that in
respect of salvation, their Popish may, and ought to hope for the same, partly
by their own merits: and what is this else, but a kind of presumption, even to
iustle with God? and with him to remember their merits. But the reformed
Churches, are so far from leading a man into this presumption of his own
merits; that I may say it and truly say it, that it is, as it were the sum
of our holy Christian, and Catholic doctrine, to bring a man to a perfect
apprehension and acknowledgement of his manifold iniquities and corrupt
nature; and by the acknowledging of the same, to bring him to such an
humiliation and depression of himself, and within himself; that for remission
of his sins, and salvation, he can look for no other means, but the only,
and alone merits of Christ's death and passion (And yet this not without store
of Christian good works to admonish the wise, and cauilling Papists by the
way) applied unto his soul, by a living and sincere faith; in which respect
our Christians are, or may be ever preserved in perfect humiliation of their
souls, and poverty of spirit.

As for humility toward man, good God, who observes not, that the Papists
have lest thereof? to particularize (though in time of persecution as they
pretend) do not they in exccesse of apparel surpass, at least equalize our
worst and disorderedst Protestants? I have often heard both Ignatian, and
Secular Priests affirm, the excess and curiosity of fashions, to have been
far worse amongst Papists then Protestants: and if they did not or would not
affirm it, who sees it not? whence I do demand of the Papists, have we our
daily innouations of fashions? not from out of France? where, as likewise in
Italy, the vanity and excess in apparel is too too unmeasurable; and for
brauing ostentation, what people under heaven come nigh by many degrees, to the
Hesperian Nation.

But to reflect upon their first point of doctrine in this consideration, by
which they affirm that he commits the sin of presumption, who hops for
salvation without merits, it is so far from assecuring their souls with
Christian comfort, that it does rather cause unto them endless afflictions,
and torment of mind, which I could confirm by many examples out of their own
histories. Nevertheless to show how pernicious this their doctrine is, for a
man any whit to rest upon his own merits, I will relate (perhaps a fable)
only one story, Coster conc. dom. 10. post pente.
which Coster produces solemnly in his Homilies. Thus it was. A certain holy
Eremite, living in a desert, being near his end; sends for a certain Abbot
dwelling near by, to come unto him and to housell him: he comes, and upon
his coming, by the ringing of a certain bell, a famous thief and a notorious
malefactor, draws near to the door of this Eremites Sell; where seeing the
Eremite using such devotion, he in his conceit thinking him to be a very holy
and blessed man; wished (so loudly, that the Eremite heard him) that he were
like unto him in holiness; which wishing of the thief, when the Eremite heard
he contemned him, and said within himself, that he had well wished, that he
had been in holiness like unto himself; and so continuing in such kind of
thoughts of his own merits, the Eremite dies: upon and for his death, the
Monk that came along with the Abbot, greatly lamenteth; and returning together
with the Abbot, in the way they find this thief (of whom we spoke before)
suddenly slain by some wild beast: at sight of which heavy chance, the
companion of the Abbot laugheth; for which, being reprehended by the Abbot, he
thus excuses himself, that God had revealed unto him, the different ends of
these two; of the Eremite, that he was damned, for pleasing and contenting
himself in his own justice; and that was the cause, why he so heavily
bewailed his death: of the thief and malefactor, that he was saved, for that
he did with humility acknowledge himself a sinner, and for salvation rested
and confided only in the mercies of God; and that was the cause, why he so
greatly rejoiced at his death. This story is related by Coster, as many other
like ones (to the reproouing of sundry Pontifician positions) though he
brings them against us Christians. How dreadful is that vision, related in
the great glass of examples? by which it is delivered: how upon Speeul. Mag.
Exemp. verbo damnatus. exe^. 2
that day when Saint Bernard dyed, it was revealed unto a certain Eremite, that
thirty thousand dyed, whereof one only with Bernard, went directly to heaven;
and three others to purgatory, which vision if it should be true, what may be
thought of those assecurances, which they give in the Popish Church, to all
such as dye in the same, with the copious furniture of their Sacraments and
their own merits?

Again, works of charity intended and instituted for the releeuing of the
poor, are great tokens of true Christianity, when they are done purely and
merely for the love of God. The Papists do brag much of this, but vainly;
for taking quantity of time for quantity, there are who dare undertake to show
as many works of piety (especially for hospitals and schools of learning)
done in the reformed Churches, as in any like time of popery: and yet such as
were done there with them, were done always with conceit of merit; to cause
Friars to pray for themselves, or the souls of their friends departed; or were
mixed with some like respect of self love, whereas all like works done in
Reformed Churches, have been done for no other end, but to relieve the poor,
further godliness, and please God, their doctrine excluding all manner of
merit, and hope therein, and all manner of fear of purgatory flashes.

Lastly, a sign of true Christianity, (especially toward the end of the
world) is frequent and devout meditation in holy Scriptures, the which is so
plentifully performed by zealous Christians, such as are touched with care of
salvation, in the Reformed Churches; that there is no comparison to be made
betwixt them and the Laikes of their Churches: who are so far from daily
meditating therein, that they dare not, nor may not, without special leave,
read in vulgar tongues, any parts or parcels of the same, which causes great
ignorance of sacred Scriptures in their Laikes: as also, the ignorance of their
Clerks therein is very gross, as by many particulars might be showed one
late one I will not here omit. There was of late (and yet perhaps is)
conducted up and down London, a Champion of the Papists, by a certain Knight:
this Champion disguised Cauiliere-like, either by accident or of set purpose,
is brought to the house of a certain Knight, where entering into disputation
about the Sacrament, he went rashly so far, as to teach that the very flesh
of Christ is rent and torn in the Sacrament by the teeth of the receivers.
(Which his manner of speech and defense, did not please the Knight his Guide
and Leader, he holding the contrary.) He also so profoundly discoursed upon the
Scriptures, that he would needs defend, that by the word Phase, (which is
interpreted, transitus Domini, the passing of the Exodus 12. 11.
Lord) was signified, the passing of the children of Israel through the red
sea. And is not this a jolly Champion, to be carried up and down the City, to
encounter either with Protestants or Ministers, indefence of Popish religion?
doubtless, they are unstable in faith, yea, already lost from faith, to use
Tertullians phrase, who are deluded by such; they are ouerladen and overcome
with sin, which are drawn away by such: but let them still rejoice in such,
Vt insipientia eorum manifesta fiat, That their folly may be made manifest:
The which God of his 2. Timoth. 3.
infinite mercy, vouchsafe to grant and guide the hearts of such as sit at the
stern, carefully and vigilantly (as they do) to look after such predicables
and transcendents which dare to come, sit, rest, walk and remain nigh the very
predicament of substance it self, to the perdition of diverse unstable souls:
he also vouch safe to open the eyes of all such, as by Popish illusions and
miracles, have been drawn to leave the charity of truth, of him, that is Via,
Veritas and Vita, the Way, the Truth and John 14. 6.
Life: To whom, with the Father and holy Ghost, be all Praise and Glory for
ever. Amen.

A second Addition, showing the vanity of a late pamphlet, in which the life
and death of one Edmund Gennings Pseudo-Martyr, is gloriously set down.
COurteous Reader; about the time I had finished this my discourse, it pleased a
very Reverend Father of this Church, the Right Reverend Bishop of Bathe and
Wels, to show me a petty transmarine pamphlet in print, gloriously bedeckt with
imagery representing unto the gazing Reader in pictures, the birth, life,
attachment, arraignement and execution, of one Edmund Gennings, who together
with one Swithune Wels (a merry Cricke, and boun Companion;) was according to
the Justice of the Laws of this Kingdom, put to death in Grayes-Inne-fields,
the year of our Lord God 1591. Having cursorily run over the pamphlet, I
should have reputed the same, the work of some childish Punie, orignorant
Wilson; but that I observed clearly by the two letters prefixed in the Front
of the book, and by some other circumstances, very clear, that the Author of
the same, was John Gennings, a Reverend Priest amongst them, and Brother to
Saint Edmund their pretensed Martyr. Both these, John and Edmund, were well
known to me: concerning whom and the pamphlet, (the contents whereof do so
square with the vanity of Popish miracles I have here handled) I thought good
to add these few observations.

First, that neither Edmund nor John conuersing amongst their fellow
Collegiates, were ever reputed to be of any note of Sanctity; what the learning
of John is, I cannot say; but if a man may take a scantling of his sufficiency
by this simple work, it must needs be reputed very I take it, that the
insufficiency of the book, is the cause why our Papists do deny any such thing
to be in print.
slender. The learning of the Pseudo-Martyr was very small, his short staying
in the College, not suffering him to be better furnished; and again, the
weakness of his constitution was a great hinderance unto him in that kind;
who otherwise also was not very capable of learning. His daily infirmities were
a cause that he was made Prefect of the Infirmarie (that is, appointed to be
an Ouerseer of the sick) whereby he was freed from certain scholasticke
burdens and duties which were incident to others: His effeminate constitution
and complexion, with carriage incident to the same, made him to be beloved of
the bearded Iuuentus, yea and the weakness of his constitution was a reason,
that he was by dispensation made Priest before he was 24. years of age; for
such is their fashion whom they find precipitate for Englands mission; though
they be imberbes to hasten them away, by giving unto them the dignity of
Priesthood: and no marvel that the Martyr hasted for England, whose daily
sickness and continual infirmities, hastened him to the grave in a strange
Country, if he had stayed at Rhemes any longer. This is all in effect, which
can be said touching his carriage, for that small time he was in the College,
and these be the beginnings of their Martyr, and I think that he who shall
read the pamphlet set out by his Brother, (who I doubt not did amplify what
he could, and set all his praises upon the tenter-hookes) may not find any
special point worth noting, commending either his learning or his Sanctity.

When I observe, how they have rashly set him forth for so glorious a Martyr, I
cannot but think of an other like Saint, who was sent from Rhemes about the
same time into England: This was one Waterson, who whilst Gennings was Prefect
of the Infirmary, served under one Master Mayor in the Sacristy, having charge
to keep the same clean, and to see that Candells, water, wafer-breades, wine,
and Mass vestiments should be in readiness, for those who were to say Mass.
This Waterson being of a very rough constitution, fitter to make a Ploughman
then a Scholar; ouergrown in years; not able to make good construction in
Latin; no, nor to expound ordinary and vulgar Latin; being found not fit for
Logic subtelties, was put to study, their positive Grosseries, cases of
divinity I should say: in which kind of learning, he made such speedy
progress; that upon a sudden he was Priested and sent over into England; the
which was not done without the offense and dislike of diverse in the College;
and others in England also: such was the man's sufficiency and his
conversation, in good fellowship etc.

But observe what follows; being come into England, so inconsiderate and
Goodfellowlike was his carriage, that he did not long escape the hands of
Justice, and being taken was according to the laws executed for his demerites;
whereupon their notes were so on a sudden changed, concerning the sanctity
of life, and glory of the death of this their Martyr, that it was a wonder
worthy laughter to hear them. Yea they were not ashamed to give out diverse
rumors of miraculous accidents which happened before, at, and after his death;
more then this our Pamphleter can, after so long consideration find out for
his Saint-brother. Which considering I cannot but observe this point, that it
mattereth not with the Pope and his Assecles, of what life and conversation
their Saints be, so it can be proved that they die stoutly and obstinately,
for the testimony of his unlimited supremacy: and it is worthy noting, that
they do most exalt and extol those fervent and fiery Spirits, who do give to
their Roman Jove absolute power to depose and dethrone Princes; and do speak
very coldly, of such their Martyrs, as die for refusing to take the Oath of
Allegiance; if being questioned about the Popes power to depose and dethrone
Princes, they answer more moderately, and temperately then others do.

And here, I advise the weak Reader, or any that may be popishly affected; not
to prize too highly this promptness in popish Priests to suffer death for the
glory of their Vice-Christ. There were of old the Circumcellions A Costro verbo
Martiriu^. Aug. ad Quodunlt. haer: 69.
stellae erraticae, wandering stars; nominated of that accursed Planet
Donatus, Donatists: these were so eager after the opinion of Martyrdom, that
if they could not find Authority which would kill them, they would destroy
themselves or kill each other. The Devil has never wanted his Martyrs; yea he
has so prevailed and bewitched many, that they have been cruel Butchers to
themselves, out of an apprehension of their own miserable estate, accounting
the most terrible of all terribles, death; to be the next way, and best means
for and to their felicity.

The learned and unlearned cannot be ignorant, but that many Ancient worthies,
Greek, and Roman, Infidel and faithful, have by daily meditation of deaths
power and the sting thereof, and by consideration of the benefits, that arise
from honorable deaths, so armed their minds, against the terrors of death,
that neither death her self, nor the immanitie of most cruel torments, could
ever contain them, from atchiuing, or attempting such honorable enterprises,
in which, they saw their glorious memories, should remain registered for all
future posterities. And yet in this they were for the most part led by a humane
Spirit: of such efficacy is Sacra fames gloriae.

I do specially note, that the condition of popish Martyrs of these times; was
lively forelineated in the Martirians; who so gloried in the number of their
Martyrs, that for their bragging in this kind, Antiquity worthily termed them
Martirians: For as those Heretics Epiphan, haeres. 80.
purchased a constancy and fortitude to contemn death by their meditations,
and Enthusiasticall exercises; so likewise these of Rome, appear evidently not
to have this their obstinacy to death from the Spirit of God, but As the
Martirians did superstitiously bury the bodies of their Martyrs and sing
praises to them, so do the Papists the very like.
do purchase the same, by their quotidian and daily exercises, in their
Seminaries and Colleges, appointed specially and ordinarily for the same
purpose. For, as at their entrance and admission into the College; they swear
to come into England whenever they shall be sent; so for ever after whilst
they are in the College they are admonished by their Rulers and Superiors, to
arm themselves against death, which the laws here, have appointed for such
their coming into this Kingdom: so that it is no marvel, if so long and
serious fore apprehensions and meditations, do obfirmato and make obstinate
their minds for the constant suffering of death, which is no more then is
daily and usually to be seen, even in the prophanest and vilest Malefactors
that come to die bravely, (as the phrase is) at Tiburne.

And to argue against them more clearly, if contempt of death be to be
admired, it is then most highly to be esteemed in such poor and simple
Persons, whom their Such worthy examples are most frequent in Acts and
Mo^uments of simple men and women of all sorts and of all ages since
Antichrists time.
Papal commandes, and most immane inquisitions have by the cruellest death of
fire, taken away in Spain, Italy, France, England, and where not? For their
constancy, as that in popish Priests cannot be attributed to any politic or
humane set exercises for such an end: No, no, it must needs be the spirit of
God, which speaks in them, and enableth them to bear patiently and joyfully
those immane Torments, and deaths most cruel and shameful, which the Pope
your holy Father has decreed against them. This I have spoken by the way only
as by a touch, lest any weakelings should be scandalized at their obstinate
sufferings. But let such ever carry that of Ciprian in their minds: Non poena
sed causa facit Martirem, It is neither death nor the manner of death which
makes a Martyr, but the cause. Which cause of death (if ever in any) then in
these Pseudomartyrs, is most far from giving them the crown of Martyrdom.
For setting aside a million of reasons which might be produced to show the
iniquity of their cause, I only at this present observe this one; If
antiquity did deservedly hold and decree, that such should not be reputed
Martyrs who moved with a seditious Spirit were killed destroying the Idols of
the Heathen the very objects of Conc: Elib. can. 60. The fathers add this
reason of their decree that no such thing is written or allowed in the Gospel,
no such thing read to have been done by the Apostles.
their idolaty, which not God, but the Devil had raised and erected: yea if
they thought him worthy of death, who at Nicomedia, Diocletian, and Maximian
being then there) did rent in sunder the cruel Edict which those Emperors had
published against the Christians, for the utter ruin and extirpation of them,
of their Temples, and of all divine worship. If I say, Antiquity reputed such
worthy of death, and would not honor them as Martyrs, who so attempted; with
what face then, are your Popes Soldiers, to be accounted Martyrs who seek
the ruin and destruction of their natural Sovereigns, whom the hand of
heaven has set over them, and do endeavor to rent in sunder, not their
Edicts, but that knot and band of Allegiance of their Subjects, wherein
consists their Regal authority? For as clear as the Heavens it is, that if
there be no Subjects, there can be no Sovereign; and Subjects there cannot
be, As all Kings are but as Viceroy^s under the great God of heaven, so
likewise all such as are under the Jove of R^me to be dethroned by him can be
no other then his Viceroyes.
where full and bound Allegiance is denied, as it is by all those who hold and
affirm, that the Pope has power to dethrone our Gracious Sovereigns: so
consequently as clear as light it self it is, that in their opinions Paul the
5. is King of England and our most Gracious Sovereign (whom God of his mercy
protect as the apple of his eye) his Viceroy and Substitute.

Touching the Contents of this Pamphlet, there is nothing worthy a Scholars
view; there are only some pretty gazing books for their blinde-Obedients; to
them we will leave them: that which I mind to examine are only some three
idle miracles thrust in, for want of better matter; I relate not the special
words of the Pamphlet, in respect that I have not at this present the Pamphlet
by me.

The first is a grand one, at the Martyrs birth, he was The first miracle of
M. Fd: Gennings.
forsooth borne with a tooth, with which sucking his Mothers breast, he did so
afflict and torment her, putting such fearful presages in her mind thereby,
that she was inconsolably troubled: But behold, she being thus perplexed, a
Romish Doctor, a Prophet enters in, and persuades her to be of good cheer,
for without all doubt (said he) this ominous tooth of the child, does forebode
that he shall travail beyond the Seas, and shall return again, to your, and
all his friends comforts. What a vanity is this? it were a sin to loose time
in refuting of it: many there have been borne with a tooth or teeth in their
head, and yet no omen made thereof. There was in my Parish of Ebbenye in Kent,
a woman borne with two teeth in her mouth, yet she never travailed beyond one
or two Seas, neither fell it out, that she was any great comfort to her
Parents; she is dead and has left behind her, children to her husband, for
whose teeth he is put carefully to provide; and this was the Omen of her two
teeth. And I think (if all be true I have heard) Mr. Gennings mother took no
comfort but great grief at her Sons return, though not so great, as the
mother of Garnet (the younger executed at Tyburne) did; for she hearing of her
Sons death, thereupon came to be distracted in her wits. Such comfort
received Garnetts Mother at his death; but perhaps he was not borne with a
tooth in his mouth, as Mr. Gennings was. Here I wish the Reader to weigh, unto
what shifts these auguring Papists are driven; to me, it is a most clear
argument of the badnesse of their cause, that they do so hunt after prodigies
and miracles for the stilting up of the same.

The second wonder I observe in this Pamphlet, is, The Martyrs second miracle
another Prodigy, si dijs placet. His belly being opened, his bowels cut out,
and his heart in the Executioners hand, yet the Martyr cries out, Sancte
Gregori ora pro me. Holy Gregory pray for me. Surely it had been a greater
prodigy, if his heart had cried so; or that his tongue being cut out, he had
so cried: but how impious are these men in their prodigies? what? were
christians ever taught by the example of Christ, command of Luc. 23. 46. Act.
7. 59.
Scriptures, practice of any Orthodoxe servant of God, at their departure
hence, to commend their souls into the hands of any creature? Search the
Scriptures, inquire of the Ancients, and learn us out of them such a manner of
practice. If ever, surely then, we are to commend our souls into the hands of
our Creator, when by his Summons we are cited hence. Imperet vobis Dominus and
obstruat ora loquentium iniqua. You have in your Legendaries, in your vitis
Patrum, in your Rosarie beatae Virginis, many most idle tales; how diverse
Penitents, by doing some acts of superstition to a Cross, to an Image; by
praying to some Saints, especially the Virgin Marie, have been prodigiously
and miraculously delivered: all these things are feigned to bring the worship
of the Creature in steed of the Creator. But this which your Gennings did, what
was it more or above that which is ordinary with superstitious, languishing,
and panging souls in the agony of death? what else was this then an argument
that life was not quite extinguished, nor his soul departed, when the
Executioner had your Martyrs heart in his hand? I hope M. Gennings that your
skill is not so slender in Philosophy, as to make the bowels of any man, so
absolute and total a receptacle of the soul, as that it is so most specially
resident in the same, that it may not without a special miracle, for an
instant or a short moment, continue in the heart, head, and tongue, at the
renting out of the bowels of man's body. The sum is, had your Brothers
tongue, or heart cried out, Sancte Gregori ora pro me, after his soul had been
departed, we might have reputed the same a Prodigy of the Devil, but not a
miracle of God: I say, a prodygie of the Devil, for I doubt not to call such
manner of invocations no other than Satan's instigations. What did your Gennings
more (nay he did less) then that Devil which being coniured to depart out of
a possessed woman, and at his departing to say the Pater Noster, and Aue Maria,
he added more and above, out of his own devotion, thus: Ah Holy Marie, pray
Ifingrenius apud Powel: de Ant. nota. 17.
for all those that visit this thy Chapel; Ah holy Marie, pray for them. And
that ye may be assured that it was the Devil who so prayed, he made his
invocation in Latin, a point above the possessed woman's reach. And as this
Devil prayed so heartily to the Virgin, for such as should superstitiously
visit her Chapel; so I doubt not to interpret, but that the Devil (whereof
Caesarius makes Caesar: lib. 5. cap. 36.
mention) which having served a certain soldier in the habit of a fair young
man, a long time, at his discharging out of his service, required a Bell to be
bought with the wages, which he accepted for his service; and the same Bell to
be hanged upon the top of an old Chapel, to call the people together: I doubt
not (I say) to interpret, that this Devil by such his erecting of a Bell,
aimed at some such superstitious worship, as your Martyrs (Sancte Gregori) was,
not at any such worship of God, as the holy Scriptures command and commend unto
us.

The third miracle which I observe in this martyrs The Pamphlet mentions
only these 3. miracles.
Legend happened thus; A certain namelesse Virgin there was, who longing after
some of the martyrs flesh, approached full of faith unto the basket into which
the martyrs quarters were cast, ready to be carried away and to be set upon
London gates; but not knowing how to obtain her desire, she presumes only to
lay her fingers upon one of the Saints consecrated thumbes; whereupon
presently (observe the miracle deserving a Baronius to annalize it) that
consecrated thumb which she touched Baronius fableth the like of a tooth for
the taking of which out of Cesarius his head three knives were broken, which
tooth after prayer came presently out very easily. Baroniu An. 11 38. I am sure
that neither my self some others nor Mr. Copley to whom John Gennings was
familiarly known ever heard thereof.
invisibly to all the standers by, did miraculouslie yield it self into her
Virginal hands, with which she joyfully departed keeping the Jewel close and
secret unto her self, until the arrived beyond the seas where and when she
made the miracle known to John Gennings brother to the said Saint Edmund
martyr; thus in effect happened the prodigy, concerning which and the manner of
it, I observe these points.

First I cannot without a kind of detestation think of the leuitie and
pronenesse which is in Papists, to admit of a miracle grounded upon so weak a
testimony of a maid, a simple maid, a namelesse maid, a maid concealing, till
she were beyond the seas; and there so covertly setting her miracle to sale,
that for ought I could ever hear there were none made acquainted with it
until now when this idle narration was to be made public.

Voraginous Jacob relates in the Legend of S. Austen how a great friend of
that Fathers bought of a Monk for a round sum of money a pretensed finger of
the same father, which nevertheless was found to be counterfeit though wrapped
up neatlie and charily in a fair piece of silk; what? could a Monk for some
lucre and gain deceive? and might not your virgin-maid have It cannot but be
marvelled at, how the thumb was never missed if the quarters were set up upon
the gates of London, etc.
some sinistrous respect to delude? you know how ordinary a thing it is for
poor maids to be put to their shifts beyond the seas, and to make the best use
they can of their wits, and all little enough: I do assure my self that if
the virgin-maide had spoke of the miracle before the quarters of their martyr
had been either rotten, taken, or consumed away; that the whole narration would
have been found a lewd tale of a lewd less: it is well for the credit of your
narration master Gennings that you now come out with the thumb, when the whole
arm and hand from which it miraculously came are rotten or consumed, for ought
I could ever hear.

But to show further the vanity of this narration, I observe secondly that
this miracle was not to confirm any point of the Roman faith to the
adversaries, but that it was only a spiritual dallying of God with the
virgin-maide, who longed after some of the martyrs flesh: how more glorious had
it been for your Church, and more for the confusion of the adversaries, if the
miracle had been done toto inspectante populo, the eyes of all the people
beholding it: pity it is that the claritie of your miracles is not more
perspicuous, they are done by your selves, upon your selves, and your selves
always, or for most part witnesses. Yea more, this miracle was not only not
showed to the people; but it was by miracle, yea by as many miracles, as there
were persons there present to behold it, (and yet did not or could not behold
it) the same was miraculously hid from them: and for this I note thirdly, that
whereas the standers by did not observe or could not observe the miraculous
parting of the thumb from the hand, the same is to be imputed to Gods special
power (or to the devils ministry by Gods permission) by which their senses
were bound; or secondly, some mist cast before them; or else thirdly the virgin
and the thumb were made strangely and prodigiouslie invisible, so that the
standers by could not apertis oculis, behold so sensible and apparent an action
done before them and in their sight. Oh how dear a Spousesse was this to have
so many prodigies done at one time, and in the same place to satisfy her
longing after the martyrs flesh! yea and further, to have the eyes of her
fellow-Catholikes bound up, that they could not behold the blessing God then
bestowed upon her. I say this, because I may not doubt but that diverse Papists
were then present at the very punctualdoing of the miracle, though her desire,
she presummeth only to lay her fingers upon one of the Saints consecrated
thumbes; wherereupon presently (observe the miracle deserving a Baronius to
annalize it) that consecrated thumb which she touched Baronius fableth the
like of a tooth for the taking of which out of Cesarius his head three knives
were broken, which tooth after prayer came presently out very easily. Baron in
An. 1138. I am sure thhat neither my self some others nor Mr. Copley to whom
John Gennings was familiarly known ever heard thereof.
invisibly to all the standers by, did miraculouslie yield it self into her
Virginal hands, with which she joyfully departed keeping the Jewel close and
secret unto her self, until the arrived beyond the seas where and when she
made the miracle known to John Gennings brother to the said Saint Edmund
martyr; thus in effect happened the prodigy, concerning which and the manner of
it, I observe these points.

First I cannot without a kind of detestation think of the leuitie and
pronenesse which is in Papists, to admit of a miracle grounded upon so weak a
testimony of a maid, a simple maid, a namelesse maid, a maid concealing, till
she were beyond the seas; and there so covertly setting her miracle to sale,
that for ought I could ever hear there were none made acquainted with it
until now when this idle narration was to he made public.

Voraginous Jacob relates in the Legend of S. Austen how a great friend of
that Fathers bought of a Monk for a round sum of money a pretensed finger of
the samme father, which nevertheless was found to be counterfeit though
wrapped up neatlie and charily in a fair piece of slike; what? could a Monk
for some lucre and It cannot but be marvelled at, how the thumb was never
missed if the quarters were set up upon the gates of London, etc.
gain deceive? and might not your virgin-maid have some sinistrous respect to
delude? you know how ordinary a thing it is for poor maids to be put to their
shifts beyond the seas, and to make the best use they can of their wits, and
all little enough: I do assure my self that if the virgin-maide had spoke of
the miracle before the quarters of their martyr had been either rotten, taken,
or consumed away; that the whole narration would have been found a lewd tale of
a lewd less: it is well for the credit of your narration master Gennings that
you now come out with the thumb, when the whole arm and hand from which it
miraculously came are rotten or consumed, for ought I could ever hear.

But to show further the vanity of this narration, I observe secondly that
this miracle was not to confirm any point of the Roman faith to the
adversaries, but that it was only a spiritual dallying of God with the
virgin-maide, who longed after some of the martyrs flesh: how more glorious had
it been for your Church, and more for the confusion of the adversaries, if the
miracle had been done toto inspectante populo, the eyes of all the people
beholding it: pity it is that the claritie of your miracles is not more
perspicuous, they are done by your selves, upon your selves, and your selves
always, or for most part witnesses. Yea more, this miracle was not only not
showed to the people; but it was by miracle, yea by as many miracles, as there
were persons there present to behold it, (and yet did not or could not behold
it) the same was miraculously hid from them: and for this I note thirdly, that
whereas the standers by did not observe or could not observe the miraculous
parting of the thumb from the hand, the same is to be imputed to Gods special
power (or to the devils ministry by Gods permission) by which their senses
were bound; or secondly, some mist cast before them; or else thirdly the virgin
and the thumb were made strangely and prodigiouslie invisible, so that the
standers by could not apertis oculis, behold so sensible and apparent an action
done before them and in their sight. Oh how dear a Spousesse was this to have
so many prodigies done at one time, and in the same place to satisfy her
longing after the martyrs flesh! yea and further, to have the eyes of her
fellow-Catholikes bound up, that they could not behold the blessing God then
bestowed upon her. I say this, because I may not doubt but that diverse Papists
were then present at the very punctual doing of the miracle, though their
blinded eyes saw it not. And so I end to speak any more of this Pamphlets
miraculous narrations: yet

I desire the Reader to observe with me how relike forgerers have been
heretofore found in ancienter times; so that now such kind of cousenage may
not be thought altogether strange.

That Rome it self has had counterset relikes, Laurentius Valla. de Ementit.
donat. Constant. Greg. l. 3. ep. 30.
Valla will confirm unto us. That the Church of Constantinople is also deluded
by false relikes, I gather thus out of Gregory, who in his Epistle to
Constantia Angusta writes constantly, and peremptorily, that the Church of
Rome, had not divided, nor durst never divide, or cut the bodies or relikes of
the Apostles; how then comes the Church of Constantinople to have had Bell.
lib. 2. de Sanct. Beatitud. cap. 3.
any of Saint Peter's relikes, as Bellarmine writes, and the public fame
goes. Again that the Grecian Churches were ordinarily abused with false
relikes; we may Greg. l. 3. ep. 30.
gather out of his said Epistle to Constantia, where herelateth how certain
Grecians, being found to dig up the bones of certain dead men, answered,
that they intended to carry them into their own country for relikes.

That France has been abused, Turonensis will tell us, Gregorius Turo^. apud
Azor. lib. 9 Institut. cap. 8.
who relates that a certain Impostor came out of Spain, pretending to bring
with him the relikes of Saint Felix, and Vincentius. As for Affricke Saint
Austen will tell us (if the Book be his) how it was abused and deluded by
August. de oper. Monach. cap. 28
Monks, carrying false relikes up and down. Further concerning this point,
Gregory and Austen will clearly Greg. lib. 12. ep. 31. Interrogat. 9. Respons.
ad August.
confirm unto us, that a whole Church and Congregation, did worship and honor
counterfeit relikes; and lastly, Sulpicius in the life of Martin, does
witness, that the bones of a notorious malefactor and thief, were honored,
as if they had been of a Saint and Martyr. By this, and more which might be
added in this kind, it does appear, how forgery has been on foot, and
practiced about relikes; and for my part in this special narration of Master
Gennings, I doubt not to affirm, but that his Virgin less has played a
trick of legerdemaine, about his Brothers thombe; to which his tale I think,
that as much credit may be given, as to the merry Genouyse Priest, who coming
out of Greece pretended to have brought with him Moses horns, which he wore
when he descended from Mount Sina: or else, to that merry Friar who proferred
to show in a box, as an admirable relike, one of the holy Ghosts fingers.

What then shall we say to this pretensed finger of this Virgin maid, whence
had she it? or what might it be? may we say, that because the Lowe-countries
was the place, where she first vented her Saints thombe, that perhaps she might
have lighted there, upon some one finger of those, which the merciless,
inhumane and Barbarous Spaniards, were wonted to cut from the hands of those
people; for greediness to have their rings? The distance of time, will seem
not to accord with this saying; and yet, why might not some of the Flemings
have reserved carefully some of those thombes or fingers; and so the holy maid
hit upon one of them?

Or shall we say, that it might be a thombe of some one other of their
Priests-Martyrs here at Tiburne? or else a thombe taken from some body,
appointed for the Anatomists. The truth is a man may hardly divine whence the
forged flesh was taken; assured I am for the reasons I have already added; and
further, because I hear not of any prodigious effects, wrought by the
miraculous piece (as the powerful custom of their Saints relikes is) that it
is counterfeit and forged: But before I end, I would advise Master Gennings to
make trial by the devils Oracle, in some of their exorcised Energuminisses
(as their wont is) whether it be the thombe of a John or a Ioane, or an Edmund;
you may be well assured Mr. John, if it be Saint Edmunds, and not a forgery
of your namelesse Ioane that it will make (like the relikes of your Briants and
Campians) the great devil himself to cry oh. It would be very fitting that
you would be pleased to make trial of it upon Mr. Bluet, if your many
exorcismes used upon, and over him, have not before this time killed both the
great Devil himself, and that most wretched creature his miserable habitacle.
As for the poor deluded Maid Virgin, if a wicked spirit had gotten power over
her for her wicked forgery, then it will concern you Master Gennings to cast
out the devil out of her soul, and conjure him at his going out to tell all
your blinde-Obedients at Brussels, and Saint Omers (as the devil cast out at
Saint Peter's in Rome out of a wench possessed, for disobeying her Father in
eating a little Costerus Postil. dom. 3. in Quadragess.
milk did there and then) that the maid should pass by Purgatory, and suffer
no other Purgatory in the next life. For as the poor wench in Rome deserved to
be freed from Purgatory, she suffered so this in life: so by a double title,
your Virgin maid deserves to pass by the fire of Purgatory, and mount up
immediately to heaven. But leaving such phrases, I pray to God to grant you
both, and all other seduced, here in this life, his holy purgatory of
repentance, and true faith in Jesus Christ.

This my discourse concerning the vanity and Antichristianisme of Popish
miracles, I have by the assistance of our Lord Jesus, brought to an end: he be
pleased to grant it such success, that it may turn to the glory of his most
blessed name, and the benefit of his Church Amen.

Deo soli Honor and Gloria.
A note of some of the special matters contained in this Treatise.
A
ANntichrist works miracles. page 9. 10 Antichrist dissembleth chastity. 17.
18 Austens works doubtful. 67 He teaches not adoration of relickes. 68. 69
Athanasius forged. 102 Antichrists miracles in M r. Floods opinion. 161 to 164
Antichrist fetches fire from heaven proved by many examples. 229. 230. 231 and
163 Antichristian miracles and their properties. 245. to 250 Antichrist wears
the Lambs horns. 238 The Image of the Beast speaks. 238. 239, 234
Antichrist and his preach Christ to be in penetrals how. 251. to 265 Absolution
of a dumb boy confessing by his mistress. 264 Attributes of God given to the
Pope. 273, Antichrist and his do miracles beseeming God. 157. 158

B
Breaden Idol. 73. 78 Mass Christ burnt. 103 Vomited. ibid. Bellarmine his
wilful lying. 151 Baptism and the profession of a Popish vow of like virtue
against sin. 206 Two beasts described. 227 236 237. etc. Beasts Image. 238.
239 Bellarmines eighth Sacrament. 107 His contradiction. ibid. Basils feigned
Mass. 296 Brigets visions. 297

C
True Church works not miracles. 8 Christ changes his heart with Catherine.
13 A cousening trick of a Friar with an Energuminisse 26 Certainty of Popish
miracles 46. 47 Church customs vary. 71 Chrysostom corrupted. 81 Churches
particular have erred 109 110. 116. 117 How Christ conuerseth in closets. 265.
255. mar. Coster his four places. 291 Christines prodigious reviving. 302 She
a redemptresse of Souls out of purgatory. ibid. Conuerts from Rome subject to
calumnies. 51 Et preface.

D
Dragons voice. 11 Doctrine of devils. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25 Devil delights
with Popish sacred things. 27 Devil dissembles with crosses 106. marg. 107
Dispensacion to votaries from Popes. 193 Dispensations what manner given by
Popes. 202 Dispensation and declaration how they differ. 194

E
Equivocation of an Ignatian. 29. 30 Equivocation casts acrow into a fever,
freed by absolution. 231 mar.

F
Who fly to Rome. 52 Master Fluds flanderous lying. 53. 54 His flattery. 55 His
idle divinity. 60 His lying. 86 His blasphemies. 20. 21 22. 23. 166 His skill
in numbering. 153 His lying. 153. Foreign mystery of the Pope and his
confederates. 180 181 Fear of Lipsius. 48 Of Maldonat. 253 A Friars devise.
112

G
Ground of Popish novelties. God tempts not, 215. 216. Gallonius his
blaspemy. 294. 295 Galeatius defended. 132 Gennings his prodigious tooth. 320
The prodigy of his miraculous finger. 331. 332 His prodigious praying at his
death. 330. 331

H
Hypocrisy of Pope and his. 284 Heavens, two of Coster. 291

I.
Ignatians first Library in Oxford. 40. Ignatians mystery. 61. Idolatry about
Images. 91. 92. 93. True use of Images. 94. 97. Images attired. 98 Image
crucified. 103 Iguatians policy. 138. marg. Their manner of restitution. 177
Their austereliues. 189. 190 Indians how converted. 178 Ignatius his Hobgoblin.
64 Best defense for Pope Ione. 148 Apaire of Ignatians gulled. 310. 311

K
A Papist King consumed with lice. 132. mar.

L
Laws of Popes for their Cleargies Celibacy resisted. 197 Laws ancient
cashierd by Popes. 198 Luthers conflict with the devil defended. 212 Laughing
toys diverse. 222 to 224 Lamb overcome how. 241 Literal interpretation of
the Beasts Image by Papists most fond. 232. 233. 160. 161 Laikes touch not
altar cloths 89

M
Miracles cease. 11 Maid of Lisbo. 14 Miracles no certain token of the true
Church. 34. 35 etc. 187 Madness objected by Papists 50. 51 Popish miracles.
89. 90 Monks roasted like geese in Purgotory. 224 Marriage of Priests
apostolical. 285 Manichaisme moved the Pope to forbid marriage in Priests. See
Brigets vision. 297. 298 Mystery of Church Papists. See Preface. Mysterye of
the Papist Ignatian. 61 Miraculous deliuerauces of the christian of Bohemia.
314. 315 Martyrians and their superstition. 327 Pseudo martyrdom. 328 Mystery
of Church Papists and Communion Recusants preface.

N
Newtons vision. 175 Nerius his ribs miraculous raised. 293 Nerius by smell
distinguishes virtues and vices. 295

O
Opinions touching Antichrist 56 Ordination of Bishops in the Church of
England. 133 Oaths desperate of Baronius, etc. 293. 294

P
Papists teach doctrines of devils. 16 Perjury of an Ignatian Priest 28 Priests
devise miracles. 33 Popish prodigies like Panyms wonders. 41. 42 Papist Angels
their negligence. 83. 84 Strange prodigies. 127 Popish miracles in Master Fluds
phrase. 134. 135. 136 Popes forge. 150 Proud. 143 Popes Turbant interpreted.
165 Popes fraud. 173 Popish forgeries. 182 Popes hardly saved. 280 Popish
Priests manner of making their Proselites. 186 Popish prodigies in England.
249. 250 Prophecies of Christ touching Antichrist. 251. 279 Parsons brag. 25
Popish exorcists, their conflicts with ihe devil. 23. 24

R
Romes Ineubies. 18 Her false fingers. 63. 64 Corruptions. 129. 130. 131 170.
to 173 Roman Empire taken out of the way. 238. 239 Roberts the Monk his brag
70 Regulus his Ass makes the sign of the Cross. 107 mar. 131 Relikes
counterfeit. 334

S
Stapletons error. 38 What is adored at receiving of the Sacraments why
kneeling. 73. 74. 75. Spanish gallants how they adore the Mass Christ. 79
Sixtus Quintus his end. 131 Satan does miracles. 157. 815 Spanish soldiers
cruelties. 179 Sanctity of Popish Preachers. 183 Sichems Goddess fell down
and is stolen. 47 Sacrament Christ equiuocateth. 90 Is buried. 297 Clipped. 22
Is consecrated by a possessed woman and is adored. 21 Signs of true
Christianity. 319. 320

T
A tale of Carmelite Monks 82 A false tale of a Jew. 88 The tale of Pope Ione
examined. 143. to 148

V
Vasquez his idle conceit about transsubstantiation. 3. Variance in popish
Doctors Vanity of popish tablets. 112. 113. Virgin Mary to be blessed. 125.
Adored by Papists as a mediatresse. 139. 140. 155. 168. Vision of Friar Leo.
155. mar That votaries may marry proved clearly out of popish principles. 191
to 211 A votary sins in keeping his vow of celibacie. 205. Popish votaries
ends of their vows. 205. Vows made for an ill end of no force. 207. Votaries
vows idle. 191. to 213 Viegas his blasphemy. 236. Vision of Briget for
marriage of Priests. 287. and Append. 297. Visions against Popery. and seq.
304. Visions prodigious. 307. Visions of Briget against the Church of Rome.
299. 308.

W
Master Whitaker defended. 218. The wound of one of the beasts heads cured.
241. Women in the habits of men. 145. Waterson Pseudomartyr. 325.

The courteous READER be pleased to mend these errates or the like.
PAge 12. vordicus read veridicus. Page same marg. lib. 2. read lib. 1. Page 15.
marg. Langius read Lazius. Page 81. honor read horrous. Page 101. premacio
read supremacy. Page same marg. mast. read mart. Page 104. with Father read
with the Father. Page 139. marg. Leo 1. read Leo 10. Page 146. breadlesse read
beardlesse.


