A WITTY AND PLEASANT COMEDY Called The Taming of the Shrew.

As it was acted by his Majesty's Servants at the Black Friars and the Globe.

Written by Will. Shakespeare.

printer's device: McKerrow 368 and 376, "framed device of a bird, probably a
smew, with the word 'wick' in its bill" NON ALTVM PETO I.S.

LONDON, Printed by W.S. for John Smethwicke, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Saint Dunstones Churchyard under the Dial. 1631.

THE Taming of the Shrew.
Actus primus.
Scoena Prima.
Enter Beggar and Hosts, Christophero Sly. Beggar. I Will pheeze you infaith.


Host. A pair of stocks you rogue.


Beg. You Are a baggage, the Slies are no Rogues. Look in the Chronicles, we
came in with Richard Conqueror: therefore Paucas pallabris, let the world
slide: Sessa.


Host. You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?


Beg. No, not a deniere: go by Ieronimie, go to thy cold b^^ ^^d warm thee.


Host. I know my remedy, I must go fetch the Head-borough.


Beg. Third, or fourth, or fifth Borough, I Will answer him by Law. He not budge
an inch boy: Let him come and kindly.


Falls asleep. Wind horns. Enter a Lord from hunting, with his train. Lo.
Huntsman I charge thee, tender well my hounds,
Brach Meriman, the poor Curre is imbost.
And couple Clowder with the deep mouthed brach,
Saw thou not boy how Silver made it good.
At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault,
I would not loose the dog for twenty pound.

Hunts. Why Belman is as good as he my Lord,
He cried upon it at the meerest loss,
And twice to day picked out the dullest sent,
Trust me, I take him for the dog.

Lord. Thou art a fool, if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such:
But sup them well, and look unto them all.
To morrow I intend to hunt again.

Hunts. I will my Lord.

Lord. What Is here. One dead, or drunk? See does he breath?

2. Hun. He breath's my Lord. Were he not warmed with Ale, this were a bed but
cold to sleep so soundly.


Lord. Oh mounstrous beast how like a swine he lies.
Gr^^me death how foul and loathsome is thine image:
^^^s, I will practice on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were conuey'd to bed,
Wrapped in sweet clothes: Rings put upon his fingers:
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?

1. Hunts. Believe me Lord, I think he cannot choose.

2. H. It would seem strange unto him when he waked,

Lord. Even as a flat'ring dream, or worthles fancy.
Then take him up, and manage well the jest:
Carry him gently to my fairest Chamber,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures.
Balm his foul head in warm distiled waters,
And burn sweet Wood to make the lodging sweet:
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound:
And if he chance to speak be ready straight
(And with allow submissiue reverence)
Say what is it your honor will command:
Let one attend him with a silver Basin
Full of rose water, And bestrew'd with flowers,
Another bear the Ewer: the third a Diaper,
And say wilt please your Lordship cool your hands.
Some one be ready with a costly sui^e,
And ask him what apparel he will wear:
Another tell him of his Hounds and Horse,
And that his Lady mournes at his disease,
Persuade him that he has bin Lunaticke,
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty Lord:
This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs,
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.

1. Hunts. My Lord I warrant you we will play our part
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less then what we say he is.

Lord. Take him up gently, and to bed with him,
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sound Trumpets. Sirrah, go see what Trumpet it is that sounds,
Belike some Noble Gentleman that means
(Traveling some journey) to repose him here.
Enter Seruingman. How now? who is it?

Ser. An't please your Honor, players
That offer service to your Lordship.

Enter players. Lord. Bid them come near;
Now fellows, you are welcome.

Players. We thank your Honor.

Lord. Do you intend to stay with me to night?

2. Player. So please your Lordshippe to accept our duty.

Lord. With all my heart. This fellow I remember,
Since once he plaide a Farmers eldest son,
It Was where you wooed the Gentlewoman so well:
I have forgot your name: but sure that part
Was aptly fitted, and naturally performed,

Sincklo. I think 'twas Soto that your Honor means.

Lord. It Is very true, thou did it excellent:
Well you are come to me in happy time,
The rather for I have some sport in hand,
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a Lord will hear you play to night;
But I am doubtful of your modesties,
Least (ouer-eying of his odd behavior,
For yet his honor never heard a play)
You break into some merry passion,
And so offend him: for I tell you sirs,
If you should smile, he grows impatient.

Play. Fear not my Lord we can contain our selves,
Were he the veriest anticke in the world.

Lord. Go sir, Take them to the Butterie,
And give them friendly welcome every one,
Let them want nothing that my house affoords.
Exit one with the Players. Sir go you to Bartholmew my page,
And see him dressed in all suites like a Lady:
That done, conduct him to the drunkards chamber,
And call him Madam, do him obeisance:
Tell him from me (as he will win my love)
He bare himself with honorable action,
Such as he has observed in noble Ladies
Unto their Lords, by them accomplished,
Such duty to the drunkard let him do:
With soft low tongue, and lowly courtesy,
And say: What is 't your Honor does command,
Wherein your Lady, and your humble wife,
May show her duty, and make known her love.
And then with kind imbracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom
Bid him shed tears, as being ouer-ioyed
To see her noble Lord restored to health,
Who for this seven years has esteemed him
No better then a poor and loathsome beggar:
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An Onion will do well for such a shift,
Which in a Napkin (being close-conuei'd)
Shall in despite enforce a waterie eye:
See this dispatched with all the have thou can,
Anon I Will give thee more instructions.
Exit a seruingman. I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
Voice, gate, and action of a Gentlewoman:
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter,
When they do homage to this simple peasant,
I Will in to counsel them: happily my presence
May well abate the ouer-merrie spleen,
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.

Enter aloft the drunkard with attendants, some with apparel, Basin and Ewer,
and other appurtenances, and Lord. Beg. For Gods sake a pot of small Ale.


1 Ser. Wilt please your Lordship drink a cup of sack?


2 Ser. Wilt please your Honor taste of these Conserues?


3. Ser. What raiment will your honor wear to day.


Beg. I am Christophero Sly, call not me Honor nor Lordship: I never drank
sack in my life: and if you give me any Conserues, give me conserues of
Beef: nere ask me what raiment I Will wear, for I have no more doublets then
Backs: no more stockings then legs: nor no more shoes then feet, nay
sometime more feet then shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over
leather.


Lord. Heaven cease this idle humor in your Honor.
Oh that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions, and so high esteem
Should be infused with so foul a spirit.

Beg. What would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher Sly, old Slies son of
Burton-heath by birth a Peddler, by education a Cardmaker, by transmutation a
Beare-heard, and now by present profession a Tinker. Ask Marrian Hacket the
fat Alewife of Wincot, if she know me not: if she say I am not xiiii. d. on
the score for sheere Ale; score me up for the lyingst knave in Christendom.
What I am not bestraught: here is


3. Man. Oh this it is that makes your Lady mourn.


2 Mar. Oh this is it that makes your servants droop.


Lord. Hence comes it, that your kindred shuns your house
As beaten hence by your strange Lunacie.
Oh Noble Lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams:
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Will thou have music? Hark Apollo plays, Music
And twenty caged Nightingales do sing,
Or will thou sleep? We Will have thee to a Couch,
Softer and sweeter then the lustful bed
On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.
Say thou will walk: we will bestrow the ground.
Or will thou ride? thy horses shall be trap'd,
Their harness studded all with Gold and Pearl.
Do thou love hawking? Thou have hawks will soar
Above the Morning Lark. Or will thou hunt,
Thy bounds shall make the Welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.

1 Man. Say thou will course, thy gray-hounds are as swift
As breathed Stags: I fleeter then the Roe.

2 M. Do thou love pictures? we will fetch thee strait
Adonis painted by a running brook,
And Citherea all in sedges hid,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the wauing sedges play with wind.

Lord. We Will show thee Io, as she was a Maid,
And how she was beguiled and surpised,
As lively painted, as the deed was done.

3 Man. Or Daphne roming through a thornie wood,
Scratching her legs, that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanlie the blood and tears are drawn.

Lord. Thou art a Lord and nothing but a Lord:
Thou have a Lady far more Beautiful,
Then any woman in this waining age.

1 Man. And til the tears that she has shed for thee,
Like envious floods ore-run her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world,
And yet she is inferior to none.

Beg. Am I a Lord and have I such a Lady?
Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak:
I smell sweet sauors, and I feel soft things:
Upon my life I am a Lord indeed,
And not a Tinker, nor Christopher Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,
And once again a pot o'th smallest Ale.

2. Man. Wilt please your mightiness to wash your hands:
Oh how we joy to see your wit resto'd,
Oh that once more you knew but what you are:
These fifteen years you have bin in a dream,
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.

Beg. These fifteen years, by my say, a goodly nap,
But did I never speak of all that time.

1 Man. Oh yes my Lord, but very idle words
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say, ye wear beaten out of door,
And rail upon the Hostess of the house,
And say you would present her at the Leete,
Because she brought stone-iugs, and no sea'ld quarts:
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.

Beg. I, the woman's maid of the house.

3. Man Why sir you konw no house, nor no such maid
Nor no such men as you have reckoned up,
As Stephen Sly, and old John Naps of Greece,
And Peter Turph, and Henry Pimpernell,
And twenty more such names and men as these,
Which never were, nor no man ever saw.

Beg. Now Lord be thanked for my good amends.

All. Amen

Enter Lady with Attendants. Beg. I thank thee, thou shall not loose by it.

Lady How fares my noble Lord?

Beg. Marry I fare well, for heereis cheer enough.
Where is my wife?

La. Here noble Lord what is thy will with her

Beg. Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
My men should call me Lord, I am your good man.

La. My husband and my Lord, my Lord and husband I am your wife in all obedi
nce.


Beg. I know it well, what must I call her?

Lord. Madam.

Beg. Alce Madam, or Ione Madam?

Lord. Madam, and nothing else, so Lords call Ladies

Beg. Madame wife, they say that I have dreamed,
And slept above some fifteen year or more.

Lady. I, and the time seeme's thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandoned from your bed.

Beg. It Is much, servants leave me and her alone:
Madam undress you, and come now to bed.

La. Thrice noble Lord, Let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two;
Or if not so, until the Sun be set.
For your Physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur you former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed:
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.

Beg. I, It stands so that I may hardly tarry so long:

But I would be loath to fall into my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in
despite of the flesh and the blood.


Enter a Messenger. Mess. Your Honors Players hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant Comedy,
For so your Doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness has congealed your blood,
And melancholy is the Nurse of frenzy,
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play,
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms, and lengthens life.

Beg. Marry I will let them play, it is not a Commontie, a Christmas gambold,
or a tumbling trick?


Lady. No my good Lord, it is more pleasing stuff.

Beg. What household stuff.

Lady. It is a kind of history.

Beg. Well, we will see it:
Com Madam wife sit by my side,
And let the world slip, we shall nere be younger.

Flourish. Enter Lucentio, and his man Triano. Luc. Tranio, since for the great
desire I had
To see fair Padua, nurserie of Arts,
I, am arrived for fruitful Lumbardie,
The pleasant garden of great Italy,
And by my fathers love and leave am armed
With his good will, and thy good company.
My trusty servant well approved in all,
Here let us breath, and happily institute
A course of Learning, and ingenious studies.
Pisa renowned for grave Citizens
Gave me my being, and my father first
A Merchant of great Traffic through the world:
Vincentio's come of the Bentiuolij,
Vicentio's son, brought up in Florence,
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds:
And therefore Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of Philosophy
Will I apply, that treates of happiness,
By verue specially to be atchieu'd.
Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left,
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
A shallow plash, to plunge him in the deep,
And with sacietie seeks to quench his thirst.

Tra. Me Pardinato, gentle master mine:
I am in all affected as your self,
Glad that you thus continue your resolve,
To suck the sweets of sweet Philosophy.
Only (good master) while we do admire
This virtue and this moral discipline,
Let Us be no Stoickes, nor no stocks I pray,
Or so deuote to Aristotle's checkes
As Ovid; be an outcast quite abiur'd:
Balke Logic with acquaintaince that you have,
And practice Rhetoric in your common talk,
Music and poesy use, to quicken you,
The Mathematickes and the Metaphysickes
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you:
No pro^it grows where is no pleasure taken:
In brief sir, study what you most affect.

Luc. Gramercies Tranio, well do thou advise,
If Biondello thou were come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness,
And take a Lodging fit to entertain
Such friends (as time) in Padua shall beget.
But stay a while, what company is this?

Tra. Master some show to welcome us to Town.

Enter Baptista with and his two daughters, Katerina Bianca, Gremio a
Pantelowne, Hortentio sister to Bianca. Lucen Tranio, standby. Bap. Gentlemen
importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolved you know:
That is not to bestow my youngest daughter,
Before I have a husband for the elder:
If either of you both love Katherina,
Because I know you well, and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.

Gre. To cart her rather. She Is to rough for me,
There, there Hortensio, will you any Wife?

Kate. I pray you sir, is it your will
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?

Hor. Mates maid, how mean you that?
No mates for you,
Unless you were of Gentler milder mould.

Kate. I faith sir, you shall never need to fear,
I-wis it is not half way to her heart:
But if it were, doubt not, her care should be,
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool,
And paint your f^ce, and use you like a fool.

Hor. From all such devils, good Lord deliver us.

Gre. And me too, good Lord.

Tra. Hushed master, here is some good pastime toward;
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.

Lucen. But in the others silence do I see,
Maids mild behavior and sobriety.
Peace Tranio.

Tra. Well said Mr, mum, and gaze your fill.

Bap. Gentlemen, that I may soon make good.
What I have said Bianca get you in,
And let it not displease thee good Bianca,
For I will love thee nere the less my girl.

Kate A pretty peate, it is best put finger in the eye, and she knew why.


Bian. Sister content you in my discontent.
Sir ^o your pleasure humbly I subscribe:
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to look, and practice by my self.

Luc. Hark Tranio, thou may hear Minerua speak.

Hor. Signior Baptista, will you be so strange,
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Bianca's grief.

Gre. Why will you mew her up
(Signior Baptista) for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue.

Bap. Gentlemen content ye: I am resolud:
Go in Bianca.
And for I know she takes most delight
In Music, Instrumen^s, and Poetry,
Schoolemasters will I keep within my house,
Fit to instruct her youth. If you Hortensio,
Or signior Gremio you know any such,
Prefer them hither: for to cunning men,
I will be very kind and liberal,
To mine own children, in good bringing up,
And so farewell: Katherina you may stay,
For I have more to commune with Bianca. Exit.

Kate. Why and I trust I may go too, may I not?
What shall I be appointed hours, as though
(Belike) I knew not what to take,
And what to leave? Ha. Exit

Gre. You may go to the devils dam: your gifts are so good here is none will
hold you: There love is not so great Hortensio, but we may blow our nails
together, and fast it fairly out. Our cakes dough on both sides. Farewell: yet
for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit
man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.


Hor. So will I signiour Gremio: but a word I pray: Though the nature of our
quarrel yet never brook'd Parle, know now upon advice, it touches us both:
that we may yet again have access to to our fair Mistress, and be happy
riuals in Bianca's love, to labor and effect one thing specially.


Gre. What Is that I pray?


Hor. Marry sir to get a husband for her Sister.


Gre. A husband: a devil.


Hor. I say a husband.


Gre. I say, a devil: Think thou Horensio, though her father be very rich,
any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?


Hor. Tush Gremio: though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud
alarums, why man there be good fellows in the world, and a man could light on
them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.


Gre. I cannot tell: but I had as lief take her dowry with this condition; To
be whipped at the high cross every morning.


Hor. Faith (as you say) there is small choice in rotten apples: but come, since
this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly
maintained, till by helping Baptistas eldest daughter to a husband, we set his
youngest free for a husband, and then have too t'afresh; Sweet Bianca, happy
man be his dole: he that runs fastest, gets the Ring: How say you signior
Gremio?


Grem. I am agreed, and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin
his woing that would thoroughly woe her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the
house of her. Come on.


Exeunt ambo. Manet Tranio and Lucentio. Tra. I pray sir tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold.

Luc. Oh Tranio till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely.
But see, while idely I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness,
And now in plainness do confess to thee
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was:
Tranio I burn, I pine, I perish Tranio,
If I atchueieue not this young modest gyrle:
Counsel me Tranio, for I know thou can:
Assist me Tranio, for I know thou will.

Tra. Master it is no time to chide you now,
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If love have touched you, naught remains but so,
Redime te captam quam queas minimo.

Luc. Gramercies Lad: Go forward, this contents,
The rest will comfort, for thy counsels sound.

Tra. Master, you looked so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you marked not what is the pith of all.

Luc. Oh yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand,
When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strond.

Tra. Saw you no more? marked you not how her sister
Began to scold, and raise up such a storm,
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din.

Luc. Tranio, I saw her corrall lips to move,
And with her breath she did perfume the air,
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.

Tra. Nay, then it is time to stir him from his trance:
I pray you awake sir: if you love the Maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to atchieue her. Thus it stands:
Her elder sister is so cursed and shrewd,
That till the Father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home,
And therefore has he closely meu'd her up,
Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.

Luc. Ah Tranio, what a cruel Fathers he:
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cuning Schoolemasters to instruct her.

Tra. I marry am I sir, and now it is plotted.

Luc. I have it Tranio.

Tra. Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and iumpe in one,

Luc. Tell me thine first.

Tra. You will be schoolmasters,
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That Is your device.

Luc. It is: May it be done?

Tra. Not possible: for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son,
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his Countriemen, and banquet them?

Luc. Basta, content thee: for I have it full.
We have not yet bin seen in any house,
Nor can we be distinguished by our faces,
For man or master: then it follows thus;
Thou shall be master, Tranio in my sted:
Keep house, and port, and servants as I should,
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
It Is hatched, and shall be so: Tranio at once
Uncase thee: take my Conlord hat and cloak,
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.

Tra. So had you need:
In brief Sir, since it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient,
For so your father charged me at our parting;
Be serviceable to my son (quoth he)
Although I think 'twas in another sense,
I am content to be Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.

Luc. Tranio be so, because Lucentio loves,
And let me be a slave, t'atchieue that maid,
Whose sudden sight has thral'd my wounded eye.
Enter Biondello. Here comes the rogue. Sir, where have you bin?

Bion. Where have I been? Nay how now, where are you?

Master has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes, or you stolen his or both?
Pray what is the news?


Luc. Sir come hither, it is no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time
Your fellow Tranio here to save my life,
Puts my apparel, and my countenance on,
And I for my escape have put on his:
For in a quarrel since I came ashore,
I killed a man, and fear I was descried:
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes:
While I make way from hence to save my life:
You understand me?

Bion. I sir never a whit.

Luc. And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth,
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.

Bien. The better for him, would I were so too.

Tra. So could I 'faith boy, to have the next wish after, that Lucentio indeed
had Baptistas youngest daughter. But sir not for my sake, but your masters, I
advise you use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies: When I am
alone, why then I am Tranio: but in all places else, you master Lucentio.


Luc. Tranio let us go:
One thing more rests, that thy self execute,
To make one among these wooers: if thou ask me why, Suffices: my reasons
are both good and weighty.

Exeunt. The Presenters above speaks. 1. Man. My Lord you nod, you do not
mind the play.

Beg. Yes by Saint Anne do I, a good matter surely: Comes there any more of it?


Lady. My Lord, it is but begun.

Beg. It Is a very excellent piece of work, Madame Lady: would 'twere done.
They sit and mark.


Enter Petrucio, and his man Grumio. Petr. Verona, for a while I take my leave,
To see my friends in Padua; but of all
My best beloved and approved friend
Hortensio: and I trow this is his house:
Here sir Grumio, knock I say,

Gru. Knock sir? whom should I knock? Is there any man has rebsu'd your
worship?


Petr. Villain I say, knock me here soundly.

Gru. Knock you here sir? Why sir, what am I sir, that I should knock you
here sir.


Petr. Villain I say, knock me at this gate,
And rap me well, or I Will knock your knaves pate.

Gru. My Mr is grown quarrelsome:
I should knock you first,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.

Petr. Will it not be?
Faith Sirrah, and you will not knock I Will ring it,
I Will try how you can Sol, Fa, and sing it.
He rings him by the ears
Gru. Help mistress help, my master is mad.

Petr. Now knock when I bid you: sirrrah villain.

Enter Hortensio Hor. How now, what is the matter? my old friend Grumio, and my
good friend Petruchio? How do you all at Verona?


Petr. Signior Hortensio come you to part the fray?
Contutti le core been trobatto, may I say.

Hor. Alla nostra casa been venuto multo honorata signior m^o Petruchio.
Rise Grumio rise, we will compound this quarrel.

Gru. Nay it is no matter sir, what he leges in Latin. If this be not a lawful
cause for me to leave his seuice, look you sir: He bid me knock him, and and
rap him soundly sir, Well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being
perhaps (for ought I see) two and thirty, a peep out? Whom would to God I had
well knocked at first then had not Grumio come by the worst.


Petr. A senseless villain: good Hortensio,
I bad the rascal knock upon your gate,
And could not get him for my heart to do it.

Gru. Knock at the gate? Oh heavens: spoke you not these words plain? Sir,
Knock me here: rappe me here: knock me well, and knock me soundly? And come
you now with knocking at the gate?


Pet. Sir begone, or talk not I advise you.

Hor. Petruchio patience, I am Grumio's pledge:
Why this a heavy chance twixt him and you,
Your ancient trusty pleasant servant Grumio:
And tell me now (sweet friend) what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here, from old Verona?

Petr. Such wind as scatters young men through the world,
To seek their fortunes farther then at home,
Where small experience grows but in a few.
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me,
Antonio my father is deceast,
And I have thrust my self into this maze,
Happily to wiue and thrive, as best I may:
Crowns in my purse I have, and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.

Hor. Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee,
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-fauor'd wife?
Thou Would thank me but a little for my counsel:
And yet I Will promise thee she shall be rich,
And very rich: but thou art too much my friend,
And I Will not wish thee to her.

Petr. Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we,
Few words su^fice: and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife:
*As wealth is burden of my woing dance)
Be she as foul as was Florentius Love,
As old as Sibell and as cursed and shrowed
As Socrates Zentippe, or a worse:
She moves me not, or not remoues at least
Affections edge in me. Were she as rough
As are the swelling Adriaticke seas.
I come to wiue it wealthily in Padua:
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.

Grue. Nay look you sir, he tells you flatly what his mind is: Why give him
gold enough, and marry him to a Puppet or an Aglet babie, or an old trot with
never a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two and fifty
horses. Why nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.


Hor. Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in,
I will continue that I broached in jest,
I can Petruchio help thee to a wife
With wealth enough, and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a Gentlewoman.
Her only fault and that is faults enough,
Is, that she is intolerable cursed,
And shrowed and froward, so beyond all measure,
That were my state far worser then it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of Gold.

Petr. Hortensio peace: thou know not golds effect,
Tell me her fathers name, and it is enough:
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder, when the clouds in Autumn crack.

Hor. Her father Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous Gentleman,
Her name is Katherina Minola,
Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.

Petr. I know her father, though I know not her,
And he knew my deceased father well:
I will not sleep Hortensio til I see her,
And therefore let me be thus bold with you,
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.

Gru. I pray you Sir let him go while the humor lasts. A my word, and she knew
him as well as I do, she would think scolding would do little good upon him.
She may perhaps call him half a score Knaves, or so: Why that is nothing; and
he begins once, he will rail in his rope tricks, I Will tell you what sir, and
she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so disfigure
her with it, that she shall have no more eyes to see withal then a Cat: you
know him not sir.


Hor. Tarry Petruchio I must go with thee,
For in Baptistas keep my treasure is:
He has the Jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,
And her withholds from me. Other more
Suitors to her, and riuals in my Love:
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearst,
That ever Katherina will be wooed
Therefore this order has Baptista taken,
That none shall have access unto Bianca,
Til Katherine the Cursed, have got a husband.

Gru. Katherine the cursed,
A title for a maid, of all titles the worst.

Hor. Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes,
To old Baptista as a schoolmasters
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca,
That so I may by this device at least
Have leave and leisure to make love to her,
And unsuspected court her by her self.

Enter Gremio and Lucentio disguisd. Gru. Here Is no knauerie. See, to beguile
the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together. Master, master,
look about you: Who goes there?


Hor. Peace Grumio, it is the rival of my Love.
Petruchio stand by a while.

Grumio. A propper stripling, and an amorous.

Gremio. Oh very well, I have perused the note:
Hark you sir, I Will have them very fairly bound,
All books of Love, see that at any hand,
And see you read no other Lectures to her:
You understand me. Over and beside
Signior Baptistas liberality,
I Will mend it with a Largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed;
For she is sweeter then Perfume it self
To whom they go to: what will you read to her.

Luc. What ere I read to her, I Will plead for you,
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
As firmly as your self were still in place,
Yea and perhaps with more successful words
Then you; unless you were a scholar sir,

Gre. Oh this learning, what a thing it is,

Gru. Oh this Woodcocke, what an Ass it is.

Petru. Peace sir.

Hor. Grumio mum: God save you signior Gremio.

Gre. And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola,
I promised to enquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man: For learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in Poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.

Hor. It Is well: and I have met a Gentleman
Has promised me to help one to another,
A fine Musician to instruct our mistress,
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.

Gre. Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.

Gru. And that h^s bags shall prove.

Hor. G^emio, it is now no time to vent our love,
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
I Will tell you ne^es indifferent good for either.
Here is a Gentleman whom by chance I met
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo cursed Katherine,
Yea and to marry her, if her dowry please.

Gre. So said, so done, is well:
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?

Petr. I know she is an irksome brawling scold:
If that be all Masters, I hear no harm.

Gre. No, sa^st me so, friend? what Countreyman?

Petr. Borne in Verona, old Butonios son:
My father dead, my fortune lives for me,
And I do hope good days and long, to see.

Gre. Oh sir, such a life with such a wife, were strange:
But if you have stomach, to it a Gods name,
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?

Petr. Will I live?

Gru. Will he woo her? I: or I Will hang her.

Petr. Why came I hither, but to that intent?
Think you, a little dinne can daunt mine cares?
Have I not in my time heard Lions rore?
Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds,
Rage like an angry Boar, chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great Ordnance in the field?
And heavens Artillery thunder in the Skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets clangue?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue?
That gives not half so great a blow to hear,
As will a Chesse-nut in a Farmers fire.
Tush, tush, fear boys with bugs.

Gru. For he fears none.

Grem, Hortensio hark:
This Gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes for his own good, and yours.

Hor. I promised we would be Contributors,
And bear his charge of wooing what soere.

Gremio. And so we will, provided that he win her.

Gru. I would I were as sure of a good dinner.

Enter Tranio brave, and Biondello. Tra. Gentlemen God save you. If I may be
bold
Tell me I beseech you which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?

Bion. He that has the two fair daughters: is it he you mean?

Tra. Even he Biondello.

Gre. Hark you sir, you mean not her to --

Tra. Perhaps him and her sir, what have you to do?

Petr. Not her that chides sir, at any hand I pray.

Tanio. I love no chiders sir: Biondello, let us away.

Luc. Well begun Tranio.

Hor. Sir a word ere you go:
Are you a suitor to the Maid you talk of, yea or no?

Tra. And I be sir, is it any offense?

Gremio. No: If without more words you will get you hence.

Tra. Why sir, I Pray you are not the streets as free for me, as for you?


Gre. But so is not she.

Tra. For what reason I beseech you.

Gre. For this reason if you will kno.
That she is the choice love of Signior Gremio.

Hor That she is the chosen of Signior Hortensio,

Tra. Softly my Masters: If you be Gentlemen
Do me this right: hear me patience,
Baptista is a noble Gentleman,
To whom my Father is not all unknown,
And were his daughter fairer then she is,
She may more suitors have, and me for one,
Fair Laedaes daughter had a thousand wooers,
Then well one more may fair Bianca have;
And so she shall: Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came, in hope to speed alone.

Gre. What, this Gentleman will out-talke us all.

Luc. Give him head, I know he will prove a Jade.

Petr. Hortensio, to what end are all these words?

Hor. Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptistas daughter?

Tra. No sir, but hear I do that he has two:
The one, as famous for a scolding tongue,
As is the other, for beauteous modesty.

Pet. Sir, sir, the first's for me, let her go by

Gre. Yea leave that labor to great Hercules,
And let it be more then Alcides twelve.

Petr. Sir understand you this of me (insooth)
The youngest daughter whom you hearken for,
Her father keeps from all access of suitors
And will not promise her to any man,
Until the elder sister first be wed.
The younger then is free, and not before.

Tranio. If it be so sir, that you are the man
Must steed us all, and me amongst the rest:
And if you break the ice, and do this seek,
Atchieue the elder, set the younger free,
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her,
Will not so graceless be, to be ingrate.

Hor. Sir you say well, and well you do conceive,
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must as we do, gratify this Gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.

Tranio. Sir, I shall not be slack, in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contriue this afternoon,
And quaffe carouses to ou^ Mistress health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.

Gru. Bion. Oh excellent motion: fellows le'ts be gone.

Hor. The motions good indeed, and be it so,
Petruchio, I shall be your Been venuto. Exeunt.

Enter Katherina and Bianca. Bian, Good sister wrong me not, nor wrong your
self,
To make a bondmaide and a slave of me,
That I disdain: but for these other goods,
Unbind my hands, I Will pull them off my self,
Yea all my raiment to my petticoate,
Or what you will command me, will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.

Kate. Of all thy suitors here I charge tell
Whom thou love best: see thou dissemble not.

Bianca. Believe me sister, of all the men alive,
I never yet beheld that special face,
Which I could fancy, more then any other.

Kate. Minion thou lie: It Is not Hortensio?

Bian. If thou affect him sister, here I swear
I Will plead for you my self, but you shall have him.

Kate. Oh then belike you fancy riches more.
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.

Bian. Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but iested with me all this while:
I pre thee sister Kate unite my hands.

Ka. If that be jest, then all the rest was so. Strikes her

Enter Baptista. Bap. Why how now Dame, whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside, poor Gyrle she weeps:
Go ply the needle, meddle not with her.
For shame thou hilding of a devilish spirit,
Why do thou wrong her, that did nere wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?

Kate. Her silence flouts me, and I Will be revenged.

Flies after Bianca. Bap. What in my sight? Bianca get thee in. Exit.

Kate. What will you not suffer me: Nay now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband,
I must dance barefoot on her wedding day,
And for your love to her, lead Apes in hell.
Talk not to me, I will go sit and weep,
Till I can find occasion of revenge.

Bap. Was ever Gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here.

Enter Gremio, Lucentio, in the habit of a mean man, Petruchio with Tranio,
with his boy bearing a Lute and books. Gre. Good morrow neighbor Baptista.

Bap. Good morrow neighbor Gremio: God save you Gentlemen.

Petr. And you good sir: pray have you not a daughter called Katerina, and
virtuous.


Bap. I have a daughter sir, called Katerina.

Gre. You are to blunt, go to it orderly.

Petr. You wrong me signior Gremio, give me leave?
I am a Gentleman of Verona sir,
That hearing of her beauty, and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty:
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show my self a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report, Which I so often have heard,
And for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine
Cunning in music, and the Mathematickes,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant,
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong,
His name is Litio, borne in Mantua.

Bap. You Are welcome sir, and he for your good sake
But for my daughter Katerine, this I know,
She is not for your turn the more my grief.

Pet. I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.

Bap. Mistake me not, I speak but as I find,
Whence are you sir? What may I call your name.

Pet. Petruchio is my name Antonio's son
A man well known throughout all Italy.

Bap. I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.

Gre. Saving your tale Petruchio, I pray let us that are poor petitioners
speak too? Bacare, you are meruaylous forward.


Pet. Oh, pardon me signior Gremio, I would feign be doing.

Gre. I doubt it not sir. But you will curse
Your wooing neighbors: this is a gift
Very grateful, I am sure of it, to express
The like kindness my self, that have been
More kindly beholding to you then any
Freely give unto this young scholar, that has
Been long studying at Rhemes, as cunning
In Greek, Latin, and other Languages,
As the other in music and Mathematickes:
His name is Cambio: pray you accept his service.

Bap. A thousand thanks signior Gremio:
Welcome good Cambio. But gentle sir,
Me thinks you walk like a stranger,
May I be so bold, to know the cause of your coming?

Tra. Pardon me sir, the boldness is mine own,
That being a stranger in this City here,
Do make my self a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous:
Nor is your firm resolve, unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This Liberty is all that I request,
That upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome amongst the rest that woo,
And free access and favor as the rest.
And toward the education of your daughters:
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
If you accept them, then their worth is great:

Bap. Lucentio is your name of whence I pray.

Tra. Of Pisa sir, son to Vincentio.

Bap. A mighty man of Pisa by report,
I know him well: you are very welcome sir:
Take you the Lute, and you the set of books,
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within.
Enter a Servant. Sirrah, lead these Gentlemen
To my daughters, and tell them both
These are their Tutors, bid them use them well,
We will go walk a little in the Orchard,
And then to dinner: you are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselues.

Pet. Signior Baptista, my business asks haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo,
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left solie heir to all his Lands and goods,
Which I have bettered rather then decreast.
Then tell me, If I get your daughters love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife.

Bap. After my death, the one half of my Lands,
And in possession twenty thousand Crowns.

Pet: And for that dowry, I Will assure her of
Her widdow-hood, be it that she survive me
In all my Lands and Leases whatsoever,
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.

Bap. I, when the special thing is well obtained,
That is her love: for that is all in all.

Pet. Why that is nothing: for I tell you father,
I am as peremptory as she proud minded:
And where two raging fires mere together,
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all:
So I to her, and so she yields to me,
For I am rough, and woo not like a babe.

Bap. Well may thou woo, and happy be thy speed;
But be thou armed for some unhappy words.

Pet. I to the proof, as Mountains are for winds,
That shakes not, though they blow perpetually

Enter Hortensio with his head broke. Bap. How now my friend why do thou
look so pale?

Hor. For fear I promise you, if I look pale.

Bap. What will my daughter prove a good Musician?

Hor. I think she will prove a soldier,
Iron may hold with her, but never Lutes.

Bap. Why then thou can not break her to the Lute?

Hor. Why no for she has broke the Lute to me:
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bowed her hand to teach her fingering,
When (with a moist impatient devilish spirit)
Frets call you these? (quoth she( I Will fume with them:
And with that word she stroke me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way,
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a Pillorie, looking through the Lute,
While she did call me Rascal, Fiddler,
And twangling Jack, with twenty such vilde terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.

Pet. Now by the world, it is a lusty Wench,
I love her ten times more then ere I did,
Oh how I long to have some chat with her.

Bap. Well go with me, and be not so discomfited.
Proceed in Practice with my younger daughter,
She Is apt to learn, and thankful for good turns:
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you.

Exit. Manet Petruchio. Pet. I pray you do. I Will attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes,
Say that she rail, why then I Will tell her plain,
She sings as sweetly as a Nightinghale:
Say that she frown, I Will say she looks as clear
As Morning Roses newly washed with dew:
Say she be mute, and will not speak a word,
Then I Will commend her volubility,
And say she utters piercing eloquence:
If she do bid me pack, I Will give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
If she deny to wed, I Will crave the day
When I shall ask the banes, and when be married.
But here she comes, and now Petruchio speak.
Enter Katerina. Good morrow Kate, for that's your name I hear.

Kate. Well have you heard, but some thing hard of hearing:
They call me Katerine, that do talk of me.

Pet. You lie in faith, for you are called plain Kate,
And bony Kate, and sometimes Kate the cursed:
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
Kate of Kate-hall, my super-daintie Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore Kate
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation,
Hearing thy mildness praised in every Town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
My self am moved to woo thee for my wife.

Kate. Moved in good time, let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence: I Knew you at the first
You were a moveable.

Pet. Why, what is a moveable?

Kat. A joined stool.

Pet. Thou have hit it: come sit on me.

Kate. Asses are made to bear, and so are you,

Pet. Women are made to bear, and so are you

Kate. No such Jade as you, if me you mean

Pet. Alas good Kate, I will not burden thee,
For knowing thee to be but young and light.

Kate. Too light for such a swain as you to catch,
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.

Pet. Should be, should: buzze.

Kate. Well taken, and like a buzzard.

Pet. Oh slow-wing'd Turtle shall a buzzard take thee?

Kate. I for a Turtle as he takes a buzzard.

Pet. Come, come you waspe, y'saith you are too angry.

Kate. If I be waspish, best beware my sting.

Pet. My remedy is then to pluck it out.

Kate. I, If the fool could find it where it lies.

Pet. Who knows not where a Waspe does wear his sting?
In his tail.

Kate. In his tongue?

Pet. Whose tongue.

Kate. Yours if you talk of tails, and so farewell.

Pet. What with my tongue in your tail.
Nay, come again, good Kate, I am a Gentleman,

Kate. That I Will try. she strikes him

Pet. I swear I Will cuffe you, if you strike again.

Kate. So may you loose your arms.
If you strike me, you are no Gentleman,
And if no Gentleman, why then no arms.

Pet. A Herald Kate? Oh put me in thy books.

Kate. What is your Crest, a Coxcombe?

Pet. A combelesse Cock, so Kate will be my Hen.

Kate. No Cock of mine you crow too like a crauen.

Pet. Nay come Kate come: you must not look so sour.

Kate. It is my fashion when I see a Crab.

Pet. Why here is no crab, and therefore look not sour.

Kate. There is, there is.

Pet. Then show it me.

Kate. Had I a glass, I would.

Pet. What, you mean my face.

Kate. Well aimed of such a young one.

Pet. Now by S. George I am too young for you.

Kate. Yet you are withered.

Pet. It Is with cares.

Kate. I care not.

Pet. Nay hear you Kate. In sooth you escape not so.

Kate. I chafe you if I tarry. Let me go.

Pet. No, not a whit, I find you passing gentle:
'Twas told me you were rough, and coy, and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar:
For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech: yet sweet as springtime flowers.
Thou can not frown, thou can not look a sconce,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor have thou pleasure to be cross in talk:
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft, and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate does limpe?
Oh sland'rous world: Kate like the hazle twig
Is straight, and slender, and as brown in hue
As hazle nuts, and sweeter then the kernels:
Oh let me see thee walk, thou do not halt.

Kate. Go fool, and whom thou keep'st command.

Pet. Did ever Dian so become a Grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gate:
Oh be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,
And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportfull.

Kate. Where did you study all this goodly speech?

Pet. It is extempore, from my mother wit.

Kate. A witty mother, witless else her son.

Pet. Am I not wise?

Kate. Yes, keep you warm.

Pet. Marry so I mean sweet Katherine in thy bed:
And therefore setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father has consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry greed on,
And will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now Kate, I am a husband for your turn,
For by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty that does make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me,
Enter Baptista, Gremio, Tranio. For I am he am borne to tame you Kaue,
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates:
Here comes your father, never make denial,
I must, and will have Katherine to my wife.

Bap. Now Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?

Pet. How but well sir? how but well?
It were impossible I should speed amiss.

Bap. Why how now daughter Katherine, in your dumps?

Kat. Call you me daughter? now I promise you
You have showed a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half Lunaticke,
A mad cap ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.

Pet. Father it is thus, your self and all the world
That talked of her, have talked amiss of her:
If she be cursed, it is for policy,
For she is not froward, but modest as the Dove
She is not hot but temperate as the morn,
For patience, she will prove a second Grissell,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity:
And to conclude, we have greed so well together,
That upon sunday is the wedding day,

Kate. I Will see thee hanged on sunday first,

Gre. Hark Petruchio, she says she will see thee hanged first

Tra. Is this your speeding? nay then godnight our part.

Pet. Be patient Gentlemen, I choose her for my self,
If she and I be pleased, what is that to you?
It Is bargained twixt us twain being alone,
That she shall still be cursed in company.
I tell you it is incredible to believe
How much she loves me: oh the kindest Kate,
She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
She vi'd so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twinke she won me to her love.
Oh you are nouices, it is a world to see
How came when men and women are alone,
A meacocke wretch can make the curstest shrew:
G^ue me thy hand Kate, I will unto Venice
To buy apparel against the wedding day;
Provide the feast father, and bid the guests,
I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.

Bap. I know not what to say, but give me your hands,
God send you joy Petruchio, it is a match.

Gre. Tra. Amen say we, we will be witnesses.

Pet. Father and wife, and Gentlemen adieu,
I will to Venice, sunday comes apace,
We will have rings, and things and fine arrayr
And kiss me Kate, we will be married a sunday.

Exit Petruchio and Katherine. Gre. Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?

Bap. Faith Gentlemen now I play a merchants part,
And venture madly on a desperate Mart.

Tra. I was a commodity lay fretting by you,
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.

Bap. The game I seek, is quiet me the match.

Gre. No doubt but he has got a quiet catch,
But now Baptista, to your younger daughter,
Now is the day we long have looked for,
I am your neighbor, and was suitor first.

Tra. And I am one that love Bianca more
Then words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.

Gre. Yongling thou can not love so dear as I.

Tra. Gray-beard thy love does freeze.

Gre. But thine does fry,
Skipper stand back, it is age that nourishes.

Tra. But youth in Ladies eyes that flourishes.

Bap. Content you Gentlemen, I will compound this strife
It Is deeds must win the prize, and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower,
Shall have my Biancas love.
Say signior Gremio, what can you assure her?

Gre. First, as you know, my house within the City
Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
Basins and ewers to laue her dainty hands:
My hangings all of tirian tapestrie:
In Iuory coffers I have stuffed my Crowns:
In Cipres chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and Canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions bost with pearl,
Vallens of Venice gold, in needle work:
Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs
To house or housekeeping: then at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pale,
Sixe-score fat Oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
My self am struck in years I must confess,
And if I die to morrow this is hers
If whilst I live she will be only mine.

Tra. That only came welll in: sir, list to me,
I am my fathers heir and only son,
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
I Will leave her houses three or four as good
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua,
Besides two thousand, Ducats by the year
Of fruitful Land, all which shall be her ioynter.
What, have I pincht you Signior Gremio?

Gre. Two thousand Ducats by the year of land,
My Land amounts not to so much in all:
That she shall have, besides an Argosie
That now is lying in Marcellus road:
What, have I choakt you with an Argosie

Tra. Gremio, it is known my father has no less
Then three great Argosies, besides two Galliasses
And twelve tite Galleys, these I will assure her,
And twice as much what ere thou offrest next.

Gre. Nay, I have offered all, I have no more,
And she can have no more then all I have,
If you like me she shall have me and mine.

Tra. Why then the maid is mine from all the world
By your firm promise, Gremio is out-uied.

Bap. I must confess your offer is the best,
And let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own, else you must pardon me:
If you should die before him where is her dower?

Tra. That Is but a cavil: he is old, I young.

Gre. And may not young men die as well as old?

Bap. Well Gentlemen, I am thus resolved,
On sunday next, you know,
My daughter Katherine is to be married:
Now on the sunday following shall Bianca
Be Bride to you, if you make this assurance:
If not to Signior Gremio:
And so I take my leave, and thank you both. Exit,

Gre. Adieu good neighbor: now I fear thee not:
Sir, young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waining age
Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy,
An old Italian fox is not so kind my boy. Exit.

Tra. A vengeance on your crafty withered hide,
Yet I have faced it with a card often:
It Is in my head to do my master good:
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, called supposed Vincentio,
And that is a wonders: fathers commonly
Do get their children: but in this case of woing,
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning. Exit.

Actus Tertia.
Enter Lucentio, Hortentio, and Bianca. Luc. Fiddler forbear you grow too
forward Sir,
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katherine welcomed you withal.

Hort. But wrangling pedant this is
The patroness of heavenly harmony:
Then give me leave to have Prerogative,
And when in music we have spent an hour
Your Lecture shall have leisure for as much.

Luc. Preposterous Ass that never read so far,
To know the cause why music was ordained:
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies, or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read Philosophy
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.

Hor. Sir, I will bear these braues of thine.

Bianc. Why Gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
To strive for that which rests in my choice:
I am no breeching scholar in the schools,
I Will not be tied to hours nor pointed times,
But learn my Lessons as I please my self,
And to cut off all strife here sit we down,
Take you the instrument play you the whiles,
His Lecture will be done ere you have tuned,

Hort. You Will leave his Lecture when I am in tune?

Luc. That will be never, tune your instrument,

Bian. Where left we last?

Luc. Here Madam: Hic Ibat Simois, hic est sigeria telus, hic steterat Priami
regia Celsa senis.


Bian. Conster them.

Luc. Hic Ibat, as I told you before* Simois, I am Lucentio, hic est, son
unto Vincentio of Pisa, Sigeria tellus, disguised thus to get your love, hic
steterat, and that Lucentio that comes a wooing Priami, is my man Tranio,
regia, bearing my port, celsa senis that we might beguile the old Pantalowne.


Hort. Madam my instrument's in tune.

Bian. Let Us hear, oh fie the treble iarres.

Luc. Spit in the hole man, and tune again.

Bian. Now let me see if I can conster it. hic ibat simois, I know you not,
hic est sigeria tellus, I trust you not, hic staterat Priami take heed he
hear us not, regia presume not, Celsa senis despair not.


Hort. Madam it is now in tune.

Luc. All but the base.

Hort. The base is right, it is the base knave that iarres.

Luc. How fiery and forward our pedant is,
Now for my life the knave does court my love,
Pedascule, I Will watch you better yet:
In time I may believe yet I mistrust.

Bian. Mistrust it not, for sure Aeacides.
Was Ajax called so from his grandfather.

Hort. I must believe my master, else I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt,
But let it rest, now Litto to you:
Good master take it not unkindly pray
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.

Hort. You may go walk, and give me leave a while,
My Lessons make no music in three parts.

Luc. Are you so formal sir, well I must wait
And watch withal, for but I be deceived,
Our fine Musition grows amorous.

Hor. Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of m^ fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of Art,
To teach you gamoth in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy and effectual,
Then has been taught by any of my trade,
And there it is in writing fairly drawn.

Bian. Why, I am past my gamouth long ago.

Hor. Yet read the gamouth of Hortentio.

Bian. Gamouth I am the ground of all accord:
A re, to plead Hortensio's passion:
Be me, Bianca take him for thy Lord
C fa ut, that loves with all affection:
D sol re, one Cliffe, two notes have I,
E la mi, show pity or I die.
Call you this gamouth? tut I like it not,
Old fashions please me best, I am not so nice
To charge true rules for old inventions.

Enter a Messenger. Nicke. Mistress your father prays you leave your books,
And help to dress your sisters chamber up,
You know to morrow is the wedding day.

Bian. Farewell sweet masters both, I must be gone.

Luc. Faith Mistress then I have no cause to stay.

Hor. But I have cause to pry into this pedant,
Me thinks he looks as though he was in love:
Yet if thy thoughts Bianca be so humble
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale:
Seize thee that List, if once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing. Exit.

Enter Baptista, Gremio, Tranio, Katherine, Bianca, and others, attendants.
Bap. Signior Lucentio, this is the pointed day
That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
And yet we hear not of our son in Law:
What will be said, what mockery will it be?
To want the Bridegroom when the Priest attends
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage?
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?

Kate. No shame but mine: I must forsooth be forced
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Unto a mad-braine rudes by full of spleen,
Who wooed in haste, and means to wed at leisure
I told you I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior,
And to be noted for a merry man;
He Will woo a thousand, point the day of marriage,
Make friends, inuit, and proclaim the banes,
Yet never means to wed where he has wooed:
Now must the world point at poor Katherine,
And say, lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife
If it would please him come and marry her.

Tra. Patience good Katherine and Baptista too,
Upon my life Petruchio means but well,
What ever fortune stays him from his word,
Though he be blunt, I knew him passing wise,
Though he be merry, yet withal he is honest.

Kate. Would Katherine had never seen though.

Exit weeping. Bap. Go girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
For such an injury would vex a very Saint,
Much more a shrew of impatient humor.

Enter Biondello. Bion. Master, master, news, and such news as you never
heard of,

Bap. Is it new and old too? how may that be?

Bion. Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchio's coming?

Bap. Is he come?

Bion. Why no sir?

Bap. What then?

Bion. He is coming.

Bap. When will he be here?

Bion. When he stands where I am, and sees you there.

Tra. But say, what to thine old news?

Bion Why Petruchio is coming, in a new hat and an old ierkin, a pair of old
breeches thrice turned; a pair of boots that have been candle-cases, one
buckled, another laced: an old rusty sword taken out of the Town Armory, with a
broken hilt, and chapelesse: with two broken points: his horse hip'd with an
old mothy saddle, and stirrops of no kindred: besides possessed with the
glanders, and like to mose in the chine, troubled with the Lampasse, infected
with the fashions, full of Windegalls, sped with Spauins, raied with the
Yellowes, past cure of the Fiues, stark spoiled with the Staggers, begnawne
with the Bots, Waid in the back, and shoulder-shotten, near legged before, and
with a halfe-chekt Bitte, and a headstall of sheep leather, which being
restrained to keep him from stumbling, has been often burst, and now repaired
with knots: one girth six times peec'd, and a woman's Crupper of velure which
has two letters for her name, fairly set down in studs, and here and there
peec'd with packthreed.


Bap. Who comes with him?


Bion. Oh sir, his Lackey, for all the world Caparison'd like the horse: with a
linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other, gartred with a red
and blew list; an old hat, and the humor of forty fancies pricked in it for a
teacher: a monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
footboy, or a Gentleman's Lacky.


Tra. It Is some old humor pricks him to this fashion, yet oftentimes he goes
but mean apparel'd.


Bap. I am glad he is come, howsoere he comes.


Bion. Why sir, he comes not.


Bap. Did thou not say he comes?


Bion. Who, that Petruchio came?


Bap. I, that Petruchio came.


Bion. No sir, I say his horse comes with him on his back.


Bap. Why that is all one.


Bihn. Nay by S. Iamy, I hold you a penny, a horse and a man is more then one,
and yet not many.


Enter Petruchio and Grumio. Pet. Come where be these gallants? who is at home?

Bap. You are welcome sir.

Petr. And yet I come not well.

Bap. And yet you halt not.

Tra. Not so well apparel'd as I wish you were.

Petr. Were it better I should rush in thus:
But where is Kate? where is is my lovely bride?
How does my father? gentles me thinks you frown,
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some Commet, or unusual prodigy?

Bap. Why sir, you know this is your wedding day
First were we sad, fearing you would not come,
Now sadder that you come so unprovided:
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eyesore to our solemn festival.

Tra. And tell us what occasion of import
Has all so long detained you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike your self?

Petr. Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear,
Suffices I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress,
Which at more leisure I will so excuse,
As you shall well be satisfied withal.
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her,
The morning wears, it is time we were at Church.

Tra. See not your Bride in these vnreuerent robes,
Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.

Pet. Not, I believe me, thus I Will visit her.

Bap. But thus I trust you will not marry her.

Pet. Good sooth even thus: therefore ha done with words,
To me she is married not unto my clothes:
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
'Twere well for Kate, and better for my self.
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
When I should bid good morrow to my Bride?
And seal the title with a lovely kiss. Exit

Tra. He has some meaning in his mad attire,
We will persuade him be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to Church.

Bap. I Will after him, and see the event of this. Exit.

Tra. But sir, Love concerns us to add
Her fathers liking, which to bring to pass
As before imparted to your worship,
I am to get a man what ere he be,
It skills not much, we will fit him to our turn,
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums then I have promised,
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope.
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.

Luc. Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
Does watch Bianca's steps so narrowly:
Twere good me-thinkes to steal our marriage,
Which once performed, let all the world say no,
I Will keep mine own despite of all the world.

Tra. That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business,
We Will ouer-reach the graybeard Gremio,
The narrow prying father Minola,
The quaint Musician, amorous Litio,
All for my masters sake Lucentio.
Enter Gremio. Signior Gremio, came you from the Church?

Gre. As willingly as ere I came from school.

Tra. And is the Bride and Bridegroom coming home?

Gre. A Bridegroom say you? it is a groom indeed,
A grumling groom, and that the girl shall find.

Tra. Curster then she, why it is impossible.

Gre, Why he is a devil, a devil, a very fiend.

Tra. Why she is a devil, a devil, the devils damme.

Gre. Tut, she is a Lamb, a Dove, a fool to him:
I Will tell you sir Lucentio; when the Priest
Should ask if Katherine should be his wife
I, by goggs woones quoth he, and swore so loud,
That allamaz'd, the Priest let fall the book,
And as he stooped again to take it up,
This mad-brain'd Bridegroom took him such a cuffe,
That down fell Priest and book, and book and Priest,
Now take them up quoth he if any list.

Tra. What said the wench when he rose again?

Gre. Trembled and shook for why he stamped and swore, as if the Vicar meant to
cozen him: but after many ceremonies done, he calls for wine, a health quoth he
as if he had been aboard carowsing to his mates after a storm, quaft off the
Muscadell, and threw the sops all in the Sextons face: having no other reason
but that his beard grew thin and hungerly: and seemed to ask him sops as he
was drinking This done, he took the Bride about the neck and kissed her lips
with such a clamorous smacke, that at the parting all the Church did echo: and
I seeing this, came thence for very shame and after me I know the rout is
coming, such a mad marriage never was before: hark hark I hear the
minstrels, play.


Music plays. Enter Petruchio, Kate, Bianca, Hortensio, Baptista. Petr
Gentlemen and friends I thank you for your pains,
I know you think to dine with me to day,
And have pr^par'd great store of wedding cheer,
But so it is, my haste does call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.

Bap. Is It possible you will away to night?

Pet. I must away to day before night come,
Make it no wonder: If you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go then stay:
And honest company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away my self
To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife,
Dine with my father, drink a health to me,
For I must hence, and farewell to you all.

Tra. Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.

Pet. It may not be.

Gra. Let me entreat you.

Pet. It cannot be.

Kate. Let me entreat you.

Pet. I am content.

Kat. Are you content to stay?

Pet. I am content you shall entreat me stay,
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.

Kat. Now if you love me stay,

Pet. Grumio, my horse,

Gru. I sir they be ready, the Oats have eaten the horses.

Kate. Nay then,
Do what thou can, I will not go to day,
No nor to morrow, not till I please my self,
The door is open sir, there lies your way,
You may be iogging whiles your boots are green:
For me, I Will not be gone till I please my self,
It Is like you will prove a jolly surly groom,
That take it on you at the first so roundly.

Pet. O Kate content thee prithee be not angry,

Kate. I will be angry, what have thou to do?
Father, be quiet, he shall stay my leisure.

Gre. I marry sir, now it begins to work.

Kate. Gentlemen, forward to the Bridal dinner,
I see a woman may be maid a fool
If she had not a spirit to resist,

Pet. They shall go forward Kate at thy command,
Obey the Bride you that attend on her,
Go to the feast, revel and domineere,
Carowse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselues:
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me:
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret,
I will be master of what is mine own,
She is my good, my chattels, she is my house,
My household stuff, my field my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing,
And here she stands, touch her who ever dare,
I Will bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua: Grumio
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves,
Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man:
Fear not sweet wench, they shall not touch thee Kate,
I Will Buckler thee against a Million. Exeunt. P. Ka^.

Bap. Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.

Gre. Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.

Tra. Of all mad matches never was the like.

Luc. Mistress, what is your opinion of your sister?

Bian. That being mad her self, she is madly mated.

Gre. I warrant him Petruchio is Kated.

Bap. Neighbors and friends, though Bride and Bridegroom wants
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no iunckets at the feast:
Lucentio you shall supply the Bridegroomes place,
And let Bianca take her sisters room.

Tra. Shall sweet Bianca practice how to bride it?

Bap. She shall Lucentio: come Gentlemen let us go.

Enter Grumio. Exeunt. Gru. Fie fie on all tired Iades, on all mad Masters, and
all foul ways: was ever man so beaten? was ever man so raied? was ever man so
weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are coming after to warm
them: now were not I a little pot, and soon hot; my very lips might freeze to
my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I
should come by a fire to thaw me, but I with blowing the fire shall warm my
self: for considering the weather, a taller man then I will take cold: Holla,
hoa Curtis.


Enter Curtis. Curt. Who is that calls so coldly?

Gru. A piece of Ice: if thou doubt it, thou may slide from my shoulder to my
heel, with no greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire good Curtis.


Cur. Is my master and his wife coming Grumio?

Gru. Oh I Burtis I, and therefore fire, fire, cast on no water.

Cur. Is she so hot a shrew as she is reported:

Gru. She was good Curtis before this frost: but thou know winter tames man,
woman, and beast: for it has tamed my old master, and my new mistress, and my
self fellow Curtis.


Cur. Away you three inch fool, I am no beast.

Gru. Am I but three inches? Why thy horn is a foot and so long am I at the
least. But will thou make a fire or shall I complain on thee to our mistress,
whose hand (she being now at hand) thou shall soon feel, to thy cold comfort,
for being slow in thy hot office.


Cur. I prithee good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?

Gru. A cold world Curtis in every office but thine, and therefore fire: do
thy duty, and have thy duty, for my Master and mistress are almost frozen to
death.


Cur. There Is fire ready, and therefore good Grumio the news.

Gru. Why Jack boy, ho boy, and as much news as thou will.

Cur. Come, you are so full of conicatching.

Gru. Why therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold. Where Is the Cook, is
supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewn, cobwebs swept, the seruingmen
in their new fustion, the white stockings, and every officer his wedding
garment on? Be the Iackes fair within, ^he Gils fair without, the Ca^pets
laid, and every thing in order?


Cur. All ready: and therefore I pray thee news.

Gru. First know my horse is tired, my master and mistress fallen out.


Cur. How?

Gru. Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs a tale.


Cur. Let Us have it good Grumio.

Gru. Lend thine ear.

Cur. Here.

Gru. There.

Cur. This it is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.

Gru. And therefore it is called a sensible tale: and this Cufte was but to
knock at your ear, and beseech listening: now I begin Inprimis we came down a
foul hill, my Master riding behind my Mistress.


Cur. Both of one horse?

Gru. What Is that to thee?

Cur. Why a horse.

Gru. Tell thou the tale: but had thou not crossed me, thou should have heard
how her horse fell, and she under her horse: thou should have heard in how
miery a place, how she was bemoil'd, how he left her with the horse upon her,
how he beat me because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to
pluck him off me: how he swore, how she prayed, that never prayed before: how
I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was burst: how I lost my
crupper, with many things of worthy memory, which now shall die in oblivion,
and thou return vnexperienc'd to the grave.


Cur. By this reckning he more shrew than she.

Gru. I, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes
home. But what talk I of this? Call forth Nathaniell, Joseph, Nicholas,
Phillip, Walter, Sugersop and the rest: let their heads be slickely combed,
their blew coats brushed, and their garters of an indifferent knit, let them
curtsie with their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my Masters
horse-taile till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?


Cur. They are.

Gru. Call them forth.

Cur. Do you hear ho? you must meet my master to countenance my mistress.


Gru. Why she has a face of her own.

Cur. Who knows not that?

Gru. Thou it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.


Cur. I call them forth to credit her.

Enter four or five seruingmen. Gru. Why she comes to borrow nothing of them.

Not. Welcome home Grumio.

Phil. How now Grumio.

Ios. What Grumio.

Nick. Fellow Grumio.

Not. How now old lad,

Gru. Welcome you: how now you: what you: fellow you: and thus much for
greeting. Now my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat?


Not. All things is ready, how near is our master?

Gre. E'ne at hand, alighted by this: and therefore be not --
Cocks passion, silence, I here my master.

Enter Petruchio and Kate. Pet. Where be these knaves? what no man at door
To hold my stirrup, nor to take my horse?
Where is Nathaniell, Gregory, Phillip.

All ser. Here, here sir, here sir.

Pet. Here sir, here sir, here sir, here sir.
You logger-headed and vnp^llisht grooms:
What? no attendants? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?

Gru. Here sir, as foolish as I was before.

Pet. You pezant, swain, you horson malt-horse drudg
Did I not bid thee meet me in the Park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?

Grumio. Nathaniels coat sir was not fully made,
And Gabriels pumpes, were all vnpinkt in the heel:
There was no Link to color Peter's hat,
And Walters dagger was not come from sheathing:
There were none fine, but Adam, Rafe, and Gregory,
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly,
Yet as they are, here are they come to meet you.

Pet. Go rascals, go, and fetch my supper in. Ex. Ser.
Where is the life that late I led?
Where are those? Sit down Kate,
And welcome. Soud, soud, soud, soud.
Enter servants with supper. Why when I say? Nay good sweet Kate be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues: you villains, when?
It was the Friar of Orders gray,
As he forth walked on his way.
Out you rogue, you pluck my foot awrie,
Take that, and mend the plucking of the other
Be merry Kate: Some water here: what hoa.
Enter one with water. Where Is my Spaniel Troilus? Sir, get you hence,
And bid my cozen Ferdinand come hither:
One Kate that you must kiss, and be acquainted with.
Where are my Slippers? shall I have some water?
Come Kate and wash, and welcome heartily:
You horson villain, will you let it fall?

Kate. Patience I pray you, 'twas a fault unwilling.

Pet. A horson beetle-headed flap-ear'd knave:
Come Kate sit down, I know you have a stomach,
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?
What Is this, Mutton?

1. Ser. I.

Pet. Who brought it?

Peter. I.

Pet. It Is burnt, and so is all the meat
What dogs are these? Where is the rascal Cook?
How durst you villains bring it from the dresser
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all:
You heedlesse iolt-heads and vnmanner'd slaves.
What, do you grumble? I Will be with you straight.

Kate. I pray you husband be not so disquiet,
The meat was well, if you were so contented.

Pet. I tell thee Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away,
And I expressesly am forbid to touch it:
For it engenders choler, planteth anger,
And better 'twere that both of us did fast,
Since of our selves, our selves are chollericke,
Then feed it with such ouer-rosted flesh:
Be patient, to morrow 't shall be mended,
And for this night we will fast for company.
Come I will bring thee to thy Bridal chamber. Exeunt

Enter Servants severally. Not. Peter did ever see the like.

Peter. He kills her in her own humor.

Grumio. Where is he?

Enter Curtis a Servant. Cur. In her chamber, making a sermon of continency to
her, and railes, and swears, and rates, that she (poor soul) knows not
which way to stand, to look, to speak, and sits as one new risen from a
dream. Away, away, for he is coming hither.


Enter Petruchio. Pet. Thus have I politickely begun my reign,
And it is my hope to end successefully:
My Faulcon now is sharp, and passing empty,
And till she stoop, she must not be full gorged,
For then she never looks upon her lure,
Another way I have to man my Haggard,
To make her come, and know her keepers call:
That is, to watch her, as we watch these Kites,
That bait, and beat, and will not be obedient:
She eat no meat to day, nor none shall eat.
Last night she slept not, nor to night she shall not:
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
I Will find about the making of the bed,
And here I Will fling the pillow, there the boulster,
This way the Couerlet, another way the sheets:
I, and amid this hurly I intend,
That all is done in reverend care of her,
And in conclusion, she shall watch all night,
And if she chance to nod, I Will rail and brawle,
And with the clamor keep her still awake:
This is a way to kill a Wife with kindness,
And thus I Will curb her mad and headstrong humor:
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak, it is charity to show. Exit.

Enter Tranio and Hortensio: Tra. Is It possible friend Lisio, that Mistress
Bianca
Does fancy any other but Lucentio,
I tell you sir, she bears me fair in hand,

Luc. Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by, and mark the manner of his teaching.

Enter Bianca. Hor. Now Mistress profit you in what you read?

Bian. What Master read you first, resolve me that?

Hor. I read, that I profess the Art to love.

Bian. And may you prove sir Master of your Art.

Luc. While you sweet dear prove Mistress of my heart.

Hor. Quick proceeders marry, now tell me I pray,
You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca
Loved me in the world so well as Lucentio.

Tra. Oh despightfull Love, unconstant womankind,
I tell thee Lisio this is wonderful.

Hor. Mistake no more, I am not Lisio,
Nor a Musician as I seem to be,
But one that scorn to live in this disguise,
For such a one as leaves a Gentleman,
And makes a God of such a Cullion;
Know sir, that I am called Hortensio.

Tra. Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca,
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca, and her love for ever.

Hor. See how they kiss and court: Signior, Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her more, but do forswear her
As one unworthy all the former favors
That I have fondly flattered them withal.

Tra. And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her, though she would entreat,
Fie on her, see how beastly she does court him.

Hor. Would all the world but he had quite forsworn
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath.
I will be married to a wealthy Widow,
Ere three days pass, which has as long loved me,
As I have loved this proud disdainful Haggard,
And so farewell signior Lucentio,
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks
Shall win my love, and so I take my leave,
In resolution, as I swore before.

Tra. Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace,
As longs to a Lovers blessed case:
Nay I have taken you napping gentle Love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.

Bian. Tranio you jest, but have you both forsworn me?

Tra. Mistress we have.

Luc. Then we are rid of Lisio.

Tra. In Faith he will have a lusty Widow now,
That shall be wooed, and wedded in a day.

Bian. God give him joy.

Tra. I, and he will tame her.

Bianca. He says so Tranio

Tra. Faith he is gone unto the taming school.

Bian. The taming school: what is there such a place?

Tra. I mistress, and Petruchio is the master,
That teaches tricks eleven and twenty long,
To tame a shrew, and charm her chattering tongue.

Enter Biondello. Bion. Oh Master master I have watched so long,
That I am dog weary, but at last I spied
An ancient Angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn

Tra. What is he Biondello?

Bion. Master a Marcantant, or a pedant,
I know not what, but formal in apparel,
In gate and countenance surely like a Father.

Luc. And what of him Tranio?

Tra. If he be credulous, and trust my tale,
I Will make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola,
As if he were the right Vincentio.

Par. Take me your love, and then let me alone.

Enter a Pedant. Ped. God save you sir.

Tra. And you sir, you are welcome,
Travail you far on or are you at the farthest?

Ped: Sir at the farthest for a week or two,
But then up farther, and as far as Rome,
And so to Tripolie, if God lend me life,

Tra. What Countreyman I pray?

Ped. Of Mantua.

Tra. Of Mantua Sir, marry God forbid,
And come to Padua careless of your life.

Ped. My life sir? how I pray? for that goes hard.

Tra. It Is death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua, know you not the cause?
Your ships are staid at Venice, and the Duke
For private quarrel 'twixt your Duke and him,
Has published and proclaimed it openly:
It Is marvel, but that you are but newly come,
You might have heard it else proclaimed about.

Ped. Alas sir, it is worse for me then so,
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence and must here deliver them.

Tra. Well sir, to do you courtesy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you.
First tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?

Ped. I sir, in Pisa have I often bin,
Pisa renowned for grave Citizens.

Tra. Among them know you one Vincentio?

Ped. I know him not, but I have heard of him:
A Merchant of incomparable wealth.

Tra. He is my father sir, and sooth to say,
In countenance somewhat does resemble you.

Bion. As much as an apple does an oyster, and all one,

Tra. To save your life in this extremity,
This favor will I do you for his sake,
And think it not the worst of all your fortunes,
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged,
Look that you take upon you as you should,
You understand me sir: so shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the City:
If this be court'sie sir, accept of it.

Ped. Oh sir I do, and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.

Tra. Then go with me, to make the matter good,
This by the way I let you understand,
My father is here looked for every day,
To pass assurance of a dowre in marriage
'Twixt me, and one Baptistas daughter here:
In all these circumstances I Will instruct you,
Go with me to cloth you as becomes you. Exeunt.

Actus Quartus.
Scena Prima.
Enter Katherina and Grumio. Gru. No, no forsooth I dare not for my life.

Kat. The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars that come unto my fathers door,
Upon entreaty have a present alms,
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity:
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Am starved for meat, giddie for lack of sleep:
With oaths kept waking, and with brawling fed,
And that which spights me more then all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love:
As who should say if I should sleep or eat,
'Twere deadly sickness, or else present death.
I prithee go, and get me some repast,
I care not what, so it be wholesome food.

Gru. What say you to a Neats foot?

Kate. It Is passing good, I prithee let me have it.

Gru. I fear it is too chollericke a meat,
How say you to a fat Tripe finely broyl'd?

Kate. I like it well, good Grumio fetch it me.

Gru. I cannot tell, I fear it is chollericke.
What say you to a piece of Beef and Mustard?

Kate. A dish that I do love to feed upon.

Gru. I but the Mustard is too hot a little.

Kate. Why then the Beef, and let the Mustard rest.

Gru. Nay then I will not, you shall have the Mustard
Or else you get no Beef of Grumio.

Kate. Then both or one, or any thing thou will.

Gru. Why then the Mustard without the beef.

Kate. Go get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
Beats him. That feed'st me with the very name of meat.
Sorrow on thee, and all the pack of you
That triumph thus upon my misery:
Go get thee gone I say.

Enter Petruchio, and Hortensio with meat. Petr. How fares my Kate, what
sweeting all a-mort?

Hor. Mistress, what cheer?

Kate. Faith as cold as can be.


Pet. Pluck up thy spirits, look cheerfully upon me.
Here Love, thou see how diligent I am,
To dress thy meat my self, and bring it thee.
I am sure sweet Kate this kindness merits thanks.
What, not a word? Nay then thou love it not:
And all my pains is s^rted to no proof.
Here take away this dish.

Kate. I pray you let it stand.

Pet. The poorest service is repaide with thanks,
And so shall mine before you touch the meat.

Kate. I thank you sir.

Hor. Signior Petruchio, fie you are to blame:
Come Mistress Kate, I Will bear you company.

Petr. Eat it up all Hortensio, if thou love me:
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart:
Kate eat apace; and now my honey Love,
Will we return unto thy Fathers house,
And revel it as bravely as the best,
With silken coats and caps, and golden Rings,
With ruffes and Cuffes, and Fardingales, and things:
With Scarfes, and fannes, and double change of brau'ry,
With Amber Bracelets, Beads, and all this knau'ry.
What have thou dined? The Tailor stays thy leisure,
To deck thy body with his ruffing treasure,
Enter Tailor. Come Tailor, let us see these ornaments
Enter Haberdasher Lay forth the Gown. What news with you sir?

Fell. Here is the cap your Worship did bespeake.

Pet. Why this was molded on a porrenger,
A Velvet dish: Fie, fie, it is lewd and filthy,
Why it is a cockle or a wallnut-shell,
A knack, a toy, a trick, a babies cap:
Away with it come let me have a bigger.

Kate. I Will have no bigger, this does fit the time,
And Gentlewomen wear such caps as these.

Pet. When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then.

Hor. That will not be in have.

Kate. Why sir I trust I may have leave to speak,
And speak I will. I am no child, no babe,
Your betters have endured me say my mind
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears,
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
And rather then it shall, I will be free,
Even to the uttermost as I please in words.

Pet. Why thou say true, it is a paltrie cap.
A custard coffen, a bauble, a silken pie,
I love thee well in that thou like it not.

Kate. Love me, or love me not, I like the cap,
And it I will have, or I will have none.

Pet. Thy gown why I: come Tailor let us see it.
Oh mercy God, what masking stuff is here?
What Is this? a sleeue? it is like a demi-cannon,
What, up and down carved like an apple Tart?
Heers snip, and nip, and cut, and slish and slash,
Like to a Censor in a barbers shop:
Why what a devils name a Tailor cal'st thou this?

Hor. I see she is like to have neither cap nor gown.

Tai. You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion, and the time.

Pet. Marry and did: but if you be remembered,
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
Go hop me over every kennell home,
For you shall hop without my custom sir:
I Will none of it; hence, make your best of it.

Kate. I never saw a better fashioned gown,
More queint, more pleasing, nor more commendable:
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.

Pet. Why true, he means to make a puppet of thee.

Tail. She says your Worship means to make a puppet of her

Pet. Oh monstrous arrogance:
Then lie, thou thread, thou thimble,
Thou yard three quarters, half yard, quarter, nail,
Thou Flea, thou Nit, thou winter cricket thou:
Brau'd in mine own house with a skeine of thread:
Away thou Ragge, thou quantity, thou remnant,
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard,
As thou shall think on prating whilst thou live:
I tell thee I, that thou have marred her gown.

Tail. Your worship is deceived, the gown is made
Just as my master had direction:
Grumio gave order how it should be done.

Gru. I gave him no order, I gave him the stuff.

Tail. But how did you desire it should be made?

Gru. Marry sir with needle and thread.

Tail. But did you not request to have it cut?

Gru. Thou have faced many things.

Tail. I have.

Gru. Face not me: thou have brau'd many men, brave not me; I will neither be
faced nor brau'd. I say unto thee, I bid thy Master cut out the gown, but I
did not bid him cut it to pieces; Ergo thou lie.


Tail. Why here is the note of the fashion to testify.

Pet. Read it.

Gru. The note lies in's throat if he say I said so.

Tail. Inprimis a loose bodied gown.

Gru. Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sow me in the Skirts of it,
and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread: I said a gown.


Pet. Proceed.

Tail. With a small compast cape.

Gru. I confess the cape.

Tail. With a trunk sleeue.

Gru. I confess two sleeves.

Tail. The sleeves curiously cut.

Pet. I there is the villainie.

Gru. Error in the bill sir, error in the bill? I commanded the sleeves should be
cut out, and sowed up again, and that I Will prove upon thee, though thy little
finger be armed in a thimble.


Tail. This is true that I say, and I had thee in place where, thou should
know it.


Gru. I am for thee straight: take thou the bill, give me thy meate-yard, and
spare not me.


Hor. God-a-mercy Grumio, then he shall have no odds.

Pet. Well sir in brief the gown is not for me.

Gru. You are in the right sir, it is for my mistress.

Pet. Go take it up unto thy masters use.

Gru. Villain, not for thy life: Take up my Mistress gown for thy masters
use.


Pet. Why sir what is your conceit in that?

Gre. Oh sir, the conceit is deeper then you think for:
Take up my Mistress gown to his masters use.
Oh fie, fie, fie.

Pet. Hortensio, say thou will see the Tailor paid.
Go take it hence, be gone, and say no more.

Hor. Tailor, I Will pay thee for thy gown to morrow,
Take no unkindness of his hasty words:
Away I say, commend me to thy master. Exit Tail.

Pet. Well come my Kate, we will unto your fathers,
Even in these honest mean habiliments:
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor:
For it is the mind that makes the body rich.
And as the Sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
So honor peereth in the meanest habit.
What is the Iay more precious then the Lark?
Because his feathers are more beautiful
Or is the Adder better then the Eele,
Because his painted Skin contents the eye.
Oh no Kate: neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture, and mean array.
If thou accountedst it shame, lay it on me,
And therefore frolike, we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport us at thy fathers house,
Go call my men, and let us straight to him,
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end,
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot,
Let Us see, I think it is now some seven a clock,
And well we may come there by dinner time.

Kate. I dare assure you sir, it is almost two,
And 'twill be supper time ere you come there.

Pet. It shall be seven ere I go to horse:
Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it, sirs let 't alone,
I will not go to day, and ere I do,
It shall be what a clock I say it is.

Hor. Why so this Gallant will command the sun:

Enter Tranio, and the Pedant dressed like Vincentio. Tra. Sirs, this is the
house, please it you that I call,

Ped. I what else, and but I be deceived,
Signior Baptista may remember me
Near twenty years a go in Genoa.

Tra. Where we were Lodgers, at the Pegasus,
It Is well, and hold your own in any case
With such austeritie as longs to a father.

Enter Biondello. Ped. I warrant you: but sir here comes your boy,
'Twere good he weere schooled.

Tra. Fear you not him: sir Biondello,
Now do your duty thoroughly I advise you:
Imagine 'twere the righ Vincentio.

Bion. Tut, fear not me.

Tra. But have thou done thy errand to Baptista.

Bion. I told him that your father was at Venice,
And that you looked for him this day in Padua.

Tra. Thou Art a tall fellow, hold thee that to drink,
Here comes Baptista: set your countenance sir.

Enter Baptista and Lucentio: Pedant booted and bare headed. Tra. Signior
Baptista you are happily met:
Sir, this is the Gentleman I told you of,
I pray you stand good father to me now,
Give me Bianca for my Patrimony.

Ped. Soft son: sir by your leave, having come to Padua
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love beteweene your daughter and himself:
And for the good report I hear of you,
And for the love he bears to your daughter,
And she to him: to stay him not too long,
I am content in a good fathers care.
To have him matched, and if you please to like
No worse then I upon some agreement
Me shall you find ready and willing
With one consent to have her so bestowed:
For curious I cannot be with you
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.

Bap. Sir, pardon me in what I have to say,
Your plainness and your shortness please me well
Right true it is your son Lucentio here
Does love my daughter and she loves him
Or both dissemble deeply their affections:
And therefore if you say no more then this,
That like a father you will deal with him,
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made and all is done,
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.

Tra. I thank you sir, where then do you know best
We be affied and such assurance taken,
As shall with either parts agreement stand.

Bap. Not in my house Lucentio for you know
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants,
Besides old Gremio is harkning still,
And happily we may be interrupted.

Tra. Then at my lodging, and it like you,
There does my father lie: and there this night
We Will pass the business privately and well:
Send for your daughter by your servant here,
My boy shall fetch the Scriuener presently,
The worst is this that at so slender warning,
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.

Bap. It likes me well:
Cambio hie you home and bid Bianca make her ready straight:
And if you will tell what has happened,
Lucentios father is arrived in Padua,
And how she is like to be Lucentios wife.

Biond. I pray the Gods she may with all my heart.

Exit. Tran. Dally not with the Gods, but get thee gone.
Enter Peter. Signior Baptista shall I lead the way,
Welcome, one mess is like to be your cheer,
Come sir we will better it in Pisa.

Bap. I follow you. Exeunt.

Enter Lucentio and Biondello. Bion. Cambio.


Luc. What say thou Biondello.

Biond. You saw my Master wink and laugh upon you?

Luc. Biondello, what of that?

Biond. Faith nothing: but has left me here behind to expound the meaning or
morrall of his signs and tokens.


Luc. I pray thee moralize them.

Biond. Then thus: Baptista is safe talking with the deceiving Father of a
deceitful son.


Luc. And what of him?

Biond His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.

Luc. And then.

Bion. The old Priest at Saint Lukes Church is at your command at all hours.


Luc. And what of all this.

Bion. I cannot tell, expect they are busied about a counterfeit assurance:
take you assurance of her. Cum preuilegio ad Impremendum solemn, to the Church
take the Priest, Clarke, and some sufficient honest witnesses:

If this be not that you look for, I have no more to say,
But bid Bianca farewell for ever and a day.

Luc. Hear'st thou Biondello.

Biond. I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to
the Garden for Parseley to stuff a Rabit, and so may you sir: and so adieu sir,
my Master has appointed me to go to Saint Lukes to bid the Priest be ready
to come against you come with your appendix.


Luc. I may and will if she be so contented:
She will be pleased, then wherefore should I doubt:
Hap what hap may, I Will roundly go about her:
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her. Exit.

Enter Petruchio Kate Hortensio. Petr. Come on a Gods name, once more toward
our fathers:
Good Lord how bright and goodly shines the Moon.

Kate. The Moon, the Sun: it is not Moone-light now.

Put. I say it is the Moon that shines so bright.

Kate. I know it is the Sun that shine, so bright.

Pet. Now by my mothers son, and that is my self,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your Fathers house:
Go on, and fetch our horses back again
Ever more crossed and crossed nothing but crossed,

Hort. Say as he says, or we shall never go

Kate. Forward I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or Sun, or what you please:
And if you please to call it a rush Candle:
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.

Petr. I say it is the Moon.

Kate. I know it is the Moon.

Petr. Nay then you lie: it is the blessed Sun.

Kate. Then God be blessed, it is the blessed sun,
But sun it is not, when you say it is not.
And the Moon changes even as your mind:
What you will have it named, even that it is,
And so it shall be so for Katherine.

Hort. Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.

Petr. Well, forward, forward thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the Bias:
But soft: Company is coming here.
Enter Vincentio. Good morrow gentle Mistress, where away:
Tell me sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Have thou beheld a fresher Gentlewoman:
Such war of white and red within her cheeks:
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely Maid, once more good day to thee:
Sweet Kate embrace her for her beauties sake.

Hort. A will make the man mad to make the woman of him.

Kate. Young budding Virgin, fair, and fresh, and sweet,
Whether away, or whether is thy aboade?
Happy the parents of so fair a child;
Happier the man whom favorable stars
Alots thee for his lovely bedfellow.

Petr. Why how now Kate, I hope thou art not mad,
This is a man old, wrinckled, faded, withered,
And not a Maiden, as thou say he is.

Kate. Pardon old father my mistaking eyes,
That have bin so bedazled with the sun,
That every thing I look on seems green:
Now I perceive thou are a reverent Father:
Pardon I pray thee for my mad mistaking.

Petr. Do good old grandsire, and with all make known
Which way thou trauellest if along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company*

Vin. Fair Sir, and you my merry Mistress,
That with your strange encounter much amasde me:
My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,
And bound I am to Padua, there to uisite
A son of mine, which long I have not seen.

Petr. What is his name?

Vinc. Lucentio Gentle sir.

Petr. Happily met the happier for thy son:
And now by Law, as well as reverent age,
I may entitle thee my loving Father,
The sister to my wife, this Gentlewoman,
Thy Son by this has married: wonder not,
Nor be not grieved, she is of good esteem,
Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified, as may be seem
The Spouse of any noble Gentlewoman:
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.

Vinc. But is this true, or is it else your pleasure,
Like pleasant trauailors to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?

Hort. I do assure thee father so it is.

Petr. Come go along and see the truth hereof,
For our first merriment has made thee jealous. Exeunt.

Hor. Well Petruchio, this has put me in heart;
Have to my Widow, and if she froward,
Then have thou taught Hortensio to be untoward. Exit

Enter Biondello, Lucentio and Bianca, Gremio is out before. Biond. Softly and
swiftly sir, for the Priest is ready.

Luc. I fly Biondello; but they may chance to need thee at home therefore
leave us. Exit.


Biond, Nay faith' I Will see the Church a your back,
And then come back to my mistress as soon as I can.

Gre. I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.

Enter Petruchio, Kate, Vincentio, Grumio With attendants. Petr. Sir here is the
door, this is Lucentios house,
My Fathers bears more toward the Marketplace,
Thither must I and here I leave y^u sir.

Vin. You shall not choose but drink before you go,
I think I shall command your welcome here;
And by all likelihood some cheer is toward. Knock.

Grem. They Are busy within, you were best knock louder.

Pedant looks out of the window. Ped. What Is he that knockes as he would beat
down the gate?


Vin. Is Signior Lucentio within sir?

Ped. He Is within sir, but not to be spoken withal.

Vinc. What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal.


Ped. Keep your hundred pounds to your self, he shall need none so long as I
live.


Petr. Nay, I told you your son was beloved in Padua: do you hear sir, to
leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you tell Signior Lucentio that his Father
is come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.


Ped. Thou lie his Father is come from Padua, and here looking out of the
window.


Vin. Art thou his Father?

Ped. I sir so his mother says if I may believe her.

Petr. Why how now Gentleman: why this is flat knauerie to take upon you an
other man's name.


Peda. Lay hands on the villain, I believe a means to cozen some body in
this City under my countenance.


Enter Biondello. Bion. I have seen them in the Church together, God send them
good sh^pping: but who is here? mine old Master Vincentio: now we are undone
and brought to nothing.


Vin. Come hither crackhempe.

Bion. I hope I may choose Sir.

Vin. Come hither you rogue, what have you forgot me?

Biond. Forgot you, no sir: I could not forget you, for I never saw you before
in all my life.


Vinc. What, you notorius villain, did thou never see thy Mistress father,
Vincentio;


Bion. What my worshipful old master? yet marry sir see where he looks out
of the window.


Vin. Is It so indeed. He beats Biondello.

Bion. Help, help, help, here is a mad man will murder me.

Pedan. Help, son, help Signior Baptista.

Pet. Prithee, Kate let us stand aside and see the end of this controversy.


Enter Pedant with servants, Baptista, Tranio. Tra. Sir what are you that offer
to beat my servant?

Vinc. What am I sir: nay what are you sir: oh immortal Gods* oh fine
villain, a silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet cloak and a copataine hat:
oh I am undone, I am undone: while I play the good husband at home, my son
and my servant spend all at the university.


Tra. How now what is the matter?

Bapt. What is the man lunaticke?

Tra. Sir, you seem a sober ancient Gentleman by your habit but your words
show you a mad man: why sir, what cernes it you, if I wear Pearl and gold: I
thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.


Vin. Thy father: oh villain, he is a Saile-maker in Bergamo.

Bap. You Mistake sir, you mistake sir, pray what do you think is his name?


Vin. His name, as if I knew not his name: I have brought him up ever since he
was three years old, and his name is Tronio.


Ped. Away, away mad ass, his name is Lucentio, and he is mine only son
and heir to the lands of me signior Vincentio.


Vin. Lucentio, oh he has murdered his Master; lay hold on him I charge you in
the Dukes name: oh my son, my son: tell me thou villain, where is my son
Lucentio?


Tra. Call forth an officer: Carry this mad knave to the Iaile: Father
Baptista, I charge you see that he be forth coming.

Vinc. Carry me to the Iaile?

Gre. Stay officer, he shall not go to prison.

Bap. Talk not signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.

Gre. Take heed signior Baptista, lest you be conicatcht in this business: I
dare swear this is the right Vincentio.


Ped. Swear if thou dare,

Gre. Naie, I dare not swear it.

Tran. Then thou were best say that I am not Lucentio.

Gre. Yes I know thee to be signior Lucentio.

Bap. Away with the dotard, to the Iaile with him.

Enter Biondello, Lucentio and Bianca Vin. Thus strangers may be haild and
abusd: oh monstrous villain.


Bion. Oh we are spoiled, and yonder he is, deny him, forswear him, or else
we are all undone.


Exit Biondello, Tranio and Pedant as fast as may be. Luc. Pardon sweet
father. Kneel.

Vin, Lives my sweet son?

Bian. Pardon dear father.

Bap. How have thou offended, where is Lucentio?

Luc. Here Is Lucentio right son to the right Vincentio,
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleer'd thine eine.

Gre. Here Is packing with a witness to deceive us all.

Vin. Where is that damned villain Tranio,
That faced and braued me in this matter so?

Bap. Why, tell me is not this my Cambio?

Bian. Cambio is changed into Lucentio.

Luc. Love wrought these miracles. Biancas love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the Town,
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss:
What Tranio did, my self enforst him to:
Then pardon him sweet Father for my sake.

Vin. I Will slit the villains nose that would have sent me to the Iaile.


Bap. But do you hear sir, have you married my daughter without asking my
good will?


Vin. Fear not Baptista, we will content you go to: but I will in to be
revenged for this villainy. Exit.


Bap. And I to sound the depth of this knauerie. Exit.

Luc. Look not pale Bianca, thy father will not frown.

Exeunt. Gre, My cake is dough, but I Will in among the rest,
Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.

Kate. Husband let us follow, to see the end of this ado.

Petr. First kiss me Kate, and we will.

Kate. What in the midst of the street?

Petr. What are thou ashamed of me?

Kate. No sir, God forbid, but ashamed to kiss.

Petr. Why then let us home again: Come Sirralet's away.

Kate. Nay, I will give thee a kiss, now pray Love stay.

Petr. Is not this well? come my sweet Kate.
Better once then never, for never too late. Exeunt.

Actus Quintus.
Enter Baptista, Vincentio, Gremio, the Pedant, Lucentio, and Bianca, Tranio,
Biondello Grumio, and widow: The seruingmen with Tranio bringing in a Banquet.
Luc. At last though long, our iarring notes agree,
And time it is when raging war is come,
To smile at scapes and perils ouerblowne:
My fair Bianca bid my father welcome,
While I with self same kindness welcome thine:
Brother Petruchio, sister Katerina,
And thou Hortensio with thy loving Widow:
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house,
My banquet is to close our stomakes up
After our great good cheer: pray you sit down,
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.

Petr. Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat.

Bap. Padua affoords this kindness son Petruchio.

Petr. Padua affords nothing but what is kind.

Hor. For both our sakes I would that word were true.

Pet. Now for my life Hortensio fears his Widow.

Wid. Then never trust me if I be affeard.

Petr. You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
I mean Hortentio is afeard of you.

Wid. He that is giddie thinks the world turns round.

Petr. Roundly replied.

Kate. Mistress how mean you that?

Wid. Thus I conceive by him.

Petr. Conceiues by me, how likes Hortensio that?

Hor. My Widow says, thus she conceiues her tale.

Petr. Very well mended: kiss him for that good Widow.

Kate. He that is giddie thinks the world turns round,
I pray you tell me what you meant by that.

Wid. Your husband being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husbands sorrow, by his woe:
And now you know my meaning.

Kate. A very mean meaning,

Wid. Right. I mean you.

Kat. And I am mean indeed, respecting you.

Petr. To her Kate.

Hor. To her Widow.

Petr. A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.

Hor. That Is my office

Petr. Spoke like an Officer: ha to thee Lad.

Drinks to Hortensio. Bap. How likes Gremio these quick witted folks?

Gre. Believe me sir, they But together well.

Bian. Head, and But an hasty witted body,
Would say your Head and But were head and horn.

Vin. I Mistress Bride, has that awakened you?

Bian. I, but not frighted me, therefore I Will sleep again,

Petr. Nay that you shall not since you have begun:
Have at you for a better Jest or too.

Bian. Am I your Bird, I mean to shift my bush,
And then pursue me as you draw my Bow.
You are welcome all. Exit Bianca.

Petr. She has prevented me, here signior Tranio,
This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not,
Therefore a health to all that shot and mist.

Tri. Oh sir, Lucentio slipped me like his Gray-hound,
Which runs himself and catches for his Master.

Petr. A good swift simile, but something currish.

Tra. It Is well sir that you hunted for your self:
It Is thought your Dear does hold you at a baye.

Bap. Oh, oh Pretuchio, Tranio hits you now.

Luc. I thank thee for that gird good Tranio.

Hor. Confess, confess, has he not hit you here?

Petr. A has a little gald me I confess:
And as the Jest did glaunce away from me,
It Is ten to one it maimed you too out right.

Bap. Now in good sadness son Petruchio,
I think thou have the veriest shrew of all.

Petr. Well I say no: and therefore sir, assurance,
Let Us each one send unto his wife,
And he whose wife is most obedient,
To come at first when he does send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.

Hort. Content what is the wager?

Luc. Twenty crowns.

Petr. Twenty crowns.
I Will venture so much of my Hawke or Hound,
But twenty times so much upon my Wife.

Luc. A hundred then.

Hor. Content.

Petr. A match it is done.

Hor. Who shall begin?

Luc. That will I.
Go Biondello, bid your Mistress come to me.

Bio. I go. Exit.

Bap. Son I Will be you^ half, Bianca comes.

Luc. I Will have no halues: I Will bear it all my self.
Enter Biondello. How now, what news?

Bion. Sir, my Mistress sends you word
That she is busy, and she cannot come.

Petr. How? she is busy and she cannot come: is that an answer?

Gre. I, and a kind one too:
Pray God sir your wife send you not a worse.

Petr. I hope better.

Hor. Sir Biondello, go and entreat my wife to come to me forthwith. Exit.
Bion.


Pet. Oh ho entreat her, nay then she must needs come.

Hor. I am afraid sir, do what you can
Enter Biondello. Yours will not be entreated: Now where is my wife?

Bion. She says you have some goodly Jest in hand,
She will not come: she bids you come to her.

Petr. Worse and worse she will not come:
Oh vild, intolerable, not to be endured:
Sir Grumio, go to your Mistress,
Say I command her come to me. Exit.

Hor. I know her answer.

Pet. What?

Hor. She will not.

Petr. The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

Enter Katerina. Bap. Now by my hollidam here comes Katerina.

Kat. What is your will sir, that you send for me?

Petr. Where is your sister, and Hortensios wife?

Kate. They sit conferring by the Parler fire.

Petr. Go fetch them hither, if they deny to come,
Swinge me them foundly forth unto their husbands:
Away I say, and bring them hither straight.

Luc. Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.

Hor. And so it is: I wonder what it boads

Petr. Marry peace it boads, and love, and quiet life,
An awful rule, and right supremacy:
And to be short, what not, that is sweet and happy.

Bap. Now fair befall thee good Petruchio;
The wager thou have won, and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed as she had never bin.

Petr. Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
And show more sign of her obedience,
Her new built virtue and obedience.
Enter Kate, Bianca, and Widow. See where she comes, and brings your froward
Wives
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion:
Katerine, that Cap of yours becomes you not,
Off with that babble, throw it under foot.

Wid. Lord let me never have a cause to sigh,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass.

Bian. Fie what a foolish duty call you this?

Luc. I would your duty were as foolish too:
The wisdom of your duty fair Bianca,
Has cost me five hundred crowns since supper time,

Bian. The more fool you for laying on my duty.

Pet. Katherine I charge thee tell these headstrong women, what duty they do
owe their Lords and husbands.


Wid. Come, come, your mocking: we will have no telling.

Pet. Come on I say, and first begin with her,

Wid. She shall not.

Pet. I say she shall, and first begin with her.

Kate. Fie, fie, unknit that threatening unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,
To wound thy Lord, thy King, thy Governor.
It blots thy beauty, as frosts do bite the Meades,
Confounds thy fame, as whirlewindes shake fair budds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman moved, is like a fountain troubled,
Maddie, ill seeming thick, bereft of beauty,
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will daigne to sip or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy Lord* thy life, thy Keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign: one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance: Commits his body
To painful labor, both by sea and land:
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whi'st thou lie warm at home, secure and safe,
And craves no other tribute at thy hands,
But love, fare looks, and true obedience;
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the Prince,
Even such a woman owes to her husband:
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sower,
And not obedient to his honest will:
What is she but a foul contending Rebel,
And graceless Traitor to her loving Lord?
I am a shamed that women are so simple,
To offer war, where they should kneel for peace:
Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.
Why are our bodies soft, and weak, and smooth,
Unapt to toil, and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions, and our hearts.
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms
My mind has bin as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason happily more,
To bandie word for word, and frown for frown;
But now I see our Lances are but strawes:
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
That seeming to be most, which we indeed least are.
Then vale your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husbands foot:
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready may it do him ease.

Pet. Why there is a wench: come on, and kiss me Kate.

Luc. Well go thy ways old Lad for thou shall have it.

Vin. It Is a good hearing, when children are toward.

Luc. But a harsh hearing, when women are froward,

Pet. Come Kate, we will to bed,
We three are married, but you two are sped.
'Twas I won the wager though you hit the white.
And being a winner, God give you good night,

Exit Petruchio. Horten. Now go thy ways thou have tamed a cursed Shrow.

Luc. It Is a wonder by your leave, she will tamed so.

FINIS.

