

VENUS AND ADONIS

Vilia miretur vulgus: mihi flauus Apollo

Pocula Castalia plena ministret aqua.

LONDON Imprinted by Richard Field, and are to be sold at the sign of the
white Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1593.

VENUS AND ADONIS.
EVEN as the sun with purple-colourd face,
Had taken his last leave of the weeping morn,
Rose-cheekt Adonis hied him to the chase,
Hunting he loved, but love he laughed to scorn:
Sick-thoughted Venus makes amain unto him,
And like a bold faced suter ginnes to woo him.
Thrice fairer then my self, (thus she began)
The fields chief flower, sweet above compare,
Stain to all Nimphs, more lovely then a man,
More white, and red, then doves, or roses are:
Nature that made thee with her self at strife,
Says that the world has ending with thy life.
Vouchsafe thou wonder to alight thy steed,
And rain his proud head to the saddle bow,
If thou will daine this favor, for thy meed
A thousand honey secrets shall thou know:
Here come and sit, where never serpent hisses,
And being set, I Will smother thee with kisses.
And yet not cloy thy lips with loathed sacietie,
But rather famish them amid their plenty,
Making them red, and pale, with fresh variety:
Ten kisses short as one, one long as twenty:
A summers day will seem an hour but short,
Being wasted in such time-beguiling sport.
With this she ceazeth on his sweating palm,
The president of pith, and liuelyhood,
And trembling in her passion, calls it balm,
Earths sovereign salve, to do a goddess good,
Being so enraged, desire does lend her force,
Courageously to pluck him from his horse.
Over one arm the lusty coursers rain,
Under her other was the tender boy,
Who blushed, and powted in a dull disdain,
With leaden appetite, unapt to toy,
She red, and hot, as coals of glovving fire,
He red for shame, but frostie in desire.
The studded bridle on a ragged bough,
Nimbly she fastens, (o how quick is love!)
The steed is stalled up, and even now,
To tie the rider she begins to prove:
Backward she pusht him, as she would be thrust,
And gouernd him in strength though not in lust.
So soon was she along, as he was down,
Each leaning on their elbowes and their hips:
Now does she stroke his cheek, now does he frown,
And gins to chide, but soon she stops his lips,
And kissing speaks, with lustful language broken,
If thou will chide, thy lips shall never open.
He burns with bashful shame, she with her tears
Does quench the maiden burning of his cheeks,
Then with her windy sighs, and golden hears,
To fan, and blow them dry again she seeks.
He says, she is immodest, blames her miss,
What follows more, she murders with a kiss.
Even as an empty Eagle sharp by fast,
Tires with her beak on feathers, flesh, and bone,
Shaking her wings, devouring all in have,
Till either gorge be stuffed, or pray be gone:
Even so she kissed his brow, his cheek, his chin,
And where she ends, she does anew begin.
Forced to content, but never to obey,
Panting he lies, and breaths in her face.
She feeds on the steame, as on a pray,
And calls it heavenly moisture, air of grace,
VVishing her cheeks were gardens full of flowers,
So they were dew'd with such distilling showers.
Look how a bird lies tangled in a net,
So fastened in her arms Adonis lies,
Pure shame and awed resistance made him fret,
Which bred more beauty in his angry eyes:
Rain added to a river that is rank,
Perforce will force it ouerflow the bank.
Still she entreats, and prettily entreats,
For to a pretty ear she tunes her tale.
Still is he sullein, still he lowres and frets,
Twixt crimson shame, and anger ashie pale,
Being red she loves him best, and being white,
Her best is betterd with a more delight.
Look how he can, she cannot choose but love,
And by her fair immortal hand she swears,
From his soft bosom never to remove,
Till he take truce with her contending tears,
Which long have raind, making her cheeks al wet,
And one sweet kiss shall pay this comptlesse debt.
Upon this promise did he raise his chin,
Like a diued apper peering through a wave,
Who being looked on, ducks as quickly in:
So offers he to give what she did crave,
But when her lips were ready for his pay,
He winks, and turns his lips another way.
Never did passenger in summers heat,
More thirst for drink, then she for this good turn,
Her help she sees, but help she cannot get,
She bathes in water, yet her fire must burn:
Oh pity began she cry, flint-hearted boy,
It Is but a kiss I beg, why art thou coy?
I have been wooed as I entreat thee now,
Even by the stern, and direful god of war,
Whose sinowie neck in battle nere did bow,
Who conquers where he comes in every jar,
Yet has he been my captive, and my slave,
And begd for that which thou vnaskt shall have.
Over my Altars has he hong his lance,
His battred shield, his uncontrolled crest,
And for my sake has learnd to sport, and dance,
To toy, to wanton, dally, smile, and jest,
Scorning his churlish drum, and ensign red,
Making my arms his field, his tent my bed.
Thus he that ouer-ruld, I ouer-swayed,
Leading him prisoner in a red rose chain,
Strong-temperd steel his stronger strength obayed.
Yet was he servile to my coy disdain,
Oh be not proud, nor brag not of thy might,
For maistring her that foyld the god of fight.
Touch but my lips with those fair lips of thine,
Though mine be not so fair, yet are they red,
The kiss shall be thine own as well as mine,
What see thou in the ground? hold up thy head,
Look in mine ey-bals, there thy beauty lies,
Then why not lips on lips, since eyes in eyes?
Art thou ashamed to kiss? then wink again,
And I will wink, so shall the day seem night.
Love keeps his revels where there are but twain:
Be bold to play, our sport is not in sight,
These blew-veind violets whereon we lean,
Never can blab, nor know not what we mean.
The tender spring upon thy tempting lip,
Shows thee unripe; yet may thou well be tasted,
Make use of time, let not advantage slip,
Beauty within it self should not be wasted,
Fair flowers that are not gathred in their prime,
Rot, and consume them selves in little time.
Were I hard-fauourd, foul, or wrinckled old,
Il-nurtur'd, crooked, churlish, harsh in voice,
Ore-worne, despised, reumatique, and cold,
Thick-sighted, barren, lean, and lacking juice;
The^ might thou pause, for the^ I were not for thee,
But having no defects, why do abhor me?
Thou can not see one wrinckle in my brow,
Mine eyes are gray, and bright, and quick in turning:
My beauty as the spring does yearly grow,
My flesh is soft, and plumpe, my marrow burning,
My smooth moist hand, were it with thy hand felt,
Would in thy palm dissolve, or seem to melt.
Bid me discourse, I will inchaunt thine ear,
Or like a Fairie, trip upon the green,
Or like a Nymph, with long disheueled hear,
Dance on the sands, and yet no footing seen.
Love is a spirit all compact of fire,
Not gross to sink, but light, and will aspire.
Witness this Primrose bank whereon I lie,
These forcelesse flowers like sturdy trees support me:
Two stre^gthles doves will draw me through the sky,
From morn till night, even where I list to sport me.
Is love so light sweet boy, and may it be,
That thou should think it heavy unto thee?
Is thine own heart to thine own face affected?
Can thy right hand ceaze love upon thy left?
Then woo thy self, be of thy self rejected:
Steal thine own freedom, and complain on theft.
Narcissus so him self him self forsook,
And died to kiss his shadow in the brook.
Torches are made to light, jewels to wear,
Dainties to taste, fresh beauty for the use,
Herbs for their smell, and sappie plants to bear.
Things growing to them selves, are growths abuse,
Seeds spring from seeds, and beauty breeds beauty,
Thou wast begot, to get it is thy duty.
Upon the earths increase why should thou feed,
Unless the earth with thy increase be fed?
By law of nature thou art bound to breed,
That thine may live, when thou thy self art dead:
And so in spite of death thou do survive,
In that thy likeness still is left alive.
By this the loue-sicke Queen began to sweat,
For where they lay the shadow had forsook them,
And Titan tired in the midday heat,
With burning eye did hotly ouer-looke them,
VVishing Adonis had his teame to guide,
So he were like him, and by Venus side.
And now Adonis with a lazy sprite,
And with a heavy, dark, disliking eye,
His lowering brows ore-whelming his fair sight,
Like mistie vapors when they blot the sky,
So wring his cheeks, cries, fie, no more of love,
The sun does burn my face I must remove.
Ay, me, (quoth Venus) young, and so unkind,
What bare excuses make thou to be gone?
I Will sigh celestial breath, whose gentle wind,
Shall cool the heat of this descending sun:
I Will make a shadow for thee of my hears,
If they burn too, I Will quench them with my tears.
The sun that shines from heaven, shines but warm,
And lo I lie between that sun, and thee:
The heat I have from thence does little harm,
Thine eye darts forth the fire that burns me,
And were I not immortal, life were done,
Between this heavenly, and earthly sun.
Art thou obdurate, flintie, hard as steel?
Nay more then flint, for stone at rain relenteth:
Art thou a woman's son and can not feel
What it is to love, how want of love tormenteth?
O had thy mother borne so hard a mind,
She had not brought forth thee, but died unkind.
What am I that thou should contemn me this?
Or what great danger, dwells upon my suit?
What were thy lips the worse for one poor kis?
Speak fair, but speak fair words, or else be mute:
Give me one kiss, I Will give it thee again,
And one for intrest, if thou will have twain.
Fie, liuelesse picture, cold, and senseless stone,
Well painted idol, image dull, and dead,
Statue contenting but the eye alone,
Thing like a man, but of no woman bred:
Thou art no man, though of a man's complexion,
For men will kiss even by their own direction.
This said, impatience chokes her pleading tongue,
And swelling passion does provoke a pause,
Red cheeks, and fiery eyes blaze forth her wrong:
Being Judge in love, she cannot right her cause.
And now she weeps, and now she feign would speak
And now her sobs do her intendments break.
Sometime she shakes her head, and then his hand,
Now gazeth she on him, now on the ground;
Sometime her arms infold him like a band,
She would, he will not in her arms be bound:
And when from thence he struggles to be gone,
She locks her lilly fingers one in one.
Fondling, she says, since I have hemd thee here
Within the circuit of this iuorie pale,
I Will be a park, and thou shall be my dear:
Feed where thou will, on mountain, or in dale;
Graze on my lips, and if those hills be dry,
Stray lower, where the pleasant fountains lie.
Within this limit is relief enough,
Sweet bottom grass, and high delightful plain,
Round rising hillocks, brakes obscure, and rough,
To shelter thee from tempest, and from rain:
Then be my dear, since I am such a park,
No dog shall rowze thee, though a thousand bark
At this Adonis smiles as in disdain,
That in each cheek appears a pretty dimple;
Love made those hollowes, if him self were slain,
He might be buried in a tomb so simple,
Foreknowing well, if there he came to lie,
Why there love lived, and there he could not die.
These lovely caves, these round enchanting pits,
Opend their mouths to swallow Venus liking:
Being mad before, how does she now for wits?
Struck dead at first, what needs a second striking?
Poor Queen of love, in thine own law forlorn,
To love a cheek that smiles at thee in scorn.
Now which way shall she turn? what shall she say?
Her words are done, her woes the more increasing,
The time is spent, her object will away,
And from her twining arms does urge releasing:
Pity she cries, some favor, some remorse,
Away he springs, and hastes to his horse.
But lo from forth a copp's that neighbors by,
A breeding Iennet, Iustie, young, and proud,
Adonis trampling Courser does espy:
And forth she rushes, snorts, and neighs aloud.
The strong-neckt steed being tied unto a tree,
Breaks his rain, and to her straight goes he.
Imperiously he leaps, he neighs, he bounds,
And now his wouen girthes he breaks asunder,
The bearing earth with his hard hoof he wounds,
Whose hollow womb resounds like heavens thunder,
The iron bit he crusheth tweene his teeth,
Controlling what he was controlled with.
His ears up pricked, his braided hanging mane
Upon his compast crest now stand on end,
His nostrils drink the air, and forth again
As from a furnace, vapors does he send:
His eye which scornfully glisters like fire,
Shows his hot courage, and his high desire.
Sometime he trots, as if he told the steps,
With gentle majesty, and modest pride,
Anon he reres upright, curuets, and leaps,
As who should say, lo thus my strength is tried.
And this I do, to captiuate the eye,
Of the fair breeder that is standing by.
What recketh he his riders angry stir,
His flattering holla, or his stand, I say,
What cares he now, for curb, or pricking spur,
For rich caparisons, or trappings gay:
He sees his love, and nothing else he sees,
For nothing else with his proud sight agrees.
Look when a Painter would surpass the life,
In limming out a well proportioned steed,
His Art with Natures workmanship at strife,
As if the dead the living should exceed:
So did this Horse excel a common one,
In shape, in courage, color, pace and bone.
Round hooft, short ioynted, fetlocks shag, and long,
Broad breast, full eye, small head, and nostrill wide,
High crest, short ears, straight legs, and passing strong,
Thin mane, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide:
Look what a Horse should have, he did not lack,
Save a proud rider on so proud a back.
Sometime he scuds far off, and there he stares,
Anon he starts, at sturring of a feather:
To bid the wind a base he now prepares,
And where he run, or fly, they know not whether:
For through his mane, and tail, the high wind sings,
Fanning the hairs, who wave like feathred wings.
He looks upon his love, and neighes unto her,
She answers him, as if she knew his mind,
Being proud as females are, to see him woo her,
She puts on outward strangeness, seems unkind:
Spurns at his love, and scorns the heat he feels,
Beating his kind imbracements with her heels.
Then like a melancholy malcontent,
He vailes his tail that like a falling plume,
Cool shadow to his melting buttocke lent,
He stamps, and bites the poor flies in his fume:
His love perceiving how he was enraged,
Grew kinder, and his fury was asswag'd.
His testie master goes about to take him,
When lo the vnbackt breeder full of fear,
Jealous of catching, swiftly does forsake him,
With her the Horse, and left Adonis there:
As they were mad unto the wood they hie them,
Out stripping crows, that strive to ouerfly them.
All swollen with chafing, down Adonis sits,
Banning his boystrous, and unruly beast;
And now the happy season once more sits
That louesicke love, by pleading may be blessed:
For lovers say, the heart has treble wrong,
When it is bard the aydance of the tongue.
An Oven that is stopped, or river stayed,
Burns more hotly, swells with more rage:
So of concealed sorrow may be said,
Free vent of words loves fire does assuage,
But when the hearts attorney once is mute,
The client breaks, as desperate in his suit.
He sees her coming, and begins to glow:
Even as a dying coal reuiues with wind,
And with his bonnet hides his angry brow,
Looks on the dull earth with disturbed mind:
Taking no notice that she is so nigh,
For all askance he holds her in his eye.
O what a sight it was wistly to view,
How she came stealing to the wayward boy,
To note the fighting conflict of her hew,
How white and red, each other did destroy:
But now her cheek was pale, and by and by
It flasht forth fire, as lightning from the sky.
Now was she just before him as he sat,
And like a lowly lover down she kneeles,
With one fair hand she heaueth up his hat,
Her other tender hand his fair cheek feels:
His tendrer cheek, receives her soft hands print,
As apt, as new fallen snow takes any dint.
Oh what a war of looks was then between them,
Her eyes petitioners to his eyes suing,
His eyes saw her eyes, as they had not seen them,
Her eyes wooed still, his eyes disdaind the wooing:
And all this dumb play had his acts made plain,
With tears which Chorus-like her eyes did rain.
Full gently now she takes him by the hand,
A lilly prisond in a gaile of snow,
Or Iuorie in an allablaster band,
So white a friend, ingirts so white a fo:
This beauteous combat wilful, and unwilling,
Showed like two silver doves that sit a billing.
Once more the engine of her thoughts began,
O fairest mouer on this mortal round,
Would thou were as I am, and I a man,
My heart all whole as thine, thy heart my wound,
For one sweet look thy help I would assure thee,
Though nothing but my bodies bane would cure thee
Give me my hand (says he,) why do thou feel it?
Give me my heart (says she,) and thou shall have it.
O give it me lest thy hard heart do steel it,
And being steeld, soft sighs can never grave it.
Then loves deep groans, I never shall regard,
Because Adonis heart has made mine hard.
For shame he cries, let go, and let me go,
My days delight is past, my horse is gone,
And it is your fault I am bereft him so,
I pray you hence, and leave me here alone,
For all my mind, my thought, my busy care,
Is how to get my palfrey from the mare.
Thus she replies, thy palfrey as he should,
VVelcomes the warm approach of sweet desire,
Affection is a coal that must be coold,
Else sufferd it will set the heart on fire,
The sea has bounds, but deep desire has none,
Therefore no marvel though thy horse be gone.
How like a jade he stood tied to the tree,
Seruilly maisterd with a leatherne rain,
But when he saw his love, his youths fair fee,
He held such petty bondage in disdain:
Throwing the base thong from his bending crest,
Enfranchising his mouth, his back, his breast.
Who sees his true-loue in her naked bed,
Teaching the sheets a whiter hew then white,
But when his glutton eye so full has fed,
His other agents aim at like delight?
Who is so faint that dares not be so bold,
To touch the fire the weather being cold?
Let me excuse thy courser gentle boy,
And learn of him I heartily beseech thee,
To take advantage on presented joy,
Though I were du^be, yet his proceedings teach thee
O learn to love, the lesson is put plain,
And once made perfect, never lost again.
I know not love (quote he) nor will not know it,
Unless it be a Boar, and then I chase it,
It Is much to borrow, and I will not owe it,
My love to love, is love, but to disgrace it,
For I have heard, it is a life in death,
That laughs and weeps, and all but with a breath.
Who wears a garment shapelesse and vnfinisht?
Who plucks the bud before one leaf put forth?
If springing things be any jot diminisht,
They wither in their prime, prove nothing worth,
The colt that is backed and burthend being young,
Loses his pride, and never waxes strong.
You hurt my hand with wringing, let us part,
And leave this idle theme, this bootlesse chat,
Remove your siege from my vnyeelding heart,
To loves allarmes it will not open the gate,
Dismiss your vows, your fained tears, your flattry,
For where a heart is hard they make no battry.
What can thou talk (quoth she) have thou a tongue?
O would thou had not, or I had no hearing,
Thy marmaides voice has done me double wrong,
I had my lode before, now pressed with bearing,
Mellodious discord, heavenly tune harsh sounding,
Ears deep sweet musik, and hearts deep sore wou^ding
Had I no eyes but ears, my ears would love,
That inward beauty and invisible,
Or were I deaf, thy outward parts would move
Each part in me, that were but sensible,
Though neither eyes, nor ears, to hear nor see,
Yet should I be in love, by touching thee.
Say that the sense of feeling were bereft me,
And that I could not see, nor hear, nor touch,
And nothing but the very smell were left me,
Yet would my love to thee be still as much,
For from the stillitorie of thy face excelling,
Coms breath perfumd, that breeds love by smelling.
But oh what banquet were thou to the taste,
Being nourse, and feeder of the other four,
Would they not wish the feast might ever last,
And bid suspicion double lock the door;
Lest jealousy that sower unwelcome guest,
Should by his stealing in disturb the feast?
Once more the rubi-colourd portall opend,
Which to his speech did honey passage yield,
Like a red morn that ever yet betokend,
VVracke to the seaman, tempest to the field:
Sorrow to shepherds, woe unto the birds,
Gusts, and foul flawes, to heardmen, and to herds.
This ill presage advisedly she marketh,
Even as the wind is hushed before it raineth:
Or as the wolf does grin before he barketh:
Or as the berrie breaks before it staineth:
Or like the deadly bullet of a gun:
His meaning struck her ere his words begun.
And at his look she flatly falls down,
For looks kill love, and love by looks reuiueth,
A smile recures the wounding of a frown,
But blessed bankrout that by love so thriueth.
The silly boy believing she is dead,
Claps her pale cheek, till clapping makes it red.
And all amazed, brake off his late intent,
For sharply he did think to reprehend her,
Which cunning love did wittily prevent,
Faire-fall the wit that can so well defend her:
For on the grass she lies as she were slain,
Till his breath breaths life in her again.
He wrings her nose, he strikes her on the cheeks,
He bends her fingers, holds her pulses hard,
He chafes her lips, a thousand ways he seeks,
To mend the hurt, that his unkindness mard,
He kisses her, and she by her good will,
Will never rise, so he will kiss her still.
The night of sorrow now is turned to day,
Her two blew windows faintly she vpheaueth,
Like the fair sun when in his fresh array,
He cheeres the morn, and all the earth releeueth:
And as the bright sun glorifies the sky:
So is her face illumind with her eye.
Whose beams upon his hairelesse face are fixed,
As if from thence they borrowed all their shine,
Were never four such lamps, together mixed,
Had not his clouded with his brows repine:
But hers, which through the cristal tears gave light,
Shone like the Moon in water seen by night.
O where am I (quoth she,) in earth or heaven,
Or in the Ocean drencht, or in the fire:
What hour is this, or morn, or weary even,
Do I delight to die or life desire?
But how I lived, and life was deaths annoy,
But now I died, and death was lively joy.
O thou did kill me, kill me once again,
Thy eyes shr^wd tutor, that hard heart of thine,
Has taught them scornful tricks, and such disdain,
That they have murdered this poor heart of mine,
And these mine eyes true leaders to their queen,
But for thy piteous lips no more had seen.
Long may they kiss each other for this cure,
Oh never let their crimson liueries wear,
And as they last, their verdour still endure,
To drive infection from the dangerous year:
That the star-gazers having writ on death,
May say, the plague is banished by thy breath.
Pure lips, sweet seals in my soft lips imprinted,
What bargains may I make still to be sealing?
To sell my self I can be well contented,
So thou will buy, and pay, and use good dealing,
Which purchase if thou make, for fear of slips,
Set thy seal manuell, on my wax-red lips.
A thousand kisses buys my heart from me,
And pay them at thy leisure, one by one,
What is ten hundred touches unto thee,
Are they not quickly told, and quickly gone?
Say for non paime^t, that the debt should double,
Is twenty hundred kisses such a trouble?
Fair Queen (quoth he) if any love you owe me,
Measure my strangeness with my unripe years,
Before I know my self, seek not to know me,
No fisher but the vngrowne fry forbeares,
The mellow plum does fall, the green sticks fast,
Or being early plucked, is sower to taste.
Look the worlds comforter with weary gate,
His days hot task has ended in the west,
The owl (nights herald) shreeks, it is very late,
The sheep are gone to fold, birds to their nest,
And cole-black clouds, that shadow heavens light,
Do summon us to part, and bid good night.
Now let me say goodnight, and so say you,
If you will say so, you shall have a kis;
Goodnight (quoth she) and ere he says adue,
The honey fee of parting tendered is,
Her arms do lend his neck a sweet embrace,
Incorporate then they seem, face grows to face.
Till breathless he disioynd, and backward drew,
The heavenly moisture that sweet coral mouth,
Whose precious taste, her thirstie-lips well knew,
VVhereon they surfeit, yet complain on drouth,
He with her plenty pr^st, she faint with dearth,
Their lips together glewed, fall to the earth.
Now quick desire has caught the yielding pray,
And gluttonlike she feeds, yet never fills,
Her lips are conquerers, his lips obey,
Paying what ransom the insulter wills:
Whose vultur thought does pitch the price so hie,
That she will draw his lips rich treasure dry.
And having felt the sweetness of the spoil,
With blind fold fury she begins to forage,
Her face does reeke, and smoke, her blood does boil,
And careless lust stirs up a desperate courage,
Planting oblivion, beating reason back,
Forgetting shames pure blush, and honors wrack.
Hot, faint, and weary, with her hard embracing,
Like a wild bird being tamed with too much ha^dling,
Or as the fleet-foot Roe that is tired with chasing,
Or like the froward infant stild with dandling:
He now obayes, and now no more resists,
While she takes all she can, not all she lists.
What wax so frozen but dissolues with tempring,
And yields at last to every light impression?
Things out of hope, are compast often with ventring,
Chiefly in love, whose leave exceeds commission:
Affection faints not like a pale-faced coward,
But the^ woes best, when most his choice is froward.
When he did frown, o had she then gave over,
Such nectar from his lips she had not sucked,
Foul words, and frowns, must not repel a lover,
What though the rose have prickles, yet it is plucked?
Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
Yet love breaks through, and picks them all at last.
For pity now she can no more detain him,
The poor fool prays her that he may depart,
She is resolved no longer to restrain him,
Bids him farewell, and look well to her heart,
The which by Cupids bow she does protest,
He carries thence incaged in his breast.
Sweet boy she says, this night i will wast in sorrow,
For my sick heart commands mine eyes to watch,
Tell me loves master, shall we meet to morrow,
Say, shall we, shall we, will thou make the match?
He tell's her no, to morrow he intends,
To hunt the boar with certain of his friends.
The boar (quoth she) whereat a sudden pale,
Like lawne being spread upon the blushing rose,
Usurps her cheek, she trembles at his tale,
And on his neck her yoaking arms she throws.
She sincketh down, still hanging by his neck,
He on her belly falls, she on her back.
Now is she in the very lists of love,
Her champion mounted for the hot encounter,
All is imaginary she does prove,
He will not manage her, although he mount her,
That worse then Tantalus is her annoy,
To clip Elysium, and to lack her joy.
Even so poor birds deceived with painted grapes,
Do surfeit by the eye, and pine the maw:
Even so she languisheth in her mishaps,
As those poor birds that helpless berries saw,
The warm effects which she in him finds missing,
She seeks to kindle with continual kissing.
But all in vain, good Queen, it will not be,
She has assai'd as much as may be proved,
Her pleading has deserved a greater fee,
She Is love; she loves, and yet she is not loved,
Fie, fie, he says, you crush me, let me go,
You have no reason to withhold me so.
Thou had bin gone (quoth she) sweet boy ere this,
But that thou toldst me, thou woldst hunt the boar,
Oh be aduisd, thou know not what it is,
With iauelings point a churlish swine to goare,
Whose tushes never sheathd, he whetteth still,
Like to a mortal butcher bent to kill.
On his bow-backe, he has a battle set,
Of brisly pikes that ever threat his foes,
His eyes like glow-wormes shine, when he does fret
His snout digs sepulchers where ere he goes,
Being moved he strikes, what ere is in his way,
And whom he strikes, his crooked tushes slay.
His brawnie sides with hairie bristles armed,
Are better proof then thy spears point can enter,
His short thick neck cannot be easily harmed,
Being irefull, on the lion he will venture,
The thornie brambles, and embracing bushes,
As fearful of him part, through whom he rushes.
Alas, he naught esteem's that face of thine,
To which loves eyes paies tributarie gazes,
Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips, and crystal eine,
Whose full perfection all the world amazes,
But having thee at vantage (wondrous dread!)
Would root these beauties, as he root's the mead.
Oh let him keep his loathsome cabin still,
Beauty has naught to do with such foul fiends,
Come not within his danger by thy will,
They that thrive well, take counsel of their friends,
When thou did name the boar, not to disse^ble,
I feared thy fortune, and my joints did tremble.
Did thou not mark my face, was it not white?
Saw thou not signs of fear lurk in mine eye?
Grew I not faint, and fell I not down right?
Within my bosom whereon thou do lie,
My boding heart, pants, beats, and takes no rest,
But like an earthquake, shakes thee on my breast.
For where love reigns, disturbing jealousy,
Does call him self affections centinell,
Gives false alarmes, suggesteth mutiny,
And in a peaceful hour does cry, kill, kill,
Distempring gentle love in his desire,
As air, and water do abate the fire.
This sower informer, this bate-breeding spy,
This canker that eats up loves tender spring,
This carry-tale, dissentious jealousy,
That sometime true news, sometime false does bring,
Knocks at my heart, and whispers in mine ear,
That if I love thee, I thy death should fear.
And more then so, presents to mine eye,
The picture of an angry chafing boar,
Under whose sharp fangs, on his back does lie,
An image like thy self, all staynd with goare,
Whose blood upon the fresh flowers being shed,
Does make the^ droop with grief, and hang the head.
What should I do, seeing thee so indeed?
That tremble at th'imagination,
The thought of it does make my faint heart bleed,
And fear does teach it divination;
I prophecy thy death, my living sorrow,
If thou encounter with the boar to morrow
But if thou needs wilt hunt, be ruled by me,
Uncouple at the timorous flying hare,
Or at the fox which lives by subtlety,
Or at the Roe which no encounter dare:
Pursue these fearful creatures over the downs,
And on thy well breathd horse keep with thy hou^ds
And when thou have on foot the purblind hare,
Mark the poor wretch to ouer-shut his troubles,
How he outruns the wind, and with what care,
He crankes and crosses with a thousand doubles,
The many musits though the which he goes,
Are like a laberinth to amaze his foes.
Sometime he runs among a flock of sheep,
To make the cunning hounds mistake their smell,
And sometime where earth-deluing Conies keep,
To stop the loud persuers in their yell:
And sometime sorteth with a heard of dear,
Danger deuiseth shifts, wit waits on fear.
For there his smell with others being mingled,
The hot sent-snuffing hounds are driven to doubt,
Ceasing their clamorous cry, till they have singled
With much ado the cold fault cleanly out,
Then do they spend their mouth's, echo replies,
As if an other chase were in the skies.
By this poor wat far off upon a hill,
Stands on his hinder-legs with listening ear,
To hearken if his foes pursue him still,
Anon their loud alarums he does hear,
And now his grief may be compared well,
To one sore sick, that hears the passing bell.
Then shall thou see the deaw-bedabbled wretch,
Turn, and return, indenting with the way,
Each envious brier, his weary legs do scratch,
Each shadow makes him stop, each murmour stay,
For misery is trodden on by many,
And being low, never releeu'd by any.
Lie quietly, and hear a little more,
Nay do not struggle, for thou shall not rise,
To make thee hate the hunting of the bore,
Unlike my self thou hear'st me moralize,
Applying this to that, and so to so,
For love can comment upon every woe.
Where did I leave? no matter where (quoth he)
Leave me, and then the story aptly ends,
The night is spent; why what of that (quoth she?)
I am (quoth he) expected of my friends,
And now it is dark, and going I shall fall.
In night (quoth she) desire sees best of all.
But if thou fall, oh then imagine this,
The earth in love with thee, thy footing trips,
And all is but to rob thee of a kis,
Rich prays make true-men thieves: so do thy lips
Make modest Dyan, cloudie and forlorn,
Lest she should steal a kiss and die forsworn.
Now of this dark night I perceive the reason,
Cinthia for shame, obscures her silver shine,
Till forging nature be condemned of treason,
For stealing moulds from heaven, that were divine,
VVherin she framed thee, in hie heavens despite,
To shame the sun by day, and her by night.
And therefore has she bribed the destinies,
To cross the curious workmanship of nature,
To mingle beauty with infirmities,
And pure perfection with impure defeature,
Making it subject to the tyranny,
Of mad mischances, and much misery.
As burning feauers, agues pale, and faint,
Life-poysoning pestilence, and frendzies wood,
The marrow-eating sickness whose attaint,
Disorder breeds by heating of the blood,
Surfets, impostumes, grief, and damnd despair,
Swear natures death, for framing thee so fair.
And not the least of all these maladies,
But in one minutes fight brings beauty under,
Both favor, savor, hew, and qualities,
VVhereat the th'impartiall gazer late did wonder,
Are on the sudden wasted, thawed, and done,
As mountain snow melts with the midday son.
Therefore despite of fruitless chastity,
Loue-lacking vestals, and selfe-louing Nuns,
That on the earth would breed a scarcity,
And barraine dearth of daughters, and of suns;
Be prodigal, the lamp that burns by night,
Dries up his oil, to lend the world his light.
What is thy body but a swallowing grave,
Seeming to bury that posterity,
Which by the rights of time thou needs must have,
If thou destroy them not in dark obscurity?
If so the world will hold thee in disdain,
Since in thy pride, so fair a hope is slain.
So in thy self, thy self art made away,
A mischief worse then civil homebred strife,
Or theirs whose desperate hands them selves do slay,
Or butcher sire, that reaues his son of life:
Foul cankring rust, the hidden treasure frets,
But gold that is put to use more gold begets.
Nay then (quoth Adon) you will fall again,
Into your idle ouer-handled theme,
The kiss I gave you is bestowed in vain,
And all in vain you strive against the stream,
For by this black-fac't night, desires foul nourse,
Your treatise makes me like you, worse and worse.
If love have lent you twenty thousand tongues,
And every tongue more moving then your own,
Bewitching like the wanton Marmaids songs,
Yet from mine ear the tempting tune is blown,
For know my heart stands armed in mine ear,
And will not let a false sound enter there.
Lest the deceiving harmony should run,
Into the quiet closure of my breast,
And then my little heart were quite undone,
In his bedchamber to be bard of rest,
No Lady no, my heart longs not to groan,
But soundly sleeps, while now it sleeps alone.
What have you urged, that I can not reprove?
The path is smooth that leads on to danger,
I hate not love, but your devise in love,
That lends imbracements unto every stranger,
You do it for increase, o strange excuse!
When reason is the bawd to lusts abuse.
Call it not love, for love to heaven is fled,
Since sweating lust on earth usurped his name,
Under whose simple semblance he has fed,
Upon fresh beauty, blotting it with blame;
Which the hot tyrant stains, and soon bereaues:
As Caterpillars do the tender leaves.
Love comfort like sunshine after rain,
But lusts effect is tempest after sun,
Loves gentle spring does always fresh remain,
Lusts winter comes, ere summer half be done:
Love surfets not, lust like a glutton dies:
Love is all truth, lust full of forged lies.
More I could tell, but more I dare not say,
The text is old, the Orator too green,
Therefore in sadness, now I will away,
My face is full of shame, my heart of teene,
Mine ears that to your wanton talk attended,
Do burn them selves, for having so offended.
With this he breaks from the sweet embrace,
Of those fair arms which bound him to her breast,
And homeward through the dark lawnd runs apace,
Leaves love upon her back, deeply distressed,
Look how a bright star shoots from the sky;
So glides he in the night from Venus eye.
Which after him she darts, as one on shore
Gazing upon a late embarked friend,
Till the wild waves will have him seen no more,
Whose ridges with the meeting clouds contend:
So did the merciless, and pitchie night,
Fold in the object that did feed her sight.
VVhereat amas'd as one that unaware,
Has dropped a precious jewel in the flood,
Or stonisht, as night wandrers often are,
Their light blown out in some mistrustfull wood;
Even so confounded in the dark she lay,
Having lost the fair discovery of her way.
And now she beats her heart, whereat it groans,
That all the neighbor caves as seeming troubled,
Make verbal repetition of her mones,
Passion on passion, deeply is redoubled,
Ay me, she cries, and twenty times, woe, woe,
And twenty echoes, twenty times cry so,
She marking them, begins a wailing note,
And sings extemporally a woeful dittie,
How love makes yong-men thrall, and old men dote,
How love is wise in folly, foolish witty:
Her heavy antheme still concludes in woe,
And still the quier of echoes answer so.
Her song was tedious, and out-wore the night,
For lovers hours are long, though seeming short,
If pleased themselves, others they think delight,
In such like circumstance, with such like sport:
Their copious stories oftentimes begun,
End without audience, and are never done.
For who has she to spend the night withal,
But idle sounds resembling parasits?
Like shrill-tongu'd Tapsters answering every call,
Soothing the humor of fantastique wits,
She says it is so, they answer all it is so,
And would say after her, if she said no.
Lo here the gentle lark weary of rest,
From his moist cabinet mounts up on hie,
And wakes the morning, from whose silver breast,
The sun arises in his majesty,
Who does the world so gloriously behold,
That Ceader tops and hills, seem burnisht gold.
Venus salutes him with this fair good morrow,
Oh thou clear god, and patron of all light,
From whom each lamp, and shining star does borrow,
The beauteous influence that makes him bright,
There lives a son that sucked an earthly mother,
May lend thee light, as thou do lend to other.
This said, she hastes to a myrtle grove,
Musing the morning is so much ore-worne,
And yet she hears no tidings of her love;
She harkens for his hounds, and for his horn,
Anon she hears them chaunt it lustily,
And all in have she coasteth to the cry.
And as she runs, the bushes in the way,
Some catch her by the neck, some kiss her face,
Some twined about her thigh to make her stay,
She wildly breaks from their strict embrace,
Like a milch Do, whose swelling dugs do ache,
Hasting to feed her fawn, hid in some brake,
By this she hears the hounds are at a bay,
VVhereat she starts like one that spies an adder,
VVreath'd up in fatal folds just in his way,
The fear whereof does make him shake, and shudder,
Even so the timorous yelping of the hounds,
Appalls her senses, and her spirit confounds.
For now she knows it is no gentle chase,
But the blunt boar, rough bear, or lion proud,
Because the cry remains in one place,
Where fearfully the dogs exclaim aloud,
Finding their enemy to be so cursed,
They all strain curt'sie who shall cope him first.
This dismal cry rings sadly in her ear,
Through which it enters to surprise her heart,
Who overcome by doubt, and bloodlesse fear,
With cold-pale weakness, nums each feeling part,
Like soldiers when their captain once does yield,
They basely fly, and dare not stay the field.
Thus stands she in a trembling ecstasy,
Till cheering up her senses all dismayed,
She tells them it is a causlesse fantasy,
And childish error that they are affrayd,
Bids the^ leave quaking, bids them fear no more,
And with that word, she spide the hunted boar.
Whose frothie mouth bepainted all with red,
Like milk, and blood, being mingled both together,
A second fear through all her sinews spread,
Which madly hurries her, she knows not whither,
This way she runs, and now she will no further,
But back retires, to rate the boar for murder.
A thousand spleenes bear her a thousand ways,
She treads the path, that she vntreads again;
Her more then have, is mated with delays,
Like the proceedings of a drunken brain,
Full of respects, yet naught at all respecting,
In hand with all things, naught at all effecting.
Here kenneld in a brake, she finds a hound,
And asks the weary caitiffe for his master,
And there another licking of his wound,
Against venimd sores, the only sovereign plaster.
And here she meets another, sadly skowling,
To whom she speaks, and he replies with howling.
When he has ceast his ill resounding noise,
Another flapmouthd mourner, black, and grim,
Against the welkin, volies out his voice,
Another, and another, answer him,
Clapping their proud tails to the ground below,
Shaking their scratcht-eares, bleeding as they go.
Look how, the worlds poor people are amazed,
At apparitions, signs, and prodigies,
VVhereon with fearful eyes, they long have gazed,
Infusing them with dreadful prophecies;
So she at these sad signs, draws up her breath,
And sighing it again, exclaimes on death.
Hard favored tyrant, ougly, meagre, lean,
Hateful divorce of love, (thus chides she death)
Grim-grinning ghost, earths-worme what do thou mean?
To stifle beauty, and to steal his breath?
Who when he lived, his breath and beauty set
Gloss on the rose, smell to the violet.
If he be dead, o no, it cannot be,
Seeing his beauty, thou should strike at it,
Oh yes, it may, thou have no eyes to see,
But hatefully at randon do thou hit,
Thy mark is feeble age, but thy false dart,
Mistakes that aim, and cleaues an infants heart.
Had thou but bid beware, then he had spoke,
And hearing him, thy power had lost his power,
The destinies will curse thee for this stroke,
They bid thee crop a weed, thou pluckst a flower,
Loves golden arrow at him should have fled,
And not deaths ebon dart to strike him dead.
Do thou drink tears, that thou prouok'st such weeping,
What may a heavy groan advantage thee?
Why have thou cast into eternal sleeping,
Those eyes that taught all other eyes to see?
Now nature cares not for thy mortal vigor,
Since her best work is ruined with thy rigor.
Here overcome as one full of despair,
She vaild her eyelids, who like sluices stopped
The crystal tide, that from her two cheeks fair,
In the sweet channel of her bosom dropped.
But through the flood gates breaks the silver rain,
And with his strong course opens them again.
O how her eyes, and tears, did lend, and borrow,
Her eye seen in the tears, tears in her eye,
Both christals, where they viewd each others sorrow:
Sorrow, that friendly sighs sought still to dry,
But like a stormy day, now wind, now rain,
Sighs dry her cheeks, tears make the^ wet again.
Variable passions throng her constant woe,
As striving who should best become her grief,
All entertaind, each passion labors so,
That every present sorrow seems chief,
But none is best, then join they all together,
Like many clouds, consulting for foul weather.
By this far off, she hears some huntsman hallow,
A nourses song nere pleased her babe so well,
The dyre imagination she did follow,
This sound of hope does labor to expel,
For now reviving joy bids her rejoice,
And flatters her, it is Adonis voice.
VVhereat her tears began to turn their tide,
Being prisond in her eye: like pearls in glass,
Yet sometimes falls an orient drop beside,
Which her cheek melts, as scorning it should pass
To wash the foul face of the sluttish ground,
Who is but dronken when she seems drowned.
O hard believing love how strange it seems!
Not to believe, and yet too credulous:
Thy weal, and woe, are both of them extremes,
Despair, and hope, makes thee ridiculous.
The one does flatter thee in thoughts unlikely,
In likely thoughts the other kills thee quickly.
Now she vnweaues the web that she has wrought,
Adonis lives, and death is not to blame:
It was not she that called him all to naught;
Now she ads honors to his hateful name.
She clepes him king of graves, and grave for kings,
Imperious supreme of all mortal things.
No, no, quoth she, sweet death, I did but jest,
Yet pardon me, I felt a kind of fear
When as I met the boar, that bloody beast,
Which knows no pity but is still severe,
Then gentle shadow (truth I must confess)
I rayld on thee, fearing my loves decesse.
It Is not my fault, the Bore prouok't my tongue,
Be wreak't on him (invisible commander)
It Is he foul creature, that has done thee wrong,
I did but act, he is author of thy slander.
Grief has two tongues, and never woman yet,
Could rule them both, without ten women's wit.
Thus hoping that Adonis is alive,
Her rash suspect she does extenuate,
And that his beauty may the better thrive,
With death she humbly does insinuate.
Tells him of trophies, statues, tombs, and stories,
His victories, his triumphs, and his glories.
O love quote she, how much a fool was I,
To be of such a weak and silly mind,
To wail his death who lives, and must not die,
Till mutual overthrow of mortal kind?
For he being dead, with him is beauty slain,
And beauty dead, black Chaos comes again.
Fie, fie, fond love, thou art as full of fear,
As one with treasure laden, hemmed with thieves,
Trifles vnwitnessed with eye, or ear,
Thy coward heart with false bethinking greeues.
Even at this word she hears a merry horn,
Where at she leaps, that was but late forlorn.
As Faulcons to the lure, away she flies,
The grass stoops not, she treads on it so light,
And in her have, unfortunately spies,
The foul boares conquest, on her fair delight,
Which seen, her eyes are murdered with the view,
Like stars ashamed of day, themselves withdrew.
Or as the snaile, whose tender horns being hit,
Shrinks backward in his shellie cave with pain,
And, there all smoothred up, in shade does sit,
Long after fearing to creep forth again:
So at his bloody view her eyes are fled,
Into the deep-darke cabbins of her head.
Where they resign their office, and their light,
To the disposing of her troubled brain,
Who bids them still consort with ougly night,
And never wound the heart with looks again,
Who like a king perplexed in his throne,
By their suggestion, gives a deadly groan.
VVhereat each tributarie subject quakes,
As when the wind imprisond in the ground,
Struggling for passage, earths foundation shakes,
which with cold terror, does men's minds confound:
This mutiny each part does so surprise,
That from their dark beds once more leap her eyes.
And being opend, threw unwilling light,
Upon the wide wound, that the boar had trencht
In his soft flank, whose wonted lilly white
With purple tears that his wound wept, had dre^cht.
No flower was nigh, no grass, herb, leaf, or weed,
But stole his blood, and seemd with him to bleed.
This solemn sympathy, poor Venus notes,
Over one shoulder does she hang her head,
Dumbly she passions, frantikely she doteth,
She thinks he could not die, he is not dead,
Her voice is stopped, her joints forget to bow,
Her eyes are mad, that they have wept till now.
Upon his hurt she looks so steadfastly,
That her sight dazzling, makes the wound seem three,
And then she reprehends her mangling eye,
That makes more gashes, where no breach should be:
His face seems twain, each several lim is doubled,
For often the eye mistakes, the brain being troubled
My tongue cannot express my grief for one,
And yet (quoth she) behold two Adons dead,
My sighs are blown away, my salt tears gone,
Mine eyes are turned to fire, my heart to lead,
Heavy hearts lead melt at mine eyes red fire,
So shall I die by drops of hot desire.
Alas poor world what treasure have thou lost,
What face remains alive that is worth the viewing?
Whose tongue is music now? what can thou boast,
Of things long since, or any thing ensuing?
The flowers are sweet, their colors fresh, and trim,
But true sweet beauty lived, and di'de with him
Bonnet, nor veil henceforth no creature wear,
Nor sun, nor wind will ever strive to kiss you,
Having no fair to lose, you need not fear,
The sun does skorne you, and the wind does hiss you,
But when Adnois liu'de, sun, and sharp air,
Lurkt like two thieves, to rob him of his fair.
And therefore would he put his bonnet on,
Under whose brim the gaudie sun would peep,
The wind would blow it off, and being gone,
Play with his locks, then would Adonis weep.
And straight in pity of his tender years,
They both would strive who first should dry his tears.
To see his face the Lion walked along,
Behind some hedge, because he would not fear him:
To recreate himself when he has song,
The Tygre would be tame, and gently hear him.
If he had spoke, the wolf would leave his pray,
And never fright the silly lamb that day.
When he beheld his shadow in the brook,
The fishes spread on it their golden gils,
When he was by the birds such pleasure took,
That some would sing, some other in their bills
Would bring him mulberries and ripe-red cherries,
He fed them with his sight, they him with berries.
But this foul, grim, and vrchin-snowted Boar,
Whose downward eye still looks for a grave:
Never saw the beauteous liuerie that he wore,
Witness the intertainment that he gave.
If he did see his face, why then I know,
He thought to kiss him, and has killed him so.
It Is true, it is true, thus was Adnois slain,
He ran upon the Boar with his sharp spear,
Who did not whet his teeth at him again,
But by a kiss thought to persuade him there.
And nousling in his flank the loving swine,
Sheathed unaware the tuske in his soft groine.
Had I bin toothed like him I must confess,
With kissing him I should have killed him first,
But he is dead, and never did he bless
My youth with his, the more am I accursed.
With this she falls in the place she stood,
And stains her faice with his congealed blood.
She looks upon his lips, and they are pale,
She takes him by the hand, and that is cold,
She whispers in his ears a heavy tale,
As if they heard the woeful words she told:
She lifts the coffer-lids that close his eyes,
Where lo, two lamps burnt out in darkness lies.
Two glasses where her self, her self beheld
A thousand times, and now no more reflect,
Their virtue lost, wherein they late excelled,
And every beauty robbed of his effect;
VVonder of time (quoth she) this is my spite,
That thou being dead, the day should yet be light.
Since thou art dead, lo here I prophecy,
Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend:
It shall be waited on with jealousy,
Find sweet beginning, but unsavory end.
Nere settled equally, but high or lo,
That all loves pleasure shall not match his woe.
It shall be fickle, false, and full of fraud,
Bud, and be blasted, in a breathing while,
The bottom poison, and the top ore-strawd
With sweets, that shall the truest sight beguile,
The strongest body shall it make most weak,
Strike the wise du^be, and teach the fool to speak.
It shall be sparing, and too full of riot,
Teaching decrepit age to tread the measures,
The staring ruffian shall it keep in quiet,
Pluck down the rich, enrich the poor with treasures,
It shall be raging mad, and silly mild,
Make the young old, the old become a child.
It shall suspect where is no cause of fear,
It shall not fear where it should most mistrust,
It shall be merciful, and too seueare,
And most deceiving, when it seems most just,
Perverse it shall be, where it shows most toward,
Put fear to valor, courage to the coward.
It shall be cause of war, and dire events,
And set dissension twixt the son, and sire,
Subject, and seruill to all discontents:
As dry combustious matter is to fire,
Since in his prime, death does my love destroy,
They that love best, their loves shall not enjoy.
By this the boy that by her side lay killed,
Was melted like a vapor from her sight,
And in his blood that on the ground lay spild,
A purple flower sproong up, checkred with white,
Resembling well his pale cheeks, and the blood,
Which in round drops, upon their whiteness stood.
She bows her head, the new-sprong flower to smell,
Comparing it to her Adonis breath,
And says within her bosom it shall dwell,
Since he himself is reft from her by death;
She crop's the stalk, and in the breach appears,
Green-dropping sap, which she co^pares to tears.
Poor flower (quoth she) this was thy fathers guise,
Sweet issue of a more sweet smelling sire,
For every little grief to wet his eyes,
To grow unto himself was his desire;
And so it is thine, but know it is as good,
To wither in my breast, as in his blood.
Here was thy fathers bed, here in my breast,
Thou art the next of blood, and it is thy right.
Lo in this hollow cradle take thy rest,
My throbbing heart shall rock thee day and night;
There shall not be one minute in an hour,
Wherein I will not kiss my sweet loves flower.
Thus weary of the world, away she hies,
And yokes her silver doves, by whose swift aid,
Their mistress mounted through the empty skies,
In her light chariot, quickly is conuaide,
Holding their course to Paphos, where their queen,
Means to immure her self, and not be seen.
FINIS

