THE TRAGEDY OF King Richard the third. Containing, His treacherous Plots
against his brother Clarence: the pittiefull murder of his innocent nephews:
his tyrannical usurpation: with the whole course of his detested life, and
most deserved death. As it has been lately Acted by the Right honorable the
Lord Chamberlain his servants.

AT LONDON ^^^nted by Valentine Sims, for Andrew Wise, dwelling in Paul's
Chuch-yard, at the Sign of the Angel. 1597.

Enter Richard Duke of Glocest(...) NOw is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this (...) of York:
And all the clouds that lowrd upon our house
In the deep bosom of the (...).
Now are our brows bound with victoriou^ wreathes,
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments*
Our stern^ alarmes changd to merry meeting^,
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visagde war, has smoothde his wrinkled front,
And now in steed of mounting barbed steedes,
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries.
He capers nimbly in a Ladies chamber,
To the lascivious pleasing of a love.
But I that am not shapte ^or sportiue tricke^,
No^ made to court an amorous looking glass,
I that am rudely stamped and want (...) majesty,
To strut before a wanton ambling Nymph:
I that am curtaild of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
Deformd, vnfinisht, sent before my time
Into this breathing world scarce half made up*
And that so lamely and unfashionable,
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them:
Why I in this weak piping time of peace
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to spy my shadow in the sun,
And descant on mine own deformity:
And therefore since I cannot prove a lover
To entertain these fair well spoken days.
I am determined to prove a villain,
And hate the idle pleasures of these days:
Plots have I laid inductious dangerous,
By drunken Prophesies, libels and dreams,
To set my brother Clarence and the King
In deadly hate the one against the other.
And if King Edward be as true and just,
As I am subtle, false, and treacherous:
This day should Clarence closely be mewed up,
About a Prophecy which says that G.
Of Edwards heirs the murderers shall be.
Diue thoughts down to my soul,
Enter Clarence with a guard of men. Here Clarence comes,
Brother, good days, what means this armed guard
That waits upon your grace?

Clar. His Majesty tendering my persons safety has appo^nted
This conduct to convey me to the tower.

Glo. Upon what cause?

Cla. Because my name is George.

Glo. Alack my Lord that fault is none of yours,
He should for that commit your Godfathers:
O belike his Majesty has some intent
That you shall be new christened in the Tower.
But what is the matter Clarence may I know?

Cla. Yea Richard when I know; for I protest
As yet I do not, but as I can learn,
He harkens after Prophecies and dreams,
And from the crosse-rowe pluckes the letter G:
And says a wisard told him that by G,
His issue disinherited should be.
And for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought that I am he.
These as I learn and such like toies as these,
Have moved his highness to commit me now.

Glo. Why this it is when men are ruled by women,
It Is not the King that sends you to the tower,
My Lady Gray his wife, Clarence it is she,
That tempe^s him to this extremity,
Was it not she and that good man of worship
Anthony Wooduile her brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the tower*
From whence this present day he is delivered?
We are not safe Clarence, we are not safe.

Cla. By heaven I think there is no man is securde,
But the Queens kindred* land night-walking Heralds,
That trudge betwixt the King and Mistress Shore,
Heard ye not what an humble suppliant
Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery.

Glo. Humbly complaining to her deity,
Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.
I Will tell you what* I think it is our way,
If we will keep in favor with the King,
To be her men and wear her livery.
The ieal^us ore wo^ne widow and her self,
Since that our brother dubd them gentle women,
Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.

Bro. I beseech your Graces both to pardon me:
His majesty has straightly given in charge,
That no man shall have private conference,
Of what degree soever with his brother.

Glo. Even so and please your worship Brokenbury,
Yo^ may partake of any thing we say:
We speak no treason man, we say the King
Is wise and virtuous, and his noble Queen
Well stroke in years, fair and not iealou^*
We say that Shores wife has a pretty foot,
A cherry lip, a bonny e^e, a passing pleasing tongue:
And that the Queens kindred are made gentlefolks.
How say you sir* can you deny all this?

Bro. With this (my Lord) my self have ^ought to do.

Glo. Naught to do with Mistress Shore, I tell thee fellow*
He that does naught with her, excepting one
Were best he do it secretly alone.

Bro. I beseech your Grace to pardon n^e, and withal forbear
Your conference with the noble Duke.

Cla. We know thy charge Brokenbury and will obey,

Glo. We are the Queen^s abiects and must obey.
Brother farewell, I will unto the King,
And whatso^uer you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edwards widow sister,
I will perform it to enfranchise you,
Mean time this deep disgrace in brotherhood,
Touches me deeper then you can imagi^e.

Cla. I know it pleases neither of us well:

Glo. Well, your imprisonment shall not be long,
I will deliver you or lie for you,
Mea^e time have patience.

Cla. I must perforce; farewell.
Exit Clar.
Glo. Go tread the path that thou shall nere return,
Simple plain Clarence I do love thee so,
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
If heaven will take the present at our hands:
But who comes here the new delivered hastings?

Enter Lord Hastings. Have. Good time of day unto my gracious Lord:

Glo. As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain:
Well are you welcome to the open air,
How has your Lordship brookt imprisonment?

Have. With patience (noble Lord) as prisoners must:
But I shall live my Lord to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.

Glo. No doubt, no doubt, and so shall Clarence too,
For they that were your enemies are his,
And have preuaild as much on him as you.

Have. More pity that the Eagle should be mewed,
While k^ihts and bussards prey at liberty.

Glo. What news abroad?

Have. No news so bad abroad as this at home:
The King is sickly, weak and melancholy,
And his Physicians fear him mightily.

Glo. Now by Saint Paul this news is bad indeed,
Oh he has kept an evil diet long,
And overmuch consumed his royal person,
It Is very grievous to be thought upon:
What is he in his bed?

Have. He is.

Glo. Go you before and I will follow you.
Exit Ha He cannot live I hope, and must not die,
Till George be packt with post horse up to heaven.
I Will in to urge his hatred more to Clarence,
With lies well steeld with weighty arguments,
And if I fail not in my deep intent,
Clarence has not an other day to live
Which done, God take King Edward to his mer^
And leave the world for me to bussell in,
For then I Will marry Warwicks youngest daughter:
What though I killed her husband and her father,
The ^eadiest way to make the wench amends,
Is to become her husband and her father:
The which will I, not all so much for love,
As for another secret close intent.
By marrying her which I must reach unto.
But yet I run before my horse to market:
Clarence still breathes, Edward still lives and reigns,
When they are gone then must I count my gains.
Exit.
Enter Lady Anne with the hearse of Harry the 6. Lady An. Set down set down
your honourable^
If honor may be shrouded in a hearse,
Whilst I a while obsequiously lament
The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster:
Poor kei-cold figure of a holy King*
Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster,
Thou bloudlesse remnant of that royal blood
Be it lawful that I invoke thy ghost,
To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son,
Stabd by the selfsame hands that made these holes,
Lo in those windows that let forth thy life,
I power the helpless balm of my poor eyes,
Cursed be the hand that made these fatal holes,
Cursed be the heart that had the heart to do it.
More direful hap betide that hated wretch,
That makes us wretched by the death of thee:
Than I can with to adders, spiders, toades,
Or any creeping venomde thing that lives.
If ever he have child abortiue be it,
Prodigious and untimely brought to light:
Whose ugly and unnatural aspect,
May fright the hopeful mother at the view.
If ever he have wife, let her be made
As miserable by the death of him,
As I am made by my poor Lord and thee.
Come now toward Chertsey with your holy load,
Taken from Paul's to be interred there:
And still as you are weary of the weight,
Rest you whiles I lament King Henry's corse.

Enter Gloucester. Glo. Stay you that bear the corse and set it dow^e.

La. What black magitian coniures up this fiend,
To stop devoted charitable deeds.

Glo. Villain set down the corse, or by S. Paul,
I Will make a corse of him that disobeies.

Gent. My Lord, stand back and let the co^^in pas^e,

Glo. Vanmanerd dog, stand thou when I command,
Advance thy halbert higher than my breast,
Or by Saint Paul I Will strike thee to my ^oote,
And spurn upon thee beggar for thy boldness.

La. What do you tremble, are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.
Auaunt thou dreadful minister of hell,
Thou had but power over his mortal body,
His soul thou can not have, therefore be gone.

Glo. Sweet Saint, for Charity be not so cursed.

La. Foul Devil, for Gods sake hence and trouble us not,
For thou have made the happy earth thy hell:
Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaimes.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
Oh gentlemen see, see dead Henry's wounds,
Open their congeald mouths and bleed a fresh,
Blush blush thou lump of foul deformity,
For it is thy presence that exhales this blood,
From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells.
Thy deed inhumane and unnatural,
Prouokes this deluge most unnatural.
Oh God which this blood made, revenge his death,
Oh earth which this blood drinkst, revenge his death:
E^ther heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead,
Or earth gape open wide and eat him quick.
As thou do swallow up this good Kings blood,
Which his hell-gouernd arm has butchered.

Glo. Lady you know no rules of charity*
Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.

Lady Villain thou know no law of God nor man:
No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.

Glo. But I know none, and therefore am no beast.

Lady Oh wonderful when Devils tell the troth.

Glo. More wonderful when Angels are so ang^y
Vou^safe divine perfection of a woman,
Of these supposed evils to give me leave,
By circumstance but (...) acquit my self.

La. Vouchsafe defused infection of a man,
For these known evils but to give me leave,
By circumstance to curse thy cursed self.

Glo. Fairer then tongue can name thee, let me have
Some patient leisure to excuse my self.

La. Fouler then heart can think thee thou can make
No excuse current but to hang thy self.

Glo. By such despair I should accuse my self.

Lad. And by despairing should thou stand excusd^,
For doing worthy vengeance on thy self,
Which did unworthy slaughter upon others.

Glo. Say that I slew them not.

La. Why then they are not dead,
But dead they are, and devilish slave by thee.

Glo. I did not kill your husband.

Ld. Why then he is alive.

Glo. Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edwards hand.

La. In thy foul throat thou lie, Queen Margaret saw
Thy bloody faulchion smoking in his blood.
The which thou once did bend against her breast,
But that thy brothers beat aside the point.

Glo. I was provoked by her slau^derous tongue*
Which laid their guilt upon my gui^tlesle shoulders.

La. Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind*
Which never dreamt on ought but butcheries,
Did thou not kill this King.

Glo. I grant yea.

La. Do grant me hedghogge then god grant me too
Thou may be damnd for that wicked deed,
Oh he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.

Glo. The fitter for the King of Heaven that has him.

La. He is in heaven where thou shall never come.

Glo. Let him thank me that help to send him thither,
For he was fitter for that place then earth.

La. And thou unfit for any place but hell.

Glo. Yes one place else if you will hear me name it.

La. Some dungeon.

Glo. Your bedchamber.

La. Ill rest betide the chamber where thou lie.

Glo. So will it Madame till I ^^e with you.

La. I hope so.

Glo. I Know so, but gentle Lady A^ne,
To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
And fall somewhat into a flower method:
Is not the causer of the timeles deaths,
Of these P^antagenets Henry and Edward,
As blamefull as the executioner.

La. Thou art the cause and most accursed effect.

Glo. Your beauty was the cause of that effect,
Your beauty which did haunt me in my sleep:
To undertake the death of all the world
So I might rest one hour in your sweet bosom.

La. If I thought that I tell thee homicide,
These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.

Glo. These eyes could never endure sweet beauties wrack,
You should not blemish them if I stood by:
As all the world is cheered by the son,
So I by that, it is my day, my life.

La. Black night ouershade thy day, and death thy life.

Glo. Curse not thy self fair creature, thou art both.

La. I would I were to be revenged on thee.

Glo. It is a quarrel most unnatural,
To be reuengd on him that loves you.

La. It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
To be reuengd on him that slew my husband.

Glo. He that berest thee Lady of thy husband,
Did it to help thee to a better husband.

La. His better does not breath upon the earth.

Glo. Go to, he lives that loves you better then he could.

La. Name him.

Glo. Plantagenet.

La. Why that was he.

Glo. The selfsame name but one of better nature.

La. Where is he.

She spitteth at him. Glo. Here.
Why do thou spitte at me.

La. Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.

Glo. Never came poison from so sweet a place.

La. Never hung poison on a fouler toade,
Out of my sight thou do infect my eyes.

Glo. Thine eyes sweet Lady have infected mine.

La. Would they were basiliskes to strike thee dead.

Glo. I would they were that I might die at once,
For now they kill me with a living death:
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,
Shamd their aspect with store of childish drops:
I never sued to friend nor enemy,
My tongue could never learn sweet soothing words:
But now thy beauty is prop^sde my fee:
My proud heart sues and prompts my tongue to speak*
Teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made
For kissing Lady not for such contempt.
If thy reuengefull heart cannot forgive,
Lo here I lend thee this sharp pointed sword:
Which if thou please to hide in this true bosom,
And let the soul forth that adoreth thee:
I la^e it naked to the deadly stroke,
And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
Nay, do not pawse, it was I that killed your husband,
But it was thy beauty that provoked me:
Nay now dispatch it was I that killed King Henry:
But it was thy heavenly face that set me on:
Here she lets fall the sword. Take up the sword again or take up me.

La. Arise dissembler, though I wish thy death,
I will not be the executioner.

Glo. Then bid me kill my self, and I will do it*

La. I have already.

Glo. Tush that was in thy rage:
Speak it again, and even with the word,
That hand which for thy love did kill thy love,
Shall for thy love, kill a far truer love:
To both their deaths shall thou be accessory.

La. I would I knew thy heart.

Glo. It Is figu^ed in my tongue.

La. I fear me both are false.

Glo. Then never was man true.

La. Well, well, put up your sword*

Glo. Say then my peace is made.

La. That shall you know hereafter.

Glo. But shall I live in hope.

La. All men I hope live so.

Glo. Voutsafe to wear this ring.

La. To take is not to give.

Glo. Look how this ring incompasseth thy finger,
Even so thy breast incloseth my poor heart.
Wear both of them for b^th of them are thine,
And if thy poor devoted suppliant may
But beg one favor at thy gracious hand,
Thou do confirm his happiness for ever.

La. What is it?

Glo. That it would please thee leave these sad designs,
To him that has more cause to be a mourner,
And presently repair to Crosbie place,
Where after I have sol^mnly interred
At Chertsie monastery this noble King,
And wet his grave with my repentant tears,
I will with all expedient duty see you:
For diverse unknown reasons, I beseech you
Grant me this boon.

La. With all my heart, and much it ioies me too,
To see you are become so penitent:
Tressill and Barkley go along with me.

Glo. Bid me farewell

La. It Is more then you deserve:
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said farewell already.
Exit.
Glo. Sirs take up the corse.

Ser. Toward Chertsie noble Lord.

Glo. No, to white Friars there attend my coming.
Was ever woman in this humor woed,
Exeunt. manet Gl. Was ever woman in this humor won:
I Will have her, but I will not keep her long.
What I that killed her husband and his father,
To take her in her hearts extremest hate:
With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
The bleed^ng witness of her hatred by,
Having God, her conscience, and these bars against m^:
And I nothing to back my suite at all,
But the plain Diuel^ and dissembling looks,
And yet to win her all the world to nothing. Hah
Has she forgot already that brave Prince
Edward, her Lord whom I some three months since,
Stabd in my ang^y mood at Tewxbery,
A sweeter and a louelier gentleman,
Framd in the prodigality of nature:
Young, valiant, wise, and no doubt right royal,
The spacious world cannot again afford:
And will she yet debase her eyes on me
That cropped the golden prime of this sweet Prince,
And made her widow to a woeful bed,
On me whose all not equals Edwards moity*
On m^ that halt, and am unshapen thus.
My Duke dome to a beggarly denier.
I do mistake my person all this while,
Upon my life she finds, although I cannot
My self, to be a merueilous proper man.
I Will be at charges for a looking glass,
And entertain some score or two of taylers,
To study fashions to adorn my body,
Since I am crept in favor with my self,
I will maintain it with some little cost:
But first I Will turn yo^ fellow in his grave,
And then return lamenting to my love.
Shine out fair sun till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my shadow as I pass.
Exit.
Enter Queen, Lord Rivers, Gray. Ri Have patience Madame, there is no doubt his
Majesty
Will soon recover his accustomed health.

Gray In that you brook it, ill it makes him worse,
Therefore for Gods sake entertain good comfort,
And cheer his grace quick and merry words,

Qu. If he were dead what would betide of me.

Ry. No other harm but loss of such a Lord.

Qu. The loss of such a Lord includes all harm.

Gr. The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son,
To be your comforter when he is gone.

Qu. Oh he is young, and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Rich. Gloucester*
A man that loves not me nor none of you.

Ri. Is it concluded he shall be protector?

Qu. It is determinde, not concluded yet,
But so it must be if the King miscarry.

(Enter Buck. Darby Gr. Here come the Lords of Buckingham and Darby.

Buck. Good time of day unto your royal grace.

Dar. God make your Majesty joyful as you have been.

Qu. The Countess Richmond good my Lo: of Darby.
To your good prayers will scarcely say, Amen:
Yet Darby notwithstanding, she is your wise,
And loves not me, be you good Lo. assurde
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.

Dar. I do beseech you either not believe
The envious sl^unders of her false accusers,
Or if she be accusde in true report,
Bear with her weakness which I think proceeds
From way ward sickness, and no grounded malice.

Ry. Saw you the King to day, my Lo: of Darby?

Dar. But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
Came from visiting his Majesty.

Qu. With likelihood of his amendment Lords?

Buc. Madame good hope, his Grace speaks cheerf^l^y.

Qu. God grant him health, did you confer with him.

Buc. Madame we did: He desires to make atonement
Betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
And betwixt them and my Lord chamberlain,
And sent to warn them to his royal presence.

'Qu. Would all were well, but that will never be.
I fear our happiness is at the highest.

Enter Gloucester Glo. They do me wrong and I will not endure it*
Who are they that complains unto the King,
That I forsooth am stern and love them not:
By holy Paul they love his grace but lightly,
That fill his ears with such discentious rumors:
Because I cannot flatter and speak fair,
Smile in men's faces, smoothe, d^ceiue and cog*
Ducke with french nods and apish courtesy,
I must be held a rankerous enemy.
Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abusde,
By silken sly insinuating iackes?

Ry. To whom in all this presence speaks your Grace?

Glo. To thee that have nor honesty nor grace,
When have I injured thee, when done thee wrong,
Or thee or thee or any of your faction:
A plague upon you all. His royal person
(Whom God preserve better ^hen you would wish)
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while,
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.

Qu. Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter:
The King of his own royal disposition,
And not prouokt by any suitor else,
Aiming belike at your interior hatred,
Which in your outward actions shows it self,
Against my kindred, brother, and my self:
Makes him to send that thereby he may gather
The ground of your ill will and to remove it.

Glo. I cannot tell, the world is grown so bad
That wrens make pray where Eagles dare not perch,
Since every Jack became a Gentleman:
There Is many a gentle person made a lack.

Qu. Come come, we know your meaning brother Gl.
You envy my advancement and my friends,
God grant we never may have need of you.

Glo. Mean time God grants that we have need of you,
Our brother is imprisoned by your means,
My self disgract, and the nobility
Held in contempt, whilst many fair promotions,
Are daily given to enoble those
That scarce some two days since were worth a noble.

Qu. By him that raisde me to this careful height,
From that contented hap which I enjoyed,
I never did incense his Majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence: but have been,
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My Lord you do me shameful injury,
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.

Glo. You may deny that you were not the cause,
Of my Lord Hastings late imprisonment.

Ryu. She may my Lord.

Glo. She may Lo: Ryuers, why who knows not so?
She may do more Sir then denying that:
She may help you to many fair preferments,
And then deny her ayding hand therein,
And lay those honors on your high deserts,
What may she not, she may, yea marry may she.

Ry. What mary may she.

Glo. What mary may she, marry with a King.
A bachelor, a handsome stripling too.
Iwis your Grandam had a worser match.

Qu. My Lo: of Gloucester, I have too long borne
Your blunt vpbraidings and your bitter scoffs,
By heaven I will acquaint his Majesty
With those gross taunts I often have endured:
I had rather be a country servant maid.
Then a great Queen with this condition.
To be thus taunted, scorned, and baited at:
Enter Q^ Margaret. Small joy have I in being Englands Queen.

Qu. Mar. And lesned be that small, God I beseech thee.
Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.

Glo. What? threat you me with telling of the King,
Tell him and spare not, look what I have said, ^
I will avouch in presence of the King: ^
It Is time to speak, my pains are quite forgot.

Qu. Mar. Out devil I remember them too well,
Thou slewest my husband Henry in the tower,
And Edward my poor son at Teuxbery.

Glo. Ere you were Queen, yea or your husband King.
I was a packhorse in his great affairs,
A weeder out of his proud adversaries,
A liberal rewarder of his friends:
To royalize his blood I spilt mine own.

Qu. Mar. Yea and much better blood then his or thine.

Glo. In all which time you and your husband Gray,
Were factious for the house of Lancaster:
And Ryuers, so were you, was not your husband
In Margarets battle at Saint Albones sla^ne:
Let me put in your minds, if yours forget
What you have been ere now, and what you are.
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.

Qu. Ma. A murtherous villain, and so still thou art.

Glo. Poor Clarence did forsake his father Wa^wicke,
Yea and forswore himself (which Jesus pardon.)

Qu* Ma. Which God revenge.

Glo. To fight on Edwards party for the crown,
And for his meede poor Lo: he is mewed up:
I would to God my heart were ^lint like Edwards,
Or Edwards soft and pitiful like mine,
I am too childish, foolish for this world.

Qu. Ma. Hie thee to hell for shame and leave the worl^
Thou Cacodemon, there thy kingdom is.

Ry. My Lo* of Gloucester in those busy days,
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We followed then our Lo: our lawful King,
So should we you if you should be our King.

Glo. If I should be? I had rather be a peddler,
Far be it from my heart the thought of it.

Qu. As little joy my Lord as you suppose
You should enjoy, were you this countries King,
As little joy may you suppose in me,
That I enjoy being the Queen thereof.

Qu. M. A little joy enioies the Queen thereof,
For I am she and altogether ioylesse.
I can no longer hold me patient:
Hea^e me you wrangling Pirates that fall out,
In sharing that which you have pild from me:
Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
If not, that I being Queen you bow like subjects,
Yet that by you deposde you quake like rebels:
O gentle villain do not turn away.

Glo. Foul wrinckled witch what makst thou in my sight?

Q. Ma. But repetition of what thou have mard,
That will'I make before I let thee go:
A husband and a son thou owe to me,
And thou a kingdom, all of you allegiance:
The sorrow that I have by right is yours,
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.

Glo. The curse my noble father laid on thee,
When thou did crown his warlike brows with paper,
And with thy scorn drewst rivers from his eyes,
And then to dry them gau^st the Duke a clout,
Steept in the faultlesse blood of pretty Rutland:
His curses then from bitterness of soul
Denounst, against thee, are all fallen upon thee,
And God, not we, has plagde thy bloody deed.

^ Qu. So just is God to right the innocent.

Have. O it was the foulest deed to slaie that babe,
And the most merciless that ever was heard of.

Riu. Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.

Dors. No man but prophesied revenge for it.

Buch. Northumberland then present wept to see it.

Qu. M. What? were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did Yorkes dread curse prevail so much with heaven,
That Henry's death my lovely Edwards death,
Their kingdoms loss, my woeful banishment,
Could all but answer for that peevish brat?
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
Why then give way dull clouds to my quick curses:
If not, by war, by surfeit die your King,
As ours by murder to make him a King.
Edward thy son which now is Prince of Wales,
For Edward my son which was Prince of Wales,
Die in his youth by like untimely violence,
Thy self a Queen, for me that was a Queen,
Outliue thy glory like my wretched self:
Long may thou live to wail thy childrens loss,
And see another as I see thee now
Decked in thy rights, as thou art stald in mine:
Long die thy happy days before thy death,
And after many lengthened hours of grief,
Die neither mother, wife, nor Englands Queen:
Rivers and Dorset you were standers by,
And so wast thou Lo: Hastings when my son
Was stabd with bloody daggers, god I pray him,
That none of you may live your natural age,
But by some unlooked accident cut off.

Glo. Have done thy charm thou hateful withred hag.

Q M. And leave out the stay dog for thou shall hear me
If heaven have any grievous plague in store,
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee:
O let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee the troubler of the poor worlds peace:
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul,
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou live,
And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends:
No sleep, close up that deadly eye of thine,
Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a he^l of ugly d^uels.
Thou eluish marked abortiue rooting hog,
Thou that wast sealed in thy nativity
The slave of nature, and the son of hell.
Thou slander of thy mothers heavy womb,
Thou lothed issue of thy fathers loins,
Thou rag of honor, thou detested, etc.

Glo. Margaret.

Qu. M. Richard.

Glo. Ha.

Qu. M. I call thee not.

Glo. Then I cry thee mercy, for I had thought
That thou had called me all these bitter names.

Qu M. Why so I did, but ^ookt for no reply,
O Let me make the period to my curse.

Glo. It Is done by me, and ends in Margaret.

Qu. Thus have you breathed your curse against your self.

Qu. M. Poor painted Queen, vain flourish of my fortune
Why strewst thou sugar on that bottled spider,
Whose deadly web ens^areth thee about?
Fool fool, thou whetst a knife to kill thy self,
The time will come that thou shall wish for me,
To help thee curse that poisenous bunchbackt ^oade.

Have. False boading woman, end thy frantike curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.

Q. M. Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine,

Ri. Were you well served you would be taught your duty.

Q. M. To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
Teach me to be your Queen, and you my subjects:
O serve me well, and teach your selves that duty.

Dors. Dispute not with her, she is lunatique.

Q M. Peace Master Marquis you are malapert,
Your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current:
O that your young nobility could judge,
What twere to loose it and be miserable:
They that stand high have many blast to shake them*
And if they fall they dash themselves to pieces.

Glo. Good counsel mary, learn it learn it Marquis.

Dor. It touches you my Lo: as much as me.

Glo. Yea and much more* but I was borne so high,
Our aerie builds in the Cedars top,
And dallies with the wind, and scorns the sun.

Qu M. And turns the sun to shade, ala^, alas,
Witness my son, now in the shade of death,
Whose bright out shining beams, thy cloudy wrath
Has in eternal darkness foulded up:
Your aie^y builds in our aieries nest,
O God that see it, do not suffer it:
As it was won with blood, lost be it so.

Buck. Have done for shame, if not for charity.

Qu. M. Urge neither charity nor shame to me,
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And shamefully by you my hopes are butcherd,
My charity is outrage, life my shame,
And in my shame, still live my sorrows rage.

Buck. Have done.

Q. M. O Princely Buckingham, I will kiss thy hand
In sign of league and amity with thee:
Now fair befall thee and thy Princely house,
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
Nor thou within the compas^e of my curse.

Buc. Nor no one here, for curses neue^ pass
The lips of those that breath them in the air.

Q. M. I Will not believe but they ascend the sky,
And there awake gods gentle sleeping peace.
O Buckingham beware of yonder dog,
Look when he fawnes, he bites, and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rackle thee to death,
Have not to do with him, beware of him:
Sin, death and hell, have set their marks on him,
And all their ministers attend on him.

Glo. What does she say my Lo: of Buckingham?

Buck. Nothing that I respect my gracious Lord.

Qu. M. What do thou scorn me for my gentle counsel,
And sooth the devil that I warn thee from:
O but remember this another day,
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess:
Live each of you the subjects of his hate,
And he to your, and all of you to Gods.
Exit.
Have. My hair does stand on end to hear her curses.

Ryu. And so does mine, I wonder she is at liberty.

Glo. I cannot blame her by ^^ds holy mother,
She has had too much (...), and I repent
My part the^eof that I have done.

Qu. In^uer did her any to my knowledge.

Glo. But you have all the vantage of this wrong.
I was too hot to do some body good,
That is too cold in thinking of it now:
Marry as for Clarence he is well repaid,
He is franckt up to fatting for his pains,
God pardon them that are the cause of it.

Ryu. A virtuous and a Christianlike conclusion,
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.

Glo. So do I ever being well aduisde,
For had I cursed, now I had cursed my self.

Cates. Madam his Majesty does call for you.
And for your Grace, and you my noble Lo*

Qu Catesby we come, Lords will you go with us.

Ry. Madame we will attend your grace.

Exeunt man. Ri. Glo. I do the wrong, and first began to braule
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach,
I lay unto the grievous charge of others:
Clarence whom I indeed have laid in darkness,
I do beweepe to many simple gul^:
Namely to Hastings, Darby, Buckingham,
And say it is the Queen and her allies,
That stir the King against the Duke my brother.
Now they believe me, and withal whet me,
To be revenged on Ryuers, Vaughan, Gray:
But then I sigh, and with a piece of scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil:
And thus I clothe my naked villainy,
With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ,
And seem a Saint when most I play the Devil:
But soft here come my executioners.
Enter Executioners. How now my hardy stout resolved mates,
Are you now going to dispatch this deed.

Execu. We are my Lord, and come to have the warrant,
That we may be admitted where he is.

Glo. It was well thought upon, I have it here about me,
When you have done repair to Cro^by place;
But sirs, be sudden in the execu^^on,
Withal* obdurate, do not hear him plead,
For Clarence is well spoken, and perhaps,
May, move your hearts to pity if you mark him.

Exec. Tush fear not my Lo: we will not stand to prate,
Talkers are no good doers be assured:
We come to use our hands, and not our tongues.

Gl. Your eyes drop milstones when fools eyes drop tears,
I like you lads, about your business.

Exeunt. Enter Clarence, Brokenbury. Brok. Why looks your grace so heavily to
day?

Clar. Oh I have past a miserable night,
So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,
That as I am a christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night,
Though twere to buy a world of happy days*
So full of dismal terror was the time.

Brok. What was your dream, I long to hear you tell it.

Cla. Me thoughts I was imbarkt for Burgundy,
And in my company my brother Gloucester,
Who from my cabbine tempted me to walk,
Upon the hatches thence we looked toward England,
And cited up a thousand fearful times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster:
That had befallen us, as we pact along,
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches:
Me thought that Gloucester stumbled, and in stumbling,
Stroke me that thought to stay him over board,
Into the tumbling billows of the maine.
Lord, Lord, me thought what pain it was to drown.
What dreadful noise of waters in my ears,
What ugly sights of death within my eyes:
Me thought I saw a thousand fearful wracks,
Ten thousand men, that fishes gnawed upon,
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued Jewels,
Some lay in dead men's sculs, and in those holes,
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crep^
As twere in scorn of eyes reflecting gems,
Which woed the s^^my bottom of the deep,
And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.

Brok. Had you such leisure in the time of death,
To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?

Clar. Me thought I had, for still the envious s^oud
Kept in my soul, and would not let if foo^th,
To seek the empty vast* and wandering air,
But smothe^ed it within my panting bulk,
Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.

Brok. Awakt you not with this ^ore agony.

Cla. O no, my dream was lengthned after life*
O then began the tempest to my soul,
Who past me thought the melancholy flood,
With that grim ferr^man, which Poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night:
The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
Was my great father in law renowned Warwick,
Who cried alowd what scourge for perjury.
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence,
And so he vanished, then came wandering by,
A shadow like an angel in bright hair,
Dabled in blood, and he squakt out alowd,
Clarence is come, false, fleeting, periurd Clarene^
That stabd me in the field by Teuxbery:
Seize on him furies, take him to your torments,
With that me thoughts a legion of foul fiend^
Enuirond me about, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries, that with the very noise
I trembling, wakt, and for a season after
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made the dream.

Bro. No marvel my Lo: though it aff^^^hted you,
I promise you, I am afraid to hear you tell it.

Cla. O Brokenbury I have done those things,
Which now bear evidence against my soul
For Edwards sake, and see how he requites me.
I pray thee gentle keeper stay by me,
My soul is heavy, and I feign would sleep.

Bro. I will my Lo: God give your Grace good rest,
Sorrow break seasons, and reposing hours
Makes the night morning, and the noonetide night,
Princes have but their titles for their glories*
An outward honor, for an inward toil,
And for unfelt imagination,
They often feel a world of res^lesse cares:
So that be^wixt their titles and low names*
There^ nothing differs but the outward fame.
The murderers enter. In Gods name what are you, and how came you hither?

Execu. I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.

Bro. Yea, are you so brief.

2 Exe. O sir, it is better to be brief then tedious,
Show him our commission, talk no more.

He reads it. Bro. I am in this commanded to deliver
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands,
I will not reason what is mean thereby,
Because I will be guiltles of the meaning:
Here are the keys, there sits the Duke a sleep,
I Will to his Majesty, and certify his Grace,
That thus I have resignd my charge to you.

Exe. Do so, it is a point of wisdom.

2 What shall I stab him as he sleeps?

1 No then he will say it was done cowardly
When he wakes.

2 When he wakes,
Why fool he shall never wake till the judgment day.

1 Why then he will say, we stabd him sleeping.

2 The urging of that word Judgment, has bred
A kind of remorse in me.

1 What art thou afraid.

2 Not to kill him having a warrant for it, but to be da^^d
For killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.

1 Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so.

2 I pray thee stay a while, I hope my holy, humor will
Change, it was wont to hold me but while one would tell xx.

1 How do thou feel^ thy self no^?

2 Faith some certain dregs of ^onscience are yet with in me.

1 Remember our reward when the deed is done.

2 Zounds he dies, I had forgot the reward.

1 Where is thy conscience now?

2 In the Duke of Glocesters purse.

1 So when he opens his purse to give us our reward,
Thy conscience flies out.

2 Let it go, there^ ^ew or none will entertain it*

1 How if it come to thee again?

2 I Will not meddle with it, it is a dangerous thing,
It makes a man a coward: A man cannot steal,
But it accuses him: he cannot swear, but it checks him:
He cannot lie with his neighbor* wife, but it detects
Him. It is a blushing shamefast spirit, that mutinies
In a man's bosom: it fil^ one full of obstacle^,
It made me once restore a purse of gold that I found,
It beggars any man that keeps it: it is turned out of all
Towns and Cittles for a dangerous thing, and every
Man that means to live well, endeavors to trust to
To himself, and to l^ue without it.

1 Zounds it is even now at my ^lbowe persuading me
Not to kill the Duke.

2 Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not,
He would insinuate with thee to make thee sigh.

1 Tut* I am strong in fraud, he cannot prevail with me,
I warrant thee.

2 Spoke like a tall fellow that respects his reputation*
Come shall we to this geere.

1 Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy sword,
And then we will chop him in the malmsey But in the next room.

2 Oh excellent device, make a sop of him.

1 Hark he stirs, shall I strike.

2 No* first lets reason with him.

Cla. Where art thou keeper, give me a cup of wine.

1 You shall have wine enough my L^: a^on.

Cla. In Gods name what art thou.

2 A man as you are.

Cla. B^t not as I am, royal.

2 Nor you as we are, loyal.

Cla. Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.

2 My voice is now the Kings, my looks mine own.

Cla. How darkly, and how deadly do thou speak^:
Tell me who are you, wherefore come you hither?

Am. To, to, to.

Cla. To murder me.

Am. I.

Cla. You scarcely have the hearts to tell me s^,
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein my friends have I offended you?

1 Offended us you have not, but the King.

Cla. I shall be reconcild to him again.

2 Never my Lo: therefore prepare to die.

Cla. Are you called forth from out a wo^ld of men
To slay the innocent? what is my offense.
Where are the evidence that do accuse me:
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Unto the frow^^ng ludge, or who pronounst
The bitte^ sentence of poor Clarence death,
Before I be convict by course of law?
To threaten me with death, is most unlawful:
I charge you as you hope to have redemption,
By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
That you depart and lay no hands on me,
The deed you undertake is damnable.

1 What we will do, we do upon command.

2 And he that has commanded, is the King.

Clar. Err^nious Vassaile, the great King of Kings*
Has in the tables of his law commanded,
That thou shall do no murder, and will thou then
Spurn at his edict, and fulfill a man's?
Take heed, for he holds vengeance in his hands,
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.

2 And that same vengeance does he throw on thee,
For false forswearing, and for murder too:
Thou did receive the holy sacrament,
To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.

1 And like a traitor to the name of God*
Did break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade,
Vnripst the bowels of thy soueraign^s son.

2 Whom thou were sworn to cherish and defend.

1 How can thou urge Gods dreadful Law to us,
When thou have broke it in so dear degree?

Cla. Alas, for whose sake did I that ill deed,
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake:
Why sirs, he sends ye not to murder me for this,
For in this sin he is as deep as I:
It God will be revenged for this deed.
Take not the qua^^ell from his powerful arm,
He needs no indirect, nor lawless course,
To cut off those that have offended him.

1 Who made thee then a bloody minister,
When gallant springing brave Plantagenet,
That Princely Nouice was stroke dead by thee?

Cla. My brothers love, the devil, and my rage.

1 Thy brothers love, the devil and thy fault
Have brought us hither now to murder thee.

Cla. Oh if you love my brother, hate not me,
I am his brother, and I love him well:
If you be hirde for meede, go back again,
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
Who will reward you better for my life,
Then Edward will for tidings of my death.

2 You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.

Cla. Oh no, he loves me, and he holds me dear,
Go you to him from me.

Am. I, so we will.

Cla. Tell him, when that our princely father York,
Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm:
And chargd us from his soul, to love each other,
He little thought of this divided friendship.
Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.

Am. I, milstones as he lessond us to weep.

Cla. O do not slander him for he is kind.

1 Right as snow in harvest, thou deceiu'st thy self,
It Is he ha^h sent us hither now to slaughter thee.

Cla. It cannot be, for when I parted with him,
He hugd me in his arms, and swore with sob^,
That he would labor my delivery.

2 Why so he does, now he delivers thee,
From this wo^lds thraldom, to the ioies of heaven,

1 Makes peace with God, for you must die my Lo:

Cla. Have thou that holy feeling in thy soul,
To counsel me to make my peace with God;
And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind,
That thou will war with God, by murdring me?
Ah sirs, consider, he that set you on
To do this deed, will hate you for this deed.

2 What shall we do?

Cla. Relent, and save your souls.

1 Relent, it is cowardly and womanish.

Cla. Not to relent, is beastly, savage, devilish,
My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks:
Oh if thy eye be not a flatterer,
Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,
A begging Prince, what beggar pitties not?

1 I thus, and thus: if this will not serve,
He stabs him. I Will chop thee in the malmesey But, in the next room.

2 A bloody deed and desperately performd,
How feign like Pilate would I wash my hand,
Of this most grievous guilty murder done.

1 Why do thou not help me,
By heavens the Duke shall know how ^lacke thou art.

2 I would he knew that I had saved his brother.
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say,
For I repent me that the Duke is slain.
Exit.
1 So do not I, go coward as thou art:
Now must I hide his body in some hole,
Until the Duke take order for his bu^iall:
And when I have my meede I must away,
For this will out* and here I must not stay.

Exeunt. Enter King, Queen, Hastings, Ryuers, Dorcet, etc. Kin. So, now I have
done a good days work,
You peers continue this united league,
I every day expect an Embas^age
From my redeemer to redeem me hence:
And now in peace my soul shall part from heaven,
Since I have set my friends at peace on earth:
Rivers and Hastings* take each others hand,
D^sse^ble not your hatred, swear your love.

Riu. By heaven, my heart is purgd from grudging hate,
And with my hand I seal my true hearts love.

Have. So thrive I as I truly swear the like.

Kin. Take heed you dally not before your King,
Least he that is the supreme King of Kings,
Confound your hidden falsehood and award
Either of you to be the others end.

Have. So prosper I, as I swear perfect love.

Riu. And I, as I love hastings with my heart.

Kin. Madame, your self are not exempt^ in this,
Nor your son Dorset, Bucking ham nor you,
You have been factious one against the other:
Wife, love Lo: Hastings, let him kiss your hand.
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.

Q. Here Hastings I will never more remember
Our former hatred so thrive I and mine.

Dor. This enterchange of love, I here protest,
Upon my part shall be unviolable.

Have. And so swear I my Lord.

Kin. Now princely Buckingham seal thou this league
With thy embracement* to my wives allies,
And make me happy in your unity.

Buc. When ever Buckingham does turn his hate,
On you or yours, but with all duteous love
Does cherish you and yours, God punish me
With hate, in those where I expect most love*
When I have most need to employ a friend,
And most assured that he is a friend,
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile
Be he unto me, this do I beg of God,
When I am cold in zeal to you or yours.

Kin. A pleasing cordial Princely Buckingham,
Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart:
There wants now our brother Gloucester here,
To make the perfect period of this peace,

Enter Glocest. Buc. And in good time here comes the noble Duke

Glo. Good morrow to my sovereign King and Queen,
And Princely peers, a happy time of day.

Kin. Happy indeed as we have spent the day:
Brother we have done deeds of charity
Made peace of enmity* fair love of hate,
Between these swelling wrong insenced peers.

Glo. A blessed labor, my most sovereign liege,
Amongst this princely heap, if any here
By false Intelligence or wrong surmise,
Hold me a foe, if I unwittingly or in my rage,
Have ought committed that is hardly borne
By any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his friendly peace,
It Is death to me to be at enmity.
I hate it, and desire all good men's love.
First Madam I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my dutious service.
Of you my noble Coosen Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were logde between us.
Of you Lo: Rivers, and Lord Gray of you,
That all without desert have frownd on me,
Dukes, Earls, Lords, gentlemen, indeed of all:
I do not know that English man alive,
With whom my soul is any iotte at odds,
More then the infant that is borne to night:
I thank my God for my humility.

Qu. A holy day shall this be kept hereafter,
I would to God all ^^^ifes were well compounded.
My sovereign liege I do beseech your Majesty.
To take our brother Clarence to your Grace.

Glo. Why Madame, have I offered love for this,
To be thus scorned in this royal presence?
Who knows not that the noble Duke is dead,
You do him in^ury to scorn his corse.

Ryu. Who knows not he is dead? who knows he is^

Qu. All seeing heaven, what a world is this?

Buck. Look I so pale Lo: Dorset as the rest?

Dor. I my good L* and no one in this presence,
But his red color has forsook his cheeks.

Kin. Is Clarence dead, the order was reuerst.

Glo. But he poor soul by your first order died,
And that a wingled Mercury did bea^e,
Some tardy cripple bore the countermaund,
That came too l^g to see him buried:
God grant that some less noble, and less loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, but not in blond:
Deserve not worse then wretched Clarence d^d,
And yet go current from suspicion.

Enter Darby. Dar. A boon my sovereign for my service done.

Kin. I pray thee peace, my soul is full of sorrow.

Dar. I will not rise unless your highness grant.

Kin. Then speak at once* what is it thou demaundst.

Dar. The forfeit sovereign of my seruant^ life,
Who slew to day a riotous gentleman,
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.

Kin. Have I a tongue to doom my brothers death,
And shall the same give pardon to a slave?
My brother slew no man, his fault was thought,
And yet his punishment was cruel death.
Who sued to me for him? who in my rage,
Kneeld at my feet and bad me be aduisde?
Who spoke of Brotherhood? who of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me:
Who told me in the field by Teuxbery,
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
And said dear brother, live and be a King?
Who told me when we both lay in the field,
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
Even in his own garments, and gave himself
All thin and naked to the numbcold night?
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
Sinfully puckt, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your carters, or your waighting vassailes
Have done a drunken slaughter, and defaste
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for pardon pardon.
And I unjustly too, must grant it you:
But for my brother, not a man would speak,
Nor I ungracious speak unto my self,
For him poor soul: The proudest of you all
Have been beholding to him in his life:
Yet none of you would once plead for his life:
Oh God I fear thy Justice will take hold
On me, and you, and mine, and yours for this.
(Exit. Come Hastings help me to my closet, oh poor Clarence,

Glo. This is the fruit of rashness: marked you not
How that the guilty kindred of the Queen,
Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence death?
Oh they did urge it still unto the King,
God will revenge it. But come lets in
To comfort Edward with our company.

Exeunt. Enter Duchess of York, with Clarence Children. Boy. Tell me good
Granam, is our father dead?

Dut. No boy.

Boy. Why do you wring your hands, and beat your breast,
And c^ie, Oh Clarence my unhappy son?

Gerl. Why do you look on us and shake your head,
And call us wretches, Orphans, castawaies,
If that our noble father be alive?

Dut. My pretty Cosens, you mistake me much,
I do lament the sickness of the King:
As loath to loose him, not your fathers death:
It were lost labor, to weep for one that's lost.

Boy. Then Granam you conclude that he is dead,
The King my Uncle is too blame for this:
God will revenge it, whom I will importune
With daily prayers, all to that effect.

Dut. Peace children, peace, the King does love you well,
Incapable and shallow innocents,
You cannot guess who causde your fathers death.

Boy. Granam we can: For my good Uncle Gloucester
Told me, the King provoked by the Queen,
Deuisd impeachments to imprison him:
And when he told me so, he wept,
And hugd me in his arm, and kindly kissed my cheek*
And bad me rely on him as in my father,
And he would lou^ me dearly as his child.

Dut. Oh that deceit should steal such gentle shapes,
And with a virtuous visaid hide foul guile:
He is my son, yea, and therein my shame:
Yet from my dogs he drew not this deceit.

Boy. Think you my Uncle did dissemble Granam?

Dut. I boy.

Boy. I cannot think it, hark what noise is this.

Enter the Quee. Qu. Oh who shall hinder me to wail and weep?
To chide my fortune, and torment my self?
I Will join with black despair against my soul,
And to my self become an enemy.

Dut. What means this scene of rude impatience.

Qu. To make an act of tragic violence;
Edward, my Lord, your son our King is dead.
Why grow the branches, now the root is witherd?
Why wither not the leaves, the sap being gone?
If you will live, lament: if die, be brief:
That our swiftwinged souls may catch the Kings,
Or like obedient subjects, follow him
To his new kingdom of perpetual rest.

Dut. Ah so much interest have I in thy sorrow,
As I had title in thy noble husband:
I have bewept a worthy husbands death,
And lm'd by looking on his images.
B^t now two mirrours of his Princely semblance,
Are cracked in pieces by malignant death:
And I for comfort have but one false glass,
Which grieves me when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother,
And have the comfort of thy children left thee:
But death has snatched my children from mine arms,
And plucked two crutches from my feeble lummes,
Edward and Clarence, Oh what cause have I
Then, being but moity of my grief,
To ouergo thy plaints and drown thy cries?

Boy. Good Aunt, you wept not for our fathers death,
How can we aid you with our kindreds ^^ares.

Gerl. Our fatherless distress was left vnmoand.
Your widows dolours likewise be vnwept.

Qu. Give me no help in lamentation,
I am not barren to bring forth laments:
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I being gouernd by the warry moan,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world:
Oh for my husband, for my eire Lo: Edward.

Ambo Oh for our father, for our dear Lo: Clarence.

Dut. Alas for both, both mine Edward and Clarence.

Qu. What stay had I but Edward, and he is gone?

Am. What stay had we but Clarence, and he is gone?

Dut. Wha^ stays had I but they, and they are gone?

Qu. Wa^ neucr Widow, had so dear a loss.

Ambo. Was never Orphans had a dearer loss.

Du. Was never mother had a dearer loss:
Alas, I am the mother of these mones,
Their woes are parceld, mine are general:
She for Edward weeps, and so do I:
I for a Clarence weep, so does not she:
These babes for Clarence weep, and so do I:
I for an Edward weep, so do not they.
Alas, you three on me threefold distressed,
Pour all your tears, I am your forrowes nurse,
And I will pamper it with lamentations.

Enter Glocest. with others. Gl. Madame have comfort, al of us have cause,
To wail the dimming of our shining star:
But none can cure their harms by wailing them,
Madame my mother, I do cry you mercy,
I did not see your Grace, humbly on my knee
I crave your blessing.

Du. God bless thee, and put meekenes in thy mind,
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty.

Glo. Amen, and make me die a good old man,
That's the butt end of a mothers blessing:
I marvel why her Grace did leave it out.

Buck. You cloudy Princes, and hart-sorrowing peers
That bear this mutual heavy lode of moan:
Now cheer each other, in each others love:
Though we have spent our harvest of this King,
We are to reap the harvest of his son:
The broken rancour of your high swollen hearts,
But lately splinterd, knit, and joined etogether,
Must gently be preserved, cherisht and kept,
Me seems good that with some little train,
Forthwith from Ludlow the young Prince be fetched
Hither to London, to be crowned our King.

Glo. Then be it so; and go we to determine,
Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow:
Madame, and you my mother will you go,
To give your censures in this weighty business,

Ans. With all our hearts.

Exeunt man, Glo. Buck. Buck. My Lord who ever iourneies to the Prince,
For Gods sake let not us two stay behind:
For by the way I Will sort occasion,
As index to the story we late talked of,
To part the Queens proud kindred from the King.

Glo. My other self, my counsels consistory:
My Oracle, my Prophet, my dear Cosen:
I like a child will go by thy direction:
Toward Ludlow then, for we will not stay behind.

Enter two Citizens. 1 Cit. Neighbor well met, whither away so fast?

2 Cit. I promise you, I scarcely know my self.

1 Hear you the news abroad?

2 I, that the King is dead.

1 Bad news birlady, seldom comes the better,
I fear, I fear, twill prove a troublous world.

Ent. another Citt. 3 Cit. Good morrow neighbors.
Does this news hold of good King Edwards death?

1 It does.

3 Then masters look to see a troublou^ world

1 No no, by Gods good grace his son shall reign.

3 Woe to that land that's gouernd by a child.

2 In him there is a hope of government,
That in his nonage counsel under him,
And in his full and ripened years himself,
No doubt shall then, and till then govern well*

1 So stood the state when Harry the sixth
Was crowned at Paris, but at ix. months old.

3 Stood the state so? no good my friend not so,
For then this land was famously enricht
With pollitike grave counsel: then the King
Had virtuous Uncles to protect his Grace.

2 So has this, both by the father and mothe^.

3 Better it were they all came by the father,
Or by the father there were none at all:
For emulation now, who shall be nearest:
Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not*
Oh full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester,
And the Queens kindred hauty and proud,
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly land might solace as before.

2 Come come, we fear the worst, all shall be well*

3 When clouds appear, wise men put on their clokes:
When great leaves fall, the winter is at hand:
When the sun sets* who does not look for night:
Untimely storms, make men expect a darth:
All may be well: but if God sort it so,
It Is more then we deserve or I expect.

1 Truly the souls of men are full of bread:
Ye cannot almost reason with a man
That looks not heavily, and full of fear.

3 Before the times of change still is it so:
By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust
Ensuing dangers, as by proof we see*
The waters swell before a boistrous storm:
But lea^e it all to God: whither away?

2 We are sent for to the Justice*

3 And so was I, I Will bear you company*

Exeunt. Enter Cardinal, Duchess of York, Quee. young York* Car. Last night
I hear they lay at Northha^pton.
At Stonistratford will they be to night,
To morrow or next day, they will be here.

Dut. I long with all my heart to see the Prince,
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.

Qu. But I hear no, they say my son of York
Has almost ouertane him in his growth.

Yor. I mother, but I would not have it so.

Dut. Why my young Cosen it is good to grow.

Yor. Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,
My Uncle Rivers talked how I did grow
More then my brother. I quoth my Nnckle Gloucester,
Small herbs have grace, great weeds grow apace,
And since me thinks I would not grow so fast:
Because sweet flowers are slow, and weeds make haste.

Dut. Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee:
He was the wretchedst thing when he was young,
So long a growing, and so leisurely,
That if this were a true rule, he should be gracious.

Car. Why Madame, so no doubt he is.

Dut. I hope so too, but yet let mothers doubt.

Yor. Now by my troth if I had been remembered,
I could have given my Uncles grace a flout,
That should have nearer touched his growth then he did mine.

Dut. How my pretty York? I pray thee let me hear it.

Yor. Mary they say, my Uncle grew so fast,
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old:
It Was full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Granam this would have heene a biting jest.

Dut. I pray thee pretty York who told thee so.

Yor. Granam his nurse.

Dut. His nurse: why she was dead ere thou were borne.

Yor. If twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.

Qu. A perilous boy, go to, you are too shrewde.

Car. Good Madame be not angry with the child.

Qu. Pitchers have ears.

Enter Dorset. Car. Here comes your son, Lo: M. Dorset.
What news Lo: Marquis?

Dor. Such news my Lo: as grieves me to unfold.

Qu. How fares the Prince?

Dor. Well Madame, and in health.

Dut. What is thy news then?

Dor. Lo: Rivers and Lo: Gray are sent to Pomfret,
With them, Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.

Dut. Who has committed them?

Dor. The mighty Dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.

Car. For what offense.

Dor. The sum of all I can, I have disclosed:
Why, or for what, these nobles were committed,
Is all unknown to me my gracious Lady.

Qu. Ay me I see the downfall of our house,
The tiger now has ceazd the gentle hind:
Insulting tyranny begins to iet,
Upon the innocent and lawless throane:
Welcome destruction, death and massacre,
I see as in a map the end of all.

Du. Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld?
My husband lost his life to get the crown,
And often up and down my sons were tossed:
For me to joy and weep their gain and loss,
And being seated and domestike broiles,
Clean ouerblowne themselves, the conquerours
Make war upon themselves, blood against blood,
Self against self, O preposterous
And frantike outrage, end thy damned spleen,
Or let me die to look on death no more.

Qu. Come come my boy, we will to sanctuary.

Dut. I Will go along with you.

Qu. You have no cause.

Car. My gracious Lady go,
And thither bear your treasure and your goods,
For my part, I Will resign unto your Grace
The seal I keep, and so betide to me,
As well I tender you and all of yours:
Come I Will conduct you to the sanctuary.

Exeunt. The Trumpets sound. Enter young Prince, the Dukes of Gloucester, and
Buckingham, Cardinal, etc. Buc. Welcome sweet Prince to London to your
chamber.

Glo. Welcome dear, Cosen my thoughts sovereign,
The weary way has made you melancholy.

Prin. No Uncle, but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy:
I want more Uncles here to welcome me.

Glo. Sweet Prince, the untainted virtue of your years,
Has not yet diued into the worlds deceit:
Nor more can you distinguish of a man,
Then of his outward show, which God he knows,
S^^dome or never iumpeth with the heart:
Those Uncles which you want, were dangerous,
Your Grace attended to their sugared words,
But looked not on the poison of their hearts:
God keep you from them, and from such false friends.

^ri. God keep me from false friends, but they were none*

Glo. My Lo, the Mayor of London comes to greet you.

Enter Lord Mayor. Lo: M. God bless your grace with health and happy days.

Prin. I thank you good my Lo: and thank you all:
I thought my mother, and my brother York,
Would long ere this have met us on the way:
Fi^, what a slug is Hastings that he comes not
To tell us whether they will come, or no,

(Enter L. Have. Buck. And in good time, here comes the sweating Lo:

Pri. Welcome my Lo: what will our mother come?

Have. On what occasion, God he knows, not I:
The Queen your mother and your brother York
Have taken sanctuary: The tender Prince
Would feign have come with me, to meet your Grace,
But by his mother was perforce withheld.

Buc. Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers? Lo: Cardinal will your grace
Persuade the Queen to send the Duke of York
Unto his Princely brother presently?
If she deny, Lo: Hastings go with him,
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.

Car. My Lo: of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here: but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
We should infringe the holy privilege
Of blessed sanctuary, not for all this land,
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.

Buck. You are too senseless obstinate my Lo:
Too ceremonious and traditionall:
Weigh it but with the grossenes of this ag^*
You break not sanctuary in seazing him:
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those whose dealings have deserude the place,
And those who have the wit to claim the place.
This Prince has neither claimed it, nor deserved it,
And therefore in mine opinion, cannot have it.
Then taking him from thence that is not there,
You break no privilege nor charter there:
Often have I heard of sanctuary men,
But sanctuary children never till now.

Car. My Lo: you shall ouerrule my mind for on^e:
Come on Lo: Hastings will you go with me?

Have. I go my Lord.

Prin. Good Lords make all the speedy have you may:
Say Uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we soiourne till our coronation?

Glo. Where (...) seems best unto your royal self:
If I may council you, some day or two,
Your highness shall repose you at the tower:
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and rec^cation.

Prin. I do not like the ^ower of any place:
Did Julius Caesar build that place my Lord?

Buc. He did, my gracious Lo: begin that place,
Which since succeeding ages have reedisied.

Prin. Is it upon record, or else reported
Successively from age to age he built it?

Buc. Upon record my gratiou^ Lo:

Pri. But say my Lo: it were not registered,
Me thinks the truth should live from age to age,
As twere retailde to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.

Glo. So wise, so young, they say do never live long.

Pri. What say you Uncle?

Glo. I say without characters fame lives long:
Thus like the formal vice iniquity,
I morallize two meanings in one word.

Pri. That Julius Caesar was a famous man,
With what his valor did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valor live:
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror,
For now he l^ues in fame though not in life:
I Will tell you what my Cosen Buckingham.

Buc. What my gracious Lord?

Pri^. And if I li^e until I be a man,
I Will win our aunci^nt right in France again,
Or die a soldier as I liude a King.

Glo. Short summers lightly have a forward spring.

Enter young York^, Hastings, Cardinal. Buc. Now in good time here comes the
Duke of York.

Pri. Rich. of York how fares our loving brother?

Yor. Well my dread Lo: so must I call you now.

Pri. I brother to our grief as it is yours:
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which by his death has lost much majesty.

Glo. How fares our Cosen noble Lo: of York*

Yor. I thank you gentle Uncle. O my Lo:
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth:
The Prince my brother has outgrowen me far.

Glo. He has my Lo:

Yor. And therefore is he idle?

Glo. Oh my fair Cosen, I must not say so.

Yor. Then he is more beholding to you then I.

Glo. He may command me as my sovereign,
But you have power in me as in a kinseman.

Yor. I pray you Uncle gi^e me this dagger.

Glo. My dagger little Cosen, withal my heart.

Pri. A beggar brother?

Yor. Of my kind Uncle that I know will give,
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.

Glo. A greater gi^t then that, I Will give my Cosen.

Yor. A greater gift, O that's the sword to it.

Glo. I gentle Cosen, were it light enough.

Yor. O then I see you will part but with light gifts,
In weightier things you will say a beggar nay.

Glo. It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.

Yor. I weigh it lightly were it heavier.

Glo. What would you have my weapon little Lord?

Yor. I would, that I might thank you as you call me.

Glo. How?

Yor. Little.

Pri. My Lo: of York will still be cross in talk:
(...) your grace knows how to bear with him.

Yor. You mean to bear me, not to bear with (...)
Uncle, my brother mockes both you and me,
Because that I am little like an Ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.

Buck. With what a sharp provided wit he reasons,
To mittigate the scorn he gives his Uncle:
He pretely and aptly taunts himself,
So cunning and so young is wonderful.

Glo. My Lo: wilt please you pass along,
My self and my good Coosen Buckingham*
Will to your mother, to entreat of her,
To meet you at the tower, and welcome you.

Yor. What will you go unto the tower my Lo*

Prin. My Lo: protector needs will have it so.

Yor. I shall not sleep in quiet at the tower.

Glo. Why, what should you fear?

Yor. Mary my Uncle Clarence angry ghost:
My Granam told me he was murdered there.

Pri. I fear no Uncles dead.

Glo. Nor none that hue, I hope.

Pri And if they live, I hope I need not fear:
But come my Lo: with a heavy heart
Thinking on them, go I unto the tower.

Exe^nt Prin. Yor. Have. Dors^manet. Rich. Buck. Buc. Think you my Lo: this
little prating York,
Was not incensed by his sub^^le mother,
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?

Glo. No doubt, no doubt, Oh it is a perilous boy,
Bold, quick, ingeni ous, forward, capable,
He is all the mothers, from the top to toe.

Buc. Well, let them rest: Come hither Catesby,
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we ^^tend,
As closely to conceal what we impa^t,
Thou know our reasons vrgde upon the way:
What think thou? is it not an easy matter
To make William Lo: Hastings of our mind,
For the instalement of this noble Duke,
In the seat royal of this famous I Will?

Cates. He for his fathers sake so l^ues the Prince,
That he will not be won to ought against him.

Buck. What think thou then of Stanley what will he?

Cat. He will do all in all as Hastings does.

Buck. Well then no more but this:
Go gentle Catesby, and as it were a far off*
Sound thou Lo: Hastings, how he stands affected
Unto our purpose, if he be willing,
Encourage him, and show him all our reasons:
If he be leaden, ^c^e, cold, Unwilling,
Be thou so too: and so break off your talk,
And give us notice of his inclination:
For we to morrow hold divided counsels,
Wherein thy self shall highly be employed.

Glo. Commend me to Lo: William, tell him Catesby,
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
To morrow are let blood at Pomfret Castle,
And bid my friend for joy of this good news,
Give Mistress Shore, one gentle kiss the more.

Buck* Good Ca^esby effect this business soundly.

Cat. My good Lo: both, with all the heed I may.

Glo. Shall we hear from you Catesby ere we sleep?

Cat. You shall my Lord.

Glo. At Crosby place there shall you find us both.

Buc. Now my Lo: what shall we do, if we perceive
William Lo: Hastings will not yield to our complots?

Glo. Chop of his head man, somewhat we will do,
And look when I am King, claim tho^ of me
The Earldom of Hereford and the moueables,
Whereof the King my brother stood possessed.

Buc. I Will claim that promise at your Graces hands.

Glo. And look to have it yielded with all willingness:
Come let us suppe betimes, that afterward
We may digest our complots in some form.

Exeunt. Enter a Messenger to Lo: Hastings. Mes. What (...) my Lord.

Have. Who knockes at the door.

Mess. A messenger from the Lo: Stanley.

Enter L. Have. Have. What Is a clock?

Mess. Upon the stroke of four.

Have. Cannot thy Master sleep these tedious (...)?

Mess. So it should seem by that I have to say:
First he commends him to your noble Lordship.

Have. And then.

Mes. And then he sends you word.
He dreamt to ^ight the bear had raste his helm:
Besides, he says there are two councels held,
And that may be determined at the one,
Which may make you and him to ^^we a^ ^the other,
Therefore he sends to know your Lordships pleasure:
I^ presently you will take horse with him,
And with all speed post into the North,
To shun the danger that his soul divines.

Have. Go fellow go, return unto thy Lord,
Bid him not fear the separated counsels:
His honor and my self are at the one*
And at the other, is my servant Catesby:
Where nothing can proceed that touches us,
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, wan^ing instance.
And for his dreams, I (...) is so ^ond*
To trust the mockery of vnquie^ s^umbers,
To fly the boar, before the boar pursues us,
Were to incense the boar to follow us,
And make pursuit where he did me an^ no chase:
Go bid thy Master (...) and come to me,
And we will both together to the tower,
Where he shall see the boar will use us kindly.

Mess. My gratiou^ Lo: I Will tell him what you say.

Enter Cates. Cat. Many good morrowes to my noble Lo:

Have. Good morrow Catesby, you are early stirring,
What news what news, in this our tottering state?

Cat. It is a reeling world indeed my Lo:
And I believe it will never stand upright,
Till Richard wear the garland of the Realm.

Have. How? we are the garland? do thou mean the crown?

Cat* I my good Lord.

Have. I Will have this crown of mine, cut from my shoulders
Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaste:
But can thou guess that he does a^me at it.

Cat. Upon my life my Lo: and hopes to find you forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof,
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day, your enemies,
The kindred of the Queen must die at Pomfret.

Have. Indeed I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still mine enemies:
But that I Will give my voice on Richards side,
To bar my Masters he i^es in true descent,
God knows I will not do it to the death.

Cat. God keep your Lordship in that gratio^s mind.

Have. But I shall laugh at this a tweluemonth hence*
That they who brought me in my Masters hate,
I live to look upon their tragedy:
I tell thee Catesby.

Cat. What my Lord?

Have. Ere a fortnight make me elder,
I Will send some packing, that yet think not on it.

Cat. It Is a^vile thing to die my gracious Lord,
When men are vnprepard and look not for it.

Have. O Monstrous monstrous, and so falls it out
With Rivers, Vaug^an, Gray, and so twill do
With some men else, who think themselves as safe
As thou, and I, who as thou know are dear
To Princely Richard, and to Buckingham.

Cat. The Princes both make high account of you,
For they account his head upon the bridge.

Have. I know they do, and I have well deserved it.
Enter Lord Stanley. What my Lo: where is your boare-speare man?
Fear you the boar and go so unprovided?

Stan. My Lo: good morrow* good morrow Catesby:
You may jest on: but by the holy ^oode.
I do not like these several councels I.

Have. My Lo: I hold my life as dear as you do yours,
And never in my life I do protest,
Was it more precious to me then it is now:
Think you, but that I know our state secure*
I would be so triumphant as I am?

Stan. The Lords at Pomfret when they rode from London,
Were iocund, and supposde their states was sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust:
But yet you see how soon the day ouercast,
This soda^ne scab of rancour I misdoubt,
Pray God, I say, I prove a needelesse coward:
But come my Lo: shall we to the tower?

Have. I go: but stay, hear you not the news,
This day those men you talked of, are beheaded.

Sta. They for their truth might better wear their heads,
Then some that have accusde them wear their hats:
But come my Lo: let us away.

Enter Hastin* a Purss^an^. Have. Go you before, I Will follow presently.

Have. Well met Hastings, how goes the world with thee?

Pur. The better that it please your Lo: to ask.

Have. I tell thee fellow it is better with me now.
Then when I met thee last where now we meet:
Then was I going prisoner to the tower,
By the suggestion of the Queens allies:
But now I tell thee (keep it to thy self.)
This day those enemies are put to death,
And I in better state then ever I was.

Pur. God hold it to your honors good content.

Have. Gramercy Hastings hold spend thou that*

He gives him his purse. Pur. God save your Lordship.

Have. What Sir John, you are well met,
(Enter a priest. I am beholding to you for your last days exercise:
Come the next sabbath and I will content you.

He whispers in his care. Enter Buckingham. Buc. How now Lo: Chamberlain, what
talking with a priest,
Your friends at Pomfret they do need the priest
Your honor has no shriuing work in hand.

Have. Good faith and when I met this holy man,
Those men you talk of came into my mind:
What, go you to the tower my Lord

Buck. I do, but long I shall not stay,
I shall return before your Lordship thence.

Have. It Is like enough, for I stay dinner there.

Buck. And supper too, although thou know it not:
Come shall we go along?

Exeunt. Enter Sir Rickard Ratliffe, with the Lo: Rivers, Gray, and Vaughan
prisoners. Ratl. Come bring forth the prisoners*

Ryu. Sir Richard Ratliffe let me tell thee this:
To day shall thou behold a subject die,
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.

Gray. God keep the Prince from all the pack of you:
A knot you are of damned bloudsuckers.

Ryu. O Pomfret Pomfret* Oh thou bloody prison*
Fatal and ominous to noble peers.
Within the guilty closure of thy wal^
Richa^d the second here was hackt to death:
And for more slander to thy dismal soul,
We g^ue thee up our guiltless bloods to drink*

Gray. Now Margarets ourse is fallen upon our heads:
For standing by, when Richard stabd her son.

Riu. Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham:
Then cursed she Rich^rd. Oh remember God,
To hear her prayers for them as now for us,
And for my sister, and her princely son:
Be satisfied dear God with ou^ true bloods,
Which as thou know unjustly must be spilt.

Rat. Come come dispatch, the limit of your line^ is out

Ryu. Come Gray, come Vaughan, let us all embrace
And take our leave until we meet in heaven.

Exeunt Enter the Lords to Council. Have. My Lords at once the cause why we
are met,
Is to determine of the coronation:
In Gods name say, when is this royal day?

Buc. Are all things fitting for that royal time?

Dar. It is, and wants but nomination.

Ryu. To morrow then, I guess a happy time.

Buc. Who knows the Lo: protectors mind here in?
Who is most inwa^d with the noble Duke.

By. Why you my Lo: me thinks you should soonest know his mind

Buc. Who I my Lo? we know each others faces:
But for our hearts, he knows no more of mine,
Then I of yours: nor I no more of his, then you of mine:
Lo: Hastings you and he are near in love.

Have. I thank his Grace, I know he loves me well:
But for his purpose in the coronation:
I have not (...) him nor he deliuerd
His Graces pleasure any way therein:
But you my noble Lo: may name the time,
And in the Dukes behalf, I Will give my voice,
Which I presume he will take in Gentle part.

Bish. Now in good time here comes the Duke himself.

(Ent. Glo. Glo. My noble L. and Cosens (...), good morrow,
I have been long a sleeper* but I hope
My absence does neglect no great designs,
Which by my presence might have been coucluded.

Buc. Had not you come upon your kew my Lo:
William L: Hastings had now pronounst your parts
I mean your voice for crowning of the King.

Glo. Than my Lo: Hastings no man might be bolder,
His Lordship knows me well, and loves me well.

Have. I thank your Grace.

Glo. My Lo: of Elie*

Bish. My Lo:

Glo. When I was last in Holborne:
I saw good strawberries in your garden there,
I do beseech you send for some of them.

Bish. I go my Lord.

Glo. Cosen Buckingham, a word with you:
Catesby has sounded Hastings in our business,
And finds the testy Gentleman so hot,
As he will loose his head ear give consent,
His Masters son as worshipful he terms it,
Shall loose the roialty of Englands throane.

Buc. Withdraw you hence my Lo: I Will follow you.

Ex Gl. Dar. We have not yet set down this day of triumph,
To morrow in mine opinion is too sudden:
For I my self am not so well provided,
Enter B. of Ely. As else I would be, were the day prolonged.

By. Where is my L. protector, I have sent for these strawberies.

Ha. His Grace looks chee^fully and smooth to day,
There Is some conceit or other likes him well,
When he does bid good morrow with such a spirit.
I think there is never a man in christendom,
That can lesser hide his love or hate then he:
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.

Dar. What of his heart perceive you in his face,
By any likelihood he showed to day?

Have. Mary, that with no man here he is offended,
For if he were, he would have shown it in his looks.

Dar. I pray God he be not, I say.

Enter Gloucester. Glo. I pray you all, what do they deserve,
That do conspire my death with devilish plots,
Of damned witchcraft, and that have preuaild.
Upon my body with their hellish charimes?

Have. The tender love I bear your grace my Lord,
Makes me most forward in this noble presence,
To doom the offenders whatsoever they be:
I say my Lo: they have deserved death.

Glo. Th^^ be your eyes the witness of this ill,
See how I am bewitched, behold mine arm
Is like a blasted sapling withered up.
This is that Edwards wife, that monstrous witch,
Consorted with that harlot strumpet Shore.
That by their witchcraft, thus have marked me.

Have. If they have done this thing my gracious Lo:

Glo. If, thou protector of this damned strumpet,
Telst thou me of iffes? thou art a traitor.
Off with his head. Now by Saint Paul,
I will not diue to day I swear,
Until I see the same, some see it done,
The rest that love me, come and follow me.

Exeunt. manet Cat. with Ha. Ha. Woe woe for England, not a whit for me:
For I too fond might have prevented this:
Stanley did dream the boat did race his helm,
But I disdaind it, and did scorn to fly,
Three times to day, my footecloth horse did stumble,
And startled when he looked upon the tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse.
Oh, now I want the Priest that spoke to me,
I now repent I told the Pursusant,
As twere triumphing at mine enemies:
How they at Pomfret bloudily were butcherd,
And I my self secure in grace and favor:
Oh Margaret Margaret: now thy heavy curse,
Is lighted on poor Hastings wretched head.

Cat. Dispatch my Lo: the Duke would be at dinner:
Make a short shrift, he longs to see your head.

Have. O momentary state of worldly men,
Which we more hunt for, then the grace of heaven:
Who buildes his hopes in air of your fair looks,
Lives like a drunken sayler on a mast,
Ready with every nod to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
Come lead me to the block, bear him my head,
They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.

Exeunt. Enter Duke of Gloucester and Buckingham in armor. Glo. Come Cosen,
can thou quake and change thy color?
Murder thy breath in middle of a word,
And then begin again, and stop again,
As if thou were distraught and mad with terror.

Buc. Tut fear not me.
I can counterfeit the deep Tragedian:
Speak, and look back, and pry on every side:
Intending deep suspicion, ghastly looks
Are at my service like enforced smiles,
And both are ready in their offices
To grace my stratagems.

Enter Mayor. Glo. Here comes the Mayor.

Buc. Let me alone to entertain him. Lo: Mayor.

Glo. Look to the drawbridge there.

Buc. The reason we have sent for you.

Glo. Catesby ouerlooke the walls.

Buck Hark, I hear a drum.

Glo. Look back, defend thee, here are enemies.

Buc. God and our innocence defend us.

Enter Catesby with Have. head. Glo. O, O, be quiet, it is Catesby.

Cat. Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.

Glo. So dear I loved the man, that I must weep:
I took him for the plainest harmless man,
That breathed upon this earth a christian,
Look ye my Lo: Mayor.
Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded,
The history of all her secret thoughts:
So smoothe he daubd his vice with show of virtue.
That his apparent open guilt omitted:
I mean his conversation with Shores wife,
He laid from all attainder of suspect.

Buck. Well well, he was the couertst sheltred traitor
That ever lived, would you have imagined,
Or almost believe, were not by great preservation
We live to tell it you? The subtle traitor
Had this day plotted in the council house,
To murder me, and my good Lord of Gloucester.

Mator. What, had he so?

Glo. What think you we are Turks or Infidels,
Or that we would against the form of law,
Proceed thus rashly to the villains death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The peace of England, and our persons safety
Inforst us to this execution.

Ma. Now fair befall you, he deserved his death,
And you my good Lords both, have well proceeded
To warn false traitors from the like attempts:
I never looked for better at his hands,
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.

Dut. Yet had not we determined he should die,
Until your Lordship came to see his death,
Which now the longing haste of these our friends,
Some what against our meaning have prevented,
Because, my Lord, we would have had you heard
The traitor speak; and timerously confess
The manner and the purpose of his treason,
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the Citizens, who happily may
Misconster us in him, and wayle his death.

Ma. But my good Lord, your graces word shall serve
As well as I had seen or heard him speak,
And doubt you not, right noble Princes both,
But I Will acquaint your dutious citizens,
With all your just proceedings in this cause.

Glo. And to that end we (...) your Lordship here
To avoid the carping censures of the world.

Buc. But since you come too late of our intents,
Yet witness what we did intend, and so my Lord adue.

Glo. After, after, coosin Buckingham,
Exit Mayor. The Mayor toward Guildhall hies him in all post,
There at your meetst advantage of the time,
Infer the bastardy of Edwards children:
Tell them how Edward put to death a Citizen,
Only for saying he would make his son
Heir to the Crown, meaning (indeed) his house,
Which by the sign thereof was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury,
And bestiall appetite in change of lust,
Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives,
Even where his lustful eye, or savage heart
Without control listed to make his prey:
Nay for a need thus far, come near my person,
Tell them, when that my mother went with child
Of that unsatiate Edward; noble York
My princely father then had wars in France,
And by just computation of the time
Found, that the issue was not his begot,
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble Duke my father:
But touch this sparingly as it were far off,
Because you know my Lord, my mother lives.

Buck. Fear not, my Lord, I Will play the Orator,
As if the golden see for which I plead
Were for my self.

Glo. If you thrive well, bring them to Baynards castle,
Where you shall find me well accompanied,
With reverend fathers and well earned Bishops.

Buc. About three or four a clock look to hear
What news Guildhall affords, and so my Lord farewell.

Glo. Now will I in to take some privy order,
Exit Buc. To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,
And to give notice that no manner of person
At any time have recourse unto the Princes.
Exit. Enter a Scriuener with a paper in his hand. This is the indictment of
the good Lord Hastings,
Which in a set hand fairly is engrosst,
That it may be this day read over in Paules^
And mark how well the sequel hangs together,
Eleven hours I spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it brought me,
The president was full as long adoyng,
And yet within these five hours lived Lord Hastings,
Vntaynted, unexamined, free, at liberty:
Heeres a good world, the while. Why whoes so gross
That sees not this palpable device?
Yet whoes so blind but says he sees it not?
Bad is the world, and all will come to naught,
When such bad dealing must be seen in thought.
Exit
Enter Gloucester at one door, Buckingham at another. Glo: How now my Lord,
what say the Citizens?

Buc. Now by the holy mother of our Lord,
The Citizens are mumme, and speak not a word.

Glo. Touched you the bastardy of Edwards children?

Buck I did, with the insatiate greediness of his desires,
His tyranny for trifles, his own bastardy,
As being got, your father then in France:
With^ll I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right Idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind,
Laid open all your victories in Scotland:
Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace:
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility:
Indeed left nothing fitting for the purpose
Untouched, or slightly handled in discourse:
And when mine oratory grew to an end.
I bid them that did love their countries good*
Cry, God save Richard, Englands royal King.

Glo. A and did they so?

Buc. No so God help me,
But like dumb (...) or breathing stones,
Gazde each on other and looked deadly pale:
Which when I saw* I reprehended them,
And asked the Mayor, what meant this wilful silence?
His answer was, the people were not wont
To be spoke to, but by the Recorder.
Then he was vrgde to tell my tale again:
Thus, says the Duke, thus has the Duke inferd:
But nothing spoke in warrant from himself:
When he had done, some followers of mine own
At the lower end of the Hall, hurld up their caps,
And some ten voices cried, God save King Richard.
Thanks loving Citizens and friends quoth I,
This general applause and loving shoute,
Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard:
And so brake off and came away.

Glo. What tonglesse blocks were they, would they not speak?

Buc. No by my troth my Lo:

Glo. Will not the Mayor then, and his brethren come.

Glo. The Mayor is here at hand, and intend some fear.
Be not spoken withal, but with mighty suite:
And look you get a prayer book in your hand,
And stand betwixt two churchmen good my Lo:
For on that ground I Will build a holy descant:
Be not easily won to our request:
Play the maids part, say no, but take it.

Glo. Fear not me, if thou can plead as well for them,
As I can say nay to thee, for my self?
No doubt we will bring it to a happy issue.

Buck You shall see what I can do, get you up to the leads.
Exit. Now my L. Mayor, I dance attendance hear,
I think the Duke will not be spoke withal.
Enter Catesby. Here coms his servant: how now Catesby what says he.

Cates. My Lord, he does entreat your grace
To visit him to morrow or next day,
He is within with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation,
And in no worl^^y suite would he be moved,
To draw him from his holy exercise.

Buck. Return good Catesby to thy Lord again,
Tell him my self, the Mayor and Citizens,
In deep designs and matters of great moment,
No less importing then our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his grace.

Cates. I Will tell him what you say my Lord.
Exit.
Buck. Aha my Lord this prince is not an Edward:
He is not lulling on a lewd day bed,
But on his knees at meditation:
Not dalying with a brace of Curtizans,
But meditating with two deep Divines:
Not sleeping to ingrosse his idle body,
But praying to enrich his watchful soul.
Happy were England, would this gracious prince
Take on himself the souerainty thereon,
But sure I fear we shall never win him to it.

M^ior. Marry God forbid his grace should say us nay.

Buck. I fear he will, how now Catesby,
Enter Cates. What says your Lord?

Ca^es. My Lo. he wonders to what end, you have assembled
Such troops of Citizens to speak with him,
His grace not being warnd thereof before,
My Lord, he fears you mean no good to him.

Buck. Sorry I am my noble Cosen should
Suspect me that I mean no good to him.
By heaven I come in perfect love to him,
And so once more return and tell his grace:
Exit Catesby. When hollie and devout religious men,
Are at their beads, it is hard to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous contemplation.

Enter Rich with two bishops a lost. Mayor. See where he stands between two
clergi^ men.

Buck. Two props of virtue for a christian Prince,
To stay him from the fall of vanity,
Famous Plantaganet, most gracious prince,
Lend favorable ears to our request,
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.

Glo. My Lord, there needs no such apology.
I rather do beseech you pardon me,
Who earnest in the service of my God,
Neglect the visitation of my friends,
But leaving this, what is your graces pleasure?

Buck. Even that I hope which pleases God above,
And all good men of this ungoverned ^le.

Glo. I do suspect I have done some offense,
That seems disgracious in the Cities eyes,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.

Buck. You have my Lord, would it pleas^ your grace
At our entreaties to amend that fault.

Glo. Else wherefore breath I in a Christian land?

Buck. Then know it is your fault that you resign
The supreme seat, the throne maiesticall,
The sceptred office of your ancestors,
The lineall glory of your royal house,
To the corruption of a blemishst stoc^e:
Whilst in the mildness of your sleepie thoughts,
Which here we waken to our countries good,
This noble I Will does want her proper limbs,
Her face defaced with scars of infamy,
And almost shouldred in the swallowing gulf,
Of blind forgetfulness and dark oblivion,
Which to recure we heartily solicit,
Your gracious self to take on you the soueraingtie thereof,
Not as Protector steward substitute,
Or lowly factor for another gain:
But as successively from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your Emperie, your own:
For this consorted with the Citizens
Your very worshipful and loving frinds,
And by their vehementinstigation,
In this just suite come I to move your grace.

Glo. I know not whether to depart in silence,
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof,
Best fitteth my degree or your condition:
Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert
Vnmeritable shunes your high request,
First if all obstacles were cut away,
And that my path were even to the crown,
As my ripe reuenew and dew by birth,
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty and so many my defects,
As I had rather hide me from my greatness,
Being a Bark to brook no mighty sea,
Then in my greatness covet to be hid,
And in the vapor of my glory smotherd:
But God be thanked there is no need of me,
And much I need to help you if need were,
The royal tree has left us royal fruit,
Which mellowed by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And make no doubt us happy by his reign,
On him I lay what you would lay on me:
The right and fortune of his happy stars,
Which God defend that I should wring from him.

Buck. My lord, this argues conscience in your grace,
But the respects thereof are nice and triuiall,
All circumstances well considered:
You say that Edward is your brothers son,
So say we to, but not by Edwards wife,
For first he was contract to lady Lucy,
Your mother lives a witness to that vow,
And afterward by substitute be^^othed
To Bena sister to the king of France,
These both put by a poor petitioner
A care-crazd mother of a many children,
A beauty-waining and distressed widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days
Made prise and purchase of his lustful eye,
Seduct the pitch and height of al his thoughts,
To base declension and loathd bigamie,
By her in his unlawful bed he got.
This Edward whom our manners term the prince,
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that for reverence to some alive
I give a sparing limit to my tongue:
Then good my Lord, take to your royal self,
This p^offered benefit of dignity:
If not to bless us and the land withal,
Yet to draw out your royal stock,
From the corruption of abusing time,
Unto a lineall true derived course.

Ma^^r. Do good my Lord your Citizens entreat you.

C^^es. O make them ioifull grant their lawful suite.

Glo. Alas, why would you heap these cares on me,
I am unfit for state and dignity,
I do beseech you take it not amiss,
I cannot nor I will not yield to you.

Buck. If you refuse it as in love and zeal,
Loath to depose the child your brothers son,
As well we know your tenderness of heart,
An^ gentle kind effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your kin,
And egallie indeed to all estates,
Yet whether you accept our suite or no;
Your brothers son shall never ^aigne our king,
But we will plant some other in the throane,
To the disgrace and downfall of your house:
And in this resolution here we leave you.
Come Citizens, zounds i will entreat no more.

Glo. O do not swear my Lord of B^ckingham.

Cates. Call them again, my lord, and accept their suit.

Ano. Do, good my lord, least all the land do rue it.

Glo. Would you enforce me to a world of care:
Well, call them again, I am not made of stones,
But penetrable to your kind intreates,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
Coosin of Buckingham, and you sage grave men
Since you will buckle fortune on my back,
To bear her burden whether I will or no,
I must have patience to endure the lode,
But if black scandale or ^oule-fac't reproach
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
Your mere inforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof,
For God he knows, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire thereof.

Mayor. God bless your grace, we see it, and will say it.

Glo. In saying so, you shall but say the truth.

Buck. Then I salute you with this kingly title:
Long live Richard, Englands royal king.

M^yor. Amen.

Buck To morrow will it please you to be crowned.

Glo. Even when you will, since you will have it so.

Buck. To morrow then* we will attend your grace.

Glo. Come, let us to our holy task again:
Farewell good coosine, ^arwel gentle friends.

Exe^nt. Enter Quee. mother, Duchess of York, Marquis D^rset, at one door,
Duchess of Glocest. at another door. Duch. Who meets us here, my niece
Plantagenet?

Qu. Sister well met, whether away so fast?

Duch. No farther then the Tower, and as I guess
Upon the like devotion as your selves,
To gratulate the tender Princes there.

Qu. Kind sister thanks, we will enter al togi^her,
Enter Lieutenant. And in good time here the Lieutenant comes.
M. Lieutenant, pray you by your leave,
How fares the Prince?

Lieu. Well Madam, and in health, but by your leave,
I may not suffer you to visit him,
The King has straightly charged the contrary.

Qu. The King? why, whose that?

Lieu. I cry you mercy, I mean the Lord protector.

Qu. The Lord protect him from that Kingly title:
Has he set bounds betwixt their love and me:
I am their mother, who should ^eepe me from them?

D^^yor. I am their Fathers, Mother, I will see them.

Duch. glo. Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother:
Then fear not thou, I Will bear thy blame,
And take thy office from thee on my peril.

Lieu. I do beseech your graces all to pardon me:
I am bound by oath, I may not do it*

Enter L. Stanl^^. Stan. Let me but meet you Ladies an hour hence,
And I Will salute your grace of York, as Mother:
And reuerente looker on, of two fair Queens.
Come Madam, you must go with me to Westminster,
There to be crowned, Richards royal Queen.

Qu. O cut my lace in sunder, that my pent heart,
May have some scope to beat, or else I sound,
With this dead killing news.

D^r. Madam, have comfort, how fares your grace?

Qu O Dorset speak not to me, get thee hence,
Death and destruction dog thee at the heels,
Thy Mothers name is ominous to children,
If thou will outstrip death, go cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell,
Go hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter house,
Least thou increase the number of the dead,
And make me die the thrall of Margarets curse,
Nor Mother, Wife, nor Englands counted Queen.

Sta^. Full of wise care is this your counsel Madam,
Take all the swift advantage of the time,
You shall have letters from me to my son,
To meet you on the way, and welcome you,
Be not taken tardie, by unwise delaie:

Duch. yor. O ill dispersing wind of misery,
O my accursed womb, the bed of death,
A Cocatrice have thou hatch to the world,
Whose vnauoided eye is murtherous.

Stan. Come Madam, I in all have was sent.

Duch. And I in all unwillingness will go,
I would to God thar the inclusiue verge,
Of golden me^tall that must round my browe,
were red hot steel to sear me to the brain,
Anointed let me be with deadly poison,
And die, ere men can say, God save the Queen.

Qu. Alas poor soul, I envy not thy glory,
To feed my humor, wish ^hy self no harm.

Duch. glo. No, when he that is my husband now,
Came to me as I followed Henry's course,
When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands,
Which issued from my other angel husband,
And that dead saint, which then, I weeping followed,
O, when I say, I looked on Richa^ds face,
This was my wish, be thou quoth I accursed,
For making me so young, so old a widow,
And when thou wedst, let sorrow haunt thy bed,
And be thy wife, if any be so mad,
As miserable by the death of thee,
As thou have made me by my dear Lords death,
Lo, ear I can repeat this curse again,
Even in so short a space, my woman's heart,
^rosselie grew captive to his honey words,
And proved the subject of my own souls curse,
Which ever since has kept my eyes from sleep,
For never yet, one hour in his bed,
Have I enjoyed the golden dew of sleep,
But have been waked by his timorous dreams,
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick,
And will no doubt, shortly be rid of me.

Qu. Alas poor soul, I pity thy complaints.

Duch. glo. No more then from my soul I mourn for yours.

Dor. Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.

Duch. glo. Adieu poor soul, thou takst thy leave of it.

D^. yor. Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee.
Go thou to Richard, and good Angels guard thee,
Go thou to sanctuary, good thoughts possess thee,
I to my grave where peace and rest lie with me,
Eighty odd years of sorrow have I seen,
And each hours joy wrackt with a week of teene.

The Trumpets sound, Enter Richard crowned Buckingham Catesby with other Nobles.
King Stand al apart. Coosin of Buckingham,
Give me thy hand:
Here ^e ascends the throne. Thus high by thy advice
And thy assistance is king Richard seated:
But shall we wear these honors for a day?
Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them.

Buc. Still live they, and for ever may they last.

King Ri. O Buckingham, now do I plai^ the touch*
To try if thou be current gold indeed:
Young Edwa^d lives: think now what I would say.

Buc. Say on my gracious sovereign.

King Why Buckingham, ^ say I would be king.

Buc. Why so you are my thrice renowned liege.

King Ha: am I king? it is so, but Edward lives.

Buc. True noble prince.

King O bitter consequence,
That Edward still should live true noble prince.
Coosin, thou were not wont to be so^dul:
Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead*
And I would have it suddenly performde.
What say thou? speak suddenly, be brief.

Buc. Your grace may do your pleasure.

King Tut, tut, thou art all y^e, thy kindness freezeth,
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?

Buc. Give me some breath, some little pause my lord,
Before I positiuelie speak herein:
I will resolve your grace immediately.
Exit.
Cates. The king is angry, see, he bites the lip.

King I will converse with iron witted fools
And vnrespectiue boys, none are for me
That look into me with considerate ^i^s;
Boy, high reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.

Boy. My Lord.

King. Know thou not any whom corrupting gold
Would tempt unto a close exploit of death.

Boy. Mylord, I know a discontented gentleman,
Whose humble means match not his haughty mind,
^ould were as good as twenty Orators,
And will no doubt tempt him to any thing.

King. What is his name.

Boy. His name my Lord is Tirrell.

King. Go call him hither presently,
The deep reuoluing witty Buckingham,
No more shall be the neighbor to my counsel,
Has he so long held out with me vntirde
And stops he now for breath?
Enter Darby. How now, what neewes with you?

Darby. My Lord, I hear the Marquis Dorset
Is fled to Richmond, in those parts beyond the seas where he abides.

King. Catesby.

Cat. My Lord.

King. Rumor it abroad
That Anne my wife is sick and like to die,
I will take order for her keeping close:
Enquire me out some mean borne gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence daughter,
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him:
Look how thou dreamst: I say again give ou^
That Anne my wife is sick and like to die.
About it, for it stands me much upon
To stop all hopes whose growth may damadge me,
I must be married to my brothers daughter,
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass,
Murder her brothers, and then marry her,
Uncertain way of gain, but I am in
So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin,
Tear fal^ing pity dwells not in this eye,
Enter Tirrel. Is thy name Tirrill?

Tyr. James Tirrell and your most obedient subject.

King Art thou indeed?

Tir. Prove me my gracious sovereign,

King Dare thou resolve to kill a friend of mi^e?

Tir. I my Lord, but I had rather kill two enemies.

King Why there thou have it two deep enemies,
Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleeps disturbs,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
Tirrel I mean those bastards in the tower.

Tir. Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon i will rid you from the fear of them.

King Thou singst sweet music. Come hither Tirrel,
he wispers in his ear^. Go by that token, rise and lend thine ear,
It Is no more but so, say is it done,
And I will love thee and prefer thee too.

Tir. It Is done my gracious lord.

King Shall we hear from thee Tirrel ere we sleep?

Enter Buc. Tir. Ye shall my lord,

Buck. My lord, I have considered in my mind,
The late demand that you did sound me in.

King Well, let that pass, Dorset is fled to Richmond.

Buck I hear that news my lord.

King Stanley he is your wifes sons. Wellooke to it.

Buck. My lord, I claim your gift, my dew by promise.
For which your honor and your faith is pawnd,
The Earldom of Herford and the moueables,
The which you promised I should possess.

King Stanley look to your wife, if she convey
Letters to Richmond you shall answer it.

Buck. What says your highness to my just demand.

King As I remember, Hen^ie the sixth
Did prophecy that Richmond should be king,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy:
A king perhaps, perhaps.

Buck. My lord.

King How chance the prophet could not at that time,
Have told me I being by, that I should kill him.

Buck. My lord, your promise for the Earldom.

King Richmond, when last I was at Exet^r,
The Mayor in courtesy showd me the Castle,
And called it Ruge-mount, at which name I started,
Because a Bard of Ireland told me once
I should not live long after I saw Richmond.

Buck. My lord.

King. I, what is a clock?

Buck. I am thus bold to put your grace in mind
Of what you promisd me.

King. Well, but what is a clock?

Buck. Upon the stroke often.

King. Well, let it strike.

Buck. Why let it strike?

King. Because that like a Jack thou keepst the stroke
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation,
I am not in the giving vain to day.

Buck. Why then resolve me whether you will or no?

King. Tut, tut, thou troublest me, I am not in the vain.
Exit.
Buck. Is it even so, rewardst he my true service
With such deep contempt, made I him king for this?
O let me think on Hastings and be gone
To Brecnock while my fearful head is on.
Exit.
Enter Sir Francis Tirrell. Tyr. The tyrranous and bloody deed is done,
The most arch act of pitteous massacre,
That ever yet this land was guilty of,
Dighton and Forest whom I did suborne,
To do this ruthles piece of butcherie,
Although they were flesht villains, bloody dogs,
Melting with tenderness and kind compassion,
Wept like two children in their deaths sad stories:
Lo thus quoth Dighton lay those tender babes,
Thus thus quoth Forest girdling on another,
Within their innocent alablaster arms,
Their lips were four red Roses on a stalk,
Which in their summer beauty kissed each other,
A book of prayers on their pillow lay,
Which once quoth Forest almost changd my mind,
But o the Devil their the villain stopped,
Whilst Dighton thus told on we smothered
The most replenished sweet work of nature,
That from the prime creation ever he framed,
Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse,
They could not speak and so I left them both,
To bring this tidings to the bloody king.
Enter K^. Richard. And here he comes, all hail my sovereign liege.

King. Kind Tirrell am I happy in thy news.

Tyr. If to have done the thing you give in charge,
Beget your happiness, be happy then
For it done my Lord.

King. But did thou see them dead?

Tir. I did my Lord.

King. And buried gentle Tirrell?

Tir. The Chaplain of the tower has buried them,
But how or in what place I do not know.

Tir. Come to me Tirre^ soon at after supper,
And thou shall tell the process of their death,
Mean time but think how I may do thee good.
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Exit Tirrel. Farewell til soon.
The son of Clarence have I pent up close,
His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage,
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
And Anne my wife has bid the world godnight*
Now for I know the Britain Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth, my brothers daughter,
And by that knot looks proudly ore the crown,
To her I go ai^llie th^iuing wooer,

Enter C^tesby. Cat. My Lord.

King. Good news or bad that thou comst in so bluntly?

Cates. Bad news my lord, Ely is fled to Richmond,
And Buckingham backed with the hardy Welchmen,
Is in the field, and still his power increases.

King. Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
Then Buckingham and his rash levied army:
Come I have heard that fearful commenting,
Is leaden seruitour to dull delaie,
Delaie leads impotent and snaile^pact beggerie,
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury and Herald for a king:
Come muster men, my counsel is my shield,
We must be brief when traitor* brave the field.

Exeunt. Enter Queen Margaret s^la. Q. Mar. So now prosperity begins to mellow
And drop into the rotten mouth of Death:
Here in these confines slilie have I lurkt,
To watch the waining of mine adversaries:
A dire induction am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, blalcke and tragical.
Withdraw thee wretched Margaret, who comes here?

Enter the Qu. and the Duchess of York. Qu. Ah my young princes, ah my
tender babes!
My vnblowne flowers, new appearing sweets,
If yet your gentle souls fli^ in the air
And be not fixed in doom perpetual,
Houer about me with your aierie wings,
And hear your mothers lamentation.

Qu. Mar. Houer about her, say that right for right,
Has dimd your infant morn, to aged night.

Quee. Will thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs,
And throw them in the intrailes of the Wolf:
When did thou sleep when such a deed was done?

Q. Mar. When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.

Dutch. Blind sight, dead life, poor mortal living ghost,
Woes scene, worlds shame, graves due by life usurped,
Rest thy unrest on Englands lawful earth,
Vnlawfulli^ made drunk^ with innocents blood*

Qu. O that thou would as well afford a grave,
As thou can yield a melancholy seat,
Then would* I hide my bones, not rest them here:
O who has any cause to mourn but I!

Duch. So many miseries have crazd my voice
That my woe-wearied tongue is mute and dumb.
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?

Qu. Mar. If ancient sorrow be most reverent,
Give mine the benefit of signorie,
And let my woes frown on the upper hand,
If sorrow can admit society,
Tell over your woes again by vewing mine,
I had an Edward, till a Richard killed him:
I had a Richard, till a Ricard killed him:
Thou had an Edward, till a Richard killed him:
Thou had a Richard, till a Richard killed him.

Duch. I had a Richard to, and thou did kill him:
I had a Rutland to, thou hopst to kill him.

Qu. Mar. Thou had a Clarence to, and Richard killed him:
From forth the kennell of thy womb has crept,
A hel-hound that does hunt us all to death,
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To worrie lambs, and lap their gentle bloods,
That foul defacer of Gods handie work,
Thy womb let loose, to chase us to our graves,
O upright, just, and true disposing God,
How do I thank thee, that this carnal curre,
Prays ^n the issue of his mothers body,
And makes her puefellow with others moan.

Duch. O, Harries wifes triumph not in my woes,
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.

Qu. Mar. Bear with me, I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloie me with beholding it,
Thy Edward, he is dead, that stabd my Edward,
Thy other Edward dead, to quitte my Edward,
Young York, he is but boot because both they
Match not the high perfection of my loss,
Thy Clarence he is dead, that killed my Edward,
And the beholders of this tragic play,
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Gray,
Untimely smothred in their duskie graves,
Richard yet lives, hels black intelligencer,
Only reserved their factor to buie souls,
And send them thither, but at hand at hands,
ensues his piteous, and vnpittied end,
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiendes roar, saints pray,
To have him suddenly conveyed away.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,
That I may live to say, the dog is dead.

Qu. O thou did prophecy the time would come,
That I should wish for thee to help me curse,
That botteld spider, that foul bunch-backt toade.

Qu. Mar. I called thee then, vain floorish of my fortune,
I called thee then, poor shadow, painted Queen,
The presentation of, but what I was,
The flattering Index of a direful pageant,
One heaued a high, to be hurld down below,
A mother only, mocked with two sweet babes,
A dream of which thou were a breath, a bubble,
A sign of dignity, a garish flagge,
To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
A Queen in jest only to fill the scene,
Where is thy husband now, where be thy brothers?
Where are thy children, wherein do thou joy?
Who ^ues to thee, and cries God save the Queen?
Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?
Where be the thronging troop that followed thee?
decline all this, and see what now thou art,
For happy wife, a most distressed widow,
For joyful Mother, one that wailes the name,
For Queen, a very caitiue crowned with care,
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues,
For one commanding all, obeyed of none,
For one that scornd at me, now scornd of me,
Thus has the course of justice whe'eld about,
And left thee but, a very pray to time,
Having no more, but thought of what thou were,
To torture thee the more, being what thou art,
Thou did usurp my place, and do thou not,
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow,
Now thy proud neck, bears half my burdened yoke,
From which, even here, I slip my weary neck,
And leave the burden of it all on thee:
Farewell Yorkes wife, and Queen of sad mischance,
These English woes, will make me smile in France.

Qu. O thou well skild in curses, stay a while,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies.

Qu. Mar. Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days,
Compare dead happiness with living woe,
Think that thy babes were fairer then they were,
And he that slew them fouler then he is,
Bettring thy loss makes the bad causer worse,
Reuoluing this, will teach thee how to curse.

Qu. My words a^e dull, O quicken them with thine.

Q. Mar. Thy woes will make them sharp, and pierce like mine.

Du. Why should calamity be full of words?

Exit Mar. Qu. Windy a^turnies to your Client woes,
A erie succeeders of inte^^ate ioies,
Poor breathing Orators of miseries,
Let them have scope, though what they do impart,
Help not at al, yet do they ease the heart.

Duch. I^ so, then be not toong-tide, go with me,
And in the breath of bitter words lets smother
My damned son, which thy two sweet sons smotherd,
I hear his drum, be copious in exclaimes.

Enter K. Richard marching with Drums And Trumpets. King Who intercepts my
expedition?

Duch. A she, that might have intercepted thee
By strangling thee in her accursed womb,
From all the slaughters wretch, that thou have done.

Qu. Hidst thou that forehead with a golden crown
Where should be graven, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the Prince that owed that Crown,
And the dire death of my two sons, and brothers:
Tell me thou villain slave, where are my children?

Duch. Thou tode, thou tode, where is thy brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet, his son?

Qu. Where is kind, Hastings, Rivers, ^aughan, Gray?

King A flou^ish trumpets, strike alarm drums,
Let not the heavens hear these tel-tale women
Rail on the Lords anointed. Strike I say.
The trumpets Either be patient, and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorus report of war:
Thus will I drown your exclamations.

Du. Art thou my son?

King. I, I thank God, my father and your self.

Du. Then patiently here my impatience.

King. Madam I have a touch of your condition,
Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.

Du. I will be mild and gentle in my speech.

King. And brief good mother for I am in have.

Du. Art thou so hasty I have staid for thee,
God knows in anguish, pain and agony.

King. And came I not at last to comfort you?

Du. No by the holy roode thou know it well,
Thou camst on earth to make the earth my hell,
A grievous burden was thy berth to me,
Techie and waiward was thy infancy,
Thy schoele-daies frightful, desperate, wild, and furious.
Thy prime of manhood, daring, bold and venturous,
Thy age confirmed, proud, fubtile, bloody, treacherous,
What comfortable hour can thou name
That ever grac^t me in thy company?

King. Faith none but Humphrey hour, that called your grace
To break fast once forth of my company,
If I be so disgracious in your sight,
Let me march on, and not offend your grace.

Du. O hear me speak for I shall never see thee more.

King. Come, come, you art too bitter.

Du. Either thou will die by Gods just ordinance,
Eeare from this war thou tu^ne a conqueror,
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish,
And never look upon thy face again,
Therefore take with thee my most heavy curse,
Which in the day of battle tire thee more
Then all the complete armor that thou wearst,
My prayers on the adverse party fight,
And there the little souls of Edwards children,
Whisper the spirits of thine enemies,
And promise them success and victori^,
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end,
Shame serves thy life, and does thy death attend.
Exit.
Qu. Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse
Abides in me, I say Amen to all.

King. Stay Maddam, I must speak a word with you.

Qu. I have no more sons of the royal blood,
For thee to murder for my daughters Richard,
They shall be praying nuns not weeping Queens,
And therefore level not to hit their lives.

King You have a daughter called Elizabeth,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.

Qu. And must she die for this? O let her live!
And i will corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,
Slander my self as false to Edwards bed
Throw over her the vale of infamy,
So she may live vnskard from bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edwards daughter.

King Wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.

Qu To save her life, i will faie she is not so.

King Her li^e is only safest in her birth.

Qu. And only in that safety died her brothers.

King Lo at their births good stars were opposite.

Qu. No to their lives bad fri^nds were contrary.

King All vnauoided is the doom of destiny,

Qu. True when avoided grace makes destiny,
My babes were destinde to a fairer death,
If grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.

King Madam, so thrive I in my dangerous attempt of hostile arms
As I intend more good to you and yours,
Then ever you or yours were by me wronged.

Qu. What good is couerd with the face of heaven,
To be discouerd that can do me good,

King The advancement of your children mighty Lady.

Qu. Up to some scaffold, there to loose their heads.

King No to the dignity and height of honor,
The high imperial tipe of this earths glory.

Qu. Flatter my sorrows with report of it,
Tell me what s^ate, what dignity, what honor?
Can^t thou demise to any child of mine.

King. Even all I have, yea and my self and all,
Will I withal endow a child of thine,
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul,
Thou drown the sadd remembrance of those wrongs
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.

Qu. Be brief, least that the process of thy kindness,
Last longer telling then thy kindness do.

King. Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter*

Qu. My daughters mother thinks it with her soul.

King. What do you think?

Qu. That thou do love my daughter from thy soul,
So from thy souls love did thou love her brothers,
And from my hearts love I do thank thee for it.

King. Be not so hasty to confound my meaning,
I mean that with my soul I love thy daughter,
And mean to make her Queen of England.

Qu. Say then, who do thou mean shall be her king?

King. Even he that makes her Queen, who should be else?

Qu. What thou?

King I even I, what think you of it Maddame?

Qu. How can thou woo her?

King That would I learn of you.
As one that are best acquainted with her humor.

Qu. And will thou learn of me?

King Madam with all my heart.

Qu. Send to her by the man that slew her brothers,
A pair of bleeding hearts thereon ingraue,
Edward and York, then happily she will weep,
Therefore present to her as sometime Margaret
Did to thy father, a handkercher steept in Rutlands blood,
And bid her dry her weeping eyes therewith,
If this inducement force her not to love,
Send her a story of thy noble acts,
Tell her thou madst away her Uncle Clarence,
Her Uncle Rivers, yea, and for her sake
Madst quick conueiance with her good Aunt Anne.

King Come, come, you mock me, this is not the way
To Win your daughter.

Qu. There is no other way
Unless thou could put on some other shape,
And not be Richard that ha^h done all this.

King Infer fair Englands peace by this alliance*

Qu. Which she shall purchase with still lasting war.

King Say that the king which may command entreats.

Qu. That at her hands which the kings king forbids.

King Say she shall be a high and mighty Queen.

Qu. To wail the title as her mother does.

King Say I will love her everlastingly.

Qu. But how long shall that title ever last.

King Sweetly enforce unto her fair lives end.

Qu. But how long farely shall her sw^et life last?

King So long as heaven and nature l^ngthens it.

Qu. So long as hell and Richard likes of it.

King Say I her soueraign am her subject love.

Qu. But she your subject loathes such soueraintie.

King Be eloquent in my behalf to her.

Qu. An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.

King Then in plain terms tell her my loving tale.

Qu. Plain and not honest is to harsh a style.

King Madame your reasons are too shallow and too quic^e

Qu. O no my reasons are to deep and dead.
Too deep and dead poor infants in their grave.

King Harp not one that string Madam that is past.

Qu. Harp on it still shall I till hartstrings break.

King Now by my George, my Garter and my crown.

Qu. Prophand, dishonerd, and the third usurped.

King I swear by nothing.

Qu. By nothing, for this is no oath,
The George prophand has lost his holy honor,
The Garter bl^misht pawnd his knightly virtue,
The crown usurped disgrac^t his kingly dignity,
If something thou will swear to be beleeude,
Swear then by something that thou have not wronged.

King Now by the world.

Qu. It Is full of thy foul wrongs.

King. My Fathers death.

Qu. Thy life has that dishonord.

King. Then by my self.

Qu Thy self thy self misusest.

King. Why, then by God

Qu* Gods wrong is most of all,
If thou had feared, to break an oath by him,
The unity the king my brother made,
Had not been broken, nor my brot^er slain.
If thou had feared to break an oath by him,
The imperial metal circling now thy brow,
Had grast the tender temples of my child,
And both the princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender play* fellows for dust,
Thy broken faith, has made a pray for worms.

King. By the time to come.

Qu. That thou have wronged in time orepast,
For I my self, have many tears to wash,
Hereafter time, for time, by the past wronged,
The children live, whose parents thou have slaughterd,
Vngouernd youth, to wail it in their age,
The parents live, whose children thou have butcherd,
Old withered plants, to wail it with their age,
Swear not by time to come, for that thou have,
Misused, ear used, by time misused orepast.

King. As I intend to prosper and repent,
So thrive I in my dangerous attempt,
Of hostile arms, my self, my self confound,
Day yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest,
Be opposite, all planets of good luck,
To my proceedings, if with pure hearts love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter,
In her consistes my happiness and thine,
Without her follows to this land and me,
To thee her self, and many a Christian soul,
Sad desolation, ruin, and decaie,
It cannot be avoided but by this,
It will not be avoided but this:
Therefore good mother (I must call you so,)
Be the attorney of my love to her.
Plead what I will be, not what I have been,
Not by des^rtes, but what I will deserve,
Urge the necessity and stat^ of times,
And be not pieuish, fond in great designs.

Qu. Shall I be tempt^d of the devil thus.

King. I, if the devil tempt thee to do good.

Qu. Shall I forget my self, to be my self.

King. I, if your selfs remembrance, wrong your self.

Qu. But thou did kill my children.

King. But in your daughters womb, I buried them,
Where in that nest of spicerie they shall breed,
Selfs of themselves, to your recomfiture.

Qu. shall I go win my daughter to thy will.

King. And be a happy mother by the deed,

Qu. I go, write to me very shortly.

King. Bear her my true loves kiss, farewell.
Exit. Relenting fool, and shallow changing woman.

Enter Rat. Rat. My gracious Sovereign on the western coast,
Rides a puissant Navy. To the shore,
Throng many doubtful hollow hearted friends,
Unarmed, and vnresolud to beat them back:
It Is thought that Richmond is their admiral,
And there they hull, expecting but the aid,
Of Buckingham, to welcome them a shore.

King. Some light foot friend, post to the Duke of Norff.
Ratcliffe thy self, or Catesbie, where is he?

Cat. Here my Lord.

King. Fly to the Duke, post thou to Salisburie,
When thou comst there, dull unmindful villain,
Why standst thou still? and go not to the Duke.

Cat. First mighty Sovereign, let me know your mind,
What, from your grace, I shall deliver them.

King. O, true good Catesbie, bid him levy straight,
The greatest strength and power he can make,
And meet me presently at Salisburie.

Rat. What is it your highness pleasure, I shall do at Salisbury,

King. Why? what would thou do there before I go?

Rat. Your highness told me I should post before.

King. My mind is changd sir, my mind is changd.
How now, what news with you?

Enter Darbie. Dar. None good my Lord, to please you with the hearing,
Nor none so bad, but it may well be told.

King. Hoiday, a riddle, neither good, nor bad:
Why do thou run so many mile about,
When thou may tell thy tale a nearer way.
Once more, what news?

Dar. Richmond is on the Seas.

King. There let him sink, and be the season him,
White liuerd runnagate, what does he there?

Dar. I know not mighty Sovereign, but by guess.

King. Well sir, as you guess, as you guess.

Dar. Sturd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Elie,
He makes for England, there to claim the crown.

King. Is the chair empty? is the sword vnswaied?
Is the king dead? the Empire vnpossest?
What heir of York is there alive but we?
And who is Englands King, but great Yorkes heir,?
Then tell me, what does he upon the sea?

Dar. Unless for that my liege, I cannot guess.

King. Unless for that, he comes to be your liege,
You cannot guess, wherefore the Welshman comes,
Thou will revolt, and fly to him I fear.

Dar. No mighty liege, therefore mistrust me not.

King Where is thy power then? to beat him back,
Where are thy tennants? and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the Western shore?
Safe conducting, the rebels from their ships.

Dar, No my good Lord, my friends are in the North.

King. Cold friends to Richard, what do they in the North?
When they should serve, their Sovereign in the West.

Dar. They have not bin commanded, mighty sovereign.
Please it your Majesty to give me leave,
I Will muster up my friends and meet your grace*
Where, and what time, your Majesty shall please.

King. I, I, thou would be gone, to join with Richmond,
I will not trust you Sir.

Dar. Most mighty Sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful,
I never was, nor never will be false.

King. Well, go muster men, but hear you, leave behind,
Your son George Stanlie, look your faith be firm,
Or else, his heads assurance is but frail.

Dar. So deal with him, as I prove true to you.

Enter a Messenger. Mes. My gracious Sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir William Courtney, and the haughty Prelate,
Bishop of Exce^^r, his brother there,
With many mo confederates, are in arms.

Enter another Messenger. Mes. My Liege, in Kent the Guilfordes are in arms,
And every hour more competitors,
Flock to their aid, and still their power increases.

Enter another Messenger. Mes. My Lord, the army of the Duke of Buckingham.

He strike^h him. King. Out on you owls, nothing but songs off death.
Take that until thou bring me better news.

Mes. Your grace mistakes, the news I bring is good,
My news is that by sudden flood, and fall of water,
The Duke of Buckinghams army is dispersed and scattered,
And he himself fled, no man knows whether.

King. O I cry you mercy, I did mistake,
Ratcliffe reward him, for the blow I gave him,
Has any well advised friend given out,
Rewards for him that brings in Buckingham.

Mes. Such proclamation has been made my liege.

Enter another Messenger. Mes. Sir Thomas Louel, and Lord Marquis Dorset,
It Is said my liege, are up in arms,
Yet this good comfort bring I to your grace,
The Britain navy is dispersed, Richmond in Dorshire
Sent out a boat to ask them on the shore,
If they were his assistants yea, or no:
Who answered him, they came from Buckingham,
Upon his party, he mistrusting them,
Ho^st sale, and made away for Britain.

King. March on, march on, since we are up in arms,
If not to fight with foreign enemies,
Yet to beat down, these rebels here at home.

Enter Catesbie. Cat. My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken,
That's the best news, that the Earl of Richmond,
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford,
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.

King. Away toward Salisburie, while we reason here,
A royal battle might be won and lo^t.
Some one take order, Buckingham be brought,
To Salisburie, the rest march on with me.

Exeunt. Entee D^rbie, Sir Christopher. Dar. Sir Christapher, tell Richmond
this from me,
That in the stie of this most bloody bore,
My son George Stanlie is franckt up in hold,
If I revolt, off goes young Georges head,
The fear of that, with holds my present aid,
But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?

Christ. At Pembroke, or at Harford-west in Wales.

Dar. What men of name resort to him.

S. Christ. Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier,
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanlie,
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
Rice up Thomas, with a valiant crew,
With many more of noble fame and worth,
And toward London they do bend their course,
If by the way, they be not fought withal.

Dar. Return unto thy Lord, commend me to him,
Tell him, the Queen has hartelie consented,
He shall espouse Elizabeth her daughter,
These letters will resolve him of my mind.
Farewell.

Exeunt. Enter Buckingha^ to execution. Buck. Will not king Richard let me
speak with him.

Rat. No my Lord, therefore be patient.

Buck. Hastings, and Edwards children, Rivers, Gray,
Holy king Henry, and thy fair son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried,
By underhand corrupted, foul injustice,
If that your moodie discontented ^oules,
Do through the clouds, behold this present hour,
Even for revenge, mock my destruction.
This is Alsoules day fellows, is it not?

Rat. It is my Lord.

Buck. Why then Alsoules day, is my bodies domesday:
This is the day, that in king Edwards time,
I wished might fall on me, when I was found,
False to his children, or his wives allies:
This is the day, wherein I wished to fall,
By the false faith, of him I trusted most:
This, this Alsoules day, to my fearful soul,
Is the determind respit of my wrongs:
That high al-seer, that I dallied with,
Has turned my fained prayer on my head,
And given in earnest what ^ begd in jest.
Thus does he force the swords of wicked men,
To turn their own points, on their Masters bosom:
Now Margarets curse, is fallen upon my head,
When he quorh she, shall spl^t thy heart with sorrow.
Remember, Margaret was a Prophetess,
Come sirs, convey me to the block of shame,
Wrong has but wrong, and blame the dew of blame.

En^er Richmond with drums and trump^ts. Rich. Fellows in arms, and my most
loving friends,
Bruisd underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land,
Have we marched on without impediment.
And here receive we, from our Father Stanlie,
Lines of fair comfort, and encouragement,
The wretched, bloody, and usurping bore,
That spoild your somer-fieldes, and fruitful vines,
Swils your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough,
In your inboweld bosoms, this foul swine,
Lies now even in the center of this I Will,
Near to the town of Leycester as we learn:
From Tamworth thither, is but one days march,
In Gods name cheerly on, courageous f^iendes,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace,
By this one bloody trial of sharp war.

1 Lo. Eue^ie man's conscience is a thousand swords,
To fight against that bloody homicide.

2 Lo. I doubt not but his friends will fly to us.

3 Lo. He has no friends, but who are friends for fear,
Which in his greatest need will shrink from him.

Rich. All for our vantage, then in Gods name march,
True hope is swift, and flies with Swallows wings,
Kings it make Gods, and meaner creatures kings.
Exit.
Enter King Richard, Norffolke, Ratcliffe, Catesbie, with others. King. Here
pitch our tents, even here in Bosworth field,
Why, how now Catesbie, why lookst thou so bad.

Cat, My heart is ten times lighter then my looks.

King. Norffolke, come hither.
Norffolke, we must have knockes, ha, must we not?

Norff. We must both give, and take, my gracious Lord.

King. Up with my tent there, here will I lie to night,
But where to morrow, well, all is one for that:
Who has discried the number of the foe.

Norff. Six or seven thousand is their greatest number.

King. Why our battalion trebles that account,
Besides, the Kings name is a tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse party want,
Up with my tent there, valiant gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the field,
Call for some men of sound direction,
Lets want no discipline, make no dela^e,
For Lords, to morrow is a busy day.

Exeunt. Enter Richmond with the Lords, etc. Rich. The weary son has made
a golden sete,
And by the bright tracke of his fiery Carre,
Gives signal of a goodly day to morrow,
Where is Sir William Brandon, he shall bear my standerd,
The Earl of Pembroke keep his regiment,
Good captain Blunt, bear my good night to him,
And by the second hour in the morning,
Desire the Earl to see me in my tent.
Yet one thing more, good Blunt before thou go:
Where is Lord Stanlie quarterd, do thou know.

Blunt. Unless I have mistane his colors much,
Which well I am assured, I have not done,
His regiment, lies half a mile at least,
South from the mighty power of the king.

Rich. If without perrill it be possible,
Good captain Blunt bear my good night to him,
And give him from me, this most needful scrowle.

Blunt. Upon my life my Lord, I Will undertake it,

Rich. Farewell good Blunt.
Give me some ink, and paper, in my ten^,
I Will draw the form, and modle of our battle,
Limit each leader to his several charge,
And part in just proportion our small strength,
Come, let us consult upon to morrowes business,
In to our tent, the air is raw and cold.

Enter king Richard, Norff. Ratcliffe Catesb^e, etc. King. What is a clock.

Cat. It is six of clock, full supper time.

King. I will not sup to night, give me some ink and paper,
What? is my be^er easier then it was?,
And all my armor laid into my tent?

C^t, It is my Liege, and all things are in readiness.

King. Good Norffolke, hie thee to thy charge,
Use careful watch, choose trusty centinell.

Norff. I go my Lord.

King. Stur with the Lark to morrow gentle Norffolke.

Nor. I warrant you my Lord.

King. Catesby.

Rat. My lord.

King. Send out a Pursiuant at arms
To ^tanle^^ regiment, bid him bring his power
Before sun rising, least his son George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night.
Fill me a bowl of wine, give me a watch,
Saddle white Surrey for the field to morrow,
Look that my staves be sound and not too heavy Ratliffe.

R^t. My lord.

King. Sawst thou the melancholy Lo. Northumberland?

Rat. Thomas the Earl of Surrey and himself,
Much about cockshut time, from troop to troop
Went through the army cheering up the soldiors.

King. So I am satisfied, give me a boule of wine,
I have not that alacrity of spirit
Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have:
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?

Rat. It is my lord.

King Bid my guard watch, leave me.
Ratliffe about the mid of night come to mytent
And help to arm me: leave me I say.

Exit. Ratliff^ Enter Darby to Ricbmond in his tent. Da^by. Fortune and
victory set on thy helm.

Rich. All comfort that the dark night can afford,
Be to thy person noble father in law,
Tell me how fares our loving mother?

Dar. I by attorney bless thee from thy mother,
Who pr^ies continually for Richmonds good,
So much for that the silent hours steal on,
And f^akie darkness breaks within the east,
In brief, for so the season bids us be:
Prepare thy battle earelie in the morning,
And put thy fortune to the arbitrament,
Of bloody strokes and mortal sta^ing war,
I as I may, that which I would, I cannot,
With best adu^ntage will deceive the time,
And aid thee in this doubsul shocke of arms,
But on thy side I may not be too forward,
Least being seen thy brother tender George
Be executed in his fathers sight.
Farewell* the leisure and the fearful time,
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love,
And am^le enterchange of sweet discourse,
Which so long sundried friends should dwelvpon,
God give us leisure for these rights of love,
Once more adieu, be valiant and speed well.

Rich. Good lords conduct him to his regiment:
I Will strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap,
Least leaden slumber peise me down to morrow,
When I should mount with wings of victory,
Once more good night kind Lords and gentlemen,
Exu^^. O thou who^e Captain I account my self,
Look on my forces with a gracious e^e:
Put in their hands thy brusing Irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy ^all,
The usurping helmets of our adversaries,
Make us thy ministers of chastisement,
That we may praise thee in the victory,
To thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ear I let fall the windows of mine eyes,
Sleeping and waking, oh defend me still!

Enter the ghost of young Prince Edward, son Harry the sixth, to Ri. Ghost to
Ri. Let me sit heavy on thy soul to morrow.
Think how thou stabst me in my prime of youth,
At Teukesburie, despair therefore (...) die.

To Rich. Be cheerful Richmond for the wronged souls
Of Butchered princes fight in thy behalf,
King Henry's issue Richmond comforts thee.

Enter the ghost of Henry the sixth. Ghost to Ri. When I was mortal my
anointed body,
By thee was punched full of deadly holes,
Think on the tower and me despair and die.
Harrie the sixth bids thee despair and die.

To Rich. Virtuous and holy be thou conqueror,
Harrie that prophisied thou should be king,
Does comfort thee in thy sleep live and flourish.

Enter the Goast of Clarence. Ghost. Let me set heavy in thy soul to morrow,
I that was washed to death with fulsome wine,
Poor Clarence by thy guile betrayed to death:
To morrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgeles sword, despair and die.

To Rich. Thou of spring of the house of Lancester,
The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee,
Good angels guard thy battle live and flourish.

Enter the ghosts of Rivers, Gray, Vaughan. King Let me sit heavy in thy soul
to morrow,
Rivers that died at Pomfret, despair and die,

Gray. Think upon Graie, and let thy soul despair.

Vaugh. Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fear^,
Let fall thy lance, despair and die.

All to Ri. Awake and think our wrongs in Richards bosom,
Well conquer him, awake and win the day.

Enter the ghosts of the two young Princes. Ghost to Ri. Dream on thy Coosens
smothered in the tower,
Let us be lead within thy bosom Richard,
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death,
Thy Nephews souls bid thee despair and die.

To Rich. Sleep Richmond sleep, in peace and wake enjoy,
Good angles guard thee from the bores annoy,
Live and beget a happy race of kings,
Edwards unhappy sons do bid thee flourish,

Enter the ghost of Hastings. Ghost Bloody and guilty, guiltilie awake,
And in a bloody battle end thy days,
Think on lord Hastings, despair and die.

To Rich. Quiet untroubled soul, awake, awake,
Arm, fight and conquer for fair Engiands sake.
Enter the ghost of Lady Anne his wife* Richard thy wife, that wretched Anne
thy wife,
That never slept a quiet hour with thee,
Now fills thy sleep with preturbations,
To morrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgeles sword despair and die.

To Rich. ^hou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep,
Dream of success and happy victory,
Thy adversaries wife does pray for thee.
Enter the Goast of Buckingham. The first was I that helped thee to the crown,
The last was I that felt thy tyrrannie,
O in the battle think on Buckingham,
And die in terror of thy giltines^e,
Dream on dream on, of bloody deeds, and death,
Fainting, despair, desparing yield thy breath,

To Rich. I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid,
But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed,
God and good angels fight on Richmons side,
And Richard falls in height of all his pride.

Richard starteth up out of a drea^^e. King Ri. Give me another horse, bind up
my wounds,
Have mercy Jesus: soft, I did but dream,
O Coward conscience, how do thou afflict me?
The lights burn blew, it is now dead midnight,
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh,
What do I fear? my self? there is none else by,
Richard loves Richard, that is I and I,
Is there a murderer here? no. Yes I am,
Then sly, what from my self? great reason why?
Least I revenge. What my self upon my self?
Alack I love my self, wherefore? for any good
That I my self have done unto my self:
O no, alas I rather hate my self,
For hateful deeds committed by my self,
I am a villain, yet I lie I am not,
Fool of thy self speak well, fool do not flatter,
My conscience has a thousand several tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain,
Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree,
Murder, stern murder* in the dyrest degree,
All several sins, all used in each degree,
Throng to the bar, crying all guilty, guilty.
I shall despair, there is no creature loves me,
And if I die, no soul will pi^ie me:
And wherefore should they, since that I my self*
Find in my self, no pity to my self.
Me thought the souls of all that I had murtherd,
Came to my tent, and every one did threat,
To morrows vengeance on the head of Richard.

Enter Ratcliffe. Rat. My Lord.

King. Zoundes, who is there?

Rat. Ratcliffe, my Lord, it is I, the early village cock*
Has twice done salutation to the morn,
Your friends are up, and buckle on their armor.

King. O Ratcliffe, I have dreamd a fearful dream,
What think thou, will our friends prove all true?

Rat. No doubt my Lord.

King. O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear.

Rat. Nay good my Lord* be not afraid of shadows*

King By the Apostle Paul* shadows to night,
Have stroke more terror to the soul of Richard,
Then can the substance often thousand soldiers,
Armed in proof, and led by shallow Richmond.
It Is not yet near day, come, go with me,
Under our tents I Will play the ease dropper,
To see if any mean to shrink from me.

Exeunt. Enter the Lords to Richmond. Lo. Good morrow Richmond.

Rich. Cry mercy Lords, and watchful gentlemen,
That you have taken a tardie sluggard here.

Lo. How have you slept my Lord?

Rich. The sweetest sleep, and fairest boding dreams,
That ever entered in drowsy head,
Have I since your depature h^d my Lords,
Me thought their souls, whose bodies Richard mur^he^d,
Came to my tent, and cried on victory,
I promise you, my soul is very I oc^^d,
In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
How far into the morning is it Lords?

Lo. Upon the stroke of four.

Rich. Why, then it is time to arm, and give direction.
His oration to his soldiers. More then I have said, loving countriemen,
The leisure and inforcement of the time,
Forbids to dwell upon, yet remember this,
God, and our good cause, fight upon our side,
The prayers of holy Saints and wronged souls,
Like high reard bulwarks, stand before our faces,
Richard, except those whom we fight against,
Had rather have us win, then him they follow:
For, what is he they follow? truly gentlemen,
A bloody tirant, and a homicide.
One raisd in blood, and one in blood established,
One that made means to come by what he has,
And ^laughtered those, that were the means to help him.
A base foul stone, made precious by the foil,
Of Englands chair, where he is falsely set,
One that has ever been Gods enemy.
Then if you fight against Gods enemy,
God will in justice, ward you as his soldiers,
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain,
If you do fight against your countries foes,
Your countries fat, shall pay your pains the hire.
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors.
If you do free your children from the sword,
Your childrens children quits it in your age:
Then in the name of God and all these rightes,
Advance your standards, draw your willing swords,
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt,
Shall be this could corpse on the earths cold face:
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt,
The least of you, shall share his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpets boldly, and cheerefullie,
God, and ^aint George, Richmond, and victory.

Enter King Richard, Rat. etc. King. What said Northumberland, as ^ouching
Richmond.

Rat. That he was never trained up in arms.

King He said the truth, and what said Surrey then.

Rat. He smiled and said, the better for our purpose,

King. He was in the right, and so in deed it is:
Tell the clock there.
The clock strikes. Give me a calender, who saw the Sun to day?

Rat. Not I my Lord.

King. Then he disdaines to shine, for by the book,
He should have braud the East an hour ago,
A black day will it be to some body Rat.

Rat. My Lord.

King. The Sun will nor be seen to day,
The sky does frown, and lowre upon our army,
I would these dewie tears were from the ground,
Not shine to day: why, what is that to me?
More then to Richmond, for the selfsame heaven,
That frowns on me, looks sadly upon him.

Enter Norffolke. Norff. Arm, arm, my Lord, the foe vaunts in the field.

King. Come, bust^e, bustle, caparison my horse,
Call up Lord Standlie, bid him bring his power,
I will lead forth, my soldiers to the plain,
And thus my battle shall be ordered.
My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
Consisting equally of horse and foot,
Our Archers shall be placed in the midst,
John, Duke of Norffolke, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of this foot and horse,
They thus directed, we will follow,
In the matne battle, whose puissance on either side,
shall be well winged with our chiefest horse:
This, and Saint George to boots what think thou Norffolke?

Nor. A good direction warlike sovereign,
he shows him a paper. This found I on my tent this morning.
Iocky of Norfolk be not so bold,
For D^ckon thy master is bought and should.

King A thing devised by the enemy.
Go gentlemen every man unto his charge,
Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls:
Conscience is but a word that cowards use,
Deuisd at first to keep the strong in awe,
Our strong arms be our conscience swords, our law.
March on, join bravely, let us to it pell mell,
If not to heaven then hand in hand to hell.
His Or^tion to his army. What shall I say more then I have inferd?
Remember whom you are to cope withal,
A sort of vagabonds, rascols and runawaies,
A scum of Britains and base lacky pesants,
Whom their orecloied country vomits forth,
To desperate adventures and assurd destruction,
You sleeping safe they bring to you unrest,
You having lands and blessed with beauteous wifes,
They would restrain the one, distaine the other,
And who does lead them but a paltrey fellow,?
Long kept in Britain at our mothers cost,
A milkesopt, one that never in his life
Felt so much cold as over shoes in snow:
Lets whip these stragglers ore the seas again,
Lash hence these ouerweening rags of France,
These famisht beggars weary of their lives,
Who but for dreaming on this fond exploit,
For want of means poor rats had hanged themselves,
If we be conquered, let men conquer us,
And not these bastard Britains whom our fathers
Have in their own land beaten bobd and thumpt,
And in record left them the heirs of shame.
Shall these enjoy our lands, lie with our wives?
Ravish our daughters, hark I hear their drum,
Fight gentlemen of England, fight bold yeomen,
Draw archers draw your arrows to the head*
Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood,
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves,
What says lord Stanley, will he bring his power?

M^s. My lord, he does deny to come,

King Off with his son Georges head.

Nor. My lord, the enemy is past the marsh,
After the battle let George Stanley die.

King A thousand hearts are great within my bosom,
Advance our standards, set upon our foes,
Our ancient word of courage fair saint George
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery Dragons,
Upon them victory sits on our helmes.

Exeunt. Alarm, excursions, Enter Catesby. Cates. Rescew my lord of Norffolke,
rescew, rescew,
The king enacts more wonders then a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger,
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death,
Rescew fair lord, or else the day is lost.

Enter Richard. King A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse.

Cates. Withdraw my lord I Will help you to a horse.

King Slave I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the die,
I think there be six Richmonds in the field,
Five have I slain to day in stead of him,
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse.

Alarm, Enter Richard and Richmond, they fight, Richard is slain then retrait
being sounded. Enter Richmond, Darby, bearing the crown, with other Lords,
etc. Ri. God and your arms be praisd victorious friends,
The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.

Dar. Courageous Richmond, well have thou acquit thee,
Lo here this long usurped roialtie.
From the dead temples of this bloody wretch,
Have I plucked off to grace thy brows withal,
Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.

Rich. Great God of heaven say Amen to all,
But tell me, is young George Stanley living.

Dar. He is my lord, and safe in Leicester town,
Whether if it please you we may now withdraw us.

Rich. What men of name are slain on either side?

John Duke of Norffolke, Water Lord Ferris, sir Robert Brookenbury, and sir
William Brandon. Rich. Inter their bodies as become their births.
Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled,
That in submission will return to us,
And then as we have taken the sacrament,
We will unite the white rose and the red,
Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,
That long have frownd upon their enmity,
What traitor hears me, and says not Amen?
England has long been mad and scard her self,
The brother blindlie shed the brothers blood,
The father rashly slaughterd his own son,
The son compel^ ben butcher to the sire,
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Divided in their dire division.
O now let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true succeeders of each royal house,
By Gods fair ordinance conioine together,
And let their heirs (God if thy will be so)
Enrich the time to come with smooth-faste peace,
With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days,
Abate the edge of traitors gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again,
And make poor England weep in streams of blood,
Let them not live to taste this lands increase,
That would with treason wound this fair lands peace,
Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again,
That she may long live hear, God Say Amen.

FINIS.

