Vindiciae Senectutis, OR, A PLEA FOR OLD AGE: Which is Senis cujusdam CYGNEA
cantio.

And the several points on parts of it, are laid down at the end of the
following Introduction.

By T. S. D. D.

LEVIT. 19 32 Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of
the OLD MAN, and fear thy GOD: I am the LORD. ECCLES. 11. 10. Childhood and
youth are vanity. PROVE. 30. 17. The eye that mocketh at his FATHER, and
despises to obey his MOTHER, the Ravens of the Vallie shall pick it out, and
the Eagles shall eat it.

LONDON,

Printed by George Miller dwelling in Black-Priers, MDCXXXIX.

TO THE WORTHY AND LIVELY Pattern of a good OLD AGE, Mr. Doctor CHADERTON, all
the blessed comforts of it: and after it, everlasting happiness.
Reverend SIR:
THe Meditations here in this Treatise presented to you, are at their highest
pitch of ambition, if they may obtain, that your judicious eyes (at your
convenient leisure) shall pass over them. I suppose, it will be asked why they
solicit you rather then any other, for this favor. It is, first for your many
years with which GOD has crowned you: and then also in respect of your
experience in your own particular, of what in this Tract is delivered: that
is, of GODS freeing this age from the Imputations cast (in a generality) upon
it: and his deyning you above many others, the blessed and comfortable
privileges, of which it is capable, and for which it has the best helps, and
most opportunities. I desire not to be made known unto you. It suffices, that
to me you are well known: and that, not by hearsay (though with that
precious ointment, a good-name Eccles 7. you are renowned) but cheefely out of
my many observations, when I was a Student in the University, and for a long
time, one of your Auditors. Every way you ratify and make good this Encomium
SENECTVTIS. And therefore yours it is, and to you it comes, both to be
corrected and disposed of, incase it may seem in any degree, worthy your so
much pains. And certainly, should I cause my thoughts to range abroad among
the Worthies that are known unto me; none would be found that might give so
ample testimony to what you shall here read, or be so living an example of
it, as your self. This (I hope) will excuse my presumption, and prevail with
you for your pains in reading the Discourse, though it should not with your
judgment for approving it. I beseech the ANCIENT OF DAYS, to continue and
increase unto you, the good your many years have possessed you of; that as
they are found in the way of righteousness, so they may be to you a crown of
glory, Prove. 16. and a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4*

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader, Young or old,
HEre is presented to thee by an Old Man past his Threescore and three.
great climactericall year, a Treatise of OLD AGE, indicted and penned by D.
Sheafe Prebin of Windsore and Rector of Wellforde.
one who has attained to those years whereunto he who attaineth is accounted
Fourscore.
Wondrous old, and dedicated to him that has almost attained to An hundred
those years Aetas. Secu^um.
beyond which there is no ordinary reckoning. The Author in dedicating his
Treatise of OLD AGE, to a more aged Friend, imitates the Orator, who thus
says of himself, Ad senem senex de senectute soripsi. Cic de A^icitia in
proem.
Being an Old Man, I wrote to an Old Man of Old Age. As the Author by reason of
his much reading, strong memory, profound judgment and long experience was
well qualified and enabled to undertake such a task, so most wisely has he
made choice of a very fit Patron, who notwithstanding his exceeding great
Old Age, and the small characters in which this Treatise was written, read it
without spectacles, and with no less prespicacie of judgment then of sight,
gave his approbation thereof. If therefore DAYS may be heard, and a testimony
given by multitude of years may gain credit, there are Two or three.
as many as the Divine Law exacteth for witness bearing that commends this
Treatise to thee: and those old enough; especially the two Elder, who by their
many years so well employed, as they have employed theirs, have attained to
great experience, and gained much wisdom; so as in them this Adage, multitude
of years teach wisdom, is verified. All the three intimated witnesses were
Academicks together. All of one and the same D. Chaderton.
University. Anno Dom. 1584
The Dedicatee was * Master of Emmanuell College Cambridge, within few years
after the Author of this Treatise came to Kings College: yet had this Author
been Sixteen year.
more then a Bachelour of Divinities time in the College, before he chose the
Publisher hereof out of Eton school to the said Kings College. A favor very
great in the kind, and in the manner of conferring it, most free. Possumne
ingraius and immemor esse? In all humble and hearty gratitude is this public
acknowledgement made of a gracious Tutors goodness, by his much bounden
Pupil. Gratitude therefore is one inducement, which has brought me on to lend
an helping hand to the publishing of this Treatise, (which is my only task.)
But an other and greater inducement is the work it self: both in regard of the
subject matter of it, which is OLD AGE, and also in regard of the exquisite
manner of handling it, it being performed by an Old Man, who has written
hereabout what experience has verified in himself. For he himself is a
lively image and representation of that true Old Man which Senectus nos ab
impudenti si misdomini^ libera^ voluptatib^* gul^ impo^it* mo^um: libidinis
frangit impetus: ange^ sapientia^: dat matu riora confili^, etc. Hier Proem 2.
lib Comment in Amos. Gran^es natu, ^yg neum nescio quid, and solito dulcius
cecinerunt Hier epist 2 ad N^ pot de vita ^er.
he describes, and whom he does vindicate and defend from the undue calumnies
of youth. If any imagine that OLD AGE, as it brings feebleness upon the
body, and upon all the parts thereof, so it blunteth the understanding, dulleth
the wit, weakeneth the memory, and much impaireth all the powers of the soul,
I refer him to S. Hierom, who in that very place where he grants the
forementioned bodily infirmities and other like to them, to be incident to OLD
AGE, sets down these good things to abide in it and with it: It keeps us from
pleasures, the most impudent masters: it puts a mean to appetite: it subdueth
the violence of lust: it increases wisdom: it gives more mature counsel*
etc. And in another place he gives us a catalogue of many heathen men, who
being very old, and near to death, sang their Swan-like songs more sweetly
then they were wont in younger years. The Author of this Treatise has given
us a larger catalogue, not only of heathen men, but also of holy men, Gods
worthies, who in their OLD AGE have been endowed with excellent and eminent
abilities, especially of mind: withal he shows, that if it so fall out as is
objected, it is in such an OLD AGE as follows upon distempered youth, and
disordered manage: but where former years have been temperately ordered, and
well employed, OLD AGE* though somewhat debilitated in bodily strength, will
prove vigorous in the indowments of the soul. Of such an Old Man speaks an
ancient Poet to this purpose,

His foot in pace is flow: (...). Eurip. ^n.

His wit does swiftly flow.
This our Author has often most truly and justly observed, that the defects
which befall OLD AGE, are occasioned for the most part, if not altogether, by
the disorder of younger years. Yea the distemper of younger years is (to
speak according to the course of nature) an especial cause that so few, even
of those who grow bearded, attain an hoary head: which (as the Wiseman has
well observed) is a crown of glory, if it be Prove. 16. 31.
found in the way of righteousness. He therefore that wrote much in
commendation Cic* de Senect.
of OLD AGE put in this proviso, Remember that I praise that OLD AGE which is
settled upon the Senectus e^rum qui adolescentiam suam honest is artibus
instruxer^nt aetate fit d^ctior, usu tritior, processu temporis sapientior, and
veterum studiorum dulcissimos fructu^ metit. Hier. ad Nepot
foundations of youth: meaning that youth which has been well passed over.
For, as an ancient Father long since said, and that upon his own experience,
The OLD AGE of them who have furnished their youth with sciences, is made by
continuance the more learned, by use the more ready, by process of time the
more prudent, and reapeth the most sweet fruits of former studies. It much
rests in men by well ordering their tender and flexible age, yea and their
more stable and settled years following thereupon, both to attain unto
OLD AGE, and also to make that OLD AGE whereunto they attain more joyous, and
glorious. It is said of a wicked man ( Job. 21. 21.) The number of his days is
(...) Divisit vulgat* dimidiavit.
cut off in the midst. And to like purpose ( Psalm. 55. 23.) Bloody and
deceitful men shall not Targum (...) N^n videbu^t dimidiu^ dierum suoru^.
live out half their days. For some by gluttony, drunkenness, whoredom and
such kind of distempers bring mortal diseases upon themselves, and thereby
hasten death: others do the like by immoderate passions, as love, grief,
fear and such like: others by too much carking, watching, fasting,
paines-taking, and other such excesses destroy nature: others by quarrels and
duells cause themselves to be cut off before their time: others by casting
themselves upon desperate attempts shorten their days: others by capital
crimes, bring themselves under the Magistrates sword which cuts them off:
others by laying violent hands upon themselves, prevent the time which
otherwise they might have lived: others by notorious sins provoke the Divine
Justice to take them away by an extraordinary judgment. In these, and other
like respects wicked men may be said dimidiare dies suos, to cut off their time
in the midst, or not to live half their days* namely which they might
otherwise have lived (according to the course of nature) if they had not fallen
into such exorbitant courses. Thus many keep themselves from OLD AGE. Yet it
cannot be denied but that sundry wicked ones attain thereto. Experience
demonstrates as much. For howsoever OLD AGE be promised as a blessing only to
the Righteous, yet it is permitted to wicked ones: but as a curse through their
abuse thereof. A curse I say, both to others and to themselves. To others, in
that the longer they live, the more mischief they do. To themselves in this
world, and in the world to come. In this world every day they multiply and
aggravate sin, and so make themselves the more odious to God, Angels and
good men; whence it comes to pass that their name rots: it is Pro. 10. 7.
like a rotten, pu^rified carrion, the longer it lies above ground, the more
noisome and stinking ^avour it sends forth. In the world to come their
torment shall be increased according to the multitude and heinousness of their
sins, Old wicked ones after their Rom 2. 5.
heardnesse and impenitent heart, treasure up unto themselves wrath against the
day of wrath. Such Old-Men are Rev. 12 9.
like to the old Serpent. OLD AGE, as spoken of in the ensuing Treatise is
proper to the Righteous. It is the Ante Abrahamnu^us est appellatus senex. Hier
comment. in Zac. 8. Sic Orig. in Isa. 1^. Hom. 15. (...) Bona Senectus.
observation of sundry of the ancient Fathers, that Abraham the father of the
faithfuil is the first that in sacred Scripture is called an Old Man. To him it
was promised as a blessing ( Genesis 15. 15.) and in that respect his OLD AGE is
styled a good Old Age (Genesis 25. 8.) Thus to take OLD AGE (separated from the
accidental imperfections thereof, such as arise not simply from OLD AGE, but
from the former and present wickedness of evil old-men) OLD AGE is one of the
pillars wherewith politi^s are supported. Who knows not that a Senate or
Counsel of State is a principal stay of a State. Now a Senate uses to consist
for the most part of Old-Men: who by reason of their age and place are called
Seniores, Elders. In the Law we read that Levites Numb. 8. 25.
having served in the house of God till they were fifty years old (at which
time OLD AGE begins) were to go to their Cities, there to dwell as Judges.
The Jews had Deuteronomy. 17. 9. 2 Chronicles. 1^. 8.
their (...)
Senate or Counsel, whereunto Christ alludeth ( Mat. 5. 22.) in this phrase,
shall be in danger of the Counsel. This Counsel consisted of Old-Men, called
Elders, of whom some were Confilium, ratio, sententia, ni^i essent in senibus
non summum consilium Majores nostri appellasse^t Senatum* Cic. de Senect Nomen
and aetatis mi te senatus habe^ Ovid lib. 5. Fast.
Priests, some Levits, some Nobles; most of them, if not all of them, Old-Men.
So the Romans and others had their Senate of such. Hereupon the Orator makes
this inference, If counsel, reason, and judgment were not in Old-Men, our
Ancestors would not have called the highest counsel a Senate. Yet further to
prove that the Ancient are a staff and stay to a State, the Prophet ( Isa. 1.
2.) puts them into the rank of such stays as in judgment are taken away,
and upon the taking away of whom, a state falls to ruin, as a Tent falls slat
down if the pole by which it is supported be taken away. See the difference
betwixt 1 King. 12 6, etc.
the counsel of Old-Men and Youngmen in Rehoboams case. Not without cause
therefore is it said, that one hearty (...). Eurip. in Andr^. (...). Hom. Odys.
B.
Old Man is of better use then many Young Men. For (as another Poet said of an
Old Man,) He knows many and those ancient things too. On this and other like
grounds, OLD AGE has in all ages been much honored. So it was among the
Magna suit capiti^ qu^dam reverentia cani Ovid. 5: Fast.
Heathen: so much more ought it to be among Gods people. The Lord himself
gives this charge ( Lev. 19. 32.) Thou shall rise up before the hoary-head,
and honor the face of the Old Man, and fear thy God. This last clause ( and
fear thy God) shows that our fear of God, who is invisible, is testified by
our reverence to those that visibly bear his Image, as Old-Men do. For God
himself is styled ( Dan. 7. 9.) the Ancient of days, and the hair of his
head is said to be like pure wool, that is white, not spotted, not stained,
not soiled: such as the hair of Old-men uses to be. In allusion hereunto, S.
Hierom Ve^usti dierum caesaries describitur candida, ut aetatis longi^udo
monstretur.
says, that the hair of the Ancient of days is described to be white, that
length of days may be declared thereby.

So pithily and plentifully has the Author of this Treatise here presented to
thee, handled this point, both Vindicatively, in freeing OLD AGE Hier. comment.
lib. 8. in Isa. 24.
from all undue imputations against it, and also Encomiastically, by setting
out the comeliness and excellency thereof, as to speak any more thereabout,
would be actum agere, to preach over the same Sermon again, yea (as it is in
the proverb) to (...). Occidit miseros cra^be repetita magistros Iuvenal. Sat.
7.
set ^ole-worts twice so^ before you, which is counted as loathsome as death it
self.

There is a Treatise of OLD AGE of old time written by MT. Cic.
the purest Latinist that ever spoke, or wrote: for the elegancy of style, for
the solid matter of that Treatise, and for many other ornaments wherewith it is
decked, it has ever been highly accounted of, and learned in most Grammar
schools: yet as far as divine learning excells humane, as far as a
judicious Divine may go before a learned Philosopher, so far is this
Treatise here tendered to thee, to be preferred Mihi quidem ita jucunda
c^nsectio ^jus libri ^uit, ut non modo omnes absterserit senectutis molestias,
sed effecerit mollem etiam, and jucundam senectutem. (...).
before that. If the Orator said truly of his Treatise, The making of this
Book was so delight some to me, as it did not only remove all the troubles of
OLD AGE, but also made it easy and pleasing* much more truly and justly may
the Author of this Treatise say the like of his. A Preachers frequent and
serious meditating and ruminating on that which he is to preach to others does
often very much affect him before he utter it, in uttering of it, and ever
after. How much more when he sets his after thoughts upon it, and more
accuratly revieweth it for the view of all that Eurip. in Hyppol. Secundae
cogitationes sapientiores.
desire to have their meditations helped about this excellent subject, OLD AGE.
For my part I heartily thank God that I came to such a through view thereof, as
I have had; and withal 1 Samuel 25 32, 33.
(as David blessed God and Abigaile in the same cause) I heartily thank the
Author (my Ancient good Tutor, to whom for all the good I received in Kings
College Cambridge, under God, I owe all the praise) this Author I heartily
thank for vouchsafing to communicate to his unworthy Pupil these his labors.
So well I approoved this Treatise in my judgment, such profit, sweetness and
comfort I have found and felt in reading it over again and again, as I could
not but do my best to bring it forth to that public view which now it is
brought to. Now I bow my knees to the Ancient of days, that, as hitherto he
has done, he would yet longer and longer continue to preserve the two good
Old-Men (the Author of this Treatise, and his Friend to whom he has dedicated
it) to be mirrours of such an OLD AGE as in this Treatise is set out, that in
and by their example and pattern* what is here written of OLD AGE may be
verified and ratified. Blackfriars London. 26. Aug. 1638.


WILLIAM GOUGE

The Author to the Reader.
Generous Reader,
I Do willingly give thee an account both of my first thoughts and intentions,
and also of my proceedings in the ensuing discourse. Thus conceive of them.
(...), know thy self, is said to be a voice from heaven, and ever has it
been held for an high and necessary point of wisdom; as contrarie-wise,
nothing comes nearer to a ben^mmed, sottish, and Nabal-like disposition, then
ignorance in this case. Know you not your own selves, says the 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Apostle.

Many there are that with great labor, no less expense, and extreme hazard
of their lives, travel into the remo^e parts of the world, only out of a
desire to know them, and yet know little of their own country: others, that
search curiously into the policy of foreign kingdoms, ignorant (the mean
while) of the state of that in which they are natives. Some again are busy
priers into their neighbors houses and affairs, never taking notice how it
stands with their own at home, all with shame enough, i^ that they are less
careful of what more* nearly concerns them. A man's proper and nearest home
of all, is himself.

The consideration hereof caused me to* look back to the sundry passages of
my life past, and to fix mine eye on my present condition, being now far
gone in years: and in this Meditation, I fell upon a serious thought of my
Old Age: as, what the discomforts of it are, that so I might address my self
to seek after the true remedy: what good I may find in it for comfort to
countervaile the evils it brings: and lastly, what opportunities it may afford
me, for my present and future happiness. Having, as I thought, found something
by this inquiry, I was willing my pen should help my memory: and so my paper
was my storer for it. Think not I do it out of that itching humor, Pers*
Sat. 1.
Scire tuum nihil est, etc. No, being conscious to my self of my emptiness, I
have ever (in privatest places of my abode) said Horat.
with the Poet, Hae latebrae dulces. Take this rather for the true cause of my
suffering the discourse to come abroad. To impart to others what we have
thought of and labored in for ourselves, is (especially when it passes not
immediately from the partial hand of the Author, but has approbation from
others more judicious) a thing usual, not discommended, no not in these
scripturient times, and in my opinion, it sorts well with society, for, Bonum
est natura s^a diffusivum, and usu, quo communius, eo melius, Every good thing
is naturally communicative, and in use, the more common, the better, and more
profitable.

If any shall think the subject of which I have made choice to be but mean,
and unworthy of my so many lines in writing, and his so much pains in reading;
I would offer to his consideration these three things. First, touching the
contempt of this age, how great and common a sin it is. Secondly, what need men
in years may have, in respect of some bodily defects, of inward comforts, as
of a staff to support them, that so they may pass on to the end of their race
with patience. And lastly, whether it will be lost labor, timely to mind
young men of the evils, which not prevented, will dog them to the age, towads
which they securely pass along; and which is to such ( Iuven. Sat. 9.
as one terms it) non intellecta senectus. Sure I am it i^ now no less
needful, then it was in Salomons time, to re^rove them for their rejoyeing in
their youth, etc. and to forewarne them of their account, as Eccles. 11. also
to counsel them even in the days of their youth to remember their Creator,
Eccles. 12.

Let no man think that this Treatise is only for OLD-MEN, chiefly it looks
toward them: yet every age, once come to years of discretion, may hap'ly by
it be put in mind of some thing or other, that will concern it for the
present; and if GOD bless them with long-life, the benefit of it may be the
greater. We may say of it, as Horat. Epist. lib. 1
the Poet does in another case. Aeque neglectum pueris, senibusque nocebit.

And so, gentle Reader, thou have my reasons (such as they are) for my
undertaking this task. If thou dislike them not, then read on.

The Introduction to the whole Discourse.
AN Old Man, though but meanly learned, may treat of OLD AGE, out of some
experience, feelingly: and in that respect, may be the more fit to discourse of
this subject. Onwhich I do not find that many have lighted: among Divines, very
few. Some Heathen Difference betwixt Theological and Philoso^hicall Tractates.
Writers have professedly handled it: and from one of them I take my aim: yet
with this maine difference, that whereas the most learned among them, do
^scribe all to the guidance of nature, and the precepts of Philosophy (which,
whosoever follows, fares one, shall be sure smoothly to pass through all the
troubles of this life) the Christian proceeds by a better and safer rule, by
that ^ Pet 1. 19.
most sure Word of GOD, to which we must take heed, as to a light that shines
in a dark place: to wit, in that darkness wherein all the Gentiles walked,
till Esa. ^. 2.
the great light shone unto them. GODS Law must direct us how to walk, and his
Promises in the Gospel, what to believe, if we will rightly judge of this or
of any other part of our pilgrimage, and take a sure course for the avoiding of
the troubles, and enjoying the comforts of every of them. How humane
testimonies to be used


I make not the strangers from the covenants of promise, our judges: yet when
they come in as witnesses to Divine truth, the authentic testimonies of the
Scriptures, I reject them not.

But here it will be necessary, before we proceed any further, for the stating
of the matter in question, to determine what we mean by OLD AGE: and then
also, whether our plea be for the age of Old-men, or for their persons.

Touching the former; In these our days, What Old Age is
OLD AGE is not to be measured by the years of the most ancient before the
flood. We are now in this respect, but as dwarfs to them, or as pigmies:
bipedales, two foot-high, or, Psalm. 39. 5, 6.
as the Psalmist speaks, our life is but palmaris, of a hands-breath in
comparison. Which made Genesis 44. 9.
Jacob to confess and complain that his days were few, and that he had not
attained to the years of the life of his fathers, in the days of their
pilgrimages: Cap. 14.
Job also to say, Man that is borne of a woman, is of few days. And it is
certain that we live now scar^e the tenth part of their time. Our life in this
old age of the world, is short, compared with the years of many bruit-beasts,
if we may believe He^iod, who makes the Crow to live thrice so long as man, the
Heart four ages of the Crow, the Raven three of the Heart, the Phoenix nine of
the Raven. But Pliny by whom He^ods conceit is reported, and Aristotle
himself, who allows no animal a longer life then man, excepting the Elephant,
do account this an idle and vain fiction. Pliny writes of one that lived 150.
of another which lived ten above that, a third, 200. another 300. and so he
goes on to an incredible number of years. But in the same place (to make what
he had said good and true) he tells us, that a year was Different account of
years.
not the same to them that reported these things, which it is to us* some among
them determining one whole year by a Summer, and another by a Winter: some by
three months, as the Arcadians, some by one month, as the Egyptians. But
these are uncertain reckonings. Hippocrates makes the extreamestage of man to
be 89. In pr^fat. in libr^s de Agric^lt.
Varro says, Annus octuage simus admonet me ut sarcinas c^lligam, antequam
egrediore vita, my year 80 (says he) calls upon me to trusse up my fardles,
and to be ready for my departure.

To leave these also. The Psalmist has given us the truest direction, as for
our* setting the bounds of a man's life, ^o likewise of OLD AGE. Psalm. 90. 10.
The time of our life is threescore years and ten ordinarily he means, and in
a generality, or with most men that come to this age: for in the particulars,
the diversity of constitutions does make a great difference, and further he
adds, that if any man live to 80. that age is accompanied with many
afflictions, there expressed by labor and sorrow. Degrees of old age
I am not ignorant, that some Physicians make three parts or degrees of
Old Age, one from 50 to 60. another from 60 to 70, and the last and extremest,
from 70 to the decrepit. But I follow the Psalmist, and from that place I
gather, that we may reckon him for old, that is come to 60. since the 70. is
made the terminus or period of ma^s life. Seneca Epist. 26.
One says well, Senecta, lassae, non siactae aetatis nomen est, the word (
Senecta) imports a wearied, not a broken age. What oldmen here intended.


Now in the next place, to the question, whether men themselves that are in
years, or the age, be the subject of our defense: I answer, the age, and not
always the person, who may be old, and yet not the OLD MAN we speak of.
There are many that in the former part of their life, have wasted their
^rationall powers, in lewdness, or at lest in idle extravagant courses These
are not OLD-MEN rightly so called: nor (indeed) men at all: but (as Tit. 1. 12.
the Apostle terms them) evil beasts and slow bellies, such, 1 Timothy 5. 6.
having lived in pleasures, were dead while they lived: their Sun is gone down
at noone, Ier. 15. 9.
as the Prophet speaks, their old age is past, before it comes. They are the
same Ver. 12.
S Jude mentions, and calls corrupt trees, twice dead, and plucked up by the
roots. Honorable age ( Wisd. 4. ^, 9.
says the Wiseman) is not that which stands in length of time, nor that is
measured by number of years: but wisdom is the gray-haire to men, and an
answerable life is Old Age. Lib. 30, moral.
S. Gregory tells us that the Scripture calls not them Old-men, which are come
to ripeness by length of time, but them which by gravity become such. Non est
quod quemquam propter canos and rugas, etc. Thou see not old age ( De
brevitate vitae.
says Seneca) whenever thou beholdest gray-hayres and wrinckles: he that has
no more to prove him an old man, may be granted to have been long, but not to
have lived long* for the part of our life ill spent, is time and not life. Puer
centum ann^rum (says Epist. 40.
S Bernard) maledictus est. He that has lived an 100. years and is still a
child, is of a cursed condition. And the Poet to one unworthy to be called an
old man, Ovid. Fast. lib. 1.
Nequi^ia est quae ^e non finit esse senem, thou might be counted an
old man, were thou a good man. The cause of such men therefore I undertake not:
but the age I would free from the wrong done to it, and vindicate its right, by
prooving that in it a man may be (though always he is not so) more happy then
in any of the other ages.

I doubt I shall be thought to stay too long (if not to dwell in the porch of
my house) The parts of this Treatise.
therefore I will now show you the whole frame of this my building, and lead
you into the several rooms of it: and then hold you a while if I may, in the
view of them.

First, you shall have the frivolous complaints taken up many times by foolish
Old-men themselves: and the accusations brought in by others against this age,
with the answers thereunto, in the first Book, which consists of four
several Chapters.

The First prooves that Old Age is not disabled for ACTION. The Second answers
the objections touching its uncapablenesse of pleasures. The Third shows, that
it is not so weak an age as is thought. The Fourth and last Chapter makes
answer to the imputation of its being near to death.
Secondly, I offer to consideration, the dignity of this age, in respect of
sundry privileges, in the second Book.

The First Privilege is, its being the storehouse, or treasury to receive and
keep whatsoever good in the afore-going ages has been brought in. Chap. 1.
The Second, is opportunities and helps, by a long time afforded for a greater
measure of grace. Chap. 2. The Third, Honor above other ages. Chap. 3. The
Fourth, Vacancy for private devotion. Chap. 4. And Lastly you have the
conclusion, containing an exhortation, or admonition to the four capable ages.
Chap 5.
I trouble not my self nor my Reader, with any further minsings or
subdivisions: because it is but a Discourse.

A Preface to the first Book, containing accusations, and complaints against
OLD AGE.
TO complain grudgingly or dis Discontentednes at ones estate.
contentedly of the affl^ctions and miseries o^ this life, or to frame
accusations against the time in which they befall us, is the property of
ignorant and wicked men; of such as have no true knowledge either of God, or of
themselves and their own condition. When any querimonies of this kind sound
in our ears, we may seem to bear the voice of Cain, repining against God and
his just proceedings. Genesis 4. 13.
My punishment (says he) is greater then I am able to bear. Or of the
Israelites murmuring in the wilderness, by acc^sion of every want or distress
Cain should have complained of the sin he had committed: that is, of himself
who had so unnaturally, so treacherously, so wickedly slain his righteous
brother Abel. And the Israelites should have known and considered that their
wants and afflictions in the desert, were from the hand of their gracious and
loving God, of whose love and care of them, they had not long before so joyful
experience in their miraculous both deliverance out of Egypt, and preservation
at the red Sea: all which (had they not been more then unthankful) would have
been fresh in their remembrance. They should have considered likewise that
those afflictions were not punishments so much as fatherly corrections by which
they were to be schooled and nurtured; being as yet a rebellious people, unfit
and unworthy to become inhabitants in that happy land of Canaan. Both Cain (I
say) and that people should have turned Complaints should be against ones*
self.
their complaints and accusations against themselves. And so all men, of what
age soever, when the infirmities of this miserable life lie heavy upon them
should look back to the first punishment of the first transgression. In the
sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, etc. And again, Dust thou art,
etc. And also to their inbred corruption and manifold actual sins they should
have had an eye, because they had deserved the afflictions of which they
complained, as they are punishments, and did necessarily require them as
fatherly chastisements.

And this one consideration might stop the mouths of those complayners,
whether they be such as before they come to this age (having studied for some
exceptions against it) fall into a base account of it; or Old Men themselves,
unworthily so called, which are ever whining and complaining of their onus
Aetna gravius (so they term it) a burden forsooth tha, lies heavier then the
hill Aetna upon their shoulders: as if the multitude of years were the cause
of al^ miseries.

But let them go on, both the one sort and the other, and not spare any one of
the imputation^* wherewith commonly they load this age, which i^ the end or
period o^ man's pilgrimage; that (...) we may see whether there be any soundness
(...) truth or reason in them.

Vindiciae Senectutis, OR, A PLEA FOR OLD AGE.
BOOK I.
CHAPTER I. Which conteynes the first imputation, and the answer thereunto.
THey disable this age 1. Complaint. Old Age makes unfit for employment.
first for employment in the necessary affairs of this life: as if men far
grown in years, were altogether unprofitable both in respect of God and men.
And is it so? are we in Answ.
Old Age quite worn out and good 1. Debaushnesse of youth causes it.
for nothing? certainly when any fall into such a debaushnesse, they may thank
their younger years for it. For the proverb is true, Erigere durum est, qui
cadit juvenis, senem. A hard thing it is to make him stand firm in Old Age
that fell in youth. Quis ullam spem ullius boni habebit in eo, cujus primum
tempus aetatis fuerit ad omnes libidines divulgatum. Who ( Cic ad Senatum post
reditum.
says one) can have hope of any good in him, whose first years have been
spent in all manner of lusts and luxury? Senes in melius mutari ab inolita
vitiorum consuetudine, difficilimum est, (says De ordine vitae.
S. Bernard.) Hard it is, Old-men after a long continued custom in
viciousness, to be reformed. The young-mans intemperance must bear the blame
of his deficiency when he is in years. His idleness in youth, and wast of
employment then, in honest and profitable courses, is the cause of his
inability for action when he is aged. I except here the deficiency 2. Many
things which debilitat^ old age, do the like to youth.
that comes by sickness, or any other accident, which may and does enfeeble
the youngest and ablest body, as we see by daily experience. But if it stand
thus, why is Old Age blamed for that which younger years bring upon it?

Howbeit we here stand upon ^. Elder years best fitted for best imployme^ts.
our denial, and doubt not to say that elder years are best fitted for the
greatest and most important employments, and that when the former ages are
brought into comparison with this, it may be truly said, Euri^ in Androm.
(...), An Eagles old age is better then the youth of a Lark. And to this
purpose one says more plainly, multis juvenibus antestat senex, cui men's
adest generosa. An Old Man of a generous disposition, is to be preferred
before many youngmen.

If we should deny this, experience Great things done by old-men.
in sundry examples would confute us. The examples (I say) of not a few
worthies, who in extreme age, either by their natural constitution, or by
their sobriety and temperance in the former part of their life, or by Gods hand
and special working in them, have been fit and able to manage great matters.
Deuteronomy. 34 7.
Moses 1. Moses.
lived to 120. and then his eye was not dim, nor his natural strength
abated, and how wise, valiant, and industrious a captain was he ^o that
people? how faithful also to God in a service so difficult, that when he
considered the weight of it, and cast his eye from it to himself, he drew
back, as we know: Exodus 3. 11.
Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh, etc. Behold him in the 31, and 32.
Chapters of Deutrenomie, how he carries himself toward Joshua, in putting
courage into him, chap. ^1. verse. 7, 8. and toward the Priests and Elders,
Ibid. v. 9, etc. toward the whole people also throughout both the Chapters,
and ye shall find him, even then, immediately before his death, extraordinarily
strong, active, and every way able for that great service. Josh 24.
Joshua died at 110. and 2 Joshua.
immediately before how did he bestir him, in that his farewellspeech, to
settle the people in a resolution to serve the Lord, to for sake the false
gods, and to knit their hearts to God. Josh. 14. 10, 11. 4. Cyrus.
Caleb 3 Caleb
at 85. was as able both for war and government as when he was but of 40.
years. Cyrus lived to a great age: yet when he died, in his last words he
professed that he felt himself at that time no weaker then in his youth. It is
said of Agesilaus, that being extremely ^. Agesilaus.
old, he was seen in winter to walk barefoot, and without his garment, that
he might be a pattern of patience to the young men. Gorgius Leontinus that
had ^. Gorgius Leontinus.
Isocrates, and many others of rare wit for his scholars, being asked when he
was aged 107. why he would live so long; answered, Quia nihil habeo, quod
senectutem accusem: because (said he) I have nothing whereof to accuse Oldage
of, etc. Plin lib. 7 cap 48.
Fabius Maximus we 7* Fabius Maximus.
read, that being very old, he quit himself in war, as when he was young:
and that he was Augur 62. years, being of ripe age when he entered that office.
Isocrates was 8. Isocrates 9. Plato.
of 94. when he wrote that ^anathenaicum, and lived after it 5 years. Plato at
81. dyed with his pen in his hand. Sophocles 10 Sophocles.
wrote tragedies in his dotage, if his sons might have been believed.
Massarissa the King of 11. Massanissa.
Numidia, at 90. went barefoot and covered not his head for any rain or cold.
We may not pass by that worthy Patron of Old Age CATO MAYOR. Pliny says of
12. Cato Major.
him, that in his last days he was optimus Orator, optimus Senator, optimus
Imperator. A most eloquent Orator, a most wise Senator and a most valiant and
complete General, touching whom also, it is a strong proof that he had an
able body, and was really industrious in Old Age, in that even then he learned
the Greek tongue, that most copious and hard language. A tedious task for such
men: children being for this more apt, both because they may be forced to it
by discipline, and in regard of their flexiblenesse for pronuntiation. Whence
is that proverb, senis mutare mores, noting a difficulty if not an
impossibility of bringing Old-men to the childs yoke. In all these examples,
studiorum agitatio, vitae aequalis fuit: that to which their studies had for
many years been accustomed and framed, went along with them to their lives
end. Even as the course of waters in rivers or streams: Rusticu^ expectat dum
deflui^ am^is, at ille labitur, etc Horat. Epist. lib. 1
the simple rustic that beholds them gliding along, conceives that the
channel will soon be dried up, which notwithstanding holds on in its wonted
course. So some ignorants when men are grown old, suppose they have spent
their store, and that all is at an end with them, but they are deceived. For by
long use the agitation of their wits, studies and actions, becomes natural to
them, so that the current cannot be stopped.

But for the further manifesting of this point, it would be considered, what
the works are in which men may profitably be employed in this life. We will
take it as granted, that they are either public or private. Let us look into
them: but first in the general.

We may not think that these Old-mens abilities in the graces of the mind.
affairs are managed by bodily strength and agility ( Prove. 10. 29.
the youngmans glory) so much as by the virtues and graces of the mind, the
crown of elder years. An Old Man sees better a far off then a younger. So
by the inward eyes of his mind, he reaches further then the other, both
backward through experience, and forward by providence and forecast.

What shall we think; is the Abilities of the mind, the best.
body made of the dust of the earth, and adjudged thither to return, of
greater use and ability then that immortal substance, and far better part of
man, the soul? that The souls excellency
soul by which the body (before but as a livelesse statue or image) received
life, when by the Spirit of God it was breathed into it: through which also man
became the principal living creature, being furnished not only with life, but
sense and reason, and with all the indowments that might make him like to his
Creator? that soul, the loss whereof our Savior tells us can no way be
recompensed? the soul which Physicians define to be principium and causa
functionum viventis corporis: the original and cause of the functions or
offices of the living body? Certainly the body to the mind is but a mere
instrument, no more then the axe or the hammer to the carpenter.

Is want of bodily strength any Abilities of the body common to wicked and to
beasts.
great disparagement? why, God gives this strength often to the wicked whom he
regards not, and many times more then to his dear children. Yea, many brute
beasts, as the Lion, Heart, Elephant, Bull, Camel and some others, go far
beyond men in this gift. Homil. ad pop 40. tom. 4.
Chrysostom therefore expostulates with such as are proud of their bodily
strength in this manner. Art thou strong and lifted up in regard thereof? I
tell thee that the thing whereof thou vauntest is base: for the Lion is bolder
then thou, and the Bore stronger: yea, robbers, thieves, and ruffians, and
thine own servants do herein excel thee, and do thou then count this a
thing so much to be esteemed? And as for agility and swiftness, were thou as
nimble as Asael, yet the Dear and Hare would out-runne thee.

God has made us men: and Man's glory wherein it consists.
therefore extreme folly it is to boast of that, or to make any great account
of it, wherein the very beasts go before us. God has made us Christians: let
us know our place and condition, and not think that the want of such things as
the Heathen have excelled us in, does disable us to do our Creator service in
whatsoever calling. Let us observe the counsel Cic de Senect.
of him that advises us, when we have this bodily strength, to use it: when it
leaves us, to count it no great want or loss.

Arist in fine Physiog.
The Philosopher tells us that great and strong men ordinarily have less wit
and wisdom then others, in which respect we may with Themistocles, liken many
of them to the sword-fish, which has a weapon but is heartlesse, they prove
many times no better then that fool of Salomons, in whose hand there is a
price, but his heart fails him. Great strength when wisdom and grace is not
answerable, breeds such a spirit in men as was in Lamech, Nimrod, Goliath, the
An^chims, and the like giants. It is not the vast bigness or largeness of the
body that makes a man complete, but the largeness of his heart, as in Solomon,
1 Kings. 4. 29.

All action consists not in the Nor all, nor the best actions in bodily
strength.
strength of the body: no, nor the greatest and most profitable. He that in a
ship sits at the stern, not mooving out of his place, though his bodily pains
be not so great as of others who labor in it: yet does he alone more for the
bringing of all safe to the haven, then all the rest. This therefore must be
held as a sure Maxim, Most good done by the mind.
that more good is done by the endeavors of the mind, then by bodily force.
Prove. 11 14.
Where no counsel is (says the wiseman) the people fall, but where many
counselors are there is health. And again, Prove. 15. 2^.
without counsel thoughts come to naught: but in the multitude of counselors
there is steadfastness.

Experience is said to be stultorum Experience a good teacher.
magistra, and so indeed it is: for it makes them wise who before were nothing
less. Arist. lib 1. Metaph.
Art teaches only generals: experience informs us in particulars: which is
the best and surest knowledge. Ovid. Metamorph.
Now the Poet tells us, -- ser is venit usus ab annis, it is multitude of
years that makes a man experimentally and truly Old Age has the best
opportunities for wisdom
wise.

Here it will be objected: Is all counsel then locked up in the breast of the
aged? may not young men be able to give advice I answer, Yes, but we speak
comparatively, and say only, that Old-men have better means and opportunities
for it then the younger, and yet the Philosopher doubts not to aver, that a
young man wanting time and experience, cannot be wise, so wise as I understand
it. But further I answer, that my speech tends not to the disabling of any:
only it would free the age I treat of, from disgrace and contempt. Howsoever
there is an instance that will extort from us a confession of thus much at the
least, that when the counsel of the aged has been rejected, and the advice
of younger men preferred before it, the success has been very unhappy. It
cost (we know) Rehoboam far the greater part of his Kingdom. Learning
increases by age.


But again, some man hap'ly will say that the Old-mans weakness and
insufficiency seizes not only on the body, but possesses the mind also. I
answer, first In Epist. ad Nepot.
with St. Ierom, that Old-men instructed in youth in the liberal arts, and
exercised in the meditation of the law of God day and night, thereby become
through their age, more learned; by use, more settled; by succession of time,
more wise: and do reap most sweet fruit by their long continued studies.
Discipulus est prior^s posterior dies, says Seneca, the following day ever
learnes of the precedent. Nunquam ita quisquam subducta ratione ad vitam fuit,
quin, etc. Teren. in Pharm.
Never (says the Comic) was any man so exact in resolving of the frame and
course of his life; whom either new occurrences, or age, or experience did not
assist with supply, and add somewhat for the profiting of his judgment, and
resolution, minding him of that whereby he perceaved that what he thought he
knew, he knew not, and what he held to be his best way, after trial he
rejected as not so good. Solon.
Another says of himself, (...), as I grow in years I grow in learning
Defects of Old Age most in the body*
and knowledge. Again I answer, that where the defects and failings of Old Age
are fully and elegantly set forth, as Eccles. 12. there is mention only of
bodily defects: or if of the minds infirmities also, they are such as proceed
from the deficiency of the bodily instruments, which (I confess) decay by
Old Age: so as neither the inward nor outward senses can do their office so
well as otherwise they might, but all this is to be imputed to the body, and
not to the mind, and the young man in that place stands charged with it, as
with the effects and fruits of his wild and unbridled carriage. Epist. 26.
Seneca said of himself, non sentio in animo aetatis injuriam, to my mind my
years are no prejudice at all.

Come we now to the particular objects of men's endeavors before mentioned. In
the first place we will consider of public affairs, and they are either
civil in the commonweal, or ecclesiastical in the body spiritual, or
Church of God.

Public civil affairs may be distinguished by the times of peace and war.
When there is peace, questionless the gown Old-men of best use in peace.
(which best fits the Old-mans back) is preferred before the sword, shield, or
helmet, as of greater use for that time. Peace and prosperity, if
extraordinarily wise governors be not as a strong bit to hold men in, is the
mother and nurse of innumerable vices. Sodom and Gomorrah are special
instances. In peace therefore for the repressing of infinite enormities, the
greatest wisdom is required, and where will that be found if not in the aged,
in the grave Senate, which has its denomination a senibus, from Oldmen? The
sagest and wisest among the Israelites were styled, the Elders of the children
of Israel. The 24. which sat round about the throne, ( Rev. 4 4.) were
Elders, and upon that place Perer.
one says, that whereas governing, instructing, judging, counselling are
necessary in every society; Old-men are the fittest for the reverence of their
age, ripeness of judgment, gravity of carriage, experience in many things,
and not least, for their freedom from perturbations, and quietness of their
minds; for the Old Man has overcome his carnal lusts, and triumphs over
them, says De legate. ad Came.
Philo, and so is crowned as a conqueror, Prove. 16. 31. The 28. likewise, of
which Lycurgus made choice for his assessors, were Old-men: Pl^tar. in vita
Licur.
Aristotle tells us that for the counsell-table and seat of judgment, wisdom
and experience are necessary, and that these are to be found chiefly in
Old-men. lib. 7. polit. cap. 7. In the time of peace therefore that must be
admitted, cedant armatoga. Now touching Old-men best Generals in wa^re.
war, It may be thought that young men who are full of hot blood, and have
quick and stirring spirits, are the only actors for this employment, and to
withstand the enemy. But neither may this be granted, unless we think that
Caius Minutius was a better General then Qu. Fabius Maximus, whom old Ennius
honors with this encomium, unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem: that he
was the man, who by his wise delays restored Rome to Rome near lo^t by the
other rash, heady, young captain. Or that he was out, who being asked whom he
counted the best leader of his time, said, Pyrrhus were he old-enough. Or that
Paulus Aemilius knew not what he said and did; who when he had with labor and
difficulty (through which his forces grew weary and weak) broken in upon his
enemies that were strongly encamped; and was wished by Nasica presently to set
upon them; made answer, that so hap'ly he should, were he of his age and
years, a man so young.

What is the number of armed men, be they never so strong and Old-men fittest
cou^sellers for war.
valorous, when they are not governed by wise and stayed Captains? or when the
table of counselors of war does not before hand, and after, during the
service, upon due consideration of all circumstances of such a business,
advise and direct what is to be done? What is it (I say) but as a great flock
of sheep without a wise and watchful shepherd, pursued and worried by
woolves ready to devour them? Even like to that which befell 1 King. 22.
King Ahab and all Israel, when having refused the wise counsel of Michaia,
he would needs be swayed by the false advice of the false Prophets, touching
his going to Ramoth Gilead? They were as the Prophet had foreseen, and
foretold they should be, scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that had no
shepherd.

Thus in the civil state: how in the Church of God? Here the Ministers of the
Gospel are the worke-men, the men of ACTION. Touching whom it is to be
considered, both what is required of them in their place and function, and also
how far Oldage disables them for it.

The task or work, which indeed The Ministers work a weighty task.
is of great weight, and of no less difficulty, is enjoined them by their
Master, the Heb. 13. 20.
great shepherd of the sheep, the LORD JESUS: and therefore his Word must be
the rule of it. Now the office or charge is set forth unto us in Scripture, by
diverse similitudes: for the Minister is compared, Ministers compared 1 To
Shepherds.


First, to a Shepherd, and his work to feeding. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, etc.
So Ioh. 21. 15.
our Savior to Peter: Love thou me more then these? and again, Love thou
me, etc. and the third time, Love thou me more then these? then, feed,
feed, feed. He had denied his Master three several times: thrice therefore he
is questioned for it. And three strict commands of feeding he receives, by
obedience whereunto, he must prove himself a true convert. As Luke 22 32.
in another place, when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren, namely by
feeding, that must be an evidence both of his repentance, and thankfulness
also to Christ, who by prayer had stengthened his faith.

Secondly 1 Cor. 3.
to a Builder, that a To Builders.
must lay CHRIST JESUS for the foundation, and build upon it gold, silver, and
precious stones, not wood, hay, stubble.

Thirdly, to Ibid.
a Husbandman: 3 To Husbandmen
such an one as labors carefully, diligently, painefully Jer. 4.
to plow up the fallow-ground of men's hearts, and to sow good seed, not
corruptible, but the 1 Pet.* 1. 23.
incorruptible seed, the seed of regeneration, which lives and abides for ever:
whereas all flesh is grass which withers and fades away.

Fourthly, to Heb. 13. and Ezech. 33.
a Watchman 4 To Watchmen.
that must give account; whose soul (tremble we at it) lies in pawn for the
souls of the people.

Fifthly, to a Steward, Mat. 24.
a faithful 5 To Stewards.
and wise steward, whom his Lord makes ruler over his household, to give them
meat in due season: to divide the word aright, and to give every one his
portion.

Sixthly, to an Ambassador for 6 His Ambassadors. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Christ, a most honorable service: a service of greatest consequence to the
state of the Kingdom of Heaven.

To be a Shepherd of CHRIST'S flock, a Builder of HIS house or Temple: a
Husbandman in HIS husbandry, a Watchman to HIS people, a Steward to HIS family,
an Ambassador to HIM; it is indeed a great and a hard task: and (...)? Who is
sufficient for these things? Not the Old Man, will some say: he is too weak
to bear so great a burden. True it Old-men not so fit for the pulpit as young.
is that in Suggesto, in the pulpit ordinarily he may not stand in comparison
with younger men, whose sides are strong and able for a Boanerges, a son of
thunder, which name (says St. Nazianzen) was given to James and John (...),
for the strength of their voice. Yet we read of Nestor, old Nestor, that from
his mouth, even in extreme age, melle dulcior fluebat oration: that his speech
even then was sweet, pleasing and delightful. It is indeed the Oldmans
decorum, his grace, to speak according to his temper, softly, and with a low
voice. His speech must be grave and short, ( in Psalm. 113.
says St. Austin) grave (as I understand it) because he speaks with
authority: and short for want of strength and breath. Yet may he do it, if not
with Nestor, sweetly, profitably at the least.

The chief part of the Ministerial Preaching the chiefest Ministerial
function.
office (I grant) is preaching by voice, by means whereof, more ordinarily
faith is wrought, and men brought into Christ's sheepe-fold: for faith is by
hearing. Yet it will not be denied, that the Word of God is taught also, yea
and preached, by Preaching by pen.
the pen; else why did Moses write those five books? and the Prophets write
and publish their prophecies? and the Apostles pen and send abroad to the
Churches, (which by voice in presence they had planted) the history of the
Gospel and their Epistles? and after them the Bishops and inferior Pastors of
the primitive Church their writings, of which (we know) the Church of God has
had, and still has so great and profitable use. It may The pen goes fur there
then the voice.
be truly said, that books have wings, and fly abroad into all parts of the
world, whereas the sound of the voice reaches not far. And it is well
observed, that the translating of the oldTestament into greek by the
Septuagint, was a written preaching, which prepared the way for Christ among
the Gentiles, as the vocal preaching of John Baptist (who was the voice of one
crying in the wilderness) did among the Jews.

Now for this kind of preaching, Old Age fittest for writing.
that is, for writing, Oldage is the fittest and ablest part of man's life.

Tell me not what thou have heard and read, and only so, but what after thy
hearing and reading, thou have often taken into thy deepest meditations, 1
These. 5
tried and found to be the truth, in this or that point; settled in thy
judgment; fixed in thy memory; embraced in thy affections; then, a long time
practiced in thy life and actions; and so made it to be truly What is true
learning.
thine own. This, and only this, is rightly called learning: and for it the
Ancients will be best provided, by reason of the long time they have had to
profit their meditations and writings, by their continual private corrections
and retractations: which are less offensive then the public: and so they
will be the ablest men for keeping the Press in work, observing the rule of
the Poet, Horat. in Art Poet.
Novumque prematur in annum.

As therefore the Apostle will Old-Men bel^ furnished for writing.
have Timothies youth to be no disrespect to his Ministry: so must younger men
be entreated not to rob 1 Timothy 5 17.
the Elder of his due honor, when he labors in the word and doctrine, though
not by a vocal preaching so much, (by reason of bodily weakness) yet by
writing, for which he may be better furnished then others, even by his age. For
having in his younger days been industrious, taught by the Pismire (to which
Solomon sends us) by his former labors to provide for the winter of his life;
and learned of the Be, to store up the word, sweeter then honey, and so become
a Scribe, instructed to the Kingdom of God; he brings forth of his treasury
things both new and old. If he have been idle in his youth, it is youths
fault, not to be imputed to Old Age. For Eccles. 25.
how can thou find that when thou art old, which in youth thou laidest not up?

Hitherto it has been prooved that elder years disable not for public
service, either in Church or Commonweal. Now try we whether the like may be
made good, touching private businesses. They are domestical or personal.
Old Age fittest for ordering families.


First of affairs in the family. We may not think that the house thrives and
prospers only or chiefly, by the toyling labors of such as in it have
stronger bodies, and do more servile works. The Masters knowledge for ordering
every business: his eye for oversight: his authority for holding every one to
his task: his wisdom and discretion in governing all that are under him: his
assiduity in prayer, for a blessing upon all their endeavors: and lastly, his
instructing them (according to his measure of knowledge,) that they may
understand themselves, and do what is required in their several places; first
in obedience to God their great master, that has called them thereunto, and
then also to him whom God has set over them: that they may do their work
Ephesians. 6. 5, 6.
not with eye-service, but in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, and as the
servants of Christ. These things are cheefely conducing to the welfare and
prosperity of a family.

When these duties of the Pater-familias What best builds up an house.
are omitted, God is excluded from building the house: and so that house has a
miserable downe-fall, Psalm. 107. 1.
they all labor in vain that build it. And contrariwise, these things duly
performed, are the most necessary and strongest pillars to uphold the family.
Now for these Old Age is ever the fittest, in regard of its endowments before
mentioned.

And here, because ( Cic. in Parad.
as one says) it is adull and livelesse discourse that wants examples for
proof of what is said; let us see how this point may be exemplified.

Abraham was 140. years old, Old men worthy Governors of families. as, 1
Abraham.
when he took that wise and religious course, for the placing of his son
Isaac in marriage, the most important business of a family: (which wrought on
Rebeckah, that holy passion expressed, Genesis 27. 46. I am weary of my life for
the daughters of Heth: If Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, like
these of the daughters of the land, what avails it me 2 Isaac.
that I live?) In like manner Isaac when he was old, and his eyes dim with
age, provided (in this kind) for that his son Jacob. In Jacob, the father of
12. 3 Iaacob.
sons, we shall see a worthy example of an able Pater-familias, even then
when years were multiplied upon him; if we behold him, Genesis 48. and 49.
Chapters, how when his son Joseph was come to do the duty of an obedient and
gracious son, to his sick, and now dying father; he rouses himself up in
his bed, takes strength both of body and mind, and in that strength (as a
Prophet) foretells, what would be the lot or condition of every one of his
children, even to the coming of Christ: transferring the right of the first
borne, both touching the inheriting the double portion in Canaan (otherwise due
to his eldest son Ruben, Deuteronomy. 21. The cause whereof is expressed, Chap. 49. v.
14.) to the two sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasses: and also concerning the
dignity (the other part of the first-bornes right) to Judah, in whose tribe the
authority and power for government was constantly to remain, to the coming
of Shiloh: so of the rest as in these two Chapters. 4. David.
David is another example, he was old, and a dying man, when he gave order for
the settling of Solomon in the kingdom: a most important business (not
politic only but domesticke) managed by him with great wisdom and
courage, as we may observe ^ Kings. cap. ^. and 2.
in every circumstance of it: his age was no let. One example more: Appius
Claudius caecus being of a 5. Appius Claudius.
great age and blind also, most carefully and wisely governed a numerous
family, consisting of 4. sons, and 5. daughters, and many servants, having
also not a few clients belonging to him.

And now what shall we say to Man cast ing up his account a weighty work.
men's personal affairs? are Oldmen unable to manage them? I pass by other
particulars of less importance. What think we of that greatest and weightiest
work, that any man can take in hand in this life? our often, or rather daily
casting up our account, and making our peace with God? that unum necessarium,
the thing that chalengeth our most earnest and most attentive thoughts and
studies? the thing to which our whole life is destined? the business which who
so neglects, all his labors under the sun will profit him nothing at all?
shall we, can we thinkethat the servants of God (for of such Old-men we Old-Men
fittest to cast up their account.
speak all this while) when they are grown in years, and have served him
long, do wax worse and worse by their long continuance in their faithful
service? they in whom the graces of Gods Spirit have had their increase year
after year for a long space? that they, after all this, shall be the weakest
and most insufficient for this work of their account? does God cast off an old
servant God casts not off an old serva^t.
that has been faithful unto him, or extinguish that fire of grace, which
has been so long in kindling and increasing? No, no; to such an one he will
say, Mat. 25.
well done good servant and faithful, etc. certainly whom God once loves, he
loves to the end: and his gifts are without repentance.

For this, David prays Psalm. 71. with faith and assurance of obtaining. v. 9.
Cast me not off in the time of old age: forsake me not when my strength
fails, and after, v. 18. Now also when I am grayheaded, forsake me not. Gods
promises best apprehen ded by old men.


Again, touching our apprehension of Gods promises, which concern our
salvation, is it not most eager and ardent, most hungring and thirsting in
elder years, when the good fight is fought, and the race near run? yes
certainly. We may have an eye before to the promised inheritance, and to the
recompense of reward with Moses: but then, in Old Age, obuijs ul^is, with
reached forth arms we embrace it. Then, Come Lord Jesus: then our hand is on
it, as it were: then we say with aged St. Paul, Now hence forth is laid up for
me, etc. Then we earnestly endeavor to that which is before us, and more
near us, pressing hard toward the mark: then with old Simeon, we resign our
selves to God, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart, Old-mens motion to
heaven the strongest.
etc. The motion of each body is according to the quality of it: things that
are heavy (we know) are carried downwards: that which is light, soars
upwards, so the unregenerate, the natural man, being earthly, and of a lumpish
quality, sinkes down still lower and lower, even toward hell, till he is
converted, and altered in his condition and inclination; and the nearer he is
to Acts. 1. 24.
his own place, the faster he moves, if grace prevent it not. So, on the
contrary, the man that is spiritual, being also heavenly, moves toward
heaven, and therefore the nearer he approaches to that his place (as in
Old Age) the stronger will his motion be. An Old Man knows that he is at the
end of the day, for which he is hired to work in Gods vineyard: and therefore
the time of his work being near upon expiring, he will bestirre him, least
death as the night overtake him, and put an end to his day or life, before his
work be at an end; he will be careful to observe that wise and necessary
precept. Eccles. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power: for there
is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou go. He will labor ( Col. 4. 5.
as the Apostle exhorts) to redeem the precious time formerly neglected and
lost, (as who loses not much) and thus his age is so far from disabling him
for this work, as that it is to him a special premonitor, that does aurem
vellere, and call upon him to be prepared for his dissolution; and who then
would complain of so helpful acompanion, or be weary of him, or accuse him of
inability.

And here now this also must be considered, that every age or Every age has
proper imployme^ts
part of man's life has, as gifts different from the rest, so likewise a
different calling and employment, or task. There is one of childhood, another
of youth, a third of ripe age: and Old Age differs from them all. It were
unreasonable to expect that of a child, which is required of young men: or that
of young men which belongs to a greater growth: so neither must every thing
that any of the former should do, be required of Old-men. God lays no more on
any age then what its able to bear.


To grow toward a conclusion of this point; I say further, if we grant that
some inability for action is to be found in this age, yet it will thence
receive no disgrace: nor has any man in years cause to complain in that
behalf. For God is not to us as Pharaoh to the Israelites: he is no exactor,
he lays no more upon any man or age, then he inables him to bear: except it
be in case of his disabling himself, by loosing his talent. Numb. 8 25.
God was so indulgent to the Levites, as that their corporal and painful
service about the Tabernacle, should determine and be no more required, after
the age of 50. When Moses was old, Joshua was appointed to be for him. When Eli
grew aged and weak, God provided that Samuel should supply his defects. St.
Austin when he was in years, gave over his Bishopric to Evadius. Senec. de
brev. vitae. cap. 20.
It was a law among the Romans, that after 50. none should be pressed to the
wars: whence was that verse, s Miles depositis annosus secubat armis. Neither
might any be forced to be of the Senate of Rome, after 60.

Solve scnescentem mature sanus ^ Proper ^ 25.
equum, ne

Peccet ad extremum ridendus and ilia ducat;

was the Poets suit to his Mecenas, and his reason for it.

If in youth and ripe age we have been diligent and painful, there is not
much left, or in our hand to be done, when we are old. If there be much
behind, let us blame the former part of our life, not old age.

A common, too common a Time commonly too much misspent.
thing it is for men to spend their strength, ( Senec ad Lucil. Epist. 1.
as one says) nihil agendo, or aliud agendo, or male agendo: in doing nothing
at all, or things impertinent, or things that are evil. These things men
suffer, ( Senec de brev. vitae. c. 3.
says the same Author) to wear out their life, they divide it among them. Not
so (says he) in their goods, or lands: they are prodigal of their time, in
which only covetousness is lawful (because time is precious) but in other
things, where it is forbidden, they are extremely covetous.

If then Old-men be dispensed Quiet acceptable to old age
with, they may rejoice at it, and comfort themselves in their manumission: and
sit down well contented, that being now emeritis stipendijs and rude donati,
they are freed from such labors and burdens as are too heavy for them. Why
should they be displeased at this so good a lot? Senectut is sors est otium and
quies. It is the lot of old age (says one) that he has leave to live quietly
and be at rest.

Man's life is a pilgrimage, and will not the Pilgrim be glad of rest when he is
weary? Francisc. Petrar.
Amens viator est, qui labor viae exhaustus, velit ad initium remeare* It were
madness in the Traveller, that is spent with the labor of his journey, to
desire to be where at the first he was. Our life is also a race: and how does
he that runs it rejoice when he is at the end of it?

A wonder it is that any man Loss of time worse in younger then in elder
years.
should complain of ease, or blame his age for freeing him of the toiles of
this life. And, as for its being an occasion of contempt, in the eyes of
younger folk; let them know, that one hour lost, or ill spent by them, while
they are in their full strength, and not dispensed with for the works of their
callings (as none are) is more disgrace to them, and shall also have a heavier
account, then diverse years of rest in Old Age, when men may truly say, --
DEVS nobis haec otia fecit: God has given us leave to be at rest.

The II. Chapter. Containing the second supposed disgrace, cast upon OLD AGE
viz. Vncapablenesse of pleasures: and the answer.
FOr the full understanding of what shall be said in answer to this imputation;
something is to be premised concerning the nature, and diverse kinds of
pleasure.

First therefore to lay down a What pleasure ^
general and brief description of it: It is defined to be a lifting up of the
mind by the presence or hope of some good that is come unto us or may befall
us, an elevating (I say) of the mind: for as when any evil betides us or is
toward us, the mind is dejected and discomforted: so when the contrary, it is
contrarily affected. The object of pleasure is some Good is the object of
pleasure
good that accrewes unto us: and according to the difference of things termed
good, must pleasures be differenced and distinguished, for either they are
falsely, or they are truly so called. Falsely diverse ways. First when they
are good in show only and opinion: and then it is false pleasure that arises
from them, not unlike to that which was in Thrasilaus, who thought all False
pleasures
the ships that arrived at the haven, to be his, and received them with great
pleasure and rejoicing: that all (likewise) which set forth were his, which he
dismissed with a joyful expectation of a gainefull return: all the while
counting himself an happy man that was the owner of so great substance, if any
of the ships miscarried, he enquired not after them: if they returned safe, he
rejoiced. Thus was it with him in his frensy: and when he came to himself, he
professed that he never lived more sweetly then when he was in that error, for
he had much pleasure (though false) and no care or trouble at all.

Secondly, things may not rightly be called good, when they are not so good, as
they are esteemed. And they also yield a pleasure (at least in part) deceitful.

Lastly, things may be thought good (and alas, nothing more common) when they
are evil, and sinful pleasure taken in them must needs be the worst of all.

Now in every of these, Cit. 2. de finib.
it is truly said, and rightly judged to be a vicious rejoicing, when a man
thinks without ground, he has atteined to that which is good.

Touching the other* kind of good, which we said is the object of pleasure, to
wit, that which is truly and in its nature good, it is of two sorts: the one
worldly and corporal, the other heavenly and spiritual: and answerable are
the pleasures which come of them, either worldly or heavenly.

Concerning the worldly; Worldly pleasures
though often, through the abuse of them they become carnal and divelish, yet
in themselves they are good and lawful.

First, because they are as a cordial How worldly pleasures are good
that releeves the infirmities of our weak nature: or as an Inn after a long
and wearisome journey.

Secondly, they are the blessings of God to animate and encourage us to
obedience. Psalm 104 15.
God has given man bread to strengthen him, and wine to glad his heart.

Thirdly, they are approoved of God in Scripture. Eccles. 3. ^.
There is a time to laugh and to dance, as well as to weep and mourn. ^h. v.
5.
And the same Preacher tells us, that God answers man in the joy of his heart,
and this rejoicing is (as it were) the condiment of* Gods outward blessings,
without which such a blessing will cease to be a blessing. For what were it to
have children, riches, honors, and not to rejoice in them. Solomon confirms
this also when he says, there is no good in outward blessings, but for a man
to rejoice and do good in his life.

Fourthly, these pleasures are many times both the matter and occasion of
praising God. The matter, when a man beholding the things in which he delights,
as the aforesaid children, riches, etc. does for them give God praise.
Occasion, when we have used these pleasures so, as that thereby we come to the
service of God with fresher spirits, and more cherfulness.

Quest. But belong these pleasures Pleasures are good only to the faithful.
to all men alike?

Answ. No, ^ Tim 1. 4.
To the faithful alone they are sanctified: only Psalm. 32. 1^.
The upright in heart can rejoice, who can rejoice when God is angry? Isa 57.
21.
There is no peace to the wicked. As Iehu to Iehoram, how can there be peace so
long as, etc. So, how can there be true joy, so long as our sins stand
unremitted?

Now, in the next place, it will be needful that we show the great difference
between these two, corporal and spiritual pleasures and rejoicing.

First, the corporal are subject Differences be^wixt corporal and spiritual
pleasures.
to excess, whereby they become dangerous and hurtful to the body and soul:
but the spiritual cannot be immoderate: for they 1 In measure.
arise from heavenly contemplation. ^ In pedigree. Psalm 4. 6.


Another difference is, that they have a different pedigree: the one proceeding
from Gods special favor, the other from worldly things.

A third: when the corporal 3 In satisfaction.
nature is satisfied, those pleasures cease: as when men have abated their
hunger and thirst, meats and drinks afford no delight. Contrary-wise the
heavenly joys and pleasures remain and continue, the object of them being at
all times pleasing and delectable: and the subject which is the soul and
spirit of a man being always capable of them.

Fourthly, the sensual pleasures 4 In season.
are not at all times in season. There is a time when Eccle. 1.
to laughter we may say, thou art mad. As there is a time to laugh, so there
is a time to weep (Ibid) as namely when we humble our selves before God for
our sins, or when any calamity is either threatened, or inflicted. That's a time
to fast and pray and to afflict our souls: then no worldly pleasures may be
admitted: they are as poison to our humiliation. Then, Psa ^2* 5.
we must sow in tears, that after we may reap with joy. Then, 1 Cor. 9. ult.
the body must be kept under. Whence it is that the Luke 16.
Rich man's Epicurisme became the more odious and the greater sin, in that he
fared deliciously every day, he made no difference of times in his pleasures.
but the heavenly joys are not limited or excluded by any time. For even in the
greatest heaviness (which is the godly sorrow for sin) the soul of Gods
children partakes of joy and comfort; the Spirit of God, even then, yea and by
means of that sorrow and repentance, assuring us, and sealing up unto us the
forgiveness of our sins, it being promised to such a turning to the Lord,
from which assurance also arises peace with God and unutterable joy and
rejoicing in our hearts.

Fifthly, another difference between 5 In stablenesse.
them is in regard of the unstablenesse of the one, and the firmness of the
other. While the comedy lasts, the spectator laughs: but the play and his
pleasure end together. Contrariwise the spiritual Pro. 15. 15.
joy is a continual feast. Satan himself cannot rob the possessor of it, it
is settled upon him by the word of Christ, your joy shall not be taken from you.
6 In Purity.


Sixthly and lastly, in regard of purity. Worldly pleasures and delights have
always some mixture of bitterness, while a man feeds his conceit with
abundance of temporal things, his heart is fed upon by three devouring
vultures: much care in getting, more fear in keeping, and most grief in
loosing: and as for greatness (so greedily hunted after) it is ordinarily a
continual vexation; because of envy from inferiors, thwarting of competitors
and jealousies of Princes and such like. How many great men's hearts have burst
with the blasting frown of a Kings forehead? Nay sometimes the disrespect of
no very great one, marrs all, which is instanced in Haman.

Thus, by way of preface (overlong Spiritual pleasures most proper to old age.
I confess) I have laid the groundwork of my answer to the aforenamed
imputation, and now I ask whether of these two kinds of pleasures is it, the
want whereof they say is a disadvantage to Old Age. The heavenly? they will
not, they cannot say it. For who may be more replenisht with this joy then the
Old Man, in whom the grain of mustard seed has had so long time to take
root, and to grow up to a tree that reaches up even to Heaven, the seat of
everlasting joy and happiness? then he whose daily exercise it is to stand
knocking at the gates of Heaven, of his house and home, toward which he has
been long traveling, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
and for which he has fetched many a sigh and groan?

The other kind therefore of Want of corporal pleasure is no great
disadvantage.
joy or pleasure it is of which men (belike) are deprived by living long. And
of that what shall we now say? If we ask heathen Philosophers their opinion,
they The vanity of corporal pleasure
will tell us, that it is gross and brutish: both an inticement to vice and a
nourisher of it: that to bring pleasure into the company of virtues, is to set
a strumpet amongst chaste and honest Matrons: that to say it is our chief good,
is, vox pecudum, non hominum, to speak like brute beasts, not like men; that
the greater the pleasure, the more it remooves the mind from its seat and
state: that it is a flattering enemy: that with virtue it has no converse,
nothing at all to do: that it makes a man neither better, nor more
praiseworthy: that nature has given to man nothing more capital and deadly,
a greater plague or enemy: that no high or heavenly cogitation can consist with
it: that he is not to be counted a man, that would spend one whole day in such
pleasure: Cic 2. de finib.
that it more often leaves cause of repentance then of remembering it: Boet.
lib. 3. de consolat.
that the desire of it is full of anxiety and doubtful fear, but the saciety
of it, is repentance: Cic de oratore.
that to it loathing is the nearest neighbor. Senec* Epist. 28.
What enemies (says one) can bring upon a man so great reproach and shame, as
comes to some men by their own rejoicing? There is (says the same Author) a
sort of men that drown themselves in pleasure, without which they cannot be,
when once they are accustomed to it: herein most miserable that they are come
to this pass, that the things which before were superfluous and needless, are
now ^o them made necessary, and so they serve their pleasures, enjoy them not.
Idem Epist. 51.
In another place he tells us, that pleasures embrace us to the end they may
stifle and strangle us: where also he gives us an instance in Ha^niball, so
hardy and patient, that he endured the snow, ice and extreme coldness, and
also the dangerous passage on the Alps: but yet the pleasures of Campania
enervated and overcame him. So what he had gained by war, he lost by
pleasures. Ethic. lib. 7. c. 11.
Aristotle will not have such pleasures to be numbered among things that are
good, because they are not the subject of any art.

This account the Heathen made of this kind of joy; the vanity and evil
whereof they had learned only by experience, and the light of nature, but we
have besides these the Scripture for our warrant; and thence we are taught,
that such as live in pleasures, are dead while they live, and that Solomon has
long time passed his sentence on them, that they are vanity. Solomon, who had
them in great abundance, who professes of himself, that whatsoever his eyes
desired, he held it not from them, that he gave himself to wine, builded
houses, etc. as Eccle. 2. and when he had sucked from these delights what
possibly they might afford, in the end he is forced to confess, that they are
all vanity and vexation.

This world is like to an infectious house, in which a man is forced Corporal
pleasures dangerous
to dwell, he has no remedy: and such pleasures are a part of the world, Gal.
6. 14
and must therefore be crucified to us and we to them. They are the Devils
baits which he lays to catch us. Hamus Diaboli trahens ad perniciem, Adsanct
Bapt.
says S. Basil, they are the kisses of an enemy, pleasant indeed, but most
dangerous and hurtful: Pro. 27 6.
and therefore the wounds of a lover are to be preferred before them, they are
Iudas-like kisses, that watch their time to betray us.

Voluptuous living is as Luke 8. 14.
thorns that choke the Seed of the Word. It is possible and too common a thing
that a man addicted much to pleasures ^ Tim* 3. 4.
should love them more then God, to most men they are Heb. 11. 15.
the pleasures of sin.

Here happily it will be objected, that what has been said in this Corporal
pleasures can hardly be well u^ sed.
point, makes not simply against pleasures; but pleasures abused. In answer
whereto I say, first that our corrupt nature is ever ready to abuse them: and
therefore better and safer it is to want, then to have them. Can we so mistake
our selves as not to know either who or where we are? Our own weakness or
inability to stand upright? or the ground on which we are while given to
pleasures how slippery it is? Our first Parents when they were in their full
strength fell from their innocence, in that Garden of delights: and shall we
then be confident and secure in this our weak constitution of body and
sinful disposition of soul, and think our selves free from the danger of
earthly pleasures? If by that their (...) a world of calamities fell upon them
and their posterity; what may we fear will come on us, when to the misery of
Adams abusing pleasures, that is added which is due to our like sin! It will
be misery upon misery, even an heap or pile of evils. The tempter was so
flesht by the foil he gave, and the victory he got in Paradise, that he
presumed to lay the same bait for our Savior himself in the wilderness; and
though there he was repulst, yet by the same temptation he has since, and
does continually prevail more or less with all the sons of Adam.

God usually lays afflictions Afflictions to weane us from pleasures.
upon his dearest children, giving them the sour of this world, rather then
the sweet: and it is to weane them from the tickling delights of bodily
pleasures. Certainly God would not put them, whom he so entirely loves, to
purchase their freedom from these things at so dear a rate, were they not
exceedingly dangerous unto them.

But the Apostle makes a direct Lawful things in danger let go.
answer to this objection; 1 Cor. 6. 12.
All things are lawful, etc. He stands there stoutly upon his privilege, his
dominion and power which he has received from God over all these lawful
things; and resolves with an eye to God first, and then also to his own
dignity and safety, not to be so uncircumspect, so unthankefull to his Lord and
creator, or so base in respect of himself, as to lay down this great
prerogative, and to become a servant to his servants, he will not embrace and
hug that with danger of dishonouring God, and wronging himself, which he has
received to a quite contrary end.

When a man is on the sea in great danger, he will cast out all the wares be
they never so rich, for the safety of his life, so would we in this case, were
we as sensible of the souls danger, as of the bodies.

It is our Saviors both counsel and charge in case of offenses, to be
contented to part with our right hand and right eye, which we know of how great
and necessary use they are to us.

A shame it were for Christians to be put to school to heathen men, especially
to the vainest and idlest of them, the Poets; yet they may teach us in this
point of pleasures. For they plainly show us in the fable of the Sirens (what
we are not apt of our selves to believe) how dangerous a thing it is to be
within the reach of these deceitful, enticing, and bewitching delights.

There are two most gross and Drunkenness and uncleanness seldom severed
hateful sins which reign in the world; drunkenness, and whoredom. The
former is an incentive to the latter. Nunquam ego ebrium castum putabo. I will
never count him chaste ( In Tit. c. 1.
says St. Ierom) that is a drunkard. Now these two sins are the filthy
Pleasures make brutish.
sinckes of sensual and brutish pleasures, the consideration whereof were
enough to make a man that is wise and circumspect, at the very naming or
thought of sensuallity, to start back and flee from it, as from the most
dangerous enemy of his well-being.

I come now at last to answer It is a glory to Oldage that it takes off from
pleasure.
the imputation, that Old Age bereaves us of these kind of pleasures, and first
I say Cic. deSe nect.
with him, O preclarum munus, etc. O thrice happy and welcome age, that takes
us off from that which in youth is (through men's aptness to abuse it) the
mother and nurse of infinite vices, most hurtful unto us? and S^nec* Epist 12.
with another: how sweet a thing is it to have given pleasures the farewell?
and Idem. Epist. 67.
again. Ago senectuti gratias, etc. I thank my Old Age for fastening me to my
bed, and disabling me to do what I should not do. Old age works joy in the
want of pleasures.


Further J say that this despised age (freed from the dominion of such
pleasures) helps us in that which the Apostle by the rare virtue of
temperance, obtained; to wit, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30.
in abundance of worldly joys and delights, to be as if we were without them:
to be when we rejoice, as if we rejoiced not: and contrariwise, in absence of
them, to be as if we enjoyed them: as sorrowful (says the Apostle) yet
always rejoicing.

We hold him a bad and dangerous Pleasures are dangerous guests.
guest, against whom we should (and will if we be wise) shut our doors to
bar him entrance. These pleasures therefore being such as if we admit of
them, are likely to rob and spoil us, may be wanting and we the safer by it.
Happy are we when we suffer not our outward senses (which are the doors and
windows to let these thieves in) to stand open to them. The most delightful
object of the eye, to a voluptuous man, is the favor and beauty of a woeman, a
piece of well fashioned and colored clay. Prove. 31. 30.
Yet is favor deceitful and beauty vanity. Job. 31.
which caused Job to make a covenant with his eyes, to bind him not to think
of a maid. And David prays, Psalm. 119. 37. That his eyes may be turned away
from beholding vanity. The eye to many is a very Pandor. The pleasure of the
ear is Music: but was Solomon any whit the better, or not the worse for his
men-singers and woemen-singers, etc. The Rose is for the smell, but how is it
compast with prickles. Honey pleases the taste, but the stinging Be lies
lurking in the comb: and the Prove. 25. 16.
Wiseman counsels him that has found honey, to eat no more then is
sufficient, least he be overfull and vomit it. The taste is often the gluttons
purveyor. The touch is a wide window to let in pleasures: but the objects of it
are to many as pitch, Eccl. 15. 1.
which who so touches shall be defiled.

It is a precept no less necessary then ancient, Mature fias senex, Be old
betimes, that thou may long be so. J^ admonishes us, in youth to abstain
from the delights of this world, and then to be as Old-men, if we will come to
that age, live long in it, and have it tolerable and pleasing, such as will
give no cause to say, Eccle. 12
I have no pleasure in it. That of the Poet, J am sure is true: voluptates
Loss of bodily pleasures recompensed in spiritual joy
commendat rar^or usus, nothing does so much commend such pleasures, as the
rare use of them.

So then, if pleasures of this kind have left and forsaken Oldage, or it
abandoned them, it is no loss at all: and were there some detriment in it, yet
would it be aboundan^ly recompensed by the far better, the truly comfortable,
the heavenly pleasures, before mentioned: of which elder years afford a
greater, more then the elder Brothers portion. For those other having left
their station, make room for these, which are better guests to be entertained
by the soul of man: roost or dwell together with safety in one heart, they
cannot. How blessed aturne is it, when a flatterer, the worst of all enemies,
is removed, to make place for a true and faithful friend?

The III. Chapter. Containing the third aspertion cast on OLD AGE, touching its
weakness, and the answer.
THe next imputation is, that in elder years we are weak. For answer, first I
see not why the Old Man should be singled out, as one liable to the greatest
disgrace, in respect of the curse and punishment which was laid on all the
posterity of Adam, without exemption or immunity of any age. But I will
address my self to a more distinct and particular handling of this point.

There are two things inquirable in it: one touching infirmity, the other
concerning sickness. We will consider of them both, and that comparatively,
that it may appear, which of the sundry ages of man's life is least subject to
this imputation.

And first of Jnfirmity: which Infirmity what it is.
in my sense is an inclination and aptness in such or such an age to any thing
that is evil, either in body or mind.

I pass by the (...), the child in the mothers womb which suffers there nine
months imprisonment, and when at the last (if at the last) it is delivered
from that misery; comes forth with great pain and danger, both to it self
and the mother. Let us see how it is with it after it is borne and becomes an
infant, and so attaines to the first age of man's life. Naked does it enter into
Infants infirmities.
the world (so Job professes of himself) whereas other creatures ( In procem.
lib ^* not hist.
as Pliny has observed) are some of them provided both of armor defensive
and offensive: the Bull of horns, the Lion and Bear of paws, the Bore of
tusks, the Elephant of a promuscis, a trunk or snout, and many others, some of
defensive only, as Trees have their rine or bark, Fishes, many of them their
shells, all, their scales: Beasts their thick skins and hair, Fowls their
feathers and wings, Sheep their skins and wool. etc. only the poor infant is
borne naked and unarmed: in it self utterly destitute of help and defense.

True it is, that our good God and provident Creator, whose tender eye is
continually on this his so weak a creature (his punishments being always
tempered with mercy) has provided for it in this most feeble estate; which is
thankefully acknowledged by David ( Psalm. 71. 6.
upon thee have I been stayed from the womb) yet miserable is the infant
considered in himself, in respect of this his nakedness, which is not as
that, Genesis 2. 25. then our first Parents, when they stood upright before their
Creator, were clothed with admirable glory (as Chrysostom notes) such as to
which no outward covering could add any grace, ornament, or help; there being
then no need: but this I speak of was and is still a punishment of Adams sin
and ours: such a punishment, as (but that God reaches forth his helping hand
and gives means in this great weakness and distress) would expose the
infant to the greatest corporal misery: and as it is, it cannot pass for
better then a heavy case, a great infirmity.

Yet besides this, a most pitiful Infants come into the world crying.
cry (ordinarily) accompanies its coming into the world; which tells us that
it foresees, or rather forefeeles the innumerable miseries to which it is
borne, when it looks into the vale of tears. And so proper is this cry to its
birth, that the Law supposes it dead-borne, or (as the common word is)
still-borne, if then it cry not: if it be still at the birth and do not
testify (by this one and only voice or means it has, to express it self
and call for life and preservation) how weak it is.

These are the lamentable beginnings of this miserable life in the Infant. And
as it begins, so it continues to the end of this miserably-weake age, finding
no great alteration or amendment, it is still apt to give notice of its pain
and feebleness.

But see further, how this weak Infants how first handled.
guest is afterward entertained in this troublesome tempestuous world.
Immediately after the birth, it is taken, and hands are laid on it (as if it
had highly trespassed by breach of prison and coming forth of the womb) and
then presently it is bound hand and foot, which is so grievous unto it, that it
does not so much as smile (if we will believe Pliny) before the fortieth day.

Of this age therefore we may truly say, that it is weakness and misery in
the abstract.

It is reported of the men of Thracia, that when a child was borne, the
neighbors sitting round about it, were wont with great lamentation and
mourning, to reckon up the many miseries with which it was to enter into this
world: and on the contrary, when any dyed, to carry the corpse forth with no
less joy and rejoicing; commemorating the calamities from which it was
delivered. The Eccl 7. 2 Infirmity of childehood.
Preacher also tells us, that the day of death is better then the day that one
is borne.

The next age is Childhood, which ( Reddere qui voces (...) puer and pe de
certo sig rat humu^ Hora^. de Art Poet
says the Poet) begins when there is ability to speak and to go. How fares
it with the child during this age? Is it not also weak, so weak and tender
that it requires (for diverse years) continual attendance, being as yet but a
gristle as it were of no strength; no, nor of wit, to avoid the danger it may
fall into? After when it is come to more growth, so infirm is it both in body
and mind, that there is no hope of its avoiding infinite mischiefs, have it
not the help of others.

Were it not so, what need The yoke of children
would there be of the yoke which children bear under their Governors,
Parents, Schoolmasters, Tutors, etc? Why else do they pass through infinite
affrighting fears, in regard of necessary severity under that government? Were
it otherwise, it would be needless and no better then cruelty, to put them to
the grievous pains which they undergo with no small reluctance: and which are
to them almost intolerable, their weak nature not brooking it. The truth is
the scales fall not from the eyes of their minds; neither can their hearts
though tender be new molded without much ado, without their great pains
both in doing and suffering: Multa tulit fecitque puer, sudavit, etc.

To what end else were restraint Correction of children
from childrens desires set upon sports and pleasures? Were they not weak,
correction would not be of so necessary use to them, which Solomon says,
Prove. 13. 34.
Who so spares hates his son. Certainly chastisement and good breeding is
of greater use to this age then bodily sustenance. For Prove. 22. 15.
Foolishness is bound up in the heart of the child, and no way is there to
drive it from him, but by the rod of correction. When this rod is neglected (as
too often it is) what is the danger? What will come of it? Of this also Prove. 23
14.
Solomon resolves us: Smiting with the rod (says he) delivers a soul from
Hell. Is correction so needful to keep the child out of this bottomless
pit? Then is he of an infirm and weak estate.

If Childhood were not an age Mothers care over children.
of great infirmity, the mother that looks on her son with a tender eye, and
in the bowels of love and compassion; sighing to remember how lamentably he
came into the world, and how dearly she has bought him: with what care also
and pains, she has nursed him and brought him up to this age; would never
dispense with her natural affection, and suffer him to be under so hard a
discipline (much less her self be the executor of it) but would say, as many
do, a If I smite him ^ Pro. 23. 13.
with the rod, he will dye, for grief he will waste and pine away.

Jn a word, the child is a young tender plant, that with much care and
diligence must be defended from hurt and propped up, that it may grow strait:
infirm therefore and weak. Infirmity of youngmen.


I come now to the young man, he stands upon his reputation and makes account
that of all men he is freest from the infirmities and calamities of this life:
ready to stabb all gaine-sayers, yet is he in the greatest danger, and most
subject to infinite evils. This weak and humorous disposition is described by
the same Horst. in Art Poet
Poet, in sundry particulars, and from him J willingly take it, least I might
seem to have a stitch to this age, and to be an over hard and harsh censurer
of it.

First, Tandem cust^de re moto gaudet equis canibusque, etc. Ibid.
he is overjoyed at his liberty Liberty a bused by youth.
and freedom from the yoke, which lately he had borne: at his being now his
own man, as we say: at his having the reins loose, so as now he may (like the
untamed horse, newly broken from his rider) shise it abroad and run the
wilde-goose-race without control, up and down in the world; delighting
himself and feeding his distempered desire and unbridled affections, sometimes
with one vanity (sin rather) sometimes with another, ^ill he has run
himself out of breath, as it were.

Secondly, Cereus in vitium slecti. Ibid.
he is easily seduced Youth ea s^ly seduced.
and carried away by evil persuasions, which bewrayes greater lightness and
weakness in him.

Thirdly, if any give him better Youth scorns counsel.
counsel, and reproove him for his evil course, Monitori^ asper
he will not abide it, but flings out and counts his best friends his enemies:
which makes him incapable of amendment. Youth improvident and prodigal.


Fourthly, Utiliu^ tardus provisor, prodigus aeris. Ibid.
as he is improvident and careless in providing necessaries, so is he
wastefull and prodigal in spending.

Sublimis cupidusque. Youth variable.
Fifthly, he is lofty and highly conceited. Quod vult, valde vult, most violent
in his desires.

Lastly, ^mata relinquere pernix Ib.
he changes, as the wind: never long in love with any thing: now of one mind,
anon of another.

I wish I were able to set forth the weakness and vanity of youth, in its
proper colors, that it might appear in how unfit a Cabinet the ornaments of
this age are laid up. Mistake me not: I note the vices only to which this age
is subject; to youth it self I have no quarrel.

Yet in regard of infirmity, I Youth like a ship.
can no better compare it then to a Ship on the Sea, that is fraught with
variety of costly wares, but wants a skillful Pilot to guide it and keep it in
safety when storms arise: whereby often it comes to pass, that it reaches not
the haven, but ship, wares and all sink in the deep Ocean. Put into this
Ship, that is, grant there is in the young man, what you will or can imagine
him to be endowed with: bodily strength, agility, freshness of wit, firmness
of memory; as much learning and knowledge as his tender years by the helps
he has had, can furnish him withal: and whatsoever else self conceit
possesses him of: his violent disorderly affection, like a blast of wind, many
times sinks all to the bottom of perdition.

So vain a thing is bodily Bodily strength dangerous
strength to youth, that not only it steades it not, but contrariwise being
the breeder of a groundless confidence, it puts it upon infinite dangers: yea,
it is the instrument or means by which corrupt nature does work its
overthrow. What security and Youth secure.
carelessenesse is there in most young men, that enjoy health and strength?
what hardness of heart^ how ^arre are many of them from any thought of
repentance, and all because they put far from them the last day of account:
presuming that for them there will be time enough hereafter. Things that are
far off seem less to us then they are, as the stars in the firmament. So,
because youngmen behold death in a great distance, they neglect both it, and
what it brings, as things not worthy their minding. So was it with Salomons
young man whom he took to task, Eccle. 11. 9. and therefore De interi^re
dom^ cap. 46.
Bernard tells us, that strength is hurtful, when it tends to disobedience,
and only then profitable when it is joined with humility of heart: Greg*
past^ral. par. 3. c. 13.
and another counsels us, to use bodily strength and health, that it may
further the health of the soul.

I could willingly stay yet longer Youth most op posite to Old Age.
in my discourse of youth, for that it stands most in opposition to the age I
treat of, and looks at it commonly with an eye full of scorn and contempt:
repining at its length of days, and oftentimes thinking it long ere it
succeeds the Old Man in his offices, lands or goods. So did that proud and
ambitious Absolon, when he thirsted after his fathers Crown. Ovid. Metamorph.
lib. 1.
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos.

This one thing here I may not Youth has most need of reformation
pretermit, that both David and Solomon single out this age, as that which has
most need of reformation, as Psalm. 119. Where withal shall a young man
cleanse his ways? And Ecclesi. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy Youth, etc.
but know, etc. and Cap. 12. 1. Remember therefore thy Creator in the days of
thy youth. And Prove. 4. he makes the simple man and the young man to draw in
one yoke, and equally to want instruction. These two so skillful Physicians of
the soul, would not have chosen this subject to work on, or lighted on the
young man for their patient, had they not thoroughly viewed his state, and found
that in his understanding, will and affections he is (for the most part)
exceeding infirm and weak, and much every way out of frame.

That which has been said J take to be sufficient to clear this point, that
the young-mans strength and flourishing estate when it is at the highest pitch,
ordinarily makes him no whit the better nor more happy: but much more miserable
every way: so weak and infirm an age it is.

The next in order is mature, Man's age when it begins.
or ripe age, in Latin, aetas virilis, mans-age. From which denomination we
may conceave, that till then a man is not a man, not the infant without
question: not the child: no, nor the youth though he strut it out, and think
there is no manhood to be found but in himself.

This aetas virilis, is an age (I Man's age in evil immovable.
confess) more staid then the former, and less hot and violent in affections:
but yet more stiff in every thing: and so whatsoever is evil in it, is more
permanent and unmooveable, and consequently more hurtful. The child (as I
showed before) is as a tender twig, newly planted and easily brought out of
frame; yet flexible. Youth, the flower of man's life, is like a tree in the
springtime, beautiful in blossoms, which gives hope of fruit: and though
these blossoms, many times are blasted, and so the tree becomes unfruitful,
yet is it of a more yielding disposition: and vice being not yet habitual in
it or deeply rooted, is more easily nipped in the head. But this age of which
we now enquire, though it be (for its season) apt to yield fruit: yet many
times for grapes it brings forth wild grapes: neither will it by Man-age
aspires high.
the dresser of the Vine so easily be wrought upon for better fruit.

But what is it, that the heart in this age, is commonly and in most men set
upon? Our Author tells us that too. Quaerit ^pes and a micitias, inservit
^onori. Horat Ibid.
Men here labor for riches that they may be settled in a great estate: they
procure the friendship of great ones, so to be backed in whatsoever they do, be
it right or wrong: they aspire to honor, and labor to be great: and all this
many times, that they may be the only commanders in the places where they
live, and may without control overtop and oppress the under-shrubs, Mans-age
pro^e to wrong.
the poor weak underlings among the people: and Dum vitant stul^i vitia,
i^o^traria currunt Et a libi, In vitium ducit culpae ^uga ^i caret art. Hora
so they fall from one extreme to another. They shun the improvidence and
prodigality of their youth and light upon the contrary covetousness, the root
of all evil. They will no longer be rash, simple and unadvised, as in their
younger years: and to avoid that, they study to be subtle and crafty, and
fall to plodding and plotting for their private (not always good) ends. They
seem ashamed of the facility and tractablenesse of youth, and become as a
brazen wall, standing unmooveable against whatsoever crosses their whatsoever
resolutions. To avoid levity, they become obstinate: and so in the rest, and
how great then is the weakness of such men's minds, though this be the most
stable, and the most commendable and in the common account of all the ages.

The Poet, our Author, forgets Old-me^ care for ^ there is go^
not the Old Man: he feels his pulse also, and notes his condition and
properties: but they are such, as bring no disparagement, but a grace and
commendation to this age. But what are they? Quaeri and inve it is ^ise abstinet*
timet ^ ubi supra
he seeks riches, and makes no use of them to himself: true, he is contented
to be poor and (in a sense) miserable himself, that others may be rich and
happy: when he is gone will not the child, the young man, the man of ripeage,
will they not all (that is all men) commend him for this? For them he gets, for
them he keeps what he spends not, that they may enjoy it after him, and
praise both him and his abstinency and bounty in the joyful use of it. They
are his heirs, to them he leaves his plus viatici, the greater part of his
provision, quibus plus viae restat, because they have (in likelihood) a far
longer journey to go. This (sure) is providence and care of posterity, not
covetousness. The eldest man alive is not so stupid and senseless, as to
think he shall carry his goods with him to his grave, and may not this be
another end of his sparing, that the hope of legacies may gain to him regard
and love while he lives from them, who are apt enough to despise his
gray-haires. M^na^der
Molestus est inter juvenes senex, says one. OLD AGE is troublesome and
unpleasing to youth. Many Old-men that have outed themselves of all, or near
all, while they lived, have after it continued alive long enough to repent when
it was too late.

Besides, it is certain that Old-men best use wealth.
though this man of years, by help of his even temper, is able to use the
wealth he has, with greater benefit, and less hurt to himself and others,
then younger men, who hardly observe a mean in any thing: yet being weaned
from the pleasures of this world, to which his riches might be the fuel or
materials; no marvel if he abstain from a much delightful use of them. While
his mind feeds on better food, his body and mind both are contented to want
the use of the worser, strange it were if such contentednes and moderation
should breed reproach.

But S. Austen may seem to Old Age not to be blamed with personal vices.
stand against us in this point. Psa. 113.
He tells us that in Old Age, all other vices decaying, covetousness
juvenescit, increases and grows daily. I answer, first it is unlikely that
this his censure was general, because he knew well, how far himself in his
elder years, was from it, and doubtless if he wrote it while he was young,
when he was grown old, he would have retracted it from his experience in
himself, had he meant it of all, Probable it is that he said it either
according to the common tenent of the disgracers of this age; or because some
Old-men of the worser sort are such, and in that case it is morum vitium, non
senectutis: to be ascribed not to the age, but to the viciousness of the
former part of man's life, whence the habit of covetousness might grow up. It
is absurd (says Cato major apud Ci^ de senectute.
the Patron of Old-men not covetous.
this age) that an Old Man. should (as an Old Man he means) be covetous* no
less absurd, then for one to vex himself with getting still more and more
provision for his journey, when he is come near the end of it. Certainly,
that which it is absurd for a man to do, and incredible that he will do it; it
is as absurd to think he is culpable in it, or to accuse him of it. Lastly, it
may be answered, that, were the Old Man faulty herein, somewhat might be said
for him by way of excuse: viz. that it is The ground of Old-mens parsimo^y.
caused by an incident infirmity, which is fear of want, arising partly from
the coldness of his temper, and in part from his inability (now) to get any
thing by his labors or endeavors; which may seem to free him from the
scraping covetousness, though it put him hap'ly upon parsimony or wariness in
spending. Dio. Cyn
One being asked what was in vita calamitosissimum, the heaviest calamity in
this life, answered well (...), the estate of a poor needy Oldman. So then,
the calamity of want being greater to this age then to the other, to be sparing
in it, is skarse any fault at all. For nature it self gives every creature a
kind of care and desire to preserve it self. Old-men wary.


Further, Res omnes timide gelideque ministrat, ubisupra.
It is said that the Old Man does all things with fear, coldly and slowly.
Warily as I conceive it, having observed in his long experience, the
innumerable mischiefs into which the rashness and unadvised hastiness of
young men does carry them. The Philosopher gives this very reason why youth is
bold, and age fearful. It is ( Arist. in Rhetor. Old-men long for better
times.
says he) because youth wastes knowledge, (for who so bold as the blind) and
age sees the danger of being overhasty.

It is added, Avidusque futuri.
that he desires and longs for better times. True, because he has seen much
evil in the world, and is wearied with greeving at it. No man can fault Why
Oldmen hard to please.
him for this.

Again, Difficilis Ibid.
he is hard to please. This may arise from his dislike of Old-men praisers of
former* times.
men's evil manners, with which no man should be pleased.

He is said to be a Laudator te^poris acti se puer^. Ibid.
prayser of former times. Not without cause, since the world grows daily more
and more out of frame and wicked. Old-men just reprovers.


He cannot wink at the vices of disordered young men, but Censor,
castigatorque minoru^. Ibid.
sharply reprooves them. Who may more justly take to him this so necessary an
office, or execute it with so much gravity, so great authority, so mature
wisdom, discretion and moderation, as the Old Man, Tum pietate grave^ aut
meriti^ fi forte virum quem co^spexere silent, etc. Uirg. in Aeneid.
of whose well-meriting love, and endeavors for the common good, all men have
had long experience and trial?

By this which has been said it is plain and evident, first that all the
ages of man's life are infirm. Secondly, that each has its proper defects: and
lastly, that the infirmities of Old Age, are not so great as of the rest, all
things duly weighed and considered.

Now, they are to be compared likewise in the point of sickness. But this part
of my task, I am willing to cast upon the Physician, both in regard of his
far greater knowledge this way, and to avoid the blame of putting my sickle
into an other man's harvest, and leaping out of mine element. Fearing to be
Piscis in arido, m^nachus in for^. Yet something of it, out of mine own
profession.

Health is (indeed) a blessing Sickness whence it came.
upon blessings: one that seasons and sweetens all the rest. But the perfection
of it was only in Paradise. For immediately after the fall, came the curse,
first upon man that had sinned. In the very same day ( Super Genesis ad lit.
says St. Austin) began Adam and Eve to dye, in which they received the law of
death. After the curse fell for man and his transgression upon the earth, and
the other bordering elements, and on all the creatures contained in them. While
man was faithful in serving his Creator, the creatures served him as their
second Lord: but presently upon his fall from his God, they all fell from him,
and shaking off the yoke of their allegiance, turned enemies and rebels
against him. Before man had the means of health and life, and immortality, (to
which he was created) laid up for him in those creatures, then all good. But
since through the curse, they are become the instruments to inflict on him that
punishment, the bodily death: or rather so many Sergeants to arrest him. And
the infinite number of diseases, bred by the earths curse, are likewise busy
tormentors, to wait on him for the execution of that punishment, which the
transgression had justly deserved. Dust now we are, and to dust we shall
return: dead-men we are, and to death the creatures are appointed to bring us.
In the sweat (...) our faces we eat our bread. Our daily labors in our
callings are now, not as Adams in Eden, but sweating labors, which make way to
sickness, and consequently to death: drying up, sensim sine sensu, by little
and little, unperceivably, the radical moisture; and wasting the natural
heat: and withal enfeebling the body, and so far disabling it to bear the
distempers, as that it is sooner or later overcome by them. During the time of
man's innocence, the great Creator so tempered the contrary qualities of the
elements of which his body consisted; that they were not (as since) at strife
among themselves: but when man had sinned, that way might be made to the
execution of the sentence of death; God drew back his hand, and left them to
their natural work, in seeking their mutual destruction. And by that means
now ( Euripides
as one says) vivere, more est, our living is a dying. While we live, and by
living, we come every day nearer and nearer to our dissolution.

This is now the weak estate Physic wherein useful.
of our earthly tabernacle, to which the art of Physic in diet and medicines
may be as a prop to a decayed and tottering house: but comes far short of
restoring it to the original perfection in the creation. Physic ( Lib. de
constitut. artis medicae.
says Galen) is an art of repairing, not of building. No, this certainly
requires the same hand which made man at the first, and the way which God the
Creator and recreator will take in it, he has plainly expressed in his word.
It is by demolishing (in his time) this decayed and daily decaying house, and
setting up a new. 2 Cor. 5. 1
The earthly house of this our* weak Tabernacle must first be destroyed, that
we may have a building given of God, not made with hands, but eternal in the
Heavens. 1 Cor. 15 36.
As the seed that is cast into the ground, first dies, and then is quickened: so
our bodies at the resurrection. This corruptible shall then put on
incorruption, and this mortal immortality.

Perfect health man had: but by Sickness by sin
his sin he lost it. Perfect health he shall recover, but the way to it is
death, and the way to death is sickness, and as the sting of death is sin,
so the evil of sickness, is sin likewise, and that not only as the
meriting cause, but also as the thing to be prevented by it. Would we always
live in health? We know not our selves. God that is better acquainted with our
estate and condition, sees, that of all afflictions, this of sickness, is most
beneficial unto us and most necessary. The reasons, to note some of them, may
be these. The first, to make us look back Benefits of sickness*
to see from whence we are fallen, and why. Another, because other afflictions
are not so direct premonitions of death, which should be the meditation of our
whole life. A third, for that this correction does not only mind us of our
sins past, and upbraid us with them, that we may repent, but serves also for
a curb or restraint to hold us in from rushing into the world of enormities and
sins, to which our corrupt and unbridled nature otherwise would carry us
headlong: for by sickness the flesh which rebels against the spirit is
weakened, and more easily observes that precept, of not suffering sin to
reign in our mortal bodies. Fourthly, health of body is an Health dangerous
occasion of many evils, especially when the soul is sick, or ill affected.
N^ qua^ pej u^ qua^ in sano cor. pore aeger animue habitat. Pet. lib. 1. dial 4.
No where (says one) can the corrupt heart dwell worse, or more dangerously,
then in a healthy body. Fifthly, when we see a man in his bed of sickness, how
much do we find him changed (if there be any spark of grace in him) from
that he was before? He hates his former disorderly course, and himself for
it. He resolves (though hap'ly with great weakness, and sometimes after
recovery, inconstancy) yet he resolves, or at least professes a resolution for
amendment: and he binds himself to God for it by many promises and vows: in
health with most men it is far otherwise.

Again, the want of health may Health co^ mon to beasts.
be borne the more patiently, both by aged and younger folk, because health is
a thing common with us to inferior creatures, not peculiar to man* as Psalm.
36. ^6. Lord thou preservest man and beast. From which place, S. Austine
observes* that we should not be proud of health, and we may from the same
ground, that there is no cause of our being much dejected, for the want of it.

Well then: were it granted that Sickness no disgrace.
old age is followed with more diseases then the other* this notwithstanding
would be no disgrace to it: a benefit rather as has been proved. But by the
concurrent judgment of Physicians, it appears to be otherwise. For they tell
us that old-men are not so subject to sickness as the younger, and that the
reasons of it are these. One, their temperance above others, by which (say
they) the most depraved and corrupt nature of man is preserved and held in a
healthy constitution. Another, because they are sensible of the least causes of
sickness, and thereby become wary, and suffer not the diseases to take root in
them* And the last is their cold and dry temper, which frees them from hot
fevers, inflammations, and corrupt humors. Whence it is ( Lib. 7. c. 50.
says Plime) that they are less subject to the pestilence. Hereunto we may
add the common Proverb, A Physician, or a fool. A Physician by experience
and many observations; or a fool for want of them. Now we know none has
Old Age has experience.
so much experience as the Oldman, whose many years afford him opportunity and
means to be to himself an Emperike, a kind of Physician. The carelessness of
former ages, have (happily) bred diseases in him: and he by his skill and
knowledge gotten by experience, practices the cure. The other ages are as
violent winds and storms that by often beating upon this house of clay (or as
bad inhabitants that by their neglect) bring it out of reparations; and OLD AGE
is as the Carpenter to repair it.

The IIII. Chapter. Containing the next and last disgrace cast upon OLD AGE,
and the answer.
THe last imputation is this; Propinquity of death objected against Old age.
that to the OLD MAN, death is at hand, and knockes at the door, as it were,
ready to come in and ceaze upon him. And here now we are fallen upon a
meditation of Death, and I rejoice at the occasion, imploring Gods help, that
I may be profitably sensible of what I deliver touching this point, and may
bring it home to my self for my better preparation.

In it, I will endeavor to prove first that to be near to death is not a
misery, but a happiness rather. Secondly, that were it an affliction, as it is
deemed to be, the other ages are as liable to it as this. And lastly, that the
former part of man's life ill ordered, is one and not the least cause of Oldages
hasting to the grave.

Touching the first. What is What makes death most grievous to good men
there in Death that may make it a misery to a good Old Man? Is it that which
David, Psalm. 6. and other where pleaded for the lengthening of his life? In
death there is no remembrance of thee, etc. And Hezekias, Isaiah. 38. The grave
cannot confess thee? That indeed should be a principal motive to the desire
of life, and the shunning of death. The end of it should be, not so much that
we may longer enjoy this world, and the comforts of it, as that we may have
longer time to go on in the works of our calling, that God may by us be yet
more glorified in this world: and that here now grace may grow and increase
still more and more in us, and so our glory be answerable in the world to come

The wisest and most valorous Men's rashness in speaking against death.
among the Heathen, who could say much and have written also (though to no
purpose) de morte contemnenda, of the contempt of death: who also that they
might seem no less courageous indeed than in word; have many of them rush't
upon this enemy, and desperately encountered him (as at this day, some among
us, though better informed of the danger of it, do in duello, in single
combat, and other unwarrantable attempts) they all (I say) may be likened to
the man whom our Luke 14. 31.
Savior taxes for his unadvisednesse, In that going to war, he consults not
before hand, how able he is to meet him that comes against him Certainly death
may be Death wherein terrible.
counted as the last, so the most potent and dangerous enemy, when it is in its
full strength (that strength which God himself put into it immediately after
the fall. Genesis 2.) And when we are naked and destitute of the armor of proof,
Ephesians. 6. weak also, as not strengthened by that victory, wherein Christ our
champion overcame this enemy for us. For God has set him upon us, and
strengthened him against us: and what are we then of our selves to withstand
him? Yet our good God has provided a remedy: not that we Remedy against death.
should recover our former strength, or be able of our selves to break the
Serpents head, but that the seed of the woeman should do it. He it is through
whom it comes, that this enemy has no power over us, because Heb. 2. 14
he has destroyed the Devil who had the power of death, 1 Cor. 15
and has taken away the sting of it, by his suffering for our sins: and the
rigor and curse of the law, which is the strength of sin: Col. 2. 14
and has put out also the hand * writing of ordinances that was against us. By
this great mercy of God we become conquerours over death, yea, more then
conquerours. Romans 8. I, but (may some man say) death when it comes may bereave
us of our confidence in Christ. No, To. 8 35
says the Apostle; neither life, nor death, etc. shall be able, etc. O, but
Heb. 2. 15.
we are in servitude to death all our life long. True, of our selves: but we
are delivered from this also by Christ's death, as in that place.

Thus we see that death is not Death a blessing.
misery. It is as easy to prove that it is great happiness. We have it by a
voice from Heaven. Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.

For the further manifesting Corruption the way to generation.
of the point: First, let it be laid down as a certain truth, that corruption
is the way to generation. We find it to be so in things natural. Air
becomes water, but first it must leave to be air: water returns to air, but
withal it leaves to be water. In things artificial: the mines bred in the
bowels of the earth, must first be dug up: after, by fire purged of their
dross: then made malleable: after, cast into a mould for fashion, and lastly
filed and polished, that they may The body not destroyed by death
p in Genesis Cap. 1. Hom. ^5.
become vessels for use. The body of death is not destroyed (says Chrysostom)
as the brass, when it is melted and cast, that a vessel may be made of it: it
loses nothing, but gains a better and more useful fashion. The Cedars which
Hiram gave to Solomon for the building of the Temple, were first cut down,
squared and framed, before they could become that glorious house of God. The
same is true of the point in hand. The earthly Tabernacle must first be
dissolved, as we said before, and then afterward we have a building of God.
And the seed that is cast into the ground must die, and then be quickened, and
have a new body given unto it. The way to the putting on of incorruption, and
immortality, is the putting off of corruption and mortality.

Is it not a blessed thing that Death opens Heaven gates
opens the gates of Heaven to us? is it not the Merchants happiness, after his
long travailes, and his venturing on the Sea through many storms and tempests,
that now at the last he is in the haven, his ship full-fraught with rich wares,
and he near his house and home, the thing often wished and much longed for?
Cie. lib. 5. Tuse. quest ^ Epist. 84.
Death (says one) is portus malorum, the haven in which a man takes harbor,
freed from all former dangers. Queri de cita morte (says Seneca) est queri,
quod cito navigaris, To complain of a speedy death, is to dislike that we have
so soon passed the dangerous seas. Can any thing more pleasingly befall the
rightly affected soul, then to be freed from imprisonment in the body, and
from the clog of that mass of clay which holds it down, and keeps it from
its proper place to which it would mount up, were it not so held? Is not he
that runs a race, or travels a journey, or works hard all day, glad when he
is at the end of his labor and ^oyle? Or he that fights, when he has attained
the victory? Or would they be again in the beginning or middle of their race,
journey, or fight? Pretiosa mors, tanquam finis laborum, tanquam victoriae
consummatio, tanquam vitae janua, and perfectae securitatis ingressio. How
precious should death be to us (says S. Bernard) death that is the end of our
labors, the consummation of our victory, the gate to life, and an entrance
into perfect security. Sup Job.
S. Austin says it is the laying down of a heavy burden. Is it not a
happiness to be delivered from sinning, from the temptations of Satan, the
allurements of the world, and the rebellion of the flesh against the Spirit in
us? Certainly death is a bed of peace and rest. Isa. 57. 2.

Who will or can doubt of the Death brings happiness
happiness that death brings with it, when he considers how many and great the
good things are which accompanies it? First, the perfection of grace, which
before was weak and in small measure. Secondly the mansion or place which
Christ is gone before to prepare for us, even Psalm. 16. ult.
a presence with God, where there is fulness of joy, etc.

Is not he happy that is near the thing he advisedly much desires? I desire,
says the Apostle, to be with Christ. S. Austin tells us that he in whom this
desire is, does not patiently die, but lives patiently and dies with joy and
delight. He (says S. Ierom) that daily remembers and considers of his
dissolution, contems things present and hastens to that which is to come.

All the faithful before the The kingdom of grace brings joy
coming of our Savior were in a joyful expectation of his coming: many
Prophets and righteous men desired it: they waited for the consolation of
Israel, as Simeon, Luke 2. After, when he was come, what rejoicing was there?
Then the Angel brings tidings of great joy, and a multitude of the heavenly
host, joined with him in a joyful praising of God. Glory be to God on high,
etc. then Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine
eyes have seen thy Salvation. After again, when John Baptist had prepared the
way, and wone Disciples to Christ, how rejoiced they at the sight of the Lamb
of God: Andrew to his brother Simon, we have found the Messiah, and Philip to
Nathaniel, we have found him of whom Moses and the Prophets did write. Both
John and Christ himself for the increase of their joy that heard them, made
this the sum of their preaching, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand:
yet (to bring it now home to our purpose) all this was but the Kingdom of
grace; and if when that was at hand, there was cause of so great joy, as indeed
there was; then how much greater cause is there, when the Kingdom of GLORY is
at hand, and even come unto us, how great joy and happiness must there needs
be?

The truth is, every man's death By death life.
is suiting to his life; if he be blessed in his life, he is more so in his
death, which follows a good life. In a word, if thou shrink and draw back at
the thought of thy death (which is a common infirmity, De gratia novi Test. Why
death unwelcome.
Tantam habet vim carnis and animae dulce consortium: of so great force in the
sweet society between the body and the soul) in case it be thus with thee, it
is because death comes not into thy frequent cogitations; because 1 Cor. 15. 31.
thou die not daily, because thou 2 Cor. 1. 9.
receivest not the sentence of death in thy self. Mortem effice familiarem
(says Seneca) ut si ita sors tulerit, possis illi obviam ire, be well
acquainted with death, that when he comes, thou may meet him as a friend, and
entertain him with joy. Facile contemnit omnia, qui semper cogitat se esse
moriturum (says In Epist. ad Paulu^.
S. Ierom,) he that continually thinks of death, easily tramples upon
whatsoever may dismay him. Or it is for that thou have not yet learned Sup. Mat
10.
of Saint Chrysostom, Offeramus Deo promunere, quod pro debito tenemur
reddere; be free in offering up thy self to God as a gift, which we are bound
to yield to Death embittered by an ill life.
him as a debt. Or, because thy life has been vicious, Mala mors putanda non
est ( De Civitate Dei.
says Saint Austin) quam bona vita preces sit, that death may not be counted
evil, which is foregon by a good life. Thou art loath to die, wherefore? thou
have lived ill, and so art unprepared for death, know that the reason of this
want of preparation is, because thou art not thoroughly persuaded and resolved
that thou shall die, nor do truly believe it; hap'ly thou can say, from a
general swimming thought of death, that we are all mortal, or the like: but a
firm and constant belief of it, is far from thee, for otherwise thou
would live in continual expectation of thy dissolution, and prepare thy
self for that day, that hour, knowing that then instantly thou art brought to
judgment. If news be brought to a City, that the enemy is coming against it
and ready to besiege it; shall we think they believe it, when they make no
preparation for defense, Quotidie morimur, quotidie mutamur, and tamen aeternos
nos esse credimus, In Epist. ad Heliod
says Saint Ierom, we die daily, and every day are we changed, and yet we
dream of eternity, even here in Death embittered by love of this world
this life. Or hap'ly, the reason of thy fear of death, is, thou art fast
glued to thy earthly portion, thy riches, thy pleasures, thy honors, thy
friends. Shake hand (at least in contentment) with these, and all will be
well, forsake them now while thou live, and then thou can not in regard of
them, think death thine enemy, or that it takes either thee from them, or
them from thee; if thou have thy treasure in Heaven, there thy heart will be,
and from thy heart and treasure thou will not be contentedly; but wilt love and
embrace the messenger and guide which conducts thee to them; namely thy death.

But (will some man say) how can there be happiness in that which all men,
yea all the other creatures do shun? for they all naturally desire to
preserve their estate of being what they are, and by all means avoid their
being dissolved.

I answer, first, Death and dissolution How death abhorred and how desired.
is two ways to be considered: either simply, as it is an abolishing of a
present estate, or as it is a passage to a future better condition: as it is
the former, naturally it is abhorred; but as it tends to perfection, it is both
in it self desirable, and by the creatures desired and longed for before it
comes; and when it presents it self, right welcome and embraced; so was it by
the Apostle, Phil. 1. 23, he desired to depart, or as some translate it, to be
dissolved. Why? not in respect of death it self, but because by this death he
should pass to a better life; he should live with Christ, he should be
delivered from his claiey house, as that word dissolved imports: or dismissed,
as Beza reads it, and our newest translation; that is, set free from
imprisonment in the body, and from the miseries of this life, and hence it is
that the Apostle there professes that he shall gain by death, ver. 21. he
shall gain Christ by it, enjoy him fully, and with him glory, even the crown
which he aspires unto, 2 Timothy 4. hence it is also that death is longed for, and
earnestly groned after, as 2 Cor. 5. neither is this true which has been
said, *only of the faithful among men, but of the other creatures also; with
earnest expectation they groan and travail in pain for the day of their
renovation, Romans 8. 19, 22.

So then, it is plain that death though it be not simply and in it self good
and desirable, yet for that which comes of it, it is.

And this may be further manifested by similitudes, with which the same Apostle
does furnish us.

First, in the place aforementioned, Death a pulling down of a Tabernacle.
2 Cor. 5. 1. the body, our earthly mansion, is compared to a tabercacle, a
weak and moveable house or dwelling: our heavenly habitation to a firm
building, not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, and 1 Cor. 15. our
interred bodies are likened to the Death as the corruption of seed.
seed which is cast into the ground, and is there corrupted and dies. I will
apply these comparisons to our present purpose.

True indeed, an old weak decayed house, is not in this happy, that it is
taken down, better to be in that mean estate in which it was before, then not
at all to be, but herein consists the happiness of its demolishment, that
thereby it becomes a new fair building, far more glorious in it self, and
more profitable for use then before.

So again, the seed is not in that happy, that it is corrupted and rotted in
the earth, but that corruption unius is generatio alterius, the dying of the
seed, is the life of the corn that springs from it. Thou fool, says the
Apostle, that which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it die.

Thus we see there is still happiness The grave as a Goldsmiths forge.
in death. The grave may be likened to the Goldsmiths Forge; in it our bodies
are refined and polished by Gods Almighty hand, and by the power of Christ's
Resurrection; and they are made of corruptible incorruptible, and of mortal
immortal, and so that comes to pass which we have, Romans 8. 28. That all
things work together for good to them that love God: it is true of afflictions
which are the forerunners of death, and true of death it self, and therefore
the 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Apostle tells us, that whether it be life or death, things present, or things
to come, all are ours: and well says In Cantio. Sermon. 51.
Saint Bernard, Bona mors, quae vitam non aufert, sed transfert in melius, O
happy death that deprives us not of life, but changes this for a far better.
Dies mortis (says Seneca) quem tanquam extremum formidas, aeterni natalis est,
How art thou deceived in thy thoughts of death? the day of thy death, which
thou so much fear as thy last day; to thee is the Birth day of eternity; and
Euripides answerably, vivere mori est, mori autem vivere, to live is to die,
and to die is to live. viz. eternally. Deaths curse removed.


But now, another block lies in our way, another Objection, which must also be
answered. How blessed by that (may some man say) which is a curse and
punishment for sin? that which God has armed against us (as was said before)
for the execution of that doom, In the day that thou eatest, thou shall die
the death?

To this I say first, that the Apostle answers it, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55. the most
hurtful creatures, if once they be disarmed and weakened, cannot hurt us; much
less when they are overcome and slain for us, and to our hand, as we say; so
is death, Christ has taken away the sting of it, and conquered it, and all
adverse power that might stop our passage to Heaven. And as when Goliath was
overcome by David, this victory made all the people of Israel, for whom he
fought, Conquerours, and freed them from the power of the enemy: so our David,
having overcome and conquered death, we are safe, being all more then
Conquerours by and in him. Other ages as liable to death as Old Age.


Now, the second point follows, which I proposed for the answering of this
last accusation (that Old Age is a near neighbor to death:) viz. that other
ages are as liable to it as this, and many times as near.

It is observed Hugo de Claustro.
by one, that there are three messengers of death, casuality, sickness, and
Old Age.

Casualities and the unhappy Casualties befall all ages.
accidents that do befall men, and shorten their lives, are indeed many,
somewhere whole Cities have been overthrown by earthquakes, others burnt up
by lightnings: some by fire: whole regions swallowedup by the earths gaping for
them, many men and places destroyed by the inundations of the sea, and many
other casualities happen daily; a hair drunk in milk, a stone in a grape, a
small bone in a fish, have been means of choking, some have dyed with
sudden joy. Wars, and the Pestilence, how many thousands do they devour?
a multitude of such accidents there are: but no age is more free from these
messengers, then this we speak of, and that for these reasons. First, because
this is an age of the best temper and greatest moderation, and circumspection,
whereby diverse of those dangers are avoided. Secondly, because it is not so
much in bodily action, as the rest. Thirdly, for that it mooves less* stirs
less abroad, giving it self to retiredness. Fourthly, it is not pressed to the
wars, where death compasses men about, and is daily and hourly expected.
Besides, it is free from quarrels, and less subject to surfettings, to
breaking and disjoynting of limbs, or to deadly wounds, etc.

Touching the second messenger Deseases befall all.
of death, Bodily diseases, they are in other ages more, more sharp, and more
incurable: every man will grant it.

If it be said, that though these Every age has a more certain period then
Old Age.
two messengers should pass by Old-men, yet their age it self will stand
ready every hour to arrest them. I answer, that neither is that so; for Tho.
4*. Sent. distinct 43. artic 3.
the Schooleman tells us that OLD AGE sometimes equals all the other in years
and durance, and whereas of the rest there is a certain set period and end; of
this there is none: for no man knows when an Old Man shall die, and cease to
be an Old Man. In epist. quadam.
Saint Jerome tells us, that Nemotam fractis viribus and decrepitae senectutis
est, quin non se putet unum adhuc annum esse victurum, that there is not any in
strength so decayed, and in age so decrepit, as not to think he shall live yet
one year longer.

Further we know that the youngest No certainty of life.
has no lease, no certainty of the number of his days; and therefore must
still be in expectation of death, as well as the aged: for it behooves him that
has no set day for his debt, to be at all times solvendo, ready for payment.
Socrates was wont to say, that to Old-men death stands before them continually
in their sight; but to young- men he lurks behind, that unawares he may come
upon them, as an enemy that lies Distemper of former agesmakes Old Age the
nearer to death*
in ambush.

The third part of my answer remains: which retorts the fault (if it be one)
of Old-ages being so near to death, upon the true cause of it: viz. men's
intemperance, and disorder in the former part of their life. I will briefly
pass through the particular foregoing ages.

In Infancy many times the Causes of infants death.
milk in the nursing, or food, when it has left the breast, is unholsome:
whereby an ill foundation is laid for the bodily constitution. And here (by
the way) I cannot but blame the indiscreet peremptorinesse of some, who doubt
not to make this a general rule or Maxim, that God never makes the womb
fruitful, and the breast barren: and thereupon stick not to conclude, that no
woman may put forth her child In what cases children may be put out to nurse.
to nurse: true, not of niceness, and to shun the pains and trouble of it.
Yet it cannot be denied, that there are many cases in which the mother not
only may refuse this office (which in it self is most natural, I confess,
and lies nearly upon her) but is a cruel mother to her child (to say nothing
of her self) if she do otherwise: for what weakness, and how many deseases
may be derived from a mother (in some cases, I say, and of some constitutions)
to the child, to its utter overthrow, and undoing? and besides, it is not true
that the mothers breasts are never dry: nor that there can be no other thing,
that may justly excuse her refusing to be a nurse. But I leave the digression,
having but occasionally and by the way fallen upon it. And now further I say,
that often through want of attendance the poor infant falls into many
mischiefs; all which it carries with it to Old Age, if the grave prevent it
not.

Childhood is subject to as great distempers and hurts.

The Young Man is next, and Causes of death in childhood.
his affections for the most part, are strong and violent (as has been
showed) whatsoever comes of him, he resolves to please his appetite in diet, to
satisfy his desire of pleasures in immoderate recreations, and to nourish the
pride of his bodily strength and activenesse in violent exercises, and his
lusts also in wantonness, and then no marvel if an intemperate youth leaves
to OLD AGE a weak and worne-out body.

Of mature, or the ripe age, Causes of death in man-age.
what shall we say? that (a man would think) will be wary of doing wrong to so
good, so near a neighbor as OLD AGE is to it. Yet we know, and cannot but
observe so much, that the two vices before noted do adhere to it; covetousness
and ambition put men upon many labors, toils and attempts, which hotly and
eagerly pursued, according to the extent of their desires; cause surfetings and
bring many infirmities Evil of former ages follow Old Age
and diseases upon it: which tend directly to death.

Now all these evils in the end, fall to the lot of the Old Man, brought upon
him (as we see) by the foregoing part of his life; and therefore to it they
must be imputed, and it may truly be said, that if Old-men be near to death,
they are thrust upon it by their predecessors, the former ages. Ita ^st, non
accepimus bre vem vita^, sed secimus: non exiguum tempus habemus, sed mulium
perdimus* necinoses ejus sed prodigi sumus. De brevitate vitae.
So it is (says Seneca) we have not received a short life, but we have made
it short: the time we have is not little, but we lose much of it by wastfull
prodigality.

And that the sicknesses of elder years (the causes of deaths approach) be
they more, or be they fewer; are to be imputed to former errors and disorders in
diet; we may have some proof from those two famous Physicians, Hippocrates,
and Galen: of whom the former lived to an hundred, the other to an hundred
and four: and how, but through their knowledge and care, by which they
attained to a rare temperance in the former part of their life. Joseph. de
bello Iud^ico. lib. 2 cap. 7.
The Essaei also (a Sect among the Jews) were very temperate and sparing in
their diet; and by means thereof lived ordinarily to an hundred.

To conclude, when all is said that may be brought either by the despisers or
accusers of this age; It must be confessed that length of days is a great
blessing, when a man comes to his grave in a full age, Job. 5. 26.
like as a shook of corn comes in, in its season: And howelse can it be
the subject of a promise, as in the fifth Commandment: Honor thy Father, etc.
that thy days may be long in the land, etc. and 1 Kings 3. 14. If thou will
walk in my ways (says God to Solomon) I will lengthenthy days. Or how can
the contrary be a curse or punishment. Psalm. ^ 5. ^lt.
The wicked shall not live out half their days. Certainly long life has
ever been a boon by which God would express his love to his dearest
servants. Among other temporal blessings which he affoorded to Abraham, this
is one, and the chief, Genesis 15* 15.
Thou shall be buried in a good Old Age, and it was accordingly performed, Genesis
25. 8. Gen 35. 29
Isaac likewise died an Old Man, and full of days. Gen 47. ^8
Jacob lived to a 14. 7. years. Psalm. 3^. ^lt.
David esteemed it a blessing earnestly to be prayed for; Spare me that I may
recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen; And again, Psalm.
71. 18.
Now, when I am old and gray headed* O God, for sake me not, until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation, etc. and he obtained it, 1 Kings 2.
Now, can any man be so shameless as to reproach that age of man's life, which
God himself has graced, by promising and giving it as a special blessing to
such as he entirely loved; and by threatening and inflicting the contrary upon
the wicked? Genesis 27. 33.
I have blessed Jacob (says I saac to Esau) yea, and he shall be blessed.
Man's blessing there stands firm and irrevocable, and shall not Gods much more?
Yes certainly; and therefore OLD AGE is both truly and firmly blessed. Prove
3. 16.
Riches and Honor may be a left hand gift, but length of days comes to us in
Wisdoms right hand. Excellently I^ Hexam. lib. 1.
Saint Ambrose, Quid naturam accusas, O homo? habet illa impedimenta quadam,
senectutem and infirmitatem: senectus ipsa in bonis moribus dulcior, etc. O
man, why art thou so injuriously busy in accusing nature? she is not
altogether free from impediments, as OLD AGE, and infirmity; but even that
weak age, in a good and holy life is more comfortable; in counsel more wise,
for constancy to entertain death, more able, and to suppress lust more
strong then any other age: the infirmity of the body, is the minds sobriety,
says he.

THE SECOND BOOK
In which it is showed that length of days is dignified by time and
opportunity, with many special privileges, more then any other age.

CHAP. 1. Wherein it is proved that OLD AGE is as a rich storehouse, or
treasury.
HItherto I have done my best, to free my Client OLD AGE from Calumniations; my
forlorn Client, that sues in forma pauperis, or hominis neglecti, and (I
doubt) speeds accordingly: yet through my want of skill, rather then of will
and desire to manifest the goodness of his cause. I will now try what may be
said for him (the next thing proposed) by way of demonstration, that the evils
to which he is subject, are fully recompensed by the opportunity and means for
good, which he has above all other ages. All privileges meet in Old Age.


And first, of his first privilege. I will not doubt to say, that whatsoever
good things accrue to man in the other part of his life, do all ordinarily
meet in this age, and in it are much nearer to Ornaments of mind.
perfection, As first, the ornaments of the mind, KNOWLEDGE 1 Knowledge.
formerly gotten by reading and study: WISDOM ^ Wisdom.
gathered both by study and experience: for he is indeed truly wise, who has
found the propositions, which he has laid up for his use, to be true, by long
trial: and is able rightly to apply them in his practice. PRVDENCE, 3 Prudence.
or discretion, purchased by a long continued observing of all pertinent
circumstances, in every case. FORTITUDE ^ Courage
and courage, a^ising from a right apprehension of all occurrences, whereby it
comes to pass, that he fears where there is cause to fear (a necessary
virtue, which who so wants, is rather foole-hardy, then valiant) and where
there is no cause of fear or doubt, is hardy and bold as a Lion. PATIENCE, 5
Patience
growing from the many victories which he has had over afflictions, outward
and 6 Constancy.
inward. CONSTANCY, as being (by experience also) settled and well grounded in
his judgment of good and evil, truth and falsehood. In a word (to pass by
other particulars) the multitude of his years have given time to the many
actions, from which habits do arise: so that through long custom, both his
wits Heb 5. ^lt.
are exercised to discern of every thing, and likewise his mind is fraught
with virtues of all kinds.

Neither is he a storer this way External privileges of Old Age*
only, for the perfection of inward indowments, but rich also in things
outward; as children, his joy and comfort, in whom he shall live after death;
honor, wealth, yea and health also, if youth have not played the prodigal,
and been a waster of them.

And here now I think of the Resemblances betwixt the seasons of the year,
and ages of man.
Analogy, or correspondency that is between the seasons of the year, and the
ages of man's life. The Springtime resembles childhood: the Summer, and
therein the growth of the fruits of the earth, youth: the Autumn, or harvest,
the ripe-age: the beginning of the Winter, when all the profits arising from
the husband-mans labors and charges, are come into his barnes and
storehouses; the age we here Fit S^mi li^s.
speak of. As therefore at this time of the year, the barn is full of corn,
the hive of honey and wax; as then the fleece is laid up ready for warm
winter clothing, and all the other provision, by the thriving Pater-familias,
is stored up for the necessary use of the house: and as then the Ants heap is
grown great for succor and food: so to Old-men all the forenamed good things
come in, and crown this age with all manner of blessings: If (I say) the
foregoing times have not been slothful and unprofitable servants to their
Master for whom they were all set a work. So tenderly is the eye of Gods
providence cast on the Old Man, that he takes order for his being plentifully
furnished with all necessaries, before he brings him to this infirm bodily
estate. As at the Creation man was not made, till God had in a readiness for
him, the whole worlds provision.

But soft, will some man say: let not the Old Man vaunt too much of the good
he receives from the times past and gone: they store up evil to him as well
as good: they daily set him on the score, and he must pay all when the
reckoning comes in. A disorderly impenitent fore-led life brings heaps of
wrath upon him, and the heavy burden of sin, then when he is least able to
bear it: to say nothing of other distresses in his temporal estate. I answer:
It is Discomforts are no disparagements to Old Age.
true, too true. The person of the Old Man oft-times feels the smart of those
discomforts: but it is no disparagement to the age that incurres no blame by
it, and it is the age so much disregarded, that is here pleaded for. Now when
we see innocence suffer, how will it affect us? with contempt, or
commiseration? surely if OLD AGE be in any man so happy (in some by Gods
gracious working it is) as to make a Comedy of that which was in danger to
prove a Tragedy; by concluding whatsoever has passed in the doubtful Acts and
Scenes of it in a joyful Catastrophe; who will be so envious, as not to grace
it with an answerable Plaudite?

CHAP. II. Touching OLD-AGES second privilege, viz. means for a greater
measure of grace.
THis my claim for OLD AGE, maintains not an uncapablenesse of it, either in
Infancy, when God is pleased graciously to work it, or in childhood, or the
other two ages; but this, That many years and long Old Age an help to grace.
life is no small help this way; and that in diverse respects: First, in regard
of the time it gives for it. Secondly, in respect of the nature of grace, which
is to grow: the more certainly, the more time it has. Thirdly, because God
the best and richest, the bountifullest master does give the greatest reward to
them that have served him longest.

Concerning the first. Time and Fit time and place must be for every thing.
place fit and convenient must be granted to every thing. As it was said by the
grand Enginer Archimedes, Da ubi consistam and movebo terram: set me in a fit
place, and I will move the earth: so says the skillful and industrious man,
give me time, and I will work wonders. Time it is, by which being and increase
is given to every creature. Six days God took for the Creating of the world,
and all things in it; that short time he allotted to that work: and the rest
of time he has appointed for his providence in governing whatsoever he has
made: for his preserving, ordering, and blessing with growth and increase every
creature, and each good thing he has bestowed on it. From hence it will
follow, Old Age has best means for grace.
that the men to whom God has granted a long time and many years, have by it
the better means and helps for adding still more and more to the grace they
have received. As, to insist in some particulars: they may attain to more
knowledge then others, and a riper judgment, Heb. 5. the Apostle compares the
Word of God to food: and the hearers and learners of it he distinguishes
according to the several kinds of food. The Word has milk, the first
principles and easiest parts of it; and that is for children and babes in
Christ. It has also stronger meat, points of doctrine more hard to be
understood: this is for men of riper age in Christianity, such as through
custom, have their wits exercised to discern between good and evil, as in
that place, ver. 12. the difference there is in the time: Concerning the time
(says the Apostle) ye ought to be teachers, etc.

The light in the dawning of the day is not so clear, as when the Sun is risen
above our Horizon: so neither is the newborn babe so enlightened in his tender
years, as when time has affoorded him more growth.

As it is in knowledge, so in Old. Age has experience.
faith. For the experience a Christian has (by long continuance in this
estate) of Gods merciful dealing with him in things temporal and spiritual,
gives strength to his assurance: as it did to David after his trial of Gods
assistance in his overcomming and slaying the Lion and the Bear. In repentance
likewise: for by the daily renewing of it, throughout a man's life, it is still
more and more perfected: and so in the rest.

I^a Seges demil vot^ respondet avari Agricolae, bis quae solemn, bis frigora
sensit. Virg in Georg
The corne-ground which has for two Summers and two Winters felt the
comfortable heat of the Sun, and the chastening frosty-cold, and has been
plowed oftener then ordinary, and so passed through many seasons; thereby
becomes the more fruitful: so the man on whom the comfortable reviving rays
of the Son of Righteousness, and the bitter nipps of afflictions, outward
and inward, have wrought a long time, is by it abundantly increased in all
grace and goodness. Why? because he has had more time Ier. 4 4.
for the breaking up of his fallow-ground, and preventing thereby his sowing
among the thorns: and this is the Old-mans case: for many years give him time
and opportunity for it.

The mysteries of salvation in The Old Age of the world had greatest mysteries.
the Old Testament, were indeed mysteries, being delivered in Types and figures
unto the people Gal. 4.
which were but as infants and children: but in the New Testament, and the last
times (the Old Age of the world) they were made more plain and evident.

The Apostles of our Savior, in The Apostles most excellent in their elder
years.
their minority, there beginnings, how weak were they? for their little faith
they were often checked by their Master: and when they had been for a good
space in Christ's School, they were notwithstanding but novices in their
conceiving of some very necessary points: as of his death, of his Resurrection
and of the vocation of the Gentiles, and how little had they then profited in
that patience and constancy, which should have been in them? in suffering, how
weak was Peter, when he denied his Master in that fearful manner? and all
the Apostles at Christ's death, when they forsook him? yet afterward in their
elder years, they were the trumpets of the Gospel in preaching: Martyrs in
suffering: and with knowledge, faith, constancy, zeal, and all manner of gifts
miraculously furnished. It is true: This was not to be ascribed chiefly to time
(as neither the other increase before mentioned) but to the mighty working of
the Spirit in them yet this, that increase of age, or time, gave opportunity
for it, cannot be denied.

What think we of the Patriarks The old Patriarks advantage
before the flood; their many years, their living (some of them) to almost a
1000, was it not a great advantage to them, for the repairing of the Image of
God, so much defaced not long Grace by growth gets strength.
before?

The next Reason to prove that many years give great help to increase of
grace; is from the nature of it. It is naturally apt, yea mighty and powerful
in growth. Whence it follows, that the longer it continues in any, the more it
may grow and increase: and OLD AGE affoords time for it. As the Word of God,
from which it arises and springs, 1 Pet. 1.
is immortal seed, and the sower, or Seeds-man, God himself, the most
skillful and Almighty Husbandman, who with the same hand, plants, waters, and
gives the increase: so the grace and fruit it self, is in such manner blessed
by the worker of it, as that it has power to grow abundantly.

In the first of Geneses, ver. 28. It is said, that God blessed his creatures
by giving them power to bring forth fruit, and multiply, etc. Now as the
blessing upon those reasonlesse creatures was for increase, and conveyed to
them a power for the same, which we call the Law of nature: so the other
blessing upon man, gives power likewise, not only for natural propagation,
but also for spiritual growth; which we may call the Law of grace, because God
by the gracious working of his Spirit, confers on it this power of increasing.
Now, as time is required for it, so the more time (which is a privilege of
OLD AGE) the more opportunity and means. 1 Cor. 13 11.
When I was a child (says the Apostle) I spoke as a child, I understood as a
child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childishness.

The seeds of grace, when they are first sown, are the least of all seeds: yet
growth (by time) makes them the greatest: our Savior instances for it, Mat.
13. 31.
in the grain of mustard seed.

So you have the second Reason Old servants respected by God.
to prove, that by multitude of years grace is multiplied. The third and
last, is taken from Gods special love and respect to an old servant, (a point
before touched) and his bounty in rewarding him above others. Every good master
does so: and God is the best Lord that any creature can serve. He rewards, not
only at the end of the day, when all our work is done, with a crown of
righteousness; but, the mean while, in the Kingdom of Grace likewise while
we are in working, and even by means of our work, and for it (as our reward)
with a greater measure of grace, even here in this life. Such a servant shall
double his talents, and thereupon be made ruler over much, and enter into his
Masters joy.

CHAP. III. Prooving that OLD AGE is honorable.
We have seen the Old-Mans second privilege: the third is Honor.

Honor, on whom soever it is Old Age honorable.
rightly conferred, is a great gift. A good name Eccl. 7. 3
is better then a precious ointment, Pro. 22. 1
To be chosen above great riches; but that only is true honor, which is given
by God himself primarily, and by men his subdispensers of it, according to his
rule and direction, Laus a laudato, he is rightly praised, that is praised by
the worthiest of praise. Man, judging of another worth, may and often does
err, his judicium, many times, is prejudicium, he judges with prejudice; not
uprightly, but with partiality, with a squint eye, and upon sinister respects.
But God is the true and just Judge, and the only giver of Honor, and God
fastens it on the gray-haires in the fifth Commandment.

But here hap'ly some man will say, Prove. 16. 31.
The heary head is indeed a crown of glory, but how? being found in the way of
righteousness, otherwise not: and so Honor is not the Old-Mans privilege,
but virtues shadow the reward of righteousness in whomsoever. I answer* Honor
belongs to the very age of an Old Man: for it is certain, and will not be
denied, that men in years, even for their years, are to be ranked among the
Fathers meant in the fifth Commandment. Now to all Fathers is Honor there
allotted, asto Fathers; and therefore even for this to Oldmen. The Magistrate in
the Commonweal, the Minister in the Church, the Father and Master in a Family
have right to it, as they are Fathers. May the subject, or the flock and
people, or the child and servant withhold this Honor, in case the forenamed
superiors do fail of what is required of them? no man may, no man will say
it. The meaning of the place therefore, I conceive to be (...), That when the
Old Man is not old only, but also virtuous, then his honor is much the
greater, even a crown of glory, as is also the Magistrates, the Ministers, the
Fathers and the Masters. In the 1 Timothy 5. 17. it is said, That the Elders which
rule well, are worthy of double honor, of honor (doubtless no man will
gainsay it) as they are Elders and Rulers; but when they rule well, the
honor must be doubled upon them. So in that place of the Proverbs; it is
plain therefore, that honor is due to Old-men, even for their years, which
is a privilege not granted to any of the other ages.

Elihu was silent before his Elders, in reverence to their age, Job 32. 6. The
glory of the aged, is the Gray-head, Prove. 20. 29. OLD AGE carries honor in
the very name, (...), which signifies both OLD AGE, and honor.

We read of Agamemnon, that when he entertained the Worthies among the
Greeks at a feast: he preferred Nestor, old Nestor above the rest, and
invited him first. And Gadera, a City in Spain, is said to have had a Temple
dedicated to OLD AGE, as to the mistress of knowledge. A good rule also it is,
which Phocid.
Menander gives: that every one should honor a man of his Fathers age, as his
Father himself. He would have also the Old Man, and the Nobleman to be of
equal honor.

CHAP. IIII. In which we have the fourth privilege, Liberty for private
devotions.
THis also falls to the lot of Retiredness a privilege
OLD AGE. And a sweet privilege it is, when a man has leave secum esse and
secum vivere, as the Proverb is, to be by himself after that he has attained
the pabulum animi, the souls provision, of which God gives greater store (or
at least means for it) to the greatest storer, the Oldman. Now the devotions
for which he may secum esse, are principally two, Prayer, and Meditation or
Contemplation

Touching Prayer: If J should Excellencies of prayer.
stand to show, first, the necessity of it, for that all Gods promises depend
upon this duty, Ask and ye shall have: Call upon me and I will deliver thee.
Secondly, the encouragement, in that God invites us to it, calls upon us to
call upon him (which may embolden us to come unto the throne of grace.)
Thirdly, the strictness of the command concerning this part of Gods service.
Fourthly, the many examples of the faithful that hereby have prevailed with
God. Fifthly, Gods gracing it, in that it is in Scripture usually put for the
whole service or worship of God, as Joel 2. 32. If I should insist on these or
other like points, for the praise of Invocation; it would of it self grow to a
long discourse, and be (I suppose) not very needful, because many others have
very well, and copiously written of it: and so, it would be but actum agere;
therefore here, no more but this, that vacancy for this part of private
Devotion, is given to men of years, more then to others.

Concerning Meditation or Contemplation commended.
Contemplation, something, though not all that might be said of it.
Contemplation, Tho. 22. quest. 180. artic. 3.
the School defines to be, Liber animi intuitus in rebus, the minds free
beholding of what is in things. Plato.
The Philosopher could tell us that it is the minds nourishment or food, like
to Ambrosia and Nectar, which the gods are fained to feed upon, and so divine
and heavenly a thing is it, that another could say, Arist. moral. lib. 10.
Nulla actio dijs digna videtur, praeter Contemplationem. In a word, by
Contemplation, we have our conversation in Heaven: and the objects of this
heavenly Exercise are many. As namely, the Word of God, Matter of meditation.
which is a spacious field for our thoughts and meditations to range in, as
David shows, Psalm 119. the largest of all his Psalms. The works of God
also: the Creation, Preservation, Redemption of the world; and therein Gods
glory, in his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Justice, and his other
Attributes. Our own particular estate likewise: how miserable in our selves,
how happy through Gods mercy in Christ Jesus. Our frailty and uncertainty of
our lives here; the last judgment, Heaven and the joys thereof, to bring us
to them: Hell, and its torments, to keep us from them: and other innumerable
objects. I add hereunto the sweet commemoration of whatsoever good we have
done by Gods help and assistance, in the precedent days of our pilgrimage. O
how happy are we if we can as Esa. 38. 3.
Hezekias, humbly plead with God, our integrity and upright walking before him.
Also the delight which men do, and may take in ruminating on the fruits of
their wits, learning, and labors; as Homer on his Iliads, Virgil on his
Aeneads, Nevius on his Bellum Punicum, Plautus in the repetition of his
Truculentus, and his Pseudolus. But above all, (for in those other there was
nothing but earth and dross in comparison) David on his Psalms, he was the
sweet singer of Israel: and (doubtless) a great comfort it was to him, when
his soul in Contemplation fed on the sundry ravishing passages, touching the
Creation and Providence of God over all his creatures, but specially his
goodness toward his Church and people, in their many deliverances, and his
innumerable benefits toward them, temporal and spiritual: and yet more
feelingly, (if it might be) when he came home to himself, and called to mind
what God had done in his particular* how he had advanced him, how graciously
and mightily preserved him from the hands of Saul, etc. What pleasure and
delight he took in reading these things, his Psalms do abundantly testify.
In the penning and meditation whereof, he may seem to have soared up to
Heaven, as on the wings of an Eagle, or in Elias fiery Chariot. He was the
first that meditated on the Hymns himself had penned, after him to be for
the use of the Church of God, even to the end of the world. Contemplation sweet.


Heavenly Contemplation certainly is asweet comfort, and incredible pleasure
does it afford to men, which makes me not to marvel at the Monks in former
ages of the Church (for of the new Monks in the Church of Monks of old.
Rome, I say no more but heu quam dissimiles!) they were so taken with this
kind of life, as to give over forthis one joy of Contemplation, all the
honors, pleasures, riches they had before so highly esteemed; falling (no
doubt) upon Salomons resolution, that they are all vanity and vexation. It is
therefore observed that among the policies Rome has invented for the upholding
of the Papacy, this is not the best prevalent, that they have Monasteries for
men to rest in, that in them, as is pretended, they may solace themselves in
heavenly Contemplation, freed from the worldly cares and businesses, which had
wearied them before. But howsoever this profession is abused by them, it is
true that Contemplation Sweetness of Solitatinesse.
brings great delight, Secum vivere is right worthy therefore the name of a
privilege, and solitudo, Tho. 20. 21. quest. 188. artic. 8.
says the Schoole-man, est instrumentum congruum Contemplationi, retiredness
is Contemplations opportunity. And again, Tho ^. 2 quest. 172 artic. 1.
Anima quando abstra^itur a corpore, aptior redditur ad percipiendum influxum
spirituali^m, the soul sequestered from things corporal, is the sitter to
receive the influence of spiritualls. A happy divorticulum is it to Old-men, so
many of them as while they are thus by themselves, can truly say, (...) God is
with us, viz. to assist us in all good and godly cogitations, and to repel all
that are evil.

Contrariwise, most miserable Contemplation an Old-mans joy.
were man's estate, especially in these elder years (which it is not, nor
cannot be denied, bring with them abodily weakness) were not their souls
raised up and raped, with great joy and rejoicing, by Contemplation. Consider
that one place, Psalm. 4. 4, 5, etc. ad finem. As there it fell out to David, so
it shall to us, If we commune with our own hearts upon our bed, and offer to
God the sacrifices of righteousness, and trust in the Lord; howsoever worldly
men wander in their thoughts, and cannot be settled in a right resolution
touching the true GOOD: yet on us God will (while in our meditations our
thoughts are on him alone, and all the powers of our soul are carried up to
Heaven) lift up the light of his countenance on us, and thereby sprinkle our
hearts with such joy as will bring us to an holy security: we shall lay us down
and sleep in peace, true and sound peace.

In the first of Kings, Chap. 5. Times of peace fit test for Gods house.
ver. 4, 5. Now (says Solomon) The Lord my God has given me rest on every
side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent: and behold I
purpose to build an house to the name of the Lord my God, that (he saw) was
the fittest time for such a task, the time of Peace and rest: and accordingly
he finished it within the compass of seven years, 1 Kings 6. 38. whereas Ezra
and Nehemiah opposed by enemies, were a far longer time in reedifying that
Old Age has least disturbance.
Temple. So is it touching the repair of our souls and bodies, the Temples of
the Holy Ghost, then are we best fitted and enabled for this so great and
necessary a work, when we are least disturbed by our spiritual enemies, as in
OLD AGE.

Certainly that great Arist. Ethic. lib. ^0 cap* 7.
Philosopher, though a Heathen, saw somewhat this way, when he placed man's
happiness in Contemplation.

The innumerable errors of our Meditation on Gods mercies is a sinners cordial.
life, especially, our great and manifold sins, do often and even daily
recoyle upon the conscience of every penitent sinner: and no salve there is for
this sore, no medicine to cure this sickness, but the multitude of Gods
mercies meditated on, and applied by faith, which bring in continually matter
of great comfort to the poor, fainting, and almost perishing soul.

Now for this sweet solace, no Old Age fittest for meditation.
part of our life gives so good opportunity, as our elder years, in which we
have both an immunity from bodily labors, and freedom from earthly pleasures,
as has been showed. This therefore is a great and much to be esteemed
benefit of OLD AGE, a singular Privilege.

CHAP. V. Containing the conclusion of the Discourse.
ANd now, because I have in this Tract, digressed sometime from the professed
subject of it, and touched upon the other ages of this life, by way of
comparing them together; I would from that which has been said, raise an
exhortation to so many of the ages as are capable of it: in imitation of the
Apostle, 1 John 2. 12. I write to you little children, I write to you Fathers,
I write to you ^oung-men, etc.

first therefore, to Children. Children happy if well seasoned.
O how happy are ye, if now in these your tender years, like young plants, ye
be set straight in a fruitful soil: if now, as new vessels, ye be seasoned
with sweet and whole some liquor; if now, with 2 Timothy 3 15.
Timothy ye know the holy Scriptures; if ye now 1 Pet. 2.
desire the sincere milk of the Word, and do therein taste how bountiful the
Lord is. Certainly after these your so good beginnings, ye will be blessed in
your further proceedings, increase daily in grace and Christianity, and grow
still nearer and nearer to perfection: and when ye are come toward the end of
your Pilgrimage, and do wax old; which ye already desire, if not in respect
of the age it self, yet out of an unwillingnesse to die, and that ye may be
partakers of the blessing of long life. Pro. ^1. ^.
Being taught in your childhood the trade of your way, when ye are old ye
shall not depart from it: and through it ye shall abundantly reap the fruit
of this your seedtime A virtuous and godly childhood, is a sure foundation for
happiness in all the following ages. Parents must well season children.


But this premonirion will sort better, and be more effectual, given to
Parents: to them who live in their children, when themselves are dead and gone:
to them that are entrusted with them in their tender years: to them, who in
their children shall be either happy or miserable: happy in their happiness,
if they set them in the right way, while they are more easily brought into it:
and miserable in their misery likewise, if then they neglect them.

In the next place to Youngmen. Hap'ly the weeds, which Youth must pluck out
weeds grown in childhood.
(through the corruption of nature, and your security) have (unawares) sprung
up in your lives while you were children, are many and rank: suffer them now
to be plucked up by the roots. For when they grow in strength, as you in
years, Infaelix lolium and steriles dominantur avenae, they will domineere
over the good seed that is sown in you, and choke it.

Say not, resolve not with your Youth needs great circumspection.
selves, we will rejoice in our youth, and will set our hearts, etc. Rather be
exhorted and persuaded now in your youth to Remember your Creator. You must
know that for you the bit is fitter and of more use then the spur. The heat of
your blood and quickness of your spirits do prick you forward; but the thing
is not so much how fast, as how well ye run. Know, and forget it not, that
ye walk on slippery ground. Ambros de viduis lib. 1.
Vicina est lapsibus adolescentia (says a Father) youth of all ages, is most
subject to falling: Ye have need therefore of the greatest circumspection and
wariness. Bodily pleasure (of which before) has the face of a friend, but the
heart of an enemy, a most insinuating enemy it is; and there is it most busy,
and prevails most where there is least watch fulness to keep it out, least
strength to resist it, and greatest aptness to entertain it, as ordinarily
there is in this your age: Hieron. ad Nepot.
wherein (says one) lust and disorderly affections are to virtue, as green
wood to the fire.

Think ye never of the evil Careless young-me^ worse then beasts.
days that are coming, the winter of your life? then are you not so wise as
many other creatures much inferior to you, being void of reason and
understanding. Shame ye not to be set to School to the Ant, Pro. 6. 6. when
reason is eclipsed by sensuality, men become worse then the brute beasts. Be
not sensible only of the present, of that Terent. in Adelph.
Quod ante pedes modo est, which is before you, and at your foot as it were:
but look forward to the end of this, and the beginning of the next life. What
you now sow in youth, you Care in youth benefits future ages*
shall reap in age. If now ye provide for health, for a good outward estate,
and chiefly for grace, and the inward furniture of the soul; ye shall have
the benefit and comfort of it, when ye are old. If not, most miserable will
ye then be, by the neglect and loss of them.

I persuade my self, and am Old men see how former years might have been
better employed.
confident of it, that there is not an Old Man in the world (such only
excepted as never had, no^ yet have so much as common wit and understanding)
that does not see how (were he now in his first years of discretion) he might
improve his talents (be they more, or be they fewer) to his exceeding great
advantage, this men of years see when it is too late. Study you therefore this
art of improoving (especially in grace and goodness) now in this your time for
growth, and put it in practice year after year: you cannot imagine how rich
it will make you: how the increase will come in upon you, use upon use; in this
only lawful kind of usury. Youths fault to scorn Old Age.


I cannot end, till I have left with you one cavear, or advice more. It is
this: that ye must be so far from the common sin of casting a scornful
eye on Old-men; as to think your selves never so well sorted, as Youth must
hearken to Old-men.
when ye are in their company. And this counsel ye shall take, not from me,
but from Saint In Epist. ad August
Ierom: Difficilibus ac morosis senibus, aures libenter praebeto: qui
proverbiorum sententijs adolescentes ad recta studia cohortantur. Lend thy
attentive ear willingly to Oldmen, seem they to you never so froward, and
hard to please: for by their wise speeches and counsels, young men are brought
into a right course of life. And with him also agrees Lib. de ordine vitae.
Saint Bernard: Aequalium usu^ dulcior, senum tutior, hap'ly (says he) thy
converse Young men must be conversant with Old-men.
with thy equals, who are ready to humor thee, may be more pleasing to thee:
but thy safest and most profitable way, is to be conversant with thy betters
and elders, so much as thou may. Resolve therefore as one did, Quoad possitis
and liceat, a senis latere nunquam disced^re: never to depart from the side of
the Old Man, with whom thou may have leave to converse. And here it may
fitly be remembered, that the young men which gave Rehoboam bad counsel, were
such as had grown up with him, 1 King. 12. 8.

Now, to men of mature, or Middleage must redeem the time.
middle-age, thus much. This is your Autumn, the year of your life is whirled
about and now come toward the period. Have ye hitherto been unthrifts? has
your childhood and youth brought in little or nothing? O then how must you now
bestirre you! Ye have neglected the first spring of your year: the latter is
now come, and that is your next season, though not so hopeful as the other.
Yet now at last awake, and begin to look about you: Repent you of your former
failings, and press now hard toward the mark: the harder, because formerly
ye have lost much time, and that which remains to you, is but short.

On the contrary, have ye thrived Good things must be communicated.
by your endeavors, and Gods blessing upon them in times past? are ye now
increased both in outward and inward riches, and become great among them with
whom ye live? O then let your neighbors be the better for it: Let there be
to them, ali quid boni, propter vicinum bonum. Let not your greatness make
others little, either in themselves, or in your esteem. Let not your wealth
be their woe and poverty, your honor their disgrace and abasement. Be not
like the tall Cedars that overtop the the lowly shrubs. If ye be wise and know
much, let others light their candle at your lamps. Know that whatsoever you
have or are, you have received it, and not for your selves alone, but that
others may have from you as freely, as you from the great DONOR. Old-men must
look back to their former passages.


Lastly, to my self, and my coetanei, all that are far gone in years. Let
us now being near the end of our journey, of our travail toward the heavenly
Canaan: and having passed through the dangerous and trouble some wilderness of
our life, imagine our selves to be on some high mountain, on Pisgah, the top
of Nebo, if you please: where Moses was being of the age of 120, when he had
finished his course, and his many, his 42. wearisome journeyes were at an end,
and from thence let us look back to the sundry passages of our life past (as*
hap'ly Moses did to his and the peoples wandering in the wilderness, though he
ascended the Mount to another end) calling to mind how God has dealt with us
(least we fall into the unthankfullnesse of that people)* how God has
preserved and kept us continually, in the womb, and in our coming into the
world, as forth of our prison in Egypt: in our infancy, childhood and riper
age. And on the other side, that we may see and acknowledge that Gods patience
has still gone along with his mercies and bounty toward us; Old men must
think of their former failings.
Let us cast up (so near as we can) all the particular failings and errors of
our life: How we have wandered up and down in the days of our pilgrimage
toward heaven: How we have (as the Israelites) in our journeyes gone
crookedly, sometimes forward, otherwhile backward: now near to our Canaan,
anon further off, never Heb. 12. 13.
making straight steps to our feet. And chiefly, let our greatest sins stand
ever before us (as David's did, Psalm. 51. 3.) and be laid to heart: and that now
while it is 2 Cor 6. 2.
a time accepted, and the day of salvation. While it is Luke 19. 42.
our day, this certainly is ours, whether the morrow will be our day, we know
not.

That which often deceives Old Age most calls for repentance.
younger men (the blind hope that they shall live yet many years, and that
therefore there is no have of their repentance or amendment) cannot have the
least color for our deferring. Our very years, besides the sense of our
frailty, daily and hourly call upon us to prepare for death, by making up our
last account.

To conclude all: because in the precedent Tract, something has been said in
the defense and praise of our despised age; for admonition therefore (least we
should deceive our selves in our particulars) let the following Distick be
ever remembered by us.

Qui laudat quasi jam facias, quae non ^acis, ille Laudando wonet, and quae
sac^enda, no^at. Art thou here praised unworthily?
Then to be worthy, learn thereby.
Imprimatur

THO: WYKES. R P. Ep. Land. Cap. Domest.

An Alphabeticall Table.
A
ACtions nor all nor the best in bodily strength, Page 23. Man casting up his
Account a weighty work, Page 47. Old men fittest to cast up their Accounts,
Page 48. Afflictions are to weane us from pleasures, Page 7^. Agamemnon
preferred old Nestor before the Worthies of Greece, Page 83. Age increases
learning, Page 26. Every Age has proper employments, P. 53* God lays no more
on any Age then what it is able to bear, Page 53. All Ages subject to
casualties Page 148. Every Age has a more certain period then Old Age, Page
150. Resemblances betwixt the seasons of the year and Ages of man, Page 165.
Agesilaus his hardiness, Page 15. Apostles most excellent in their elder
years, Page 174.
B
Bodies abilities common to wicked and beasts, Page 20. Body not destroyed by
death, Page 131.
C
Casualties befall all Ages, page 148. Cato Major learned the Grecke tongue in
his Old Age, page 16. Child-hoods infirmities, page 91. Childrens yoke, page
92. Contemplation an Old-mans joy, page 192. Contemplation commended, page 186.
Contemplation sweet, page 190. Correction of children, page 93. Children in
what cases they may be put out to nurse, page 152. Children happy if well
seasoned, page 196. Causes of death in Childhood, page 154. Complaints should
be against ones self, p. 8. Corporal pleasures, See Pleasures. Corruption the
way to generation, page 130.
D
Death what makes it most greevous to good men, page 126. Men's rashness in
speaking against Death, page 127. Death wherein terrible, page 128. Death,
remedy against it, page 128. Death a blessing, page 130. Death destroys not
the body, page 131. Death opens heaven gates, page 132. Death brings
happiness, page 134. Death is suiting to a man's life, p. 137. Death why
unwelcome, p 137. Death imbittered by an ill life, p. 138. Death imbittered by
love of this world, p. 140 Death how abhorr^d and how desired, p 141 Death a
pulling down of a tabernacle, p. 143 Death as the corruption of seed, page
144. Deaths curse removed, p. 146. Death of infants causes of it, p. 142. Death
causes of it in childhood, p. 154. Death causes of i^ in Man-age, p* 154.
Diseases befall all, p. 1^0. Distemper of former ages makes Old Age the nearer
to death, p. 151. Discontentednesse at ones estate, page 7. Discomforts are no
disparagement to Old Age page ^7. Drunkenness and uncleanenesse seldom
severed, p 79.
E
Experience a good teacher, page 24. Evil of former ages follows Old Age,
page 155.
F
Fabius Maximus Augur 6^ years. p 16. To order Families Old Age the fittest, p
42 Families Old-men worthy governors of them, ^ 45.
G
Gadera a City in Spain dedicated to Old Age, p 18^. Georgius Leontinus had
nothing to accuse Old Age p ^ Glory of man wherein it consists, p. 11. Good
the object of pleasure, p. 59. The Kingdom of Grace brings joy, p. 135. Grace
by growth gets strength, p. 175. The Grave as a Goldsmiths forge, p. 145. Good
things must be communicated, p. 205.
H
Health dangerous, p. 12^. Health common to beasts, p. 1^. House how best built
up, p. 122.
I
Employment Old Age makes not unfit for it, page 10. Greatest Employments elder
years best fitted for, page 12. Infirmity what it is, page 86. Infirmity of
child hood, page 99. Infirmity of young men, page 95. Infants infirmities, page
86. Infants come into the world crying, p. 89. Infants how first handled, p.
90. Infants deatli causes of it, p. 152.
L
Lawful things in danger let go, p. 77. Learning increases by age, p 26. True
Learning what it is, p 40. Liberty abused by youth, p. 96. An ill Life
imbitters death, p. 138. Life uncertain, p. 151.
M.
Man age when it begins, p. 103. Man-age in evil irremoveable, p 103. Man age
aspires high, p* 104. Man age prone to wrong, p 105. Causes of death in
Man-age, p. 154. Man's glory wherein it consists, p 21. Massarissa went
bare-head and barefoot at 90 years age p. 16. Matter of Meditation, p 187.
Meditation on Gods mercies a sinners cordial. p 194. Meditation, Old Age
fittest for it p. 195. Middle-age must redeem the time, p. 204. Minds
abilities the best, p* 19. Most good done by the Mind, p. 23. Ornaments of the
Mind, p. 162. Ministers work a weighty task, p. 34. Ministers compared to
Shepherds, Builders, Husbandmen Watchmen, Stewards, Ambassadors, p 3^ etc.
Monks of old, p 190. Mothers care over children, p. 94.
N
In what cases children may be put out to Nurse, p. 152.
O
Old Age what it is p 2. Old Age has the best opportunities for wisdom, p.
24. Old-ages defects most in the body, p. 27. Old Age fittest for writing, p.
40. Old Age fittest for ordering of Families, p. 42 Spiritual pleasure most
proper to Old Age, p. 69. It is a glory to Old age that it takes off from
pleasures, p. 80. Old Age works joy in the want of pleasure, p. 80 Old Age not
to be blamed with personal vices, p. 109. Old Age has experience, p 124,
172. Other ages as liable to death as Old Age, p. 147. Every age has a more
certain period then Old Age, p 150. Distemper of former ages makes Old Age the
nearer to death, p 151. Evil of former ages follows Old Age, p. 155 All
privileges meet in Old Age, 162. Old-ages external privileges, p. 164.
Discomforts are no disparagements to Oldage. p 167. Old Age an help to grace,
p. 169. Old Age has best means for grace, p. 170. The Old age of the World
had great mysteries, p 173. Old Age honorable, p. 179. Great things done by
Old-men, p 13. Old age has least disturbance, p 194. Old age fittest for
meditation, p. 195. Old age most calls for repentance, p. ^09. Old-men must
think of their former failings, p. 208. Old-mens abilities in the graces of
the mind, p. 19. Old men of best use in peace, p. 29. Old-men best Generals in
war, page 31. Old-men best counselors for war, p. 32. Old men not so fit
for the Pulpit as young, page 37. Old men worthy Governors of families, p 45
Old-men best furnished for writing, p 41. Old-men fittest to cast up their
accounts, p 48 Old-men best apprehend Gods promises, p. 49 Old men's motion to
heaven the strongest, p. ^0 Old-mens care for others good, p. 106. Old-men best
use wealth, p. 108. Old-men not covetous, p. 110. The ground of Old-mens
parsimony, p. 111. Old-men war, p. 112. Old-men long for better times, p.
112. Old-men why hard to please. p. 113. Old-men praisers of former times, p.
113. Old-men just reprovers, p. 113. Old-men most think of their former
failings, page 208. Old men see how former years might have been better
employed, p. 203. Old-men must look back to* their former passages, p. 206.
Old servant not cast of by God, p. 49. Old servants respected by God, p. 178.
P
Parents must well season children, p. 198. In Peace old men of best use, p.
29. Times of Peace fittest for Gods house, p. 193 The old Patriarks advantage,
p. 175. Physic wherein useful, p. 118. Plato died with his pen in his hand at
81. years of age, p. 16. Pleasure what it is, p. 59. Pleasure, the object of
it is good, p. 59. False Pleasure, p. 60. Worldly Pleasures, p 62. Worldly
Pleasures how good, p. 62. Pleasures are good only to the faithful, p 64
Pleasures corporal and spiritual how differenced, p. 64, etc. Pleasures
spiritual most proper to Old Age, page 69. Pleasure corporal want of it no
great disadvantage, p. 70. Pleasure corporal the vanity of it, p. 70, etc.
Pleasures corporal dangerous, p 74. Pleasures corporal can hardly be well
used page 75. Pleasures make brutish, p. 7^. Pleasures are dangerous guests, p.
81, etc. Pleasures bodily lost recompensed with spiritual joys, p. 83. Prayer
excellencies of it, p. 184. Preaching the chiefest Ministerial function, page
38. Preaching by pen, p. 38. The Pen goes further then the voice, p. 39.
Promises of God best apprehended by old men, p 43.
Q
Quiet acceptable to old age, p. 56.
R
Retiredness a privilege, p. 184.
S
Old Servants not cast off by God, p, 49. Old Servants respected by God, p.
178. Sickness whence it came, p. 115. Sickness by sin, p. 119. Sickness the
benefits of it, p. 120. Sickness no disgrace, p* 122. Solitariness sweetness
of it, p. 191. Sophocles wrote Tragedies in his dotage, page 16. Souls
excellency, p. 19. Spiritual Pleasures, See Pleasures.
Bodily Strength dangerous, p 99. In bodily Strength nor all nor the best
actions, p. 23.

T
Testimonies humane how to be used, p. 2. Time commonly too much misspent, p.
55. Time loss of it worse in younger than in elder years, p. 57. Fit Time and
place must be for every thing, p. 169. Tractates Theological and
Phylosophicall how differenced, p. 1.
W
In War Old-men the best governors, p. 31 For War Old-men the best
Counselors, page 32. Wisdom Old*age has the best opportunities for it, p
24. Worldly Pleasures, See Pleasures.
Love of the World imbittors death, p. 140. Writing, Old Age fittest for it, p
40. Writing, Old-men best furnished for it, page 41.

Y
Elder Years best fitted for best employments, p. 12. Young men's infirmity, p.
95. Young men careless worse then beasts, p. 201 Young men must be conversant
with Oldmen, p 203. Youths deboishnesse makes Old Age unfit for employment, p
11. Youth abuse liberty, p. 96. Youth easily seduced, p. 97. Youth scorns
counsel, p 97. Youth improvident and prodigal, p. ^7. Youth variable, p. 97.
Youth like a ship, p 98. Youth secure, p. 99. Youth most opposite to Old Age,
p. 101. Youth has most need of reformation, p. 101 Youth must hearken to
Old-men, p. 203. Youth must pluck out weeds grown in childhood, p. 199.
Youth needs great circumspection, p. 199: Care in Youth benefits future ages,
p. 201. Youths fault to scorn Old Age, p. 203.
FINIS.

