THE FIRST SERMON OF R. SHELDON PRIEST, after his Conversion from the Romish
Church: Preached before an honorable Assembly at S. Martins in the Field, upon
Passion Sunday, etc.

PSALM. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is unspotted, converting souls: the
testimony of the Lord is faithful, giving wisdom to little ones.

Published by Authority.

printer's device of a woman's head and two laurel branches, apparently not in
McKerrow

LONDON, Printed by I B. for NATHANAEL BVTTER. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPVL, and his much respected friend, Sir THOMAS GARDENER
Knight, all happiness in Christ Jesus.
SIR, I present this my Sermon unto you, and place your worthy name in the
forefro^t thereof; thereby to show my respective love unto you, and to let you
understand; that if there be any fault committed in the publishing thereof; that
you ought to bear a great portion of the blame, who have bin (amongst very
many others) earnest. with me to afford it public attire. If the Pon ificians
be distasted therewith, they may in some part thank them selves; some of them
have been too clamourous out of the relation either of ignorant, maleuolent,
or semi-popish hearers, in rumoring the same, to have been but a rouing
discourse, sometimes ouerlearned; somewhiles vnlcarned; but always very bitter
against the Papists; so bitter, that in it, I branded all those of that sect
and heresic (excepting none whatsoever) with the vile mark of disloyalty and
traitorous spirits. In consideration whereof, I was easier induced to let it
see light, and in so public a habit to undergo all censures: and (to give
thereader some satisfaction) this also the rather, because through confuse
noises, and clatterings, of voices, and of doors (my self, staying not less
then a whole hour in an open pew, before the delivery of my Sermon;) the
recollection of my memory was then somewhat confused: so that, for that cause,
and through want of time also, I did not, nor could not pronounce all thereof,
so fully, and in that sort as I intended it. The scope thereof (kind Sir) being
briefly and contractly (not intended for so public, and so honorable an
assembly) to delineat the inestimable perfections and dignities of Christ; to
persuade all my Auditors to a sincere and most zealous affiance for salvation
in his only blood: to most assured loyalties to their Prince, and Country,
and to a detestation against all Pop^sh, Ignatian, bloody, and sanguineous
attempts, against the state of this Church and Country: I do not know any one
of your worthy rank and calling, to whom a discourse of this kind would prove
more acceptable, more welcome. Make acceptance of it (Sir) therefore, with that
love and respect, with which it is sent; and do me this favor, that if you
hear any semi-papists, or any that are leaning that way, or any other,
doubtfullie to conjecture or surmise, whether my c^nuersion be from the heart
or not; or for hope of preferment, to speak as you have heard, as you think,
and perfectly know of me: for you know, and knew from the beginning, from
whom my encouragements have been; from God; from Jesus Christ: whose name
therefore, be ever magnified and blessed; to whose blessings, and gracious
favors, I commend both you and yours, for ever.

From my chamber, this 28. of April, 1612. Your worships most assured in
Christ Jesus, R. SHELDON.

A SERMON PREACHED AT S. MARTINS in the Field upon Passion Sunday, etc. 1612.
HEBR. 9. verse. 13. 14. For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes
of a young Cow being sprinkled; purifieth the unclean, as touching the
purification of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who by the
eternal Spirit, offers himself without spot to God, purge the conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God?


GOD most infinite, immense in Nature; in power incomprehensible, and in the
perfect possession, of a consummate happiness, consisting in an unspeakable
contemplation, comprehension, and fruition of his own divine Nature and
essence: three persons, and one God; from all eternities most blessed: at time
appointed by his holy pleasure, out of an admirable propension of goodness, to
communicate and diffuse himself, did produce and create ( ad extra) without
himself this whole Universe, as an imperfect, yet very good shadow, and
obscure resemblance of himself, so wisely framed, that man, considering and
admiring the beauties and perfections of the same, might surmount with his
soul, and eleuate his understanding above all, and by all that is in it, to
contemplate (though obscurely) that Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath; of
whose Majesty, and Glory, Heaven and Earth are so full; and to understand, how
infinitely more excellent, the maker of all these things is to be admired, and
esteemed. Whose infinitely wise goodness also considering, how all the
creatures, which he had produced, were but as very imperfect and defective
shadows of his most infinite excellency, desirous more fully to diffuse
himsefe, resolved in his eternal Consistory, in an infinite, and a divinely
inexplicable sort, to imparte himself to his creatures, by giving and
imparting his Son, consubstantial, and coaequall to himself, to humane
nature, to assume the same, into a Divine unity, not of nature (for that is
impossible) but of subsistence, of personalitie; in so admirable a sort, that
thereupon we may Christianly believe and confess, that God is become Man, and
Man is become God, without all confusion or permixtion of natures, in a most
perfect, and sweet unity of one person.

This is that immense, that infinite communication of God to his creatures, so
often fore prophesied, so often promised by God; so longed for, so desired, so
expected both by God and Man, that as it may seem, and, if I may so speak,
both God and Man, like women travailing with child, and longing for delivery
travailed with longing desires for the accomplishing of the same. Of the Sons
longing desires (intermitting now to speak of the other two persons of the
most sacred Trinity) I dare boldy affirm so much, because he himself long
before his in carnation, has so forespoken by the mouth of his holy Prophet
and Wiseman, Proverb. 8. Deliciae meae esse cum filijs hominum, They are my
dainties, my delicates (says he) to be with the sons of men. How is this
otherwise, then as a man amongst men? as the Son of man (a name in which our
sweet Savior being conversant upon earth, much delighted, as my Catholic and
religious Auditors well know) amongst the children of men, amongst the Sons
of men. This infinite communication being made (then which a greater the
omnipotent power and wisdom of God, cannot think upon or make) what was the
purpose, and project of it? What was the object, and last end of the sons
longing desires? I answer; but not without premitting the admiration and
exclamation of the Prophet Esaias (Domine quis credidit auditui nostro) O Isay 53.
Lord, who has believed our hearing, what we have heard, or to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed? I answer, that the project of this immense
communication of God, this infinite elevation of the manhood is, that this God
himself, should be a sacrifice, this man assumpted, should die, this Man and
God, this God and Man (O most divinely sweet mystery) should be an expiation,
and propitiation for the sins of humane nature, that the same being revived,
and sanctified in his blood, might be elevated into a most sweet fellowship of
divine purity and happiness; consisting in the contemplation, love,
possession, fruition of this God, most blessed from, and for, all eternities.

And as I delivered before, how God to represent himself, did make this whole
universe, as a book for his reasonable creatures, to look upon, and in it, to
rende him, his glory, goodness, and majesty: yet nevertheless, many
profane, impious, and godless men there have been, who would not know God,
and who have said in their Psalm. 14.
most foolish hearts, There is no God. So likewise, before this admirable
communication this most sweet assumption, was to be made to be a sacrifice, a
propitiation for all man kind, Jew and Gentile: Good God! by how many legal
sacrifices and sacraments? By how many rites and obseruances? By how many
expiations and sprinklings? of bloods, of waters, of bloods of Bulls, Goats,
Kiddes, Hee-goates, Lambs, young Hefers, Turtle Doves, Pigeons? was this
admirable sacrifice, and the infinite excellencies thereof, presignified,
premonstrated, and foretold? to give unto mankind, some certain fore knowledge
and belief of the immaculate Lamb slain from the beginning Apoc. 13.
of the world: to and for the salvation of all sincere believers. And although,
all that was appointed by God either in the Law of nature, or under Moses, to
foreshew the infinite excellency of this sacrifice, were but as dark types,
and imperfect shadows, in respect of the truth and body it self of this
sacrifice: yet, the incredulous Jews, to whom the prophecies of Christ, and
this sacrifice were specially made, might by the Son, have come to perfect
knowledge, and belief thereof: But the veyle of malice against the most meek
Lamb, our holy sacrifice; who taxed their vices, reproved their
transgressions, condemned their Pharisaicall pride, blinded their eyes:
especially, the veil of pride, by which they gloried in the Law of Moses, in
the blood of Abraham, in the observation Romans 2.
of the works of the Law; was it, which so captiuated their understanding,
that they presumptuously thought, they needed no such a Messiah, who by
sacrificing himself, should be a propitiation, a reconcilement for their
sins: they rather, despised, disesteemed such a Messiah, making him as a
stumbling block, and scandal to their own utter ruin and perdition: by
their ambitious thoughts, they proiected to themselves, a Messiah like some
Sovereign Lord, and mighty Monarch, who should restore the temporal glory of
Israel, and extend his dominions over the whole force of the earth: just such
an other, as the ambitious Bishop and Monarch of Rome challenges himself to
be, in his pretended Vicary for the Messiah.

Against this, their unhappy incredulity, the blessed Apostle S. Paul, who
once had been a contumelious persecutor of all religious worshippers of this
sacrifice; does most egregiously, and divinely dispute in his Epistle directed
unto them, out of the 9. Chapter, whereof the 13. and 14. verses I have chosen
for my Theme; upon which I purpose to discourse. The which I selected, partly
to proportion my discourse to the season, when we all are, or should be,
preparing and making a Quadragesime, or fortieth, as a parasceue of Christ his
death and passion: partly, for my own special consolation, who knowing not
how to make any least requital to my Savior, for his unspeakable Charity,
toward me, do take (according to the counsel of the Prophet David) the cup
Psalm. 116.
of salvation into my hand and do invoke the Name of the Lord: for that he
has mercifully vouchsafed to translate me into the kingdom of his beloved
Son Jesus; making known to me, the mystery of Christ crucified; and
delivering me from the base servitude of contemptible creatures, weak
elements, and the most idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass, which humane
inventions has most presumptuously devised, and set up in the Popish
synagogue, as an abomination most detestable, against the one, and only
sacrifice, and altar of the Cross: for which my happy deliverance, his
Majesty be blessed by me, and magnified for ever.

When I first chose this text to handle, I thought to speak at large of every
branch thereof; but meditating thereupon, it became so fruitful, that store
made me penurious: and I could not but say in my soul, with learned
Augustine, O mira profunditas eloquiorum tuorum, Confess. lib. 12 Cap. 14.
Deus meus: mira profunditas, mira profunditas, horror est intendere in eam;
horror honoris, tremor amoris. O wonderful profoundenesse of thy speeches my
God! wonderful profoundnesse, wonderful profoundenesse: it is a horror to
think upon it, a horror of honor, a trembling of love. Wherefore I resolved
to pretermit all allegorizing and moralizing upon the figures, and especially,
to confine my discourse, to that blood, to that sacrifice; in belief whereof,
the salvation of us all consists: wherein, as I doubt not, but that I shall
be assisted by your devout and Christian prayers; so I most humbly request your
kind acceptance of these first fruits and labors, from my self, a
nouice-Preacher in the Church of England. I have bin perhaps over prolixe
(contrary to the fashion of complete Orators) in my Exordium, before I come to
the distinguishing of my Theme, and to the selecting of some special branch:
whereupon to insist, a fault pardonable and excusable with such as are
acquainted with the profoundnesse of sacred Scriptures, and Christian
mysteries: the devout consideration whereof, as it illuminateth the
understanding, so it also repleteth the mind with such a treasury of
discourse, that the religious chewer of such a cudde, finds greatest
difficulty to be brief, to distinguish, to divide.

For if the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the ashes of a young Cow being
sprinkled, purifieth the unclean, touching the purification of the flesh: how
much more, etc.
This argument of the Apostle, which consists upon a proposition and an
inference, is of that kind, which is called by the Philosophers ( a minori ad
maius) from a less, to a greater; from a dark, obscure, lesser, and smaller
truth, admitted by the Adversary, to infer and euince a truth, cleerer,
manifester, greater, and most certain. If (says the Apostle) the blood of
such contemptible creatures, the weak, unclean, and servile sprinckling of
the ashes of a young Cow, mixed with water, can purify the flesh: how much
more shall the blood of Christ, who by the eternal spirit, offered himself
unspotted to God, cleanse the conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God? Singular vessel of election, how mighty is thy argument either to
confound or convert the incredulous Hebrews!

Christian and beloved Hearers, observe the Antithesis and oppositions of the
Apostle, weigh his comparisons, betwixt blood and blood: one, base, filthy,
corrupt, servile, contemptible: the other, honorable, most pure, sincere,
free, excellent: the one, of Bulls, and Goats: the other of man, of a
perfect, and most innocent, and holy man. As if the Apostle should say, O ye
Hebrews, you have bulls, goats, kiddes, lambs: we have Christ the Messiah
desired, expected: you have the sprinckling of a few corruptible drops, we
have incorruptible, and sincere drops of Christ, divinely united to his
person: you have the unclean and durtie ashes of a young cow, intermixed with
water; we have the admirable sprinckling of the divine and humane nature, in
unity of person: your sprinckling is naturally unclean, and corporally
polluteth the takers: ours is most pure, sanctified by the eternal spirit,
beautified by the divinity it self: yours is a sprinckling made upon man,
ours is a sweet smelling sacrifice offered to God: your sprinckling only
purifieth an outward kind of impuritie, and legal irregularitie; ours cleanses
and purifieth the souls and consciences of faithful offerers: yours, many,
and often repeated, can never make the offerers perfect: ours, being one, and
once only offered, has found an eternal redemption, and eternally
consummateth all believers: yours were not efficacious for sanctification:
ours, so potent, that it gives abundance of grace, whereby we may be enabled
to serve the living God. Christian and religious hearers, is it not worthily
written of this Apostle, Saulus autem, etc. But Act. 9.
Saul was comforted and strengthened, and every where confounded the Jews,
testifying that Jesus is Christ. O incredulous Jews! when I consider the pride
of your minds, and withal, the baseness of such creatures, and such
elements, under which you lived, in so toilesome a servitude, I am astonished
to think, that you would rest in such weak sacrifices, rites, sacraments,
ceremonies, and obseruancies, and would not seek, nor receive Christ, the
Messiah, and the true immaculate Lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
being offered unto you.

Thus much most briefly of the proposition it self: for I hasten to the
inference made by the Apostle: in which full of all Christian consolation, I
observe and distinguish, first, of whom the blood is, which is offered; to wit,
of Christ; in these words: How much more, the blood of Christ? Secondly, I
observe by whom, and through whom, this blood is offered, By, and through the
Eternal spirit: (...) (says the Apostle) by the eternal Spirit. Thirdly, I
distinguish, to whom it is offered; there; to God. Fourthly, I observe for what
end, this sacrifice is offered; there; to cleanse the conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God. Of these four (intermitting some other
observations which might be here made) in order.

Touching the first, when I weigh with my self, whose blood it is, which is
offered: I am wholly disanimated from presuming to decipher the excellencies,
perfections, and eminences of his person. For, I believing with faith, that he
is both God and man; not only man, nor only God, but a Christ consisting both
of God and man; a perfect supposit, a complete Person; who though as Christ,
had a beginning, and was not before the incarnation; yet as touching his
divinity, and personality, he was most perfectly, from all eternities very
perfect God, of God, Son of the father; who in the fullness of time, by a
certain inexplicable union became the Son of man, or rather the true and
natural Son of a woman, and the reputed Son only of man, of Joseph, his
putatiue father.

These things I say believing with faith, the saying of Isaiah the Prophet (
Generationem eius quis enarrabit) Isay 53.
who shall declare his generation? occurreth, and checketh my presumption, that
I be not too bold a searcher of majesty; least I be oppressed, and confounded
with the glory thereof. Yet, considering that the veil of Moses is removed,
and the veil of Sancta Sanctorum is rent, at the dreadful hour of Christ's (
consummatum est) it is consummated: and that the mystery of Christ, the hope
of our glory; which was hidden in ancient ages and generations, (as the Apostle
speaks in his Epistle to the Colossians) is now made manifest to the Saints:
I will, according Collos. 1.
to the rule of Christian faith, with my best faculty of wit, and learniug,
(but alas, what a nothing is all that, in respect of the excellency of the
object, whereof I am to discourse?) declare unto you, what this Christ is, of
whose blood we speak: what this, ( verbum abbreuiatum) this abbreuiated word
is, to speak with the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Romans is: if in this
discourse, I seem Romans 9.
brief and obscure, impute it to the eminency of the object, which otherwise
then defectiuely, cannot be spoken of, neither by the tongue of man, nor of
Angel.

With most submisse reverence therefore, we will consicer Christ; first, with a
reference to God and his actions, secondly, with a reference, and relation to
us: Thirdly as he is in himself. In the first consideration, first of all, we
consider Christ, as the very term, object, or bound, of the greatest
communication, or diffusion, which the Almighty Trinity can make: so that, by
the communication, which the most blessed Trinity, and peculiarly the second
Person, has already made of his subsistence, and personality to the humane
nature, the same blessed Trinity, (be it spoken under correction of faith, and
with demisse reverence) is at a stop and stay, not potent to make a greater
communication, then this which is already made, whereby Christ is made. For, is
a substantial communication of the divinity it self, in the very divine
nature were possible; (which yet cannot be granted, unless we will subvert the
very foundation of christian religion) yet the same greater then this, which is
already made, should, nor could not be: because a greater co^municatio^ then
of God himself, which is already made, by this personal conjunction in
Christ, cannot be imagined. Again, if either the father, or the holy Ghost,
or both, (as Christian divinity faith it is possible) should aslume, by
hypostatical and personal union the nature of an Angel or of man; yet both
such communications, both such assumptions, should not surpass in greatness,
or excellency, this one, which is already made in Christ alone. For our holy
faith teaching us, that two persons of the most ineffable Trinity, are not
greater then one, nor one of them lesser then two; but that every Person has
infinitely a perfect equality, and persection with the other two: manifest it
is, that the communications of two Persons, or of three, is not greater nor
excellenter then of one only: How admirable therefore? how ineffable therefore
is this communication of God to man, whereby the Omnipotent power of God is so
bounded and limited, that it cannot proceed further, to make a work of greater
perfection? O inenarrable generations! As the Eternal and natural generation
of the son in divine essence, is so infinite, so immense, that God the father
could not beget a more perfect natural Son: so like wise, the voluntary, and
temporal generation of Christ, is so absolute, so infinitely perfect, that a
greater cannot by God be made.

Well, did thou cry out, holy Isay (Generationem Isay 53.
eius quis enarrabit?) who shall show forth his generation? and again, O Lord,
who has believed, what we have heard, and the arm of the Lord to whom is it
revealed? Admirable indeed, but more sweetly, and more comfortably admirable is
that, which the same Prophet adioineth of this our Christ, that he should be
reputed with the wicked, with malefactors; that through slander, and false
judgment, he should be cut from the land of the living, that he should be
smitten by the senere decree of his father, for the expiation of the sins of
a most wicked, and most ungrateful people. O Lord, who will believe what we
have heard, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? not framing the
heavens; but nailed and hanging upon the Cross, to eleuate man with the might
of his blood, to the heavens. But of this anon.

This supreme communication of God to man, does so far surpass all natural
productions of creatures, or supernatural, of qualities of that kind; as of
justification, sanctification, glorification, that there is no comparison to be
made: yea all the same graces, of justification, sanctification, glorification,
by necessary consequence, follow upon the same communication; and by virtue of
the hypostaticall union; so, that it is impossible, that the soul or humane
nature, which is assumpted into unity of the divine Person; should not by
necessary consequence, be holy, be sanctified, be glorified, beatified. And had
not Christ, by his almighty power, bounded and limited the brightness, which
the soul and humane nature received and possessed, by the vision of the divine
nature, from redounding and imparting it self unto his inferior parts, and his
body: the same, by an effluence, and over flowing of happiness from his soul,
should have become glorious, glorified, and consequently impassible, immortal;
and so Christ could not have died.

But because our dear Savior, ( desiderio desiderauit) with a desire desired
(as he testifies of himself) that is, most vehemently desired, to drink the
cup of passion; and Luc. 28.
to die the death, lest the whole nation of mankind, for want of such a death,
should have perished. Therefore, ( in capite libri) in the very head,
beginning, or top of the book, (as it is described in the 40. psalm by some
readings) in the very first moment of his conception, he graciously, and out of
the bowels of an infinite mercy, vouchsafed by a great miracle to stop, and
contain the glory of his soul, from communicating, or redounding it self, to
his body: that so, he might have a fit, a ready, or Psalm. 40. Heb. 10.
prepared body, as the holy Prophet and our Apostle do speak: a ready and
prepared body, a body fitted to suffer. O sweet Jesus, had not thy body
been fitted for the person of thee a God, if it had not been passible, apt to
suffer, apt to die? No, no, says our Christ, otherwise not fit: but being so
fitted, so prepared, then says Christ Ibidem.
(ecce venio) Behold I come, behold I come, to do the will of my Father, and
to die for the delivery of mankind. O Christian and Catholic souls, are you
not astonished with admiration? Are you not incensed and fired with flames of
loving and most thankful affections? to observe, that the very first miracle
which Jesus should make, and this upon the very moment of his conception, was
to contain the glory, which by virtue of the Hypostaticall and personal
union, would have imparted it self to his body, and have made it impassible
and immortal, that by such a miraculous subtraction and containing of glory
he might make his body passible, mortal, apt, and fitted to suffer, to die:
for whom? for whom? for you Christian hearers, and for all mankind. If upon
such considerations you feel no alterations of love, of joy, of detestation of
sin, of amendment of life, of thanksgiving, of consolation in your souls
(Tentate vosmetipsos ne forte reprobi sitis) Try your selves to speak with
the 2. Cor. 13.
Apostle, least perhaps you be reprobate: try and examine whether souls
congealed, and obdurate in sin, not to be moved or melted by such a fire of
love, are not reprobat, Hebr. 6.
and near to malediction.

But, to our confiderations upon Christ, whom if we consider, with respect to
the divine attributes, and infinite perfections in God, to wit, his infinite
wisdom, omnipotency, justice, mercy, goodness, etc. they do so perfectly
shine and appear in him, that most worthily therefore he is called in holy
Scripture (facies Domini) the face of the Lord, (for so some think that is to
be understood) in the Number. 6.
book of Numbers (ostendat Dominus faciem suam) the Lord show his face: and
those frequent speeches in holy Scriptures, Show thy face O Lord, Turn not
away thy face, Illuminate thy countenance over us. What other face or
countenance of God is this, than that, of which Saint Hebr. 1.
Paul thus pronounces? That he is the splendor of the glory of his Father,
and the figure of his substance. And I understand this shining and appearing of
the divine attributes in Christ, not only in respect of his divine essence,
and nature, by which he is the son of God, and therefore, according to the
common law of Sons, as a Son, he is like to his Father, nor in respect of
any supernatural gifts or qualities only, or by reason of his soul; for
these two later are common with him to just and sanctified persons: but
moreover, in a certain admirable and inexpressible sort, the divine attributes
did so shine, and were so resplendent in Christ, his humane nature and
conversation, that by the same he might be known to be very God, even as the
sex of man or woman is known and distinguished by their faces. May I not
gather this out of that speech of Christ to Philip? (Philippe qui videt me
etc.) Ioh. 14.
Philip, he who sees me, sees my Father. Again, if you had known me, you
should also have known my Father. Clear is this in S. John the beloved
Disciple thus pronouncing. 1. Joh. 1.
(Quod fuit ab initio etc.) That which has been from the beginning, which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes of the word of life, that which
we have beheld, and our hands have felt, of the word of life, and the life is
made manifest, and we have seen, and witness, and do show to you the life
eternal, which was with the Father, and has appeared unto us. O admirable,
divine, and most beloved Disciple in Christ's conversation and apparition, thou
did see with thy eyes, and feel with thy very hands God the life, the
word, made flesh. But tell us, O ye Sages of the East; ye, who being invited
and conducted by a star from heaven, came and found this our Christ in his
mothers lap, and hanging upon her breasts: what splendours of majesty? What
beams of glory did you behold in that Almighty infant? What, shall your
gifts speak for you? ( Aurum, Thus, Mirrha) Gold, Frankincense, Mirrhe, to a
King, to a God, to a Man: who taught you this wisdom? the Star, or Balaams
prophecy only? no doubtless: the divine Majesty of that babe which you there
beheld, in that garment of our humanity, sent forth such splendours, to your
great admiration, that entering into the house, and finding the child with the
blessed virgin Marie, as the Evangelist describes it, you could Math. 2.
not but prostrate your selves, open, offer your gifts, your treasures to him,
Gold, Mirrhe, Frankincense; all which were mystical gifts: for by Gold, the
child's royal authority and supremacy; by Mirrhe, his sweet humanity and
mortality: by Frankincense, his Divinity and Godhead was signified, honored,
and adored. O consummate wisdom of these Sages from the East, honoring the
majesty of this Almighty Babe, even then, when the beams of his birth,
reflecting upon Jerusalem, daunted and confounded Herod, with his Court,
together with all the citizens of that earthly Jerusalem. I will not stand to
ampliare this my discourse, by asking the Doctors and learned of Jerusalem,
what illustrations of wisdom and knowledge they saw in this child, hearing
the wise answers and demands which he made, being but twelve years of age:
it is enough for me, that the Scripture says (Stupebant autem omnes etc) But
all who heard him, were astonished, and amazed at his wisdom and answers,
Luke 2.
divine wisdom doubtless appearing in him. Neither will I stand to demand
of the Apostles, the Disciples of this Christ, nor of the devout multitude,
what they saw, when to him, sitting upon a silly Ass, they gave such
acclamations, excelling the condition of a pure man ( Osanna in excelsis etc.)
Health, Prosperity, Safety from on high: God speed on high, Blessed is he who
comes in the name, in the power of the Lord: Blessed is he, who comes the
Lord, and with the power of the Lord; the Lord, and God himself. Six hundred
passages of sacred Scripture I pass over, recounting the divine wisdom,
mercy, power, justice, goodness of a God, shiningly appearing in Christ, and
his conversation: so that every where his divine praises were breathed forth,
either from the mouths of infants, from the testimonies of his adversaries, or
the religious applauses of the devout multitudes. But give me leave, most
beloved and religious Christians, yet to enter with this Christ into his
passion, and there to consider how magnificent and apparent in it were the
attributes and perfectio^s of his Godhead. I pass over his confounding, his
casting and throwing down to the ground, his adversaries with traitorous Judas
coming to apprehend him, with those few words only (Quem quaeritis? ego sum)
Whom seek you? I am, I am: whom you seek, I am he: I pretermit hundreths of
arguments in the time of his passion, for the proof and honor of a suffering,
of a dying Majesty. I only consider, what divine splendours of goodness,
mercy, justice, wisdom, power, patience, clemency, did with a collateral
reflection represent themselves out of Christ crucified, and reflect upon the
right-handed, rather the right-hearted thief, that he was moved to make that
most Christian and happy invocation Luke 23.
and confession (Memento mei Domine, cum veneris, etc.) Remember me O Lord,
when thou shall come into thy kingdom. O most happy confession of a most
happy thief! flesh and blood revealed not this unto thee. O thou thief, not
now a wicked thief, but an innocent thief, robbing rather in a Paradise than
upon earth. O thief, wonted with violence to violate men, but now, with the
violence of a eontrite heart, lively faith, and constant confession, purchasing
Paradise. Christian and religious hearers, what kingly, what divine ornaments
saw this most Christian thief, to make such a confession? to profess Christ
to be the King of heaven? for of any earthly kingdom he could not mean. The
Scepter of the vain reed, with the most scornful, Hail king of the Jews,
he had not seen, he had not perhaps heard: the scepter he then beheld, were
the sharp piercing nails, fastening his Kings hands, to the shameful cross:
the kingly robes, were Adams nakedness, and our confusion: the chair of
State, the hard and ignominious cross: the royal fare and kingly dainties,
gall and vinegar: the Prince-like acclamations, were tauntes, reproaches,
exprobrations, reuiles, with scornful casting of hands, and moving of the
heads of those damned miscreants, with those most contemptuous vahs: vah, vah,
He has saved others, let him now save himself: If he be the son of God,
let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe in him. I dare
pronounce, that these most unspeakable ignominies, borne with that admirable
patience, invincible charity, most charitable compassion and clemency, and
the powerful suffering of Christ, did draw this our holy thief to that
Christian confession; Remember me, O Lord, when thou shall come into thy
kingdom. It was not the wonders only, which moved him thereunto: no, no; he
made this confession before diverse of them were made, as you shall read in
Saint Luke, the 42. and 43. verses of the 23. Chapter: therefore, by the secret
working of the holy Ghost, and by that confluence of the divine attributes of
patience, mercy, justice, power, goodness, charity, which appeared in Christ
(more then could be in a pure man) hanging upon the cross, the good and
Christian thief came to acknowledge him to be a Lord, and to confess his
eternal and everlasting kingdom.

Oh, how could my tongue here expatiate it self, to amplify by similitudes
and examples, how the attributes of a God every where appeared in Christ!
whether J behold him lying in the manger, or resting in his mothers arms:
whether amongst the Doctors disputing in the Temple, or betwixt the thieves,
praying, and offering supplications upon the cross: whether scourging
sacrilegious buyers and sellers out of the Temple, his fathers house, or
himself fast bound to a pillar, tormented and scourged most cruelly by those
sacrilegious executioners: whether sitting weary upon Jacobs fountain, or
hanging languishing upon the cross, yielding forth of the blood of salvation a
most precious fountain: whether raising the dead, or himself adjudged to
death: whether in the desert feeding others with bread, or himself fed by
others with gall and vinegar upon the cross: wheresoever and howsoever, I see
and contemplate him, J cannot but admire, and confess him, ( speciosum forma,
prae filijs hominum) beautiful in form above the children of men: beutiful in
the form of God above the children of men. I cannot but with admiration say
unto him with Kingly David, Beautiful in form above the children Psalm. 45.
of men, Grace is diffused in thy lips: therefore thee, O God! thy God has
anointed with the oil of gladness, above thy fellows: so anointed, that in
very form he appeared more than his fellows; above his fellows not only a
holy man, but a God, God and man. I cannot but proclaim, that although the
glory of the Divinity of Christ, imparted to his soul, was so contained from
communicating it self to his body, yet it could not be so concluded and shut
up, but that some beams and glitterings thereof did so diffuse themselves
(like unto the beams of the glittering Sun under a clear cloud) that the
pious beholder might contemplate the very divine attributes, to be in an
admirable sort relucent and resplendent, in the very humanity of Christ,
conuersing with man. O Emanuel! O Emanuel! God with us: God with us: conuersing
amongst men, and by so divine conversation, known to be the true Emanuel
indeed, the true God amonst us, amongst men.

Thus too breefly, and imperfectly, how theattributes, and divine perfections,
of God were transponent in Christ.

Oh, that time would permit me, fully to consider this our Christ, as he has
relation to the actions, and operations of God, in the framing, and governing
of this universe, especially, his actions to ward mankind! we should find him,
to be the very scope, and end, for which all this world was made; we should
find him, to be the very drift, butte, and end of all Gods desires; we should
find, that of the holy Prophet Isay to be true in him ( Et eris Isay 62.
corona gloriae, in manu domini, and diadema Regni in manu dei tui.) Thou shall
be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord; a Diadem of a Kingdom in the
hand of thy God. A crown of glory, a Diadem of a Kingdom, even upon the
head, and in the hands of the Lord, of God; to honor, to make glorious, God
the Lord. A crown of glory, A diadem of a Kingdom in the hands of God, in
the hands of the Lord, ever to be looked upon, to be contemplated, admired,
desired. Hear the heavenly father, himself more then once, auouching as much.
Math. 17. Ma^c. 1. Luc. 9. Mat. 3.
( Hic est filius meus, etc. This is my beloved son, in whom I am very well
pleased, in whom my soul takes full content. This, this, is the scope of all
my actions; This is my word, which I looked upon, framing the whole world. This
is the very Idea, upon which I contemplated, electing, predestinating, my
children to my glory: and when I call those, whom I have elected, and
predestined, according to the purpose of my will, from all eternities; to
justify them, to sanctify them, to glorify them: I make them all confermable
to the Image of this my son: Yea so well pleased is my soul in him that for
his sake, from all eternities, I have absolutely perfectly, loved those, whom I
have elected in him, and for him, before they were any thing at all, and when
in time, like fugitive servants, they were at enmity with me, through sin,
living in sin, delighting in sin: I then, for his sake, called, justified,
sanctified them, leaving them not, until I bring them for respect of him to my
eternal glory, and until, I accomplish my will in them, I will not surce ase:
no man shall take them out of my hands, no man shall stop the might of my
election. This, this, Christian hearers, as it is doctrine, full of all
consolation to the faithful, that have a living and a sanctifying faith,
through and in this Christ: so is it not novel but most ancient, Catholic,
howsoever most commonly, the Pontifician Divines teach and affirm, that the
predestination, and election of Gods children; is not without preuision of
their merits: and so making the merits of man, as a motive of Gods eternal
election; they show themselves, to be nothing less, then Semipelagians; whole
Pelagians, I would call them, if they taught these merits of man; without
necessity of grace through, and in Christ. Merits we exclude (Christian
hearers) when they are made as causes of predestination: but not good works,
as fruits of sanctification, in which, God has eternally preordained his
elect to walk in.

Six hundred places of scripture, (wherewith you learned in Gods book, are
acquainted) I could produce for the confirming of this truth: how that without
works freely in Christ alone, we were loved, beloved, and elected; before we
were any thing at all; (except only in Gods election,) yea and afterward
also, when in time, we became worse then nothing, by committing sin (the
which, as it is nothing of Gods work, so for so much as it is man's work, it
makes him worse then nothing) yet for Christ's sake, man so wicked, so
abominable, was called, justified, sanctified, according to the purpose of
Gods eternal election.

O inestimable! O unspeakable benefit therefore of Christ! O Christ! powerful
in the eternal providence of God, before creation, for our election: powerful
in time appointed, for our vocation, justification, sanctification: powerful
for our perseverance, and final consummation: so powerful, and so precious in
the sight of God; that if God, (whose goodness is so great, that he would
suffer no ill; if he knew not how, to produce good thereout) had not foreknowne
such a remedy against sin; such an anointed one; such a Christ; for the
curing of souls; he would never have permitted Adam to have sinned, at least
wise, he would never have permitted his sin, as a general deluge, to have
over whelmed all mankind; so that as in a sort, it may be said: sin had not
bin permitted, if such a Savior, such a Christ, could not have been sent;
have been provided: so neither, such a dying Savior; such a passible Christ
had not been sent, if sin had not been permitted. O mystery of all
mysteries! from the very profoundest of my soul, I proclaim; O Christ; most
blessed, and eternally to be desired; for if thou could not have been sent,
to expiate sin; the same had not been permitted; and if sin had not been
permitted, thou had not beenesent, to seek the lost sheep of mankind: O
infinite goodness of God. Therefore, I dare boldly pronounce, with ancient
Gregory. (O Felix Adae peccatum, etc.) O happy sin of Adam; which deserved to
have such, and so great a Redeemer? O truly necessary sin of Adam; which by
the death of Christ, is abolished and destroyed; of Christ I say, of whose
excellencies and perfections, in respect of us; and in the manner of his
concurrence to our sanctification, and salvation, in respect of every sort of
causing and working as material, formal, efficient, final; and in respect of
himself, for those treasures of divine wisdom, and graces, without measure,
(as far as the right hand of God, by his ordinary power could extend it
self) imparted to his soul: if I should further, (according to my division
made above of the respects of Christ) discourse Hebr. 5.
and ampliate my speech, it should prove, to be (sermo ininterpretabilis) a
speech vninterpretable, (as the Apostle speaks) either by my self the
speaker, or by you the hearers, neither does the time favor me so much: He is
God, what seek you? he is God: what desire you? or why do I yet presume to
search?

Consider his attributes, his perfections, to day, to morrow, the more you
shall seek, the less you shall find (if you think to attain) for he is
incomprehensible: believe the scriptures, thus pronouncing (lucem inhabitat
inaccessam) he dwells in a light, to which there is 1. Timoth. 6.
no access. Here therefore, a periode and a stop of this my discourse: not
able to make any further progress; I answer, (as Simonides the Philosopher
did to Hiero touching God) the more I seek the perfections of Christ, the
less I find them. But for application and use of this doctrine; I will make no
other then what I have already made; by which I see Christ already in faith,
and love applied to your souls: with whom I doubt not, but that you will
speak, and commune as Christians ought with such a Christ, so dear, so sweet,
so perfect a Spouse.

How much more: he blood of Christ?
But how shall I prosecure the other consideration of this my first part of my
text? what a paradoxe, shall I seem to deliver, to speak of the blood of such
a majesty? of such a glory? how ill do consort, the majesty of Godhead; and
the humility of bloodshed? these attributes of divinity, and such defects of
humanity: such a humility, and such a glory? If I should preach to the
Gentiles, they would esteem me (in sanire) to be mad, and such doctrine to
be mere folly: if to the Jews, they would not endure the scandal of the
Cross; nor the ignominy of this blood: but considering I preach to this so
religious an assembly, called and associated together (non de sanguinibus) not
by bloods; not by bloods of Bulls, Goats, Sheep, etc. but (de sanguine quasi
agni immaculati) by the one blood of the immaculate Lamb: one lamb, and once
sacrificed. I shall easily persuade you, the sweet conjunction of such a
Majesty, and such a humility: I shall easily persuade you, that the blood of
this lamb is (virtus Dei omni credenti) the very virtue of God, to every one
who believes, and confideth in it.

How much more the blood of Christ?
Manifold is the acception of blood in sacred Scriptures, and with profane
Philosophers. Blood for murder, manslaughter, death, cruelty: blood for
impuritie, uncleanness of life: blood for the seed of generation: blood, as
it is the seat and domicile of life; the immediate cause and instrument of
nourishment, of motion, of natural health, color, temperature, due
complexion, etc. But intermitting all these acceptions, and the moralizing
upon them: the blood which our Apostle means, is the blood of Christ, the
Seal of the new Testament, the blood of redemption, satisfaction; of
reconciliation, sanctification.

O wonderful and most venerable blood! But is the acception of this blood of
our one Jesus, one, or manifold? It is Christian Catholic Auditors, both one,
and manifold: one, in Christ: manifold, from Christ: one in Christ, in an
individual, substantial, and integrall unity of nature, concurring to make
him a perfect living man: manifold, as it is effused and flowing from Christ,
to make us perfect Christian men. How manifold is this blood? witness, first,
that bloody sweat in the garden, arising rather from his tender and inward
compassion over sinners, then from any desolation. O drops, not dropping, but
of blood (decurrentis in terram) running down upon the earth! what earth?
mankind, by sinful conversation transformed into earth: but this blood
trickleth, yea runs down upon it, to wash it, to sanctify it, and to make
it fructify. Witness those streams of blood which gushed from every part of
Christ's sacred body, when the merciless scourgers whipped and tormented him,
being fast bound to a pillar. I read elsewhere (Christus erat petra, and
bibebant de spirituali consequente eos 1. Cor. 10.
petra) Christ was a rock, and they drunk (the ancient faithful) of the
spiritual rock which followed them. Here I contemplate Christ, not a rock,
but a most tender man, fast bound to a stone, to a rock, whipped, scourged,
tormented, to yield forth a stream, a great fountain of blood; of which all
may drink, from the beginning until the consummation of the world. For not
only ( Agnus occisus, but Agnus flagellatus ab origin mundi) was the Lamb
slain, but also whipped, from the beginning of the world: Moses, Abraham,
Noe, Adam, drunk of this rock, or rather of this Christ, bound to a rock,
and yielding a fountain of blood. Not here ( petra erat Christus) Christ was a
rock, a stone, but ( apud Petram Christus) a tender man, a sensitive man, fast
bound to a stone, a pillar of stone, feeling the sharp pain of most cruel
scourging, able enough to have killed Christ, had he not also determined to
ascend up into the Palm Tree: what said, I the Palm Tree? I should have said
the tree of the cross, the tree of curse, of malediction. Witness, those
currents from his head crowned with thorns, his hands and feet nailed and
pierced. Witness his most divine side opened with a spear; whence, in
testimony that this Christ had made a complete expiation for mankind: with his
last drops of blood, water also issued forth: (continuo exiui sanguis and
aqua) presently, instantly, upon the opening of the sacred side, blood and
water went forth. Blood and water stood attending that opening of the divine
wall; which once opened, and launced, blood and water, fell not out, rushed not
out, dropped not out; but went out, walked out, going in fortitude, in virtue,
strength, to confront with Satan, to vanquish death and damnation, to
consummate our redemption. What marvel is this, to us believing, that this
blood and water, by a strange and wonderful union, were united to the
subsistence and person of him, who is the author of all life, giver of all
motion? O blood and water, consummating all sanctification, filling all ruins,
in heaven and upon earth! Weight and balance are the judgments of God, Prou.
16.
says the divine Scripture. But in this extraordinary work of our
redemption, in this judgment exercised upon the son of God, what measure
has been kept? what balance has been used? what mean has been observed?
all is shed, all is effused: and in testimony thereof, with the last drops
of blood, water is adjoined; by such a conjunction of water with blood,
proclaiming to mankind, That the blood of Christ does not only merit, redeem,
satisfy; but also wash, purify, sanctify with purity of grace, the
consciences of all such, who with a living, and a sanctifying faith should
confide in it.

Rowze up you souls beloved, in this blood, and demand of me, by which of all
these bloods are we redeemed: and I will answer unto you, That we are redeemed
by them all: all these are (passio Christi) the passion of Christ: by them all,
by them all: plentiful therefore is your redemption, absolute, and in very
rigor of justice so consummate, that applied by faith to your souls,
apprehended by faith, (justifying faith, sanctifying faith I mean, which
destroys dead works, innouateth your consciences with a new, and with the
principal spirit) the severe, and just eye of God cannot reject or condemn
such as are signed, and marked with the same. The last hour (Christian
hearers) ends the day, the last sand emptieth the houre-glasse, the last
drops fill the vessel, the last figure consummateth and makes perfect any
number; so, the last drops of Christ's blood, consummated, perfected, our
redemption. All these effusions of blood by me mentioned, did concur to your
redemption and salvation; but the last drops consummated all: for it is the
blood of Christ dying, the effusion of blood, in which the life of Christ was
offered, which consummately perfected all, merited, satisfied for us. O most
sweet providence of God! (non alius defuit Deo, saluandi mundum modus) there
wanted not, says Saint Austen, another manner, or means to God, for saving of
the world. Notwithstanding, by blood he would have it done, and this by the
blood of his only begotten son.

O most potent blood, not of Bulls or Goats, for a legal and carnal
purification only; but of Christ, to make such a purification of souls, that
the eye of the most just Judge looking upon them, signed with the same, cannot
repute them unclean, unsanctified, but divinely beautified. Not of Bulls, and
Goats, Calves, and Kiddes, often to be repeated, and reiterated: but of one
only Christ, by one only oblation eternally sanctifying all sincere believers.
Not of goats and oxen, for the Jewish nation only; but of Christ, the living
fountain (irrigans vniuersam terram) watering the whole earth: all ages, all
sexes, all conditions of mankind. Fourfold were the rivers, which issued from
one fountain, in the earthly Paradise, and watered the whole earth, making the
same fruitful: not four fold only, but manifold are the rivers, which issued
from the fountain in the spiritual Paradise, where Christ Jesus was placed
with his spouse, his wife, his Church. How manifold were the rivers, issuing
from this fountain, you have already heard, from every part, side, and end of
this fountain, from the head of this fountain, by thorns; from the feet, and
hands by nails; from his sweetest face, by blows, buffets, and most cruel
scratches, from his side, by the spear; from his whole body, by the sharp
scou^ging of (...) executioners.

O Rare fountain, streaming on every side! O divine altitude, longitude,
latitude, and p^ofundity of this fountain! Oh that we would, with all Saints,
comprehend the altitude, longitude, latitude, and profoundnes of this ^^eding
fountain of this bleeding Christ, commended by the Apostle in his Epistle to
the Ephesians? Ephesians. 3.
O that we would, or could endeavor, to comprehend in our daily
considerations, the altitude of the bleeding head of this fountain? should we
not, trow ye, with tears of sorrow, and compunction, bewail the pride, of
our own ambitious heads? should we not wash away our aspiring thoughts, by
which yearly, lately, at all moments, we project our own greatness, to mount
up ourselves, though it be with the circumuention of our own brethren, breach
of fidelity, incurring of perjury, and the commitment of any most dreadful
sins? Oh that we would consider, the longitude of this bleeding fountain?
longitude in time, from thursday evening, till friday evening; for upon friday
evening ( Mar. 15.
Circa horam nonam expirauit Jesus) about the ninth hour sweet Jesus expired:
I should have said, longitude in time, from the day of his circumcision, until
his expiration, or rather until the apertion of his side, after his expiring.

Longitude in place, from the Garden of Gethsemanie unto the houses of Annas,
Caiaphas; thence to the town house; thence to the mount Caluary; where we
have many longitudes; longitudes of his arms, stretched out to the arms of
the Cross; longitude of his feet, and body proportioned to the length of the
Cross, and in all these longitudes, Christ boisterously drawn out, stretched
forth, mercilesly hoysed up, immanely pitched down with the cross, fastened
in the ground; what a moving? what an effectual and divine longitude would
this prove, if it were daily meditated upon? would it not (think you) produce
in our souls a longanimity of patience, in all our tribulations? a longitude
of hope against all suggestions of despair? a length of love, to forgive our
enemies, offending and iniuring us, though never so often? A virtue very
necessary, and needful in these times, especially, with our Gallants; who so
unchristianly stand upon their points of honor; who never as yet have learned,
for Christ's sake, to forgive any wrong; to put up any injury upon any
submission, or acknowledgement whatsoever: nothing will content them; but ( lex
Talionis) the law of requital, of equality: An eye, for an eye; a tooth for a
tooth: life for life, blood for blood? O ye Christians! (truly Gallants, and
truly nobles, if you hear this lesson) in the behalf of this Christ; which
did once sustain your persons, to deliver you from damnation; who suffered so
many injuries, to give you eternal honor: I ask of you, I require of you,
that for his sake, for his love, for his honor, and for the honor of the
Christian name, end your controversies, conclude your contentions, and quarrels
as Christians ought to do: that is so often, ( though seventy seven times Mat.
18.
says Christ) as the offender shall acknowledge his fault, make submission;
do ye forgive, be reconciled, forget injuries.

I dare here boldly pronounce, he understands nothing, he knows nothing, he
is worth nothing; he has no dram of Christian magnanimity in him; who will
not admit, and approve such a reconcilement, to be Christian, honorable,
glorious, both before God and man: such a reconcilement (I say) as the duty of
a Christian to Christ crucified, dead and sacrificed, requires, challenges,
commands. And if any here will despise, or neglect this Christian counsel,
and stand upon Machiuillian, and Italian puntidel-honore, I will confidently
proclaim against him, or them, whatsoever they be, that of the Prophet Osee,
(Ventum seminat, turbinem metet) he sows a wind, but shall reap a
whirlewind? Osec. 8.
he sows a puff of vain glory, a blast of spanish Ostentation, but shall
reap a whirle wind of confusion and ignominy to himself and his posterity,
perhaps in this live, if he offend the law, and feel the severity of the same,
(accordingly as he deserves) or else most assuredly at the dreadful day of
his judgment, he shall meet with that dreadful whirlewind of ( Ito maledicte)
Depart thou accursed; Mat. 25.
which shall conuolue and wrap him up with his consorts, the servants of the
Roaring and devouring Lion, into the whirlepoole of Eternal damnation, where,
and with whom, he may if it shall so please him, cast firebrands, for
precedence of honor, and chaires of dignity eternally.

But to our sountaine, to our fountain. Oh that we would consider Christ with
such a length of his arms, so prodigally and charitably effusing, and pouring
forth his blood, to wash all, to sanctify all: would it not persuade us, to
lengthen forth our arms, and to open our palms to the poor, and needy? but
out alas, we contemplate not this longitude, and therefore instead of
stretching forth our arms to the poor, we stretch and whet our tongues, we
sharpen our speeches against them, we ad affliction to their affliction, we
revile, exprobrate, discomfort them. O damnable custom ouerflowing Italy! O
wretched practice ouerabounding Spain and France! O practice of Reprobates,
too too frequent in England. O fashion every where in fashion, and yet the
fashion only, of Reprobates and children of perdition! I boldly here speak it,
that it is a special sign, mark, badge, and character of reprobates, and
children of perdition, so to en^ertaine, so to abuse the poor Lazars; why said
I poor Lazars? I should have said poor Christ's, and poor Jesus in these
Lazars: He has said it, and I dare proclaim it, whatsoever you shall do to
one of these, you shall do to me. Honorable, worshipful and Mat 25.
most worthy Christians, especially you of the devout and religious sex, who
are more accustomed to be like to the worthy Matron of your own sex described
in the Proverbs, to open her palms to the needy, and to stretch forth her
arms to the poor: I beseech you often to consider Proverb. ^^
of this blood of Christ, shed so prodigally for your souls: and if you will
not be prodigal to him in his poor, at least be liberal, be Charitable:
Expend often that saying of Christ to the couteous Scribes, which I now
inclucate to your religious ears and hearts, ( Date elemosynam and ecce omnia
munda sunt vobis:) Give alms, and behold all things are clean unto you: Be
charitable, Luc. 11.
be liberal, be prodigal, unto the poor Lazars, unto the needy Christ's, and
behold all things shall be clean unto you: if you do not, beware of the
thunderclap ( depart accursed,) Mat 25.
the which, as assuredly as the word of God shall not pass unfulfilled, so
certainly shall all such as decline their ears from hearing, and their hearts
from comforting and releeuing the poor, shall hear it, shall undergo it, and
shall be eternally confounded with it.

But from the length of this fountain, to the breadth, to the latitude
thereof, the which if we would devoutly consider, yielding streams of blood
on every side, and upon all sorts of persons, upon enemies, and only enemies,
and all enemies, to what a breadth of love would it persuade us? to love all
that Christ loves: and because Christ loves, to love our friends in Christ,
and our enemies for Christ. What a latitude of resolution would it engender in
our Souls, to walk the commandments of God cheerfully? what a breadth of
charitable love and compassion would it cause in us, to give to the poor
cheerfully? for ( hilarem datorem diligit Deus) God loves a merry and
cheerful giner, 2. Cor 2.
says the Apostle.

Would we consider the profunditie of this fountain, founded in love, and the
mestimable charity of God; founded in the unspeakable humility of the son
of God: what a depth of humility, what a profoundnesse of meekness, what an
abyss of charity, what a purpose of steadfast perseverance in Gods service,
would it innouate and confirm in our minds? Let experience, Christian
Hearers, be your mistresle in this: make trial, and as you find, so be
persuaded, so give credit to what I speak.

But alas! who can bewail sufficiently, the miseries of these times? Even as
in the earthly Paradise, after the deluge of the slood had overwhelmed the
whole world, neither the fountain, nor the rivers issuing from the same, can
certamely be distinguished, or known, which, or where they are: so out alas!
since partly, deep ignorance of Popery, manifold inundation of heresy,
abundance of iniquity, extreme defect of charity, have overwhelmed the
visible face of the Church; it is hard to find, where this fountain of Christ
crucified, where these rivers issuing from the same fountain, do make their
courses, where their channels be. Devout Christians, I speak not this, as
though I knew no place where Christ crucified is truly preached: for in so
speaking, I should calumniate that Church, to which I have happily associated
my self, where the infinite energie, virtue of Christ's death, and passion, is
daily and incessantly preached, commended, extolled, and applied to all
believing souls. But I speak this of Christian conferences, of devout
souls, who should daily meditate, and suck of this fountain; who by their
pure lives, and sincere conuersations should show, that it is the blood of the
most immaculate Lamb, whereof they drink: it is the blood of the unspotted
sacrifice, where with they are fed and nourished. Such kind of channels, such
kind of streams are hardly sound, are hardly scene. But let us yet at last
awake our souls, and recall them from drinking of the puddles of Egypt: there
is no hour too late for repentance, the energie of this blood is everlasting
it speaks still better, and lowdly to all, then that of Abel: therefore even
now, and at this moment, it will not be too late to begin to drink of this
fountain; no impuritie so great, the which it washes not away: it is the
Alpha and Omega of vocation, justification, sanctification, perseverance,
glorification; because the blood of the Eternal Alpha and Omega of all things.

O Well of all consolation! O fountain of all Graces! O wounds not killing,
but the only Asyle and Sanctuatie of sinful and afflicted souls! wounds,
in which, and in which only, we may be secured from the sting of sin, and
power of Satan.

Give me leave here for this purpose, to apply to your ears, the words of a
certain devout Father: Vbi tuta Bernard ^1. in Cant.
sirmaque requies infirmis, etc. Where is there safe and secure rest to the
infirm and weak, but in the wounds of our Savior? there I dwell more
securely, by how much he is more potent to save: the world fretteth, my flesh
presses, Satan lies in wait; I fall not, because I am founded upon a firm
rock: I have sinned a great sin, my conscience will be troubled, but it
shall not be ouer-troubled, because I will remember the wounds of the Lord: for
he is wounded for our iniquities: What so near to death, which is not saucd
by his death? If therefore so potent, and so efficient a medicine shall come
into my mind, I cannot be terrified with the greatness of any disease. And
again a little after, But I do confidently usurp to me, what is wanting to
me, from the bowels of my Lord, which abound with mercy. Neither do there
want holes, by which it may flow out, they have dug his hands and feet,
and have pierced his side with a lance: and by these chinkes, it is lawful
for me to sncke honnis from the rock, and oil from the most hard stone, and
taste, that the Lord is most sweet. The secrets of the heart are opened by the
holes of the body, that great Sacrament of piety is opened: The bowels of
mercy of our God, in which the Orient from above has visited us, are opened.
And why may not bowels appear, and show themselves, by, and through wounds?
In what more clearly, then in thy wounds, does it appear, O Lord? that thou
art sweet, meek, and of much mercy: for greater mercy no man has, then that
he give his life for his friend: but thou, O Lord, have had greater charity,
who have given thy self for off-casts and damned persons. Therefore my merit
is the mercy of the Lord: I am not altogether void of merit, so long as he
shall not be void of mercy and miserations. But if the mercies of our Lord, be
many, even so am I much in merits: for what if I am guilty to my soul of many
sins? truly, where sins have abounded, grace has ouer-abounded. And if
the mercies of the Lord be from eternity to eternity, I also will for all
eternities sing his mercies. And a little after: How great in the holes of the
rock is the multitude of weetnesse, the fullness of grace, the perfection of
virtues? Thus far devout Bernard. Truly great, and very delectable is the
sweetness of these wounds, honey in the mouth, melody in the ears, and
exultation in the heart; from discoursing whereof I am most loath to surcease:
but my Text calls me away.

As for use and application of this Doctrine, I make no other, then that which
your religious hearts have made already, by your constant faith in it, by your
inflamed affections of love to it. But before I proceed to my other parts of my
Text, give me leave to give a glaunce at the Popish abomination, set up by
humane invention, against the most dreadful sacrifice of this blood of the
cross. Let us pause a little.

How much more the blood of Christ?
The Pontificians and Romanists, who out of a Pharisaicall pride, have accursed
and condemned all the Reformed Churches; for the setting forth and extolling
the Majesty, and efficacy of this blood: and of the infinite energie of the
one and only sacrifice, and daily oblation of the Christians: have withal, by
their most profane and idolatrous sacrifice of their Mass, (against which, I
have more largely discoursed out of their own Canons, in my Book of Motives)
as much as lies in them, conculcated the blood of the New Testament, and
profaned the one and only sacrifice of the cross.

Antiochus was a figure of Antichrist, he took away and abolished for his
time, the daily sacrifice of the Jews. The Roman Antichrist (Roman Anticrist
I call him, for we must understand, that there have been, are, and shall be,
Antichrists of different kinds) has by might and maine, oppugned the only
sacrifice of the cross, although with many fair pretenses, he would seem to
magnify the same in his Massing sacrifice: but alas, how vainly? Briefly, let
us consider, the Christians sacrifice of the cross, either as it is an
expiation for sin, or a satisfaction for punishment, a means of
reconcilement, a merit of salvation, a powerful deliverance from Satan; and we
shall find, that in all these respects, and diverse others (not now to be stood
upon) that the man of Sin, and his Disciples, have most abhominably depraved,
profaned, contemned it.

The sacrifice of the cross, being of an immense valor, and infinite
efficacy: Christ the high Priest, by one only oblation of it, in the
consummation of the world, appeared for the destruction of sin, says the
Apostle in the ninth Chapter to the Hebrews, and the 26. verse, adding in the
very next verse, thus: ( Et quemadmodum) And even as it is appointed, for man
once to die, and after follows judgment: so Christ was once offered, to take
away the sins of many. And so frequent are the passages of holy Scripture,
for Christ's once offering himself, by once shedding of his blood, and for his
one oblation only, and once only to be made; that it is altogether needless
to add more, for the confirmation of so evident a truth. The Adversaries
themselves cannot deny it, though to their own confusion: for by their new
daily consecratings of Christ, I should say, their daily new makings
productions, factions, creations, and fieries of Christ, they are confounded.
In such words and phrases they delight, and such words their
Transubstantiation requires: for it is impossible to conceive a substantial
Transubstantiation, without a substantial production, making, faction, or
fiery of that substance, into which the other substance which is destroyed, is
transubstantiated, and substantially converted. And this is so manifest, in the
very principles of all Philosophy, that the learned of them cannot deny it:
and yet, it is impossible, and implies, that Christ, who was, and is
substantially subsistent, before all their consecrations, should be by the
same, substantially produced, made, created: for, a substantial production and
making, is the bringing, and drawing out of a substance; from a no being, to a
being; from a non esse, to an esse; from a no existence, to an existence: how
then is it conceiueable, that Christ's substance, which was, and is before their
consecrations, should be made, and produced by the same? Again, it is
inconceivable, that there should be a new production of any substance, or
Person, and perfect supposit, without the making of a new subsistence, or
existence: Tell me then, O all ye Pontificians, what new subsistences? what new
existencies are made of one Christ, by your productiue, creatiue, and factiue
consecrations in your massing five words? But were these daily, and infinitely
multiplied consecrations, productions, real offerings, real desitions,
cessations, remoouings, destructions of Christ upon your Altars, in your
stomakes, possible, as you pretend and believe; yet, by them all, it is
manifest, and as clear as the Sun, that you rest not in the one, and only
real sacrifice of the cross; but that you require daily new real offerings,
consecratings of Christ upon your altars. And can any one of them, be so
impudently ignorant, as to affirm, that the consecrations, oblations,
consumptions, desitions of Christ, which they make daily, and multiply
infinitely upon their profane altars, and in their stomachs, should be the
same in number, and individual unity, with the making of Christ in his mothers
womb? with that offering of Christ, that consumption, and death of Christ,
upon the cross? with that resurrection of Christ from the Sepulcher? Believe
me, Christian and Catholic Hearers, when it is demanded of them whether their
sacrifice, oblation, making, and consumption of Christ, be the same in
individual unity, and number with that, upon the cross, they are so pusled,
to solue the knot, that they know not, what to answer; Sometimes, they will
say, it is the same in number, and individual unity. (I mean, as it is a
sacrifice, an oblation, and offering,) with that of the cross: but who would
not scorn this? who would not contemn such ignorant folly? the absurdity of
the paradox, overthrows it self: for there, Christ was truly, and naturally
borne, by a substantial generation from his mother; here, by an imagined
substantial action, and fieri, of their own, which makes nothing, which was
not before, and that, which is already made, in one place, by one substantial
action, it is impossible, that it should be made often by many other
substantial actions in other places, unless we will make many things
substantially to be one, and one to be many substantially: which insoldeth
contradiction, as all Philosophers will easily grant: There, Christ's blood was
truly and really shed, here in imagination, and seeming only, as themselves
confess: there, his body was truly rent: here, only in show: there, Christ
truly died, and so really, that ( in triduo) in those three days, whilst his
body lay in the grave, he was not man: (for such a dissolution, such a
separation of the soul of Christ, from his body, which true death requires
was necessary for our redemption,) here, he only cease to be, (as they
vnintelligibly teach) by an imaginary cessation in their boxes, pixes,
stomachs, when their species, their forms of bread, and wine, as whiteness,
roundnesse, savor, relish, do cease, are corrupted, and changed.

Some others therefore pretending more learning than wisdom, or Christian
piety; grant indeed, that there is not the same individual, and numerall
oblation of Christ, upon their Altars, with that of the Cross: which their
answer indeed is most true, according to their own principles, both in
Philosophy, and Divinity; but discovers the ignominy of their
abomination, in setting up, and teaching a new daily, real sacrificing, and
oblation of their imagined Christ upon their Altars; against that infinitely
valuable offering, and sacrificing of Christ Jesus upon the Cross: by which
once only, really, truly, corporally, carnally offered, all faithful believers
are justified, and sanctified, are consummated, by the eternal might and never
dying energie of his blood. I pretermit here, to stand to demand of them, why
they do so vainly require a real and truly Propitiatory sacrifice of Christ,
in Person, and Substance, upon their Altars; to apply the virtue of Christ
sacrificed upon the Cross: for how vain is it to imagine, that the same
cannot be applied by a lively faith, and the use of a holy Sacrament of Bread
and Wine, as it is applied by Faith and Water in Baptism? I pretermit to
charge them, that they are not yet accorded what to affirm, or how to teach,
in what action of their Mass, this their sacrifice does consist, whether in
their making of Christ by their Priests five mighty words; or by their
Elevation of their Christ up, or by their laying down of their Christ upon
their Altars; these things I omit, with much more to like purpose, because the
out-running of time causes me to be brief.

But you know Christian and Catholic Auditors, that they (not without cause)
contend for this their real, and unbloody sacrificing of their Christ; as for
the very liuelyhood, and soul of their religion: you are not ignorant, how
many zelouse and renowned Professors of the only blood of the Cross, have and
do daily shed their bloods, for the denying of their profane sacrifice:
doubtless, then they do, greatly magnify it; they do greatly extol it:
Hear me how; and first, touching the expiation, and remission of sin, I will
deliver unto you, a position, or rather a Paradoxe of theirs (for so I am
assured it will seem unto you.) Notwithstanding this their faith of their
Christ, truly and really sacrificed in their Mass, yet they do deny power,
valor, and efficacy to this their sacrifice, to take away the sins of such
as do offer it, or of such, for whom it is offered; what said I, that they
deny this their sacrifice to expiate the sins of the offerers, or for whom
it is offered? I so said indeed, and it is most true: but yet they grant unto
it forsooth, force, and energie, to abolish, to wipe away smaller sins,
venial sins; such as are also taken away by their holy Bread; by their
sprinkling of ashes upon Ashwednesday; by their daily lustrall, profane holy
water; by their knocking of their breasts; by their Priests blessings; by their
signing of themselves with the sign of the Cross; by bearing of Palms upon
Palme-Sunday; and Candells upon Candle-masse-day; and by innumerable such their
sacramentalls, (devised by humane presumption) as themselves teach, and
confess. Whereby it is manifest, that they do equalize the sprinkling of
their lustrall water, of their profane ashes, in the effect of taking away of
venial smaller sinners, with the true and real offering of their Christ,
their God and Man, sacrificed, offered upon their Altars. O most profane, most
ignorant folly of these men! their Christ and God, truly offered as a
propitiatory sacrifice for sins by them; and being the very same with that
of the Cross; for expiating of sins, does no more, works, effects, no
more than the base, servile, contemptible ashes of a few Palms, magically by
them consecrated upon Palme-Sunday, and sprinkled upon their counterfeit
humiliats upon Ashwednesday. But to proceed, hear yet somewhat, as prodigious
as the former, if not more. If either Priest, or Lay person, wanting
opportunity of a Ghostly Father, to confess their secret sins unto; shall
with a most contrite heart lamenting, and bewailing their sins, acknowledging
them, confessing them to God, offer, or receive this their sacrifice, with such
a living faith, and humble devotion, as they require; yet this their Christ and
God, there so offered as a sacrifice Propitiatory, there so received as their
divine Sacrament, does not sanctify the conscience, does not expiate the sin
of the consciences of such Offerers, of such Receivers of it, as it is a
sacrifice, or as it is a Sacrament; but, as it is joined withal, with an
implicit and vertuall purpose, and resolution of the offerers, of the
receivers, to confess their sins to some approved Priest, some Ghostly
Father: and if there be any Papal or Episcopal reservation (a custom, a most
detestable custom, very frequent amongst them) then forsooth, the vertuall and
implicit vow must be to confess to such Bishops, to the holy Father, and have
accordingly absolution from them, or else, this their Christ, as a
propitiatory Sacrifice, expiateth not their sins, as a divine Sacrament
sanctifies not their consciences. O most blasphemous doctrine, eneruating the
blood of Christ, devised only to set up the Papal Sovereignty, and their
Antichristian pride, to the horrible ruin and inconsolable affliction of
innumerable souls! O most blasphemous doctrine, and damnable folly rather
than heresy! The blood of Christ truly offered, truly received, by souls
confessing sin to God, lamenting sin for the love of God; cannot, does not
abolish sin, without implicit relation, to a Papal absolution; if it shall
please his Holiness, to restrain such sins, to reserve such cases for his
own absolution, and not without some pecuniarie mulcts, as the practice
(Romanae Curiae, and tax, Apostolicae Cancellariae.) Of the Roman Court, and
the tax, of the Apostolical Chancerie do euince. Catholic and religious
Hearers, what can be accounted impious doctrine, against the only sacrifice of
the Cross, if this be not to be esteemed; to be accounted for such?

To proceed; As touching the satisfaction for punishment of sin: Good God!
their Altar-sacrifice is weaker than their fatuouse Purgatorie-fire, than their
vain Chimerian Indulgences (in the founding the tresurie whereof, although
Christ be the principal, yet he has his consorts and fellows, Saint
Stephens, Saint Laurences, etc. to set up and enrich their vain checker) for
these forsooth, can take away and satisfy, by the way of Justice, of perfect
requital and repaiment for all punishment remaining and due to sin: Yea
further, the profession and solemn vow of a Monastical life, in the hands
and presence of the Superiors of such houses, Monasteries, Nunries, is a
complete and perfect expiating of all punishment for sin, as absolute as
Baptism it self.

But their Christ offered in their Mass, as it is a sacrifice, does not this,
effects not this; neither in the offerers, nor in them, for whom it is
offered, nor in the receivers. What said I? does it not so? yes but it does: I
have forgotten my self, I confess it: it does satisfy for punishment; but
when? but when? Marry, when this their Christ is offered and sacrificed upon
privileged Altars, as at Loretto, at Sichem, at S. Laurences, at S. Sebastians
without the Gates of Rome: then, then; and upon such Altars, by the holy Father
of Rome, privileged for such ends: Christ sacrificed, does, and can satisfy
for all punishment of sin; then he can work a plenarie Indulgence, and
delivery of soul upon soul, out of Purgatory: Further, when this their
Christ is offered and sacrificed by English Priests in this Kingdom, upon
Wednesdaies, and Fridaies; provided they have a sanctified Medall, or Cross
for that purpose, blessed by their holy Father, either with them, or lying upon
their Altar: then forsooth, upon such an indulgent Indulgence, from the most
profane Baron of the Roman Checker, Christ can, and does satisfy for the
punishment and pain due to sin: how poor? how weak? how contemptible is their
altar Christ? their mass sacrifice? which needs the addition of such an
Indulgencer, to satisfy for the pain and punishment of sin? weaker, and
feebler, is this sacrifice, then their Ordinary Priests, with their blessed
Grains, of which some bring into this Kingdom Decades of thousands, for so
many thousands of souls, to deliver them from all pain of sin enjoined, or
to be enjoined (by ghostly Fathers) or to be endured in Purgatory. But as
for the powerful Friars, Monks, and Ignatians (called Jesuits, but have not
a dram of Jesus his spirit in them) they forsooth, in their very Persons; and
knotted girdels surpass this their Christ, this their Propitiatory Sacrifice:
for whosoever shall make a first confession Plenarie Indulgence, and a general
pardon annexed to the very persons of Ignatians and Monks at the first
reconcilement of any man by them to the Roman Church.
of all his sins (which they call a reconcilement from heresy to the Church
of Rome) to any of them, shall precisely in that respect, not because they are
Priests, (for so every Priest should have it) for confessing first to them, and
having absolution from them, have, and obtain a full Plenarie: most full, most
plenarie Indulgence, of all pains and punishment due to sin.

How ambitious is this humor of Ignatians, of Benedictine but vnbenedict
Monks, for Precedencie before their Secular Priests, in so high a privilege
and preeminencie of their Persons? but rather, how impious and detestable a
practice is this, of the Roman Sinagogue, not to equalize only, but to prefer
the Persons of weak men before, and above the Person of their Christ, of their
God of Majesty, offered, sacrificed upon their Propitiatory Altars? how
mystical every knot of their Saint Francis his powerful girdells are, it is
superuacaneous to deliver; Wear it next your skin or shirt you have such a
pardon: wear it longer, greater is your pardon; pray upon all the knots,
maruailous are your pardons: you shall die no sudden death. O fopperies!
Concerning reconcilement to God, mediation to God: Alas, neither Christ in
their Mass, nor upon the cross is with them sufficient. Hear the Remists the
deprauers Annotat. in 1. ad Tim. 2.
of al youth, in their deprauations upon the first of Timothy, (Opus est
Mediatore, ad Mediatorem, nec nobis alia est vtilior, Maria) We have need of a
Mediator, to our Mediator, and none more profitable, then Marie. I acknowledge,
that they cite these words, as out of devout Bernard; but considering what I
have related out of him here above, and how contrary this their vain position
is, to his doctrine, I cannot but think that the works of that learned man
are corrupted, and depraved: but howsoever ( Bernardus non vidit omnia)
especially in that corrupt and most ignorant age: And the doctrine is so
impious, so heretical, that if all Austens, all Bernards, all Gregory's, all
Angels from heaven should affirm it, we were to denounce unto them the
Anatheme of S. Paul in his Epistle to the Galathians. For, if they understand
this their position of supposed and absolute necessity, because so appointed
by God, that we must needs have a Mediator to our Mediator, or else that in
respect of our own unworthiness, and sins, we must needs have a Mediator
to our Mediator, it is the most blasphemous heresy that ever was maintained,
worthy to be persecuted with fire and faggot, for it overthrows the whole
work of our Redemption; and I do boldly here pronounce, agreeing to sacred
Scriptures, and doctrine of all ancient Churches; that whosoever defends such
necessity of a Mediator to our Mediator, he is fallen from Christ, he is
fallen from Grace, and ought not to be esteemed, named, or called a Christian.
As for you Catholic Auditors, it is sufficient, and abundantly sufficient,
that you have an Advocate, a Redeemer, a Savior: An Advocate of their
Advocates and Aduocatesses: a Savior of their Saviors and Sauiouresses: a
Redeemer of their Redeemeresses, who inuiteth, exhorts, yea commands, All
that are heavy laden, and labor under the burden of sin, to come unto him,
promising that he will refresh them, comfort them, etc. But as for such as are
diffident in his promises, doubtful of his mercies, distrustful of his
gracious admittance; let them keep themselves still to their Sauiouresses and
Aduocatesses; which as is manifest, cannot hear them, but by the appointment,
power, and authority of him, who commands us, with all confidence to approach
to him with a firm faith, a full trust to enter into Ad Heb. 10. 19.
the holies, even unto himself our high Priest, and only Sheep-heard of our
souls. I must be brief.

As touching the merit of salvation, deliverance from Satan's power; which we
Catholic Christians confess, and profess to be only, and effectually through
the power of the death and blood of Jesus Christ upon the Cross: I should
trifle the time (which I see is ouer-spent) if I should stand to show how by
their confidence and trust in their Vows, Pilgrimages, Inuocations to
fellow-Seruants: How by their Agnus-Deies, the very excrements of Satan; their
idle Relikes, wooden Crosses, Images, lustrall Water, hallowed Salt, Palms,
Candles, they do daily and infinitely derogate from the might and power of the
blood of Christ, once crucified: putting more, or at least equal affiance in
such devised trumperies (I dare call Crosses and Images trumperics, if adored,
if worshipped, otherwise not) as in the blood of Christ, as in their very
Christ sacrificed upon their Masse-Altars, that herein I do not belie them, it
is as manifest as Noon day* for they will not hold nor account him a good
Roman Catholic, who does not use, practice, esteem, and put affiance in them;
against Fire, Water, Devil, and all the power of that damned crew. And how
clear it is, that more privileged Altars, and Pilgrimages, for safety, for
deliverance; more frequent oblations for help and assistance, are made by the
Papistically superstitious, and allowed by their Bishops and Priests, unto
their Saints, and unto the blessed Virgin Marie, then unto God, then to Christ,
our only sacrifice? I know some here in England, but I may not name them, who
often, frequently, and confidently will set up in their gardens, orchards,
galleries, chambers, closets, certain small wooden pictures, framed like to
that of Sichem, and there they will make often Pilgrimages to the same every
day, to obtain deliverance of some grievous dangers and disasters: but alas,
as yet they have not been heard; they have not been helped. Worthy observing is
that superstitious devotion used long ago at Canterbury, and at the shrine of
Thomas Becket, where the offerings and oblations made to him in a very large
degree, yea by ten degrees and more, exceeded the like, made to the ever
blessed Virgin Marie, and those which were made to her, in a greater degree
surpassed those which were offered and consecrated to Christ himself, the one
and only Savior, and sacrifice of all Catholic Christians. No man, Catholic
hearers, can better testify how weak their confidence and trust is in Christ
and his blood, than such, as have been acquainted with their miserable
miseries, or rather servile miseries, and inconsolable worships. Wherein
(believe me, most worthy Auditors) what with their vain confidence in unsound
Indulgences, their imperfect and stained merits, their absolute and complete
numbering of all their sins, and circumstances changing the nature of sin
in their auricular confessions (a matter morally impossible) the deuouter sex
amongst them, or rather the more superstitious sex, lead such inconsolable
lives, that any compassiue mind and heart knowing the same, cannot but
compassionate their wretched and uncomfortable seruitudes: no marvel of this,
seeing they serve Gods, who cannot, give them rest by day nor Icrem. 16.
by night, such as the Prophet Jeremy has long ago fore mentioned.

But thou, O England! rejoice, for that thou art delivered from these impure
Idolatries, and Romish slaueries; and that the light of Christ crucified is
illuminated over thee, that thou may serve him without fear: but rejoicing
Luc. 1.
remember through what means the Jews were cut off, and fell; through their
incredulity: and how fell they into Romans 11.
incredulity? because they were not permanent in goodness, in works of
sanctification. Remember how the Romans were cut off? Through incredulity: and
how fell they into that? Because they did not abide in goodness, and works of
sanctity: This is that, which our Apostle affirms of the Jews, and
threatens to the Romans, in the 12 Chapter of his Epistle, directed to them,
Read it. Rejoice, O England, (to make a little digression here, to another
kind of blood) that thou art delivered from the Papal tyrant^e; but
rejoicing, be still watchful, against this ambitious Monarch; this most
bloody Bishop; The devil is a busy Bishop, says the old proverb, I may say,
that this Bishop, is a busy devil, against the Church and State of this
Kingdom. This proud Bishop, has profaned the blood of the cross, he has
set up his profane, and his imaginary blood of his Idolatrous altars: But
what? proceeds he no further? medleth he with no other blood? Oh that it
were so! England, is well acquainted, with his proceedings, what they have
been, and how that in these later times, there have been no bloody
Commotions, and horrible Massacres, in which the Holy Fathers fingers have not
been. And what, O ye Britains? (for so I will call you, mentioning your late
happy delivery, when as English, you should have been ruinated and
destroyed; but as Brytaines for the favor of your GOD over your Britain
Sovereign and his Royal offspring you were protected, delivered.)

Do you think, that the Holy Father, was not acquainted, with that most
hellish attempt of those smokie locusts? Could GARNET, GERRARD, TESMOND, with
their Ignatianed Disciples be actours, principals? Could STANLEY, OWEN, know
it? Could Antwerpe, and the Low-countrie mutter of some great Alteration, not
of the heavens, but of Englands Scepter? Could PARSONS, CRESWELL, be not
ignorant? And could it be concealed from AQVAVIVA, the General of the holy
quarrel; or he hide it from the holy Father, Paul the fifth? Who will once
imagine this* that has been but once acquainted with the Ignatians manner of
proceedings? And what does the holy Father now rest? has the late most happy
and miraculous delivery of all Englands glory, daunted his courage so; that
he will project no more villainy of like kind? God grant it be so: but, it is
to be doubted, he will not surcease, until he be consumed by the spirit of
Gods mouth, as most infallibly he will one day.

Idle are the prophecies which fly up and down, especially amongst the
speudo-Iesuited and Ignatianed Papists: I will relate none of them because I
contemn them as bables, unworthy of the ears of so honorable an audience:
yet give me leave to mention a bloody piece of one of them; and a little to
demurre upon the same. A Pope forsooth shall fight against two English Kings,
and with bloody hands shall bless England. The most gracious God, as he has
confounded them often, and who broke their necks the fifth of November, does
doubtless suffer them to be deluded in their vain prophecies, and will, I
most humbly trust and pray, subvert all their wicked enterprises. But seeing
prophecies are mystical, and mystically to be interpreted, especially such as
are paper ones, described by pictures, as they say, this is: I will deliver my
conceit what I think, may be understood, by these bloody hands of the Pope;
For my part I cannot better interpret the same, then thus: That by the Popes
bloody hands, the Ignatians are to be understood, and by the bloody fingers
their Ignatianed, and disloyal foranized Disciples, be they Priests or Laikes,
(I always except temperate and moderate Recusants, of which, I know, some of
the Laity, to be very true hearted and loyal English, as likewise I cannot
doubt, but that there are some moderate Secular Priests, I mean such, as are
vn-Ignatianed.) For, were not such, and only such Ignatians, and Ignatianed,
the Powder-Miners, and Powder-Locusts? Are not such only, or most singularly
those, who every where, at home, and abroad, in foreign Countries, do seek
to disgrace the Magistrates (Sovereign not excepted) of these Kingdoms, and
if any of them have any vice or defect (and who lives without some one at
least?) they will aggrauate the same; yea, and rather then fail, they will
devise new, vain, and those most foul and filthy, in the forge of their own
wicked brains (oh how meet is it that such as are eminent should be careful
of their conuersations when they are besieged with such malicious Zoiles?) Such
only, or chiefly, are they, who will gladly talk or presage of the decay of
our shipping; delightfully reason of the consuming of our Kings treasure,
pleasingly commune of the decay, and fall of martial men; joyfully listen
after mutterings, or any least discontents, in the mutinous multitudes; against
government or Governors: these are they, who gladly discourse of foreign
powers, foreign preparations: these are they who unwillingly and fearfully
hear of the admirable prowess and martial magnanimity of our most hopeful
Alexander, or rather desired Constantine, and most dear Prince Henry: these
are they (to be short) who delight in nothing more, take content, and hope in
nothing more, than to hear of fallings out and quarrels betwixt those of the
Scottish and English Nation; hoping, desiring, and expecting, that from
personal quarrels they may come to be National. Honorable, right
Worshipful, and most worthy Christians, all that are here present, from the
highest to the lowest; I beseech you all, in respect of your duty to Christ
Crucified, in respect of your duty to your Sovereign, love to your Country,
care of your own safeties, and the flourishing state of Christ's Church and
Ghospel, have no such quarrels amongst you; and if any such arise, appease them
speedily, end them Christianly: Believe it, believe it, nothing will please the
Ignatianed Papists more (I except still the temperate) nothing can be more
grateful to their holy Father, then to understand that the Subjects of two so
honorable nations, under so peaceable, so gracious, and so religious a
Sovereign should have any iarres and contentions. How often, Catholic
hearers, have I heard Robert Parsons, Joseph Creswell, presagingly hope for
such contentions upon union of the two kingdoms, whereby, as he and they all
think (and wisely think, if it should so fall out: but God auert it) the
unconquerable and invincible power of this kingdom (under God, and by God
protected) might be broken and weakened: and alas who is so simple a
coniecturer as can not presage upon whose head the bean would be bruised and
broken: doubtless the beginner of any such quarrel by all Britains should
deserve to be reputed as a most detestable Anatheme, worthy all execration.
But to return to the bloody hands of the holy Father of Rome: consanguineous,
and of the same blood with these, were those Ignatian Valladolidian Padres, of
the English Seminary: who, when the proclamation for our most gracious
Sovereign was brought unto them, by a Spanish Duke, were so strangely daunted
therewith; thus it was. Those English Padres, had long time held that king of
Spain, and the Nobles of that kingdom, in expectation of great matters, to be
done, at the death of Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, for the bringing of the
Infanta of Spain into this kingdom, upon the fantastical Title to this
Crown: but that Heroisse being departed, and our most gracious Sovereign
being almost even with the brething up of her ghost, most joyfully in this city
proclaimed: Copies of the said Proclamation were with all speed by
Intelligencers, sent into some foreign Countries, and into Spain also, where,
presently upon the fresh receipt of one of them, a certain great Spanish Duke,
posteth in his Caroch with all speed, to the English Fathers of the Seminary
in Valladolid, who first demands of them what news out of England? or what
expectations they had, of any good to be done there? According to their
accustomed answers their unnatural and vnenglished spirits they forsooth
promised and hoped for much at the death of Queen Elizabeth, for their Spanish
Lady: till then (as they said) their hopes were but weak, but small, but
cold. Well answered the Duke, If you hear no news, here then is news for you,
and withal he presented to them a printed Proclamation for the most joyful
acknowledgement of our Sovereign king James: where now (says the duke) be
your great promises? where now are your expectations? where now are your hopes
at the death of Q Elizabeth? They stood as me^ astonished, danted, and
confounded, that they had scarce a word to say. The Duke observing their
confusion presently departs, discourses with some persons of note, who were
with him in his Caroch, touching the busy spirits of those english Padres,
greatly laughing at their follies, their vain promises and expectations. But
these holy Fathers, not able to contain their grief, give notice of the
unexpected news to some of their favorites, among their scholars, whereof one of
them, presently as one ready to burst, coms in have, and discharges his
stomach to his fellows thus: We are undone my masters, we are undone, (God
grant it, and let all England say Amen,) James of Scotland is proclaimed King
of England. These things being true, and justly imputed to the^, with much more
that I have observed in my Motives, may I be thought unfitly to have
interpreted, the Popes bloody hands, and fingers, wherewith he incessantly
labors to bless England, to be these Ignatian Fathers, and their Ignatianed
children? O England, or rather, O Britany! revived in thy Britain Sovereign:
Think on these bloody hands and fingers, and be ever vigilant: Remember thy
late miraculous delivery, and be ever thankful to thy Almighty and
Allmercifull Deliverer: Remember thy late danger, and be ever watchful:
Remember how as God then delivered thee, so he also vouchsafed to inspire thee,
that thy Sovereign with thee did then provide an Oath, as a Touchstone,
whereby the disloyal and forranized Spirits might be discerned from the
Natural and Temperate: Do thou make use of Gods Doctrine? Do thou apply
this touchstone? and distinguish, upon what spirit it is refused, either out of
a Womanish scrupulositie (for some few feminine men in swearing are perhaps
like to scrupulous women) or out of inueterated disloyalty, and grounded
heresy? if so, it is well and most happy for Englands security; for Englands
Posterity, our Children, our Childrens Children will bless such providence,
etc. But I observe the time is very far spent, that I cannot prosecute my
division of my Text so fully as I desired: therefore I must be brief; it
follows in my Text.

Who by the Eternal Spirit offered himself unspotted to God.
In these words the Apostle delivers unto the Hebrews, what the Sacrifice
is, which he so highly commends unto them; how it is offered; to whom it is
offered; by whom, or through whom it is offered. The sacrifice offered is
Christ, who also is the high Priest, offering and sacrificing himself most
voluntarily, freely, and unspotted, to his Father: The Person, to whom the
sacrifice is offered designed by that word (Deo) to God. But what is that, by
which, or through which this Sacrifice is offered. Hear the Apostle ((...))
By, or through the Eternal spirit, as if he should have specially expressed it
thus: by the Eternal Godhead, by the eternal everlasting Divinity. Here,
here, Christian Hearers, are mysteries of love, of faith, of admiration, of
excess, of divine wisdom, of excess and an infinite excess of divine
goodness, of divine power, of which excess Moses and Elias, communed with
Christ upon the Mount Thabor, so says the Scripture (Loquebantur de excessu
eius) they spoke of his excess. What an excess, above all humane
intelligence, where God and the Divinity is concurring in every circumstance of
this Sacrifice? God the Priest, God the Sacrifice, God the receiver of the
Sacrifice; and God the Dignifier, the Sanctifier, and Beautifier of the
sacrifice, and yet all these circumstances are in one God. These considerations
do astonish me, and produce a strange admiration in my soul, that the most
infinite Trinity should so busy themselves, himself to make and accomplish a
bloody sacrifice, of one of that infinite society: but in no respect, I am
touched with greater admiration, then to consider how most willingly, most
voluntarily, the infinite majesty of Christ, did consent to dedicate himself
to the ignominious death of the Cross; did consent to offer himself, to give
himself as a free gift, for the deliverance of most ungrateful mankind.
(Dedit semetipsum, etc.) He gave himself ( Tit 2.
says the holy Apostle to Titus) that the might redeem us: That which is
given, you know Catholic hearets, is put out of the power and possession of
the giver, and is at the disposing of him, to whom the gift is made; and you
know, that the strongest, the absolutest manner of passing away any goods is by
deed of gift, as being irreuocable, O inestimable mystery! Christ gives
himself, makes an irreuocable deed of gift of his blood to his Father? yea,
but not only to him; to such faithful believers that should confide in him?
yea, but not only to them? to whom farther? to who else? marry, he puts
himself into the power, dominion, and disposing of those damned and reprobate
miscreants the Jews; that they should vorke their pleasure on him, Isai. 50.
(genas dedit vellentibus, corpus perentientibus,) His cheeks he gave to be
pulled, rented, his body, his whole body, to be smitten, and this that we
who were in the slavery of sin, and Satan, might be made free, by so great a
grace; and be put in the free possession and disposing of our selves, within
that most divine Paradise, which his most sacred blood should eternally water
and sanctify. What a humiliation? what an offering is this? The holy Apostle
admiring thereat, pronounces thus: ( Humiliauit semetipsum etc. Phil. 2.
He has humbled himself, made obedient unto death, even to the death of the
Cross;) that he might exalt and honor us. What a mystery of love? that he
might raise us up to life, he debaseth himself to death. For this purpose
being in the form of God he puts on him the shape of man; that is much: but
hear more. The form of a Man obnoxious to the law, subject to the law; yet
more, he is vested with the condition and quality of a sinful man: yet more,
he is arraied and clothed with the iniquities of all mankind: yet more, he
is made upon the Cross as a curse, as a malediction for mankind: yet more, or
most of all, upon that Cross, before the Tribunal of his Eternal Father, be
sustaineth the Person of all mankind, undergoes his displeasure (such a
displeasure in which is life, Psalm 30.) he has that judgment pronounced upon
him and against him, which mankind had deserved; so heavily, so grievously,
that in the infliction of the judgment, and the execution of the sentence; as
Man he cried out my God my God, why have thou forsaken me: and yet as man he
could not be swallowed up, nor held long with the torments and terrors of
death. What a progress is here? what a summarie of greatest humiliation, for
the Son of God, thus to offer himself to his Father as a malediction, that
in him we all might be a benediction, and a blessing in the heavenly holies
of holies? what an abisse of humiliation, that he offers himself alone; no
man of the Nations, no Person of the Jews, no Angel from the heavens helping
him, assisting him, (Torcular caleat solus) but himself alone, he alone
treads the Press of his most bitter Passion: there was indeed a Trinity of
devout Persons; the two Mary's, and the Disciple whom Jesus loved, standing, or
languishing with grief by the Cross; by that their presence and attendance,
they gave testimony of their loves, and most sincere compassion; but nothing
able to relieve him, to comfort him, who had hoised himself up, upon the Altar
of the Cross, out of their reaches toward the heavens, and to the view of his
heavenly Father, in heaven; where the price of our Redemption, of our
Reconciliation, was to be made and paid. What a smelling, and a most
sweetsmelling savor, did reeke up from that press, and Altar of the Cross,
to the Nostrills of the eternal Judge, and most just God? by him most
worthily, most desiredly admitted and received: receiving (duplicia de manu
Domini,) a twofold, a double price from the hand of the Lord, our dying Esai 40.
Lord. Surely, if no other dignity had been in this our Lords person, who
offered himself: yet the inestimable chatitie, the unspeakable love, wherewith
he so freely dedicated himself to death, to satisfy his Fathers heavy
displeasure, would have made the sacrifice to be most worthily esteemed.

But there is a Dignity, there is an Excellency in this high Priests
sacrificing himself, which did make the same sacrifice, not only by acceptance
and favor, but even out of the worth and inestimable value of it, to be
accepted and admitted, as a complete, consummate satisfaction, redemption, in
very perfection of justice and satisfaction, of all, and for all, who should
steadfastly believe, and confide in it. What dignity is this? what worthiness
is this? you will ask and demand of me: Our Apostle shall answer; hear him
((...)) Who by the eternal spirit offered himself. This eternal Spirit, the
Divinity of the second person in Trinity, by reason of the hypostaticall and
personal union of it with the humanity, communicated unto the same humanity
an infinite dignity; the very dignity and unspeakable excellency, of the
Godhead it self; and by reason of the same personal Union, the operations
and actions of this person, (for operationes sunt suppositorum, Operations and
actions are of the persons and supposites themselves) though immediately,
proceeding from the humanity, or the soul of Christ, or any power of his
soul, or body: do receive and are dignified, with an infinite kind of
valor, dignity, and estimation; as being the operations of God and Man: and
although there be no Physical, Divines or Supernatural impression, or
quality, given to these actions, yet the only proceeding of these operations
from such a person, having so inestimable an excellency, and dignity,
intrinsecally within himself, gives unto them an extrinsecall valor, by
which they are esteemed, and regarded, as the very actions of God himself, by
which he offers and submits himself to his Father: and therefore, no
tongue, neither of Man nor Angel, can deliver how infinitely deserving they
are, of esteem, and regard: the only knowledge of God, which is infinite, can
comprehend their worth and valor.

If I should stand largely to prove this, you would think that I held these my
Auditors, to be but of common intelligence. Few of you are so ignorant, as I
suppose, but conceive, that according to the dignity or excellency of the
Person, is the moral worth, and esteem of the action, which proceeds from
such a Person: Respect worthy, is a salutation or honorable use, which comes
from a worthy Gentleman; more worthy, that which comes from a Knight;
worthier is the same from a Baron; above that, is the same, proceeding from an
Earl, a Duke: but of highest esteem, is that, which is given from a Prince,
and if there were any earthly Prince, of infinite worth, and excellency, in
the intrinsecall worthiness of his person, the actions and operations of such
a Prince, in moral estimation, would have a moral kind of infinity.
Here-hence it is, that our high Priest Jesus, whose dignity was the very
Godhead it self, whose Person was of infinite Majesty, did immediately, and
by it self, communicate unto his operations and actions, an infinite kind of
moral worthiness and valor; by which they were so elevated, that being
presented to the sight of the divine Majesty; in very rigor of Justice, and
perfection of Satisfaction, and Merit, they were equivalent, super-excellent,
and surpassing all the malice of sin, which mankind had, or could commit:
and therefore, this our high Priest offering himself by the eternal Spirit,
(thus dignifying, and eleuating his actions and operations:) to his Heavenly
Father, for the Redemption of Mankind; did by the same Oblation and Sacrifice,
so fully, so abundantly, so perfectly, so justly, so deseruingly, purchase us
to himself, and reconcile us to his Father; that his Father could not refuse
his face, making intercessions and supplications for us, upon the Altar of the
Cross: and this is that, which our Apostle pronounces in this his same
Epistle to the Hebrews: of the infinite worthiness and excellency of Christ?
Hebr. 5
Qui in diebus carnis suae, etc.) Who in the days of his flesh, with tears,
and a loud cry, offering up prayers and supplications to him* who was able to
save him from death, was heard for his Reverence: So great, (Catholic and
Christian Hearers) so infinite was the reverence and excellency of CHRIST,
because he was the Son of GOD; that his Father could not, but hear his
requests and supplications, made unto him for us: and from this reverence, and
from this worthiness has his flesh valor, efficacy, and force, to cleanse
our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.

Hear to this purpose, (but what need I authority of any man to confirm so
manifest a truth:) Saint AUSTEN, Aug. lib. 10. de Ciuit. cap. 24.
( Non ergo Caro Christi, per se ipsum mundat credentes, sed perverbum a quo
suscepta est: Therefore the flesh of Christ does not by it self cleanse the
believers, but by the word, of which it was taken and assumpted: and this is
that which AQVINAS has most clearly. Aquin q. 48. art. 6. in cap. and ad 1.
and ad 2. eodem art.
(Efficiens principale humanae salutis, est Deus: Quia vero humanitas Christi,
est diuinitatis instrumentum, ideo ea consequenti, omnes actiones and passiones
Christi, instrumentaliter operantur in virtute diuinitatis, ad salutem humanam;
and secundum hoc, Passio Christi, efficicienter causat salutem humanam. The
principal efficient, of salvation of mankind is God; but because the
humanity of Christ, is the instrument of his divinity; therefore
consequently, all the operations and actions of Christ, do work in the virtue
of the divinity, to the salvation of mankind. And in his answer to the first
objection, thus most clearly ( Pasio Christi etc.) the passion of Christ,
referred to the flesh ibidem.
of Christ, answers and is agreeing to the infirmity assumpted; but referred
to his divinity, has thereby, an infinite virtue or efficacy: Thus he; which
I partly bring, to confirm what I have said, partly to stop the mouths of
such Pontificians, who gladly would calumniate the Church of England, for her
doctrine touching the concurrence of Christ's divinity in the office, and acts
of his most high Priesthood.

But what shall I here plunge my self into that depth, in to that profound
abisse of discoursing, of the manner of Christ's concurring as a Priest, by
reason of his divinity and humanity, for the salvation of mankind? no, no: (
Sermo in-interpretabilis) the speech would be uninterpretabile: my shallow
conceit, would be ouerplunged in such a depth: it is enough for us, at this
present, to understand, and conceive, that by reason of the personal unity,
not only the humane nature, but very Christ God himself, was offered to his
Father, and offered himself to his Father, and also, this divine nature, had
his concurrence in the suffering, of his humanity, that the same consented to
his suffering, and did in a wonderful sort particularly govern, comfort and
strengthen the said humanity, as being a principal and proper part of
himself; that it might suffer, and be offered in such obedience to the Father,
to the death of the most ignominious cross. I shall not here need, to insist
upon the third branch, of my division: by the which our Apostle distinguishes,
to whom this sacrifice is offered; to wit to God: For, if all sacrifices are to
be consecrated as sacred unto him; to whom else should the sacrifice of a God,
and from a God be offered then to God himself? neither shall I need to dwell
any whit in this discourse, to show how this Christ, this sacrifice, was
unspotted; without blemish, and most immaculate: I could not esteem it less
then blasphemy in me, to seem to discourse thereupon, and by way of argument
to prove it: for can it sink into the imagination of any, that God should be,
or could be spotted with any sin, imperfection or blemish thereof? Our
Christ indeed, took upon him the semblance of a sinner, but it was impossible
to the absolute and almighty power of God, to have permitted him, to have
been taynted with any the least internal or true blemish of sin. Yea by the
omnipotent power of God, would not hinder or let it, but that by virtue of the
perssinall union, and hypostolicall conjunction, the soul of Christ was so
sanctified, and replenished, with all graces, that absolutely and most
necessarily it was impeceable, vnsinneable, and not capable of any the lest
spot of sin. And it was indeed most meet that our high Priest should be such
a Person Heb. 7.
impolluted, innocent, separated from sins, and made higher then the very
heavens themselves, as being the Lord and God of themand all that is in them.
And so, I proceed, to the last branch of my division in which is thus.

Shall cleanse the conscience, from dead works, to serve the living God.
Here is the scope of Christ's blood offered; here is the end of Christ's
offering himself, by the Eternal Spirit to God: that our consciences might be
cleansed from dead works, to serve the living God. Good God, what are men, or
the consciences of men that thou do so visit them? thou do so esteem
them? what are they that, to cleanse them, thou did so far depresse and
humble thy only begotten Son, under thy Angels, even to an ignominious death,
to make man equal with Angels in everlasting life? it is thy unspeakable
love and charity: no deserving of ours at all. But how? by what means? by
what instrument, is this cleansing sacrifice applied to our consciences, to
cleanse them from dead works, to serve the living God. God made heaven and
earth and all in them, made man and all belonging to him without any
concurrence or help from him by that word ( fiat, fiat) be it done be it
made. Does he so cleanse the conscience of man, from dead works, without any
act of man, as a means, as an instrument, to apply this sovereign sacrifice
to his conscience? no, no: Hear the Apostle, Romans 3.
((...).) Being iust^fied gratis frankly, by the grace of him, by the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus whom God has proposed, a propitiation by
faith in his blood: by faith therefore, by a living faith, Christ^s proposed a
propitiation in his blood (not in man's works) to every believing conscience.
Indefinite, universal, is this proposing of this propitiation, by faith in his
blood, to all Nations, all sexes, all conditions, in all times and in all ages:
no person whatsoever, is excluded from faith and confidence in it, no not Judas
himself, who betrayed it, had he been so happy; not the crucifying Jews,
had they been so fortunate.

How powerful a sound faith in this blood, is to cleanse consciences; let Leo
an Ancient Pope confront against these latter Pontificians all of them being
meritists ( de condigno o^ de congruo) out of condignitie or congruitie to
their first or second justification (for such a distinction, their novel
Scholasticall heresy has denied.) (...) in (...). sept. m^ns.
Effusio pro iniustis iusti sanguinis, tam potens fuit ad praemium, tam dives
ad praetium, vt sivniuersitas Captiuorum, in Redemptorem suum crederent,
^alium, tyrannica vincula retinerent. The effusion (says this Pope) of the
just blood, for the unjust was so potent for a reward, so rich for a price,
that if the whole university of Captives would believe in their Redeemer, the
bands of the Tyrant should hold or retain none. To him I adioyne Saint Austen:
Modo fratres, vt a peccato sanemur, Christum crucifixum intu^^amur, quomodo
illi intuebantur illum serpentem, and a morsibus August. tract. super Ioh.
sanabantur serpentium; sic qui fide intuentur mortem Christi, sanantur
morsibus peccatornm sed illi sanabantur a morte, a d vitam temporalem; hi
autem, vt habeant vitam aeternam; hoc enim interest inter figuratam imaginem,
and rem ipsam: figura praestabat vitam temporalem, res ipsa cuius imago erat,
praestabat vitam aeternam. Now brethren* (says he) that we may be healed from
sin, let us behold Christ crueified, even as they beheld that Serpent, (he
speaks of the Jews in the Desert) and were healed of the biting of Serpents;
so they who in faith behold the death of Christ, are healed from the biting of
sin: but they were healed from death, to a temporal life; but these, that
they may have life everlasting: for this is the difference, betwixt the
figuring image, and the thing it self: the figure gave temporal life, but the
thing it self of which the Image was gave everlasting life. Thus he with
infinite much like, which might be producted out of him, and all Ancient
Fathers, agreeingly to the whole current of sacred Scriptures, for
justification by faith; against the doctrine of all Pontificians who require a
positive, and immediate concurrence (dispositiue and, preparatiue at lest) of
man's works, to the first justification, too to derogatorie against the blood
of Christ and faith in it.

How pernicious is that position of many of them, that the works which do
proceed, and go before justification do, ( de congruo) out of congruitie,
merit justification? shall I call this, tenent, an incongruous position only? not
so: it is heretical; it is damnable, not only in the teachers, but in the
consenters and approuers of the same: For tell me, All ye Pontifician
Meritists out of congruitie and de congrua, as you speak: can the power of
God? can the justice of God? can the wisdom of God? do any thing? dispose
any thing? or proceed in any thing? against congruitie, right, equity
decency? No surely, you must answer; unless like madmen you will affirm that
his wisdom may do some thing vncongruously, his power may work something
indecently, inconueniently, unseemly: you are not yet so impudent, as to deny
the attributes of God his infinite Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, and
consequently his Godhead: see then and observe what your merit of congruitie
produces: marry, a merit of condignitie; for such a conueniencie, such a
congruitie, such a worthiness of a work to God, is as a condignitie. For I
demand of you in good earnest. Is not that a merit of condignitie, which in
respect of the disposition of the worker, and worthiness of the work, so
binds, urges, and constrains the omnipotent hand of God, that he cannot
(unless he will proceed against decency and congruitie) but respect,
regard, and reward the same with subsequent and following justification in the
soul which has it? whereby then, it is as clear as the Sun, that from
merits of congruitie preceding justification, you are come to merits of
condignitie, preceding the same: by which your heretical condignitie, you are
condignely fallen from Christ, you are condignely fallen from the justification
which is in Christ; which is only by grace, not by Romans 11.
works; otherwise, grace should not be grace, if the Apostles argument, in his
Epistle to the Romans may stand, and take place: and that of the same Apostle
also to Titus stand firm. ( Nos iustificatos esse, illius gratia, vt haeredes
efficeremur aeternavitae.) That we are justified by his grace, that we might
be made Heirs of everlasting life. And that again of the same Apostle, in
his Epistle to the Romans. ( Iustificati ergo ex fide, etc.) We being
justified therefore by Cap. 5.
faith, let us have peace to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; by whom we
have access by faith, into this grace, in which we stand, and do glory, in
the hope of the glory, of the children of God.

How admirable therefore is the excellency of Christian faith, by which the
faithful believer is justified in Christ, is inserted to Christ? made the
Son of God? the Heir of heaven? partaker of justice? possessor of life? not
by purchasing merits of his own, but by the same faith, possessing all the
merits and justice of Christ, which thereby are efficaciously for his
justification, communicated unto him. But what? do we by this extolling of
faith, and by this comfortable doctrine of justification by faith, subvert the
necessity of good works? God forbid: do we grant a license, or impunitie of
sinning? God auert it: do we grant a Christian security, and hope of
salvation without merits? Yes, without merits; but not without good works, not
without the fruits of sanctification, which God has ordained prepared and
commanded his elect to walk in. Hear that learned man master Calvin cap. 10.
of his learned institutions (that his propugnacle and defense of Christian
religion which no Pontifician durst ever yet attempt to confute) Per fidei
iustificationem etc. By justification by faith the Adversaries cavil good
works to be destroyed, what if thereby, they be more established? for we
dream not (says he) of a faith void of good works, or of a justification,
which consists without them; this is only the difference, that whereas we
confess faith, and good works necessarily to cohere together; notwithstanding,
we place justification in faith, and not in works: And the same, by what means
it is done, it is easy to explicate, if we convert our selves to Christ, to
whom our faith is directed, and from whom, it receives all virtue and force;
why therefore are we justified by it? because by faith we apprehend the justice
of Christ, by which only, we are reconciled to God: But this thou may not
apprehend, unless thou do withal apprehend his sanctification; for he is
given to us, for Justice, Wisdom, Redemption, Sanctification, therefore
Christ justifies no man, whom he does not also sanctify: For these benefits,
are with an insolluble knot conjoined; so that whom Christ illuminateth, those
he redeemeth; whom he redeemeth, he justifies; whom be justifies, he
sanctifies: thus he most excellently; agreeingly to sacred scriptures and all
antiquity; conformably to the faith of the Church of England; and accordingly
to the Christian doctrine, and resolution of all reformed Churches, as the
harmony of confessions testifies. And I dare avouch, that the universal and
Catholic concordance, of this fundamental point of justification, (without
which no Church and no person can be held for Christian (in the strict,
proper, and true acception of the name of Christian) is more uniformly taught
and held, by all the reformed Churches, then any point of Doctrine controuerted
in these times, is held by the Pontisicans: How glad would they be, had they
but such a unity and conformity for the very rule of their faith touching
which they are not yet agreed as I have showed in my motives. But the
conformity and irreprehensible agreement of all reformed Churches, for this
fundamental article of justification, by faith in the blood of Christ Jesus,
as it is an euidentargument of Christ's spirit amongst them, and tends greatly
to the glory of our Redeemer; so it produces wonderful and immovable
consolation in the souls of the faithful and sanctified believers. The
adversary, forsooth, frame unto themselves an Historical belief for
justification in Christ; the which as 1. Ioh. 2.
the Devils have, and yet notwithstanding do tremble: so the Christian
ancient Churches never knew it, and the Reformed do explode it: and against
justification by this Historical faith, they muster argument upon argumentt;
and produce text upon text; to show, that besides such a faith, there is
required necessity of good works, and the fruits of sanctification. But alas,
( oleum and operam perdunt) they wast their oil and loose their labor. For
what Christian reformed Church ever taught such a blasphemous paradoxe, of
justification by such an Historical faith? they utterly detest, abhominate and
renounce such a justifying faith. And here, give me leave, most beloved and
Catholic Auditors, to feel the very pulses of your consciences, and my own
also; to see how you stand, and whether we are cleansed with the blood of
Christ, or no, by this justifying, by this sanctifying faith. Do you at any
time, persisting in the purpose of sin, desire of sin, persuade your
selves, that notwithstanding the same, you are justified in Christ,
apprehending him by a dead faith as your Savior? Do you at any time, having a
conscience to act sin, to commit, approve, consent to sin; think that
Christ notwithstanding will justify and sanctify you, without humble
acknowledgement and hearty detestation of the said sins? if the Devil
(having transformed himself) have lulled any of you into such a lethargy, I
must needs pronounce, that such a confidence, is but a mere presumption, such a
justification is a most pernicious deprauation. But arise, arise, and Christ
will illuminate you, and will tell you 1. Joh. 1
what you ought to do. ( Si confiteamur peccata etc.) If Jacob 2.
we confess and acknowledge our sins, God is faithful to remit 1. Joh. 3.
them. Again he who says, he knows God, (by a justifying faith) and keeps
not his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him. Again ( Omnis
quinatus est ex Deo non peccat etc.) Every one, who is borne of God sins
not, because the seed of God, remains in him; neither can he sin, because
he is borne of God. Millions of like passages of sacred Scripture, might be
produced to show that no man can be justified in Christ, whiles with full
consent, and with a settled intention and purpose of sin, he prosecuteth the
same: doubtless it were a most pernicious paradoxe, to teach, that Christ
justifies any one, while he is proposing and prosecuting with full and free
consent Romans 6.
sin, the hire and wages whereof are death and damnation. H^b. 3.
If any one here, should be so dangerously seduced by the fallacy of sin,
and deceit of Satan, let him awake from so profane a persuasion; or else, I
must needs tell him, that as much as in him lies, he does conculcate the
blood of the New Testament, and does esteem the blood of Christ as polluted:
for, were it not a pollution even in the blood of Christ it self, so to
partake, so to consent, to communicate with sin? to justify a conscience
actually, deliberately polluting, and contaminating it self with sin? be it
spoken with reverence, it is a thing which the infinite goodness of God cannot
do, cannot effectuate. How lamentable therefore is the state of certain
sinners, who always live in the state of sin, and infallible occasion of
sin? who therefore cannot (unless they be most presumptuously made) ever
esteem themselves to be justified through faith in Christ; and so
consequently, never feel the true comfort of the soul which arises from a
Christian persuasion of justification in Christ: I mean not such persons, who
through infirmity and ignorance may fall seven (yea seventy seven) times in a
day, and rise again; Prou 24
but I mean such, as still are falling and never arise; because they are fast
bound, and chained in the occasion and state of sin: I mean such auaricious
persons, be they Church men or Laikes, which do detest Papisticall idolatry;
and yet themselves daily, and incessantly do commit their spiritual
idolatry, and whordome with their gold and silver; with their continual
beholding, solicitous and covetous turning, winding, telling, locking, and
vnlocking, meditating, caring, contemplating, adoring, worshipping of their
Idols: and yet presumptuous fools, most ignorant Doctors of the law, they
will think themselves to be justified in Christ, because they can talk of
justification in Christ, without works: alas, alas, they should rather tremble
with the Devils, and with remorse of conscience, bewail their damnable state
in which they live, and be most assured, that whilst they serve such Mammons
in their chests, they cannot serve Christ in their souls, nor be justified in
Christ in their hearts. I mean such wanton ones, who abuse and separate
themselves from their nuptial bed and do glue their souls to their
Concubines, whom they keep at home, or adore abroad: and yet good holy ones,
they think that Christ rests daily in their souls for their justification;
as their filthes lie by their sides to satisfy their abominable pleasures. I
mean such, as ever, and at all moments, carry upon their backs and about
them obligations for the Devil, adding vanity upon vanity, injustice upon
injustice; and never do so much as once imagine of any recompense, of any
satisfaction, or restitution to be made: and yet, as vain as butter-flies,
they will think, that at, and in the same seasons, and momen^, Christ does by
justification vouchsafe to adorn, and trimm their souls.

Infinite is the number of such like perverse believers, and fools: of whose
presumption, when I seriously consider, I cannot but judge of them, that in
their consciences they are to be esteemed the most blasphemous Heretics, that
ever were, in having such crooked and doltish persuasions of Christ: who as he
is a most comfortable and potent Advocate, for all humble and penitent sinners,
never refusing any who with contrite heart shall return to him; so likewise
against impenitent sinners, he has in his mouth a double edged sword, to
chastise them with eternal malediction; and as it were with the double edge of
a double most sharp punishment, of loss of the glory of heaven, and of the
undergoing of eternal punishment in the bottomless Lake of hell, the damned
pit of everlasting affliction. But to Christ justifying, to Christ sanctifying,
with a most humble confidence, and with prostrate souls; let us all here
assembled return, and in a full faith invoke him, that he will vouchsafe by
the energie of his Almighty blood, to cleanse our consciences from dead
works, to serve him, the living God: that none of us here present, be found of
that presumptuous rank, to think, that although we live deliberately and
continually in dead works: yet we shall be living to God through a dead
faith, for Christ's sake. And here to conclude; Most Religious and Christian
Auditors (ye, who have learned, according to the profession of all reformed
Churches, that the blood of Christ does sanctify and cleanse from dead works,
all such consciences as are justified by faith in the same) with what passage
of sacred Scripture may I more fitly end, and salute you then with that of this
our Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrews; (Habentes igitur, etc.) Seeing
therefore, Brethren, Heb. 10. v. 19.
we may with a firm trust enter into the holies, in the blood of Christ, by
the new way, and a living way which he has prepared for us, by the veil of
his flesh: And having a high Priest over Gods house; let us draw near in a
true heart, in the fullness of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil
conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water: let us keep the
profession of our faith, without wavering; for he is faithful that promised:
and let us consider one another, to provoke to love and good works, not
forsaking the fellowship or the assembly as the custom of some is; but let us
exhort, and comfort one another, and that so much the more, because ye see the
day approaches. O heavenly persuasion! O most divine lesson! with a firm and
an assured faith, we may walk into the holies in a new and a living way,
which Christ dying in his blood, has dedicated for us upon the Cross: yet
with this condition, most dearly beloved, with this prouiso; that our hearts
be sincere our consciences sprinkled, with this blood; and our bodies washed
with this water, and we be cleansed from dead works, to serve the living
God. From dead works, I say, wherein we pleased Satan, were obsequious to our
lusts, and followed our own concupiscences, to living works of piety, love,
compassion, godliness, fear of God, to serve the living God: The living God,
once dying, but now living: living from above, to consider all our actions;
living within us, to give us life, moving, and to search our very reins;
living in the heavens, ready with reuengefull hand to punish the wicked, and
with a most plentiful arm to reward the virtuous; living amongst us upon
earth with his grace, to quicken, to sanctify us. What? most devout
Christians? shall our God be living, and we his servants dead? and dead in
sinful works, Whose stipend and hire is death and damnation? What? shall
the everliving God die an ignominious death? rise to a most glorious life, to
quicken us, to revive us? and will we not be quickened, be revived? The
Pelican with blood stricken out of her breast, quickneth such of her young ones,
as the Serpent may have poisoned or killed: and shall not the blood of our
Pellicane Christ Jesus, powered Psalm. 102.
upon us, being stricken dead with mortiferous sin, quic ken us, revive us?
the Pellicane gives drops of blood; Our Pellicane provides a bath; the
Pellicane strikes her breast only; Our Pellicane has his whole body smitten,
on every part, on every side, streaming upon us blood and water: shall he not
sanctify us? shall he not wash us, revive us, in justice, piety, charity,
and other living works of sanctification? If any here will still take
sinful delight in dead works; it is more then to be doubted, that the
second death and everlasting damnation, will more then attend upon him: But my
very soul is comforted? for in your very countenances, and aspects, I see your
resolutions, I see your Christian determinations, that you will be revived; and
revived in living works of faith, charity, justice, longanimitie, patience,
obedience, piety, to serve the living God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost;
to whom be all praise, honor, and dominion, from henceforth, for evermore.

AMEN.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

