THE MOST LAmentable Roman Tragedy of Titus Andronicus: As it was Plaide by
the Right Honorable the Earl of Darbie, Earl of Pembrooke, and Earl of
Sussex their Servants.



LONDON, Printed by John Danter, and are to be sold by Edward White and Thomas
Millington, at the little North door of Paul's at the sign of the Gunne. 1594.

The most Lamentable Roman Tragedy of Titus Andronicus: As it was Plaide by
the Right Honorable the Earl of Darbie, Earl of Pembrooke, and Earl of
Sussex their Servants.
Enter the Tribunes and Senators aloft: And then enter Saturninus and his
followers at one door, and Bassianus and his followers, with Drums and
Trumpets. Saturninus. NOble Patricians, Patrons of my Right,
Defend the justice of my cause with arms.
And Countrymen my loving followers,
Plead my successiue Title with your swords:
I am his first borne son, that was the last
That ware the Imperial Diadem of Rome,
Then let my Fathers honors live in me,
Nor wrong mine age with this indignity,

Bassianus. Romans, friends, followers, favorers of my Right,
If ever Bassianus Ceasars son,
Were gracious in the eyes of Royal Rome,
Keep then this passage to the Capitol,
And suffer not dishonor to approach,
The Imperial seat to virtue, consecrate
To justice, continence, and Nobillitie:
But let desert in pure election shine,
And Romans fight for freedom in your choice.
Marcus Andronicus with the Crown. Princes that strive by factions and by
friends,
Ambitiously for Rule and Emperie,
Know that the people of Rome for whom we stand
A special Party, have by common voice,
In election for the Roman Empery
Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius:
For many good and great deserts to Rome,
A Nobler man, a brauer Warrior,
Lives not this day within the City walls.
He by the Senate is accited home,
From weary wars against the barbarous Goths,
That with his sons a terror to our foes,
Has yoakt a Nation strong, traind up in Arms.
Ten years are spent since first he undertook
This cause of Rome, and chastised with arms
Our enemies pride: Five times he has returned
Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons,
In Coffins from the field, and at this day,
To the Monument of that Andronicy
Done sacrifice of expiation,
And slain the Noblest prisoner of the Gothes^
And now at last laden with honors spoils,
Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
Renowned Titus flourishing in Arms.
Let us entreat by honor of his name,
Whom worthily you would have now succeed,
And in the Capital and Senates Right,
Whom you pretend to honor and adore,
That you withdraw you, and abate your strength,
Dismiss your followers, and as suitors should,
Plead your deserts in peace and humblenes.

Saturninus. How fair the Tribune speaks to calm my thoughts.

Bassianus. Marcus Andronicus, so I do affie,
In thy vprightnes and integrity,
And so I love and honor thee and thine,
Thy Noble brother Titus and his sons,
And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,
Gracious Lauinia, Romes rich ornament,
That I will here dismiss my loving friends:
And to my fortunes and the peoples favor,
Commit my cause in balance to be waid. Exit Soldiers.

Saturninus. Friends that have been thus forward in my right.
I thank you all, and here dismiss you all,
And to the love and favor of my Country,
Commit my self, my person, and the cause:
Rome be as just and gracious unto me,
As I am confident and kind to thee.
Open the gates and let me in.

Bassianus. Tribunes and me a poor Competitor.
They go up into the Senate house. Enter a Captain. Romans make way, the
good Andronicus,
Patron of virtue, Romes best Champion:
Succesfull in the battles that he fights,
With honor and with fortune is returned,
From where he circumscribed with his sword,
And brought to yoke the enemies of Rome.

Sound Drums and Trumpets, and then enter two of Titus sons, and then two men
bearing a Coffin covered with black, then two other sons, then Titus
Andronicus, and then Tamora the Queen of Goths and her two sons Chiron and
Demetrius, with Aron the More, and others as many as can be, then set down the
Coffin, and Titus speaks. Titus. Hail Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds,
Lo as the Bark that has dischargd his fraught,
Returns with precious lading to the bay,
From whence at first she wayd her anchorage;
Comes Andronicus, bound with Laurel bows,
To resalute his Country with his tears,
Tears of true joy for his return to Rome,
Thou great defender of this Capitol,
Stand gracious to the rights that we entend.
Romans, of five and twenty valiant sons,
Half of the number that king Priam had,
Behold the poor remains alive and dead:
These that sur^iue, let Rome reward with love:
These that I bring unto their latest home,
With bu^ia^l amongst their ancestors.
Here Goths have given me leave to sheath my sword,
Titus unkind, and careless of thine own,
Why sufferst thou thy sons unburied yet,
To houer on the dreadful ^h^re of stix,
Make way to lay them by their brethren.
They open the Tomb. There greet in silence as the dead are wont,
And sleep in peace, slain in your Countries wars:
O sacred Receptacle of my joys,
Sweet Cell of virtue and Nobility,
How many sons have thou of mine in store,
That thou will never render to me more.

Lucius. Give us the prowdest prisoner of the Goths.
That we may hew his limbs and on a pile,
Ad manus fratrum, sacrifice his flesh:
Before this earthy prison of their boanes,
That so the shadows be not vnappeazde,
Nor we disturbde with prodegies on earth.

Titus. I give him you the Noblest that suruiues,
The eldest son of this distressed Queen.

Tamora. Stay Roman brethren, gracious Conqueror,
Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
A mothers tears in passion for her son:
And if thy sons were ever dear to thee,
Oh think my son to be as dear to me.
Suffices not that we are brought to Rome
To beautify thy triumphs, and return
Captive to thee, and to thy Roman yoke:
But must my sons be slaughtered in the streets^
For valiant doings in their Countries cause?
O if to fight for king and commonweal,
Were piety in thine, it is in these:
Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood.
VVilt thou draw near the nature of the Gods?
Draw near them then in being merci^ull,
Sweet mercy is Nobilities true badge,
Thrice Noble Titus, spare my first borne son.

Titus. Patient your self Madam, and pardon me,
These are their brethren, whom your Goths beheld
Alive and dead, and for their brethren slain,
Religiously they ask a sacrifice:
To this your son is mark^, and die he must,
To Appease their groaning shadows that are gone.

Lucius. Away with him, and make a fire straight,
And with our swords upon a pile of wood,
Lets hew his limbs till they be clean consumde.

Exit Titus sons with Alarbus. Tamora. O cruel irreligeous piety.

Chiron. Was never Sythia half so barbarous.

Demetrius. Oppose not Sythia to ambitious Rome,
Alarbus goes to rest and we survive,
To tremble under Titus threatening look,
Then Madam stand resolud, but hope withal,
The self same Gods that armde the Queen of Troy^
With opportunity of sharp revenge
Upon the Thracian Tyrant in his Tent,
May ^auour Tamora the Queen of Goths,
(When Goths were Goths, and Tamora was Queen,)
To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.

Enter the sons of Andronicus again. Lucius. See Lord and father how we have
performd
Our Roman rights, Alarbus limbs are lopt,
And intrals feed the sacrifising fire,
Whose smoke like incense does perfume the sky,
Remains naught but to interre our brethren,
And with loud larums welcome them to Rome.

Titus. Let it be so, and let Andronicus,
Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
Sound Trumpets, and lay the Coffin in the Tomb. In peace and honor rest you
here my sons,
Rooms readiest Champions, repose you here in rest,
Secure from worldly chances and mishaps:
Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells,
Here grow no damned drugges, here are no storms,
No noise, but silence and eternal sleep,
In peace and honor rest you here my sons.
Enter Lauinia. In peace and honor, live Lord Titus long,
My Noble Lord and father live in fame:
Lo at this Tomb my tributarie tears,
I render for my brethrens obsequies:
And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy
Shed on this earth, for thy return to Rome,
O bless me here with thy victorious hand,
Whose fortunes Rooms best Citizens applaud.

Titus. Kind Rome that have thus lovingly reserude,
The Cordial of mine age to glad my heart,
Lauinia live, outliue thy fathers days,
And fames eternal date for virtues praise.

Marcus. Long live Lord Titus my beloved brother,
Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome.

Titus. Thanks gentle Tribune, Noble brother Marcus.

Marcus. And welcome Nephews from succesfull wars
You that survive, and you that sleep in fame:
Fair Lords, your fortunes are alike in all,
That in your Countries service drew your swords,
But safer triumph is this funeral pomp,
That has aspirde to Solons happiness,
And triumphs over chance in honors bed.
Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome,
Whose friend in justice thou have ever been,
Send thee by me their Tribune and their trust,
This Palliament of white and spotles hue,
And name thee in election for the Empire,
With these our late deceased Emperors sons:
Be Candidatus then and put it on,
And help to set a head on headles Room.

Titus. A better head her glorious body fits,
Than his that shakes for age and feeblenes:
What should I don this Roabe and trouble you?
Be chosen with Proclamations to day,
To morrow yield up rule, resign my life,
And set abroad new business for you all.
Room I have been thy soldier forty years,
And led my Countries strength succesfullie,
And buried one and twenty valiant sons
Knighted in Field, slain manfully in Arms,
In right and service of their Noble Country:
Give me a staff of Honor for mine age,
But not a scepter to controwle the world,
Upright he held it Lords that held it last^

Marcus. Titus thou shall obtain and ask the Emperie.

Saturni. Proud and ambitious Tribune can thou tell.

Titus. Patience Prince Saturninus.

Saturninus. Romans do me right.
Patricians draw your swords and sheath them not,
Till Saturninus be Romes Emperor:
Andronicus would thou were shipped to hell,
Rather than rob me of the peoples hearts.

Lucius. Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good,
That noble minded Titus means to thee.

Titus. Content thee Prince, I will restore to thee
The peoples hearts, and weane them from themselves.

Bassianus. Andronicus I do not flatter thee,
But honor thee and will do till I die:
My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends
I will most thankful be, and thanks to men
Of Noble minds, is honorable meede.

Titus. People of Rome, and peoples Tribunes here,
I ask your voices and your suffrages,
Will ye bestow them friendly on Andronicus.

Tribunes. To gratify the good Andronicus,
And gratulate his ^afe return to Rome,
The people will accept whom he admits.

Titus. Tribunes I thank you, and this suit I make,
That you create our Emperors eldest son,
Lord Sa^urnine: whose virtues will I hope,
Reflect on Rome as Tytus Rays on earth,
And ripen justice in this Common weal:
Then if you will elect by my advise,
Crown him and say, Long live our Emperor.

Marcus An. With voices and applause of every sor^
(...) ricians and Plebeans, we create
(...)d Saturninus Romes great Emperor,
(...)d say Long live our Emperor Saturnine.

Saturnine. Titus Andronicus, for thy favors done,
To us in our election this day,
I give thee thanks in part of thy deserts,
And will with deeds requite thy gentleness:
And for an onset Titus to advance,
Thy name and honorable family,
Lauinia will I make my Empress,
Romes Royal Mist^is, Mistress of my heart,
And in the sacred Pathan her espouse:
Tell me Andronicus does this motion please the^.

Titus. It does my worthy Lord, and in this match,
I hold me highly Honored of your Grace,
And here in sight of Rome to Saturnine,
King and Commander of our common weal,
The wide worlds Emperor, do I consecrate
My sword, my Chariot, and my Prisoners,
Presents well worthy Romes imperious Lord:
Receive them then, the tribute that I owe,
Mine honors Ensigns humbled at thy feet.

Saturnine. Thanks Noble Titus Father of my life,
How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts
Rome shall record, and when I do forget
The least of these unspeakable deserts,
Romans forget your Fealty to me.

Titus. Now Madam are you prisoner to an Emperor.
To him that for your honor and your state,
Will use you Nobly, and your followers.

Saturnine. A goodly Lady trust me of the hue,
That I would choos^ were I to choose a new:
Clear up fair Queen that cloudy countenance,
Though change of warhath wrought this change of chea^
Thou comst not to be made a scorn in Rome^
Princely shall be thy usage every way
Rest on my word, and let not discontent,
Daunt all your hopes, Madam he comforts you,
Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths,
Lauinia you are not displeasde with this.

Lauinia. Not I my Lord, since true Nobility,
Warrants these words in Princely courtesy.

Saturnine. Thanks sweet Lauinia, Romans let us go,
Raunsomles here we set our prisoners free,
Proclaim our Honors Lords with Trumpe and Drum.

Bassianus. Lord Titus by your leave, this maid is mine.

Titus. How sir, are you in earnest then my Lord?

Bascianus. I Noble Titus and resolude withal,
To do my self this reason and this right.

Marcus. Suum cuiqum is our Roman iustce,
This Prince in justice ceazeth but his own.

Lucius. And that he will, and shall if Lucius live.

Titus. Traitors auaunt, where is the Emperors guard?
Treason my Lord, Lauinia is surprizde.

Saturnine. Surprizde, by whom?

Bascianus. By him that justly may,
Bear his betrothde from all the world away.

Mutius. Brothers, help to convey her hence away,
And with my sword I Will keep this door safe.

Titus. Follow my Lord, and I Will soon bring her back.

Mutius. My Lord you pass not here.

Titus. What villain boy, barst me my way in Rome?

Mutius. Help Lucius, help.

Lucius. My Lord you are unjust, and more than so,
In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.

Titus. Nor thou, nor he, are any sons of mine^
My sons would never so dishonor me,
Traitor restore Lauinia to the Emperor.

Lucius, Dead if you will, but not to be his wife^
That is another lawful promised love.

Enter aloft the Emperor with Tamora and her two sons and Aron the moore.
Emperor. No Titus, no, the Emperor needs her not,
Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock:
I Will trust by leisure, him that mocks me once,
Thee never, nor thy traitorous hawtie sons,
Confederates all thus to dishonor me.
Was none in Rome to make a stale
But Saturnine? Full well Andronicus
Agree these deeds, with that proud brag of thine,
That said I begd the Empire at thy hands.

Titus O monstrous, what reproachful words are these?

Saturn. But go thy ways, go give that changing piece,
To him that florisht for her with his sword:
A valiant son in law thou shall enjoy,
One fit to bandie with thy lawless sons,
To ruffle in the Commonwealth of Rome.

Titus. These words are rasors to my wounded heart.

Satur. And therefore lovely Tamora Queen of Goths,
That like the stately Thebe among her Nymphs,
Do ouershine the gallanst Dames of Rome,
If thou be pleased with this my sudden choice,
Behold I choose thee Tamora for my Bride,
And will create thee Emperesse of Rome.
Speak Queen of Goths do thou applaud my choice?
And here I swear by all the Roman Gods,
Since Priest and holy water are so near,
And tapers burn so bright, and every thing
In readiness for Hymeneus stand,
I will not resalute the streets of Rome,
Or clime my Palace, till from forth this place,
I lead espowsde my Bride along with me.

Tamora. And here in sight of heaven to Rome I swear,
If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
She will a handmaide be to his desires,
A loving Nurse, a Mother to his youth.

Sat. Ascend fair Queen: Panthean Lords accompany
Your Noble Emperor and his lovely Bride,
Sent by the Heavens for Prince Saturnine,
Whose wisdom has her Fortune conquered,
There s^all we consummate our spousall rites.

Exeunt Omn^s. Titus. I am not bid to wait upon this bride,
Titus when were thou wont to walk alone,
Dishonored thus and challenged of wrongs.

Enter Marcus and Titus sons. Marcus. O Titus see: O see what thou have done
In a bad quarrel slain a virtuous son.

Titus. No foolish Tribune, no: No son of mine,
Nor thou, nor these, confederates in the deed,
That has dishonored all our Family,
Unworthy brother, and unworthy sons.

Lucius. But let us give him burial as becomes,
Give Mucius burial with our brethren.

Titus. Traitors away, he rests not in this toombe^
This monument five hundredth years has stood,
Which I have sumptuously reedified:
Here no^e but soldiers and Romes seruitors
Repose in fame: None basely slain in braule s^
Bury him where you can he comes not here.

Marcus. My Lord this is impiety in you,
My Nephew Mutius deeds do plead for him,
He must be buried with his brethren.
Titus two sons speaks. And shall or him we will accompany.

Titus. And shall^ what villain was it spoke that word?
Titus son speaks. He that would vouch it ^n any place but here.

Titus. What would you bury him in my despite?

Marcus. No Noble Titus, but entreat of thee.
To pardon Mutius and to bury him.

Titus. Marcus: Even thou have stroke upon my Crest.
And with these boys mine honor thou have wounded,
My foes I do repute you every one,
So trouble me no more, but get you gone.

3. Son. He is not with himself, let us withdraw.

2. Son. Not I till Mutius bones be buried.
The brother and the sons kneel.
Marcus. Brother, for in that name does nature plead.

2. son. Father, and in that name does nature speak.

Titus. Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.

Marcus. Renowned Titus, more than half my soul,

Lucius. Dear father, soul and substance of us all.

Marcus Suffer thy brother Marcus to interre,
His Noble Nephew here in virtues nest,
That died in honor and Lauinias cause.
Thou art a Roman, be not barbarous:
The Greeks upon advise did bury A^ax
That slew himself: and wise Laertes son,
Did graciously plead for his Funerals:
Let not young Mutius then that was thy joy,
Be bard his entrance here.

Titus. Rise Marcus, rise,
The dismalst day is this that ere I saw,
To be dishonored by my sons in Rome:
Well bury him, and bury me the next.

they put him in the tomb. Lucius. There lie thy bones sweet Mutius with thy
friends,
Till we with Trophies do adorn thy tomb:
they all kneel and say, No man shed tears for Noble Mutius,
He lives in fame, that did in virtues cause.

Exit all but Marcus and Titus. Marcus. My Lord to s^ep out of these dririe
dumps,
How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths,
Is of a sudden thus aduaunc'd in Rome.

Titus. I know not Marcus, but I know it is.
(Whether by devise or no, the heavens can tell.)
Is she not then beholding to the man,
That brought herfor this ^igh good turn so fair.

Enter the Emperor, Tamora and her two sons, with the Moore at one door.
Enter at the other door Bascianus and Lauinia, with others. Saturnine. So
Bascianus, you have played your prize,
God give you joy sir of your gallant Bride.

Bascianus. And you of yours my Lord, I say no more,
Nor wish no less, and so I take my leave.

Saturnine. Traitor, if Rome have law, or we have power,
Thou and thy faction shall repent this Rape.

Bassianus. Rape call you it my Lord to ceaze my own,
My true betrothed love, and now my wife:
But let the laws of Rome determine all,
Mean while am I possessed of that is mine.

Saturnine. It Is good sir, you are very short with us.
But if we live, we will be as sharp with you.

Bascianus. My Lord what I have done as best I may^
Answer I must, and shall do with my life,
Only thus much I give your Grace to know,
By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
This Noble Gentleman Lord Titus here,
Is in opinion and in honor wronged,
That in the rescue of Lauinia,
With his own hand did slay his youngest son,
Inzeale to you, and highly moude to wrath,
To be controwld in that he frankelie gave.
Receive him then to favor Saturnine,
That has expressed himself in all his deeds,
A father and a friend to thee and Rome.

Titus. Prince Bascianus leave to plead my deeds,
It Is thou, and those, that have dishonored me,
Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge,
How I have loud and honored Saturnine.

Tamora. My worthy Lord, if ever Tamora,
Were gracious in those Princely eyes of thine,
Then hear me speak indifferently for all:
And at my suit (sweet) pardon what is past.

Saturnine. What Madam be dishonored openly,
And baselie put it up without revenge.

Tamora. Not so my Lord, the Gods of Rome forfend.
I should be Author to dishonor you.
But on mine honor dare I undertake,
For good Lord Titus innocence in all,
Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs:
Then at my suit look graciously on him,
Loose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,
Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.
My Lord: Be ruled by me, be won at last,
Dissemble all your griefs and discontents,
You are but newly planted in your Throne,
Least then the people, and Patricians too,
Upon a just suruay take Titus part,
And so supplant you for ingratitude,
Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin.
Yield at entreats: and then let me alone,
I Will find a day to massacre them all,
And race their faction and their family,
The cruel father, and his traitorous sons,
To whom I sued for my dear sons life.
And make them know what it is to let a Queen,
Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.
Come, come sweet Emperor, (come Andronicus:)
Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart,
That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.

Saturnine. Rise Titus rise, my Empress has preuaild^

Titus. I thank your Maiesti^, and her my Lord,
These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.

Tamora. Titus I am incorporate in Rome,
A Roman now adopted happily,
And must advise the Emperor for his good,
This day all quarrels die Andronicus.
And let it be mine honor good my Lord,
That I have reconciled your friends and you.
For you Prince Bassianus I have past
My word and promise to the Emperor,
That you will be more mild and tractable.
And fear not Lords, and you Lauinia,
By my advise all humbled on your knees,
You shall ask pardon of his Majesty.
We do, and vow to Heaven and to his Highness,
That what we did, was mi^d ie as we might,
Tendering our sisters honor and our own.

Marcus. That on mine honor here do I protest.

Saturnine. Away^ and talk not, trouble us no more^

Tamora. Nay, nay sweet Empe^or, we must all be friends,
The Tribune and his Nephews kneel for grace,
I will not be denied, sweet heart look back.

Saturnine. Marcus, for thy sake, and thy brothers here,
And at my lovely Tamoras entreats,
I do remit these young men's heinous faults,
Stand up: Lauinia though you left me like a Churl,
I found a friend, and sure as death I swore,
I would not part a Batchiler from the Priest.
Come if the Emperors Court can feast two Brides,
You are my guest Lauinia and your friends:
This day shall be a loue-daie Tamora.

Titus. To morrow and it please your Majesty,
To hunt the Panther and the Heart with me,
With horn and hound, we will give your grace boniour.

Saturnine. Be it so Titus and gramercie too. Exeunt.

sound trumpets, manet Moore. Aron. Now climeth Tamora Olympus ^oppe,
Safe out of fortunes shot, and fits aloft,
Secure of thunders crack or lightning flash,
Aduaunc'd above pale enuies threatening reach,
As when the golden suune salutes the morn,
And having gilt the Ocean with his beams,
Gallops the Zodiac in his glistering Coach,
And ouer-looks the highest piering hills.
So Tamora.
Upon her wit does earthly honor wait,
And virtue stoops and trembles at her frown,
Then Aron arm thy heart, and fit thy thoughts,
To mount aloft with thy Imperial Mistress,
And mount her pitch, whom thou in triumph long
Have prisoner held, fettred in amourous chains,
And faster bound to Arons charming eyes,
Than is Prometheus tide to Caucasus.
Away with slavish weeds and servile thoughts,
I will be bright and shine in pearl and gold,
To wait upon this new made Emperesse.
To wait said I? to wanton wi^h this Queen,
This Goddess, this Semerimis, this Nymph,
This Siren that will charm Romes Saturnine,
And see his shipwreck, and his Commonweals.
Hollo, what storm is this?

Enter Chiron and Demetrius brauing. Demetrius. Chiron thy years wants wit,
thy wits wants edge,
And manners to intrude where I am graced,
And may for ought thou know affected be.

Chiron. Demetrius, thou do ouerweene in all,
And so in this, to bear me down with braues,
It Is not the difference of a year or two
Makes me less gracious, or thee more fortunate:
I am as able and as fit as thou,
To serve, and to deserve my Mistress grace,
And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
And plead my passions for Lauinias love.

Moore. Clubs, Clubs, these lovers will not keep the peace.

Demetrius. Why boy, although our mother (vnaduizd)
Gave you a daunsing Rapier by your side,
Are you so desperate grown to threat your friends:
Go too: have your lath glued within your sheath,
Till you know better how to handle it.

Chiron. Mean while sir, with the little skill I have,
Full well shall thou perceive how much I dare.

Demetrius. I boy, grow ye so brave? they draw.

Moore. Why how now Lords?
So near the Emperors Palace dare ye draw,
And maintain such a quarrel openly?
Full well I wot the ground of all this grudge,
I would not for a million of gold,
The cause were known to them it most concerns,
Nor would your Noble Mother for much more,
Be so dishonored in the Court of Rome.
For shame put up.

Demetrius. Not I till I have sheathd,
My Rapier in his bosom, and withal
Thrust those reproachful speeches down his throat,
That he has breathd in my dishonor here.

Chiron. For that I am prepared, and full resolude,
Foul spoken Coward, that thundrest with thy tongue,
And with thy weapon nothing dare perform.

Moore. Away I say.
Now by the Gods that warlike Goths adore,
This petty brabble will undo us all:
Why Lords, and think you not how dangerous
It is to ^et upon a Princes right?
What is Lauinia then become so loose,
Or Bascianus so degenerate,
That for her love such quarrels may be brocht,
Without controulement, justice, or revenge.
Young Lords beware, and should the Empress know,
This discords ground, the music would not please.

Chiron. I care not I, knew she and all the world,
I love Lauinia more than all the world.

Demetrius. Yongling learn thou to make some meaner choice,
Lauinia is thine elder brothers hope.

Moore. Why are ye mad? or know ye not in Rome,
How furious and impatient they be,
And cannot brook competitors in love?
I tell you Lords, you do but plot your deaths,
By this devise.

Chiron. Aron, A thousand deaths would I propose,
To atchiue her whom I love.

Aron. To atchiue her how?

Demetrius. Why makes thou it so strange?
She is a woman, therefore may be wood,
She is a woman, therefore may be woonne,
She is Lauinia, therefore must be loud.
What man, more water glideth by the mill
Than wo^s the Miller of, and easy it is,
Of a cut loaf to steal a shiue we know:
Though Bascianus be the Emperors brother,
Better than he have worn Vulcans badge.

Moore. I and as good as Saturninus may.

Demetrius. Then why should he despair that knows to court it,
With words, fair looks, and liberality.
What have not thou full often stroke a Do,
And borne her cleanly by the Keepers nose?

Moore. Why then it seems some certain snatch, or so
Would serve your turns.

Chiron. I so the turn were served.

Demetrius. Aron thou have hit it.

Moore. Would you had hit it too,
Then should not we be ^irde with this adoo.
Why hark ye, hark ye, and are you such fools
To square for this: would it offend you then
That both should speed.

Chiron. Faith not me.

Demetrius. Nor me so I were one.

Aron. For shame be friends, and join for that you iar,
^Tis policy and stratageme must do
That you affect, and so must you resolve,
That what you cannot as you would atchiue,
You must perforce accomplish as you may:
Take this of me, Lucrece was not more chaste
Than this Lauinia, Bascianus love.
A speedier course this lingering languishment
Must we pursue, and I have found the path:
My Lords a solemn hunting is in hand,
There will the lovely Roman Ladies troop:
The forest walks are wide and spacious,
And many unfrequented plots there are,
Fitted by kind for rape and villainy:
Single you thi^her then this dainty Do,
And strike her home by force, if not by words,
This way or not at all, stand you in hope.
Come, come, our Empress with her sacred wit
To villainy and vengeance consecrate,
Will we acquaint withal what we intend,
And she shall file our engines with advise,
That will not suffer you to square your selves,
But to your wishes hight advance you both.
The Emperors Court is like the house of fame,
The Palace full of tongues, of eyes, and ears:
The woods are ruthles, dreadful, deaf, and dull:
There speak, and strike brave boys, and take your turns,
There serve your lust^ sh^dowed from heavens eye,
And revel in Lauinias treasurie^

Chiron. Thy counsel Lad smells of no cowardice.

Demetrius. Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream,
To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits,
Per Stigia, per manes Vebor.

Exeunt. Enter Titus Andronicus, and his three sons. making a noise with
hounds and horns. Titus. The hunt is up the Moon is bright and gray,
The fields are fragrant, and the woods are green,
Uncouple here, and let us make a bay,
And wake the Emperor, and his lovely Bride,
And rowze the Prince, and ring a Hunters peale,
That all the Court may echo with the noise.
Sons let it be your charge, as it is ours,
To attend the Emperors person carefully:
I have been troubled in my sleep this night,
But dawning day new comfort has inspirde.

Here a cry of Hounds, and wind horns in a peale: then enter Saturninus,
Tamora, Bascianus, Lauinia, Chiron, Demetrius, and their Attendants. Titus.
Many good morrowes to your Majesty,
Madam to you as many, and as good,
I promised your Grace a Hunters peale.

Saturnine. And you have rung it lustilie my Lords,
Somewhat too early for new married Ladies.

Bascianus. Lauinia, how say you?

Laui. I say no: I have been broad awake, two hours and more,

Saturnine. Come on then, horse and Chariots let us have,
And to our sport: Madam, now shall ye see,
Our Roman hunting.

Marcus. I have Dogs my Lord,
Will rouse the prowdest Panther in the Chase,
And clime the highest promontarie topp.

Titus. And I have horse will follow where the game
M^k^s way^ and runs like swallows ore the plain.

Demetrius. Chiron we hunt not we, with horse nor hound
But hope to pluck a d^intie Do to ground. Exeunt.

Enter Aron alone. Moore. He that had wit, would think that I had none,
To bury so much gold under a tree,
And never after to inherit it.
Let him that thinks of me so abiectlie,
Know that this gold must coin a stratageme,
Which cunning lie effected will beget,
A very excellent piece of villainy:
And so repose sweet gold for their unrest,
That have their alms out of the Empress Chest.

Enter Tamora alone to the Moore. Tamora. My lovely Aron, wherefore lookst
thou sad,
When every thing dorh make a gleefull bost?
The birds chaunt melody on every bush,
The snakes lies rolled in the cheerful sun,
The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind,
And make a checkerd shadow on the ground:
Under their sweet shade, Aron let us sit,
And whilst the babbling echo mocks the hounds,
Replying shrillie to the well tuned horns,
As if a double hunt were heard at once,
Let us sit down and mark their yellowing noise:
And after conflict such as was supposde
The wandering Prince and Dido once inioyed,
When with a happy storm they were surprisde,
And curtaind with a counsaile-keeping Cave,
We may each wreathed in the others arms,
(Our pastimes done,) possess a golden slumber,
VVhiles hounds and horns, and sweet mellodious birds
Be unto us as is a Nurces song
Of Lullabie, to bring her Babe a sleep.

Moore. Maddam, though Venus govern your desires,
Saturn is dominator over mine:
What signifies my deadly standing eye,
My silence, ann my clowdie melancholy,
My fleece of wollie hair that now vncurles,
Even as an Adder when she does vnrowle,
To do some fatal execution.
No Maddam, these are no veneriall signs,
Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand,
Blood and revenge are hammering in my head.
Hark Tamora the Empress of my soul,
Which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee,
This is the day of doom for Bassianus,
His Philomel must loose her tongue to day,
Thy sons make pillage of her chasttitie,
And wash their hands in Bascianus blood.
See thou this letter? take it up I pray thee,
And give the king this fatal plotted scrowle.
Now question me no more we are espied,
Here comes a parcel of our hopeful lbootie,
Which dreads not yet their lives destruction.

Enter Bascianus, and Lauinia. Tamora. Ah my sweet Moore, sweeter to me than
life.

Moore. No more great Empress, Bascianus comes,
Be cross with him, and I Will go fetch thy sons
To back thy quarrels what so ere they be.

Bascianus. who have we here? Romes Royal Empress,
Unfurnished of her well beseeming troop?
Or is it Dian habited like her,
Who has abandoned her holy groves,
To see the general hunting in this Forest?

Tamora. Saucy controwler of my private steps,
Had I the power that some say Dian had,
Thy temples should be planted presently,
With horns as was Acteons, and the hounds,
Should drive upon thy new transformed limbs,
Unmannerly intruder as thou art.

Lauinea. Under your patience gentle Empress,
It Is thought you have a goodly gift in horning,
And to be doubted that your Moore and you,
Are singled forth to try thy experimens:
Jove sheeld your husband from his hounds to day,
It Is pity they should take him for a Stag.

Bassianus^ Believe me Queen your swartie Cymerion,
Does make your honor of his bodies hue,
Spotted, detested, and abominable.
Why are you sequestered from all your train,
Dismounted from your snow white goodly steed,
And wandered hither to an obsure plot,
Accompanied but with a barbarous Moore,
If soul desire had not conducted you?

Lauinia. And being intercepted in your sport,
Great reason that my Noble Lord be rated
For sausines, I pray you let us hence,
And let her joy her Raven culloured love,
This valie fit^s the purpose passing well.

Bass. The King my brother shall have notice of this.
Lauinia I, for these slips have made him noted long,
Good King to be so mightily abused.

Queen. Why I have patience to endure all this.
Enter Chiron and Demetrius.
D^met. How now dear sovereign, and our gracious Mother,
Why does your highness look so pale and wan?

Queen. Have I not reason think you to look pale,
These two have ticed me hither to this place,
A barren, detested vale you see it is,
The trees though summery yet forlorn and lean,
Overcome with moss and balefull misselto.
Here never shines the sun, here nothing breeds,
Unless the nightly Owl or fatal Raven:
And when they showd me this abhorred pit,
They told me here at dead time of the night,
A thousand feends, a thousand hissing snakes,
Ten thousand swelling toades, as many vrchins,
Would make such fearful and confused cries,
As any mortal body hearing it
Should strait fall mad, or else die suddenly.
No sooner had they told this hellish tale,
Bu^ strait they told me they would bind me here,
Unto the body of a dismal Ewghe,
And leave me to this miserable death.
And then they calde me foul adulteress,
Lauicious Goth, and all the bitterest^tearmes,
That ever ear did hear to such effect.
And had you not by wondrous fortune come,
This vengeance on me had they executed:
Revenge it as you love your Mothers life,
Or be ye not hence forth called my Children,

Demetrius. This is a witness that I am thy son. stab him.
Chi And this for me struck home, to show my strength.

Lauinia. I come Semeranis, nay barbarous Tamora,
For no name fits thy nature but thy own.

Tamora. Give me the poynard, you shall know my boys,
Your Mothers hand shall right your Mothers wrong.

Demetrius. Stay Madame here is more belongs to her,
First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw:
This minion stood upon her chastity,
Upon her Nuptial vow, her loyalty,
And with that painted hope, braues your mightenes,
And shall she carry this unto her grave.

Chiron. And if she do, I would I were an Euenuke,
Drag hence her husband to some secret hole,
And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust.

Tamora. But when ye have the honey we desire,
Let not this waspe out live us both to sting,

Chiron. I warrant you maddame we will make that sure:
Come Mistress now perforce we will enjoy,
That nice preserved honesty of yours.

Lauinia. Oh Tamora, thou bear a woman's face.

Tamora. I will not hear her speak away with her.

Lauinia. Sweet Lords entreat her hear me but a word.

Demetrius. Listen fair Maddame let it be your glory
To see her tears, but be your heart to them:
As unrelenting Flint to drops of rain.

Lauinia. When did the Tigers young ones teach the dam,
Oh do not learn her wrath: she taught it thee,
The Milk thou suckst from her did turn to Marble,
Even at thy teat thou had thy tyrranie,
Yet every Mother breeds not sons a like,
Do thou entreat her show a woman's pity.

Chiron. What would thou have me prove my self a bastard?

Lauinia. It Is true the Raven does not hatch a Lark,
Yet have I hard, Oh could I find it now,
The Lion moved with pity did endure,
To have his Princely paws parde all away:
Some say that Ravens foster forlorn children,
The whilst their own birds famish in their nests:
Oh be to me though thy hard heart say no,
Nothing so kind but something pitti^ull.

Tamora. I know not what it means, away with her.

Lauinia, Oh let me teach thee for my Fathers sake,
That gave thee life when well he might have slain thee,
Be not obdurate, open thy deaf years.

Tamora. Had thou in person nere offended me,
Even for his sake am I pitiless.
Remember boys I powrd forth tears in vain,
To save your brothe^ from the sacrifice,
But fearce Andronicus would not relent,
Therefore away with her, and use her as you will,
The worse to her the better loved of me.

Lauinia. Oh Tamora be called a Gentle Queen,
And with thine own hands kill me in this place,
For it is not life that I have begd so long,
Poor I was slain when Bascianus did.

Tamora. What begst thou then fond woman let me go?

Lauinia. It Is present death I beg, and one thing more,
That woman-hood denies my tongue to tell,
Oh keep me from there worse than killing lust,
And tumble me into some loathsome pit,
Where never man's eye may behold my body,
Do this and be a charitable murderer.

Tamora. So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee,
No let them satisfiee their lust on thee.

Demetrius. Away for thou have staide us here too long.

Lauinia. No grace, no womanhood, ah beastly creature,
The blot and enemy to our general name,
Confusion fall

Chiron. Nay then I Will stop your mouth, bring thou her husband,
This is the hole where Aron bid us hide him.

Tamora. Farewell my sons, see that you make her sure,
Nere let my heart know merry cheer indeed,
Till all the Andronicie be made away:
Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moore,
And let my spleenfull sons this Trull defloure.

Enter Aron with two of Titus sons. Come on my Lords the better foot before,
Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit,
Where I espied the Panther fast a sleep.
Quintus. My sight is very dull what ere it bodes.

Mart. And mine I promise you, were it not for shame,
Well could I leave our sport to sleep a while.

Quintus. What art thou fallen what subtle hole is this,
Whose mouth is covered with rude growing briers,
Upon whose leaves are drops of new shed blood,
As fresh as morning dew distild on flowers,
A very fatal place it seems to me,
Speak brother have thou hurt thee with the fall?

Martius. Oh brother with the dismalst object hurt,
That ever eye with sight made heart lament.

Aron. Now will I fetch the King to find them here,
That he thereby may have a likely guess, Exit.
How these were they, that made away his brother.

Martius. Why do not comfort me and help me out
From this vnhollow, and blood stained hole.

Quintus. I am surprised with an uncouth fear,
A chilling sweat oreruns my trembling joints,
My heart suspects more than mine eye can see.

Martius. To prove thou have a true divining heart,

Aron, and thou look down into this den,
And see a fearful ^ight of blood and death.

Quintus. Aron is gone, and my compassionate heart,
Will not permit mine eyes once to behold,
The thing where at it trembles by furmise:
Oh tell me who it is, for nere till now,
Was I a child to fear I know not what.

Martius. Lord Bassianus lies bereaud in blood,
All on a heap like to a slaughtered Lamb,
In this detested dark blood drinking pit.

Quintus. If it be dark how do thou know it is he.

Martius. Upon his bloody finger he does wear
A precious ring, that lightens all this hole:
Which like a tape^ in some monument,
Does shine upon the dead man's earthy cheeks,
And shows the ragged intrals of this pit:
So pale did shine the Moon on Pr^amus,
When he by night lay bathd in Maiden blood,
O Brother help me with thy fainting hand,
If fear^ has made thee faint as me it has,
Out of this fell devouring receptacle,
As hateful as Ocitus mistie mouth.

Quint. Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee ou^,
Or wanting strength to do thee so much good,
I may be plucked into the swallowing womb,
Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus grave:
I have no strength to pluck thee to the brinck,

Martius. Nor I no strength to clime without thy help.

Quint. Thy hand once more, I will not loose again,
Till thou art here a loft or I below:
Thou can not come to me, I come to thee.

Enter the Emperor and Aron, the Moore. Saturninus. Along with me, I Will see
what hole is here.
And what he is that now is leapt into it.
Say who art thou that lately did descend,
Into this gaping hollow of the earth.

Martius. The v^happie sons of old Andronicus,
Brought hither in a most unlucky hour,
To find thy brother Bassianus dead.

Saturninus. My brother dead, I know thou do^t but jest,
He and his Lady both are at the lodge,
Upon the north side of this ple^sant chase,
It Is not an hour since I left them there.

Mart. We know not where you left them all a live,
But out alas, here have we found him dead.

Enter Tamora, Andronicus, and Lucius. Tamora. Where is my Lord the King?

King. Here Tamora, though gri^de with killing grief.

Tamora. Where is thy brother Bassianus?

King. Now to the bottom do thou search my wound,
Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.

Tamora. Then all too late I b^ing this fatal writ.
The complot of this timelesse Tragedy,
And wonder greatly that man's face can fold,
In pleasing smiles such murderous tyrranie.
She gives Saturnine a letter. Saturninus reads the letter. And if we miss
to meet him handsomelie,
Sweet huntsman, Bassianus it is we mean,
Do thou so much as dig the grave for him,
Thou know our meaning look for thy reward,
Among the Nettl^s at the Elder tree,
Which over shades the mouth of that same pit,
Where we decreed to bury Bassianus,
Do this and purchase us thy lasting friends.

King. Oh Tamora was ever heard the like,
This is the pit, and this the Elder tree,
Look Sirs if you can fi^de the huntsman out,
That should have murdered Bassianus here.

Aron. My gracious Lord here is the bag of gold.

King. Two of thy whelps, fell ^urs of bloody kind,
Have here bereft my brother of his life:
Sirs drag them from the pit unto the prison,
There let them bide until we have deuisd,
Some never hard of tortering pain for them.

Tam. What are they in this pit, Oh wondrous thing!
How easily murder is discovered.

Titus. High Emperor, upon my feeble knee,
I beg this boon, with tears not lightly shed,
That this fell fault of my accursed sons,
Accursed, if the faults be proud in them.

King. If it be proud, you see it is apparent,
Who found this letter, Tamora was it you?

Tamora. Andronicus himself did take it up.

Titus. I did my Lord, yet let me be their bail,
For by my Fathers reverent toombe I vow,
They shall be ready at your highness will,
To answer their suspicion with their lives.

King. Thou shall not bail them, see thou follow me.
Some bring the murdered body, some the murderers,
Let them not speak a word the guilt is plain,
For by my soul, were there worse end than death,
That end upon them should be executed.

Tamora. Andronicus I will entreat the King,
Fear not thy sons, they shall do well enough.

Titus. Come Lucius come, stay not to talk with them

Enter the Empress sons with Lauinia, her hands cut off, and her tongue cut
out, and ravished. Deem. So now go tell and if thy tongue can speak,
Who it was that ^ut thy tongue and ravished thee.

Chi. Write down thy mind bewray thy meaning so,
And if thy stumpes will let thee play the scribe.

Deem. See how with signs and tokens she can scrowle^

Chi. Go home, call for sweet water wash thy hands.

Demet. She has no tongue to call, nor hands to wash'
And so lets leave her to her silent walks.

Chi. And twere my cause, I should go hang my self.

Dmet. If thou had hands to help thee knit the corde^
Exeunt. Enter Marcus from hunting. Who is this, my Niece that flies away so
fast,
Cosen a word, where is your husband:
If I do dream would all my wealth would wake me.
If I do wake some Plannet strike me down,
That I may slumber an eternal sleep.
Speak gentle Niece, what stern ungentle hands,
Has lopt, and hewde, and made thy body bare,
Of her two branches those sweet Ornaments,
Whose cyrcling shadows, Kings have sought to sleep in,
And might not gain so great a happiness
As half thy love: Why do not speak to me?
Alas, a crimson River of warm blood,
Like to a bubling Fountain stirde with wind,
Does rise and fall between thy Rosed lips,
Coming and going with thy honey breath.
But sure some Tereus has deflowred thee,
And lest thou should detect them cut thy tongue.
Ah now thou turnst away thy face for shame,
And notwithstanding all this loss of blood,
As from a Conduit with their issuing spouts,
Ye^ do thy cheeks look red as Titans face,
B^ushing to be encountered with a Clowde^
Shall I speak for thee, shall I say it is so.
Oh that I knew thy heart, and knew the beast,
That I might rail at him to ease my mind.
Sorrow concealed like an Oven stoppt,
Does burn the heart to cinders where it is.
Fair Philomela, why she but lost her tongue,
And in a tedious sampler sowed her mind.
But lovely Niece, that mean is cut from thee,
A craf^ier Tereus, Cosen have thou met,
And he has cut those pretty fingers off,
That could have better sowed than Philomel.
Oh had the m^nster seen those Lilly hands,
Tremble like aspen leaves upon a Lute,
And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
He would not then have tucht them for his life.
Or had he heard the heavenly Harmony,
Which that sweet tongue has made^
He would have dropped his knife and fell a sleep,
As Cerberus at the Thracian Poets feet.
Come le^ us go, and make thy f^ther blind,
For such a sight will blind a fathers eye.
One hours storm will drown the fragrant meades,
What will whole mo^ths of tears thy fathers eyes?
Do not draw back, for we will mourn with thee,
Oh could our mourning ease thy misery.

Exeunt. Enter the Judges and Senators with Titus tw^ sons bound, pa^sing on
the Stage to the place of execution, and Titus going before pleading. Titus.
Hear me grave Fathers, Noble Tribunes stay,
For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent
In dangerous wars, whi^st you securely slept.
For all my blood in Rooms great quarrel shed,
For all the frostie nights that I have watched,
And for these bitter tears which now you see,
Filling the aged wrincles in my cheeks,
Be pitiful to my condemned sons,
Whose souls is not corrupted as it is thought.
For two and twenty sons I never wept,
Because they died in honors lofty bed,
Andronicus lies down, and the Judges pass by him^ For these, Tribunes, in
the dust I write
My hearts deep languor, and my souls sad tears:
Let my tears staunch the earths dry appetite,
My sons sweet blood will make it shame and blush:
O earth I will be friend thee more with rain,
That shall distill from these two ancient ruins,
Than youthful April shall with all his showers.
In summe^s drought, I Will drop upon thee still,
In win^er with warm tears I Will melt the snow,
And keep eternal ^pring time out hy face,
So thou refuse to drink my dear sons blood.
Enter Lucius with his weapon drawn. Oh reverent Tribunes, Oh gentle aged men
Unbind my sons, reuerse the doom of death,
And let me say, (that never wept before)
My tears are now prevailing Orators.

Lucius. Oh Noble Father you lament in vain,
The Tribunes hear you not, no man is by,
And you recount your sorrows to a stone.

Titus. Ah Lucius, for thy brothers let me plead,
^ra^e Tribunes, once more I entreat of you.

Lucius. My gracious Lord, no Tribune hears you speak.

Titus. Why it is no matter man, if they did hear
They would not mark me, if they did mark,
They would not pity me, yet plead I must,
And bootlesse unto them.
Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones,
who though they cannot answer my distress,
Yet in some sort they are better than the Tribunes^
For that they will not intercept my tale:
when I do weep, they humbly at my feet
Receive my tears, and seem to weep with me,
And were they but attired in grave weeds,
Rome could afford no Tribunes like to these:
A stone is soft as wax, Tribunes more hard than stones:
A stone is silent, and offends not,
And Tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
But wherefore standst thou with thy weapon drawn?

Lucius^ To rescue my two brothers from their death,
For which attempt the Judges ^aue pronoun^st,
My everlasting doom of banishment.

Titus. O happy man, they have befriended th^e:
why foolish Lucius, do thou not perceive
That Rome is but a wilderness of tigers?
Tigers mu^t pray, and Rome affords no pray
But me and mine, how happy art thou then,
From these deuourers to be banished.
But who comes with our brother Marcus here?

Enter Ma^cus with Lauinia. Marcus. Titus, prepare thy aged eyes to weep,
Or if not so, thy Noble heart to break:
I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.

Titus. will it consume me? Let me see it then.

Marcus. This was thy Daughter.

Titus. why Marcus so she is.

Lucius. Ay me, this Object kills me.

Titus. Faint-harted-boy, arise and look upon her,
Speak Lauinea, what accursed hand,
Has made thee handles in thy fathers sight?
what fool has added water to the sea?
Or brought a faggot to bright burning Troy?
My grief was at the height before thou camst,
And now like Nylus it disdaineth bounds.
Give me a sword I Will choppe off my hands too,
For they have fought for Rome, and all in vain:
And they have nursed this woe, in feeding life:
In bootlesse prayer have they been held up,
And they have serude me to effectles use.
Now all the service I require of them,
Is that the one will help to cut the other.
It Is well Lauinia that thou have no hands,
For hands to do Rome service is but vain.

Lucius. Speak gentle sister, who has martred thee.

Marcus. Oh that delightful engine of her thoughts,
That blabd them with such pleasing eloquence,
Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage,
VV^ere like a sweet mellodious bird it sung,
Sweet varied notes inchaunting every ear.

Lucius. Oh say thou for her, who has done this deed?

Marcus. Oh thus I found her straying in the Park,
Seeking to hide her self, as does the Dear
That has receaude some vnrecuring wound.

Titus. It was my Dear, and he that wounded her,
Has hurt me more than had he killed me dead:
For now I stand as one upon a rock,
Inuirond with a wilderness of sea,
Who marks the waxing tide, grow wave by wave,
Expecting ever when some envious surge,
Will in his brinish bowels swallow him.
This way to death my wretched sons are gone,
Here stands my other son a banished man,
And here my brother weeping at my woes:
But that which gives my ^oule the greatest spurn
Is dear Lauinia, dearer than my soul.
Had I but seen thy picture in this plight,
It would have madded me: what shall I do,
Now I behold thy lively body so?
Thou have no hands to wipe away thy tears,
Nor tongue to tell me who has martred thee:
Thy husband he is dead, and for his death
Thy brothers are condemnde, and dead by this.
Look Marcus, Ah son Lucius look on her,
When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
Stood on her cheeks, as does the honey dew,
Upon a gathred Lilly almost withered.

Marcus. Perchance she weeps because they killed her husband,
Perchance, because she knows them innocent.

Titus. If they did kill thy husband then be joyful,
Because the Law has t^ne revenge on them.
No, no, they would not do so foul a deed,
Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.
Gentle Lauinia, let me kiss thy lips,
Or make some sign how I may do thee ease:
Shall thy good Uncle, and thy brother Lucius,
And thou, and I, sit round about some Fountain,
Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks,
How they are staind like meadows yet not dry,
With mierie slime left on them by a flood?
And in the fountain shall we gaze so long,
Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearenes,
And made a brine pit with our bitter tears?
Or shall we cut away our hands like thine?
Or shall we bite our tongues? and in dumb shows
Pass the remainder of our hateful days?
What shall we do? Let us that have our tongues,
Plot some devise of further misery,
To make us wonderd at in time to come.

Lucius. Sweet father cease your tears, for at your grie^
See how my wretched ^ister sobs and weeps.

Marcus. Patience dear niece, good Titus dry thine eyes.

Titus. Ah Marcus, Marcus, Brother well I wot,
Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,
For thou poor man, have drowned it with thine own.

Lucius. Ah my Lauinia, I will wipe thy cheeks.

Titus. Mark Marcus, mark, I understand her signs,
Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say
That to her Brother, which I said to thee.
His napking with her true tears all bewe^,
Can do no service on her sorrowful cheekes^
Oh what a simpathie of woe is this,
As far from help, as ^ymbo is from bliss.

Enter Aron the Moore alone. Moore. Titus Andronicus, My Lord the Emperor,
Sends thee this word, that if thou love thy sons,
Let Marcus, Lucius, or thy self old Titus,
Or any one of you, chop off your hand
And send it to the King, he for the same,
will send thee hither both thy sons alive,
And that shall be the ransom for their fault.

Titus. Oh gracious Emperor, Oh gentle Aron,
Did ever Raven sing so like a Lark,
That gives sweet tidings of the Suns vprise?
With all my heart, I Will send the Emperor my hand,
Good Aron will thou help to chop it off?

Lucius. Stay father, for that Noble hand of thine,
That has thrown down so many enemies,
Shall not be sent: my hand will serve the turn,
My youth can better spare my blood than you,
And therefore mine shall save my brothers lives.

Marcus. which of your hands has not defended Rome,
And reard aloft the bloody Battleaxe,
wrighting destruction on the enemies Cas^le?
Oh none of both, but are of high desert:
My hand has been but idle, let it serve
To ransom my two Nephews from their death,
Then have I kept it to a worthy end.

Moore^ Nay come agree whose hand shall go along,
For fear they die before their pardon come.

Marcus. My hand shall go.

Lucius. By heaven it shall not go.

Titus. Sirs strive no more, such withred herbs as these
Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.

Lucius. Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
Let me redeem my brothers both from death.

Marcus. And for our fathers sake, and mothers care,
Now let me show a brothers love to thee.

Titus. Agree between you, I will spare my hand.

Lucius. Then I Will go fetch an Axe.

Marcus. But I will use the Axe. Exeunt.

Titus. Come hither Aron, I Will deceive them both,
Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.

Moore. If that be calde deceit, I will be honest,
And never whilst I live deceive men so:
But I Will deceive you in another sort,
And that you will say ere half an hour pass.

He cuts off Titus hand. Enter Lucius and Marcus again. Titus. Now stay your
strife, what shall be, is dispatcht^
Good Aron give his Majesty my hand,
Tell him it was a hand that warded him
From thousand dangers, bid him bury it,
More has it merited, that let it have:
As for my sons, say I account of them,
As jewels purchasde at an easy price,
And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.

Aron. I go Andronicus, and for thy hand,
Look by and by to have thy sons with thee.
Their heads I mean: Oh how this villainy,
Does fat me with the very thoughts of it.
Let ^ooles do good, and fair men call for grace,
Aron will have his soul black like his face. Exit.

Titus. Oh here I lift this one hand up to heaven,
And bow this feeble ruin to the earth,
If any power pitties wretched tears,
To that I call: what would thou kneel with me?
Do then dear heart, for heaven shall hear our prayers,
Or with our sighs well breath the welkin dim,
And stain the sun with fogge, as sometime clouds,
When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.

Marcus. Oh Brother speak with possibility,
And do not break into these deep extremes.

Titus. Is not my sorrow deep having no bottom?
Then be my passions bottomless with them.

Marcus. But yet let reason govern thy lament.

Titus. If there were reason for these miseries,
Then into limits could I bind my woes:
When heaven does weep, does not the earth oreflow?
If the winds rage, does not the sea wax mad,
Threatening the welkin with his bigswolne face?
And will thou have a reason for this coile?
I am the sea. Hark how her sighs does flow:
She is the weeping welkin, I the earth:
Then must my sea be moved with her sighs,
Then must my earth with her continual tears,
Become a deluge: ouerflowed and drowned:
For why, my bowels cannot hide her woes,
But like a drunkard must I vomit them.
Then give me leave, for loosers will have leave,
To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.

Enter a messenger with two heads and a hand. Messenger. Worthy Andronicus,
ill art thou repaid,
For that good hand thou sentst the Emperor:
Here are the heads of thy two Noble sons,
And here is thy hand in scorn to thee sent back:
Thy grief, their sports: Thy resolution mocked:
That woe is me to think upon thy woes,
More than remembrance of my fathers death.

Marcus. Now let hot AEtna cool in Cycili^,
And be my heart an euerburning hell:
These miseries are more than may be borne.
To weep with them that weep does ease some deal,
But sorrow flowted at, is double death.

Lucius. Ah that this sight should make so deep a wound
And yet detested life not shrink thereat:
That ever death should let life bear his name,
Where life has no more interest but to breath.

Marcus. Alas poor har^, that kiss is comfortless,
As frozen water to a starued snake.

Titus. When will this fearful slumber have an end?

Mar. Now farewell flattrie, die Andronicus,
Thou do not slumber, see thy two sons heads,
Thy warlike hand, thy mangled Daughter here:
Thy other banished son with this dear sight,
Struck pale and bloodlesse, and thy brother I,
Even like a stony image cold and numme.
Ah now no more will I controwle thy greefes,
Rent off thy silue^ hair, thy other hand,
Gnawing with thy teeth, and be this dismal sight
The closing up of our most wretched eyes:
Now is a time to storm, why art thou still?

Titus. Ha, ha, ha.

M. Why do thou laugh? It fits not with this hour.

Titus. Why I have not another tear to shed;
Besides this sorrow is an enemy,
And would usurp upon my watrie eyes,
And make them blind with tributarie tears.
Then which way shall I find Reuenges Cave,
For these two heads do seem to speak to me
And threat me, I shall never come to bliss,
Till all these mischiefs be returned again,
Even in their throats that has committed them
Come let me see what task I have to do,
You heavy people cirkle me about.
That I may turn me to each one of you,
And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs,
The vow is made. Come brother take a head,
And in this hand the other will I bear,
And Lauinia thou shall be imployde in these Arms,
Bear thou my hand sweet wench between thy teeth:
As for thee boy, go get thee from my sight,
Thou art an Exile, and thou must not stay,
Hie to the Goths and raise an army there,
And if ye love me as I think you do,
Lets kiss and part for we have much to do.

Ex^unt. Lucius. Farewell Andronicus my Noble Father,
The woefulst man that ever liude in Rome:
Farewell proud Rome till Lucius come again,
He loves his pledges dearer than his life:
Farewell Lauinia my Noble sister,
O would thou were as thou to fore have been,
But now nor Lucius nor Lauinia lives,
But in oblivion and hateful greefes:
If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs,
And make proud Saturnine and his Emperesse^
Beg at the gates like Tarqui^ and his Queen.
Now will I to the Goths and raise a power,
To be reuengd on Rome and Saturnine.

Exit Lucius. Enter Lucius son and Lauinia running after him, and the Boy
flies from her with his Books under his Arm. Enter Titus and Marcus. Puer.
Help Grandsier help, my Aunt Lauini^,
Follows me every where I know not why.
Good Uncle Marcus see how swift she comes,
Alas sweet Aunt I know not what you mean.

Marcus. Stand by me Lucius, do not fear thine Aunt.

Titus. She loves thee boy too well to do thee harm.

Puer. I when my Father was in Rome she did.

M. What means my Niece Lauinia by these signes^

Tit. Fear her not Luci^s, somewhat does she mean,
See Lucius see, how much she makes of thee:
Some whither would she have the egoe with her.
A boy, Cornelia never with more care,
Red to her sons than she has red to thee,
Sweet Poetry and Tullies Orator:
Can thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus.

Puer. My Lord I know not I, nor can I guess,
Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her:
For I have heard my Grandsier say full often,
Extremity of greeues would make men mad.
And I have red that Hecuba of Troy,
Ran mad for sorrow, that made me to fear,
Although my Lord I know my Noble Aunt,
Loves me as dear as ere my Mother did,
And would not but infurie fright my youth,
Which made me down to throw my books and fly
Causeles perhaps, but pardon me sweet Aunt,
And Maddam if my Uncle Marcus go,
I will most willingly attend your Ladyship.

Mar. Lucius I will.

Titus. How now Lauinia, Marcus what means this?
Some book there is that she desires to see:
Which is it gyrle of these, open them boy,
But thou art deeper read and better skild,
Come and take choice of all my Lybrarie,
And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens
Reveal the damned contriuer of this deed.
Why lifts she up her Arms in sequence thus?

M. I think she means that there were more than one
Confederate in the fact, I more there was:
Or else to heaven, she heaues them for revenge.

Titus. Lucius what book is that she tosseth so^

Puer. Grandsier it is Ouids Metamorphosis,
My Mother gave it me.

Marcus. For love of her that's gone,
Perhaps she culd it from among the rest.

Titus. Soft so busily she turns the leaves,
Help her, what would she find? Lauinia shall I read?
This is the tragic tale of Philomel,
And trea^s of Tereus treason and his rape,
And rape I fear, was root of thy annoie,

Marcus. See brother see, note how she coats the leaves,

Titus. Lauinia were thou thus surpised sweet gyrle?
Ravished and wronged as Phlomela was,
Frocd in the ruthlesse Vast and gloomie woods;
See, see, I such a place there is where we did hunt,
(O had we never, never hunted th^re,)
Patternd by that the Poet here describes,
By nature made for murders and for rapes,

Mar. O why should nature build so foul a den.
Unless the Gods delight in Tragedies,

Titus. Give signs sweet gyrle, for here are none but friends,
What Roman Lord it was durst do the deed?
Or slonke not Saturnine as Tarquin erst,
That left the Camp to sin in Lucrece bed

Marc. Sit down sweet Niece, brother sit down by me,
Appollo, Pallas, Jove or Mercury,
Inspire me that I may this treason find,
My Lord look here, look here Lauinia,
He writes his name with his staff and guides it with feet and mouth. This
sandy plot is plain, guide if thou can
This after me, I have writ my name,
Without the help of any hand at all.
Cursed be that heart that forcd us to this shift:
Write thou good Ne^ce, and here display at last,
What God will have discovered for revenge,
Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,
That we may know the traitors and the truth,
She takes the staff in her mouth, and guides it with he^ stumps and writes.
Oh do ye read my Lord what she has writ,
Stuprum, Chiron, D^etrius.

Marcus. What, what, the lus^full sons of Tamora,
Performers of this heinous bloody deed.

Titus. Magni Dominator poli,
Tam lentus audis scelera, tam lentus vides?

Marcus. Oh calm thee gentle Lord, although I know
There is enough written upon this earth,
To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts,
And arm the minds of infants to exclaimes,
My Lord kneel down with me, Lauinia kneel,
And kneel sweet boy, the Roman Hectors
And swear with me as with the woeful feere,
And father of that chaste dishonored Dame,
Lord Iunius Brutus swear for Lucrece rape,
That we will prosecute by good advice
Mortal revenge upon these Traitorous Goths,
And see their blood or die with this reproach.

Titus. It Is sure enough, and you knew how,
But if you hunt these Bear whelps then beware,
The Dam will wake and if she wind ye once,
She Is with the Lion deeply still in league,
And luls him whilst she plaieth on her back.
And when he fleepes, will she do what she list.
You are a young huntsman Marcus, let alone,
And come I will go get a leaf of brass,
And with a gad of steel will write these words,
And lay it by: the angry northen wind
Will blow these sands like Sibels leaves a broad,
And whereas our lesson then, boy what say you?

Puer. I say my Lord that if I were a man,
Their mothers bedchamber should not be safe,
For these base bondmen to the yoke of Rome.

Marcus I that's my boy, thy father has full often,
For his ungrateful Country done the like.

Puer. And Uncle so will I, and if I live.

Titus. Come go with me into mine Armorie,
Luci^s ^le fit thee, and withal my boy
Shall carry from me to the Empress sons,
Presents that I intend to send them both:
Come, come, thoult do my message will thou not?

Puer. I with my dagger in their bosoms Grandsier.

Titus. No boy not so, I Will teach thee another course,
Lauinia come, Marcus look to my house,
Lucius and I Will go brave it at the Court,
I marry will we sir, and we will be waited on. Ex^unt.

Marcus. O heavens, can you hear a goodman groan
And not relent, or not compassion him?
Marcus attend him in his ecstasy,
That has more scars of sorrow in his heart,
Than ^oe-mens marks upon his battred shield,
But yet so just, that he will not revenge,
Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus. Exit.

E^ter Aron, Chiron, and Demetrius at one door, and at the other door young
Lucius, and another with a bundle of weapons, and verses writ upon them. Chiron
Demetrius^ here is the son of Lucius,
He has some message to deliver us.

Aron. I some mad message from his mad Grandfather.

Puer. My Lords, with all the humblenes I may,
I greet your Honors from Andronicus;
And pray the Roman Gods confound you both.

Demetrius. Gramarcie Lovely Lucius, what is the news.

Puer. That you are both discipherd, that's the news,
For villains marked with rape. May it please you,
My Grandsier well aduisde has sent by me,
The goodliest weapons of his Armorie,
To gratefie your honorable youth
The hope of Rome, for so he bid me say:
And so I do, and with his gifts present
Your Lordships, when ever you have need,
You may be armed and appointed well,
And so I leave you both: Like bloody villains. Exit.

Demetri. what is here? a scrole, and written round about,
Let Us see,
Integer vitae scelerisque purus, non eget mauri iaculis nee a^c^.

Chiron. O it is a verse in Horace I know it well,
I read it in the Grammar long ago.

Moore. I just, a verse in Horace, right you have it,
Now what a thing it is to be an Ass.
Here Is no sound ^east, the old man has found their gilt,
And sends them weapons wrapped about with lines,
That wound beyond their feeling to the quicke^
But were our witty Empress well a foot,
She would applaud Andronicus conceit,
But let her rest in her unrest a while.
And now young Lords, wast not a happy star,
Led us to Rome strangers, and more than so
Captives, to be advanced to this height:
It did me good before the Palace gate,
To brave the Tribune in his brothers hearing.

Demetrius. But me more good to see so great a Lord,
Baselie in sinuate and send us gifts.

Aron. Had he not reason Lord Demetrius,
Did you not use his daughter very friendly?

Demetrius. I would we had a thousand Roman Dames
At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.

Chiron. A charitable wish, and full of love.

Aron. Here lacks but your mother for to say Amen.

Chiron. And that would she for twenty thousand more.

Deem. Come let us go and pray to all the Gods,
For our beloved mother in her pains.

Aron. Pray to the devils, the Gods have given us over.

Trumpets sound. Demet. Why do the Emperors trumpets flourish thus.

Chi. Belike for joy the Emperor has a son.

Demetrius. Soft who comes here.

Enter Nurse with a black a moore child. Nurse. God morrow Lords, O tell me
did you see Aron the Moore.

Aron. Well, more or less, or nere a whit at all,
Here Aron is, and what with Aron now.

Nurse. Oh gentle Aron we are all undone,
Now help, or woe betide thee evermore.

Aron. Why what a ca^terwalling do thou keep,
what do t^ou wrap and fumble in thy arms?

Nur. O that which I would hide from heavens eye,
Our Empress shame and st^tely Romes disgrace,
She is delivered Lords she is deliuered^

Aron. To whom.

Nur. I mean she is brought a bed.

Aron. Well god give her good rest, what has he sent her?

Nurse. A diue^l.

A. Why then she is the devils Dam, a joyful issue.

N. A Ioyles, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue,
Here is the babe as loathsome as a toade,
Amongst the fair fast breeders of our clime,
The Empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,
And bids thee christen it with thy daggers point.

A. Zounds ye whore, is black so base a hue?
Sweet blowse you are a beauteous blossom sure.

Deem. Vi^laine what have thou done?

A. That which thou can not undo.

Chiron. Thou have undone our mother.

Aron. Villain I have done thy mother.

Deem. And therein hel^ish dog thou have undone her,
VVoe to her chance, and damde her loathed choice,
Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend.

Chi. It shall not live,

Aron. It shall not die.

Nurse. Aron it must, the mother wills it so.

Aron. What must it Nurse? then let no man but I.
Do execution on my flesh and blood.

Demet. I Will broach the tadpole on my Rapiers point,
Nurse give it me, my sword shall soon di^patch it.

Aron. Sooner this sword shall plow thy bowe^s up,
Stay murtherous villains will you kill your brother?
Now by the burning tapors of the sky,
That shone so brightly when this boy was got,
He dies upon my Semitars sharp point,
That touches this my first borne son and heir:
I tell you yonglings, not Enceladus,
With all his threatening band of Typhons brood,
Nor great Alciades, nor the God o^ war,
Shall ceaze this pray out of his fathers hands:
What, what, ye sanguine shallow hearted boys,
Ye white limde walls, ye alehouse painted signs,
Cole-blacke is better than another hue,
In that it scorns to bear another hue:
For all the water in the Ocean,
Can never turn the swans black legs to white,
Although she laue them howrely in the flood:
Tell the Empress from me I am of age
To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.

Demetrius. VVilt thou betray thy Noble Mistress thus:

Aron. My Mistress is my Mistress, this my self,
The vigor, and the picture of my youth:
This before all the world do I prefer,
This mauger all the world will I keep safe,
Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.

Demetrius. By this our mother is for ever shamde.

Chiron. Rome will despise her for this foul escape.

Nurse. The Emperor in his rage will doom her death.

Chiron. I blush to think upon this ignomie.

Aron. Why there is the Privilege your beauty bears:
Fie treacherous hue, that will betraie with blushing
The close enacts and counsels of thy heart:
Here Is a young Lad framde of another leere,
Look how the black slave smiles upon the father,
As who should say, old Lad I am thine own.
He is your brother Lords, sensibly fed
Of that self blood that first gave life to you,
And from your womb where you imprisoned were,
He is infraunchised, and come to light:
Nay he is your brother by the surer side,
Although my seal be stamped in his face.

Nurs^. Aron, what shall I say unto the Empress.

Demetrius. Advise thee Aron, what is to be done,
And we will all subscribe to thy advise:
Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.

Aron. Then sit we down and let us all consult,
My son and I will have the wind of you:
Keep there, now talk at pleasure of your safety.

Demetrius. How many women saw this child of his?

Aron. why so brave Lords, when we join in league
I am a Lamb, but if you brave the Moore,
The chafed Bore, the mountain Lioness,
The Ocean swells not so as Aron storms:
But say again, how many saw the childe^

Nurse. Cornelia the Midwife, and my self,
And no one else but the delivered Empress.

Aron. The Empress, the Midwife, and your self,
Two may keep counsel when the third's away:
Go to the Empress, tell her this I said. He kills her.
Week, week, so cries a Pigge prepared to the spit.

Deem. What meanst thou Aron, wherefore did thou this?

Aron. O Lord sir, it is a deed of policy,
Shall she live to betraie this gilt of ours?
A long tongude babbling Gossip, No Lords, no:
And now be it known to you my full intent.
Not far, one Muliteus my Countriman
His wife but yesternight was brought to bed,
His child is like to her, fair as you are:
Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
And tell them both, the circumstance of all,
And how by this their child shall be a duaunst,
And be received for the Emperors Heir,
And substituted in the place of mine,
To calm this tempest whirling in the Court,
And let the Lmperour dandle him for his own.
Hark ye Lords, you see I have given her Physic,
And you must needs bestow her Funeral,
The fields are near, and you are gallant Grooms:
This done, see that you take no longer days,
But send the Midwife presently to me.
The Midwife and the Nurse well made away,
Then let the Ladies tattle what they please.

Chi. Aron, I see thou will not trust the air with secrets.

Demetrius. For this care of Tamora,
Her self, and hers, are highly bound to thee. Exeunt.

Aron. Now to the Goths as swift as swallow flies,
There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,
And secretly to greet the Empress friends:
Come on you thicke-lipt-slaue, I Will bear you hence,
For it is you that puts us to our shifts:
I Will make you feed on berries, and on roots,
And feed on curds and whay, and suck the Goat,
And cabin in a Cave, and bring you up,
To be a warrior and command a Camp. Exit.

Enter Titus, old Marcus, young Lucius, and other gentlemen with bows, and
Titus bears the arrows with letters on the ends of them. Titus. Come Marcus,
come, kinsemen this is the way,
Sir boy let me see your Archerie,
Look ^ee draw home enough and it is there straight,
Terras Astreareliquit, be you remembered Marcus,
She Is gone, she is fled, sirs take you to your tools,
You Cosens shall go sound the Ocean,
And cast your nets, happily you may catch her in the sea,
Yet there is as little justice as at land:
No Publius and Sempronius, you must do it,
It Is you must dig with mattocke and with spade,
And pierce the inmost Center of the earth,
Then when you come to Plutoes Region,
I pray you deliver him this petition,
Tell him it is for justice and for aid,
And that it comes from old Andronicus
Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome.
Ah Rome, well, well, I made thee miserable,
What time I threw the peoples suffrages
On him that thus does tyrrannize ore me.
Go get you gone, and pray be careful all,
And leave you not a man of war unsearched,
This wicked Emperor may have shipped her hence,
And kinsemen then we may go pipe for justice.

Marcus. O Publius, is not this a heavy c^se
To see thy Noble Uncle thus distract?

Publius. Therefore my Lords it highly us concerns,
By day and night to attend him carefully:
And feed his humor kindly as we may,
Till time beget some careful remedy.

Marcus. Kinsmen his sorrows are past remedy
Join with the Goths, and with reuengefull war,
Take wreake on Rome for this ingratitude,
And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.

Titus. Publius how now, how now my Masters,
What have you met with her?

Publius. No my good Lord, but Pluto sends you word,
If you will have revenge from hell you shall,
Marry for Justice she is so imploid,
He thinks with Jove in heaven, or some where else,
So that perforce you must needs stay a time.

Titus. He does me wrong to feed me with delays,
I Will diue into the burning lake below,
And pull her out of Acaron by the heels.
Marcus we are but ^hrubs, no Cedars we,
No big-boand-men framde of the Cyclops size,
But metal Marcus, steel to the very back,
Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear:
And since there is no justice in earth nor hell,
We will solicit heaven and move the Gods,
To send down Justice for to wreake our wrongs:
Come to this gear, you are a good Archer Marcus,
He gives them the Arrows. Ad Iouem, that's for you, here ad Apollonem,
Ad Martem, that's for my self,
Here boy to Pallas, here to Mercury,
To Saturnine, to Caius, not to Saturnine,
You were as good to shoot against the winde^
Too it boy, Marcus loose when I bid,
Of my word I have written to effect,
There Is not a God left vnsollicited.

Marcus. Kinsemen, shoot all your shafts into the Court,
We will afflict the Emperor in his pride.

Titus. Now Masters draw, Oh well said Lucius,
Good boy in Virgoes lap, give it Pallas.

Marcus. My Lord, I aim a mile beyond the Moon,
Your letter is with Iubiter by this.

Titus. Ha, ha, Publius, Publius, what have thou done?
See, see, thou have shot off one of Ta^rus horns.

Marcus. This was the sport my Lord, when Publius shot
The Bull being galde, gave Aries such a knock,
That down fell both the Rams horns in the Court,
And who should find them but the Empress villain:
She laughed, and told the Moore he should not choose,
But give them to his Master for a present.

Titus. Why there it goes, God give his Lordship joy.

Enter the Clown with a basket and two pigeons in it. Clown. News, news
from heaven,
Marcus the Poast is come.

Titus. Sir what tidings, have you any letters,
Shall I have justice, what says Iubiter?

Clown. Ho the Gibbetmaker? He says that he has taken them down again,
for the man must not be hanged till the next week.


Titus. But what says Iubiter I ask thee?

Clown. Alas sir, I know not Iubiter,
I never drank with him in all my life.

Titus. Why villain art not thou the Carrier.

Clown. I of my pigeons sir, nothing else.

Titus. Why did thou not come from heaven?

Clown. From he^uen, alas sir, I never came there,
God forbid I should be so bold, to press to heaven in my young days:
Why I am going with my pigeons to the tribunal Plebs, to take up a matter
of brawle betwixt my Uncle, and one of the Emperals men.


Marcus. Why sir, that is as sit as can be to serve for your Oration, and let
him deliver the pigeons to the Emperor from you.


Titus. Tell me, can you deliver an Oration to the Emperor with a grace.

Clown. Nay truly sir, I could never say grace in all my life.

Titus. Sir come hither, make no more adoo,
But give your pigeons to the Emperor,
By me thou shall have justice at his hands,
Hold, hold, mean while here is money for thy charges,
Give me pen and ink.
Sir, can you with a grace deliver up a Supplication?

Clown. I sir.

Titus. Then here is a Supplication for you, and when you come to him, at the
first approach you must kneel, then kiss his foot, then deliver up your
pigeons, and then look for your reward. I Will be at hand sir, see you do it
bravely.


Clown. I warrant you sir, let me alone.

Titus. Sir have thou a knife? Come let me see it.
Here Marcus, fold it in the Oration,
For thou have made it like an humble Suppliant.
And when thou have given it to the Emperor,
Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.

Clown. God be with you sir, I will. Exit.

Titus. Come Marcus let us go, Publius follow me.

Exeunt. Euter Emperor and Empress and her two sons, the Emperor brings
the Arrows in his hand that Titus shot at him. Saturnine. Why Lords what
wrongs are these, was ever seen,
An Emperor in Rome thus ouerborne,
Troubled, confronted thus, and for the extent
O fegall justice, used in such contempt.
My Lords you know the mightfull Gods,
How ever these disturbers of our peace
Buz in the peoples ears, there naught has past
But even with law against the wilful sons
Of old Andronicus. And what and if
His sorrows have so ouerwhelmde his wits?
Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreakes,
His fits, his frencie, and his bitterness?
And now he writes to heaven for his redress,
See here is to Jove, and this to Mercury.
This to Apollo, this to the God of war:
Sweet skrowles to fly about the streets of Rome,
What Is this but libelling against the Senate,
And blazoning our injustice every where,
A goodly humor is it not my Lords?
As who would say in Rome no justice were.
But if I live his fained ecstasies
Shall be no shelter to these outrages,
But he and his shall know that justice lives
In Saturninus health, whom if he sleep,
Hele so a wake as he in fury shall,
Cut off the proud'st conspiratour that lives.

Tamora. My gracious Lord, my lovely Saturnine,
Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,
Calm thee and bear the faults of Titus age,
The'ffects of sorrow for his valiant sons,
Whose loss has pearst him deep and skard his heart,
And rather comfort his distressed plight,
Than prosecute the meanest or the best
For these contempts: why thus it shall become
Hie witted Tamora to gloss with all.
But Titus I have touched thee to the quick,
Thy life blood out: if Aron now be wise,
Then is all safe, the Anchor in the port^
Enter Clown. How now good fellow would thou speak with us?

Clown. Yea forsooth and your Mistriship be Imperial,

Tamora. Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor.

Clow. It Is he, God and Saint Steven give you Godden,
I have brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.

He reads the letter. Satur. Go take him away and hang him presently?

Clow. How much money must I have.

Tamora. Come sir you must be hanged.

Clown. Hanged be Lady, then I have brought up a neck to a fair end.


Exit. Satur. Dispightfull and intolerable wrongs,
Shall I endure this monstrous villainy?
I know from whence this same devise proceeds.
May this be borne as if his traitorous sons,
That did by law for murder of our brother,
Have by my means bin butchered wrongfully.
Go dragge the villain hither by the hair,
Nor age, nor honor, shall shape privilege,
For this proud mock, I Will be thy slaughter man,
Sly frantic wretch, that holpst to make me great,
In hope thy self should govern Rome and me.

Enter Nutius Emillius. Satur. What news with thee Emillius?

Emillius. Arm my Lords, Rome never had more cause,
The Goths have gathered head and with a power
Of high resolved men, bent to the spoil,
They hither march amain, under conduct
Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus,
Who threats in course of this revenge, to do
As much as ever Coriolanus did.

King. Is warlike Lucius General of the Goths,
These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
As flowers with frost, or grass beat down with storms.
I now begins our sorrows to approach,
It Is he the common people love so much,
My self has often heard them say,
When I have walked like a private man,
That Lucius banishment was wrongfullie,
And they have wished that Lucius were their Emperor.

Tamora. why should you fear, is not your City strong?

King. I but the Citizens favor Lucius,
And will revolt from me to succor him.

Tamora. King Be thy thoughts imperious like thy name,
Is the sun dimde, that Gnats do fly in it,
The Eagle suffers little birds to sing,
And is not careful what they mean thereby,
Knowing that with the shadow of his wings,
He can at pleasure ^lint their m^lodie.
Even so may thou the giddie men of Rome,
Then cheer thy spirit for know thou Emperor,
I will inchaunt the old Andronicus,
With words more sweet and yet more dangerous
Then baits to fish, or honniestalkes to sheep,
When as the one is wounded with the bait,
The other rotted with delicious seed.

King. But he will not entreat his son for us.

Tamora. If Tamora entreat him than he will,
For I can smooth and fill his aged ears,
With golden promises, that were his heart
Almost impregnable, his old years deaf,
Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.
Go thou before to be our Ambassador,
Say that the Emperor requests a parlie,
Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting,
Even at his Fathers house the old Andronicus.

King. Emillius do this message honorably,
And if he stand in hostage for his saftie,
Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.

Emillius. Your bidding shall I do effectually.

Exit. Tamora. Now will I to that old Andronicus,
And temper him with all the Art I have,
To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.
And now sweet Emperor be blithe again,
And bury all thy fear in my devises,

Saturnine. Then go sucessantly and plead to him.

Exeunt. Enter Lucius with an Army of Goths with Drums and Soldiers. Lucius.
Approved warriors, and my faithful friends,
I have received letters from great Rome,
Which signifies what hate they bear their Emperor,
And how desiro^s of our sight they are.
Therefore great Lords be as your titles witness,
Imperious, and impatient of your wrongs,
And wherein Rome has done you any skath,
Let him make treable satisfaction.

Goth^ Brave slip sprung from the great Andronicus,
Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort,
Whose high exployts and honorable deeds,
In grateful Rome requites with foul contempt,
Be bold in us we will follow where thou leadst,
Like stinging Bees in hottest summers day,
Led by their Master to the flowred fields,
And be aduengde on cursed Tamora:
And as he says, so say we all with him.

Lucius. I humbly thank him and I thank you all,
But who comes here led by a lusty Gothe?

Enter a Goth leading of Aron with his child in his Arms. Goth. Renowned
Lucius from our troops I straid,
To gaze upon a ruinous Monastery,
And as I earnestly did fix mine eye,
Upon the wasted building suddenly,
I heard a child cry underneath a wall,
I made unto the noise, when soon I heard,
The crying babe controld with this discourse:
Peace tawnie s^aue, half me, and half thy Dame,
Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,
Had nature lent thee but thy mothers look,
Villain thou might have bin an Emperor.
But where the bull and Cow are both milk white,
They never do beget a coleblacke Calfe:
Peace Villain peace, even thus he rates the babe,
For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth,
Who when he knows thou art the Empress babe,
Will hold thee dearly for thy mothers sake.
With this my weapon drawn I rusht upon him
Surprisde him suddenly, and brought him hither
To use as you think needful of the man.

Lucius. Oh worthy Goth this is the incarnate devil,
That robbed Andronicus of his good hand,
This is the Pearl that pleased your Empress eye,
And here is the base fruit of her burning lust,
Say wall-eyd slave whither would thou convey,
This growing image of thy f^endlike face,
Why doo^t not speak? what deaf, not a word?
A halter Soldiers, hang him on this tree,
And by his side his fruit of Bastardie.

Aron. Touch not the boy, he is of Royal blood.

Luc. Too like the sier for ever being good,
First hang the child that he may see it sprall,
A sight to vex the fathers soul withal.

Aron. Get me a ladder, Lucius save the child;
And bear it from me to the Empress:
If thou do this, i will show thee wondrous things,
That highly may advantage thee to hear,
If thou will not, befall what may befall,
I Will speak no more, but vengeance rotte you all.

Lucius. Say on, and if it please me which thou speakst^
Thy child shall live, and I will see it nourisht.

Aron. And if it please thee? why assure thee Lucius,
Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak:
For I must talk of murders, rapes, and massakers,
Acts of black night, abominable deeds,
Complots of mischief, treason, villainies,
Ruthful to hear, yet pitteously performde,
And this shall all be buried in my death,
Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.

Lucius. Tell on thy mind, I say thy child shall live.

Aron. Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.

Luci. Who should I swear by, thou beleeuest no God,
That granted, how can thou believe an oath.

Aron. What if I do not, as indeed I do not,
Yet for I know thou art religious,
And have a thing within thee called conscience,
With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies,
Which I have seen thee careful to observe,
Therefore I urge thy oath, for that I know,
An idiot holds his bauble for a God,
And keeps the oath which by that God he swears,
To that i will urge him, therefore thou shall vow,
By that same God, what God so ere it be
That thou adorest, and have in reverence,
To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up,
Or else I will discover naught to thee.

Lucius. Even by my God I swear to thee I will.

Aron. First know thou, I begot him on the Empress.

Lucius. Oh most insatiate and luxurious woman.

Aron. ^ut Lucius, this was but a deed of charity,
To that which thou shall hear of me anon,
It Was her two sons that murdered Bassianus,
They cut thy Sisters tongue, and ravished her,
And cut her hands, and trimd her as thou saw.

Luc. Oh detestable villain, callst thou that trimming.

Aron. Why she was washed, and cut, and trimd,
And it was trim sport for them which had the doing of it.

Luc. Oh barberous beastly villains like thy self.

Aron. Indeed I was their tutor to instruct them,
That codding spirit had they from their mother,
As sure a card as ever won the set:
That bloody mind I think they learnd of me,
As true a Dog as ever fought at head:
Well let my deeds be witness of my worth,
I traind thy brethren to that guilefull hole,
where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay:
I wrote the letter that thy Father found,
And hid the gold within that letter mentioned,
Confederate with the Queen and her two sons.
And what not done, that thou have cause to ^ue,
wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it,
I played the cheater for thy fathers hand,
And when I had it drew my self a part,
And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter,
I pried me through the creuice of a wall,
when for his hand he had his two sons heads,
Beheld his tears and laughed so hartelie,
That both mine eyes were raynie like to his:
And when I told the Empress of this sport,
She sounded almost at my pleasing tale,
And for my tidings gave me twenty kisses.

Goth. What can thou say all this and never blush^

Aron. I like a black Dog, as the saying is^

Lucius. Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds.

Aron. I that I had not done a thousand more,
Even now I curse the day and yet I think
Few come^ within the compass of my curse,
wherein I did not some notorious ill.
As kill a man, or else devise his death,
Ravish a maid, or plot the way to do it,
Accuse some innocent, and forswear my self,
Set deadly enmity between two friends,
Make poor men's cattle break their necks,
Set fire on^ barnes and haystalks in the night,
And bid the owners quench them with their tears:
Often have I digd up dead men from their graves,
And set them upright at their dear friends door,
Even when their sorrows almost was forgot,
And on their skins as on the bark of trees,
Have with my knife carved in Roman letters,
Let not your sorrow die though I am dead.
But I have done a thousand dreadful things,
As willingly as one would kill a fly,
And nothing grieves me hartelie indeed,
But that I cannot do ten thousand more.

Lucius. Bring down the Devil for he must not die,
So sweet a death as hanging presently.

Aron. If there be Devils would I were a Devil,
To live and burn in everlasting fire,
So I might have your company in hell,
But to torment you with my bitter tongue.

Luci. Sirs stop his mouth and let him speak no more.

Enter Emillius. Goth. My Lord there is a messenger from Rome,
Desiers to be admitted to your presen^e.

Lucius. Let him come nere.
VVelcome Emillius, what is the news from Rome?

Emil. Lord Lucius, and you Princes of the Goths,
The Roman Emperor greets you all by me,
And for he understands you are in A^mes,
He craves a Parley at your fathers house,
VVilling you to demand your hostages,
And they shall be immediately delivered.

Goth. What says our General.

Luci. Emillius, let the Emperor give his pledges,
Unto my Father and my Uncle Marcus,
And we will come, march away.

Enter Tamora and her two sons disguised. Tamora. Thus in this strange and
sad habilliament,
I will encounter with Andronicus,
And say I am revenge sent from below,
To join with him and right his hamous wrongs,
Knock at his study where they say he keeps,
To ruminate strange plots of diere revenge,
Tell him revenge is come to join with him,
And work confusion on his enemies.

They knock and Titus opens his study d^ore. Titus. Who does molest my
contemplation?
Is it your trick to make me open the door,
That so my saddecrees may fly away,
And all my study be to no effect.
You are deceiude, for what I mean to do,
See here in bloody lines I have set down.
And what is written shall be executed.

Tamora. Titus, I am come to talk with thee.

Titus. No not a word, how can I grace my talk,
VVanting a hand to give that accord,
Thou have the odds of me therefore no more.

Tamora. If thou did know me thou would talk with me.

Titus. I am not mad, I know thee well enough,
Witness this wretched s^ump, witness these crimson lines,
witness these trenches made by grief and care,
witness the tiring day and heavy night,
witness all sorrow that I know thee well
For our proud Empress, mighty Tamora:
Is not thy coming for my other hand.

Tamora. Know thou sad man, I am not Tamora,
She is thy enemy, and I thy friend,
I am Revenge sent from the infernal Kingdom,
To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind,
By working wreakfull vengeance on thy foes:
Come down and welcome me to this worlds light,
Confer with me of murder and of death^
There Is not a hollow Cave or lurking place,
No vast obscurity or mistie vale,
Where bloody murder or detested rape,
Can couch for fear but I will find the mout,
And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,
Reu^nge which makes the foul offender quake.

Titus. Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me,
To be a torment to mine enemies.

Tamora. I am, therefore come down and welcome me.

Titus. Do me some service ere I come to thee,
Lo by thy side where Rape and Murder stands,
Now give some surance that thou art revenge,
Stab them, or tear them on thy Chariot wheels,
And then I Will come and be thy wagoner,
And wherle along with thee about the Globes.
Provide thee two proper palfrays, black as iet,
To hale thy vengefull wagon swift away^
And find out murder in their guilty cares.
And when thy Car is laden with their heads^
I will dismount and by thy wagon wheel,
^rotte like a servile footeman all day long,
Even from Epeons rising in the East^
Until his very downfall in the Sea.
And day by day I Will do this heavy task,
So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.

Tamora. These are my ministers and come with m^.

Titus. Are them thy ministers, what are they called?

Tamora. Rape and Murder, therefore called so.
Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.

Tit. Good Lord how like the Empress sons they are,
And you the Empress, but we wordlie men
Have miserable mad mistaking eyes:
Oh sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee,
And if one arms imbracement will content thee,
I will embrace thee in it by and by.

Tamora. This closing with him fits his L^nacie,
What ere I forge to feed his braine-sicke humors,
Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,
For now he firmly takes me for Revenge,
And being credulous in this mad thought,
I Will make him send for Lucius his son,
And whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,
I Will find some cunning practice out of hand,
To scatter and disperse the giddie Goths,
Or at the least make them his enemies:
See here he comes, and I must plie my theme.

Titus. Long have I bin forlorn and all for thee,
welcome dread Fury to my woeful house,
Rapine and Murder you are welcome too:
How like the Empress and her sons you are,
well are you fitted, had you but a Moore,
Could not all hell afford you such a Devil?
For well I wot the Empress never wags,
But in her company there is a Moore.
And would you represent our Queen a right,
It were convenient you had such a Devil:
But welcome as you are, what shall we do?

Tamora. what would thou have us do Andronicus?

Demet. Show me a murderer I Will deal with him^

Chi. Show me a villain that has done a rape,
And I am sent to be reuengde on him.

Tamora. Show me a thousand that has done thee wrong,
And I will be revenged on them all.

Titus. Look round about the wicked streets of Rome,
And when thou findst a man that is like thy self,
Good murder stab him, he is a murderer.
Go thou with him, and when it is thy hap,
To find another that is like to thee,
Good Rapine stab him, he is a rauisher.
Go thou with them, and in the Emperors Court,
There is a Queen attended by a Moore,
Well shall thou know her by thine own proportion.
For up and down she does resemble thee,
I pray thee do on them some violent death,
They have bin violent to me and mine.

Tamora. Well have thou lessond us, this shall we do,
But would it ^lease thee good Andronicus,
To s^nd for Lucius thy thrice valiant son,
Who leads toward Rome a band of warlike Goths,
And bid him come and banquet at thy house,
When he is here even at thy so^emne feast,
I will bring in the Empress and her sons,
The Emperor him self and all thy foes,
And at thy mercy shall they stop and kneel,
And on them shall thou ease thy angry heart:
What says Andronicus to this devise.

Enter Marcus. Titus. Marcus my brother, it is sad Titus calls,
Go gentle Marcus to thy nephew Lucius,
Thou shall enquire him out among the Goths,
Bid him repair to me and bring with him,
Some of the chiefest Princes of the Goths,
Bid him encampe his Soldiers where they are.
Tell him the Emperor and the Empress too^
Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them,
This do thou for my love, and so let him,
As he regards his aged Fathers life.

Marcus. This will I do, and soon return again.

Tamora. Now will I hence about thy business,
And take my min^sters a long with me.

Titus. Nay, nay, let rape and murder stay with me,
Or else I Will call my brother back again,
And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.

Tamora. What say you boys will you abide with him,
VVhiles I go tell my Lord the Emperor,
How I have gouernd our determind jest,
Yee'd to his humor, smooth and speak him fair,
And tarry with him till I turn again.

Titus. I knew them all though they supposd me mad,
And will ore reach them in their own devises,
A pair of cursed hell hounds and their Dame.

Deem. Maddam depart at pleasure, leave us here.

Tamora. Farewell Andronicus, Revenge now goes,
To lay a complot to betray thy foes.

Titus. I know thou do and sweet Revenge farewell.

Chiron. Tell us old man how shall we be imploid,

Titus. Tut I have work enough for you to do
Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine.

Publius. What is your will?

Titus. Know you these two.

Pub. The Empress sons I take them, Chiron. Demetrius.

Titus. Fie, Publius fie, thou art too much deceaude,
The one is Murder and Rape is the others name,
And therefore bind them gentle Publius,
Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them,
Often have you heard me wish for such an hour,
And now I find it therefore bind them sure,
And stop their mouths if they begin to cry.

Chiron. Villains forbear we are the Empress sons.

Pub. And therefore do we what we are commanded,
Stop close their mouths let them not speak a word,
Is he sure bound, look that you bind them fast.

Enter Titus Andronicus, with a knife, and Lauinia, with a Basin. Titus. Come,
come, Lauinia look thy foes are bound,
Sirs stop their mouths let them not speak to me,
But let them hear what ^earefull words I utter.
Oh villains Chiron and D^metrius,
Here stands the spring whom you have staind with mud,
T^is goodly summer with your winter mixed,
You killed her husband, and for that vild fault,
Two of her brothers were condemnd to death,
My hand cut off and made a merry jest,
Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more dear
Than hands or tongue, her spotless chastity,
Inhumame traitors you constraind and forced.
What would you say if I should let you speak?
Villains for shame you could not beg for grace.
Hark wretches how I mean to marter you,
This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,
VVhiles that Lauinia tweene her stumps does hold,
The basin that receaues your guilty blood.
You know your Mother means to feast with me,
And calls herself Revenge and thinks me mad.
Hark villains I will grind your bones to dust,
And with your blood and it I Will make a paste,
And of the paste a coffen I will rear,
And make two pasties of your shameful heads,
And bid that strumpet your unhallowed Dam,
Like to the earth swallow her own increase.
This is the feast that I have bid her too,
And this the banquet she shall surfeit on,
For worse than Philomell you used my daughter,
And worse than Progne I will be reuengd.
And now prepare your throats, Lauinia come,
Receive the blood, and when that they are dead,
Let me go grind their bones to powder small,
And with this hateful liquour temper it,
And in that paste let their vile heads be bakt,
Come, come, be every one officius,
To make this banquet which I wish may prove
More stern and bloody than the Centaurs feast,
He cuts their throats. So now bring them in for I Will play the Cook,
And see them ready against their Mother comes,

Exeunt. Enter Lucius, Marcus, and the Goths. Lucius. Uncle Marcus, since it is
my Fathers mind,
That I repair to Rome I am content.

Got. And ours with thine, befall what Fortune will.

Luci. Good Uncle take you in this barberous Moore,
This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil,
Let him receive no sus^na^ce, fetter him,
Till he be brought unto the Empress face,
For testemonie of her foul proceedings,
And see the Ambush of our friends be strong,
I fear the Emperor means no good to us.

Moore. Some devil whisper curses in my ear,
And prompt me that my tongue may utter forth,
The venomous malice of my swelling heart.

Lucius. Away inhumane dog unhallowed slave,
Sirs help our uncle to convey him in,
The trumpets show the Emperor is at hand.

Sound Trumpets. Enter Emperor and Empress with Tribunes and others. King.
What has the firmament mo suns than one?

Lucius, What boots it thee to call thy self a sun?

Mar. Romes Emperor and Nephew break the Parle,
These quarrels must be quietly debated,
The feast is ready which the careful Titus,
Has ordainde to an honorable end,
For peace, for love, for league and good to Rome,
Please you therefore, draw ni^ and take your places.

King. Marcus we will.

Trumpets sounding, Enter Titus like a Cook, placing the dishes, and Lauinia
with a veil over her face. Titus. VVelcome my Lord, welcome dread Qu^ene,
VVelcome ye warlike Goths, welcome Lucius,
And welcome all although the cheer be poor,
Twill fill your stomachs, please you eat of it.

King. Why art thou thus attired Andronicus?

Titus. Because I would be sure to have all well,
To entertain your highness and your Empress.

Tamora. We are beholding to you good Andronicus,

Titus. And if your highness knew my heart you were,
My Lord the Emperor resolve me this,
Was it well done of rash Viginius
To slay his daughter with his own right hand
Because she was enforst, stainde, and deflowrde?

King. It was Andronicus.

Titus^ Your reason mighty Lord.

King. Because the girl should not survive her shame,
And by her presence still renew his sorrows.

Titus. A reason mighty, strong, and effectual,
A pattern president, and lively warrant,
For me most wretched to perform the like,
Die, die, Lauinia and thy shame wirh thee,
And with thy shame thy Fathers sorrow die.

King. What have thou done, unnatural and unkind.

Tit. Killed her for whom my tears have made me blind,
I am as woeful as Virginius was,
And have a thousand times more cause than he,
To do this outrage, and it now is done.

King. What was she ravished, tell who did the deed.

T. VVilt please you eat, wilt please your highness feed.

Tam. Why have thou slain thine only Daughter thus?

Titus. Not I, it was Chiron, and Demetrius,
They Ravished her and cut away her tongue,
And they, it was they, that did her all this wrong.

King, Go fetch them hither to us presently.

Titus. Why there they are both baked in this Pie.
Whereof their Mother daintilie has fed,
Eating the flesh that she her self has bred,
It Is true, it is true witness my knives sharp point.

He stabs the Empress. Emperor. Die frantic wretch for this accursed deed,

Lucius. Can the sons eye behold his father bleed?
There Is meede for meede, death for a deadly deed.

Marcus. You sad fa^de men, people and sons of Rome
By vprores seuerd as a flight of foul,
Scatterd by winds and high tempes^uous gus^s,
Oh let me teach you how to knit again,
This scattered corn into one mutual sheaffe,
These broken limbs again into one body.

Roman Lord. Let Rome her self be bane unto her self.
And she whom mighty kingdoms cursie too,
Like a forlorn and desperate cast away,
Do shameful execution on her self.
But if my frostie signs and chappes of age,
Grave witnesses of true experience,
Cannot induce you to attend my words,
Speak Rooms dear friend as erst our Ancestor,
When with his ^olemne tongue he did discourse
To love sick Didoes sad attending ear,
The story of that balefull burning night,
When subtle Greeks surprizd King Priams Troy.
Tell us what Sinon has be wicht our ears,
Or who has brought the fatal engine in
That gives our Troy, our Rome the civil wound.
My heart is not compact of flint nor steel,
Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,
But floods of tears will drown my Oratorie,
And break my vttrance even in the time,
When it should move ye to attend me most,
And force you to commiseration,
Here Is Romes young Captain let him tell the tale,
While I stand by and weep to hear him speak.

Lucius. Then gracious auditorie be it known to you,
That Chiron and the damned Demetrius,
Were they that murdered our Emperors brother,
And they it were that ravished our sister,
For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded,
Our Fathers tears dispi^de, and basely cousend,
Of that true hand that fought Romes quarrel out,
And sent her enemies unto the grave.
Las^ly my self unkindly banished,
The gates shut on me and turned weeping out,
To beg relief among Romes enemies,
Who drowned their enmetie in my true tears,
And opt their arms to embrace me as a friend,
I am the turned forth be it known to you,
That have preserude her welfare in my blood,
And from her bosom took the enemies point,
Sheathing the steel in my aduentrous body.
Alas you know I am no vaunter I,
My scars can witness dumb although they are,
That my report is just and full of truth,
But soft, me thinks I do digress too much,
Cyting my worthles praise, Oh pardon me
For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.

Marcus. Now is my turn to speak, behold the child,
Of this was Tamora delivered,
The issue of an irreligious Moore,
Chief architect and plotter of these woes,
The villain is alive in Titus house,
And as he is to witness this is true,
Now judge what course had Titus to revenge.
These wrongs unspeakable past patience,
Or more than any living man could bear,
Now have you heard the truth, what say you Romaines^
Have we done ought amiss, show us wherein,
And from the place where you behold us pleading,
The poor remainder of Andronicie,
Will hand in hand, all headlong hurl our selves,
And on the ragged stones beat forth our souls,
And make a mutual closure of our house,
Speak Romans speak, and if you say we Shall,
Lo hand in hand Lucius and I will fall.

Emillius. Come come thou reverent man of Rome,
And bring our Emperor gently in thy hand,
Lucius our Emperor for well I know,
The common voice do cry it shall be so.

Marcus. Lucius, all hail Romes royal Emperour^
Go go into old Titus sorrowful house,
And hither hale that misbelieuing Moore,
To be adiudge some dyrefull slaughtring death,
As punishment for his most wicked life.
Lucius all hail Romes gracious governor.

Lucius. Thanks gentle Romans may I govern so,
To heal Romes harms, and wipe away her woe,
But gentle people give me aim a while,
For nature puts me to a heavy task,
Stand all a loo^e but uncle draw you near,
To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk,
Oh take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips,
These sorrowful drops upon thy blood slain face,
The last true duties of thy noble son.

Marcus. Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,
Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips,
Oh were the sum of these that I should pay,
Countlesse and infinite, yet would I pay them.

Lucius. Come hither boy come, come and learn of us
To melt in showers, thy Grandsire loved thee well,
Many a time he daunst thee on his knee,
Song thee a sleep his loving breast thy pillow,
Many a story has he told to thee,
And bid thee bare his pretty tales in mind,
And talk of them when he was dead and gone.

Marcus. How many thousand times has these poor lips,
When they were living warmd themselves on thine,
Oh now sweet boy give them their latest kiss,
Bid him farewell commit him to the grave,
Do them that kindness and take leave of them.

Puer. Oh Grandfire, Grandsire, even with all my heart,
Would I were dead so you did live again,
O Lord I cannot speak to him for weeping,
My tears will choacke me if I open my mouth.

Roman. You sad Andronicie have done with woes,
Give sentence on this execrable wretch,
That has bin breeder of these dyre e^ents.

Lucius. Set him breast deep in earth and famish him,
There let him stand and rave and cry for food.
If any one releeues or pitties him,
For the offense he dies, this is our doom,
Some stay to see him fastened in the earth.

Aron. Ah why should wrath be mute and fury dumb,
I am no babie I, that with base prayers
I should repent the evils I have done,
Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did
Would I perform if I might have my will,
If one good deed in all my life I did
I do repent it from my very soul.

Lu. Some loving friends convey the Emperor hence,
And give him burial in his fathers grave,
My Father and Lauinia shall forthwith,
Be closed in our households monument,
As for that rauinous tiger Tamora,
No funeral right, nor man in mourning weed,
No mournful bell shall ring her burial
But throw her forth to beasts and birds to pray,
Her life was beastly and deuoide of pity,
And being dead let birds on her take pity.

Exeunt. Finis the Tragedy of Titus Andronicus.

