A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES CROSS: LAYING OPEN THE BEAST, and his MARKS.

Upon the 14. of the Revelations, verse. 9. 10. 11.

By RICHARD SHELDON, a Convert from out of BABYLON.

Doctor in Divinity, His Majesty's Chaplain.

IEREM. 50. 14. Put your selves in array against Babylon, round about it: all
ye that bend the Bow, shoot at her, spare no Arrows: for she has sinned
against the Lord. AT LONDON Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-Crosse
Street. 1625.

TO THE TRVLY REVEREND, AND RELIGIOUS Doctors and Pastors of the Reformed
Churches of Great Britain; and namely, to John D. Boys, Deane of Canterbury;
John D. Young, Deane of Winchester; Francis D. White, Deane of Carlisle; and to
William D. Kingsley, Archd. and M. John Sanford Prebend of Canterbury, etc.
R. REVEREND:
YOu cannot but have observed, how when in time of ignorance, error, and
transgression, a Riddle was proposed in the Court of King Darius, what of all
things was greatest and strongest: there were who stood for Wine, some for
Kings, a third sort for Women; but Zorobabel enlightened by the God of Truth,
gave his verdict for Truth: That Truth was of all things greatest and
strongest: Which his opinion, if it were then applauded by the people, approved
by the Senators of State, honored and rewarded by King Darius himself; we, who
believe the manifestation of the Word-Truth, and the illightning of the World
by the Word of Truth; may not marvel to observe that Truth, now in this last
hour (justified of her own children) sits Ouant and Triumphant, not only over
Wine, Women, and Kings, as they are in the common vsance of mankind; but also
over and against Wine, Women, and Kings, as they are abused by that usurping
King of Kings, Who sits in the Temple of God, out-shewing himself as if he were
a God; who though by sly contempt of Conjugal Chastity (in his seduced
Votaries) seems to pretend Virginal purity, yet how vain such his pretenses
have been, the pens of his own have evidently discovered; though he and
his would be thought not to ouer-delight in any delicacies or delicious Wines;
yet in this respect precisely taken; they do carke and care for the flesh,
posting from all quarters and coasts, delicacies and delicious viands, and
Wines for their Holy Father, and his Purpurats: yea, providing for English
Seminarists in Rome, not plain Romanisco, the common and usual briskish Wine
of Italy, but Vino deripa Wine of the Bank (fit to beget Spanish Iinnets) must
be their cotidian liquor. Though inwords he pretend himself to be Servant of
the Servants of God, yet Truth euinces him to assume unto himself either
directly or indirectly (that is the lest) an ouertopping Sovereignty over all
that is sacred and venerable.

The prevailing of Truth against this Man of untruth, has not in any thing
more evidently appeared, then in a gracious precedent illustration of Truth
(before the powerful and illustrious coming of the God of Truth) whereby he,
who formerly by the Inhabitants of the Earth, was admired and adored as a
Vice-God, a Vice-Christ; is now by the consent of renowned Peoples, by the
approuance of sagest Peers of States, by opinion of judicious Kings and
Princes, by censure of learnedest Clerks in Christendom, found to be the
Apocalistticall Beast himself: and their Pontificious, Omnipotency, and
Burghesian Eternity to be naught else, then the very top-crowne of
Antichristianisme. For the laying open and professing of this kind of Truth,
the Spirit of God, who in the thickest of Egyptian darkness, did here and
there in times past excite some Worthies: has in this last hour, (the third,
fourth, and fifth Angels, even yet pouring forth their Vialls:) Like as in
other Churches others, so in this renowned one of Great Britain raised up you,
an Army of Valiants, arightly ordered; who with tongue and pen do happily
and dexteriously (without ceasing) perform the same.

To which service it has pleased him, who brought me from out the Babilonian
Vr, to call me, an unworthy one, and one far less, then so great and
gracious a miseration; wherein, how far and graciously, the Spirit of Truth
has enabled me in this and my other writings, I do with all lowly reverent
and indifferent respect refer and remit to you all; all Lovers of Truth; and
to the thrice Reverend and venerable Sees and Chayres of your learning, the
renowned Universities of this I Will I said with indifferent respect: for although
I may not account (...) them Twins in every respect alike, yet in regard of
that Light (for the discerning betwixt Truth and falsehood) which they have
happily received from the God of Light, I dare write them, Semblable and
Symbolizing O^bs, illustrating this famous Church of Britain, yea emaning
forth their illustrius Beams, to the utmost of the world. And by how
plentiful and liber all a hand, he has imbreathed of his Spirit into; and
has powered of his dew of Hermon upon the Head of the most Gracious Primat of
England (A thrice-worthy and best deserving Patron of all Conuerts, and under
God the only Feeder of Me and Mine) unto the very skirts of the Garment, it
does most linely appear, by many, not wandering, but fixed Stars, seated and
resplendant in this most illustrious Church of Great Britain.

Amongst whom, with special and deserved respect, I have presumed (before this
my Epistle) to prefix the names of some, by them speaking to you all: From
them, and from you all, humbly desiring a favorable and gracious countenancing
both of Me, and Mine; in particalar of this my Argument of Truth and Ingenuity;
for following my Text closely, I have endeavored (such is your wont) to open
the genuine sense of the Holy Ghost therein contained: in the prosecution
whereof, if some bitter and tart speeches against the Beast, etc. do occur;
from the Lord they are.

Secondly of duty, for according to my bounden duty and service, I have herein
endeavored to blazon the deserved honor of my Sovereign Lord and Master: for
his vndoubtable integrity in the thrice holy Religion he professes, which by
some (not peircing into the secrets of State) may unworthily have bin
questioned.

Thirdly of Sincerity, for in regard of the sincerity of my conversion from out
of Babylon, I dare boldly style my self, A Nathaniel in whom there is no guile.

Fourthly, I said of Zeal; for zeal against a certain blaspheming Rabshaketh
of the Beast, has brought forth this argument of zeal against the Beast, and
the obstinate Admirers and Adorers of the Beast? It was my hap to receive from
the hands of a worthy Knight and his Lady, a certain blasphemous Pamphlet (put
into their hands by Seducers) entitled, A humble Appeal to his most Excellent
Majesty, and written by one John Hunt, calling himself, A Roman Catholic.
This blasphemous Rabshaketh, I find in the sixth Chapter of his Pamphlet,
formally and unavoidably (I say formally and undeniably) blaspheming our most
Glorious God. (God be merciful to me in repeating the words:) These are his
words, That the God of the Protestants (whom he knows to be Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost) is the most uncivil and euill-mannered God, of all those, who have
borne the names of gods upon earth: yea worse then Pan, God of the Clownes,
which can endure no Ceremonies, nor Good manners at all: Reading these, with
diverse such like, my bowels trembled within me, and my zeal for the Lord was
set on fire, and I said unto my Soul, Spare no arrows, but shoot against
Babylon, for that she has sinned against the Lord: And I say more again,
Anathema, Maran-atha, to him whose zeal for the Lord, is not with such
blasphemies incensed and set on fire, against the blasphemers. I dare not once
suspect that Royal Majesty (though the blasphemous Pamphlet be dedicated
presumptuously to it) or Parlalament-Excellency, or Senate-Integrity of this
Christian-State has ever had any special notice or information of so
blasphemous a Pamphlet; formerly in time of Conniuency, and yet still (to the
joy of the Adversaries, and unspeakable scandal of the Pious and Godly)
hunting up and down this Kingdom: Arise, O God, and put into the knowledge,
and heart of our Soueraign, to avenge such thy blasphemous Adversaries, and all
their witting Abettors with deserved reproach, Amen! We pray again; Arise, O
Lord, and avenge thy own Cause, and as dust before the face of the wind, so
scatter thou the Enemies of thy Glorious name, Amen, Amen.

And so humbly praying, the God of Truth, to make you all perfect in the
knowledge and love of Truth; I rest a reverent Euer-admirer of your Admirable
learning in Truth: and humbly pray, that we all may be zealous
Euer-imitators, of our Glorious and Angel-like Predecessors, for the
Reformation and constant defense of that Piety and Truth, The Testimony of
JESUS, Amen.

Yours, and every one of yours, in the LORD JESUS; Richard Sheldon.

A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross the first of September, etc.
APOC. 14. 9. 10. 11. And the third Angel followed them with a loud voice
saying, If any man worship the Beast and his Image; and receive his mark in
his forhead or in his hand. The same shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath,
which is powered out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation. And he
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels,
and in presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torments ascends up for
ever, and ever.
THe words which I have read in the ears of this most Christian, and
honorable Assembly; are an obscure partial prophecy of that mystical
Book, which (to use Hieromes Epist. ad Paulin:
phrase) has no more words, then it has mysteries; How then shall I who am of
a dull apprehension, of a stammering speech, and of a weak spirit, be able to
lay open the sense of the same? except the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, give me a
spirit of courage and confidence, unless the Lamb slain, which has the
seven eyes (that manifold light of knowledge) impart unto me some gracious
measure of wisdom and understanding. O thou Gracious Lamb, who scatterest of
thy graces where thou please; illighten my understanding, that I may truly
interpret, this thy Scripture! O thou Powerful Lion of Judah; who openest and
no man shuts; open thou my mouth, and set on fire mine affections, that I
may confidently and constantly with a loud voice, deliver this thy truth, to
the glory of thy great name, to the confusion of Antichrist, and to the
eternal comfort and consolation of our own souls!

And the third Angel fellowed them with a loud voice saying If any man
worship, etc.
MY Text (which in the whole is a most dreadful Edict Division.
sent from the Court of heaven) may be divided into three General parts 1. an
Inscription or Title, And the third Angel followed them saying with a loud
voice. 2. Into an Hypothesis or Supposition. If any man worship the Beast and
the Image of the Beast, and receive his mark in his forhead, and in his hand.
The 3. a most fearful Threat, and Denounciation; the same shall drink of the
Wine of Gods wrath, which is powered forth without mixture, into the Cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in presence of
the holy Angels, and of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torments ascends
up for ever, and ever. Thus our division. And though for the avoiding of
confusion, and for breuity sake, I do only thus in general distinguish my
Text, into an Inscription, a Supposition, and a Denounciation; yet, if you
shall be pleased to lend unto me religious, and attentive ears, you shall well
observe, that in the prosecution thereof, I shall lay open unto you, great
secrets, of highest consequence and necessity; prepare not your ears for any
oratorious florishes; for such, from this and like places, I for my part rather
despise, then honor or admire. We begin with the Inscription.

And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, etc.
FOr Declaration hereof, I prefixe certain suppositions; 1. Supposition.
First I suppose, that which is most manifest according to the exposition of
all, to wit, that this inscription does present unto our considerations, an
imaginary forevision of our Prophet, foreseeing certain zealous Preachers
(typed unto us Zealous Preachers typed by the 3. Angel.
by this third Angel) who were with loud, constant, and perspicuous voices, to
denounce Gods fearful judgments, against the adorers and worshippers of the
Beast.

Secondly we suppose, a like manifest truth, (concerning 2. Supposition.
the circumstance of time,) that these zealous Preachers (typed unto us by the
third Angel) were immediately to follow other Preachers and Pastors,
represented unto us by other two Zealous Preachers joining hand in hand for
reformation.
Angels, described in the 6. and 7. precedent verses of this Chapter. The
sum is, a certain rank of holy Preachers, fore-typed unto us by these three
Angels immediately following each other through the midst of Heaven, (that
is, publicly and manifestly,) were to join hand in hand, in the consormity of
the Doctrines sounded out (by the three Angels) for the reformation of the
world, for the repair of decayed Christianity, and for the beating down of
all manner of Antichristian superstition and idolatry. For the clearer opening
of which truth of the last branch of this our second supposition, I suppose,

In the third place, that the Preachers which the Holy Ghost 3. Su^p^sition.
does represent unto us by these three Angels, were not to appear near the
days of the Apostles, in the time of the Primative Church, nor for a long time
after; no, they These zealous Preachers when they are to preach. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
were not to appear, until (the Devils being let loose) the Antichristian
state was to be revealed, and the mystery of iniquity by the breath of Christ's
mouth, was by degrees to be dissolved; a truth so manifest, that there is no
color to gainsay it; for against the Beast, the adorers thereof, and the
receivers of the Beasts marks, these Preachers (typed by Angels) were to
sound forth their doctrines of reformation; I say doctrines Preachers of
Reformation
of reformation, for by invincible arguments it may be made manifest (which
for breuity, I must omit) that these Preachers are to be reputed of the number
of those, of who^ it is said, that they were to prophesy again, before many
peoples, and Apoc. 10. 11.
Nations, and tongues, and Kings. Prophesy again says the spirit of God; why
again? but for the reformation of the glorious perfection of Christianity,
decayed and ruinated, by the tirany of the Beast.

Fourthly, I suppose, that upon the Preaching of such Pastors, 4. Supposition.
typed unto us by Angels; effects answerable to their doctrines, were
infallibly to ensue; a general reformation of Reformation infallsbly to follow
upon the appearing of these Preachers. Math. 24.
the world; the fall of Babylon, the Throane and Seat of the Beast; and also
great zeal of Christians, for their utter detesting of the marks of the
Beast; for heaven and earth shall pass and be changed, but the word of God
shall not pass away unaccomplished.

From out of these suppositions not to be gainsaid; I deduce A conclusion most
evident for the honor of the Reformed churches.
this conclusion; that where and when, we first find a rank of godly Preachers
sounding out in their due order the doctrines of these three Angels, with
answerable effects following thereupon; that there, then, and by them, we must
take this Prophesy of the Holy Ghost, to be accomplished and fulfilled. And so
we come to observe, what the Doctrines of these three Angels are, what their
order of delivering of them is, and withal to make most clear application of
the Prophesy, to the Doctors and Pastors of the Reformed Churches.

The first Angel, described verse 6. flies through the midst of v. 6.
heaven, having an everlasting Gospel, that he might preach the The Doctrine
of the first Angel, the groundworke from whence all Reformed Churches have
begun their reformation.
same to the inhabitants of the earth, to every nation, tongue, tribe, and
people; saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give him glory, for the hour
of his judgment is come, and worship him, who made heaven and earth, the sea
and fountains of waters. And is not this the first principle for reformation,
(fear God and give him glory,) the everlasting Gospel, whereon, the Doctors
and Pastors of the reformed Churches, have begun their doctrine of
reformation, and have laid open the Idolatrous enormities, and superstitious
mysteries of the Antichristians? This they have protested to Counsels, so they
have professed to Kings and States, their sound has gone forth into the Romans
10. 18.
whole earth, and their words have (and shall) spread abroad into the ends of
the earth.

The second Angel in the 8. verse sounds out, the ruin and v. 8.
fall of Babylon; She is fallen, she is fallen, Babylon that great City is
fallen, for she has made all Nations drink of the Wine of her whoredoms. And
have we not here the never intermitted cries, voices, alleluiahs, and
exultations of the Doctors and Pastors The Doctrine of the second Angel
delivered and received in the Reformed churches.
of the Reformed Churches rejoicing against Babylon, the seat of Antichrist? in
regard of the great errors and defections thereof (upon their doctrines and
preachings) partly rejoicing for so much as is already accomplished, in
Germany, Bohemia, Swethland, Denmark, England, France, Burgundy, and
elsewhere, partly fore-preaching her utter ruin and desolation to be at hand,
even then, when the fifth viole of Gods Apoc. 16. 10.
wrath shall be cast into the Throane of the Beast, the very Seat of the
Antichristian state.

The third Angel follows, denouncing (according as my in the 9. 10. 11.
verse. The Doctrine of the third Angel with answerable effects in the Reformed
churches.
text has it) Gods eternal wrath against all those, who should worship the
Beast, and the image of the Beast, and should receive his character in their
hands, orforeheads. And are not such the never intermitted forewarnings, and
doctrines of the reformed Churches, earnestly (and in Gods name) persuading
every person, to renounce all manner of communion with the Antichristian
Synagogue of Rome, the effects of which their doctrines and persuasions, how
glorious they have bin, what eye observes not, and what Christian heart joys
not to have observed?

These things being thus manifest, shall we not henceout Applicatio of the
prophesy most evident in the Pastors of the Reformed Churches.
infer most clearly, that the Pastors of the Reformed Churches, are the
very men who were fore-typed by these three Angels, sounding out the fear and
worship of God alone, denouncing forth the ruin of Babylon? threatening aloud,
most heavy judgments against all those, who should worship the Beast, and the
image of the Beast, and receive the mark of the Beast in their hands or on
their foreheads? we say, and truly say; Isa. 41. 23.
(for it is an argument of Gods own making) If any Prophet shall foretell
things before they do happen, if the things foretold, do happen according as
they are foretold that they should happen; that the foretellers of such things,
are to be reputed for true Prophets. Why then shall we not answereably say,
that these things, which happen agreeingly to a fore-prophesy, of Gods own
Spirit, and accordingly as Gods Spirit has foretold that they should happen?
that they are the very things, which the Spirit of God did fore tell should so
happen? If then the Pastors and Doctors of the Reformed Churches, do the
very things, Preach the very Doctrines, observe the very order in their doings
and preachings, which the Spirit of God under the type of these three Angels,
has foretold, should be so done, should be so preached, should be so observed,
against the Beast and Antichristian state of Rome, for the reformation of
decayed Christianity; why then, are not they the very men, whom the Holy Ghost
has here by these three Angels fore-shewed unto us. The full accomplishing of
any Prophesy is the opening, yea is the Ire^^ lib. 4. 42.
proof of a Prophesy; a kind of proof, often used by the Scriptures, when
they add and attest. That it might be fulfilled Matthew. 1. 22. and 2. 15. John
15. 25.
which was spoken by the Prophets, etc.

This Prophesy is accomplished in the Reformed Preachers, most punctually;
assuredly then, the truth and intent of the Prophesy, aimed at them, and
intended them: dissolve me this riddle ye Pontificialls, either you for your
selves, or (in your behalf) some of your favorites, I mean newtralizing
Interim-ists; pretended Pacificatours, but in truth Romes subdolous factours!

It cannot be denied (our Adversaries will say) but that the Preachers of the
Reformed Churches, have pretended to An ^uasion of the Adversary most idle.
begin all their reformation from the Doctrine of the first Angel, fear
God, give him glory, and worship him alone; neither can it be denied, but that
they are frequent in their inuectiues against Rome Popish, as against Babylon;
and withal that they do detest, and diswade all manner of communion, with the
Pope and with the Church of Rome, neither can it be denied that upon such their
preachings, effects answ^^^able to their pretenses have followed, falls and
defections of diverse States and Kingdoms from the Pope; yet for that they
mistake their mark, in inueighing against our Holy Father the Pope (Christ's
Vicar) instead of Antichrist; barking against the Church of Rome, (which is the
most chaste Spouse of Christ,) as against the Beasts throane and seat; here
hence it is, that we deservedly account them as forerunners of Antichrist, but
not any rank or order of Godly Preachers, foresignified by these three Angels:
so Bristow, so Harding, Answer.
so Saunders, so Bellarmine, so the whole army of Papal Rabbis. O the vanity
of this subterfuge! who shall teach us what is the beast, and where is the
throane and seat of the beast, if not those very men who by the Spirit of God
have been fore-signed for that function, and in whom every jot of the Prophesy
is accomplished? O the idleness of this evasion! does the spirit of God
fore-expresse no other properties and tokens of those Preachers, (which were to
inueigh against Antichrist and his seat,) then such as the very forerunners of
Antichrist should to the full perform and practice? O the impiety of this
pretense, to affirm, that the forerunners of Antichrist, shall build their
preachings upon these foundations, Fear God, give him glory and worship him
alone; Acts 4. 11.
and upon this, there is no name given us under heaven for salvation, but the
name of Jesus, and of the Lamb. If we had no other The calumnious and
irreligious reasoning of our Adversaries.
proofs, to convince the Pope to be an Antichrist, yet this would abundantly
suffice, for that they account the Doctors and Pastors of the Reformed
Churches to be forerunners of Antichrist; in regard they contend, to bound
all true religious worship, within that principle: Fear God, give him glory,
and worship him alone; and for that they sum Acts 4. 12.
up all happiness of Faith within that Apostolical decree, there is no name
given us under heaven by which we must be saved but the name of Jesus; Jesus
that Lamb, which solely and alonely, takes away the sins of the world. John
1.


Thus have we by a brief examination of the inscription (our first general
part) made a door of entrance, for the laying open of those great mysteries
and difficulties, which lie hid and covered in our second part, the Hypothesis
and supposition which (the Spirit of God inabling,) we shall now endeavor to
lay open, and declare.

If any one worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive Second General part,
the Hypothesis or Supposition.
his mark in his hand or forehead, the same, etc.
HErein consists the greatest (I may say all) difficulty of our Text, not in
respect of the persons, against whom the Supposition is made; for the
Hypothesis being universal and indefinit, ( If any) it includes all, excludes
none; All, Emperors, Kings, Princes, States, Nobles, Gentles, Peoples, Young
or Old, Rich or Poor; all; If any one worship the Beast, and the Image of the
Beast; or receive his mark in hand, or on forehead, they shall surely drink
of the wine of Gods wrath: neither is their any difficulty to declare the sense
of the word worship, (...) If any one shall worship or adore the Beast, or the
image of the Beast; for who is so ignorant as not to observe, The worship here
condemned is a divine religious worship, not a civil reverence.
that the adoration and worship here spoken of condemned, is not a civil
worship or politic adoration given to any civil Authority or Majesty? no,
no; it is a religious and divine (both externe and interne) worship, given to
the State and See of the Beast; and this, upon the acknowledgement of a divine
and Godlike kind of Dignity and Majesty residing in the Beast, or in the
Supreme head of that State, which is typed by the Beast; as hereafter we
shall more fully Wherein consists the difficulty of this text.
declare; wherein then consists all the difficulty? surely in declaring what is
meant by the Beast, what by the image of the Beast, what by the taking of the
Beasts mark either in hand or Bellar: de Romans pont: lib. 3. Cap. 11. 15.
Viega^ et Ribera in Apocalip: Christophorso^ treat: of Antichrist against
Downam part: 2. Chapt. 8. alij.
on forehead. O thou Lion of Judah, thou that openest, and no hand shuts,
reveal this mystery unto us.

Here we first observe by the way (and I desire your attention) the
feuer-trepidation, and ignorance of certain prime Ignatian and other
Pontifician Rabbis; who, fearing the true mystical sense of this place, do
(again stall antiquity, and their own tenants) hold themselves to the very
letter of the prophecy; affirming, that the followers of Antichrist shall be
compelled to adore and worship, a true real beast; and a true real Image of a
Beast; (we must interpret them of a Beast having so many heads and horns
with Diadems thereon, as is described by the Prophet) and also, that they shall
be Ier. 13.
enforced like F^lons (by real inustion) or like the Priests A most
impertinent subterfuge of our Adversaries.
of Baal, by cruel incision, to receive a real mark of the Beast in their
hands, or on their foreheads. Which their subterfuge while I deliver, do ye
smile at their follies? or frown at their impudencies? or bewail their
obstinacies? Perhaps you will rather admire, what may be the reason, why they
fly to so doting an interpretation; which if they do, then be pleased to
take the reason thereof to be this. Many Doctors and Pastors of the reformed
Churches (so also his Praemonit. page 111.
most Excellent Majesty, in his Premonition to Christian Princes) do verily
object against the Pope and his, that by the adoration of the Beast, and the
Image of the Beast, and by the taking of the Beasts mark in the hand, or on
the forehead, is most lively (in a true mystical sense) typed forth No man
kissing the Popes feet, omits him adoration both going and coming; and when he
kisses he is well nigh prostrate to the ground. The form and Ground of all
Papal faith.
the Papal Antichristian State, with the answerable practices thereof; of
their adoring the Popes Person with Divine and religious adoration; of their
Soule-subiection to him, in the vorie tie and band of supernatural faith, and
sacred obedience to his damnable laws, and forged traditions: so that, as in a
true sense it may be an Article of Faith (yea the form and ground of all
their faith) in that Church, We believe our holy Father the Pope; so it may
be likewise a new principle of religious worship with them; We adore and
worship our Holy Father the Pope: and as for their taking of diverse
superstitious marks, of communion, under him in their hands and foreheads,
what more manifest? as we shall anon most fully declare.

Now the Pontificians, to avoid this grievous imputation sticking so close to
their sides) knowing for certain, that not any of their Popes ever as yet,
erected any such real Beast, or real Image of Beast (as is described by Saint
John) to be adored and worshipped; having so many heads and Why Popish Rabbis
dream of a real Beast to be set up by Antichrist for adoration.
horns, in proportion like a Leopard; having the feet of a Bear, and the
mouth of a Lion: Again, they knowing for certain, that their Popes as yet
never compelled their followers to receive any rcall marks by inustion, or
incision, in their hands, or upon their foreheads: Here hence it is, that they
are so strongly addicted, to the litterall interpretation of this prophecy, of
a real Beast, of a real Image, and of the real adoring and worshipping of
the same; together with the receiving of real marks of the Beast, by incision
or by inustion, in their hands, or on their foreheads. But O the vanity of this
so doting an interpretation! How verified against Psalm. 49. 13.
them, is that of the Prophet? Man being in honor, has not understood, he
has been compared with the beasts, and been made like unto them.

For against this their vanity, many contrarieties, impossibilities, and
absurdities do concur? Contrarieties against Their vain interpretation
against all Antiquity, and against their own Tenants.
the joint interpretation of all the Auntients; who all of them (none excepted)
do interpret the Beast, either for the whole multitude of the wicked; or for
the wicked State and Empire of Antichrist himself: Contrariety against their
own doctrine, they all generally affirming, that Antichrist shall suppress
all manner of Idolatry; what likelihood then, that he shall set up so absurd
and misshapen a beast, or image of the beast for idolatrous adoration and
worship? Contrariety against their own doctrine; diverse of them teaching,
that the Beast typeth Contrarieties against the same.
forth and signifies by one of his heads, the very State and Empire of
Antichrist himself; yea Bellarmine (frequent Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. c.
5.
in his oversight and contradictions) affirms as much.

Again, how many impossibilities do present themselves against this their
interpretation, of such a real beast, real marks, real inustions and
incisions? Impossibility; for how Bell. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. c. 8.
possible, that within the space of three years and a half (the full time of
the Beasts reign, in the opinion of all Pontificians) that the whole earth
(the Inhabitants of the whole earth) should be brought personally and
presentially to adore and worship such a Beast? what? shall the fair Beast be
carried up and down, from Country to Country like their Holy Father, upon
men's shoulders; or like their Siluer-shrines, upon men's backs? or like their
God of bread; by their hands in Siluer-turretts? or shall it ( Dagonlike) be
reared and set up for a Pilgrimage-stocke in some Wood, or Grove, or in some
Chapel? as at Loretto, Mount-serrat^, Sichem? or shall this adoration only
be done, by some Puppet-images (in the bosoms of the Beasts sworn deuouts)
like those of Diana, or like those their bosome-Godlings, worn by diverse of
their deuouts in their bosoms, pretty small Images; of their Images adored,
and worshipped at Loretto, Mountserrato, Sichem, Impossibilities against the
same.
and elsewhere? Answer, O ye our Adversaries, (and Adversaries of Gods truth)
how this adoration of such a real Beast, or Image of the Beast, shall be
performed by the Inhabitants of the earth?

Again, impossibilities; for how shall such a Beast (except it be a living
Gereon-like monster) fight his battles? What weapons shall he use for the
ouercomming of Gods Saints? In what manner and form of government shall he
rule and govern the whole earth? how shall he speak, or what language shall
it use? how shall one of the Beasts heads be cut off, Apoc. 13.
so that the Beast shall thereupon dye, and yet be revived again? Let our
Adversaries remove these impossibilities (with many such like) or else let them
cease to dream any longer, after so doting a conceit, of a real Beast, or
Image of a beast, to be set up by Antichrist, to be worshipped and adored.

Besides contraricties and impossibilities; how absurd also Absurdities against
the same.
is this their Paradoxe? how absurd to think, that wily Antichrist, should
rear up such a beast to be adored? How absurd, that the whole world should
be drawn to the adoration of such a beast? How absured to dream, that the
real Ribera apud Vi^ga^ and Vitgas in cap. 13. apoc. sect. 7.
mark or image of a Dragon (so Ribera the Jesuit) or that the picture of
Antichrists own person (so Viegas the Jesuit) should by real inustion,
impression, or incission, be burnt or cut, into the very hands and foreheads,
of the followers of Antichrist?

3. Ye, who pretend to be followers and admirers of venerable Antiquity:
yea, your Tridentine Fathers command you, not to interpret the Scriptures,
against the unanimous consent of the Ancients; tell us, who, or how many of the
Ancient Fathers ever dreamed of this your conceit of such real beasts,
marks, inustions, or incisions? True it is somefew, but those not very
ancient, as Primasius and Ansbertus have affirmed, that the mark of the Beast
shall be composed of Apud Viogam in Apoc. 13.
three Greek letters P T X which joined and framed into one form and figure,
do compendiously represent the name of Christ. But this their conceit, by no
means pleases our Adversaries, for thereout it may be inferred, that (in the
opinion of the Ancients) Antichrists mystery of iniquity, shall be a pretensed
mystery, under the very name of Christ; A very Vice-gerency in the stead and
place of Christ; the very thing, which the Pope arrogantly assumes to himself;
that which his flatterers do attribute unto him; that, for which all the world
admires after him.

Thus have we laid open and refuted the interpretation of our Adversaries, we
come now to declare the true sense of these words. I pray again, O thou God,
who art the reuealer Our prayer.
of all secrets, reveal this thy truth unto us! First, of the Beast, and of
the Image of the Beast in abstracto what they are, afterward in concreto and
by way of application, where Gerson. tract. contra heresin dei communione sub
vtra specie. to. 1. p. 522. Ambros. ser. 8. in Psalm. 118. Dan. 7. What the
Beast is, and that a very State and wicked Empire is thereby signified.
they are, who they are.

If any one adore the Beast, and the Image of the Beast, etc.
IF we compare Scripture with Scripture ( the best rule and surest way for
interpretation;) then agreeing to the interpretation of all the Ancients, we
shall find, that as in Daniel, by the four beasts arising from out of the Sea,
were signified the four Monarchies of the world; the Assirian, Persian,
Grecian, and the Roman: so likewise here, by the beast arising out of the Sea,
with such a variety of horns, heads, and diadems; we are to understand some
Prime or Principal State, or Empire (having either successively or jointly
different forms of Government) to be presignified and fore-shewed: Bell. de
Antich. cap. 5. and 15.
which is so apparent a truth, that the Pontifician Rabbis themselves, yea
Bellarmine (their Hercules) acknowledges it for very probable, that the
Apocalipticall beast, with so many heads, horns, and diadems, does signify
the Roman State, with their several forms of Government; yea and that by one
of the heads is signified, the most wicked and execrable State of Antichrist
himself. Thus have we found, what is typed by the beast; if then we will
resolve, the Hypothesis and supposition, it is thus: If any one worship the
beast; that is, if any one worship and acknowledge the State of Antichrist,
etc. But What the Image of the Beast is. --
what is the Image of this Beast, which is likewise forbid, under most
fearful punishment, to be worshipped and adored?

The Image of any thing, must be a special resemblance, of that whereof it is
an Image; If perfect and natural, it must Two sorts of Images.
have a likeness, not only representative, but also in nature, and being of
existence; so the natural son, is a perfect image of his father, like in
representation, and like in being and existence: If the image be imperfect;
then, though it be different from the thing (whereof it is an image) in nature
and being (as the image of a man, drawn by the Painter on a Tablet) yet in
form and virtue of representing, it must have a representative form of
likeness, as the same The Image of the Beast may be taken in a double sense.
image drawn by the Painter has: Now then, the image of that State, or form
of Government, which is signified by the beast, may either be a perfect image
thereof, like in representing, and like in existence and being, to weet, a
State representing that State; one wicked form of Government representing
another; or else it may be an imperfect image, in some likeness either by
expression of the pen of the Writer, or the pencill of the Painter,
representing the same. Sarisburg. in policrat. l. 5. c. 16. fol. 169.
For example, we may take the forms of government of Papal Legates and
Nuncios, sent forth (to use Sarisburiensis his words) from the presence of
Satan, for the dissipation and destruction of the Church; We may (I say) take
them, for perfect images (because of like nature) and also representing the
absolute, sacred Monarchy of their Holy Fathers the The State-Legatine an Image
of the State-Papall.
Popes; a State Legatine, representing a State Papal: but for inperfect
Images, we may either take that, which is done by the adulatorious pens of the
Canonists, describing the absolute state, or sacred Numen of their Lord God the
Pope, or A threefold Image of the State-Papall.
that, which by the Popes themselves is expressed, in their Bulls,
Constitutions, Clementines, Decretalls, or Extrauagants; or finally that, which
the Painter, Statuary, or Goldsmiths, performs in painting, caruing, or
casting of the Popes sacred Tiare, or Triple-crowne: by which sacred Tiare, or
triple Crown, is represented unto us, a lively image of the Papal The Papal
Tiare, or triple crown an Image of the Papal State.
State, both in heaven above, below on earth, and underneath even in hell it
self. In heaven by the top-crowne thereof; for it being most certain, that no
man can enter into heaven, except absolved from his sins; so likewise in the
Papal state it is as assured, that none can be absolved from their sins, but
by authority derived from the Pope, yea, and in cases papal and reserved,
either the Pope himself in person, or his chief Penitentiary must absolve,
and so unlock heaven gates, or else there can be no entrance thereinto. By his
second crown, is signified, that his power upon earth; unto which it is
necessary, under the forfeit of salvation (so defines Pope Boniface) that
every humane Creature be subject; nay, Bonif. vnam Sanctam de maioritate.
it is not enough for every one in particular and (ipso facto) in very deed,
to be subject to such his power; but every one out of necessity of salvation,
must further believe, that all others, even every humane Creature, is subject
thereunto. O presumption! it is not enough, for a man in himself to be ipso
facto, by very deed subject to the Pope, to give unto him his Soul and
Conscience, in faith and obedience; but he must further profess and believe
(with a divine faith) all the body of Christianity to be subject unto him.
Lo how Supereminent his Monarchy is upon earth; exalting himself (...), over
all that which is called God; or which is called Augustum, sacred. Now his
power over Hell (for Purgatory is in the suburbs of Hell) signified by the
third and last of his triple-crownes, is so sacred and so absolute; that he
can fasten upon base creatures ( Grains and Meddalls) such a saving power, and
efficacy, that whosoever shall use the same; with such conditions as by his
fatherhood are prescribed; he shall thereby, deliver souls (more or fewer)
out of the flames of their imagined purgatory. Lo how Pape, a word of wonder,
comes from Papa the worlds wonder.

Thus have we expressed, what is meant by the Beast, and What is the Beasts
mark.
by the image of the Beast; now come we to declare, what is the Beasts mark,
what the taking thereof, whether in hand or on forehead. I should trifle the
time, contemn all learned Antiquity, fall into a laberinth of contrarieties,
impossibilities, and absurdities, if I should but only dream of a corporal
mark to be engraven by incision, or to be burnt by inustion (as the fashion
of men is to do with their cattle) Praemonit. page 111.
in the hands, or upon the foreheads of Antichrists followers: no, no; the
mark must be metaphorical (as his Majesty most excellently) by some rite of
profession; it must be mystical, by some rite of subjection; the mark on the
forehead, some sacrilegious ceremony, whereby the authority of that
Blasphemous The marks of the Beast not real by incision or inustion, and
diverse reasons for the same.
State is professed: the mark in the hands, some like impious ceremony, or
thing accepted of in the hand, whereby subjection and obedience to that wicked
State is performed. And this without all doubt, is most agreeing to truth: (to
truth I say) for as the marks of Christ his flock, 2. Timoth. 2. 9. Greg. 29.
moral. cap. 2.
are not any real marks, by incision or inustion: but the profession of his
faith, with obedience to him, with the acceptance of some religious Ceremonies,
or godly Sacraments taken for that purpose: so likewise, shall the marks of
the Beast, Christ's marks mystical and spiritual; so the marks of Antichrist.
and Antichristian State (for contraries are of the same kind) be some
sacrilegious ceremonies, or sacraments. Again, agreeing to truth; because such
marks, being required as necessary for allowed commerce in the Antichristian
State; most meet, that they should be answerably taken, like to other marks
of humane society and communication. Agreeing to truth; because they being
taken, as marks of a continued religious (or rather superstitious) worship, by
repetition The marks of the Beast to be reiterated.
of superstitious acts, whereby faith and obedience to Antichrist is
acknowledged; most meet, that they should be such, as may be often reiterated.
For we may not think that Antichrist, a most ambitious and arrogant Lord, will
be contented with an once, and a one subjection, signified by a mark once
violently imprinted: no, no, this will not serve his turn; for howsoever, the
hearts of his followers may stand affected to him, yet he will assuredly
require very frequent acts and rites of profession, and obedience to be made
unto him: what need then of such a horse-like impression, that cannot be
reiterated? Further, most agreeing to truth: for it being most certain (and
let the Adversaries deny this if they can) that the adoration of the Beast, and
of the Image of the Beast, and the taking of the Beasts mark in hand, or upon
forehead, shall be some superstitious services, and idolatrous worships
yielded to the Beasts State, yea the primest of his services: Why then, shall
not the same be performed by some flagitious acts, or sakerments of subjection
unto the Beasts State?

Lastly, most agreeing to the truth, for if the name of the An unavoidable
reason and proof.
Beast, and the number of the name of the Beast, be not by real characters,
to be written in the hands, or upon the foreheads of Antichrists followers (as
it is most manifest, and our Adversaries deny not) but only mystically to be
taken, for that they shall be either called after his name, or after the
number of his name: for example, ^ither Papists after the name Papa, (a name
which Gregory the seventh decreed should be peculiar to the Popes alone) or
else Latins or Romans, after the number Dictat. Greg. 7. apud Bar^. ann. 1175.
of his name, Latins, after (...), Romans after Hebr. Romijt. Why then, shall
not likewise the marks of the Beast be mystically interpreted, of some
superstitious rites or ceremonies, taken in hand or forehead? whereby
subjection is professed unto the Beast, as to a sacred Majesty upon earth?

Thus by Gods gracious assistance, it rests proved, what the Beast is, to
weet, a flagitious state of Government, set up against that of Christ, though
pretended to be the very same with that of Christ himself, as hereafter we
shall prove more fully. It rests also proved, what the Image of this Beast
is, A scelerate and idolatrous representation of the same, either by a like
subordinate state unto it; or else by some other similtudinary means, as is
above expressed: and lastly it rests proved, what the taking of the beasts
mark in the hand or forehead is, to weet, An impious acknowledgement, and
adoration of the Antichristian State, by some superstitious rite, sakerment or
ceremony taken in hand or forehead: and yet the greatest difficulty and
obscurity remains behind; which now comes to be cleared and opened by us: to
weet, upon what form of Government now upon earth, may we fasten so grievous
an imputation? Is this wicked State and form of Government, yet come or are we
to look for it? O thou innocent Lion, who have the key of David, who openest
The Authors prayer.
and no man shuts, unseal unto us the secret of this thy sacred mystery!

For the clearing of this great difficulty, we must suppose First supposition.
these things. First, that this Antichristian State, typed by the Beast and the
Image of the Beast, together with the adoration thereof, and the flagitious
subjection yielded thereunto (typed by the taking of the mark of The state of
the Beast, can be no mere politic Civil State or Empire.
the beast, and of the name or the number of the name of the beast in hand or
on forehead) cannot justly be applied to any civil form of Government, in
regard of any civil subjection yielded thereunto: No, no, it is most certain,
that all such civil States are the Ordinances of God; and that all civil
subjection (out of conscience) yielded to such powers, is expressly required by
God; yea so stricktly, that whosoever shall deny the same, Romans 13.
they shall thereby purchase to themselves condemnation.

Secondly, I suppose, that the Antichristian State here 2. Suppos. The State
of the Beast a p^etended sacred State.
condemned, is a State pretending to be divinely Sacred (as Christ's one Rod
and Scepter) so powerful, that it shall presume to change laws and times; so
arrogantly sacred, that it shall undertake to institute other rites and
ceremonies, then those Christ has appointed, for the abolishing of sin, and
for sanctifying of the Soul: A State challenging Matt. 24. 6. Apoc. 13. 15.
to be acknowledged, by a religious supernatural faith; and by divine worship
to be honored, and this so strictly (in the very name of Christ) that
whosoever shall refuse to do the same, must be destroyed.

Hereout, I thirdly suppose; that the Antichristian State 3. Suppos.
typed, shall in all arrogancy presume to exercise her power The State of the
Beast shall exact supernatural faith and obedience and is a pretended State
over the consciences of men. 4. Suppos.
over the souls and consciences of men, requiring from them a divine faith in
the profession of her power; exacting from them an absolute obedience out of
conscience to her Authority; to admit of all her Rites, all her Laws, even as
the very Rites and Laws of God himself.

In the fourth place I suppose; that the Antichristian State, shall not only
pretend a spiritual power (typed by The State of the Beast a M^narchy vp^n
divine, p^^tence.
the horns of a Lamb) but also an universal (direct or indirect) temporal
power: For he shall speak like the Dragon, and consequently shall with infinite
afflictions vex those, who adhering to the doctrines of the Preachers, typed
by Apoc. 14. 9. 10.
the three Angels, are only and solely for the Faith of Jesus, against his
superstitious rites; are only and solely for obedience to the Commandments of
God, against his humane traditions, are only and solely for the worshipping of
God, against the adoration and worship of any creatures, against all his
enforced Thelo-threskies, and wilworships. On the contrary he shall enrich with
wealth and treasury; increase in glory and honor; all those, who shall fall
down, adore and worship him, and his State.

These most true suppositions (which with an infinity of testimonies, and
reasons might be confirmed) being The Papal State the State of the Beast.
carefully preobserued: I do in the fear of God, and out of the confidence of
a good conscience constantly lay this imputation, upon the present state and
government of the Pope of Rome; affirmimg his State and Government, to be that
flagitious State, which is here typed forth by the Beast, and by the Image of
the Beast: And so hereby Articles agreed on by the Synod of Bishops, and the
Convocation.
I demonstrate, how true that is which we have (and in the defense whereof I
have partly meditated this argument) in our Articles of the Church of England,
That the Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in the Realm of England: Page 68.
For if his State be Antichristian, and of the Beast (as his Majesty, also
most truly in his Premonions to Christian Princes) then it will follow
vnuoidably, that all his challenge for jurisdiction within the Realm of
England, is arrogancy and presumption. This my imputation I will not endeavor
to prove, by enumetating an infinity of their blasphemous superstitions and
laws against the Majesty of God, the glory of his Son, and the honor of
his Tabernacle (the true universal Catholic Church of Christ) but I will
only do it ( Gods holy Spiiit enabling me) by certain general
demonstrations, drawn from the consideration of the very proper conditions of
the Antichristian State it self; partly laid down in my former suppositions,
but most fully in the Book of God, whereunto for brevity sake I will only
point my religious Audience.

First then I argue thus: The State of the Beast, must F^rst reason.
be a State upon earth, pretending to be for Christ Matt. 24. 6.
coming in the name of Christ, and bearing pretensedly the very Apoc. 13. 11.
2. Thessal. 2. A vanity in Bellarmine, affirming that Antichrist shall deny
Christ.
horns of the Lamb, though in truth it shall speak like the Dragon: Again,
this State must be not a proclaimed impudency of Iniquity; but it must be a
mystery of Iniquity, a pretensed semblance of Christian Sanctity: A State so
full of subtlety, and pretending the name of Christ, even to the doing of
miracles, and such miracles Matthew. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Hi^^r. orat. in Aux^nt.
Hiero. Epist ^1 q. ad algas. Oec^men. Theophil. in 2 Thessalonians. 2 and Chrisost
ibid alij. See Remes Annotat in 2. These. 2. annotat. 5.
that the very Elect shall be in danger to be seduced. It must also be a State
ruling and sitting in the Temple of God, that is in the visible Churches of God
(so certain of the Fathers) pretending therein (in Gods stead) to have power
over the very souls and consciences of the faithful: yea, and therein to
have (in Gods stead) a power dispensatiue over all the Laws of God; over all
powers ordained by God; over all that is sacred (...) all Majesty whatsoever.
And are not these, and every of these conditions, most properly appliable to
the present Papal Roman State? only and solely to the Papal State? It alone
pretends to w^are the Lambs horns, and to be an absolute Vice-gerencie for
Christ: It alone requires that her Authority The Papal State pretinded to be
Christ's own state.
and power* be believed (under necessity of salvation) with supernatural
faith: She alone, pretends to sit (that is to rule) in the temple of God, that
is the whole visible Church of God: to rule (I say) the same with a rod of Iron
and Direction. She alone, works in so powerful and subtle a manner
(pretending Christ's power) miracles done in his name, that thereby she
(drawing to her band a whole multitude of Inhabitants of the earth) hazards the
souls of the very elect; so that they are in danger to be seduced. Thus our
first proof; and yet here I must not omit to note, that though the Papal
State, pretends the Lambs horns; that is, to be Christ's absolute and sole
Vicegerent: yet notwithstanding, it speaks like the Dragon; How, speaks like
the Dragon? For that it persecutes with Sword, Fire, and Faggot (as the Dragon
did) all those who cleave only to the Lamb; for their salvation hoping only
Revel. 13. 11.
upon the Lambs merits; for their direction both in faith and manners,
resting only on the Lambs Word. The Roman Fathers like the old Emperors
Instruments of the Dragon,
And are not these the very things, for which the Dragon persecuted the first
Christians in the Roman Emperors? and does he not now persecute us for the
very same in the Roman Fathers Pope-Emperours? It is the testimony of Jesus:
Jesus only, Jesus solely, which the Dragon persecuted by the old Emperors;
and it is the same testimony of Jesus, which the Dragon persecuteth in these
Roman Fathers: The Roman Emperors, would not have Jesus alone to be honored,
against their Idoll-Gods; And these Holy Fathers, will not have Jesus alone, to
be acknowledged and believed to salvation without their Godlings, nor to be
only heard for direction, without their Traditions. Because we will
acknowledge nothing, nor will believe no other necessary for salvation, but
Jesus, only Jesus: This is that very testimony, against which the Dragon now
speaks in the Roman Fathers, and persecuteth in us, with the extremity of
Fire, Sword, and Faggot.

My second reason I frame thus; The state Antichristian Second Reason.
will require, to be adored of all the Inhabitants of Earth; not with civil and
humane adoration only; but with a Apoc. 13. 15. 16
supernatural adoration, with a soule-Reuerence due to it, as to an earthly
God. But this the Papal State most exactly Adoration given to the Papal
State, as to an Numen and Divinity upon earth
does require; and as yet no other State ever required the same; neither can,
or shall any other (with fire and faggot) more rigorously require the same,
then the Papal State, now does require it: It follows then, that the Papal
State, is that very State which is here typed by the Beast: That the Papal
State requires such a soule-adoration, and supernatural obedience, as due to
an earthly Deity, it is more then most manifest: For, who has not observed,
that in a religious subjection to the Pope, and in a Soule-vnion with the Pope,
consists the very life and Wherein consists the life of the Papacy.
essence of the Papal State? Here hence it is, that it is reputed a high point
of the Majesty of that State (yea it is reputed as a partial means to
salvation) that the Pope receives adorations and kissings of his feet, from
all the faithful An act of Religion to kiss the Popes feet.
of the world; and in their faith ought to receive (at lest in preparation of
mind) from all the Inhabitants of the Earth. Lo, how that of the Prophet is
accomplished, That Apoc. 13 4.
the whole earth admired after the Beast. This reason I confirm with the words
of Odoard Guilliand, Bishop of Cas^n^^ Odoard. Guilli^dus de Civilly and moral.
Facult. lib. 14 cap. 3.
a City of Flaminia in Italy. This man in a certain book of his, dedicated
to Clement the eighth, does excellently describe unto us, the Divinity and
Godhead of their Holy Fathers the Popes. A Papa (says he) tanquam a Capite in
vniuersum Ecclesiae corpus, hoc est in omnem Christianan rempublicam, spiritus
influunt celestium gratiarum sensum fructumque praestantes, and efficacem motum
ad sempiternam beatidinem, merito igitur Sanctissimus, and Beatissimus
appellatur, and ab omnibus religionem Christianam profitentibus, quasi quidam
Deus adoratur, and colitur. From the Pope, as from the head, there does flow
into the whole body of the Church, that is into the whole Christian
commonwealth, certain spirits of heavenly graces, which do yield both sense
and fruit, and efficacious The Pope to be adored as a cer^aine God.
motion to everlasting happiness: worthily therefore, is he called most Holy,
and most Blessed, and of all those who profess Christian Religion, he is to
be adored and worshipped as a certain God. Thus he, and such is the
blasphemous note and tune of diverse of them, flat opposite to that confession
of the Saints in the Revelations: Salvation comes from our God, that sits
upon the Throne, and from the Lamb. And shall Apoc 7. 10.
we desire more to lay open the blasphemous presumption of that State? or
shall we dare to affirm, that such Admirers Revel. 13. 3.
after the Beast, that sits in the Temple of God, showing himself (...) as
if he were God are in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
state of salvation) if they be wilfully obstinate and reluctant against the
truth sufficiently proposed unto them?

In the third place I reason thus; The Antichristian Third Reason.
state, is that very Government, against which in the very height of her pride
and presumptions, certain zealous and Godly Preachers (foresignified by the
three Angels, Revel. 14. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
flying through the midst of Heaven, and having the everlasting The preaching
of the three Angels accomplished against the Papal State.
Gospel) were to oppose themselves, by preaching the fear and worship of God
alone, and keeping of his commandments, and consequently, were to beat down
all manner of Idolatry and Wilworship reared up against the same: were again
in the second place, to sound out the ruin and desolation of that State; and
consequently, were to check the insolent confidence of her followers and
Admirers, glorying in her ever infallibility and indefectibilitie: And lastly,
were in the third place, to dehort from all manner of communion with that
state; and agreeingly were to teach all true Christians to detest the marks and
characters of that State. And is not this the very selfe-Gospel The Papal
State persecuteth the Preachers typed by the three Angels.
of Reformation, which the Pastors and Doctors of the Reformed Churches do
now sound out against the Papal State, yea and (according to the prediction of
the Prophets) to the begun ruin of the Papal State? This reason Apoc. 14. 2.
may be confirmed, if with all we consider, that even as it is foretold in
the Revelation, the same. Chapter; The Antichristian State, would conceive so
great rage against the said Preachers (typed by the three Angels) for such
their preaching and doctrines, that thereupon it would raise, Reave. 14. 12, 13
or cause to be raised against them most fearful persecutions; persecutions
so great and so manifold, that the Spirit of God though it meet to prearme his
chosen against the same, with these and such like comfortable instructions:
Here is the faith and patience of Saints; here are those, who keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. Blessed are those, who dye in the
Lord, who dye for the Lord; From henceforth says the Spirit, they shall rest
from their labors. Revel. 2. 29.
Thus there; In which most comfortable instructions, does not the Spirit of God
manifestly premonish, and prearme us of these times against the Pope? Hear all
ye, that have ears to hear, what the Spirit of God says to the Churches.
The Pastors of the Reformed churches suffered from the Pope, according as by
Gods Spirit it has bin foretold


For, is not this the very thing, which is now, and has formerly been acted
in the world? Do not the Pastors and Doctors of the Reformed Churches, and
other faithful, suffer for this very cause? for that they sound out publicly
the doctrines of the three Angels; the Everlasting Gospel? of the fear of
God alone? of the ruin and fall of Babylon? of the State of the Beast? and
against the taking of the marks and characters of the Beast in hand or on
forehead? and from whom, or by whose means do they suffer for such things, but
from the Papal state? What Inquiries are made after them? What hideous
Inquisitions are reared for them? What Crosse-warres have been proclaimed
against them? Ask our Fathers of old in France, Italy, Germany, Spain,
England, Denmark, Scotland, Burgandy, and where not? Our Adversaries the
Pontificians cannot deny this, it being the very desire of their Fathers and of
their own souls. Let it then rest proved, that the principle prophecy
against the State of the Beast, being accomplished in the Papal State, that
the Papal State is the very State of the Beast. And so I adioyne a fourth
reason thus.

That is, the Antichristian State (typed by the Beast, and Fourth Reason.
the Image thereof) or typed by the seven and eight August. 20. de Ciuit c. 19.
Hier. ad Algas. quest. 11. in Dan and ad Gerontia^ de monogamia. Tertul. de
resurrect. carnis Cir. catech. 15. Chrysostom. Ambros. Theophil. Oecume Primasi in
2. These. 2. The Papal State has done out of the way tho Roman Empire. See
glos in Canon si Imperatori Radeuic. de gestis Friderici. Sidon. l. 11. de
regno Itali^.
heads thereof) which was in the very government of Rome it self, to succeed
the Roman temporal Empire: So diverse of the Ancient Fathers, Austen, Hierom,
Lactantius, Tertullian, with others have affirmed: unto which Antichristian
State also, ten Kings (a number certain for an uncertain) springing out of
the ruins of the Roman Empire, were for a time to give their powers (for the
honoring and supporting of her) and yet afterward (forsaking her) would bend
their forces against her (God, putting the same into their hearts) to make her
desolate, and consume her with fire. And is not this the very Papal State it
self, succeeding in the Government and Empire over Rome, the Roman Temporal
Empire? For in Rome who knows not, that it is reputed no less crime then
le-so-Sanctitie, to affirm the Emperors (that are now) to have ought to do
therein, independently from the Pope? or that they have any Imperial
Sovereignty over Rome: no, no, in the faith of the Pope and his, Imperator
Presens, the present Emperor is but Homo ligius Papae: A liege devout servant
to the Pope. Again, to too apparent it is, that those Kings and Kingdoms, into
which the temporal Roman Empire (upon her ruin) was divided, did (the Dragon
putting the same into their hearts) yield and submit their powers and crowns
unto the Papal State, for the support of the same: And is it not most
manifest, that the said Kings and Kingdoms (God putting the same into their
hearts) have already begun to hate the Papal State, to make it desolate, and
to consume it with the fire of the zeal of Gods glory and truth, God grant
they continue the same unto the end: but should any States or Kingdoms which
have begun in the spirit decline to the flesh, yet shall they never be able to
make frustrate and void Gods infallible and inevitable decree, of the utter
ruin and fall of the Autichristian State, even as of a millstone cast into the
bottomless Sea, whereof there remains Apoc. 17.
neither token nor memory: And so I add a fifth proof.

The Antichristian State, is that State which was to have Fifth Reason.
her Sea, and to reside in mystical Babylon; mystical Babylon that Great
City which is situated upon seven Hills: that Reu. 17. 9. 4, 18, etc.
City, which in S. John's time had rule and command over the Kings of the
Earth; that City which was to be a whore The Antichristian Throne in Rome.
and Apostata from her first faith, by superadding many doctrines of devils,
and errors of wicked spirits; and yet 1. Tim. 4.
was insolently to glory of her euer-in errabilitie, and that she should see
no widow-hood: that City, which was to Revel. 17. 2.
make drunk with the cup of her abominations (pretending to be the sole
mother of Christianity) all the Kings and Ibid. 4.
Kingdoms of the Earth; that City which was to be ruddy with the blood of
Saints, those Saints which were to suffer for the testimony of Jesus, I
interpret for the sole faith of Jesus, as the only means of salvation. That
City which Ibid. 5.
was to have the name Mystery written in her forehead, full of mysteries;
professing mysteries; making mysteries: That City which was with honor,
riches, and glory to enrich and make glorious all her Lovers and Admirers, the
Inhabitants of the Earth. And are not all these things most punctually
accomplished in the Papal State? I need not to repeat nor to make any
particular application; but I say again, and again, are not all these things,
with all other such like (fore prophesied by the Spirit of God, against the
Antichristian State) fulfilled and accomplished in the Papal State, which has
its residence in Rome, its Throne and See in Rome, etc.

Some of our Adversaries (that so we may answer an A vain objection
objection by the way) do against this reason, pretend a very idle evasion;
they acknowledge, that Rome shall be the Seat of the Antichristian State, and
of the Beast; but Rome Ethnike, say they, not Rome Christian; Rome as it was
before the days of Constantine, but not Rome as it is now in these our times.
O the vanity of this answer, Rome The Answer.
Ethnike, as it was before the time of Constantine, is to be the Throne of the
Antichristian State, and Seat of the Beast? and yet in their own opinions
Antichrist is not to come until a very short time before the consummation of
the world, and then also his reign (in their opinions) is to be only of three
years and a half continuance. O that these wise Sages would inform us, how
this their Inerrable and Infallible Papal See (so they glory) shall become
Ethnike and Heathenish? By what precursour of Antichrist shall it be so made
Heathenish? for the entertaining of the Great Antichrist? shall Antichrist
himself make it Heathenish and Ethnike? shall he rear up the adoration of
many Gods (the proper character and badge of Heathenisme,) that, they cannot
say, for they profess (vainly) that Antichrist shall suppress all manner of
Idolatry, he cannot then be in their judgments the Author of Heanish
Idolatry; vain then and most vain is their pretended reason.

Again, like vain is their answer, when they pretend, A second evasion.
that the Beast which shall sit at Rome, is not the same, with that Beast which
arises out of the Sea, having seven heads Apoc. 13.
and ten horns. For do they not all confess, that both Answer.
Beasts do type unto us Antichrist, yea the Great Antichrist? which
Antichrist, in all their judgments shall be so indiuidually, one only man,
that herehence they think they have an invincible buckler of defense against
us, that their Popes are not Antichrist, nor the Beast; for that they are not
one only man, but many, yea very many, a whole Generatinn of men: how then can
they avoid, but that it is one and the same Antichrist which is typed by both
the Beasts? for if Antichrist typed by both, be indiuidually one, then of
necessity one and the same State is typed and signified by both the Beasts:
And if Antichrist (typed by the one Beast) sit at Rome; he cannot also sit at
Babylon, unless it be by turns; or that the fair Beast be divided into two
parts, the one to have his Throne at Rome, the other to have his seat at
Babylon: Let it then thus rest proved, that the present Papal state, is the
very Antichristian state, typed by the Beast.

This imputation, which is so grievous and heavy; howsoever Diverse learned
Authors of the Papists Church, have reputed the Papal State Antichristian and
of the Beast.
it may to some as halt betwixt God and Baal (for many such medleys these times
have) seem injurious; yet is it not much more, then that, which some ingenious
professors (of diverse points of Popery) have prophetically and covertly
heretofore delivered, to the everlasting confusion of that State: Bernard was
not far from the sight hereof (for to him in part Gods spirit had reueal^d
this truth) when as, in respect of the infinite abuses of the Papal state, he
cries out that the Churches of his times, Bernard l. 4. de considerat.
were rather folds for devils then for sheep; and in his sermon upon the
conversion of S. Paul, he complains; that Ser. 1. in Conuers. S. Pauli.
the whole Church of Christianity (so I interpret) seemed to have conspired
against God; yea so conspired, that in regard In Psalm. qui habitat. Psalm. 91.
thereof, he is bold thus to pronounce elsewhere: It remains (says he)
that the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition be revealed; not only the day,
but the very noone-deuill; which is not only transformed into an Angel of
light, but is extolled above all that is called God, or that is worshipped.
Thus he; where I cannot but note, that Bernard using the phrase of the
Apostle, that Antichrist (in regard of the excess of impieties and abominable
iniquities) was shortly to be revealed, shortly to be revealed; I cannot, I
say, but note how that Bernard did think, that Antichrist and his state, did
then work powerfully and rage tirannously; and where if not there, in that,
rather Court then Ber. Epist. 235. ad Curia Roma.
Church of Rome, unto which Bernard writing, dares to proclaim thus. In the
very house of God, we observe things horrible; These horrible things, which
Bernard observed in Rome, to us is revealed to be the very State of Antichrist
himself, and of his Admirers that worship him.

Was Peter de Aliaco, that venerable Prelate of Cambray, Aliac. de Reformat.
Eccles. oblat. Conc. Constant.
far from the sight of this truth, whereas he dares to affirm, that the
Church in his days, was come to that pass, that it deserved to be ruled
only by Reprobates? Was Gerson far off, when as he confidently affirms,
that (through papal Gerso. to. 1. de Conc. Gener. and vnius obed. q. 5.
abuses) the Churches of his times, were come to be, totas brutales, carnales,
monstrosas, nihil sapientes; Brutish, carnal, monstrous, understanding naught.
I interpret naught, that was good or pious. Was Ioannes Sarisburiensis far
off, Policatat. l. 6. c. 17.
when as he professes that the Church of Rome, was become a den of thieves;
the secret of the Sanctuary was become a Stew; yea, and that the Church of Rome
was become a stepmother Apud Auentinu^.
to all? I pass by many others, yea Synods of Popish Bishops in France and
Germany, in plain words terming the Holy Father Antichrist. How downright
is Bernard Morlanensis, calling the Pope, Ipsum Regem Babylonis, Morlane de
contempt. number. 3. apud vsherum.
the very King of Babylon;

Heu sua propria deputat omnia Rex Babylonis,
Out alac the King of Babylon reputes all for his own.
A complaint which Bernard used against the Holy Fathers. Lib. do consid.
clarissime.
But howsoever I pass by the testimony of these, and diverse others, yet I may
not omit the ingenuous confession of a venerable Priest of Burgandie. This man,
does so largely and punctually point out, and declare unto us, the
Antichristianitie of the Popish Church, that he seems to have had that
revealed unto him, which he durst not Circ. An. 1200.
commend to writing; even that very truth of Papal Antichristianitie, which to
us is made so manifest: Intuere, Honor. Augustodunensis. in dialog. -- in
Auctau^ Biblioth. Pat. ad Calcem. Edit. Paris. 1610. collect. ex vshero.
says he, Principes and ludices, in his posita est Bestiae Seeds, etc. Behold,
says he, the Princes and Judges, in them is set the Seat of the beast; They
are ever intent to evil, ever unsatiably occupied in businesses of Iniquity:
They do not only themselves scelerately; but they teach others so to do: They
sell holy things, they buy crimes, and their whole endeavor is, that they may
not go alone to hell. verte te ad Clerum and videbis in eis, bestia tentorium,
etc. Turn thy self to the Clergy, and in them thou A notable description of
the state of the Beast in the Papacy.
shall see, the very tent of the beast; They neglect the service of God, they
study earthly gain; their Priesthood they pollute by uncleanness, the people
they seduce by hypocrisy, they deny God by their wicked lives, they shake off
all Scriptures, which serve for salvation; by all means they set themselves as
snares, and a ruin to the people, whom (being blind themselves) they lead
blind to destruction. Contemplure and Monachorum Conciliabula, and videbis in
eis bestiae tabernacula, etc. Contemplate the Conuents or Conuenticles of
Monks, and in them thou shall see the Tabernacles of the beast, by their
fained profession (deriding God) they provoke his wrath; by their wicked life
and manners they trample down all regular discipline; by their habit they
deceive the world, and being themselves deceived, they deceive many: they are
entangled with worldly businesses, being slugish in the service of God: many of
the^ are given and addicted to luxury and gluttony; some of them rot in the
dirt and filth of uncleanness. Aspice etiam habitaculae monialium, and in eis
cernes bestiae preparatum thalamum, etc. Look upon the habitacles of Nuns; and
in them, see a bride-chamber prepared for the beast: These from their tender
age learn impudency, to the increase of their damnation, they draw unto them
many companions; they hasten to be covered with Vailes, that by such a means
they may let loose the bridles of luxury; they do prostitute themselves, in a
worse sort then any fornicators, and as an insatiable gulf, they are never
filled with the dung of uncleanness; These do ensnare the souls of young
men, and then they rejoice when they have ensnared many; and she reputes her
self worthy of the Palm of victory, who excels in villainy. Verte te ad
plebem reliquam, and in ea videbis bestiae effigiem, etc. Turn thee to the
other of the people, and in them thou shall see the very shape of the beast:
Priests they despise, they contemn to hear ought of God, they lead their
whole life in pride, boasting, and vanity, and are reprobate to every good
work. Also the unlearned multitude has the very Idol of the beast, the true
God they have not known, but with all devotion they serve the God of their
belly; they are carried with various desires of the flesh, and in every respect
they lead a beast-like life. Thus he (with more to like purpose) describes
the beastialitie of the Papal State. Can you desire more, or will you require
more?

And thus have we, by euidencie of Scripture, and other venerable authority,
fastened vnuoydably the Antichristian State and Government upon the Pope of
Rome, and his purpured brethren; and thereby also have I showed the vanity of
his ambitious claim of supremacy over this Church and Kingdom; for no one
point is more Antichristian in him, then his usurped claim of supremacy; and
for my part, I am of opinion (and I dare undertake very probably to confirm
the same) that whosoever denies the Pope to be Antichrist (that son of
perdition, who 2 Thessalonians. 2.
sits in the Temple of God) may justly be suspected, to favor his most
ambitious claim of supremacy; this I mean of those who understand
themselves, and the extent of these terms; the Papal State, Antichristianity,
Papal Supremacy, Roman Monarchy, etc.

For further confirmation, of this our principal point in hand, I could
produce more proof, or Grounds and Principles of reasons, from out of Saint
Paul's Epistles to the Thessalonians; to Timothy and to the Romans; yea, from
out of the Epistles of Saint Peter, and holy Jude; and from out of Daniel:
more, there are very few Prophecies in the Scriptures of God, or in the
approved predictions of any of the servants of God (concerning Antichrist and
his Government) which may not most probably (if not evidently) be settled upon
the Papal State, either the head or members thereof: but that which has been
delivered, may suffice for the euidencie of this truth, especially with How
Neutralizers betray Gods truth.
sincere professors: those I mean which are not Neutralizers (if any such
hear me this day) Neutralizers, I say, or Interim-ists; such as dare secretly
mutter and mussitate; Rome and the Reformed Churches agree in the substance of
Religion, that there is no fundamental difference betwixt them and us; and
again that they teach no Heresies; so that they altogether with us make up but
one mystical body of Christ. O the vanity of these men! against the Spirit of
God, thus to dream of the uniting of Sion and Babylon; of Egypt, and
Jerusalem; of Christ, and Antichrist; of light, and darkness; of God, and
Beliall: The 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Spirit of God has foretold, that Christ shall in the brightness of his
coming, by the Spirit of his mouth, (that is, by the preaching of the Gospel
in the days of reformation, when that of the Revelation shall be
accomplished, Oportet te iterum, etc. Thou must again prophecy to Nations,
Peoples, Apoc. 10. 11.
Tongues, and many Kings.) the Spirit of God has (I say) foretold, that
Antichrist shall be dissipated and ruinated, by No union betwixt the State of
the Beast and true Christianity.
the brightness of his coming, and the Spirit of his mouth: and yet these men
dare dream of Christian union, and brotherly consociation betwixt those, whom
the Spirit of God does thus disunite and dissociate; here, by a perfect hate,
dividing each from other, and in the world to come by casting the Beast and his
Admirers, into the lake of ever burning fire and brimstone; and by taking up to
the supper and joys of the Lamb, those, who have here happily followed the
Lamb in all things, and have also suffered for the testimony of Jesus the Lamb.

Now come we to declare, how the Papal State compels all her followers, to
take certain impious marks in their hands, and likewise on their foreheads:
without which they may not be allowed, to buy or sell, in that State.

If any one receive the mark of the Beast, either in his hand or in his
forehead.
FOr declaration of this point (according to my use, and that I may the better
be understood) I suppose these 1. Suppos.
things: First, that which I have already euinced, by the euidencie of Reason,
and the ioynt-consent of Antiquity, The mark and character of the Beast, not
to be taken for any beast-like mark, by inustion or by incision.
that these marks and Characters of the Beast, are not to be taken for any
corporal signs, made either by the inustion of some hot-iron, or by the
incision of some sharp instrument, in the hands, or upon the foreheads of
Antichrists followers: no, no, the same is to be understood of some flagitious
mystical ceremonies, taken in the hands, or on the foreheads: whereby the
Takers are marked for devoted Servants of the Beast. Secondly I suppose, that
no 2. Suppos.
State or Government, Antichristian or Heretical, Arrian, Nestorian, Pelagian,
or of any other form whatsoever, since the days of Christ, did ever cause and
compel their followers to take any special marks (specializing their
heresies or infidelities) real or ceremonial in their hands, or on their
foreheads (thereby to profess a Soule-allegiance to the whole form of their
sect and superstition) save only the Papal State.

Thirdly I suppose, that whereas it is said that those, 3. Suppos.
who would not receive such marks of the Beast, should Without the Beasts
mark no commerce.
have no power, either to buy or to sell in the Antichristian State; that the
same must be understood of a total exclusion from all manner of communion and
society in that wicked State: where that State does prevail and is not
limited nor abridged, by the moderation of any Temporal power.

Fourthly, I suppose, that this total exclusion from all 4. Suppos No buying,
nor selling in the Papal State, without taking of marks.
manner of buying and selling, is so punctually completed in the Papal State
(yea in all Popish Kingdoms, where the Inquisition is on foot) against all
those, who receive not certain marks of profession and obedience from that
State, that nothing can be more assured, or more manifest.

These things supposed, how manifest is it, that all Professors of the Papal
State, do receive in their hands, or on their foreheads, some ceremonious
mark of obedience and profession, which if they contemn to do, they are
reputed in that state as Of-casts, not to be admitted to All in the Papal
State receive marks.
any manner of commerce and communion: Are they not all, or ought they not all
(at least in purpose of mind) to be anointed and marked on their foreheads,
with oil consecrated (I should say execrated) by Papal Charms? whereby the
same is become so sacred, that the very presence Marks in the forehead.
and efficacy of the holy Ghost is said, and by them is believed to be
therein: so sacred, that the hands of those, who are anointed therewith on
their foreheads, may not presume to touch the said oil, or their own bare
foreheads so anointed; so sacred, that the foreheads of the anointed, Foreheads
marked must be bound with linen fillets.
after the same inunction, are for certain days to be covered with linen
bands fastened thereunto, that by such means the sacred oil may be defended
from the injury of wind, dust, and weather, and may by such continuance make
better impression, and pierce into the forehead (such is the vanity of these
fooleries, and impieties:) so sacred, that the Popish Bishop anointing the
forehead, calls it and professes it to be, Chrisma salutis, The very crisme
Their manner and form of marking
of salvation, I sign thee (says the Bishop) with the sign of the Cross;
and I confirm thee, with the crisme of salvation, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

And may we not here justly exclaim against such sacriledgies? A just
innection against marking used in Papacy.
thus to call a vile creature, the very Crisme of salvation! O blasphemy
against the God of heaven! not Christ alone by his blood, but the Beast by his
charmed Chrisme, does and can give salvation? O presumptuous men, who without
any command or institution from God, dare thus sacrilegiously presume, to
annexe the thrice sacred name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (and this
in a sacramental manner for remission of sins) The marks of the Papacy worthy
to be execrated.
to a vile and mean creature! Who that has ears to hear, eyes to see, and a
heart to conceive, does not observe this flagitious cerermony, to be an
Antichristian mark taken in the forehead? A mark, not only because by a
superstitious and transeunt motion, signed by the thumb or finger on the
forehead: not only a mark, because the Chrisme is to be fast bound to the
forehead, so that if it were possible it might make some real impression in
the flesh: but a mark most properly, because in that state, no man is reputed
a perfect comsummate Christian without the same: a mark, because by the order
of that state, no Rituall. Roman. in Ceremo de Baptismo, fine.
man is to be admitted to receive the body of Christ, before he have the
same. Finally, a mark most properly, because in that state, it is an Article
of Faith, that by the Cone. Trident.
virtue of the outward crismaticall unction, there is imprinted and ingraued in
the very souls of the anointed, an indeleble spiritual character: A mark
then it is, and by it they profess obedience to the Papal State, and can we
require more for the clearing of this point? I might here note others, yea and
show how they give marks on the foreheads, or crown of the head, or both, in
their very administration of the Sacrament of Baptism it self; not in regard
of their baptising in the usual form, In the Impious marking in their
administration of Baptism.
name of the Father, etc. but for that, they (holding natural water not to be
sufficient, nor fit matter of the Sacrament) do make a magical and
superstitious commixtion of water and oils together: first of the holy oil
alone (so they call it) secondly, of crisme alone; and thirdly of crisme and
oil together. Thus they abuse the sacred Sacrament of Christ, and with such
charmed and commixt waters and oils, they mark all their followers in their
foreheads.

Concerning the Papalls taking of the Beasts mark in their hands, I first
pass by (because it is not generally of them all) the superstitious unction,
which their Deacons and Priests (at their taking of Orders) do take into their
Matt. 24. 24.
hands; in regard whereof it may be probably thought that Christ is pleased
(if we stand to the plain litte^all sense) to have fore-prophecied against
them, under the name of (...), false Christ's, false anointed-ones: This mark
(I say) I pass by. The first mark that I note, is that their taking in their
hands (for it is common to them all) the mark of their superstitious wooden
or silver I call them blasphemous Agnusdeyes, for that they hold the same,
Depellere omne malignu^, to drive away all evil, yea, Peccatu^ frangere, etc.
to break and destroy sin, as the blood of Christ, yea there is no good which
they they do ^ot bring, no evil which they do not remove; witness those
known verses. Balsamus and munda cera cum Crismatis vnda, etc. Marks in the
Papacy, and the same also Antichristian.
Crosses, their Grains, Beads, Medalls; but above all, their most blasphemous
Agnus-deyes (all marks, because marked with some superstitious form or other)
whereby they acknowledge, a sacred Sovereignty in the Pope and his
Antichristian State: a Sovereignty on earth, by the use of such superstitious
trumpery to remit all sins, with a most full and plenary pardon; a Sovereignty
in the heavens, by the virtue of such superstitious ceremonies to open heaven
gates, therein to admit all the superstitious receivers of such marks: A
Sovereignty within the bowels of the earth, thence to fetch out, from out of
their imagined Purgatory poor patient souls, more or fewer, according as it
shall seem expedient, to the superstitious Blesser, or rather Charmer of the
said superstitious marks: And may not these be justly reputed Antichristian
marks? marks, because really such; marks, because mystically such;
distinguishing betwixt Popery and Christianity? Antichristian, for what more
Antichristian, then to tie remission of sins, the opening of heavens gates, the
delivering of poor patient souls out of Purgatory, to the superstitious use
of such contemptible creatures? having no other virtue of sanctification in
them, then what the charm of Papal breath may presume to have given them? O
impiety of impieties! a man dying, if he have one of these Papal marks of
grains, or meddals, etc. in his hands, if he can but say, Jesus in his
heart, he shall assuredly have a plenary pardon Papal blasphemy. Idulgent.
variae concess. Colleg. Angl. and Imperatr nuper. pro laborantibus apud Indos.
and remission of all his sins: but if he want, or have no such grain, then
no such assurance: so they rather blaspheme, then affirm.

Again, another Antichristian mark taken in the hand, in the Papal State, I
note this: That then, when those of that Synagogue, are made Catechumens (which
to speak ordinarily they must be before they be baptized) the Priest must
put into their right hands the sign of the Cross; which sign or mark of
the Cross, I do not by The Cross superslitiously abused a mark of the
Papal State.
any means call Antichristian, for so much as it is a sign commemoratiue or
remembrance of Christ's Cross; but I do boldly and confidently call it
Antichristian, as it is abused by them in that state: for they most
flagitiously pretend; that the putting of the said mark, or sign into the
hands of those that are to be baptized, is a necessary preparation for the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the due receiving of the same; and again, for that
by that very sign and mark so made, they promise defense against Satan,
perseverance in faith, and after death life everlasting: Ordo Romanu (...)endu^
Catechumenum This mark, such as received it not being baptized Infants, do
afterward take it, yea some at the state of men and women. A maine objection
answered.
for thus says the Priest, Trade tibi signaculum Domini nostri Jesus Christi in
manu tua dextra, vt te signs and aduersam partem repellas, and in fide
Catholica permaneas, and habeas vitam aeternam, and viuas in secula seculorum.
I deliver thee in thy right hand, this sign of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
thou may sign thy self, drive away the adverse part (the devil) that thou
may persevere in the Catholic faith, may have life everlasting, and live
for ever and ever.

Here (to answer an objection by the way) we may not think, that the Papal
State, may be cleared from the just imputation of Antichristianisme, for that
together with their vain unctions, and charmed oils, in their pretended
Sacraments, or Sacramentalls (as they speak) they do join the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; or for that they do call on the mercies of God;
or for that they do withal use the sign of the Cross: no, no, this will not
serve the turn; for it is most certain (by express testimony of Scripture)
that the Antichristian State, must be a mystery, not an impudency of
Iniquity: A State so ruling 2 Thessalonians 2.
and powerfully working miracles, even in the Temple The Papal State
Antichristian, though they call upon the blessed Trinity, and the mercies of
God in their superstitious rites.
of God; that the very Elect will be in danger to be seduced: A circumstance
so plain, and so important; that to me, they seem no less then to dote, who
affirm that Antichrist shall deny the Lord Jesus Christ; for what danger of
seducing to the Elect, where Christ is flatly denied? No, no, the Antichristian
State will pretend to be the very horns of the Lamb; a very Vice-gerency
instead of Christ, and such in truth is the Genuine signification of the word
See Stephanus, and all the Greek Lexicons. See Matthew. 17. 27. and Matthew. 20.
Luke 11. 11.
(...), for, according as the Preposition (...) may be taken, it signifies
both one in the stead and lieu of Christ, and also one most opposite to Christ;
and such a one indeed shall Antichrist be: He shall pretend to come in the name
of Christ, and yet shall he be most opposite to Christ, even to the utter
perdition of the true followers of Christ. The Magicians, Witches, and
Coniurers call upon the name of God, use Crosses, both material and transions,
yea the Papal Artotheos God in bread.


Though the Magicians (as it is most certain) though Witches (as it is a thing
known) though Coniurers (a thing likewise clear) do use to call upon the
name of God, and the holy Trinity in their abominable practices; though they
use frequent and often crossings, yea can do (in some business) nothing
without crosses; though they have many material crosses, sacred oils,
hallowed waters, yea the Papalls own Christ in the Hosts; which they do use
and abuse in their most execrable exercises: yet I hope, no Intelligent Papal
will deny, but that such their practices may be justly called abominable,
flagitious, and of the devil: though in them (I say) they use often crosses,
crossings, with recrossings; yea, with adoring of their consecrated Hosts, and
callings upon the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of the holy
Angels, and of the blessed Virgin her self: Why then, shall we be doubtful
to call these practices of Popery Antichristian, though they adioyne to their
fopperies and impieties, the Invocation of the name of God, and though they use
therein the sign of Cross: The sign of the Cross may be used as a laudable
ceremony, if void of scandal.
the which, though it may be used as a laudable ceremony (where just scandal
is not given) yet, as it is abused in the Papal State, I boldly call it (and
such like) Antichristian, and marks of the Beast: Antichristian, because
delivered (in the name of Christ) as efficacious for temission of sin, for
increase of grace, for defense against Satan; having for the same end, no
institution nor command from Christ: Antichristian, because persuading us to
look for remission of sins, otherwise then by the blood of Christ:
Antichristian, because drawing our confidence from Christ, and placing it in
the servile use of contemptible creatures: Concluding this point, I answer an
objection, which thus may be made. The mark of Antichrist, is but one, but
The Answer.
then, can they be the mark of the Beast, Except many may be thought to
stand for one? I answer, True it is, that the word of the Scripture, is here
delivered in the singular How the marks of the Beast, both many, and one.
number; mark, not marks: yet, for that the said Scripture affirms, that it
is to be taken in hand and forehead (either jointly or severally) it
insinuates the marks to be more then one; and this is agreeing to the
interpretation See Lira alios.
of diverse of the Ancient, who by the mark in the forehead, understand open
profession by mouth; by the mark in the hand some public act of obedience, or
some profession by oath, by laying down, lifting up, or putting forth hand or
finger: But what need we to respect the Authority of men, when as the
Scripture it self tells us (explicating it self) that no man shall be
allowed Apoc. 13.
either to buy or sell, who has not either the mark of the The marks of the
Beast more then one,
Beast, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name: Lo here, not one,
but three; except we shall not distinguish that, which the Holy Ghost has so
distinguishedly delivered unto us: or that the name of the Beast, or the number
of his name, shall not be expressed by some ceremonious mystical mark, either
of denomination or profession; of denomination to be called Latins or Romans,
after the number of the name; or by profession to profess the Italike Church,
or to be called Papists after the Papists the proper and vnrefusable name of
our Adversaries.
name of the Beast, Papa, or some such like. I say Papists after the name of
the Beast: for since the decree of Gregory the seventh, clear it is that Papa
is arrogated as a name peculiar to the Pope, and does significantly express
the Dictatus Greg. 7. apud Baron. ann. 1175.
whole state of Papacy: after which, the professors of that State (because by
faith they believe the Pope to be the visible Head thereof) ought not to refuse
(if they understand themselves) to be called Papists, or Papalls, no they
ought rather to glory in the same name: Howsoever of this, clear it is, that
the Admirers of Antichrist, may have more marks then one, and yet these more
(whether two or three) may be called one; because they agree in one analogicall
reason and respect, of appertaining and belonging to the Beast, and this is
(without question) the sense and intent of the Holy Ghost, that no man shall
be permitted either to buy or sell, in the Antichristian state; who by some
public mark of profession, or obedience, shall not subject himself (in a
very Soule-subiection) unto the same.

Now come we in few words to declare, how that no man who wants such marks,
as are above expressed, No man permitt^d to buy or sell in the papal state, who
wants the former marks, or some of them
may be permitted either to buy or sell (so our Prophet speaks) within the
State of the Popes Dominions. A most fearful calamity, denoting an
universal Apostacy and defection; designing also the state of the true
Church, for the whole time of Antichrists reign, to be obscure, unvisible, and
vnconspicuous, as being not allowed any manner The true Church inconspicuous in
the time of Antichrist.
of commerce or society at all: what more apparent? And is not this very thing
(to dispatch all in a word) the very selfe-yoke of the Exactor, and of that
oppression, which by the Pope, i^ laid upon all Persons whatsoever, who refuse
or contemn the marks above expressed? Let our Adversaries (a most fit name
for the Papists) shewvs, if they can, any State, Kingdom, or Commonwealth
(where the Papal Canons are not limited, or moderated by the Temporal
Magistrate) in which any man or person, may be permitted either to buy or sell
(that is, to have any peaceable commerce or society at all) who refuses or
contemns the aboue-expressed marks.

What else, but refusal and contempt of the said marks (since the absolute
reign of Popes, in the Temple of decayed Christianity) has caused so many
commotions and subuersions of States and Kingdoms? What else, has been the
Lake and Head of so many fearful hideous massacres? of such immane
disquisitions, and Inquisitions? Refusal of Papal marks, cause of infinite
calamities and oppressions
of such merciless stranglings and burnings? of so many rebellions, and
insurrections? what else has brought forth such an infinity of thunderclaps?
of Interdicts and Excommunications? of threats and depositions? of
imprisonments and proscriptions, what tongue can number them all? what heart
can sufficiently deplore them all? Present examples hereof we have, so that he
is a plain stupid, who observes them not; he deserves not the name of a
Christian, who condoles them not; neither is he worthy the name of a zealous
Christian, who to the utmost of his power, withstands them not. And thus have
I, by many reasons, suppositions, and demonstrations, confirmed and delivered,
that, which his most Excellent Majesty has in a few lines most solidly and
Christianly objected, in his most Christian Praemonition (a praemonition worthy
eternal memory) to Christian Princes; to weet, That the Papal State, is the
very State of the Beast: My interpretation and exposition then, of this Text,
in this place, and at this time, may not come unwelcome, which comes
countenanced, by such an Authority; Great is Truth, and is will prevail. And
so a few words of our last Part, the dreadful threat, and denuntiation of Gods
wrath, against the followers and Admirers of the Beast.

The same shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath, which is Third Part.
powered out without mixture into the cup of his indignation. And he shall be
termented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever
and ever.
HEnce-from we must learn a lesson of instruction, to lay to our hearts, and
to fix in our remembrances, this fearful denuntiation of the Angel, against
all those, who shall either worship the Beast, or the Image of the Beast; or
who shall receive the Beasts mark, either in their hands, or on their
foreheads; that they shall drink, of the wine of Gods wrath, which is powered
out without mixture, in the cup of his indignation; and that they shall be
termented for ever, with fire and brimstone, in presence of the holy Angels,
and of the Lamb. And who is not awaked? moved? yea, astonished to hear such a
thunder? to observe such a storm? A thunder, arising from the breath of
Angels, of the Lamb, and of Gods own mouth: A storm, not of fire alone, but
of fire and brimstone; not a nights-storme, but an euer-during storm, powered
from out of the cup, of Gods heauiest wrath and indignation: What more
dreadful; what more to be dreaded? O religious cares, and Christian hearts,
let the fear of these things, teach us to put on a spirit of resolution and
constancy, against the charms and deceitful sorceries, of all the subdolous
Hellens, Sinons, and Circeyes Great warines to be vsea against the Sinons of
Antichrist.
of Aniichrist: Those, who are of ordinary rank, it may be thought
sufficient for them (for the avoiding of eternal damnation) that they go out
of Babylon; that they adore neither the Beast, nor the Image of the Beast;
neither do take his mark in their hands, or upon their foreheads: but for
others, who sway and bear Staves and Swords of Magistracy; who sit in the
Chair of Prelacy, if these ( God having put into their hearts to have
preached, and to have written against the Whore: if these do not endeavor (to
the utmost of their powers) to make her desolate? What else shall remain for
them, but a fearful expectation of Gods just judgment, together with the
Beast, to drink of the Cup of his indignation and of the dregs of the Violls
of his fury?

I say not this, as though any Christian Magistrate may not suffer any
peaceable professors of the Antichristian State to live (yea to live
peaceably) within the precincts of his dominions: not so; for we cannot but
think, that How worshippers of the Beast may be tolerated
as their are stratagems in war, so also that there are policies in. State: A
wise General will be content, to lose some small quarter of his Army, so the
day may be his: A wise and Christian Sovereign, may in wisdom give way a
little in one place, so that Christ may gain more else where; especially, if
there may be any probable hope, that Christ may be there preached, where
(through the tyranny of Inquisition) he is scarce yet truly heard of.
Constantius the Emperor (being moved thereunto by the Arrian Bishops) required
of Athanasius, that the Arrians might be allowed Aremarkeable answer of
Athanasius.
one Church at Alexandria: to which proposition, that ever renowned Prelate,
made this answer: Most willing (said he) upon this condition, that the
Orthodoxe may have one Church allowed them at Antioch: which his answer, though
Baron. Anal. An^. Do. 349. n. 15.
it seemed most reasonable and equal to the Emperor; yet the Arrians, would
none of it; so bad a cause did they maintain, and so loath were they to measure
to others, with that measure: wherewith they would have others measure unto
themselves.

And who is he, if he be persuaded that truth is with us Our Adversaries dare
not allow one Church for two; not one Minister for three Popish Priests.
(as most certain it is) and that also in the end, truth must and will
prevail? Who I say is he, who would not wish with his whole heart that in all
Cities and Towns, of any Protestant States and Kingdoms, that our Adversaries
the Papists, might be allowed two Churches and two Priests, upon this
condition, that in like Cities and Towns (number for number) of any Popish
Kingdoms, or States; the Protestants and sincere Christians might be allowed
but one Church and one Minister. This option, though it may seem unequal (two
against one) for as it is in the proverb, Not Hercules against two; yet sure I
am (so great ever is the diffidence of Heretics, and fear of those that are
false) that they will never give their assent thereunto: which being so, what a
vanity were it to think, that our Adversaries, shall ever be able to
prevail by the way of truth? No, no, where they have not the means of
promotion, nor teeth of Leuiatham, and power of the Sword in their hands, there
they are very feeble and weak; except it be upon some wanton and instable
persons (laden with sin) who think that to be a most facill religion, which
teaches dames and maids, men and boys, to disburden their loaded souls into
a Priests lap; to confess and to be absolved, and then all to be cock-sure:
for, say they, the Priests sentence on earth, is also ratified in the very
heavens; yea, though the sentence be given, wel-nigh in the very heat of the
sin; yea more, in the gilt of cankeriated and seared consciences, prepared
and ready to return (as the dog to the vomit) to the same sin again.

How vain to think, that our Adversaries, shall be ever able to prevail by
the way of truth, when as their fingers never cease (by additions, detractions,
and immutations) to corrupt (they say to correct) Ancient Authors? when as they
dare not suffer any of theirs to read any of our See Azor. institut. moral. p.
1. l. 8. c. 16.
books? but curse with bell, book, and candle, all those who (without
special license) shall attempt the same? And though they may be thought to
deal discreetly, in Manifest timidity in the Popes, not to allow the reading
of any of our books, no not to their Prelates.
that they do not indifferently permit the reading of our books, to the
promiscuous multitude; yet that they should not allow their learned Laics;
more, their learned Priests; more, their learned Pastors; more, their Doctors
and Prelates to read our books? What else can be the cause, but a conscience
of their own weakness? On the contrary, Truth goes on so confident (like a
Lion) and courageous, in all Protestant States, or most of them; that welnigh
an infinity of Popish Authors are therein permitted; and yet, notwithstanding
such an infinite liberty (which How Popery tolerated, and yet to little effect.
in a true sense may be called a toleration of Popery, even in her cunningest
and readiest mystery of deceit) yet how few, of our learned, judicious, and
understanding professors, are by such means drawn away from us to them?
blasts and puffs of discontent, do indeed drive away some from us: But, should
such a liberty of our books be allowed amongst them, it were not possible,
but that the tenth (if not more) of theirs (both learned and judicious) would
repair to us: And is not this, an argument Ostensine, that truth is with us,
and not with them? And again, that their books, though tolerated amongst us
(to use Chrysostoms phrase) do rather confirm and settle solid minds, then
move or shake them. Chrysostom in 1. ad Corinth.


Thus much have we noted of their books tolerated: but (to add a few words
for your instruction) where (in any State Protestant) it may happen any
Ignatians, or other Popish Priests and Friars to be tolerated, or conniued at;
what is the primest and onlyest weapon and means, by which they use to
negotiate Souls, and to draw seduced fools, into their net of perdition:
surely, it is fraudulent latencie and seerecie; to work in secret, not
suffering them, whom they assault (if possibly they may be so persuaded) to
make known their attempts, to any of our learned Doctors and Pastors. Carbo,
contesting and opposing The fraudulent endeavors of Popish Friars, etc.
against Silla his sworn enemy, was wonted to affirm of him: That in Silla
he fought both against Fox and Lion, yet that he feared more from the Fox,
then from the Lion: Our Contestation and opposition, being against these our
most devoted Enemies ( Roman Sillas) we are in them to oppose both against Fox
and Lion, yet (in my opinion) we may justly fear, more from the Fox, then from
the Lion: I mean, more from their crafty subtilty; then from their open
hostility and imm^nitie. Amongst all the subtilties of the Fox, his hole is
the primest; Amongst all the subtilties of the Ignatians, Friars and Monks
(where the public face of religion is nor theirs, but they may only happen to
be tolerated or conniued at) no one Their greatest subtilty is Latency.
subtlety is like to that of their Latencie: who, as they (there) desire to go
disguised in their habits, and to walk in many colors, and forms saving
their own: yea, and had rather be conniued at, to go so disguised, then to
be tolerated, to go in their own habits themselves ( for being subdolo^^
workmen, they shun nothing more then the light:) so above all things they
endeavor, that the persuasions which they use, to draw any from the truth, may
be secret, latent, and not known: If then, the wisdom of any Protestant
State, should (for some high respects) think it A necessary advice.
meet to tolerate, or to conniue, at such manner of persons; then, above any
cautions to be used, against their subtilties, diuices, and circumuentions; I
dare be bold to give this, and (in the fear of God, and in his presence) to
charge you with it; that so soon as any of you may be assaulted, with their
secret and sugared persuasions (to forsake Gods truth, and to embrace their
Idolo-many) that forthwith, and with all speed, ye make the same known, to
some learned and discreet Divines: who, by the rule of reason, by the
Authority of venerable Antiquity; but, above all, by the sacred Word of God
(the rule of our Faith) may prearme you against all their superstitious, and
sophistical vanities: I said before, discreet and learned Ministers; for above
all things those who are so assaulted, must beware of those men, who are
Semi-Admirers after the Beast, I mean such, who (who having put on the
Dalmatian Apostatizing spirit, or at least, are beginning to put on the same)
do hold that the Papal Church, is the true Church of Christ; and that the
obstinate Papists, so living and dying (without repentance) are in the state of
salvation: Further, who affirm and dare to dogmatize, that there are no
Heresies publicly defended and maintained in the Papal State; and that there
is no fundamental difference, betwixt the Roman and the Reformed Churches: and
yet, lest these Neutralizers should be taken in their hypocrisy, they will
fairly mince the matter, and refine their words: For, they will acknowledge
the Roman Church to be (O Egregious) aliqualiter corruptam, in somewhat
corrupted: These, these Sinoes ye must by all means avoid, for howsoever they
seem to be ours, yet they are not in truth of us; but are ready to go out of
us, driven by any blast of discontent, or allured by any gayle of promotion,
and that we have now more such amongst us, it arises from the vanity of
false hopes and expectations. And yet let me not here be mistaken, in that
which I so resolutely affirm against the salvation of Papists; or of their
being in the state of salvation: This I affirm, not of or against all, but
against wilful unrelenting and unrepentant Papists. For no doubt can be made,
but that in the Popish Church, there are and have bin diverse (which if we will
speak properly, and according to the nature of terms, we may not call
Papists) who (ignorant of the altitudes of the Beast, or not obstinately wedded
thereunto) are in the way of salvation: but I say of such, that they are in the
Popish Church, though not of the Popish Church, and that they suck only, the
good which is in that Church; but have a reluctancie against the errors and
superstitions; against the immanities and presumptions of the Beast, and of his
State. If any one ask me, how this can be so: my answer is very facill; for
that in that Church, there is the Creed of the Apostles; there are How
salvation may be thought to be had in the Popish Church.
also the holy Scriptures (though partly corrupted) why then shall it be
thought impossible, for many in that Church, to profess the holy Creed in its
true sense? and to embrace so much of the holy Scriptures (in the true sense)
as is necessary to salvation? And as for practice, most certain it is, that
diverse in that Church, neither adore their Images; nor their God in bread; nor
greatly heed praying to Saints; nor the Popes Supremacy; nor Purgatory
flashes, with such like: and as for Papal Pardons, Grains, Meddalls,
Agnus-deyes (with such like trumperies) they do both scorn and detest them,
though for fear of the Pharisees they dare not so profess. Of these and such
like, I will confidently think and affirm, that they may so fairly be in
the way of salvation, as Nicodemus was, John 3. 2.
whilst he came to Christ by stealth in the night; and as some of those
thousands were (of whom God to Elias) who had not bowed their knees to Baall.

This point, I might further enlarge, and more fully confirm, but time permits
me not so to do; yet time, (by your Christian patience and leave) shall yield
me liberty, to give a necessary instruction unto such (if any such hear me
this day) who trembling and fearing where there is no just cause of fear, do
fearfully presage, and fear to themselves, that there may happen (and also
that the same is at hand) some general fall, and change from Religion A vain
fear of change of religion, convicted and reproved.
to Popery, in this renowned State and Kingdom. Against the vanity of this
conceit (though I nothing doubt, but that there are, who endeavor such a fall,
and most perfidiously endeavor it) let me thus confirm and arm you: That such
a thing is Morally, Royally, and Divinely impossible: First, it is morally
impossible, that a Kingdom, so settled and established in Christ's Gospel,
should ever endure to behold, the puppit plays of Popery; had the truth bin so
established in King Edwards reign, as now (by Gods favor) it is; we should
not have seen, nor heard of so sudden a change, as was made presently after:
but what was the cause thereof, the Calves of Bethel, were then fresh in
remembrance; the Beast then but entered into her consumption with us, the words
of God there and then are fulfilled, when and where her flesh is eaten, and her
bones consumed. The Gospel was indeed planted in King Edwards days, but not
watered before Queen Mary's Tragedy. The good seed was cast into the ground,
but it rooted not, till it was watered (and after it was watered) with the
blood of Saints; ever since, it has flourished as the Palm, and shall still
(God saying Amen) flourish, maugre the malice of Satan, and of Antichrist.

Cast your eyes round about this present World, reflect your memories into
Generations, al Generations past; and show me (if you can) any State or
Kingdom, which having once fully (fully I say) shaken off the Papal yoke, by a
perfect reformation, did ever setledly receive the same again? How many
pretended unions of subjection (above half a score) have been made, betwixt
the Church of Rome, and those of Constantinople, and of the East? and as yet
they have not setledly agreed, neither will they ever so do. The Muscouian
Empire, which is now of the Greeks belief, had it not rather fall into the
hands of the Turk, then into the Bears Feet? And is not such the resolved
affection of most Reformed professions and States? Not for any love they bear
to the Turkish profession (as Turce-Papizing Reinolds calumniously Coluino,
turc. lib. 7.
inferres and deduces) but for that, there is a Greater Clemency in Turk,
then in Pope; the later, incessantly persecuting with fire and faggot all
reformed Professors, whom the other Clemently tolerates, and respectively
protects: as likewise he does those of the Papal faith, who are tolerated
likewise (if peaceable) within the bounds of his Empire. And to conclude this
point, where the light of the Gospel has been thoroughly preached; and the
puppet-like vanities of Popery have been lively displaied, it is not possible
that any Intelligent or understanding Nation, should be brought to creep to a
wodden stock, or to fall down and adore, (...), a God of bread, which after
digestion, is to be cast in secessum, into the privy, or which locked up in a
Tabernacle may be knawen by a Mouse or Rat, or consumed by Worms, etc. Thus is
alteration and change of religion, in this renowned State (and what Statesman
knows not so much?) showed to be morally impossible: more might be added, I
said in the second place, that such a change was divinely impossible; for how
else (to dispute probably, and why may not such be the sense of the Holy
Ghost?) shall the words of God be accomplished, that those States and
Kingdoms, Apoc. 17. 1^.
which first loved the whore, should afterward hate her, yea so hate her, that
they should eat her flesh, and consume her bones with fire: and what is this
else but to make her desolate, without any hope of ever recovering her former
state again? The Scripture speaks thus of all the haters of the whore;
haters of the whore (I say) such as make a perfect reformation, not in part,
but wholly; not in substance only, but in ceremonies likewise; such as eat and
devour the delicacy of all her superstitious rags, and consume the very body
of her errors and heresies; the Scripture affirming this of all the haters of
the Whore, may we not with great probability apply and assume the same to this
renowned State and Church, which is become as an Assyle and Sanctuary to all
sincere haters of the Whore, to all such whom the Tyranny of the Whore and her
Confederates may force into exile; and to all such whom the force of Truth may
effectually move to abandon all subjection to the Whore. The Word of God is
gone forth; and by what is already happily begun, let us be most assured,
that her utter ruin will in time be accomplished: what? if our disguised
Adversaries vaunt (to their deceived Dames and deluded wantons) the contrary?
what though our Lukewarm Laodiceanizers (halters betwixt Baal and God) dream
to the contrary; gaping after preferments by such means, which are never
likely to come to pass? what? though the Couert-chaffe of Communion-Recusants,
do now show it self to be Church-Recusants; dreaming after we cannot tell
what? what though there be such shadows of vain hopes? The words of God must
be accomplished, and ere it be long (hypocrites in all States and Churches,
being to their shame discovered) The man of sin, and son of perdition will
be brought to utter ruin and Change of Religion royally impossible.
perdition: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. I said in the third place, that such
a change was Royally impossible: For how possible, that our Religious David,
should not be Semper Idem, always the same? How possible but he, who has
gone in and out before us in this holy war? Yea more, Cecinit classicum, has
sounded out his most Christian and learned Alarm; wherein the Papal State is
most lively and Praemonit. reg.
learnedly declared to be the State of the Beast: and wherein there is more
learning and Divinity, then can justly be refuted by all Papal Rabbis; I
add, or by any of their dissembling Favorites: How possible (I say) that he,
who has so happily begun in the spirit, should end in the flesh? Shall any
of us, dare to be so irreuerent against Majesty (so Christian a Majesty) as
once to think, that he will do ought against the knowledge of his own
conscience? (a sin against the Holy Ghost) or that he will suffer, that truth
to be imprisoned, impugned, which his Royal Pen has so learnedly and
Christianly defended and maintained? Far be all such surmises from the hearts
and tongues of all dutiful Subjects, who also ever will (as they ought)
interpret, Arcana Regni, Secrets of State, in the best sense. But if, we will
not persuade our selves, that such a change is Royally impossible; in regard we
have a Religious, Learned and Resolved Prince, in all points of Christianity;
yet let us be persuaded, that such an alteration is Royally impossible, in
respect we have an Intelligent, and a Politic wise Prince: for who cannot but
know, that with such a change he must put on, lugum exactoris, The very yoke of
the Exactour, and that he and his Successors, must of Absolute Monarchs, and
Sovereign Commanders, become blind deuouts to Papal Breefs, and liege
Servants also to the Sovereign Lord (of all Lords) the Pope. For in Papistry
it is an Axiom, that the Nation and Kingdom, which shall not serve the Pope,
shall, must, and ought to perish. Let us then rest resolved, that such a change
is altogether both unlikely and impossible: Let us cast off such fears, and
rather take heed that our Adversaries do not think that we have conceived any
such fear; for upon such conceptions, they will begin new stratagems, and will
think the day to be half theirs, if they once apprehend that we are afraid of
their prevailing.

I sum up this my discourse, and advise thus; let every soul here present,
fear, lest through demerits of our sins, we may be drawn from the stedfastnes
of our profession; let us also in deuor by force of truth, and firmness of
persuasions, to draw the Papist from the Idols of his Heresies, Superstitions,
and Impieties. Ulysses his followers stopped their A necessary caveat.
ears, so to escape the charms of Circes; Ulysses himself (his ears being
unstopped) binds himself fast to the Mast of the Ship, that so he might escape
her veneficious charms: Ye that are but weak in zeal, or not fully
instructed, stop your ear against Romes Charmers, charm they never so
gloriously; but ye who are better instructed, and who dare to hear their
disputes, their conferences, their arguments; tie your souls inuiolably to the
Mast of Christ his Ship, his sacred Word; with the cords A true rule of
Catholicisme: Vincent Litiuensis contra Hereses.
of the rule of Faith; which rule is no other, then that form of doctrine
which is Catholic: that Quae semper, quae vbique, quae ab omnibus credita
fuit; That doctrine which always, which in all places, and of all persons has
been believed. Under this Mast only ( Gods sacred Word Catholikely, not
Popishly interpreted) shall ye be safe and secure, against all the novel
vanities, and vain novelties; against all the impious blasphemies, and
blasphemous impieties; against all the arrogant presumptions, and presumptuous
arrogancies of the Antichristian State of Rome.

Let us then, O Christian souls! be resolute and constant for the testimony of
Jesus! he who looks back (having put his hand to the plough) is not fit for
the Kingdom of God: neither is he fit for the religious chase, and zealous
pursuit, which is to be made after so execrable a Beast, who may either look
back by returning, or withdrawing his first works (like some Godless
Dalmatian Apostata) or who like some profane Helcesaean (dissembling his Faith)
may shake hands in somewicked communion with the Beast, or with these sworn
champions of the Beast; or finally, who like some Godless Adiaphorizer, may
either say in his heart or speak with his mouth, that any man (so he profess
Christ, believe on Christ) may be saved in such his faith and profession, be
it Popish, be it Muscouish; be it Pelagian, be it Donatian, be it of any other,
falsely named, form of Faith whatsoever. O Christ, what times do thou
suffer, when we are thus enforced to speak against such an excess of
impiety and irreligiosity!

I conclude, the God of Gods has spoken, Mercy and Judgment belongs to him:
mercy from him, for all those, who shall sincerely serve and worship him;
judgment against all those, who shall worship the Beast, or the Image of the
Beast: mercy for ever, for all those who under the Lamb, are called chosen and
faithful; judgment against all those, Who shall receive the mark of the Beast
in their hands, or on their foreheads: mercy for all those, Who may dye in the
Lord, for they shall rest from their labors: (which God of his infinite mercy
grant to every soul here present:) judgment against all those, who shall
admire after the Beast; for they shall drink of the cup of Gods wrath and
indignation.

From us, who worship the Lamb, but abhor the Beast; who only adore Gods
Word, but execrate the Beasts Traditions: From us, who have in hate all the
marks and Characters of the Beast, and who are signed with the Spirit of the
holy Lamb in the day of our Redemption. From us (I say) to our God, together
with the Lamb that sits upon the Throne, and their ever blessed Spirit, be
rendered benediction, Claritie, power, wisdom, honor, thanksgiving, virtue,
and obedience, from this time forth for evermore,

Amen.
Laus Deo.

