THE History of Troylus and Cresseida. As it was acted b^ the Kings Majesty's
servants at the Globe.

Written by William Shakespeare.

LONDON Imprinted by G. Eld for R. Bonian and H. Waller, and are to be sold at
the spread Eagle in Paul's Church-yeard, over against the great North door.
1609.

The history of Troylus and Cresseida.
Enter Pandarus and Troylus. Troy. CAll here my varlet, I Will unarm again,
Why should I war without the walls of Troy:
That find such cruel battle here within,
Each Troyan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field Troylus alas has none.

Pan. Will this geere nere be mended?

Troy. The Greeks are strong and skillful to their strength
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant,
But I am weaker then a woman's tear;
Tamer then sleep; fonder then ignorance,
Less valiant then the Virgin in the night,
And skillesse as vnpractiz'd infancy:

Pan. Well, I have told you enough of this; for my part i will not meddle nor make
no farther; he that will have a cake out of the wheat must tarry the grynding.


Tro. Have I not tarried?


Pan. I the grindin^; but you must tarry the boulting.


Troy. Have I not tarried?


Pa^de. I the boulting; but you must tarry the leauening.


Troy. Still have I tarried.


Pan. I, to the leauening, but hears yet in the word hereafter, the kneading,
the making of the cake, the heating the oven, and the baking, nay you must stay
the cooling too, or yea may chance burn your lips.


Troy. Patience her self, what Godesse ere she be,
Does lesser blench at suffrance then I do:
At Priams royal table do I sit
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts,
So traitor then she comes when she is thence.

Pand. Well she looked yesternight fairer then ever I saw her look, or any
woman else.


Troy. I was about to tell thee when my heart,
As ^edged with a sigh would riue in twain,
Least Hector or my father should perceive me:
I have (as when the Sun does light a scor^e)
Buried this sigh in wrincle of a smyle,
But sorrow that is coucht in seemin^ gladness,
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness.

Pan: And her hair were not somewhat darke^ then H^ll^ns, well go to, there
were no more com^arison between the women ^ but for my part she is my
kinswoman, I would not as they term it praise her, but I would som-body had
heard her talk yester-day as I did, I will not disprai^e your sister
Cassandras wit, but --


Troy. Oh Pandarus I tell thee Pandarus,
When I do te^l ^hee there may hopes lie drowned
Reply not in how many sadomes deep,
They lie indrench'd^ I tell thee I am mad:
In Cressids love? thou answe^st she is fair,
Powrest in the open ulcer of my heart:
Her eyes, her hair her cheek, her gate, her voice,
Handlest in thy discourse: O that her hand
In whose compari^on all whites are ynke
Writing their own reproach; to whose soft seizure,
The cignets down is harsh, and spirit of sense:
Hard as the palm of plowman; this thou telst me,
As true thou tel^t me, when I say I love her,
But saying thus in steed of oil and balm,
Thou layst in every gash that love has given me
The knife that made it.

Pan: I speak no morethen truth.

Troy. Thou do not speak so much.

Pan: Faith I Will not meddle in it, let her be as she is, if she be fai^e it is
the better for her, and she be not, she has the me^ds in her own hands.


Tro^. Good Pandarus. how now Pandarus


Pan: I have had my lab^ur for my travel, ill thought on of her, and ill
thought of you, go^ between and between, but sma^l thanks for my labor.


Troy. What are thou angry Pandarus? what with me?


Pan. Because sh^e's kin to me therefore she is not so fair as H^llen, and she
were kin to me, she wo^ld be as fair a Friday as Hellen, is on Sunday, but
what I? I care not and she were a black eamore, it is all one to me.


Troy. Say I she is not fair?


P^n. I do not care whether you do or no, she is a fool to stay behind her
father let her to the Greeks, and so I Will tell her the next time I see her for
my part I Will meddle nor make no more ith'matter.


Troy. Pandarus.


Pan. Not I.


Troy. Sweet Pandraus.


Pan. Pray you speak no more to me I will leave all as I found it and there
an end.

Exit.
Sound alarm. Troy. Peace you vn^racious clamors, peace ^ude sounds,
Fools on both sides, Helle^ must needs be fair,
When with your blood you daily paint her thus,
I cannot fight upon this argument:
It is too starved a subject for my sword,
But Panda^us: O gods* how do you plague me
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar,
And he is as teachy to be wood to woe,
As she is stubborn, chaste, against all suite.
Tell me Apollo for thy Daphnes love
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we:
Her bed is India there she lies, a pearl,
Between our Ilium, and where she reides
Let it be called the wild and wandering stood:
Our ^el^e the Merchant, and this sailing Pandar,
Our doubtful hope, our conuoy and our bark.

Alarm Enter Aeneas. Aene. How now prince Troylus, wherefore not a field,

Tro^. Because not there; this woman's answer sorts,
For woman (...) it is to be from thence.
What news Aeneas from the field to day?

Aene. That Paris^ returned home and hurt.

Troy. By whom Aeneas?

Aene. Troylus by Menelaus.

Troy. Let Paris bleed it is but a scar to scorn,
Paris gored with Menelaus horn.

Alarm. Aene. Hark what good sport is out of town to day.

Troy. Better at home, if would I might were may:
But to the sport abroad are you bound thither?

Aene. In all swift have.

Troy. Come go we then together.

Exeunt. Enter Cressid and (...) man. Cres. Who were those went by?

Man. Queen Hecuba, and Hellen.

Cres. And whether go they?

Man. Up to the Eastern tower,
Whose hight commands as subject all the veil,
To see the battle: Hector whose patience,
Is as a virtue fixed, to day was moved:
He chid A^dr^mache and struck his armo^er,
And like as there were husbandry in war
Before the Sun rose, he was harnest lyte,
And to the field goes he; where every flower
Did as a Prophet weep what it foresawe,
In Hectors wrath.

Cres. What was his cause of anger.

Man. The noise goes this, there is among the Greeks,
A Lord of Trojan blood, Nephew to Hector.
They call him. Ajax.

Cres. Good; and what of him,

Man. They say he is a very man perse and stands alone.


Cres. So do all men unless the are drunk, sick, or have no legs.


Man. This man Lady, has robbed many beasts of their particular additions, he
is as valiant as the Lion, churlish as the Bear, slow as the Elephant: a man
into whom nature ha^h so crowded humors, that his valor is crushed into folly,
his folly sauced with discretion: there is no man has a virtue, that he has
not a glimpse of, nor any man an attaint, but he carries some stain of it. He
is melancholy without cause and merry against the hair, he has the joints of
every thing, but every thing so out of joint, that he is a gowtie Briareus,
many hands, and no use: or purblinde Argus, al eyes, and no sight.


Cres. But how should this man that makes me smile, make Hector angry.


Man. They say he yesterday cop't Hector in the battle and stroke him down,
the disdain and shame whe^eof has ever since kept Hector fasting and waking.


Cr^s. Who comes here.


Man. Maddam your uncle Pandarus.


Cres. Hector a gallant man.


Man As may be in the world Lady.


Pand. What Is that? what is that?


Cres. Good morrow uncle Pandarus.


Pan. Good morrow cozen Cressid: what do you talk of? good morrow Alexander:
how do you cozen^ when were you at Illum?


Cres. This morning uncle.


Pan. What were you talking of when I came? was Hector armed and gone ere yea
came to Illium, Hellen was not up was she?


Cres. Hector was gone but Hellen was not up?


Pan. E'ene so, Hector was stirring early.


Cres. That were we talking of, and of his anger.


Pan: Was he angry?


Cres. So he says here.


Pan: True he was so; I know the cause to, heel lay about him to day I can
tell them that, and there is Troylus will not come far behind him, let them take
he^de of Troylus; I can tell them that too.


Cres. What is he angry too?


Pan: Who Troylus? Troylus is the better man of the two:


Cres: Oh Jupiter there is no comparison.


Pan: What not between Troylus and Hector? do you know a man if you see him?


Cres: I, if I ever saw him before and knew him:


Pan: Well I say Troylus is Troylus:


Cres. Then you say as I say, for I am sure he is not Hector,


Pan. No not Hector is not Troylus in some degrees.


Cres. It Is just, to each of them he is himself.


Pan. Himself, alas poor Troylus I would he were.


Cres. So he is.


Pan. Condition I had gone barefoot to India.


Cres. He is not Hector.


Pan. Himself? no? he is not himself, would a were himself, well the Gods
are above, time must friend or endwell Troylus well, I would my heart were in
her body; no, Hector is not a better man then Troylus.


Cres. Excuse me.


Pand. He is elder.


Cres. Pardon me, pardon me.


Pand. The Others not come to it, you shall tell me another tale when the others
come to it, Hector shall not have his will this year.


Cres. He shall not need it if he have his own.


Pand. Not his qualities.


Cres. No matter.


Pand. Nor his beauty.


Cres. Twould not become him, his own's better.


Pan: You have no judgment niece; Hellen her self swore the other day that
Troylus for a b^owne favor ( for so it is I must confess) not brown neither.


Cres. No, but brown.


Pand. Faith to say truth, brown and not brown.


Cres. To say the truth, true and not true.


Pand. She praisd his complexion above Paris.


Cres. Why Paris has color enough.


Pand. So he has.


Cres. Then Tr^ylus should have too much, if she praizd him above, his
complexion is higher then his, he having color enough, and the other higher,
is too flaming a praise for a good complexion, I had as lieue Helens golden
tongue had commended Troylus for a copper nose.


Pand. I swear to you I think Helen loves him better then Paris.


Cres. Then she is a merry greek indeed.


Pand. Nay I am sure she dooes, she came to him the other day into the compast
window, and you know he has not past three or four hairs on his chinne.


Cres. Indeed a Tapsters Arith^^etique may soon bring his particulars therein
to a total.


Pand. Why he is very young, and yet will he within three pound list as much as
his brothers Hector.


Cres. Is he so young a man, and so old a lifter.


Pand. But to prove to you that Hellen loves him, she came and puts me her
white hand to his cloven chin.


Cres. (...) have mercy, how came it cloven?


Pan. Why, you know it is dimpled, I think his smyling becomes him better then
any man in all Ph^igia.


Cres. Oh he smiles valianty.


Pan. Dooes he not?


Cres. Oh yes, and twere a clowd in Autumn.


Pan. Why go to then, but to prove to you that Hellen loves Troylus.


Cres. Troylus will stand to thee proof if you will prove it so.


P^n. Troylus, why he esteems her no more then I esteem and addle egg:


C^es. If you love and addle egg as well as you love and idle head you would
eat chickens ith shell.


Pan. I cannot choose but laugh to think how she ticled his chin, indeed she
has a mar^el's white hand I must needs confess.


Cres. Without the rack.


Pan. And she takes upon her to spy a white hear on his chinne.


Cres. Alas poor chin many a wart is ritcher.


Pan. But there was such laughing, Queen Hecuba laughed that her eyes ran ore.


Cres. With milstones.


Pan. And Cassandra laughed.


Cres. But there was a more temperate fire under the por of her eyes: did her
eyes run ore to?


Pan. And Hector laughed.


Cres. At what was all this laughing.


Pan. Marry at the white hear that Hellen spied on Troylus chin.


Cres. And t'had been a green hear I should have laughed too.


Pan. They laughed not so much at the hear as at his pretty answer.


Cres. What was his answer?


Pan. Quoth she here is but two and fifty heirs on your chinne; and one of
them is white.


Cres. This is her question.


Pan. That's true, make no question of that, two and fifty heirs quoth he,
and one white, that white heir is my father, and all the rest are his sons.
Jupiter quoth she, which of these heirs is Paris my husband? the ^orked one
quoth he, plucked out and g^ue it him: but there was such laughing, and Hel^en
so blushed, and Paris so chaft, and all the rest so laughed that it past.


Cres. So let it now for it has been a great while going by.


Pan. Well cozen I ^ould you a thing yesterday, think on it.


Cres. So I do.


Pan. I Will be sworn it is true, he will weep you an'twere a man borne in April


Sound a retreat. Cres. And I Will spring up in his tear^s an'twere a nettle
against May.


Pan. Hark they are coming from the field, shall we stand up here and see
them as they pass toward Ilion, good Niece do, sweet Niece Cresseida.


Cres. At your pleasure.


Pan. Here, here, here is an excellent place, here we may see most bravely,
iletell you them all by their names, as they posse by, but mark Troylus above
the rest.


Enter Aeneas. Cres. Speak not so loud.


Pan. That's Aeneas, is not that a brave man, he is one of the flowers of Troy I
can tell you, but mark Troylus, you shall see anon.


Cres. Who Is that?


Enter Antenor. Pan. That's Antenor, he has a shrowed wit I can tell you, and
he is man good enough, he is one o'th soundest judgments in Troy whosoever, and
a proper man of person, when comes Troylus, i will show you Troylus anon, if he
see me, you shall see him nod at me.


Cres. Will he give you the nod:


Pan. You shall see:


Cres. If he do the rich shall have more.


Enter Hector. Pan. That's Hector, that, that, look you that, there is a fellow!
go thy way Hector, there is a brave man Niece, O brave Hector, look how he
looks, there is a countenance, is it not a brave man?


Cres. O a brave man.


Pan: Is a not? it dooes a man heart good, look you what hacks are on his
helmet, look you yonder, do you see, look you there, there is no jesting, there is
laying on, takt off, who will as they say, there be hacks.


Cres. Be those with swords.


Enter Paris. Pan: Swords, anything he cares not, and the devil come to him,
its all one, by Gods lid it dooes ones heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder
comes Paris, look ye yonder Niece, is it not a gallant man to, is it not, why
this is brave now, who said he came hurt home to day. He Is not hurt, why this
will do Hellens heart good now ha? would I could see Troylus now, you shall see
Troylus anon.


Cres. Whose that?


Enter Helenus: Pan. That's Helenus, I marvel where Troylus is, that's Helenus,
I ^hinke he went not forth to day, that's Helenus.


Cres: Can Helenus. fight uncle?


Pan: Helenus no: yes heel fight indifferent, well, I marvel where Troylus
is; hark do you not here the people cry Troylus? Helenus is a priest;


Cres: What s^eaking fellow comes yonder?


Enter Troylus. Panda: Where? yonder? that's Dei^hobus. It Is Troylus! there is a
man Niece* hem? brave Troylus the Prince of chivalry.


Cres. Peace for shame peace.


Pan. Mark him, note him: O brave Troylus, look well upon him Niece, look
you how his sword is bloudied, and his helm more hackt then Hectors, and how
he looks, and how he goes? O admirable youth, he never saw three and
twenty, go thy way Troylus, go thy way, had I a sister were a grace, or a
daughter a Goddess, he should take his choice, O admi^able man! Paris? Paris
is dirt to him, and I warrant Hellen to change would give an eye to boot.


Cres. Here comes more.


Pa. Asses, fools, doults, chaff and bran, chaff and bran, porredge after
meat, I could live and die in the eyes of Troylus, nere look, nere look, the
Eagles are gonne, crows and dawes, crows and dawes, I had rather be such a
man as Troylus, then Agamemnon and all Greece.


Cres. There is amongst the Greeks Achilles a better man then Troylus.


Pan. Achilles, a dray-man, a porter, a very Cammell.


Cres. Well well:


Pan. Well, well, why have you any discretion, have you any eyes, do you know
what a man is? is not birth, beauty, good shape, discourse, manhood, learning,
gentlen^sse, virtue youth, liberallity and such like, the spice and salt that
season a man.


Cres. I a minst man, and then to be baked with no date in the pie, for then
the man's date is out:


Pan. You are such a woman a man knows not at what ward you lie:


Cres. Upon my back to defend my belly, upon my wit to defend my wiles, upon
my secrecy to defend mine ^onesty, my mask to defend my beauty, and you to
defend all these: and at al these wards I lie, at a thousand watches.


Pan. Say one of your watches.


Cres. Nay I Will watch you for that; and that's one of the chiefest of them two:
If I cannot ward what I would not have hit: I can watch you for te^ling how I
took the blow unless it swell past hiding and then its past watching:


Pan: You are such another:


Enter Boy: Boy: Sir my Lord would instantly speak with you.


Pan: Where?


Boy: At your own house there he vnarmes him:


Pan. Good boy tell him I come, I doubt he be hurt, fare ye well good Neice:


Cres: Adieu uncle:


Pan: I will be with you Neice by and by:


Cres: To bring uncle:


Pan: I a token from Troylus:


Cres: By the same token you are a Bawd,
Word^, vows, gifts, tears and loves full sacrifize:
He offers in another enterprise,
But more in Troylus thousand fould I see,
Then in the glass of Pandars praise may be:
Yet hold I off: women are angels woing,
" Things woone are done, joys foul lies in the doing.
That she beloved, knows naught that knows not this,
" Men price the thing vngaind more then it is,
That she was never yet that ever knew
Love got so sweet, as when desire did sue,
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach,
" Atchiuement is command; vngaind beseech,
Then though my hearts content firm love does bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.

Exit. Enter Agamemnon* Nestor, Ulysses, Diomedes, Menelaus with others. Aga.
Princes: what grief has set these Iaundies ore your cheeks?
The ample proposition that hope makes,
In all designs begun on earth below,
Fails in the promised largeness, checks and disasters,
Grow in the veins of actions highest reard.
As kno^^ by the con^lux of meeting sap,
Infects the sound Pine, and diuerts his grain,
Tortiue and errant from his course of growth.
Nor Princes is it matter new to us,
That we come short of our suppose so far,
That after seven years siege, yet Troy walls stand,
Since ever action that has gone before,
Whereof we have record, trial did draw,
Bias and thwart: not answering the aim,
And that unbodied figure of the thought,
That gau't surmised shape: why then you Princes,
Do you with cheeks abasht behold our works,
And call them shames which are indeed naught else,
But the protractiue trials of great love,
To find persistiue constancy in men.
The f^nenesse of which metal is not found,
In fortunes love: for then the bold and coward,
The wise and soole, the Artist and unread,
The hard and s^ft se^m ^^ll aff^n'd and ^in,
But in the wind and ^em est of her frown,
Distinction with a br^^d and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnowss the light away,
And what has mass or matter by it self,
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.

Nestor. With due observance of the godlike seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance,
Lies the true proof of men: the sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble boat, dare ^aile,
Upon her ancient breast, making their way
With those of nobler bulk^?
But let the ^uffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle That is, and anon, behold
The strong ribbd bark through liquid mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist elements,
Like Perseus horse. Where Is then the saucy boat,
Whose weak vntymberd sides but even now
Corriuald greatness? either to harbot fled,
Or made a toste for Neptune: even so
Does valors show, and valors worth divide
In storms of fortune; for in her ray and brightness
The heard has more annoyance by the Bryze
Then by the Tiger, but when the splitting wind,
Makes flexible the knees of knotted Oaks,
And Flies fled under shade, why then the thing of courage,
As rouzd with rage, with rage does simpathize,
And with an accent tuned in self same key,
Retires to chiding fortune.

Vliss. Agamemnon,
Thou great Commander, nerves and bone of Greece,
Heart of our numbers, soul and only spright,
In whom the tempers and the minds of all
Should be shut up: here what Ulysses speaks,
Besides the applause and approbation,
The which most mighty (for thy place and sway
And thou most reverend) for the stretched out life,
I give to both your speeches; which were such
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece,
Should hold up high in brass, and such again
As venerable Nestor (hatched in silver)
Should with a bond of air strong as the Axel-tree,
(On which heaven rides) knit all the Greekish cares
To his experienced tongue, yet let it please both
Thou great and wise, to hear Ulysses speak.
Troy yet upon his bases had been down,
And the great Hectors sword had lackt a master
But for these instances.
The specialtie of rule has been neglected,
And look how many Grecian tents do stand,
Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions,
When that the general is not like the hiue,
To whom the forragers shall all repair,
What honey is expected? Degree being visarded
Th'vnworthiest shows as fairly in the mask.
The heavens themselves, the plannets and this center
Observe degree, prioritie and place,
In sisture, course, proportion, season form,
Office and custom, in all line of order.
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol,
In noble eminence enthroned and spherd,
Amidst the other; whose medcinable eye,
Corrects the influence of evil Planets,
And posts like the Commandment of a King,
Sans check to good and bad. But when the Planets,
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What plagues, and what portents, what mutiny?
What raging of the sea, shaking of earth?
Commotion in the winds, frights, changes, horrors
Diu^rt and crack, rend and deracinate,
The unity and married clame of states
Quite from their fixure: O when degree is shakt,
Which is the ladder of all high designs,
The enterprise is sick. How could communities;
Degrees in schools, and brother-hoods in Cities,
Peaceful commerce from deuidable shores,
The primogenitie and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, crowns, scepters, laurels,
Bu^ by degree stand in authentic place:
Take but degree away, vntune that string,
And hark what discord follows, each thing melts
In mere oppugnancie: the bounded waters
Should lift their bosoms higher then the shores,
And make a sop of all this solid globe:
Strength should be Lord of imbecilitie,
And the rude son should strike his father dead.
Force should be right or rather right and wrong,
(Between whose endless jar Justice recides)
Should loose their names, and so should lustice to?
Then every thing include it self in power,
Power into will will into appetite,
And appetite an universal Woolfe,
(So doubly seconded with will and power)
Must make perforce an universal prey,
And last eat up himself.
Great Agamemnon,
This chaos when degree is suffocate,
Follows the choking.
And this neglection of degree it is,
That by a pace goes backward with a purpose
It has to clime. The generals disdaind,
By him one step below, he by the next,
That next by him beneath, so every step,
Exampl'd by the first pace that is sick
Of his superior, grows to an envious fever
Of pale and bloudlesse emulation,
And it is this fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinnews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness stands not in her strength.

Nestor. Most wisely has Vli^^es here discouerd,
The fever whereof all our power is sick.

Aga^em. The nature of the sickness found Ulysses
What is the remedy?

Ulysses. The great Achilles whom opinion crowns,
The sinnow and the fore-hand of our host,
Having his care full of his ay^ie same,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his Tent
Lies mocking our designs: with him Patroclus
Upon a lazy bed the liue-long day,
Breaks scurrell jests,
And with ridiculous and silly action,
Which (slanderer) he Imitation calls,
He pageants us. Some-time great Agamemnon,
Thy toples^e deputation he puts on,
And like a strutting Player, whose conceit
Lies in his ham-st^ing, and does think it rich
To here the wooden dialogue and sound,
Twixt his stretched footing and the scoaffollage,
Such to be pitied and ore-rested seeming,
He act^ thy greatness in* And when he speaks,
It Is like a chime a mending, with terms vnsqua^e,
Which from the tongue of roaring Tiphon dropped,
Would seem hiperboles, at this fustie stuff,
The large Achilles on his pressed bed lolling,
From his deep chest laughes out alowd applause,
Cries excellent; it is Ag^memnon right,
Now play me Nest^r, hem and stroke thy beard,
As he being dressed to some Oration,
That Is done, as near ^s the extremest ends
Of paralells as like as Vnlcan and his wife:
Yet god Achilles still cries excellent,
It Is Nestor right: now play him me Patroclus,
Arming to answer in a night alarm,
And then forsooth the faint defects of age,
Must be the scaene of mirth, to coffe and spit,
And with a palsy fumbling on his gorget,
Shake in and out the riuet, and at this sport
Sir valor dies, cries O enough Patrocl^s,
Or give me ribbs of steel, I shall split all
In pleasure of my spleen, and in this fashion,
All our abilities gifts, natures shapes,
Seueralls and generals of grace exact,
Atchiuements, plots, orders, preuentions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truc^,
Success or loss, what is, or is not, (...)
As stuff for these two* to make paradoxes.

Nestor. And in the imitation of these twain,
Who as Ulysses says opinion crowns,
With an imperial voice: many aro infect,
Ajax is grown selfe-wild, and bears his head
In such a reyne, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles: ^eepes his Tent like him,
Makes factious f^asts, railes on our state of war,
Bold as an Oracle, and sets Thersites
A slave, whose ga^l coins standers like a mint,
To match v^in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken our discredit, our exposure
How rank so ever rounded in with danger,

Ulysses. They tax our-pollicie; and call it cowardice;
Count wisdom as no member of the war,
Forstall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand, the sti^l and mental parts,
That do contri^e how many hands shall st^ike,
When fitness calls them on, and know by measure
Of their obser^ant royle the enemies weight,
Why this has not a finge^s dignity,
They call this bed-worke, mappry, Closet war,
So that the Ram that batters down the wall,
For the great swinge and rudeness of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the engine,
Or those that with the (...) of their souls,
By reason guide his execution.

Nest. Let this be granted, and Achilles horse
Makes many (...) sons,

Agam. What trompet? look Me^el^^s*

Mean. From Troy.

Agam. What would you fore our tent

Aene. Is this great Aga^e^nons tent I pray you?

Agam. Even this.

Aene. May one that is a Herr'ald and a Prince,
Do a fair message to his Kingly eyes?

Agam. With surrty strong earth on Achilles (...)
Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice,
Call Agamemnon head and general.

Aene. Fair leave and large security, how may
A stranger to those most imperial looks,
Know them from eyes of other mortals?

Agam. How?

Aene. I, I ask that I might waken reverence,
And bid the cheek b^ ready with a blush,
Modest as morning, when she coldly eyes the youthful Phoebus,
Which is that god, in ^ffice guiding men,
Which is the high and mighty Agame^n^^.

Agam. This Troyan scorns us, or the men of Troy,
Are c^remonious Courtiers.

Aene, Courtiers as free as debonaire, unarmed
As bending Angels, that's their same in peace:
But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong ioints, true sword, and great lo^es accord
Nothing so full of heart: but peace Aeneas,
Peace Troyan, lay thy finger on thy lips,
The worthiness of praise distaines his worth,
If that the praisd himself bring the praise forth.
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath fame blows, that praise sole pure transcends.

Agam. Sir you of Troy, call you your self Aeneas?

Aene. I Greek, that is my name.

Agam. What Is your affairs I pray you?

Aene. Sir pardon, it is for Agamemnons cares.

Aga. He heeres ^^ught privately that comes from Troy.

Aene. Nor I from Troy come not to whisper with him,
I bring a trumpet to awake his ^are,
To set his seat on that attentive bent,
And then to speak.

Agam. Speak frankly as the wind,
It is not Agamemnons sleeping hour;
That thou shall know Troyan he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.

Aene. Trumpet blow alowd,
Send thy brass voyc^ through all these lazy tents,
And every Greek of m^trell let him a now,
What Troy means fairly, shall be spoke alowd,
Sound trumpet. We have great (...) herre in Troy,
A Prince called Hect^^, (...) is his father,
Who in his dull and long continued truce,
Is restie grown: H^ bad me take a Trumpet,
And to this (...) speak, Kings, Princes, Lords,
If ^here be one among the fairest of Greece,
That holds his honor higher then his case,
And feeds his praise, more then he fears his perilt,
That knows his (...)^ knows not his fear,
That loves his (...) more then in confession,
(With truant vows to her own lips he loves)
And dare avowe her bea^^ie, and her worth,
In other arms then he^s: to him this challenge;
Hector in view of Troyans and of Greeks,
Shall make it good or do his best to do it:
He has a Lady, wiser, fairer, tr^er,
Then ever Greek did couple in his arms,
And will to morrow with his Trumpet call;
Midway between your tents and walls of Troy,
To rouse a Greci^^ that is true in l^^e;
If only come; Hector shall honor him*
If none, ^eele say in Troy wheir he (...),
The Grecian dames are ^un-burnt, and not worth
The splinter of a Lance. Even so much*

Agam. This shall be told our louer^ Lord Aeneas,
If none of them have soul in such a (...).
We (...) them all at (...), we are soldiers,
And may that soldier a (...) recreant prove,
That means not, has (...), or is not in love:
If then one is, or has a means to be,
That one meets Hector: if none else I am (...).

Nest. Tell him of Nestor, (...) was a man
When Hectors (...)^ He is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian host,
A noble man that has no spark of fire
To answer (...)^
I Will hide my silver ^eard in a gould beauer,
And in my vambrace put, my (...) braunes
And meeting him tell him that my Lady,
Was fairer then his grandam, and as chaste,
As may be in the world (his youth in flood)
I Will prove this troth with my three dr^ps of blood,

Aene. Now heavens for-send such (...) of men*

Vlis. Amen* fair Lord Ae^eas let me touch your hand,
To our pauilion shall I lead you (...);
Achilles shall hau^ word of this intent,
So shall each Lord of Greece from tent to tent,
Your self shall feast with us before you go,
And find the welcome of a noble so.

Vlis. Nestor.

Nest: What says Ulysses?

Vlis. I have a young conception in my brain,
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.

Nest. What is it?

Vlis: Blunt wodges true hard kno^s, the seeded pride,
That* has to this mat^rity blown up
In rank Achill^s, must or now be cropped,
Or shedding breed a noursery of like evil,
To ouer-bulk us all.

Nest. Well and how?

Vlis: This challeng that the gallant Hector sends,
How ever it is spread in general name
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.

Nest. True the purpose is perspicuous as substance,
Whose grofensse little characters sum up*
And in the publication make no strain,
But that Achilles wear his brain, as barren,
As banks of libi^ ( though Apollo knows
It Is dry enough) will with great speed of judgment,
I with celerity find Hectors purpose, pointing on him.

Vlis. And wake him to the answer think you?

Nest. Why it is most meet; who may you el^e oppose*
That can from Hector bring those honors off,
If not Achilles: though it be a sportfull combat.
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells:
For here the Troyans taste our de^rst repute,
With their fin'st pallat, and tru^^ to me Vlissis
O^r imputation shall be odly poizde
In this vilde action, for the success,
Although particular shall give a scantling
Of good or bad unto the general,
And in such indexes (although small pricks
To their subsequent volumes) there is seen,
The baby figure of the giant mass,
Of things to come at large: It is supposed
He that meets Hector, yssues from our choice,
And choice (being mutual act of all our souls)
Makes merit her election, and does boil,
(As twere from forth us all) a man distilled
Out of our virtues, who miscarrying,
What heart receives from hence a conquering part,
To steel a strong opinion to them selves.

Vliss. Give pardon to my speech? therefore it is meet,
Achilles meet not Hector, let us like Merchants
First show foul wares, and think perchance they will sell;
If not; the luster of the better shall exceed,
By showing the wors^ first: do not consent,
That ever Hector and Achilles meet,
For both our honor and our shame in this, are dogged with two strange
followers.


Nest. I see them not with my old eyes what are they?

Vl^ss. What glory our Achilles shares from Hector
Were he not proud, we all should share with him:
But he already is too insolent.
And it were better par^ch in Afrique Sun,
Then in the pride and sault scorn of his eyes
Should he escape Hector fair. If he were foild,
Why then we do our maine opinion c^ush
In taint of our best man. No, make a lottry
And by devise let blockish Ajax draw
The sort to fight with Hector, among our selves,
Give him allowance for the better man,
For that will physic the great Myrmidon,
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall,
His crest that prouder then blew Iris be^ds,
If the dull brainlesse Ajax come safe off
We Will dress him up in voices, if he fail
Yet go we under our opinion still,
That we have better men, but hit or miss,
Our proiects ^ife this shape of sense assumes
Ajax employed plucks down Achilles plumes.

Nest. Now Ulysses I begin to relish thy advise,
And I will give a taste thereof forthwith,
To Agamemnon, go we to him straight
Two curres shall came each other, pride alone
Must art the mastiffs on, as twere a hone.

Exexnt. Enter Ajax and Thersites. Ajax. Thersites.


There. Agamemnon, how if he had bi^es, full, all over, generally.


Ajax. Thersites.


There. And those byles did run (say so), did not the general run then, were
not that a botchy coro.


Ajax. Dog.


There. Then would come some matter from him, I see none now.


Aia: Thou bitchwolfs son can thou not hear, feel then.


There. The plague of Greece upon thee thou mongrell beef witted Lord.


Ajax. Speak then thou unsalted leaven, speak, I will beat thee into
hansomnesse.


There. I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness, but I think thy horse
will sooner cunne an oration without book, then thou learn prayer without
book, thou can strike can thou? a red murrion ath thy Iades tricks.


Ajax. T^de-stoole? learn me the proclamation.


There: Do thou think I have no sense thou strikest me thus?


Ajax. The proclamation.


There: Thou art proclaimed fool I think.


Ajax. Do not Porpentin, do not, my fingers itch:


There. I would thou did itch from head to foot, and I had the scratching of
the, I would make thee the lothsomest scab in Greece, when thou art forth in
the incursions thou strikest as glow as another.


Ajax. I say the proclamation.


There. Thou gromblest and raylest every hour on Achill^s, and thou art as full
of envy at his greatness, as C^rb^rus is at Proser^inas beauty, I that thou
barkst at him.


Ajax. Mistres Thersites.


There. Thou should strike him. Ajax Coblofe, He would punne thee into
shiuers with his fist, as a sayler breaks a biscuit, you horson curre. Do? do?


Ajax: Thou stool for a witch:


There. I, Do? do? thou sodden witted Lord, thou have no more brain then I have
in mine elbowes, an Asinico may cutor thee, you scuruy valiant ass, thou art
here but to thrash Troyans, and thou art bought and sold among those of any
wit, like a Barbarian slave. If thou use to beat me I will begin at thy
heel, and tell what thou art by inches, thou thing of no bowels thou.


Ajax. You dog:


There. You scun^y Lord.


Ajax. You curre.


There. Mars his Idiot, do rudeness, do Camel, do, do.


Achil. Why how now Ajax wherefore do ye thus,
How now Thersites what is the matter man.

There. You see him there? do you?


Achil. I what is the matter.


There. Nay look upon him.


Achil. So I do, what is the matter?


There. Nay but regard him well.


Achil: Well, why so I do.


There: But yet yo^ looke^ o^ well upon him, for who some ever you take him to
be he is ^iax.


Achil. I know that fool.


There. I but that fool knows not himself.


Ajax: Therefore I be ate thee.


There: Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he vtters, his euasions have ears
thus long, I have bobd his brain more then he has beat my bones. It will buy
nine sparrowes for a penny, and his pia matter is not worth the ninth part of a
sparrow: this Lord ( Achilles) Ajax, who wears his wit in his belly, and his
guts in his head, I tell you what I say of him.


Ach. What.


There. I say this Ajax.


Achil. Nay good Ajax.


There. Has not so much wit.


Achil. Nay I must hold you.


There. As will stop the eye of Hellens needle, for whom he comes to fight.


Achil. Peace fool?


There. I would have peace and quiet^esse, but the fool will not, he there,
that he: look you there?


Ajax. Oh thou damned cur^e I shall --


Achil. Will you set your wit to a fools.


There. No I warrant you, the fools will shame it.


Patro. Good words Thesites.


Achil. What Is the quarrel.


Ajax. I bad the vile oule go learn me the ^enor of the proclamation, and he
railes upon me.


There. I serve thee not?


Ajax. Well, go to, go to.


There. I serve here volu^tary.


Achil. Your last service was s^ffrance: it was not voluntary, no man is beaten
volun^ary, Ajax was here the voluntary, and you as under an Impresse.


There. E'ene so, a great deal of your wit to, lies in your sinnewes, or else
there be hers, Hector shall have a great catch and knock at either of your
beains, a were as good crack a sust^ nut with no kernel.


Achil. What with me to ^hersites.


There. The^s Ulysses and old Nest^r, whose wit was mou^dy ere their grandsiets
had nails, yoke you like draught oxen, and make you plough up the wars.


Achil What? what?


There. Yes good sooth to Achill^, to Ajax, to --


Ajax. I shall ^ut out your to ^^ue.


There. It Is no matter, I shall ^peake as much as thou afterward.


Patro. No more words Thersites peace.


There. I will hold my peace when Ac^^lles brooch bids me, shall I?


Achil. There Is for you Patro^lus.


There. I will see you hanged like Clatpoles, ere I come any more to your tents,
I will keep where there is wit stirring, and leave the faction of fools.

Exit.
Patro. A good riddance.


Achil. Marry this sir is proclaimed through all our hosle,
That Hector by the first hour of the Sun.
Will with a trumpet twixt our Tents and Troy,
To morrow morning call some Knight to arms,
That has a stomach, and such a one that dare,
Maintain I know not what, (it is ^ash) farewel^ --

Ajax. Farewell, who shall answer him.

Achil. I know not, ^is put to lottry, otherwise,
He knew his man.

Ajax. O meaning you? I will go learn more of it.

Enter Prian, Hector, Troylus, Paris and Helenus. Priam. After so many hours,
lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks:
Deliver Hellen, (and all damage else,
As honor, loss o^ time, travel, expense,
Wounds, friends and what else d^ere that is con^i^m'd
In hot digestion of this cormoraut war)
Shall Be stroke off, Hector what say you to it?

Hect: Though no man lesser seares the Greeks then I
As sarre as touches my particular yet dread Priam
There is no Lady of more softer bowels,
More spungy to suck in the sense of fear:
More ready to cry out, who knows what follows
Then Hector is: the ^ound of peace is surely
Surely secure, but modest doubt is called,
The be^^on of the wise, the tent that serches,
Too'th bottom of the worst let Hellen go,
Since the first sword was drawn about this question
Every tith soul amongst many thousand dismes,
Has been as dear as H^llen. I mean of o^^s,
If we have lost so many ^enthes of ours,
To guard a thing not ours, not worth to us,
(Had it our name) the value of one ten,
What merits in that reason which denies,
The yielding, of her up?

Troy. Fie, fie, my brother,
Way you the worth and honor of a King:
So great as our dread fathers in a scale
Of common ounces? will you with Com^ters sum,
The past proportion of his infinite
And buckle in, a waste most ^atho^les,
With spanes and inches so dymi^u^^e*
As fears and reasons: Fie for Godly shame?

Hele. No marvel though you bite so sharp of reasons,
You are so empty of them should not our father;
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reason,
Because your speech has none that tell him so?

Troy. You are for dreams and slumbers brother Priest,
You furre your gloves with reason, here are your reasons
You know an enemy intends you harm:
You know a sword imployde is perilous
And reason flies the object of all harm.
Who maruells then when Helenus beholds,
A Gretian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heels,
And (...) like chidden Mere^ry from Io^e
Or like a star disorbd? nay if we talk of reason,
Sets shut our gates and sleep: manhood and honor,
Should have hare hearts, would they but fat their thoughts
With this crammed reason, reason and respect,
Make lyuers pale, and lush hood deiect.

Hect. Brother, she is not worth, what she does (...) the keeping.


Troy. What Is aught but as it is valued.

Hect. But value dwell^ not in particular will,
It holds his estimate and dignity,
As well wherein it is precious of it self
As in the prizer, it is mad Idolatry
To make the ser^ice greaterthan the God,
And the will dotes that is attributiue;
To what' infectiously it self affects,
Without some image of th'affected merit,

Troy. I take to day a wise, and my election*
Is led on in the conduct of my will,
My will en^indled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded pilots twixt the dangerous shore,
Of will and Judgment: how may I avoid?
(Although my will distaste what it elected)
The wife I choose, there can be no ^uasion,
To blench from this and to stand firm by honor,
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant
When we have soild them, nor the remainder viands,
We do not throw in vn^espectue sieve,
Because we now are full, it was th^ught me^te
Pa^is should do some vengeance on the Greeks.
Your breath with full consent bellied his ^ailes,
The seas and winds (old wranglers) took a ^tuce:
And did him se^uice, he touched the ports desired*
And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held Captive,
He brought a Grecia^ Queen, whose youth and freshness,
Wrincle, Apolloes, and makes pale the morning.
Why keep we her? the Grecians keep our Aunt,
Is she worth keeping? why she is a pearl
Whose price has lansh'^ above a thousand ships:
And turned (...) Kings to Merchants,
If you will (...) it was wisdom Paris went,
As you mast needs, for you all cried go, go,
If you will confess be brought home worthy prize:
As you must needs, for you all, clapped your hands,
(...)^ why do you now
The yss^e of your p^oper wisdoms rate,
And do a deed that neu^^ fortune did,
Beggar the estimation, which you (...)
Ritcher then sea and land? O thest most base,
That we have stolen, what we do fear to keep^,
But thieves vnwo^thy of (...) so sto^ne:
That in their country did them that disgrace,
We fear to warrant i^ our native place.

Enter Cassandra rauing. Cass. Cry Troyans cry:

Priam. What no^^e? what shrik is this?

Troy. It Is our mad (...) I do know h^^ voice.

Cass. Cry Troy^^s.

Hect. It is Cassandra!

Cass. Cry ^^oyans cry, (...) thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with prophetic tears.

Hect. Peace sister peace*

Cass. Virgins and boys, mid-age, and wrinckled elders,
Soft in^ancie, that not^ing can but cire,
Add to my clamours: et us pay be-times
A moytie of that mass of moan to come:
Cry Troyans cry, practice your eyes with tears,
Troy must not be, nor goodly I lion stand.
Ou^ firebrand brother Paris bu^nes us all,
Cry Tro^aus c^ie, a Holen and a woe.
Cry, cry, Troy b^rnes, or else let H^llen go.
Exit.
Hect. Now youthful Tr^ylus, do not these high strains
Of divination in our S^ster, work
Some touches of remorse? or is your blood
So madly ho^t, that no discourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad ^uccesse in a bad cause,
C^n qualify the same?

Troy. Why brother Hector,
We may not think the justness of each act
Such, and no other then event does form it,
Nor once deiect the courage of our minds,
Because Cassandra's mad, her brainsick raptures
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel,
Which has our several honors all engaged,
To make it gracious. For my private part,
I am no more touched then all Priams sons:
And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us,
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen,
To fight for and maintain.

Par. Else might the world convince of leuitie,
As well my vnder-takings as you^ counsels,
But I attest the gods, your full consent,
Gave wings to my propension, and cut off
All ^eares attending on so dire a protect,
For what (alas) can these my single arms?
What propugnation is in one man's valor
To st^nd the push and enmity of those
This quarrel wou^d exc^te? Yet I protest
We^e I alone to pass the difficulties,
And had as ample power, as I have will,
Paris should nere ^etract, what he has done,
Nor faint in the pursuit,

Pria. Paris you speak
Like one be-sotted on your sweet delights,
You have the honey still, but these the gall,
So to be valiant, is no praise at all.

Par. Sir, I propose not merely to my self,
The pl^asures such a beauty brings with it,
But I would have the soil of her faite rape,
Wiped of in honorable keeping her,
What ^reason were it to the ^ansackt queen,
Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me*
Now to deliver her poss^ssi^n up
On terms of base compulsion? can it be,
That so degenerate a strain as this,
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
There Is not the meanest spirit on our party,
Without a heart to dare, or sword to draw,
When Helen is defended: nor none so noble,
Whose life were ill bestowd, or death vnfam'd,
Where Helen is the subject. Then I say,
Well may we fight for her, whom we know well,
The worlds large spaces cannot parallel.

Hect. Paris and Troyl^s, you have both said well,
And on the cause and question now in hand,
Have glo^d, but superficially, not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to here M^rrall Philosophy;
The reasons you allege, do more condu^e
To the hot passion of distempred blood,
Then to make up a free dete^mination
Twixt right and wrong: for pleasure and revenge,
Have ears more deaf then Adders to the voice
Of any true decision, Nature craves
All dues be rendered to their owners, Now
What nearer debt in all humanity,
Then wife is to the husband* if this law
Of nature be corrupted through affection
And that great minds of partial indulgence,
To their benumbed wills resist the same,
There is a law in each well-orderd nation,
To curb those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refracturio;
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's King,
As it is known she is, these morrall laws
Of nature and of nations, speak alowd
To have her back returned: thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Hectors opinion
Is this in way of truth: yet nere the less,
My spritely brethren* I propend to you
In resolution to keep Helen still,
For it is a cause that has no mean dependence,
Upon our joint and several dignities.

Tro. Why there you touched the life of our designer
Were it not glory that we more affected,
Then the performance of our heauing spleenes,
I would not wish a drop of Troy an blood,
Spent more in her defense. But worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honor and renown,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may be ate down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize us,
For I presume brave Hector would not loose
So rich advantage of a promisd glory,
As smiles upon the forehead of this action,
For the wide worlds reuenew.

Hect. I am yours,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus,
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst
The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks,
Will shrike amazement to their drowsy spirits,
I was aduertizd, their great general slept,
Whilst emulation in the army crept:
This I presume will wake him.
Exeunt. How now Thersites? what lost in the Labyrinth of thy fury? shall the
Elephant Ajax carry it thus? he beats me, and I rail at him: O worthy
satisfaction, would it were otherwise: that I could beat him, whilst he raild
at me: Sfoote, ^Ile learn to conjure and raise Devils, but I Will see some issue
of my spiteful execrations. Then there is Achilles, a rare inginer. If Troy be
not taken till these two undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of
themselves, O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus, forget that thou art Io^e
the king of gods: and Mercury, loose all the Serpentine craft of thy Caduceus,
if ye take not that little little less then little wit from the^ that they
have: which short-armd Ignorance it self knows is so abundant scarce, it
will not in circumuention delurer a fly from a spider, without drawing their
massy Irons* and cutting the web. After this the vengeance on the whole
ca^^pe, or rather the Neopolitan bone-ache: for that me thinks is the curse
depending on those that war for a p^acket. I have said my pra^ers, and devil
Envy say Amen. What ho my Lord Ac^illes?


Patrocl. Whose there? Thersites? good Thersites come in and rail.


Thersi. If I could a remembered a guilt counterfeit, thou could not have
slipped out of my contemplation: but it is no ma^ter, thy self upon thy self.
The common curse of mankind, Folly and Ignorance, be thine in great reuenew:
Heaven bless thee from a tutor, and discipline come not n^ere thee. Let thy
blood be thy direction till thy death: then if she that lays thee out says
thou art not a fair course, I Will be sworn and sworn upon it, she never
shrouded any bu^ lazars. Amen. Where Is Achilles?


Patro. What art thou devout? wast thou in prayer?


There Is. I the heavens hea^e me.


Patro. Amen.


Enter Achilles. Achil. Who Is there?


Patro. Ther^^tes my Lord.


Achil. Where? where? O where? art thou come why my cheese, my digestion, why
have thou not served thy self into my table, so many meals, come what is
Agamemnon?


There. Thy commander Achilles, then tell me Patroclus, what is Achilles?


Patro. Thy Lord Thersites. Then tell me I pray thee, what is Thersites?


There. Thy knower, Patroclus: then tell me Patroclus, what art thou?


Patro. Thou must tell that know.


Achil. O tell, tell.


There. I Will decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles is
my Lord, I am Patroclus knower, and Patroclus is a fool.


Achil. Derive this? come?


There. Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles, Achilles is a fool
to be commanded. Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool, and this Patroclus
is a fool positive.


Patr. Why am I a fool?


There. Make that demand of the Prouer, it suffices me thou art: look you, who
comes here?


Enter Agam: Vliss: Nestor, Diomed, Ajax and Calcas. Achil. Come Patroclus, I Will
speak with no body: come in with me Thersites.


There. Here is such patcherie, such iugling, and such knavery: all the argument
is a whore, and a Cuckold, a good quarrel to draw emul^us factions, and bleed
to death upon.


Agam. Where is Achilles?


Patro. Within his tent, but ill disposd my Lord.


Aga. Let it be known to him; that we are here,
He sat, our messengers and we lay by,
Our appertainings, visiting of him
Let him be told so, least perchance he think,
We dare not move the question of our place,
Or know not what we are.

Patro. I shall say so to him.

Vliss. We saw him at the opening of his tent,
He i^ not sick.

Ajax. Yes Lion sick, sick of proud heart, you may call it melancholy if you
will favor the man. But by my head it is pride: but why, why, let him show us a
cause?


Nest. What mooues Ajax thus to bay at him?

Vliss. Achillis has inuegled his fool from him,

Nest. Who Thersites?

Vlis. He.

Nest. The^ will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost his argument.

Vlis. No you see he is his argument, that has his argument Achilles.


Nes. All the better, their fractio^ is more our wish then their faction, but
it was a strong composure a fool could disunite.


Vlis. The amity that wisdom knits not, folly may easily vnty.
Here comes Patroclus.

Nest. No Achilles with him.

Vlis. The Elephant has joints, but none for courtesy,
His legs are legs for necessity, not for flexure.

Patro. Achilles bids me say he is much sorry,
If any thing more then your sport and pleasure
Did move your greatness, and this noble state,
To call upon him. He hopes it is no other
But for your health, and your disgestion sake,
An after dinners breath.

Agam. Here you Pa^roclus:
We are too well acqu^inted with these answers,
But his cuasion winged thus swift with scorn,
Cannot out-flie our apprehensions,
Much attribute he has, and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him. Yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously on his own part beheld,
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss,
Yea like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish,
Are like to rott untasted. Go and tell him,
We come to speak with him, and you shall not ^inne,
If you do say, we think him ouer-proud
And vnder-honest, in self assumption greater
Then in the note of judgment. And worthier then himself
Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on
Disguise, the holy strength of their command,
And vender-write in an observing kind,
His humorous predominance: yea watch
His course, and time, his ebbs and flows, and if
The passage, and wholest came of his commeacement,
Rode on his tide Go tell him this, and add,
That if he ouer-hold his price so much,
Weele' none of him, But let him like an engine,
Not portable, lie under this report.
Bring action hither, this cannot go to war,
A stirring dwarf we do allowance give,
Before a sleeping giant. Tell him so.

Patr. I shall, and bring his answer presently.

Agam. In second voice we will not be satisfied,
We come to speak with him: Ulysses entertain.

Ajax. What is he more then another.

Agam. No more then what he thinks he is.

Ajax. Is he so much: do you not think he thinks himself a better man then
I am?


Agam. No question.


Ajax. Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is.


Agam. No noble Ajax, you are as strong, as valiant, as wife, no less noble,
much more gentle, and altogether more tractable.


Aia. Why should a man be proud? how does pride grow? I know not what pride is.


Agam. Your mind is the cleerer, and your virtues the fairer, he that is
proud eats up himself: Pride is his own glass, his own trumpet, his own
chronicle, and what ever praises it self but in the deed, deuoures the deed in
the praise.


Enter Ulysses. Ajax. I do hate a proud man, as I do hate the ingendring of
Toades.


Nest. And yet he loves himself, i^t not strange?


Vlis. Achilles will not to the field to morrow.


Agam. What Is his excuse?


Vlis. He does r^lye on none.
But carries on the stream of his dispose,
Without observance, or respect of any,
In will peculiar, and in self admission.

Agam. Why will he not upon our fair request,
Vntent his person, and share th air with us.

Vlis. Things ^mall as nothing, for ^equests sake only,
He makes important possessed he is with greatness,
And speaks not to himself but with a pride,
That quarrels at self breath. Imagind worth,
Ho^ds in his b^oud such swollen and hott discurse,
That twixt his mental and his active parts,
Kingdom ^ Achilles in commotion rages,
And batters down himself. What should I say,
He is so plaguie proud, that the death tokens of it,
Cry no recovery.

Agam. Let Ajax go to him,
De^re Lord, go you, and greet him in his tent,
It Is said he holds you well, and will be lead,
At ^our request (...) from himself.

Vlis. O Agamemnon let it not be so,
We Will consecrate the steps that Ajax makes,
When they go from Achilles: shall the proud Lord
That ba^ts his ^rrogance with his own^seame,
And never suffe^s matter of the world
Enter his tho^ghts, (...) such as does reuolue,
And ^uminate himself: shall he be worsh^pt,
Of that we hold an idol more then he,
No^ this thrice wor^hy and right valiant Lord,
Shall not so staule his palm nob^y acquird,
Nor by my will aslubiugate his merit,
As amply liked as Achilles is by going to Achilles,
That were to enlard his fat already pride,
And add more coals to Cancer when he burns,
With entertaining great Hiperi^^,
This Lo^d go to him. Jupiter forbid,
And sa^ in thunder Achilles go to him.

Nest. O this is well, he rubs the vain of him.

Diom. And how his silence drinks up his applause,

Aia. If I go to him: with my armed fist il^ push him ore the ^a^e.

Agam. O no, you shall not go,

Aia. And he be proud with me, I Will phe^e his pride,
Let me go^ to him.

Vliss. Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.


Ajax. A paltry insolent fellow.


Nest. How he describes him self.


Ajax. Can he not be sociable.


Vliss. The Raven chides blackness.


Ajax. I Will tell his humorous blood.


Agam. He will be the physician, that should be the pacient.


Ajax. And all men were of my mind.


Vliss Wit would be out of fashion.


Ajax. A should not bear it so, a should eat swords first? shall pride carry
it?


Nest. And t^o^od yow'd carry half.


Ajax. A would have ten shares. I will kneade him, I Will make him supple he is not
yet through warm?


Nest. Force him with prayers pou^e in, pour, his ambition is d^ie.


Vliss. My Lord you feed to much on this dislike,


Nest. Our noble general do not do so?


Diom. You must prepare to fight without Achill^s.

Vliss: Why it is this naming of him does him harm,
H re is a man but it is before his face, I will be silent.

Nest. Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous as Achilles is.

Vliss. Know the whole world he is as valiant --

Ajax. A hoarson dog that shall palter with us thus, would he were a Troyan?


Nest. What a vice were it in Ajax now:

Vliss: If he were proud.

Diom. Or covetous of praise.

Vliss. I or surly borne.

Diom. Or strange or self affected.

Vliss: Thank the heavens Lord, thou art of sweet composure
Praise him that gat thee, she that gave thee suck:
Famed be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature,
Thrice famed beyond all thy erudition:
But he that disciplind thine arms to fight,
Let Mars divide eternity in twain,
And give him half, and for thy vigor?
Bull-bearing Mil^ his addition yield,
To sinowy Ajax, I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which like a board: a pale, a shore confines
This spacious and dilated parts, here is Nestor,
Instructed by the antiqua^y times:
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise,
But pardon father Nestor were your days
As green as Ajax, and your brain so tempered,
You should not have the emynence of him,
But be as Ajax.

Ajax. Shall I call you father?

Nest. I my good Son.

Di^m. Be ruld by him Lord Ajax.

Vliss. There is no tarrying here the Heart Achilles,
Keeps thicket, please it our great general,
To call together all his state of war,
Fresh Kings are come to Troy, To morrow
We must with all our maine of power stand fast,
And here is a Lord come Knights from East to West
And call their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.

Aga. Go we to counsel, let Achil^es sleep,
Light boats sail swift, though greater hulkes draw deep.

Exeunt. Enter Pandarus. Pan. Friend you, pray you a word, do you not follow
the young Lord Paris.


Man. I sir when he goes before me.


Pan. You depend upon him I mean.


Man. Sir I do depend upon the Lord.


Pan. You depend upon a notable gentleman I must needs praise him.


Man. The Lord be praized?


Pan. You know me? ^oe you not?


Man. Faith sir superficially.


Pan. Friend know me better, I am the Lord Pandarus.


Man. I hope I shall know your honor better?


Pan. I do desire it.


Man. You are in the state of grace?


Pan. Grace? not so friend, honor and Lordship are my titles, what music is
this?


Man. I do but partly know sir, it is music in parts.


Pan. Know you the musiciars?


Man. Wholly sir.


Pan. Who play they to?


Man. To the hearers sir.


Pan. At whose pleasure friend?


Man. At mine sir, and theirs that love music,


Pan. Command I mean:


Man. Who shall I command sir?


Pan. Friend we understand not one another, I am to co^rtly and thou to
cunning, at whose request do these men play?


Man. That's to it indeed sir? marry sir, at the request of Paris my Lord, who is
there in person, with him the mortal Venus, the heart blood of beauty, loves
invisible soul:


Pan. Who my cozen Cressida,


Man. No sir, Hellen, could not you find out that by her attributes.


Pan. It should seem fellow thou have not seen the Lady Cressid I come to
speak with Paris, from the Prince Troylus. I will make a complemental^ assault
upon, him for my business seeth's.


Man. Sodden business, theirs a stewed phrase indeed.


Enter Paris and Hellen. Pan. Fair be to you my Lord, and to all this fair
company, fair desires in all fair measure fairlie guide them, especially to
you fair Queen fair thoughts be your fair pillow.


Hell. Dear Lord you are full of fair words:


Pan. You speak your fair pleasure sweet Queen,
Fair Prince here is good broken music.

Par. You have broke it cozen: and by my life you shall make it whole again,
you shall piece it out with a piece of your performance.


Nel. he is full of harmony:


Pan: Truly Lady no:


Hell: O sir:


Pan: Rude in sooth, in good sooth very rude.


Paris: Well said my Lord, well, you say so in fits:


Pan. I have business to my Lord dear Queen? my Lord will you vouchsafe me a
word.


Hell. Nay this shall not hedge us out, we will here you sing ^ertain^ly:


Pan: Well sweet Queen you are pleasant with me, but, marry thus my Lord my
dear Lord, and most esteemed friend your brother Troylus.


Hell. My Lord Pandarus honey sweet Lord,

Pan. Go too sweet Queen, go to?
Comends himself most affectionatly to you.

Hell. You shall not bob us out of our melody,
If you do our melancholy upon your head.

Pan. Sweet Queen, sweet Queen, that's a sweet Queen
I faith --

Hell. And to make a sweet Lady sad is a sower offense.


Pan. Nay that shall not serve your turn, that shall it not in truth la? Nay I
care not for such words, no, no. And my Lord he desires you that if the King
ca^ for him at super. You will make his excuse.


Hell. My Lord Pandarus.


Pan. What says my sweet Queenem,y very very sweet Queen?


Par. What exploit's in hand, where suppes he to night?


Hell. Nay but my Lord?


Pan What says my sweet Queen? my cozen will fall out with you.


Hell. You must not know where he sups.


Par. I Will lay my life with my disposer Cresseida.


Pan. No, no? no such matter you are wide, come your dispose^ is sick.


Par. Well i will makes excuse?


Pan. I good my Lord, why should you say Cresseida, no, your disposers sick.


Par. I spy?


Pan. You spy? what do you spy? come, give me an instrument now sweet
Queen:


Hell. Why this is kindly done?


Pan. My Niece is horribly in love with a thing you have sweet Q^eene.


Hell. She shall have it my Lord, if it be not my Lord Paris.


Pand. He? ^o? she will none of him, they two are tawine.


Hell. Falling in after falling out may make them three.


Pand. Come, come, I Will hear no more of this, I Will sing you a song now.


Hell: I, I, prithee, now by my troth sweet lad thou haste a fine forehead.


Pand: I you may, you may.


Hell: Let thy song be love: this love will undo us all. Oh Cupid, Cupid,
Cupid.


Pand: Love? I that it shall in faith.


Par: I good now love, love, nothing but love.


Pand: Love, love, nothing but love, still love still more
For o loves bow. Shoots Bucke and Do.
The shafts confound not that it wounds
But ticles still the sore:
These lovers cry, o^ ho they dye,
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Does turn oh ho, to ha ha he,
So dying love lives still,
O ho a while, but ha ha ha,
O ho groans out for ha ha ha -- hey ho,

Hell: In love I faith to the very tip of the nose.


Par. He eats nothing but doves love, and that breeds hot blood, and hot blood
begets hot thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deeds, and hot deeds is love.


Pand. Is this the generation of love: hot blood hot thoughts and hot deeds,
why they are vipers, is love a generation of vipers:

Sweet Lord whose a field to day?

Par: Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, A^thenor, and all the gallantry of Troy. I
would feign have armed to day, but my Nell would not have it so.

How chance my brother Troylus went not?

Hell: He hangs the lip at something, you know al Lord Pandarus.


Pand: Not I honey sweet Queen, I long to hear how they sped to day:

You Will remember your brothers excuse?

Par: To a hair.


Pand: Farewell sweet Queen.


Hell. Commend me to your niece.

Pand: I will ^weet Queen.

Sound a retr^at^ Par: Their come from the field: let v^ to Priames Hall
To greet the warriers. Sweet He^len I must woe you,
To help v^-arme our Hector: his stubborn bucle^
With this your white enchaunting fingers touched;
Sha^^ more obey then to the edge of steel*
Or force of Greekish sinews: you shall do more
Then all the Hand Kings, disarme great Hector*

Hell: It Will make us proud to be his servant Paris^
Yea what he shall receive of us in duty,
Gives us more palm in beauty then we have.
Yea over shines our self.

Par: Sweet above thought I love her?

Exe^^t. Enter. Pand^r^s Tr^yl^s, man. Pand: How now where is thy master, at my
Cousin Cress^das?

Man: No sir stays for you to conduct him thither.

Pand: O here he comes^ how now, how now?

Troy: Sir walk off.

Pand: Have you seen my Cousine?

Troy: No Pandarus, I stalk about her dor^
Like to a strange soul upon the Stigian banke^
Staying for waftage. O be thou my Char^n.
And give me swift transportance to these fields,
Where I may wallow in the lilly beds
Propos^d for the deseruer. O gentle Pandar,
From Cupi^s shoulder pluck his pain^ed wings,
And fly with me to Cres^id.

Pand: Walk here ith'Orchard, ^le bring her straight*

Troy: I am giddy; expectation whirles me round,
Th'ymaginary relish is so swee^e,
That it inchaunts my sense: what will it be
When that the wa^ry pallats ^aste indeed
Loves thrice repured Nectar? Death I fear me
Sounding destruction, or some joy to fine,
To subtle, potent, tuned to sharp in sweetness
For the capacity of my ruder powers;
I fea^e it much, and I do^ fear beside^
That I shall loose distinction in my joys
As does a battle, when they charge on heaps
The enemy flying.

Pand. She Is making her ready, she will come straight, yo^ must be witty now, she
does so blush, and fetches her wind so short as if she were fraid with a
spirit: I Will fetch her; it is the pre^^iest villain, she fetches her breath as
short as a new ^ane sparrow.


Troy: Even such a passion does embrace my bosom,
My heart beats thicker then a ^eauorous pulse,
And all my powers do their bestowing loose
Like vassalage at unawares encountering the eye of majesty.

Enter pand^r and Cressid* Pand. Come, come, what need you blush?
Shames a babie; here she is now, swear the oaths now to her that you have
sworn to me: what are you gone again, you must be watch^ ^re you be made
^ame, must you? come your ways come your ways, and you draw backward we will
put you i^h filles: why do you not speak to her. Come draw this curtain, and
lets see your picture; alas the day? how loath you are to offend day light;
and twere dark youd close sooner: so so, r^b on and kis^e the mistress; how
now a kiss in fee-fa^^e: build there Carpenter* the air is sweet. Nay, you
shall fight your hearts out ere I part you. The fa^lcon, as the tercell: for
all the ducks i^h riue^: go too, go too.


Troy: You have bereft me of all words Lady.


Pand: Words pay no debts; give her deeds: but she will bereave you ath' deeds
too if she call ^our acti^ity in question: what billing again: heeres in
witness whereof the parties interchangeably. Come in come in I Will go get a fire?


Cres. Will you walk in my Lord?


Troy. O Cressed how often have I wished me thus.


Cres. Wish^ my Lord? the gods grant? O my Lord?


Troy. What should they grant? what makes this pretty abruption: what to
cur^ou^ dreg espies my sweet lady in the fountain of our love?


Cres. More dregs then water if my tears have eyes.


Troy. Fears make devils of Cherubins, they never see truly.


Cres. B^ind fea^e that seeing reason leads, finds safer f^oting, t^en b^ind
reas^n, stumbling without fear: to fear the worst o^t cures the worse.


Troy. O let my Lady apprechend no fear,
In all Cupids pageant there is presented no monster.

Cres. N^r nothing monstrous neither.


Troy. Nothing but our undertakings, when we vow (...) w^epe seas, live in
fire, ea^e rocks, ^ame Tigers, thinking it harder for our mist^esse to devise
impo^ition enough then for us to undergo any difficulty imposed. --

This the monstruosity in love Lady, that the will is infinite and the
execution confind, that the desire is boundless, and the act a slave to lymite.


Cres. They say all lovers swear more performance then they are able, and yet
reserve an ability that they never perform: vowing more then the perfection of
ten: and discharging less then the tenth part of one. They that have the voice
of Lions, and the act of Hares are they not monsters?


Troy. Are there such: such are not we; Praise us as we are tasted, allow us
as we prove: our head shall go bare till merit lover part no affection in
reuersion shall have a praise in present: we will not name desert before his
birth, and being borne, his addition shall be humble: few words to fair
faith. Troylus shall be such to Cressid, as what envy can say worst shall be a
mock for his truth, and what truth can speak truest not truer then Troylus.


Cres. Will you walk in my Lord?


Pand. What blushing still, have you not done talking ye^^


Cres. Well Uncle what folly I commit I dedicate to you.


Pand. I thank you for that, if my Lord get a boy of you, you will give him me:
be true to my Lord, if he ^^inch chide me for it.


Troy: You know now your hostages, your Uncles word and my fi^me faith.


Pand. Nay I Will give my word for her too: our kindred though they b^ long ere
they be woed* they are constant being won, they are burres I can tell you,
they will ^^icke where they are thrown.


Cres. Boldness comes to me now and brings me heart: Prince Troylus I have
loved you night and day, for many weary months.


Troy: Why was my Cressid then so hard to wy^?

Cres: Hard to seem won: but I was won my Lord
With the first glance; that ever pardon me
If I confess much you will play the tyrant,
I lou^ you now, but till now not so much
But I might master it; in faith I lie,
My thoughts were like unbridled children groan
Too headstrong for their mother: see we fools,
Why have I blab^d: ^ho shall be ^rue to us
When we a^e so vnsecret to our selves.
But th^ugh I loue'd you well, I woed you not,
And yet good faith I wished my self a man;
Or that we women had men's privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent: see see your silence
Coming in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My very soul of council. Stop my mouth.

Troy: And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence.

Pand. Pretty in faith.

Cres. My Lord I do beseech you pardon me,
It Was not my purpose thus to beg a kiss:
I am ashamed; O Heavens what have I done ^
For this time will I take my leave my Lord.

Troy: Your leave sweet Cressid:

Pan: Leave: and you take leave till to morrow morning.

Cres: Pray you content you.

Troy: What offends you Lady?

Cres: sir mine own company.

Troy: You cannot shun your self.

Cres: Let me go and try:
I have a kind of self recids with yo^:
But an unkind self, that it self will leave,
To be another ^oole. I would be gone:
Where is my wit? I know not what I speak,

Tro. Well know they what they speak, that speak so wisely,

Cres. Perchance my Lord I show more craft then love,
And fell so roundly to a large confession.
To angle for your thoughts, but you are wise,
Or else you love not: for to be wise and love,
Exceeds man's might that dwells with gods above,

Tro. O that I thoug^t it could be in a woman.
As if it can I will presume in you,
To feed for age her lamp and flames of love.
To keep her constancy in pligbt and youth.
Out-liuing beauties outward, with a mind,
That does renew swifter then blood decays,
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me*
That my integrity and truth to you,
Might be affronted with the match and weight,
O^ such a winnowed purity in love,
How were I then vp-lifted! but alas,
I am as true as truths simplicity,
And simpler then the infancy of truth.

Cres. In that i will war with you,

Tro. Overtuous fight,
When right with right wa^res who sha'be most right,
True sw^ins in love shall in the world to come
Approve their truth by Troylus, when their times,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare,
Wants ^imele's truth tyrd with iteration.
As true as steel, as plantage to the moon.
As sun to day: as ^n^^le to her mate,
As Iron to Adamant: as Earth to the Center,
After all compariso^s of truth.
(As tr^^hs anthentique author to be cited)
As ^rue as Troylus, shall croune up the verse,
And sancti^ie the nombers,

Cres. Prophet may you be,
If I be fal^e or swerve a hair from truth,
When time is old or has forgot it self,
When water drops have worn the stones of Troy,
And blind obli^ion swallowd Cit^^es up.
And mighty states character-les are grated,
To dusty nothing, yet let memory,
From falce to falce among falce mayds in love,
Vpbraid my falcehood, when th'haue said as falce,
As air, as water, wind or sandy earth,
As Fox to Lamb; or Wolfeto Heifers Calfe,
Pard to the Hind, or stepdame to her Son*
Yea let them say to stick the heart of falsehood,
As false as Cressid.

Pand. Go to a bargain made, scale it, seal it i will be the witness here I hold
your hand, here my Cozens, if ever you prove false one, to another since I have
taken such pain to bring you together let all pitiful goers between be called
to the worlds end after my name, call them all Panders, let all constant men be
Troylusses all fal^e women Cressids, and all brokers between panders; say
Amen.


Tro. Amen.


Cre. Amen*


Pan. Amen.

Whereupon I will show you a Chamber, which bed because it shall not speak of
your pretty encounters press it to death; away.

Exeunt. And Cupid grant all tong-tide maidens here,
Bed, chamber, Pander to provide this ge^re.
Exit.
Enter Ulysses, Diomed, Nestor, Agamem, Chal^as. Call Now Princes for the
^eruice I have done,
The Advantage of the time prompts me aloud,
To call for recompense: appear it to mind,
That through the sight I bear in things to love,
I have abandond Troy, left my possession,
Incurd a traitors name, exposd my self,
From certain and po^^est conueniences,
To doubtful fortunes sequestring from me all,
That time acq^aintance, custom and condition,
Made ^ame, and most familiar to my nature:
And here to do you service am become,
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted.
I do beseech you as in way of taste,
To give me now a little benefit.
Out of those many registered in promise,
Which you say live to come in my behalfe^

Aga. What would thou of (...) Trojan? make demand^

Calc. You have a Trojan prisoner called Aut^^or*
Yesterday took, Troy holds him very dear.
Of^ have you (often have you thanks therefore)
Desird my Cressed in right great exchange.
Whom ^roy has still denied, but thi^ Auth^^^r,
I know is such a wrest in their affairs:
That their nego^iations all must slack,
Wan^ing his manage and they will almost,
Give v^* a Prince of blood a Son of Prya^,
In change of him. Let him be sent great Princes,
And he shall buy my da^ghter: and her presence,
Shall quite strike of all service I have done,
In most accepted pain.

Aga. Let Di^medes bear him,
And bring us Cressid hither, Calcas shall have
What he requests of us* good Di^^ed
Furnish you farely for this enterchange,
Withal bring word If Hector will to morrow,
Be answered in his challenge. Ajax is ready.

Di^. This shall I undertake, and it is a bu^then
Which I am proud to bear.
Exit,
Achilles and Patro stand in their sent. Vli. Achilles stands its entrance of
his tent,
Please it our general pass strangely by him:
As if he were forgot, and princes all,
^ay negligent and loo^e regard upon him,
I will come last, it is like he^le question me.
Why such vnpaulsiue eyes are bent? why ^urnd on him,
If so I have derision me decinable,
To use between your strang^e^ and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink*
It may do good, pride has no other glass,
To show it self but pride: for supple knees,
Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees,

Aga. We Will execute your purpose and put on,
A form of strangeness as ^e (...) along*
So do each Lord, and either greet him no^
Or else disdaynf^lly, which shall shake him more:
Then if not looked on. I will lead the way.

Achil. What comes the general to speak with me?
You know my mind IIe fight no more against ^roy:

Aga. What says Achilles would he ought with us?

Nest. Would you my Lord ought with the general.

Achil. No.

Nest. Nothing my Lord:

Aga. The bet^es*

Achil. Good day, good day:

Men. How do you? how do you?

Achil. What do^s the C^^kould scorn me^

Ajax. How now Patroclus?

Achil. Good morrow Ajax?

Ajax* Ha:

Achil Good morrow.

Ajax. I and good next day too.

Exeunt. Ac^. What mean these fellows know they not Achilles?

Patro. They pass by strangely: they were used to bend,
To send their smiles before them to Achilles:
To come as humbly as they vsd to creep, to holy a^ltars:

Achil. What am I poor of late?
It Is certain, greatness once fallen out with fortune,
Mu^t fall out with men to, what the declined is,
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
As feel in his own fall: for men like butter-flies,
Show not their mealy wings but to the Summer,
And not a m m for being simply man,
Has any honor, but honor for those honors
That are without him, as place, riches, and ^auour,
Prizes of accident as often as merit
Which when they fall as being slipery standers,
The love that leaned on them as slipery too,
Does one pluck down anot^^r, and together, die in the ^all,
But it is not so with me,
Fortune and I are friends, I do enjoy:
At ample point all that I did poss^sse,
Save these men's looks, who do me thinks fi^de out:
Some thing not worth in me such rich beholding,
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses
I Will interrupt his reading, how now Ulysses?

Vl^ss. Now great Thetis Son.

Achil. What are you reading?

Vliss. A strange fellow here,
Writes me that man, how derely ever parted:
How much in having or without or in
Cann^t, make bost to have that which he has,
Nor feels not what he owes but by reflection^
As when his ve^tues aiming upon others,
Heat them and they retort that heat again.
To the first giuers.

Achil. This is not strange Ulysses,
The beauty that is borne here in the face:
The bearer knows not* but commends it self,
To others eyes, nor does the eye it self
That most pure spirit of sense, behold it self
Not going from it self: but eye to eye opposed,
Sallutes each other, with each others form*
For speculation t^rnes not to it self,
Till it has trauel'd and is married there?
Where it may see it self: this is not strange at all.

Vliss. I do not strain at the position,
It is familiar, but at the authors drift,
Who in his circumstance expressly proo^es,
That no man is the Lord of any thing:
Though in and of him there be much con^isting,
Till he communicate his parts to others,
Nor does he of himself know them for aught:
Till he behold them formed in the applause.
Where they are extended: who like an arch reuerb 'rate
The voice again or like a gate of steel:
^ronting the Sun* receives and renders back
His figure and his heat. I was much raped i^ this,
And apprehended here immediately,
Th'vnknowne Ajax, heavens what a man is there?
A very horse, that has he knows not what
Nature what things there are.
Most object in regard, and dear in use,
What things again^ most dear in the esteem:
And poor in worth, now shall we see to morrow,
An act that very chance does throw upon him
Ai^x renowned? O heavens what some men do,
While some men leave to do.
How some men creep in skittish fortunes hall,
Whiles others play the Ideo^^ in her eyes,
How one man eats into another pride,
While pride is fasting in his w^ntonesse.
To see these Grecian Lords, why even already:
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder
As if his foot were one brave Hectors b^est,
And great Troy shriking.

Ach^ll. I do believe it,
For they past by me as misers do by beggars,
Neither gave to me good word nor look:
What are my deeds forgot?

Vliss. Time has (my Lord) a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion:
A great sized monster of ingratitudes,
Those scraps are good deeds past,
Which are devoured as fast as they are made,
Forgot as soon as done, perseverance dear my Lord*
Keeps honor bright, to have done, is to hang*
Quite out of fashion like a ru^ty male,
In monumentall mockry? take the instant way,
For honor trauells in a straight so narrow:
Where on but goes a breast, keep then the path
For emulation has a thousand Sons,
That one by one pursue, if you give way,
Or turn a side from the direct forth right:
Like to an entered tide they all rush by,
And leave you him, most, then what they do in pr^sent:
Though less then yours in pass, must ore top yours.
For time is like a fashionable host,
That slightly shakes hi^ parting gu^st by the hand,
And with his arms out-stretcht as he would fly,
Graspes in the comme^: the welcome ever smiles,
And farewell goes out sighing. Let not virtue seek,
Remu^eration for the thing it wa^. For beauty, wit,
High bi^th, vigor of bone, desert in seruic^^
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects al,
To enu^ous and calumniati g^^me,
One ^ouch of nature makes the whole world kin,
That all with one consent praise newborn ga^^es,
Though they are made and molded of things past,
And go to dust, that is a little guilt,
More laud then guilt o^e-dusted.
The present eye praises the present object.
Then marvel not ^hou great and complet man,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax;
Since things in mo^ion sooner catch the eye,
That what stirs not. The ^rie went o^ce on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou would not entombe thy self alive,
And case ^^y repu^ation in thy tent.
Whose glorious deeds but in ^^ese fi^lds of late,
Made emulous missions among the gods them selves,
And drove great Mars to faction.

Achil. Of this my priua^ie,
I have strong reasons.

Vlis. But against your priuacie,
The reasons are more potent and heroycall:
It Is known Ach^^^es that you are in love
With one of Pria^^ daughters.

Achil. H^^? known.

Vlis. Is that a wonder:
The providence th^^^ in (...)^,
Knows almost e^^ry thing,
Finds bo^^om in the vncomprehens^^e depth,
Keeps place with thought and almost like the gods,
Do tho^ghts vn^aile in their ^umbe (...)
There is a mystery (with whom relation
Durst never meddle) in the soul of state,
Which has an operation more divine,
Then breath or pen can give expressure to:
All the commerse that you have had with Troy,
As perfectly is ours, as yours my Lord,
And better would it fit, Achilles much,
To throw down Hector then Polixena.
But it must grieve young Pir^^s now at home,
When fame shall in our Islands sound her trumpe,
And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing,
Great Hectors sister did Achilles win,
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him:
Farewell my Lord: I as your lover speak,
The fool slides ore the Ice that you should break.

Patr. To this effect Achilles have I moved you,
A woman impudent and mannish grown,
Is not more loathed then an effeminate man
In time of action: I stand condemnd for this
They think my little stomach to the war,
And your great love to me, restraines you thus,
Sweet rouse your self, and the weak wanton Cupid,
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fould,
And like dew drop from the Lions mane,
Be shook to air.

Ach. Shall Ajax fight with Hector.

Patro. I and perhaps receive much honor by him.

Achil. I see my reputation is at stake,
My fame is shrowdly gored.

Patro. O then beware.
Those wounds heal ill, that men do give themselves,
Omission to do what is necessary.
Seals a commission to a blanke of danger,
And danger like an ague subtly taints
Even then when they sit idely in the sun.

Achil. Go call Thersites hither sweet Patroclus,
I Will send the fool to Ajax, and desire him
Tinu^^e the Troyan lords after the combat,
To see us here unarmed. I have a woman's longing,
An appe^tite that I am sick with-all,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace,
To talk with him, and to behold his vis^ge,
Even to my full of view. A labor saved.

Enter Thersites. Thersi. A wonder.

Achil. What?

Thersi. Ajax goes up and down the field asking for himself.


Achil. How so?


Thersi. He must fight singly to morrow with Hector, and is so prophetically
proud of an her^ycall ^udgeling, that ^e raues in saying nothing.


Achil. How can that be?


Thersi. Why a stalks up and down like a peaco^k, ^ stride and a stand:
ruminates like an host^sse, that has no Arithmatique but her brain to set
down her reckoning: bites his lip with a politic regard, as who should say
there were wit in this head and ^woo'd out: and so there is. But it lies as
coldly in him, (...) fire in a stin^, which will not show without knocking, the
man's undone for ever, for if Hector break not his neck in the combat, he will
br^akt himself in vain glory. He knows not me. I said good morrow Ajax:
And he replies thanks Agamem^^^. What think y^u of this man that taken me
for the General? He Is grown a very land-fish languagelesse, a monster, a
plague of opinion, a man may wear it on both sides like a lether Ierkin.


Achil Thou must be my Ambassador Thersit^^.


Thersi. Who I: why heel answer no body: he professes not answering, speaking
is for beggars: he w^ares his tongue in's arms. I will put on his presence,
let Patroclu^ make demands to me. You shall see the p^geant of Ajax.


Achil. To him Patroclus, tell him I humbly desire the v^liant Ajax, to inuit
the valorous Hector to come vna^m'd to my tent, and to procure safe conduct for
his person, of the mag^^animous and most illustriou^ six or seven times
honored Captain General of the army. Aga^^em^e^, do this.


Patro. Iou^ b^esse g^^at Ajax.


There Is. Hum.


Patr. I come from the worthy Achill^^.


There Is. Ha?


Patr. Who most humbly d^sires ^you to inuit Hector to his ^ent.


There Is. Hum?


Patr. And to procure safe conduct from (...).


There Is. Agam^m^e^?


Patr. I my Lord.


There Is. Ha?


Patr. What say you to it.


There Is. God buy you with all my h^^rt.


Patr. Your answer sir.


There Is. If to morrow be a fair day, by a ^euen of the clock it will go one
way or other, howsoever he shall pay for me ere he has me.


Patr. Your answer sir.


There Is. Fare ye well with all my heart.


Achil. Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?


There Is. No: but out of tune thus, What music will be i^ him, when Hector has
knocked out his brains, I know not. But I am sure none, unless the fiddler
Apollo get his sinnews to make Catlings on.


Achil. Come, thou shall bear a letter to him straight.


There Is. Let me hear another to his horse, for that's the more capable crea^ure.


Achil. My mind is troubled like a fountain stird,
And I my self see not the bottom of it.

There Is. Would the fountain of your mind were clear Again^, that I might
water an Ass at it, I had rather be a ^ick in a sheep, then such a valiant
ignorance.


Enter at one door Ae^ea^, at another Paris, Deiphob^^, Ant^m^r, Di^med the
Gr^cian with torches. Paris. See ho? who is that there?

Dei^h. It is the Lord Ae^eas.

Aene. Is the Prince there in person?
Had I so good occasion to lie long
As your prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business,
Should rob my bed mate of my company.

Dio. That Is my mind too? good morrow Lord Aene^^.

Paris. A valiant Greek Aene^^ take his hand.
Witness the process of your speech: wherein
You ^old how Dyomed a whole week by days,
Did haunt you in the fie'd.

Aene. Health to you valiant sir,
During all question of the gentle truce:
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance,
As heart can think or courage execute.

Diom. The one and other Diomed embraces,
Our bloods are now in calm, and so long health:
Lul'd when contention, and occasion m^ete,
By Jove ^le play the hunter for thy life,
With all my force, pursuit, and policy.

Aene. And ^hou shall hunt a Lion that will fly,
With his face back-ward, in humane gentleness:
Welcome to Troy, now by A^ch^ses life,
Welcome indeed: by Ven^^ hand I swear:
No man alive can ^oue in such a ^ort,
The thing he means to kill, more excellently.

Diom. We simpathize. (...) let Aen^^^ line
(If to my sword his fate be not the glory)
A thousand complete courses of the Sun,
But in mine e^^lous honor let him die:
With every joint a wound and that to morrow -- *

Aene. We know each other well?

Diom. We do and long to know each other worse.

Par. This is the most despigh^^ull gentle greeting,
The noblest hateful love that ere I heard of, what bus^^nesse
Lord so ea^ely*

Aene. I was sent for to the King? but why I know no^.

Par. His purpose meets you* it was to bring this Greek,
To Calcho's house, and there to render him:
For the enfreed A^^henor the fair Cressid,
Lets have your company, or if you please,
Have there before us. I constantly believe,
(Or rather call my thought a certain knowledge)
My brother Troyl^s ^^^ges there to night,
Roufe him and give him note of our approach*
With the whole quality wherefore:
I fear we shall be much vnwelcom^.

Aeneas. That I assure you: Tr^yl^^h^d rather Troy were borne to Greece, then
Cressied borne from Troy.


Paris. There is no help.
The bitter disposition of the time will have it so:
On Lord, we will follow you.

Aeneas. Good morrow all.

Paris. And tell me noble Di^^ed, faith tell me true,
Even in soul of sound good fellowship,
Who in your thoughts, deserves fair Helen best,
My self, or Men^laus.

Diom. Both ^like*
He merits well to have her that does seek her,
Not making any scruple of her ^oyle,
With such ^ he^l of pain, and world of charg^.
And you as well to keep her, that defend her,
Not pallating the ^afte of her dishonor
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends,
He like a puling Cu^kold would drink up,
The le^s and dreg^ of a flat tamed piece:
You like a le^cher out of whorish loins,
Are pleased to breed out your inheri^ors,
Both merits poyzd, each weighs nor less nor more,
But he as he, the h^^ui^r for a whore.

Paris. You are too bitter to your country-woman*

Diom. She Is bitter to her country* hear me Paris,
For every fal^e d^op in her bawdy veins,
A Grecians life has (...) for every scruple
Of her contaminated cartion wa^ght,
A Troyan has been slain. Since she could speak,
She has not given so many good words breath,
As for her Greeke^ and Troyans suff^ed death.

Paris. Fair Diomed you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that they d^^^^e to buy,
But we in silence hold this virtue well,
We Will not commend, what we inte^d to sell. Here lies our way.

Exeunt. Enter Troylus and Cresseid^. Troy. Dear, trouble not your self, the
morn is cold.

Cres. Then sweet my Lord i will call mine uncle down,
He shall vnbolt the (...)

Troyl. Trouble him not.
To bed to bed: sleep kill those pri^ty eyes,
And give as soft a^^achment to thy senses,
As infants empty of all thought.

Cres. Good morrow then.

Troyl. ^p^ithee now to bed.

Cres. Are you a weary of me?

Troyl. O Cresseid^! but that the bu^ie da^,
Wak't by the Lark has rouzd the ribald Crows,
And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer,
I would not from thee.

Cres. Night has been too brie^e.

Tro. B^shrew the witch I with venomous wight^ she stai^^^
As ^ediously as h^ll, But flies the graspes of love,
With wings more momentary swift then thought,
You will catch cold and c^rse me.

Cres. Prithee ^arry, you men will never tarry,
O foolish Cresseid* I might have still held of,
And then you would have tarried, Hark there is one up.

Pand What Is a^l the door^^ open here*

Tro^l* It is your Uncle.

Cres. A pestilence on him: now will he be mocking:
I shall have such a life.

Pand. How now, how now, how go maiden-heads,
H^ere you maid, where is my cousin Cress^id?

Cres. Go hang your self* you n^ugh^y^ mocking uncle*
You bring me to do -- and th^^* you flou^e me to.

Pand. To do what, to do what? let her say wha^,
What have I brought you to do?

Cres. Come, come* ^eshr^w your heart, you will ^^re be good, not suffer others.


Pand. Ha* ha: ala^ poor^ wretch: a poor chipochi^, have not slept ^o night?
would he not (a naughty man) let it ^leepe, a bug-beare take him.


Cres. Did not I tell you? would he were (...)^,
Who Is that (...) door, good uncle go and s^e.
O^^ kn^cks. My Lord, come you again into my chamber,
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.

Troyl. Ha, ha.

Cres. Come you are deceived, I think of no such thing,
How earnestly they knock, pray you come in.
Knock. I would not for half Troy have you seen here,

Exeunt. Pand. Who Is there? what is the matter? will you beat down the door?
How now, what is the matter?


Aene. Good morrow Lord, good morrow.


Pand. Who Is there my Lord Aenea^: by my troth I knew you not: what news with
you so early?


Aene. Is not Prince Troylus here?

Pand. Here, what should he do here?

Aene. Come he is here, my Lord, do not deny him,
It does import him much to speak with me.

Pan. Is he here say you* its more then I know i will be sworn For my own part I
came in late: what should he do h^re?


Aene. Who, nay then! Come* come, you will do him wrong ere you are ware, you will be
so true to him, ^o be false to him: Do not you know of him, but yet go fetch
him hither, go.


Troyl. How now, what is the matter?

Aene. My Lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash: there is at hand,
Paris your brother, and Dei^hobus,
The Grecian Diomed, and our Anthenor
Delivered to him, and forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomedes hand
The Lady Cresseida*

Troyl. Is it so concluded?

Aene. By Priam and the general state of Troy,
They are at hand, and ready to effect ^t.

Troyl. How my atchiuement^ mock me*
I will go meet them: and my Lord Aenea^,
We met by chance, you did not find me here.

Aen Good, good, my lord, the sec^ets of neighbor Pand^
Have not more gift in ^aciturnitie.

Exeunt. Pand. Is It possible: no sooner got but lo^t, the devil ^ake Anthenor,
the young Prince will go ^^adde, a plague upon Anthenor. I would they had
brok's neck.

Enter Cress. How now? what'^ the matter? who was here?


Pand. Ah, ah!


Cres. Why ^igh you so profoundly, where is my Lord? gone? tell me sweeet Uncle,
what is the matter.


P^n. Would I we^e as deep under the earth as I am above.


Cres. O the Gods, what is the matter?


Pand. Pray thee get thee in: would thou had nere been bo^^e, I knew thou
would be his death. O poor Gentleman, a plague upon A^t^^nor.


Cres. Good uncle; I beseech you on my knees, what is the matter?


Pand. Thou must be gone wench, thou must be gone: thou art changed for
Anthenor. Thou mu^t to thy father and be gone from ^roylus, twill be his
death, twill be his bane, he cannot bear it.


Cres. O you immortal Gods, I will not go.

Pand. Thou must.

Cres. I will not Uncle. I have forgot my father,
I know no ^ouch of consanguinitie,
No kin, no lou^, no blood, ^o soul so near me
As the s^eete Troylus. O you gods divine,
Make Cresseids name the very crown of falsehood,
If ever she leave Troyl^^. Time, force and death,
Do to this body what extremes you can:
But the strong base, and building of my love,
Is as the very center of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. I Will go in and weep.

Pand. Do, do.

Cres. Tea^e my bright hair, and scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs, and break my heart,
With sounding Troylu^: I will not go from Troy.

Enter Paris, Troyl. Aeneas, Deiphob, A^th. Diomedes. Par. It is great morning,
and the hou^e prefixed,
For her delivery to this valiant Greek,
Comes fast upon: good my brother Troylu^
Tell you the Lady what she is to do,
And have her to the purpose.

Troy. Walk into her house,
I Will b^ing her to the Grecian presently:
And to his hand when I deliver her,
Think it an altar, and thy brother Troylus
A priest there offering ^o it his own heart.

Paris. I know what it is to love,
And would, as I shall pity I could help:
Please you walk in my Lords?

Exeunt. Enter Pa^darus and Cresseida. Pan: Be moderate, be moderate.

Cress. Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief i^ fine, full, perfect that I tast^^
And violenteth in a sense as strong
As that which causes it, how can I moderate it?
If I could temporize with my affections,
Or brew it to a weak and coulder pa^lat,
The like alayment could I give my grief:
My love admittes no qualifiing dross,
No more my grief in such a precious loss.

Enter Troylus. Pan. Here, here, here he comes, a sweet ducks.

Cres. Oh Troylus, Troylus.

Pan. What a pair of spectacles is here, let me embrace too, Oh heart, as the
goodly saying is, Oh heart, heavy heart, why sighst thou without breaking:
where he answers again, because thou can not ease thy smart by friendship
nor by speaking: there was never a (...) ^ime. Let us cast away nothing, for
we may live to have need of such a verse, We see it, we see it, how now lambs?


Troy. Cressid I love thee in so strained a purity,
That the ble^t Gods as angry with my fancy:
More bright in zeal then the devotion, which
Cold lips blow ^o their di^^ies, take thee from me.

Cres. Have the Gods en^y?

Pan I, I, I, I, it is to plain a case.

Cres. And is it true that I must go from Troy?

Troy. A hateful truth.

Cres. What and from Troylus to?

Troy. From Troy, and Troylus*

Cress. Is It possible?

Troy. And suddenly, where injury of chance
Pu^s back, leave taking* iussles roughly by:
All time of pause: rudely beguiles our lips
Of all reioyndu^e: forcibly preuent^
Our locked embras^^es, strangles our dear vows,
^uen in the birth of our own laboring breath:
We two that with so many thousand sighs,
Did buy each other, must poorly sell our selves:
With the rude breuity, and discharge of one,
Injurious time now with a robbers have,
Cra^^'s his ^itch thee^'ry up he knows not how.
As many farewells as be stars in heaven.
With distinct breath, and consignde kisses to them*
He fumbles up into a loose adewe:
And ska^ts us with a single famisht kiss,
Distasted with the salt of broken tears.

Aeneas within. My Lord is the ^ady ready?

Troy. Hark, you are called, some say the Geni^^
Cries so to him that instantly must die,
Bid them have patience she shall come anon.

Pan. Where are my tears rain to lay this wind, or my heart will be blown up
by my ^hro^te.


Cress. I must then to the Grecians.

Troy. No remedy?

Cress. A woeful Cressid mo^gst the merry Greeks,
When shall we see again.

Troy. Here me love? be thou but true of heart.

Cres. I true? how now? what wicked deem is this?

Troy. Nay we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us.
I speak not be thou true as fearing thee.
For I will throw my glove to death himself,
That there is no macula^^on in thy heart:
But be tho^ true say I to fash^on in*
My sequent protestation; be ^hou true, and I will ^ee thee.

Cres. Oh you shall be expos^d my Lord to dang^rs,
As infinite as imminent; but i will be ^rue,

Troy. And i will grow friend with danger, were this sleeue.

Cres. And you this glove, when shall I see you?

Troy. I will corrupt the Grecian centinells,
To give thee nightly visitation, but yet be true.

Cres. Oh heavens be true again?

Troy. Here why I speak it lou^,
The Grecian youths are full of quality,
And swelling ore with arts and exercise:
How nouelty may move, and parts with portion,
Alas a kind of Godly iealousi^,
(Which I bese^ch you call a vert^ous sin,)
Makes me a feared.

Cres. Oh heavens you love me not!

Troy. Die I a villa^^^ then,
In this I do not call your faith in question:
So mainely as my merit. I cannot sing
Nor heel the high la^o^t, nor sweeten talk,
Nor play at subtle games, fair virtues all:
To which the Grecians are most prompt and preg^ane*
But I can tell that in each grace of these*
There lurkes a still, and dumb-discours^^e devil
That tempts most cunningly, but be not tempted.

Cres. Do you think I will?

Troy. No, but something may be done that we will not,
And sometimes wear devils to our selves:
When we will tempt the frail^y of our powers,
Presuming on their changefull potency.

Eneas within. Nay good my Lord?

Troy. Come kiss, and let us part.

Paris within. Broth^r Troylus?

Troy. Good brother come you hithe^?
And bring Eneas and the Grecian with you*

Cres. My Lord will you be true?

Troy. Who I, alas it is my vice, my fault,
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I with great truth catch mere simplicity,
Whilst ^ome with cunning guild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I do were mine bare:
Fear not my truth, the morrall of my wit,
Is plain and true? there is all the reach of it,
Welcome sir Diomed, here is the Lady,
Which for A^tenor we deli^er you.
At the port (Lord) I Will give her to thy hand,
And by the way possess thee what she is
Entreat her fair, and by my soul fair Greek,
If ere thou stand at mercy of my sword:
Name Cr^ss^d, and thy life shall be as safe,
As Priam is in Illion?

Diom. Fair Lady Cressid,
So please you save the thanks this Prince expects:
The luster in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleades your fair usage, and to Diomed,
You shall be mistres, and command him wholly.

Troy. Grecian thou do not use me courteously,
To shame the seal of my petition to thee:
In praising her. I tell thee Lord of Greece,
She is as far high soaring ore thy praises:
As thou unworthy to be called her se^uant,
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge:
For by the dreadful Pluto, if thou do not,
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
I Will cut thy throat.

Diom. Oh be not moved Prince Troylus,
Let me be priueledg'd by my place and message:
To be a speaker free? when I am hence,
I Will answer to my lust, and know you Lord
I Will nothing do on charge, to her own worth,
She shall be prized: but that you say be it so,
I speak it in my spirit and honor no.

Troy. Come to the port I Will ^el thee Diomed,
This brave shall often make thee to hide thy head,
Lady give me your hand, and as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.

Paris. Hark Hectors trumpet?

Aene. How have we spent thi^ m^^ning?
The Prince must think me ^ardy and re^^isse,
That swore to ride before him to the field,

Par. It Is Troylus falte, come, come, to field with him.

Exeu. Enter Ajax armed, Achilles, Patroclus, Agam* M^n^laus, Ulysses, Nester,
Calcas. etc. Aga. Here art tho^ in appointmen^ fresh and fair,
Anticipating time. With starting courage,
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to ^roy
Thou dreadful Ajax that the appauled air,
May pearce the head of the great Comba^ant, and hale him hither.

Ajax. Thou, trumpet, there is my purse,
Now crack t^y lungs, and split thy brazen pipe:
Blow villain, till thy sphered Bias cheek,
Out-swell the colic of puffed Aquilo^,
Come stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood:
Thou blowest for Hector.

Vliss No trumpet answers.

Achil. It Is but early days.

Aga. Is not yond Diomed with Calcas daughter.

Vliss. It Is he, I ken the manner of his ga^e,
He rises on the too: that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.

Aga. Is this the Lady Cressid?

Diom Even she.

Aga. Most dearly welcome to the Greeks sweet Lady.

Nest. Our general does salute you with a kiss.

Vliss. Yet is the kindness but particular, twere better she were kis^ in
general.


Nest. And very courtly counsel. I Will begin: so much for Nestor.

Achil. I Will take that winter from your lips fair Lady,
Achilles bids you welcome.

Men. I had good argument for kissing once.

Patro. But that's no argument for kissing now,
For thus pop't Pa^is in his hardiment,
And parted thus, you and your argument.

Vliss. Oh deadly g^ll and theme of all our scomes,
For which we loose our heads to guild his homes.

Patro. The first was ^ward^ kiss this mine,
Patrolus kisses you.

Mean. Oh this is trim.

Patr. Paris and I kiss evermore for him.

Mean. I Will have my kiss sir? Lady by your leave.

Cres. In kissing do you render or recei^e.

Patr. Both take and give.

Cres. I Will make my match to live,
The kiss you take is better then you give: therefore no kiss.

Mean. I Will give you boot, i will give you three for one.

Cres. You are an od man give even or give none.

Mean. An odd man Lady, every man is odd.

Cres. No Paris is nor, for you know it is true,
That you are odd and he is even with you.

Mean. You fillip me a'th head.

Cres. No i will besworne.

Vliss. It were no match, your nail against his horn,
May I swee^^ Lady beg a kiss of you.

Cres. You may.

Vliss. I do desire it.

Cres. Why beg then.

Vlis. Why then for Venus sake give me a kiss*
When Hellen is a maid again and his --

Cres. I am your debtor, claim it when it is due.

Vlis. Neuers my day, and then a kiss of you.

Diom. Lady a word, i will bring you to your father.

Nest. A woman of quick sense.

Vliss. Fie, fie upon her,
Ther^s language in her eye, her cheek her lip,
Nay her foot speaks, her wanton spirits look out
At every joint and motive of her body,
Oh these encounrerers so glib of tongue,
That give a coasting welcome eroit comes,
And wide vnclapse the tables of their thoughts,
To every ticklish reader, set them down,
For sluttis^ spoils of op^^rtunity:
And daughters of the game.

Flowrish enter all of Troy. All. The Troyans trumpet.

Agam. Yonder comes the troup.

Aene. Hail all the state of Greece: what shall be done,
To him that victory commands, or do you purpose,
A victor shall be known, will you the knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other, or shall they be divided,
By any voice or order of the field, Hector bad ask?

Aga. Which way would Hector have it?

Aene. He cares not, heel obey conditions.

Aga: It Is done like Hector, but securely done,
A little proudly, and great deal misprising:
The knight opposed.

Aene. If not Achilles sir, what is your name?

Achil. If not Achi^les nothing:

Ene: Therefore Achilles, but what ere know this,
In the extremity of great and little:
Valor and pride excel themselves in Hector
The one almost as infinite as all,
The other blanke as nothing, way him well.
And that which looks like pride is cu^tesie,
This Ajax is half made of Hectors blood,
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home,
Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek:
This blended knight half Troyan, and half Greek.

Achil. A maiden battle then, Oh I perceive you.

Aga. Here is sir Diomed? go gentle knight,
Stand by our Ajax. As you and Lord Eneas
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it, either to the uttermost,
Or else a breath, the combatants being kin,
Half stints their strife, before their strokes begin.
Ulysses: what Troyan is that some that looks so heavy?

Vlis. The youngest son of Priam, a true knight,
Not yet mature, yet match^esse firm of word,
Speaking deeds, and deedlesse in his tongue,
Not soon prouok't nor being (...) soon calmed,
His heart and hand both open and both free.
For what he has he gives, what thinks he shows,
Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impare thought with breath;
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous,
F^r Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects, but he in heat of action,
Is more vindicatiue then jealous love.
They call him Troylus, and on him erect,
A second hope as fairly built as Hector:
Thus says Aeneas ou^ that knows the youth,
Even to his yn^hes: and with private soul
Did in great Illion thus translate him to me.

Alaruns. Aga. They are in action.

Nest. Now Ajax hold thine own.

Troy. Hector thou sleep'st awake thee.

Aga. His blows (...) well: dispo'd, there Ajax.

trumpets cease. Diom. You must no more.

Aene. Princes enough so please you.

Ajax. I am not warm yet, let us fight again.

Diom. As Hector pleases.

Hect. Why then will I no more,
Thou art great Lord my fathers sisters Son,
A cousen german to great Prianss feed,
The obligation of our blood for bids,
A gory emulation twixt us twain:
Were thy (...) Greek and Troyan so,
That thou could say this hand is Grecian all:
And this is Troyan, the sinnewes of this leg
All Greek, and this all Troy: my mothers blood,
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my fathers. By lou^ multipotent
Thou should not bear from me a Greekish member,
Wherein my sword had not impressure made.
But the just Gods gainsay,
That any day thou borrowd'st from thy mother,
My sacred Aunt, should by my mortal sword,
Be drained. Let me embra^e thee Ajax:
By him that thunders thou have lusty aims,
Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
Cozen all honor to thee.

Ajax. I thank thee Hector,
Thou art to gentle, and too free a man,
I came to kill thee cozen, and bear hence,
A great addition earned in thy death*

Hect. Not Neoptslymus so mirable,
On whose bright crest, fame with her lowdst (O yes)
Cries, this is he, could promise to himself,
A thought of added honor, torn from Hector.

Aene. There is expectance here from both the sides,
What further you will do.

Hect. We Will answer it,
The issue is embracement, Ajax farewell.

Ajax. If I might in entreaties find success,
As seld I have the chance, I would desire,
My famous cousin to our Grecian tents.

Diom. It Is Agamemnous wish, and great Achilles
Does long to see unarmed the valiant Hector.

Hect. Aeneas call my brother Troylus to me.
And signify this loving enterview
To the expectors of our Troyan part,
Desire them home. Give me thy hand my Cozen.
I will go eat with thee, and see your Knights

Ajax. Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here.

Hect. The worthiest of them, tell me name by name:
But for Achilles my own searching eyes,
Shall find him by his large and portly size.

Agam. Worthy all arms as welcome as to one,
That would be rid of such an enemy.
From heart of very heart, great H^ctor welcome.

Hect. I thank thee most imperious Agamemno^.

Agam. My well-fam'd Lord of Troy, no less to you.

Mean. Let me confirm my princely brothers greeting:
You brace of warlike brothers: welcome hither.

Hect. Who must we answer?

Aene. The noble Menelaus.

Hect* O you my Lord, by Mars his gauntlet thanks,
(Mock not thy affect, the vntraded earth)
Your quandrm wife swears still by Venus glove,
She Is well, but bad me not commend her to you.

Men. Name her not now sir, she is a deadly theme.

Hect. O pardon, I offend.

Nest. I have thou gallant Troyan seen thee often,
Laboring for destiny, make cruel way,
Through ranks of Greekish youth, and I have seen thee
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrigian steed,
Despising many forfaits and subduments,
When thou have hung th'aduanced sword ith'ayre,
Not letting it decline on the declined,
That I have said to some my standers by,
Lo Jupiter is yonder dealing life.
And I have seen thee pause, and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greeks have shrupd thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling. This have I seen,
But this thy countenance still locked in steel,
I never saw till now: I knew thy grand-fire,
And once fought with him, he was a soldier good,
But by great Mars the Captain of us all,
Never like thee: O let an old man embrace thee,
And worthy warrior welcome to our tents.

Aene. It Is the old Nest^r.

Hect. Let me embrace thee good old Chronide,
That have so long walked hand in hand with time,
Most reverend Nest^r, I am glad to claspe thee.

Nest. I would my arms could match thee in contention.

Hect. I would they could.

Nest. Ha? by this white beard I Would fight with thee to morrow.
Well, welcome, welcome, I have ^eene the time.

Vlis. I wonder now how yonder City stands,
When we have here her base and pillar by us?

Hect. I know your favor lord Ulysses well,
Ah sir, there is many a Greek and Troyan dead,
Since first I saw your se^fe and Diomed,
In Illion on your Greekish embassy.

Vlis. Sir I foretold you then what would ensue,
My prophecy is but half his journey yet,
For yonder walls that pertly front your town,
You towers, whose wanton tops do busse the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet.

Hect. I must not believe you.
There they stand yet, and modestly I think*
The fall of every Phrigian stone will cost,
A drop of Gree an blood: the end crowns all,
And that old common arbitrator Time, will one day end it.

Vlis. So to him we leave it.
Most gentle and most va^ant Hector, welcome:
After the General, I beseech you next
To feast with me, and see me at my tent.

Achil. I shall forestall thee lord Ulysses thou:
Now Hector I have fed mine eyes on thee, (by joint.
I have with exact view peru^de thee Hector, and quoted joint by joint.

Hect. Is this Achilles?

Achil. I am Achilles.

Hect. Stand fair I pray thee, let me look on thee,

Achil. Behold thy fill.

Hect. Nay I have done already.

Achil. Thou art too brief, I will the second time,
As I would buie thee, view thee lim by lim,

Hect. O like a book of sport thou wilt read me ore:
But there is more in me then thou understand dst,
Why do thou so oppress me with thine eye.

Achil. Tell me you heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him: whether there, or there, or there,
That I may give the local wound a name,
And make distinct the very breach, whereout
Hectors great spirit flew: answer me heavens.

Hect. It would discredit the blessed gods proud man,
To answer such a question: stand again,
Think thou to catch my life so pleasantly,
As to prenominate in nice conjecture,
Where thou (...) hit me dead.

Achil. I tell ^hee yea.

Hect. Were thou an Oracle to tell me so,
I^e not believe thee* Henceforth guard thee well,
For I Will not kill thee there, nor there, no^ there,
But by the forge that stichied Mars his helm.
I Will kill thee every where, yea ore and ore.
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag,
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
But i will endeavor deeds to match these words,
Or may I never --

Ajax. Do not cha^e thee cozen.
And you Achilles, let these threats alone,
Till accident or purpose bring you to it,
You may have every day enough of Hector,
If you have stomach, The general state I fear,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.

Hect. I pray you let us see you in the field,
We have had pelting wars since you refusd, the Grecians cause.

Achil. Do thou entreat me Hector?
To morrow do I meet thee fell as death: to night all friends.

Hect. Thy hand upon that match.

Agam. First all you Peers of Greece, go to my ^ent,
There in the full conuiue we: afterward
As Hectors leisure, and your bounties shall
Concur together, severally entreat him
To taste your bounties, let the trumpets blow,
That this great soldier may his welcome know.

Exeunt. Troy. My Lord Ulysses, tell me I beseech you,
In what place of the field does Calcas keep.

Vlis. At Menelaus tent, most princely Troylus:
There Diomed does feast with him to night,
Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth,
But gives all gaze, and bent of amorous view,
On the fair Cresseid.

Troyl. Shall I sweet Lord be bound to you so much,
After we part from (...) tent,
To bring me theth^^.

Vlis. You shall command me sir.
But gentle tell me of what honor was
This Cressids in Troy? had she no lover there
That wailes her absence?

Tro. O sir to such as bosting show their skarres,
A mock is due; will you walk on my Lord,
She was beloved my Lord, she is, and does,
But still sweet love is food for fortunes tooth.

Exeunt. Enter Achilles and Patroclus. Ach. I Will heat his blood with greekish
wine to night,
Which with my Cemitar i will cool to morrow,
Patroclus let us feast him to the hight

Pat. Here comes Thersites.

Enter Thersites. Ach. How now thou curre of envy.
Thou cru^ly batch of nature what is the news?

The. Why thou picture of what thou seem, and Idol,
Of idiot w^rshippe^s* heers a letter for thee.

Ach. From whence fragment.

The. Why thou full dish of fool from Troy,

Pat. Who keeps the tent now.

The. The Surgeons box or the pacients wound.

Pat. Well said adversity, and what needs this tricks,

The. Prithee be silent box I profit not by thy talk,
Thou art said to be Achilles male varlot,

Pat. Male varlot you rogue what is that.

The. Why his masculine whore, now the ro'ten dis^ases of the south, the guts
griping ruptures: loades a gravel in the back, lethergies, could palsies, raw
eyes, durtrott^ livers, whissing lungs, bladders full of impostume, Sciaticaes
lime. kills in the palm, incurable bone-ach, and the riueled ^ee simple of the
tetter, take and take again such preposterous discoueries.


Pat. Why thou damnable box of envy thou what means thou to curse thus.


The. do I curse thee.


Pat. Why no you ruinous but, you horson indistinguishable cur, no.


The. No why art thou then exasperate, thou idle immaterial skein^ of sleiue
silk, thou green sacenet ^lap for a sore eye, thou toslell of a prodigalls
purse-thou ah how the poor world is pestred with such water flies, diminitiues
of nature.


Pat. Out gall.

There. Finch egg.

Achil. My sweet Patroclus I am thwarted quite,
From my great purpose into morrowes battle,
Here is a letter from Queen (...)*
A token from her daughter my fair love
Both taxing me, and gaging me to keep:
An oath that I have sworn: I will not break it,
Fall Greeks, fail fame, honor or go or stay,
My mayor vow lies h^re; this i will obey,
Come, come, Thersites help to trim my tent?
This night in banqueting must al be spent, away Patroclus.

There. With to much blood, and to little brain, these two may run mad, but if
with to much brain and to little blood they do i will be a curer of madmen,
here is Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough, and one that loves quails, but he
has not so much brain as eare-wax, and the goodly transformation of Inpiter
there, his be the Bull, the primitive starve, and oblique memorial of
cuck-olds, a thrifty shooing-horue in a chain at his bare leg, to what form
but that he is, should wit larded with malice, and malice faced with wit,
turn him to: to an Ass, were nothing he is both Ass and Ox to an Ox were
nothing, here is both Ox and Ass, to be a day, a Moyle, a Cat, a Fichooke, a
Tode, a Lezard, an Oule, a Puttock, or a Herring without a row. I would not
care, but to be Menelaus I would conspire against desteny, ask me what I
would be, if I were not Thersites, for I care not to be the Louse of a Lazar,
so I were not Menelaus -- hey-day sprites and fires.


Enter Agam: Ulysses, Nest: and Diomed with lights. Aga. We go wrong we go
wrong.

Ajax. No, yonder it is there where we see the lights.

Hect. I trouble you.

Ajax. No not a whit:

Vlis. Here comes himself to guide you.

Achil. Welcome brave Hector, welcome Princes all.

Aga. So now fair Prince of Troy, I bid God night,
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.

Hect. Thanks and good night to the Greeks general.

Mean. Good night my Lord.

Hect. Good night sweet Lord Menelaus.

There. Sweet draught, sweet quoth a, sweet sink, sweet sure.

Achil. Good night and welcome both to those that go or tarry.

Aga. Good night.

Exeunt Agam: Menelaus. Achil. Old Nector tarries, and you to Diomed.
Keep Hector company an hour or two.

Dio. I cannot Lord, I have important business,
The tide whereof is now, good night great Hector.

Hect. Give me your hand.

Vlis. Follow his torch, he goes to Calcas tent, i will keep you company.


Troy. Sweet sir you honor me?

Hect. And so good night.

Achil. Come, come, enter my tent.

Exeunt. There. That same Diomed^ a false hearted rogue, a most unjust knave, I
will no more trust him when he leeres, then I will a serp^at when he hisses,
he will spend his mouth and promise like brabler the (...), but when he
performs, Astronomers forett^^ it, is (...), there will come some change, the
Some borrowe^ of the Moon when Diomed keeps his word, I will rather leave to
see Hector then not to dog him, they say he keeps a Troyan drab, and uses the
trayto^ Calcas tent, I Will after -- nothing but let chery all incontinent varlots.


Enter Diomed. Dio. What are you up here (...) speak?

Chal. Who calls?

Dio. (...), Chalc^s I think where is your daughter?

Call. She comes to you.

Vlis. Stand, where the torch may not disceuer us.

Troy. Cressid comes forth to him.

Enter Cressid Dio. How now my charge.

Cres. Now my sweet guardian, hark a word with you.

Troy. Yea so samiliar?

Vlis. She will sing any man at first sight.

There. And any man may sing her, if he can take her Cliff, she is noted.


Dio. Will you remember?

Call. Remember yes:

Dio: Nay but do then and let your mind be coupled with your words.

Troy. What shall she remember.

Vlis. Lift?

Cres. Sweet honey Greek tempt me no more to folly.

There: Roguery.

Dis. Naythen.

Cress: I Will tell you what.

Dio: Fo, fo, come tell a pin you are forsworn.

Cres: In faith I cannot, what would you have me do?

There: A rugling trick to be secretly open,

Dio: What did you swear you would bestow on me?

Cres: I prithee do not hold me to mine oath,
Bid me do any thing but that sweet Greek.

Dio: Good night.

Troy: Hold patience.

Vlis. How now Troyan.

Cres. Diomed.

Dio: No, no, good night I Will be your fool no more,

T^oy: Thy better must,

Cres: Hark a wo^d in your ear.

Troy: O plague and madness!

Vlis: You a^e moved Prince, let us depart I pray
Least your displeasure should enlarge it self
To wrathful terms, this place is dangerous:
The time right de^dly, I beseech you go.

Troy: Behold I pray you.

Vlis: Now good my Lord go off.
You flow to great destruction, come my Lord.

Troy: I prithee stay.

Vlis: You ^aue not patience, come.

Troy: I pray you stay; by hell, and all hells tormen^*
I will not speak a word.

Dio: And so good night,

C^es: Nay b^t you part in anger*

Troy: Does that grieve thee, O withered truth.

Vlis* How now my Lord?

Troy: By love I will be patient.

Cres: Guardian? why Greek?

Dio: Fo fo you palter.

Cres. In faith I do not, come hither once again^.

Vlis: You shake my Lord at something, will you go. you will break out.


Troy. She strokes his cheek.

Vlis: Come, come.

Troy: Nay stay, by Jove I will not speak a word,
Therein betw^^ne my will and all (...)
A guard of pat^ence, stay a little while,

There: How the devil Luxury with his fat rumpe and potato finger, tickles
together; frye lechery frye.


Dio: Will you then?

Cres: In faith I will lo, never trust me else.

Dio: Give me some token for the surety of it.

Cres: I Will fetch you one.
Exit.
Vlis: You have sworn patience:

Troy: Fear me not my Lord.
I will not be my self, not have cognition
Of what I feel, I am all pa^ience:

Enter Cress. There: Now the pledge, now, now, now.

Cres: Here Diomed keep this sleeue.

Troy: O beauty where is thy faith*

Vlis: My Lord.

Troy: You look upon that sleeue behold it well,
He loved me (oh false wench) giu't me again:

Dio: Whose wast?

Cres: It is no matter now I have it again.
I will not meet with you to morrow night:
I prithee Diomed visit me no more.

There: Now she sharpens, well said Whetstone.

Dio: I shall have it.

Cres: What this?

Dio: I that.

Cres: O all you gods; O pretty pretty pledge!
Thy master now lies thinking on his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
And gives m^moriall dainty kisses to it, as I kiss thee.

Dio: Nay do not snatch it from me.

Cres: He that takes that does take my heart withal.

Dio: I had your heart before, this follows it.

Troy: I did swear patience.
You shall not have it Diomed, faith you shall not,
I Will give you something else.

Dio: I will have this, whose was it?

Cres: It is no matter.

Dio: Come tell me whose it was?

Cres. It Was on's that loved me better then you will,
But now you have it take it.

Dio: Whose was it?

Cres: And by all Di^^as waiting women yond
And by her self I will not tell you whose.

Dio: To morrow will I wear it on my Helm,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.

Troy: Were thou the devil, and wor'st it on thy horn,
It should be challengd.

Cres: Well, well, it is done, it is past: and yet it is not.
I will not keep my word.

Dio: Why then farewell, thou never shall mock Diomed again.


Cres: You shall not got: one cannot speak a word but it straight starts you.


Dio: I do^ not like this fooling.

There: Nor I by Plut^; but that that likes not you, pleases me best.


Dio: What shall I come? the hour --

Cres: I come; O Ione: do come, I shall be plagued.

Dio: Farewell till then.

Cres: Good night, I prithee come:
Troylus farewell, one eye yet looks on thee,
But with my heart the other eye does see,
Ah poor cur s^x, this fault in us I find,
The error of our eye di^ects our mind,
What error leads must err: O then conclude,
" Minds swayd by eyes are full of turpitude.
Exit.
There: A proof of streng^h, she could not publish more,
Unless she said my (...) is now turned whore.

Vlis: All Is done my Lord.

Troy: It is.

Vlis: Why stay we there?

Troy: To make a^ ecordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke:
But if I tell how these two did Court,
Shall I not lie in publishing a truth,
Since yet there is a credence in my heart,
An esperance so obstinatly strong,
That does (...), attest of eyes and ears,
As if those organs were deceptions functions,
Created only to calumniate. Was Cresseid here?

Vlis. I cannot conjure Troyan.

Troyl. She was not sure.

Vlis Most sure she was.

Troy, Why my negation has no taste of madness.

Vlis. Nor mine my Lord: Cresseid was here but now.

Troyl. Let it not be believed for woman-hood.
Think we had mothers, do not give advantage
To stub borne Critiques apt without a theme
For deptauation, to requare the general sex
By Cresseids rule, Rather think this not Cresseid.

Vli. What has she done Prince that ca^ spoil our mothers.

Troyl. Nothing at all, unless that this were she.

There. Will a swagger himself out on's own eyes.

Troyl. This she, no this is Di^^eds Cresseid^,
If beauty have a soul this is not she:
If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,
If sanctimony be the gods delight:
If there berule in unity it self,
This was not she: O ma^nesse of discourse,
That cause sets up with and against it self,
By-found authority: where reason can reuol^
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason,
Without revolt* This is and is not Cresseid,
Within my foul there does conduce a fight
Of this strange nature, that a thing inseparat,
Diuides more wider then the sky and earth:
And yet the spacious breadth of this division,
Admits no orifex for a point as subtle,
As Ariachra's broken woo^e to enter,
Instance, O instance strong as Plu^^^s gates,
Cresseid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven,
Instance, O instance, strong as heaven it self,
The bonds of heaven are slipped, dissolved and loosd,
And with another knot find finger tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love.
The fragments, scraps, the bitts and greazie relics.
Of her ore-eaten faith, are gluen to Diomed,

Vlis. May worthy Troylus be half attached
With that which here his passion does express?

Troy. I Greek, and that shall be divulged well
In Characters as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Venus: never did young man fancy
With so eternal and so ^ixt a soul.
Hark Greek, as much I do Cressid love,
So much by weight, hate I her Diomed:
That sleeue is mine, that heel bear on his Helm:
Were it a Caske composed by Vuleans skill
My sword should bite it: Not the dreadful spout
Which Shipmen do the hurricano call,
Constringd in Mass by the almighty sun
Shall dizzy with more clamor Neptunes ear, in his descent,
Then shall my prompted sword, ^alling on Diomed.

Their: Heel ticle it for his concupie.

Troy: O Cressid, O false Cressid, false, false, false:
Let all untruths stand by thy s^ained name,
And they will seem glorious,

Vlis: O contain your self;
Your passion draws ears hither.

Enter Eneas. Aene: I have been seeking you this hour my Lord:
Hector by this is at ming him in Troy:
Ajax your guard stays to conduct you home.

Troy: Have with you Prince: my courteous Lord adieu,
Farewell reuoulted fair: and Diomed
Stand fast, and wear a Castle on thy head.

Vlis. I Will bring you to the gates.

Troy. Accept distracted thanks.

Exeunt Troyl. Eeneas and Ulysses. There. Would I could meet that rogue
Diomed I would croke like a Raven. I would bode, I would bode^ Patroclus will
give me any thing for the inteligence of this whore: the Pa^ot will not do more
for an almond then he for a commodious drab: Lechery, lechery, still wars and
lechery, nothing else holds fashion. A burning devil take them.

Exit.
Enter Hector and Andromache. And. When was my Lord so much ungently temperd,
To stop his ears against admonishment:
Unarm unarm, and do not fight to day.

Hect. You train me to offend you, get you in,
By all the everlasting gods I Will go.

And. My dreams will sure prove ominous to the day.

Hect. No more I say.

Enter Cassandra. Cas. Where is my brother Hector?

And, Here sister, armed and bloody in intent,
Consort with me in loud and dear petition,
Pursue we him on knees: for I have dreamt
Of bloody turbulence, and this whole night
Has nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter.

Cass, O it is true.

Hect. Ho? bid my trumpet sound.

Cres. No notes of sallie for the heavens sweet brother.

Hect. Begone I say, the gods have heard me swear.

Cas. The gods are dease to ho^^e and peevish vows,
They are polluted offerings more abhord,
Then spotted livers in the sacrifice.

And. O be persuaded, do not count it holy,
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow,
But vows to every purpose must not hold:
Unarm sweet Hector.

Hect, Hold you still I say,
Mine honor keeps the weather of my fate:
Life every man holds dear but the dear man,
Holds honor sarre more precious dear then life,
Enter Troylus. How now young man, meanest thou to fight to day.

And. Cassandra call my father to persuade.

Exit Cassan. Hect. No faith young Troylus, dof^e thy harness youth,
I am to day in the vain of chivalry,
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee go, and doubt thou not brave boy,
I Will stand to day for thee and me and Troy.

Troyl. Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you,
Which better fits a Lion then a man.

Hector. What vice is that? good Troylus chide me for it.


Troyl. When many times the captive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword.
You bid them rise and live.

Hect. O it is fair play.

Troyl. Fools play by heaven Hector.

Hect. How now? how now?

Troyl. For'th love of all the gods
Lets leave the Hermit Pity with our Mother,
And when we have our armors buckled on,
The venomd vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, rain them from ruth.

Hect. Fie savage, fie.

Troyl. Hector then it is wars.

Hect. Troylus I would not have you fight to day.

Troyl. Who should withold me?
Not ^ate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars,
Beckning with fiery trunchion my ^etire,
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
Their eyes ore-galled with recourse of tears,
Nor you my brother, with your true sword drawn,
Opposd to hinder me, should stop my way,

Enter Priam and Cassandra. Cass. Lay hold upon him, Priam hold him fast,
He is thy crutch: now if thou loose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.

Priam. Come Hector, come, go back,
Thy wife has dreamt, thy mother has had visions,
Cassandra does forcsee, and I my self,
Am like a prophet suddenly en^apt,
To tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore come back.

Hec. Aeneas is a field,
And I do stand, engagd to many Greeks,
Even in the faith of valor to appear,
This morning to them.

Priam I but thou shall not go.

Hec. I must not break my faith,
You know me dutifall, therefore dear sir,
Let me not shame respect, but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you do here forbid me royal Priam.

Cass. O Priam yield not to him.

And. Do not dear father.

Hec. Andromach^ I am offended with you,
Upon the love you bear me get you in.

Exit Androm. Troy. This foolish dreaming superstitious girl,
Makes all these bo^ements.

Cas. O farewell dear Hector.
Look how thou dy'est look how thy eye turns pale.
Look how thy wounds do bleed at many vents,
Hark how Troy roares, how Hecuba cries out,
How poor Andromache shrils her dolours forth,
Behold destruction, frenzy, and amazement,
Like witlesle an iques one another meet,
And all cric Hector, Hectors dead, O Hector.

Troyl. Away, away.

Cas. Farewell, yet soft: Hector I take my leave,
Thou do thy self and all our Troy deceive?

Hec. You are amazed my liege, at her exc^aime,
Go in and cheer the town,
We Will forth and fight,
Do deeds worth praise, and tell you them at night.

Priam. Farewell, the gods with safety stand about thee.

A^arum. Troyl. They are at it hark proud Diomed believe.
I come to loose my arm or win my sleeue.

Enter Pandar. Pand. Do you here my (...)^

Troyl. What now?

Pand. Here Is a letter come from yond poor gir^e.

Troy. Let me read,

Pand. A whoreson tisick, a whoreson rascally tisick, so troubles me, and the
foolish fortune of this girl, and what one thing, what another, that I shall
leave you one ath's days: and I have a rheum in mine eyes too, and such an
ache in my bones, that unless a man were cursed I cannot tell what to think
on it. What says she there?


Troy. Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart,
The Effect does operate another way.
Go wind to wind, there turn and change together:
My love with words and errors still she feeds,
But edi^ies another with her deeds.

Exeunt. Enter Thersi^es: excursi^^s. Thersi. Now they are clapper-clawing one
another: I Will go look on, that dislembling abhomihable vatlet Diomede, has go^
that same scurnie dooting foolish knaves sleeue of Troy there in his helm. I
would feign see them meet, that that same young Troy an ass that loves the
whore there, might send that Greekish whore-masterly villain with the fleeue,
back to the dissembling luxurious drabbe of a sleeuelesse arrant. Ath' the other
side, the policy of those cra^tie swearing raskalls; that stale old
Mouse-eaten dry cheese Nestor: and that same dogge-foxe Ulysses, is not
proou'd worth a Black-berry. They set me up in policy, that mongrill curre
Ajax, against that dog of as bad a kind Achilles. And now is the curte Ajax,
prouder then the curre Achilles, and will not arm to day. Whereupon the
Grecians began to proclaim barbarism, and policy grows into an ill
opinion. Soft here comes sleeue and the other.


Troy. ^^lye not, for should th^^ take the ^uer Stix, I would sw^m after,


Dio^ed. Thou do miseall re^^e,
I do not (...), but aduantagious care,
Withdrew me from the ods of multitude, have at thee?

There. Hold thy whore Grecian: now for thy whore Trojan,
Now the sleeue, now the sleeue.

Enter Hector. Hect. What art Greek, art thou for Hectors match.
Art thou of blood and honor.

There. No, no, I am a rascal, a scuruy railing knave, a very filthy rogue.


Hect. I do bele^ue thee, live.

There. God a mercy, that thou will believe me, but a plague break thy neck --
for frighting me: what is become of the wenching roagues? I think they have
swallowed one another. I would laugh at that miracle -- yet in a sort lechery
eats it self, i will seek them.

Exit.
Enter Diomed and S^ruant. Dio. Go go, my servant take thou Troylus horse,
Present the fair steed to my Lady Cressid,
Fellow commend my service to her beauty:
Tell her I have chastis'd the amorous Troyan,
And am her knight by proof.

Enter Agamem. Man. I go my Lord.

Aga. Renew, renew, the fierce Polidamas,
Has beat down Menon: bastard Margarelo^,
Has Doreus prisoner.
And stands Colossus wise wauing his beam,
Upon the pashed corses of the Kings:
Epistropus and Cedus, Polixines is slain,
A^phimacus and Thous deadly hurt,
Patroclus taken or slain, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised, the dreadful Sagittary,
Appalls our numbers, have we Diomed,
To re-enforcement or we perish all.

Enter Nest^r. Nest: Go bear Patroclus body to Achilles,
And bid the snail-pac't Ajax arm for shame,
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
And there lacks work, anon he is there a foot
And there they fly or die, like sealing sculls,
Before the belching Whale, then is he yonder:
And there the strawy Greeks ^ipe for his edge
Fall down before him like a mowers swath,
Here, there and cuery where, he leaves and takes.
Dext^^ty so ob aying appeute,
That what he will he does, and does so much:
That proof is called impossibility.

Enter Ulysses, Vliss. Oh courage, courage Princes, great Achilles,
Is atming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengcance,
Patroclus wounds have roused his drowzy blood,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons
That noselesle, handlesse, hackt and chipt come to him.
Crying on Hector, Ajax has loft a friend,
And ^oames at mouth, and he is armde and at it.
Roa^ing for Troylus, who has done to day,
Mad and fantastique execution:
Engaging and redeeming of himself
With such a careless force, and forcelesse care,
As if that lust in very spi^ht of cunning, bad him win all.
Enter Ajax. Troylus, thou coward Troylus.
Exit,
Dio. I there, there?

Nest: So, so we draw together.
Exit.
Enter Achilles. Achil. Where is this Hector?
Come, come, thou boy-queller show thy face,
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry
Hector where is Hector I will none but Hector.
Exit. Enter, Ajax. Troylus thou coward Troylus show thy head.
Enter Diom. Troylus I say where is Troylus?

Ajax. What would thou.

Diom. I wo^ld correct him.

Ajax. Were I the general thou should have my office,
Ere that correction? Troylus I say what Troylus.

Enter Troylus. Troy. Oh traitor D^omed, turn thy false face thou traitor,
And pay thy life thou owe^t me for my horse.

Dio. Ha art thou there?

Ajax. I Will fight with him alone stand Diomed.

Diom. He is my prize, I will not look upon.

Troy. Come both you cogging Greeks have at you both.

Hect. Yea Troylus, O well fought my youngest brother.
Enter Achil: Now do I see thee ha, have at thee Hector.

Hect. Pause if thou wi^t.

Achil. I do disdain thy courtesy proud Troyan,
Be happy that my arms are our of use:
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shall here of me again:
Till when go s^eke thy fortune.
Exit.
Hect. Fare thee well.
I would have been much more a fresher man,
Had I expected thee, how now my brother.

Enter Troyl: Troy. Ajax has taken Aeneas, shall it be,
No by the flame of yonder glorious heaven
He shall not carry him i will be tano^o,
Or bring him off, fate here me what I say:
I wreake not though I end my life to day.
Exit.
Enter one in armor. Hect: Stand, stand thou Greek, thou art a goodly mark,
No? will thou not. I like thy armor we will,
I Will frush it and vn^oc^^ the rinets all:
But i will be master of it, will thou not beast abide,
Why then fly on, i will hunt thee for thy hide.
Exit. Enter Achilles with Myrmidons. Come here about me you my Myrmidous,
Mark what I say, attend me where I wheel:
Strike not a stroke, but keep your selves in breath,
And when I have the bloody Hector found:
Empale him with your weapons round about,
In fellest manner execut your a^mes
Follow me sirs and my proceedings eye,
It is decreed Hector the great must die.
Exit.
Enter Thersi: Me^^: Paris. There. The cuck-old and the cock-old-maker are at
it, now bull, now dog low, Paris low, now my double hen'd spartan, low
Paris, low the bull has the game, wate horns ho?


Exit Paris and Menelus. Enter Bastard Bast. Turn slane and fight.

There. What art thou?

Bast. A Bastard son of Priams.

There Is: I am a bastard too, I love bastards. I am bastard be. got, bastard
instructed, bastard in mind, bastard in va^ our, in cuery thing illigitimate,
one bear will not bite another, and wherefore should one bastard? take heed,
the quarrels most ominous to us, if the son of a whore ^ight for a whore, he
tempts judgment, farewell bastard.


Bast. The d^uell take thee coward.
Exit.
Enter Hector. Hect. Most putrified core so fair without,
Thy goodly armor thus has cost thy life;
Now is my days work done i will take my breath*
Rest sword thou have thy fill of blood and death.

Enter Achilles and Myrmidons. Achil: Look Hector how the Sun begins to set,
How ougly night comes breathing at his heels
Even with the veil and darkning of the Sun,
To c^ose the day up, Hectors life is done.

Hect. I am vna^m'd sorgee this vantage Greek.

Achil. Strike fellows ^rike, this is the ^an I seek,
So Illion fall thou next, come Troy sink down,
Here lles thy heart, thy sin was and thy bone.
On Myrmydous, and cry you all amain,
Achilles has the mighty Hector slain,
Retreat: Hark a retire upon our Grecian prat.

One: The Troyans trumpet sound the like my Lord.

Achil: The dragon wing of night orespreds the earth,
And stickler-like the aimies separates.
My halse supt sword that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bake: thus goes to bed:
Come tie his body to my horses tail,
Along the field I will the Troyan traile.

Exe^nt: Enter Agam: Ajax, Meue: Nestee, Diom: and the rest m^^ching. Aga.
Hark, hark, what is this?

Nest. Peace drums.
Sold: within. Achilles, Achilles, Hectors slain Achilles.

Dio. The brute is Hectors slain and by Achilles.

Ajax. If it be so yet braglesse let it be,
Great Hector was as good a man as he.

Aga. March patiently along: let one be sent,
To pray Achi^les see us at our tent:
If in his death the Gods have us befriended.
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.

Exeunt. Enter Aeneas, Paris, Antenor, Diephobus. Aene. Stand ho? yet are we
masters of the field,

Enter Troylus. Troy. Never go home, here starve we out the night,
Hector is slain.

All. Hector! the gods forbid.

Troy. He Is dead and at the murderers horses tail,
In bestly sort dragd through the shameful field:
Frown on you heavens, effect your rage with speed,
Sit gods upon you thrones, and smile at Troy.
I say at once, let your breese plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on.

Aene. My Lord you do discomfort all the host.

Troy. You understand me not that tell me so,
I do not speak of flight, of fear of death
But dare all immynence that gods and men
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so or Hecuba?
Let him that will a scrich-ould aye be called,
Go into Troy and say their Hectors dead,
There is a word will Priam turn to stone,
Make wells and Niebe's of the maids and wives:
Could statues of the youth and in a word,
Scarre Troy out of it self, there is no more to say,
Stay yet you proud abh^minable tents:
Thus proudly pitched upon our Phrigian plains,
Let Tytan rise as early as he dare;
I Will through, and through you, and thou great sized coward,
No space of earth shall sunder out two hates:
I Will haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
That moulderth goblins swift as f^ienzes thoughts,
Strike a free march, to Troy with comfort go
Hope of reueng shall hide our ^^ward woe.

Enter Pandarus. Pan. But here you, here you.

Troy. Hence broker, lacky, ignomyny, shame,
Pursue thy life, and hue aye with thy name.

Exeunt all but Pandarus. Pan. A goodly medicine for my asking bones, Oh world,
world -- thus is the poor agent despised, Oh traitors and bawds, how earnestly
are you set a work, and how ill requited, why should our endeavor be so loved
and the performance so loathed, what verse for it? What instance for it?

Let me see,
Full merrily the humble Be does sing,
Till he has lost his honey and his sting.
And being once sub dude in armed tail,
Sweet honey, and sweet notes together fail.
Good traiders in the flesh, set this in your painted clothes,
As many as be here of Pandars, (...),
Your eyes half out weep out at Pandars fall.
Or if you cannot weep yet give some groans,
Though not for me yet for my aching bones:
Brethren and sisters of the hold-ore trade,
Some two months hence my will shall here be made*
It should be now but that my fear is this,
Some gauled goose of Winchester would hiss.
Till then i will sweat and seek about for cases,
And at that time bequeath you my diseases.

FINIS.

