THE TRIAL OF THE PROTESTANT PRIVATE SPIRIT. WHEREIN Their Doctrine, making
the said Spirit the sole ground and means of their Belief, is confuted. By
Authority of Holy Scripture. Testimonies of ancient Fathers. Evidence of
Reason, drawn from the Grounds of Faith. Absurdity of consequences following
upon it, against all Faith, Religion, and Reason.


The Second Part, which is Doctrinall.

WRITTEN By I. S. of the Society of JESUS.

Ezech. 23. verse. 3. Vae Prophetis insipientibus, qui sequuntur Spiritum suum,
and nihil vident.

Woe to the foolish Prophets, who follow their own Spirit, and see nothing.

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XXX.

Tertullian. de praescript. cap. 4. Qui lupi rapaces nisi sensus and Spiritus
subdoli, ad infestandum gregem intrinsecus delitescentes?

Who are ravenous wolves, but deceitful Spirits and senses, lying close to
molest the flock of Christ?

Calvin. in 1. Joan. 41. Multi falsi doctores titulum Spiritus mentiuntur.
Insurgunt multi fanatici qui se temere iactant Spiritu Dei praeditos esse.
Loquuntur priuato suo nomine, prodeunt priuato suo nomine, proferumt ex proprio
sensu.

Many false Doctors do feign the title of the Spirit. Many mad men do rashly
boast that they have the spirit of God. They speak in their own name, they go
out in their own name, and they utter what they say in their own name.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
This second Part of the Protestant Private Spirit, like a nevv-borne Infant,
is at length, after long travail, come to light. I may justly term it an
Agrippa, because it was hardly brought forth. It caused many great, and long
gripings in the Mothers womb, in the Conception and Framing, but passed
difficulties, both greater and longer, in the Birth and Printing (so hard it is
for an Israelite among the Egyptians to conceive and bear such Infants.) It
was in danger to have been stifled under Midvviues hands: one was long sought
for, hardly obtained, and far fetched; and yet as a stranger, not so
skillfull, but that many errors are committed. If therefore it come to thy
view maimed and imperfect, blame not the Author, excuse the Printer.

Thou vvilt marvel how this second Part gets birth and breath, and comes to
light before the first. The reason is this: like to two Tvvins they strugled
in the birth, and passing the hands of diverse Midvviues, this fell to the lot
of one more ready and skillfull, and so got the precedence of Birthright;
which yet in part was its due, as being first formed and composed, and that
before the other was intended. For supposing the Adversary as common and
known, to wit the Private Spirit, without discussing the quarrel, it
assaulted him at the first, and so aimed to vvound Heresy in the head.

But wherefore then is this called the second, the other the first Part?
Because the matter or subject so requires, this being a Confutation of the
Private Spirit, the ground of all Protestancy; the other a Proof, or
declaration, that the same Spirit is such a Ground to the Protestants: which
at the first supposed, was afterward thought fit to be at large proved; that
thereby it may appear, that this Private Spirit is by the said Protestant
Doctrine, made not only a Ground, but a sole and whole Ground of their Faith
and Religion; yea that all other true Grounds are for that end by them
neglected, and rejected. Which proof of being a Ground (the order of Doctrine
so requiring) because it is precedent to the reproof of the same; there fore
the other Part, though later composed and diuulged, claims the title of the
first and this, of the second Part.

In the mean time, if this, thus hardly brought forth, and thus svvadled in
the cloutes of many imperfections both of pen and print, may give thee Content;
and thy Content give Vente; and the Vente help on to the birth of the other; my
hope shall be, that as this Part may satisfy thee in the disproofe of this
supposed false Ground: so the other will more satisfy, first in the proof of
the true Grounds assigned by Catholics; next in the contempt of the same
Grounds used by Protestants, and that for the establishing of their false
Ground, which in the first Part is fully performed.

Of which if either the one, or both may ground, or confirm thee in the Truth
and true Grounds of Truth; this thy good shall be the fruit, I desire, of my
pains; and my pains shall think themselves, at thy hands, sufficiently
requited, by thy good prayers, which I desire for my self, and further
endeauours; all to the Honor of God, and good of his holy Church.

THE CONTENTS Of the Chapters, Sections, and Subdiuisions of this second Part
of the Private Spirit, as it is Doctrinall, and confuted.
CHAP. I.
CERTAIN Considerations of the Means of Faith, necessary for the
understanding of this Protestant Private Spirit. Sect. 1. Of six means, and
helps to attain Faith. Sect. 2. Of the order and necessity of these means.
Sect. 3. How the Protestants want all these 6. means of faith. Sect. 4. How
the Catholics and Protestants differ in these six means; and how the
Protestants make their Private Spirit the only means for all.
CHAP. II.
THE Private spirits interpretation of Scripture, deciding of Controversies,
and judging of Faith, confuted by holy Scripture. Sect. 1. Out of the 1. S.
John 4.1. S. Paul. 1. Tim. 4.11. Act. 20.30. 2. Pet. 2. describing this Spirit.
Sect. 2. Out of 2. Pet 1.20. making the same spirit author, and interpreter of
Scripture. Sect. 3. Out of 1. Cor. 12.8. proving the interpretation of
Scripture to be a gift gratis given, not common to al faithful. Sect. 4. Out
of Ezech. 13. describing in false Prophets this Private Spirit, with the
effects and punishment of it. Sect. 5. Out of Job 32. declaring in Eliu his
friends spirit, the manner of proceeding of this Private spirit. Sect. 6. Out
of Tit. 3.10. showing the Spirit of an Heretic. Sect. 7. Out of diverse places
of Scripture condemning the relying upon our own judgment.
CHAP. III.
THE Private Spirits interpreting of holy Scripture, and judging of Mysteries
of Faith, and Controversies, confuted by the testimony of ancient Fathers.
CHAP. IV.
THE Private Spirits interpreting of Scripture, and judging of Controversies,
confuted by reasons drawn from the difficulty of discerning of Spirits. Sect.
1. Of the diversity of Spirits. Sect. 2. Of the difficulty to discern these
Spirits. Sect. 3. Of the difficulty and uncertainty of the rules of discerning
spirits. Sect. 4. Of the subtilty of Satan, in deceiving by the similitude of
spirits. Sect. 5. The difficulty to discern spirits, proved by Scripture.
CHAP. V.
THE Private Spirits authority to interpret Scripture, and judge of
Controversies, confuted by the true infallible authority, and means of
interpreting scripture. Sect. 1. What interpretation, authority, and means are
necessary, and infallible for the sense of Scripture. Subd. 1. What
interpretation of scripture is necessary. 2. Who have authority to make this
interpretation. 3. What means are to be used by these interpreters, to make
this interpretation: and of 4. rules of infallible interpreting of Scripture.
Sect. 2. That the private Spirit cannot have this infallible authority, and be
this infallible means, is proved. Subd. 1. By reasons drawn from the nature
of the Holy Scripture, which is to be expounded. 2. By reasons drawn from the
private spirit, which should expound it.

CHAP. VI.
THE Private Spirits authority to judge of Controversies of faith, confuted by
reasons drawn from the nature of a Judge of Faith. Sect. 1. The properties of
a Judge of Faith. Sect. 2. The whole body of the Church cannot be this Judge.
Sect. 3. Secular Princes cannot be this Judge. Sect. 4. Lay People cannot be
this Judge. Sect. 5. The Scripture cannot be this Judge. Sect. 6. Bishops, and
Prelates of the true Church, are this Judge. Sect. 7. The private spirit cannot
be this Judge.
CHAP. VII.
THE private spirits authority to judge of Controversies of faith, confuted by
reasons drawn from the nature and certainty of Faith. Sect. 1. The properties
of Faith, with the private spirits manner of proceeding. Sect. 2. The private
Spirit cannot be a means of Unity in faith. Sect. 3. Nor a means of the
certainty of Faith. Sect. 4. Nor a means of the integrity and perfection of
faith. Sect. 5. Nor a means of faith, which is got by hearing. Sect. 6. Nor a
means of Faith which requires credible testimonies. Sect. 7. Nor a means of
Faith which obliges all to believe, and accept of it.
CHAP. VIII.
THE private spirits authority to judge of Faith, confuted by circular
absurdities following upon it, against Faith. Sect. 1. Of the nature of a
Circle, and the difference of Circles. Sect. 2. The Catholics cleared from the
objected Circle against their doctrine. Sect. 3. The Protestants diverse manners
of Circles. Subd. 1. Their Circle between the scripture, and the spirit. 2.
Between the spirit, and Faith. 3. Between election, and understanding of
scripture. 4. Between the Spirit of every private man, and of a general
Council.

CHAP. IX.
THE private Spirits Authority to judge of Controversies of Faith, confuted by
doctrinall absurdities following upon it, against Faith. Sect. 1. Idolatry and
heresy compared: and of 4. heads, and origens of all late Heresies, proceeding
of the private Spirit. Sect. 2. Of absurdities which follow upon the 1. head,
Of contempt of all Church Authority, and relying upon the private Spirit. Sect.
3. Of absurdities which follow upon the 2. head, Of sole Faith. Subdiu. 1.
Against man, making him as just, and more certain of salvation, then Christ.
2. Against Faith, making it false, contradictory, sinful, rash,
presumptuous, and preiudicious to charity etc. 3. Against Christ, to whom it
is injurious, as a Redeemer, Physician, Lawgiuer, Judge, Priest: and makes him
ignorant, sinful, and damned for the time.
Sect. 4. Of absurdities which follow upon the 3. head, that is, Of
Concupiscence being original sin. Subdiu. 1. Eight diverse absurdities which
follow upon it. 2. The difference between a just Catholic, and Protestant.
Sect. 5. Of absurdities which follow upon the 4. head, that is, Of absolute
predestination to damnation. Subdiu. 1. Absurdities against man, leading to
carelessness, despair of salvation, and inability to be saved. 2. Absurdities
against God, making him the Author of sin. 3. A Sinner. 4. The only Sinner.
5. A Liar, and dissembler. 6. A Tyrant most cruel. 7. A Devil. 8.
Observations upon the former doctrine.
Sect. 6. Of absurdities which follow against Faith, and the Creed. Subdiu. 1.
In general, destroying all Faith. 2. In particular, against all the 12.
articles of the Creed.
Sect. 7. Of absurdities against Prayer, and the Pater Noster. Subdiu. 1. In
general, making all prayer needless, or hopeless. 2. In particular, opposing
all the 7. petitions of the Pater Noster.
Sect. 8. Of absurdities against the observation of all laws, and chiefly the
Ten Commandments. Subdiu. 1 In general, how all laws are made impossible,
and not obliging. 2. In particular, how many ways the Protestant dostrine
encourages to the breach of all laws, and to all lewdenesse of life. 3. To
what vices in particular the same leads, chiefly to Sloth, Lust, Cruelty, and
Pride. 4. Bad life. 1. In the common people. 2. In the Ministers. 3. In the
first reformers of protestant Religion, confessed to be an effect of this
doctrine.
Sect. 9. The conclusion, comparing the private spirits doctrine with the
Catholic Churches doctrine; whether leads to the greater honor of God.
CHAP. X.
THE Protestants Objections and proofs, taken out of Scripture, for the
defense of their private Spirits authority to interpret Scripture, and judge
of Controversy, are proposed, and answered. Sect. 1. Of certain observations
profitable for the solution of objections. Sect. 2. The objections for the
private Spirits authority, answered. Sect. 3. More objections proposed, and
answered.
CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS OF SIX MEANS NECESSARY TO ATTAIN FAITH, All wanting
in the Protestants, and suppressed by their doctrine of the Private Spirit.
CHAP. I.
Of these six means, which they be. SECT. 1.
THOUGH, according to S. Hierome, Hierom.
Haereses ad originem reuocare, refut are est: To reduce heresies to their
origin, is to refute them, that is, to show not only the time when they did
begin, but also the head, or fountain from whence they did spring, is a
sufficient proof, both of their nouelty and falsity; and so to have showed the
Private Spirit to have been the origin, and Mother which has begot all late
heresies, which as a brood of such a Damme, have descended from her (which in
the first Part is fully performed) is a sufficient proof that the same
heresies are degenerate from all divine Verity, and are as so many poisoned
streams descended from an infected fountain. And though all Sect-maisters,
who disclaim and delude the usual received grounds of Christian religion, such
as are, Scripture, Tradition, Church, Councels, Sea Apostolic, and Fathers,
and appeal every man to his own Private Spirit, do make this their Spirit the
orige^ of their faith (which also in the former part is, I hope sufficiently
and copiously convinced, that the chief and prime Protestants before cited,
have done) might suffice to convince their doctrine of falsity, for that it is
descended from a Mother of such impiety: Though (I say) this, that has been
thus proved, might be a sufficient motive to breed a dislike of this Private
Spirit, and of the doctrine springing from it; yet because, that out of it all
sorts and sects of heresies, especially lately engendered, have issued as so
many vipers out of a dunghill: and because the confutation of it is the
confutation of all heresies in their origin, and as it were a brusing of all
late novel opinions in the head, or a strangling of them together wiih their
Mother in her womb, (for to prove the fountain to be poisoned, is to prove
the stream to be infected, and to convince the Mother of adultery, is to prove
the child liable to basta^dy;) it is a work profitable, and (I hope) worth the
labor to descend into a particular confutation of this Private Spirit, and by
special and several kinds of arguments (such as are the authority of holy
Scripture, the testimonies of ancient Fathers, the principles of holy Faith,
the euidency of solid reason, and the absurdities both doctrinall and
practical that ensue upon it, and the fruits and effects which have been
produced by it) to lay open the deformity, falsity, and impiety of this Private
spirit, and to show the inconveniences, absurdities, and blasphemies which
ensue upon the making it the whole ground of Faith, the sole interpreter of
Scripture, and the only judge of all controversies of Faith and Religion, which
(as is before in the former part showed) all Protestants have done, and yet do.

For the better performance of which undertaken task, and the more, both
orderly to proceed, and more clearly to understand the same, as in the former
part we proved six grounds of Christian and Catholic faith, upon which it is
built; and showed, that as the Catholics do embrace them all, the Protestants
do reject and delude them all: so it will not be amiss in this part, first
(before we enter the particular confutation) to propose to the judicious
Readers consideration, also six helps or means, Six means or helps to attain
faith
by which ordinarily God uses to work true and Catholic faith, in the heart
of every true believer; and to show that, as they are all, and every one of
them concurring to the true faith of every Catholic, so they are all wanting to
all sorts of Protestants, and to their faith and religion, whereby both
Catholics and Protestants may discern, as well by what kind of causes and
means true Faith is produced, as upon how solid a ground and foundation the
same is builded; and so al may the better be enabled to judge whether of the
two Religions, that is, Catholic or Protestant, be not only more solidly
grounded, but also more divinely produced.

For which we may note, that as these six Means or helps are necessary to
Faith, so three of them are necessary in respect of the Object believed, and
three in respect of the Subject believing. In respect of the Object, 1. The
material object what we do believe.
the first is the Material object, or articles to be believed, which as they
are supernatural, and above the capacity of our understanding, so are they to
reason not evident and clear, but obscure, both in their verity that they are
true, and in their revelation, that they are revealed by God, and therefore are
by faith, for the authority of God affirming, believed. And these are the B.
Trinity, the Incarnation, Resurrection, Transubstantiation, Justification,
Glorification, and the rest which we believe.

The second mean is the Formal Object, 2. The formal object or revelation
why we believe.
or motive why we believe, which is the prime verity, revelation, or testimony
of God, who, as he has revealed all mysteries that we are to believe, and as
we are to believe them, because God has revealed them; so did he at the first
reveal them all to the Prophets, and Apostles, from whom we are to receive by
Scripture, or Tradition all revelations of all mysteries of Faith, whatsoever
are by any, till the worlds end, believed, without expectance of new
revelations, by any new spirit; for so did Christ himself make known to the
Apostles, Joan. 15.15.
All which he heard of his Father etc. And thereupon the Apostles Mat. 16.15.
are commanded to preach the Gospel to all creaturs. And all faithful are
said Ephesians. 2.10
to be built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, that is, upon
the revelations made by Christ unto them, and by them delivered by 2. These. 2
14.
Scripture, or tradition to us.

The third Mean is the Proponent cause, or condition necessarily required to
our belief, which, as an infallible rule and judge, 3. The propone^t cause
declaring the certainty of what, and why we believe.
is immediately to propose to us the verity, and certainty, both of the articles
revealed, and of the revelation of them; for as the articles are above our
capacity, and the revelation may to us be doubtful, and both are obscure; and
as the Scripture, and Tradition are not only hard and obscure, but also mute,
and unable either to explicate themselves, or express to us the resolution of
al doubts which may arise: therefore some Judge, or Proponent cause in respect
of us, is necessary, which must be not only infallible, and universal in it
self, and able without error to satisfy all doubts, but also known and
visible unto us, that by it we may know the verity of all, both articles, and
revelation, as also Scripture, and Tradition: which proponent cause except God
had provided and left us, he had left us destitute of a necessary means to
faith, which is to deliver and declare to us what God has revealed, and so had
not provided us sufficient helps to attain to the certainty of belief: And
this is the authority of the Church of God, 4 Credible Testimonies to convince
the Understanding, of the probability of faith.
or the Spouse of Christ, as afterward shall be proved. And thus, are
necessary in respect of the object, 1. the Material object, what we believe.
2. the Formal object, why we believe, 3. the Proponent cause, to assure us of
the verity both of what, and why we believe.

In respect of the subject, who belieues, are also necessary other three
helps: First, a Speculatiue judgment of the Understanding, grounded upon
credible Testimonies and probable reasons of persuasions, which do make
appear evident to man's natural judgment, that this faith is credible, and
worthy of belief, and prudently may be accepted as more credible, and more
worthy of belief, then any other of Pagans, Jews, or Heretics whatsoever,
though it be not as yet for these reasons believed as true. These evident
testimonies of credibility (which according to diverse dispositions, do
diversely move, and persuade some of them one person, and some another, and
which are only humane not divine, and leave as yet an impression only of
evident credibility, not of divine verity) as they are in Scripture required,
Psalm. 25
Thy testimonies are made credible exceedingly; so are they ordinarily to men
of reason so necessary to their conversion, that the Will, which is not moved
but with reason, or show of reason (for nihil volitum nisi praecognitum) cannot
give consent to any Verity of faith, except it first be persuaded by some
direction of these motives of credibility. Whereupon ordinarily those who are
converted from infidelity to Christianity without some one or other of these
motives, may be said to be too credulous; for qui cito credit leuis est cord,
Eccles. 15.4.
He that gives credit quickly is light of heart; as on the contrary, they who
are not moved by them sufficiently proposed, Luc. 24.25.
are Stulti and tardi cord ad credendum; Foolish and slow of heart to believe,
and thereby are inexcusable from sin; but they who with desire and deligence,
with devotion, humiliation, and resignation do endeavor, and duly do enquire
and seek out the truth of Religion, are by invincible ignorance excused from
all sin of positive infidelity, until their understanding be convinced by
evident reasons of persuasion that the one religion is false, and damnable, the
other true and infallible. Thus these reasons of credibility are the first help
or means in the subject to illustrate the understanding and convince it of the
credibility of the things believed.

Secondly a pious motion, affection, or disposition of the Will, which directed
by the former motives of credibility, and inspired by the special gift of
grace, either preventing or infused, does first it self give consent, and
submit itself to obedience of faith, then does determinate the Understanding
to give assent to the verity of the mysteries proposed. This pious disposition,
The pious disposition of the will disposed by grace to give consent to the
verity.
first is supernatural, proceeding from the grace of God, Phi. 2.23.
who works in us both to will, and to accomplish; Phi. 16.
And begins in you a good work, and so our first motion to faith, is of grace.
Seconly, it is free, proceeding from our free power and will, Mar. 16.26.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that belieueth not
shallbe condemned. And so our free will concurs also to faith and salvation, or
resists by incredulity to damnation. Thirdly, it is necessary to the conversion
of the faithful, and is the cause why some who have slender (yet sufficient)
motives of credibility, and weak motions of grace, are freely converted;
whereas others, who have stronger both motives and motion, do obstinatly resist
and will not be conuertd, according to that: Act. 28.24.
Certain believed these things which were spoken (by Paul) certain believed
not. And, Matt. 23 37.
How often would I gather together thy children, and thou would not? And
this is the second help, or mean working in the will.

The gift or habit of faith cocurring to the act of assent or belief.
The third, and last help, or mean in the Gift, or habit of Faith, which 1. is
a permanent gift, or quality produced by God, and infused into our
Understanding; 2. It does enable and lighten the Understanding (which otherwise
of it self is as able to see and believe the high mysteries of faith, as the
eye without light is to see colors) to give assent, and belief to whatsoever
articles are by holy Church proposed, as revealed by God: Heb. 11.3.
By faith we understand, or believe that God is. It is the beginning and first
ground of salvation and justification, by which we first know God. Romans 1.17.
The justice of God is revealed by faith: by which we live in God. Ibid.
The just lives by faith: and by which we are prepared to justification. Romans
10.10.
With the heart we believe unto justice: We are justified by Romans 5.1
faith. It is sometimes both obtained before grace of justification be had, and
also kept, after that is lost: so that many have this habit of faith, who have
not the habit of Charity. Joan. 12.42.
Many of the Pharisees believed in him, but did not confess him. 1. Cor. 13 24.
If I should have all faith, and have no Charity etc. It may be lost, and that
only by infidelity, or refusing to believe, as it was in 1. Tim. 1.20. 2. Tim.
2.17
Hymenaeus and Philetus, and in those 1. Tim. 6.10.
who erred from the faith: 1. Tim. 10.19.
Made shipwreck about the faith. Heb. 6 5.
And fell from faith.

And thus it is lost in all Heretics, who fall from faith into heresy, and so
loose their habit, by which in Baptism they were enabled afterward to believe
truly. And these three, to wit, The credible testimony, to convince the
Understanding, to accept the articles as credible: The pious affection of the
will, to incline the will to obedience of faith: And the gift or habit of
Faith, to enable both Will and Understanding, to consent and assent to the
divine revelations, are those which are required on the part of the subject, or
person who belieues.

The order and necessity of the former means. SECT. II.
THE second Consideration may be, to ponder, first, The order and manner of
operation of the six means of faith.
the order and manner of proceeding. Secondly, the necessity and efficacy of
these six helps or means of Faith, all as they are compared one with another,
and all, as they have their operation in us. And first, for the order, we may
observe, that the manner which by God ordinarily is used, according to these
means, to prepare and help an Infidel, or Heretic of discretion, to his
conversion to true faith, is this: 1. Man's Understanding by reason of
credibility, and motives of persuasion is induced and disposed to accept this
faith, 1. Credible testimonies persuade.
as credible, and such as in prudence may, and is before any other to be
believed; and his judgment by certain marks, and signs apparent and easy to
every ones capacity, is persuaded that this Church and company of belieuers is
rather then any other, the true Church of Christ, by which he is to be directed
in all particulars of his belief. 2. 2. The churches authority proposes.
He is directed by the Churches authority, how to discern between the verity
and falsehood of things declared, and between certainty of revelation divine,
and illusion diabolical. And by it is proposed and declared to him what in
particular he is to believe as true, and what to condemn as false. 3. 3 Grace
inclin^th the will.
The will is inclined by grace to subject it self unto obedience, in consenting
to faith, and to determine the understanding to yield assent to faith. 4. The
habit of faith enableth the Understanding to believe the articles revealed, and
the revelation of them.
4. The gift, or habit of faith, is infused into the Understanding, that it
may yield a firm, and infallible belief, or assent to the articles of faith,
thus made probably credible, by reasons of credibility, thus proposed by the
Churches authority, and thus made of infallible verity, for the authority or
testimony of God revealing, and affirming them to be true. In which act of
assent consistes the essence, and perfection of divine and supernatural faith.

By which is apparent both the manner, and order how ordinarily God works true
Faith in every Christian, by these means, and also how faith is resolved and
grounded upon every one of these means in particular. How faith is resolved
Dispositiue.
For if we respect the disposing means by which we are prepared to accept of
our faith as credible, it dependes upon the exterior motives of credibility,
and so our faith is resolved into them dispositiue. If we respect the directing
means, which propose and declare to us in particular, what we are to believe,
our faith depends upon the authority of the Church, and so it is resolved into
it directive. Directive.
If we respect the efficient means by which it is wrought in us, it depends
upon the gift, or habit of faith, and so is resolved into it effectiue.
Effectiue.
But if we respect the formal means, and final resolution, why we do
believe it, it depends upon the divine revelation of God, and so is resolved
into it, formaliter, Formaliter.
and finaliter. Of which the preparatiue means, that is, the Credible
testimonies are precedent to faith, and leave only an human persuasion of the
credibility of the verityes. The Directive means, that is, the Churches
authority, is also precedent, exteriourly proposing what in particular, and why
we are to believe. The Effectiue means, that is, the habit of faith, does
interiourly co^curre with the Will and Understanding to the act of belief. And
the Formal motive, or means, that is, revelation of God, is the formal,
final, and last resolution why we believe infallibly such verityes to be true.
So that if one ask, by what we are before prepared, and disposed to believe
the truth, it is by the credible testimonies; if by what we are directed and
guided to know the truth, it is by the Churches proposition; if by what we are
assisted, and enabled to assent infallibly to this truth, it is by the habit of
Faith; if for what, and why we do actually, formally, and finally assent, and
believe the same truth, it is for the revelation of God. As therefore the
Samaritans at the first were prepared by the woman's relation (who told them,
that surely it was the Messiah who had told her all that she had done) to
think it probable that he might be the Messiah, and the woman was as it were a
proponent, or propounding cause to them of him, Joan. 4.39:
Many of the Samaritans believed in him, for the word of the woman, giving
testimony, that he told me all things whatsoever I have done. But afterward
having heard and conuersed with our Savior himself for two days, they now
said: Verse. 42.
Not for thy saying O woman, do we believe, for our selves have heard, and do
know, that this is the Savior of the world indeed. So all Christians are first
prepared by credible testimonies, and directed by Church authority, to the
knowledge and certainty of that truth: but afterward when the divine
revelation it self, as the word of our Savior, is made known to them, then
do they now (formally and finally) not for the testimonies of credibility, or
Church proposition, but for the divine revelation it self, give firm and
infallible assent, and belief to the verityes or articles of faith.

And thus Catholic faith is that, which is for probable testimonies accepted
as credible, by Church proposed as infallible, by an infused habit effected as
supernatural, by divine verity revealed as truth infallible, and necessary to
be believed. This faith is that, which is the beginning and ground of
justification, the way and gate to salvation: Effects of Faith.
upon which the Church of Christ is founded, and is as the life and soul of
it, which makes us members and parts of Christ's Church, we being by it, and
Baptism inserted into his mystical body, which makes us certainly and
infallibly believe, either expressly, or implicit, all whatsoever articles of
says God has revealed to his Church by his Apostles, which is a necessary
mean, instrument, or disposition to our justification, and salvation; without
which none are justified, and by which, informed with charity, all are
justified: which is one, and entire faith in all faithful, who for one motive,
and by one proponent cause, do believe all one doctrine, which being one and
entire, believe as they ought, either all articles of faith explicit or
implicit, or none at all, which (by refusing to assent to any one article (in
which is questioned the ground of all) is by infidelity lost to all: and to
conclude which distinguishes a Catholic from an Heretic, in that whosoever
has this faith is a Catholic, and whosoever wants it, or looses it, is an
Infidel, or Heretic, and so out of state of grace and salvation. And thus
much for the order and manner of Gods working of faith, by these means, in us.

The necessity of these six means of Faith.
Secondly, for the necessity and efficacy of these means (though all and every
one in particular be ordinarily necessary to true and divine supernatural
faith) the credible testimonies, as exterior motives, to convince our
Understanding, Of credible testimonies

Of the pious disposition of the habit of Faith.

Of the material object.

Of the formal object.

Of the propone^t cause


that it may prudently accept of this faith, as credible and worthy of belief:
the motion of grace, and habit of faith, as interior assistants, that the Will
may not resist, but piously incline to consent, and determine the Understanding
to assent, and that the Understanding may obediently yield assent to the
mysteries of faith: the material objects, as those which we are to believe,
and the formal, as that, why we are to believe; all which are absolutely
necessary to make faith credible, free, and supernatural, and without them,
all faith is but humane, false, or fained: yet in respect of us, and of our
certainty of belief, a proponent cause, and that infallible, which can be no
other but the Churches authority, is most important and necessary. And first,
that a proponent cause is needful all grant, because faith Romans 10 17.
being by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ, some preacher, or teacher
is necessary, to propose, and teach us what is to be believed by us; for as
faith depends not upon reason, but upon authority, and that of God, affirming
this, or that to be true, and commanding it to be believed; so this authority,
thus affirming this verity, must be made known to us, by some directing or
proponent means, or else we cannot come to the knowledge of it. 2. That this
directing and proponent cause must be infallible, so that it cannot err it
self, Infallibility
nor propose to us an error, or falsehood to be believed for a truth, is
proved: for since God requires of us a certainty and infallibility of faith,
and this our certainty must be had by some direction, and proposition, by which
it is proposed and made known to us, what we are certainly to believe; it must
needs follow, that this Proponent cause must be certain and infallible, or
else our faith directed and guided by it, cannot be certain. Thence it
follows, Aug. de vtil. credendi. Which is church proposition.
that they who admit a proponent cause (as the Protestants do their church) and
yet do admit it to be fallible and subject to error (as all of them do their
Church) cannot have any certain and infallible faith at all, as wanting a
necessary, certain, and infallible means to propose, and teach them this
certain and infallible faith, which is confirmed by S. Augustine, who says,
That if Gods providence rule and govern humane matters, we may not despair,
but that there is a certain authority appointed by the same God, upon which
staying our selves, as upon a sure step, we may be lifted up to God.

Thirdly, this certain and infallible proponent, or directing cause is
Church Authority, which Church that it may infallibly direct us, and we
securely rely upon it; first, Jesus Christ selected, and made it, not only his
inheritance, Psalm. 32 12
Which he has chosen; Matt. 28 1.20.20.
Or his house which he builded and governed; 1. Cor. 13.16.17.19.
Or his Temple of which himself is Priest: Cant. 4.8 Joan. 3.19.
but also, his dearest spouse; Ose. 2.
Which he espoused to himself alone in faith and truth; 2. Cor. 11.2.
As a Virgin pure and unspotted, without corruption; Romans 12.5. Ephesians. 4.4
Yea, as his own body; And one body with him; Ephesians. 5.25.29.
Which as head he nourishes, cherishes, and sanctifies, making her glorious
without spot; Act. 20.28.
And which he has purchased with his precious blood. Secondly, he privileged
it first with his own presence, promising to be Mat. 28.20.
with it all days, even to the consu^mation of the world. Next, with the
presence of the Holy Ghost, Joan. 14.16.
The spirit of truth that he may abide with you for ever; Esa. 59.21.
And shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and
out of the mouth of thy seeds seed for ever. And for what end? Joan. 14.16.
That he may teach you all things; Joan. 16 13.
That spirit of truth, shall teach you all truth. Thirdly, he armed it with all
power and authority; Matt. 16 18.
To remit, or retain all sins, to bind or loose whatsoever is to be bound or
loosed in earth or in heaven; 1. Cor. 4.21.
to correct and punish with the rod of correction; 1. Cor. 5.3.
To excommunicate and deliver up to Satan; Act. 15.28.
And to determine all questions, or controversies, as it should seem good to
the Holy Ghost, and it. Fourthly, he established and confirmed it; 1. Tim. 3 15.
As the pillar and foundation of truth, that being in it self grounded in
truth, and also grounding others in the same, it should stand so firmly, Matt.
16.18.
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Fifthly, he gave to it
commission and charge Matt. 15 15.
to teach all nations, and to preach the Gospel to all creatures. Sixthly, he
gave us warrant and security, that we might safely hear and obey it; Luc.
10.16.
He that hears you, hears me. Seauenthly, he gave us charge, and command by
precept of obligation, that whatsoever Matt. 13 2.
they shall say to you (speaking of the Scribes and Pharisees in Moses chair,
but a fortiori, of the Pastors and Prelates in Peter's Chair) that do you.
Eighthly, he threats and terrifyes under great punishment; first of danger, and
of contempt of himself, by contemning it, Luc. 10.16.
He that despises you, despises me. Secondly, of infidelity, and loss of his
favor and grace; Matt. 18 17.
He that will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen, and the
Publican. Thirdly, of hell and damnation for ever; Mar. 16.16.
He that belieueth not, shall be condemned.

All which do prove, not only an authority, and that infallible in the Church
to direct and teach us; The church that is, the pastors of it.
but also an obligation in us to obey and submit our selves for faith, to the
direction and instruction of it. And least any should doubt of this Church,
what it is, the holy Ghost explicates the meaning of our Savior, and tells us,
that it is; Ephe. 4.11.
Some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other some
Pastors and Doctors, to the consumation of the Saints, unto the work of the
ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ, until we meet all into the
unity of Faith. Which Pastors he will give us, according Ier. 3.15
to his own heart, who shall feed us with knowledge, and doctrine. And how
shall they feed us? by preaching and proposing to us the doctrine of faith; for
as hearing is a necessary means to believing; Romans 10.
How shall they believe him, whom they have not heard? so preaching, and
proposing what is to be believed by Church-pastours, is necessary to hearing,
and so to believing; Romans 10.14.
How shall they hear without a Preacher? By which is apparently proved the
necessity, and infallibility of Church authority for a propounding and
directing cause, in matters of faith and Religion.

All which may be confirmed: First, by authority of holy Fathers, among whom I
will cite S. Irenaeus, Church proposition confirmed by Fathers.
and S. Augustine for the rest. Irenaeus that learned Doctor, and holy Martyr,
says: We ought not to seek among others the truth, which we may easily take
and receive from the Church, seeing that the Apostles have most fully laid up
in her, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 4.
all things which are of truth, that every man that will, may take out of her
the drink of life. For which those things that are of the Church, are with
diligence to be loved, and the tradition of truth is to be received. Aug. lib.
1. cont. Cresco^. cap. 33.
S. Augustine says: The truth of the Scripture is holden of us, when we do
that which pleases the universal, or whole Church, the which is commended by
the authority of the Scriptures themselves, that, because the Holy Scriptures
cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be deceived with the obscurity of this
question, let him require the judgment of the Church, which without any
ambiguity, the holy Scripture does demonstrate. In which is affirmed: First,
that all truth is left by the Apostles in the Church, not in Scripture only.
Secondly, that the same truth is to be learned and received of all by the said
Church. Thirdly, that the truth thus received, is most true, and is to be
loved, and followed of all. See more of the Fathers above in the first part, to
whom I add a confirmation out of Luther, against himself, and his followers,
who says, that, The Church neither can, Luth. de anti. Eccl. tom. 7. fol. 562.
Ger. 2. part. 10.40.
nor ought to teach errors, no not in the least things, since God is the
mouth of the Church, and as God cannot lie, so neither can the Church.

Secondly, by Reason; for since of all the rest of the means and rules also of
faith, there may be, and often is question and doubt, as for example, of the
articles which be true, which not; of revelation which is revelation of God,
and which an illusion of the enemy; of the motion of the spirit, which is of
God, which of nature, and which of Satan; of the inclination of the Will,
which is a pious disposition, and which an illuding affectation; of tradition,
which is divine, Apostolical or Ecclesiastical, which not; of Scripture,
which is true, which false; of true, which is the incorrupted translation,
which corrupted; of the incorrupted translation, which is the true sense, which
is false; and of the true sense, which is to be believed as fundamental, and
necessary, which is not to be believed as fundamental, but only voluntary. Of
all which, since, I say, there ever has been, and now is great question and
contention, some infallible directing judge, and propounding cause is a
necessary mean, to end these and all like controversies, and to settle and
resolve us in the assured certainty of the one or other, or else will the
contention be ever endless, and we in our opinions restless. Among which
seeing no other can be assigned but the Church, and that God has given so
large commission, and privilege for that end to it, as we have produced; it
remains that the Church and Church authority, is, of all necessary means of
faith, the most necessary for us, to settle and satisfy us, in the certainty of
our divine faith. And thus much of the order and necessity of these six means,
and chiefly of Church-proposition, or the Proponent cause.

How the Protestants want all these six means of Faith. SECT. III.
THE third Consideration, is to reflect how that of all these six means
necessary to divine faith, The Protestants want all the means of faith.
the Protestants have not any one, but are defective in all. These means are
either External as the credible testimonies, which by evidence of reason
conuinceth that such a faith is credible, and may prudently be believed,
External.
and Church proposition, which by the credit of authotity, assures, that the
same is true, and is to be believed, both which are external to the person
believing; or Eternal, Eternal.
as the articles which are believed, and the revelation why they are believed,
both which are of eternal verity and certainty; or Internal, Internal.
as the pious disposition of the will by grace preuenient, and the actual
assent to faith in the Understanding, by the infused gift of Faith, both which
grace and gift, do operate and cooperate to the act of divine, supernatural,
and catholic faith: That these, I say, all and every one of these means are
wanting in Protestants to their faith and belief, I prove.

And first, that they want all testimonies of credibility, Protestants want
credible testimonies, which are such as either may.
which may persuade any man prudently to accept of their faith, we may suppose,
and note, that these testimonies, or motives are of three sorts. 1. such as
may persuade Jews, and Gentiles to become Christians. 2. such as may confirm
Catholics to continue Christians. 3. such as may induce Heretics to return
to be Catholics. Of the first sort are many alleged, by ancient Fathers
Dionysius Areopagita, 1. Confirm Pagans, and these are,
Justinius, Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius,
Chrysostom, and Augustine, against the Gentiles, all cited and proved by
Valentia tom. 3. dis. 1 q. 1. art. 4. page 87. etc.
Valentia. As for example in respect of Christ, the dignity of his person, the
efficacy of his preaching, the verity of his predictions, and the virtue of his
miracles. In respect of Christian doctrine, the manner of the propagation of
it, not by power, eloquence, nobility, or liberty, but by the simplicity of
simple, poor, and unlearned men's preaching, In respect of Christ.
and that to a faith above reason, and contrary to the inclination of flesh,
and blood. The confirmation of it by miracles, Of Christian doctrine.
martyrdom, prophecies, sanctity of doctrine, and order of discipline; the
opposition of it by the violence, and persecution of Jews and Pagans, and by
the eloquence, Of holy Scripture.
and reasons of Rethoricians, and Philosophers, all in vain. In respect of the
Scripture, the antiquity of it, as extant before any writings of any
Philosophers, and the consonancy of it, Of Christian Professors.
in the agreement of the old testament with the new, and of both in themselves.
In respect of the Professors, 2. Or may confirm Catholics, such as are,
their excellent wit, eloquence, learning, and virtue in it, their conuersions
from infidelity to it, their wonderful constancy, and fortitude in defending,
and dying for it. All which have been urged as strong motives, against Gentiles
to convert them to it. Of the second sort which may confirm Catholics, Aug.
lib. cont. epist. Funda. cap. 4.
or such as confirmed S. Augustine in his catholic belief against the
Maniches, which he recites to have been, 1. the consent of people and Nations.
2. Authority begun by miracles, nourished by hope, Consent. Authority.
Succession. Name Catholic.
increased by charity, and confirmed by antiquity. 3. The succession of Priests
from the seat of Peter, to the then present Bishop of Rome. 4. The name of
Catholic, never usurped by Heretics, speaking to strangers, but usually
attributed by them to Catholics: all which did justly keep me (says he) in
the bosom of the Catholic Church.

Of the third sort, which may reduce Heretics, are such as the Nicen Council,
in the Creed, S. Augustine, Aug. de unit. Eccl. c. 7. tom. 7. Concione 2. in
Psalm. 30.12.
and others did allege to convince the Heretics of their time, that is, 1.
Unity of the present Church with the ancient in doctrine, and unity of the
parts with the head by faith, and unity among themselves by charity, and to
their Pastor by obedience. 2. Sanctity of doctrine, which induces sinners to
holiness, 3. Or may reduce Heretics, such as are,
and conuerts Infidells to christianity; and sanctity of persons, who exercise
good works of piety, and confirm their doctrine and holiness by miracles and
prophecies. 3. Universality, in name by which it is called Catholic. In place
by being or having been extended, Unity.
in preaching, or professing to all or most Nations, Sanctity.
at the least successively. In time, by being ancient in beginning from the
Apostles, and constant in continuing from them until this present, against al
persecution of Gentiles, universality
Jews, or Pagans. 4. Succession of Pastors and Prelates, who by lawful
succession from some Apostolical sea, Succession.
or from some who have authority from it, and by lawful ordination from them
who are lawfully ordained, can derive their succession and ordination from the
Apostles. These are marks and testimonies, which distinguish the true Church
of Christ from al conuenticles of Heretics, and do convince evidently that to
be the true church where they are to be found, and that to be false, where they
are wanting.

Which supposed, it is to be proved. First, that the Protestants want all these
testimonies of credibility, Protestants want testimonies of credibility.
which should make evident the credibility of their faith, and religion, either
to Pagans to convert them, or to Heretics to reduce them, or to their own
followers to confirm them. And first, because it will be to tedious to touch
every one in particular, we will select the most principal; and for the first
sort, which may convert Paga^s, it is certain, 1. To convert Pagans
that whatsoever of the former motives the Protestants can allege, either
concerning Christ his doctrine, his Scripture, or his Professors, to prove
Christian Religion credible to a Paga^, they received them all from us, and our
Church; (from which they have received what they have, either of Christ, of
Scripture, of Sacraments, of Christian religion in general) therefore what
these prove or confirm, they prove and confirm our Church and doctrine, not
theirs.

For the first of the rest, if we seek Unity of doctrine, 2. To convince
Heretics.
among them it is not to be found. They have not Unity, either with the
Primitive Church, and Fathers, whose doctrine they reject in free Will, Merit,
Justification, As unity* with the primitive Church.
Prayer to Saints, and most points now in controversy, as in the first part is
at large proved; nor with any head, or supreme Governor, of which sort they
admit none on earth, but disclaim all supremacy in any person whatsoever for
matter ecclesiastical; nor yet among themselves, Or among themselves.
who are divided into many divisions and subdiuisions of Sects and Heresies,
that long ago the number exceeded a hundredth, and now are so many, that they
cannot be numbered. In all which as they want all Unity, so they want all means
to settle any unity, in that they admit no judge to decide any controversy, and
to silence any persons contentious. Sanctity of doctrine.
If we seek for Sanctity, either of doctrine, or of persons, by holiness of
life or miracles, it is not to be expected among them; for their doctrine
(which is for example, that every motion, though natural, of concupiscence is
sin, as well without, as with consent, that all works, though the best, are
sin, that no good Works do merit, that no Justice is inherent, but
imputative, that only Faith iustifies, that the Commandments are impossible,
that Man has not Free Will, that God ordaines, and creates Men to salvation or
damnation, without respect to their endeavor or works:) This doctrine I say,
is a special retractiue to detain any man from attaining to any sanctity and
perfection of life, as impossible and not in his power. For any kind of
Miracles, Of miracle
they are so destitute of them, to confirm their new doctrine, that they
disclaim all; and because they have none, they affirm that none are now
wrought, or if any be wrought, that they are false, feygned, or diabolical.
For Holiness of life, they confess it to be so far from them, that as Luth.
conc 2. Domin. 1. Aduentus.
Luther confesses: Men are daily worse, being possessed now with seven
Devils, more then before, yea with whole troops of Devils, and are more
covetous, crafty, cruel, and wicked, then when they were Papists. And the like
is confessed by Calvin, Musculus, and others cyted by Becan. de fide cap. 6.
number. 4.
Becanus, and the Protestants Apology. If we seek for Universality, they are
ashamed to style themselves by the name Catholic, Universality.
which is universal, but by the name of Protestant, or for distinction of
Protestants, by the name Lutheran, Caluinist, Of name Catholic.
or the like. Universality of place they cannot challenge, because their
doctrine never extended out of the limits of a few Northern countries in
Europe, nor ever entered Africa, Of place.
Asia, or America. Universality of time they cannot challenge, because their
Church had its first being but about an hundred years ago, Of time.
and this so apparently, that we can nominate the year when, the author who,
the place where, the opinions what, the mantainers and abetters by whom this
doctrine had first being in the world, and the opposers who at first did, and
yet continue to gainsay it: so as they disclaim expressly from this mark, not
only denying it to be any mark of the Church, but also confessing that their
Church was, according to some of them, seven hundred, to others a thousand, to
others twelve hundred, to others fourteen hundred years, ever from Christ
(as before is proved) either not at all, or altogether latent and invisible.
Succession of Ordination.
If we seek for Succession of Ordination from the Apostles, they either beg it
from the Roman Church, which they account Antichristian, or else take up a new
one at their own hands, and are Prelates and Pastors of their own creation;
and for want of ordinary vocation from Christ, are content with an
extraordniary of their own invention. By which, And Vocation.
and much more for breuity omitted, is evident, that all testimonies of
credibility sufficient to make their doctrine seem probable, and worthy of
credit, are wanting to them, and their Church.

2. Protestants want Church-infallible proposition, in that they
That the Protestants want the two externalll means of faith, which is
Church-infallible proposition, by which they should be assured and confirmed in
the certainty of their divine revelation, and mysteries revealed, in the
certainty of their spirit and motions by it, and in the certainty of their
Scripture, and meaning of it, is proved: because whether we take the Church
Authoritatiue, for the chief Pastors and Prelates by whose authority it is
governed, or Representative, for the general Councels in which the whole body
in the assembly of Bishops is represented, or Collectiue, for the whole
multitude of all faithful belieuers through the whole world dispersed: Take
it, I say, in which of these senses you will (in all which it is the true
Church of God, and of infallible authority) yet in none of these do the
Protestants receive any infallible direction or confirmation from it. For if we
respect their Pastors and Prelates, Disobey their Pastors.
they are not directed by them, or obedient in faith to them, but, by the
liberty and privilege of their spirit, every private person has authority to
censure and judge them. If we respect general Counsels, they disclaim all,
as before is proved, Disclaim general Councels.
or if they approve any, it is so far as their Decrees do agree with the
fancy of their spirit, to which they subject them, and so long as they are
pleased to observe what is commanded by them, in which they will be free
without obligation to obey them. And condemn their whole Church of error.
If we respect the whole body of the Church they in their general Tenants do
generally hold, that it may err and fail in doctrine and faith, and for
practice do boldly affirm, that for many ages it has fallen, and failed not
only in doctrine of Idolatry, superstition, and heresy, but also in very
extancy, and being of a Church, as having been invisible not extant, but dead,
buried, and corrupted for so many ages together, as in the first part is
proved: and thus they cut off al infallible authority of Church proposition,
which more then the other means, Protestants want a pious disposition of the
Will.
they do in plain terms expressly reject and condemn.

3. That the Protestants want the first internal means of Faith, that is, a
pious disposition, or inclination to believe what is proposed by the Church, as
revealed by God, is proved; because as a pious inclination of the will, moved
by the grace of God, does apply and determine the Understanding of a willing
and well disposed person, either to labor and seek out such motives, and
testimonies, as do make the truth of Religion seem probable, or to assent to
such as are already proposed unto it: By obstinacy by which
so the obstinate disposition of a willful Protestant, does refuse to give any
credit, or belief to any reasons, though never so evident, or to any
definition of the Church, though every way most certain; but resolves with out
amendment to persist in his preiudicate opinion, notwithstanding any reason or
authority to the contrary. By which his obstinacy, They fall into heresy.
1. He falls into heresy, by wilfully following his own opinion which he
chooses, and carelessly conte^ning the authority of the Church, Loose their
faith.
in that it defines. 2. He loses his faith which he received in Baptism, and
falls into infidelity, partaking with Heretics. 3. He belieues no articles of
faith (to which he assentes, though truly, firmly, Believe no truth by any
divine Faith.
and for the testimony of God) by any divine and Catholic faith, which depends
upon an infallible mean, that is Church proposing authority; but by humane
faith, wholly relying, and lastly resolving his belief, either upon the
authority of some deceauing master, or upon the testimony of some wrested
Scripture, or upon the euidency of some deluding notes and marks, or upon the
seeming apparency of his own spirit, Separate themselves from Christ.
and conceit. 4. He separates himself from the union of the body of Christ,
from the benefit of the merits of his passion, from the communion of his
Saints, both in earth and heaven, and from all participation of hope of glory
in Gods Kingdom to come, and so remains as a dead member, cut from the body,
as a dry bough divided from the tree, as a dark glimse of light separated from
the Sun, and as a small stream stopped from the current of the fountain;
all which as they do presently decay and dry, or come to nothing, so he.

Protestants want an infused gift of Faith.
4. That the Protestants want the two internal means and help of Faith, that
is, the infused and permanent gift of faith inherent in the Understanding, and
both enabling and illuminating it to the producing of the act of divine
supernatural faith, is proved: Because Protestants who hold that Faith does
justify, and that Justification is not by any inherent guif and quality, but by
the extrinsecall favor of God, not imputing our sins unto us, must needs by
consequence hold, and so for the most part do hold, that there are no infused
and permanent guiftes, or habits of faith, which concur or help to our
Justification, but that all is wrought by the motion of a transeunt spirit:
which motion, as it works (according to them) in them by it self only, and
wholly, all internal good works, without any cooperatio^ of man, or man's
freewill; so it is only a motion which works in whom it will, when it will,
and how it will, al, and whatsoever it will, in man to his justification and
salvation: by which it is evident, that as in all their opinions, they are
neither constant nor permanent, but are wafted with every wind of new doctrine,
and so fly from the belief of one thing to another: so they are not guided by
any permanent gift or quality, Protestants want the material objects, or
articles of Faith: because they believe not Traditions, nor many parts of
Scripture in which they are revealed.
but by certain flashes and motions of an uncertain spirit, which leads them
from one uncertainty to another, and so leaves them in all, uncertain.

5. That the Protestants want the first of the eternal means or helps of
Faith, that is, the material objects or articles of belief, which are to be
believed, as revealed by Christ unto the Apostles, and by the Apostles left to
their Successors, and by them to us, and posterity, is proved. 1. Because they
believe many things as objects of Faith, which are not revealed, either in
Scripture, or Traditions, of which are many instances given in the former
part; so do they not believe many articles which are revealed both in
Scripture and Tradition; for which cause they reject all tradition, and in it,
many mysteries of faith, which the Apostles left only by Tradition, Nor many
articles believed by ancient Church and Fathers.
and refuse many parts of Scripture, and that chiefly, because they contain
many points of doctrine, which they will not believe. 2. Because as they admit
many points of doctrine, into the number of their articles of faith, which the
ancient Church condemned for heresies, as contrary to Apostolical doctrine
(witness the ancient condemned heresies of Heluidius, Vigilantius, Arius,
Iouinian, and others by them revived;) so they condemn many points of
doctrine as erroneous, superstitious, or idolatrous, which the ancient Church
received for articles of Faith as agreeable to Apostolical tradition (witness
all the points of doctrine, which the Magdeburgenses and others before cyted
condemn as errors, and stains in the ancient Fathers in every age since
Christ) in both which they err in the material objects of Faith, as well in
receiving condemned heresies for Apostolical verities, as in co^demning
received Apostolical verities revealed by Christ for erroneous heresies. Not
any article by divine faith.
3. Because, as they admit special Faith only (whose object is only their
remission of sins and justification) for divine Faith, by which they are
justified; so all other faith, by which they believe, for example, the B.
Trinity, Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, with
the rest of the articles of faith usually believed, they acknowledge for no
other, but for a general Faith, common as well to the damned and Devils, as to
them; which faith in the Devil, and damned as it is no voluntary and free act,
proceeding from a pious disposition of the Will, nor a divine and supernatural
work, depending upon any authority of God revealing; but a mere natural and
necessary act of knowledge^, conuincing their understanding either by force of
experience, or by evidence of reason, or by apparent and evident notes of
credibility, or by some manifestly known testimonies of God, of the verity of
that which they believe and tremble at; so in the same manner, their Faith of
the same articles, by their own confession, is not divine but a mere humane
faith, grounded upon some general received opinion, or upon some mere human
authority: and so what they conceive of the general articles of faith,
Protestants want the formal object of faith or divine revelation:
they do not receive them as any articles of doctrine and supernatural faith;
but as general received positions, humane conjectures, and their own
selfe-seeming and chosen opinions.

6. That the Protestants want all divine Revelation, for which as the formal
cause and the final resolution, they should believe al which is by God
revealed, is proved. 1. Because what they believe, they believe not for that it
was revealed to the Apostles by the Holy Ghost, either at Pentecost, when it
did visibly teach and confirm them, As not depending upon the revelations made
to the Apostles, but to them selves by their private spirit.
or in success of time, when upon occasion (as at the conversion of Gentiles)
it did reveal to them all the mysteries ever after to be believed (which
Revelation made to the Apostles is the formal cause of faith;) nor yet, for
that it is proposed to them by Church infallible authority, as a condition
necessary to know what is revealed; but for that, it is revealed to them a new,
by their own private spirit, from which they receive all their directions and
certainty, both what is revealed, why it is revealed, and also by what means
it is revealed. 2. Because the means by which Christ does manifest and declare
unto us his divine revelations, they either plainly reject, or wholly subject
to their private spirit; for the authority of traditions, by which part of the
divine revelations are delivered to us, and the Proposition of the Church, by
which we are secured of the certainty of them, they reject and deny. The
authority of the Scripture, which is an other mean by which God has revealed
his truth, and which they challenge as the only means both of knowledge and
certainty of divine revelations, they wholly subject to their private spirit, by
which they are assured, which is true Canon, which is true edition, which true
translation, which true sense of it. And so for divine revelation they have
neither any at all, nor yet any means to know or attain unto it. And thus
much of the Protestants want of all the necessary helps and means, by which
true and divine supernatural Catholic faith is produced, conserved, and
increased in the soul of every faithful belieuer, and member of Christ's holy
body, and Church.

How the Catholics and Protestants differ in these six means; and how the
Protestants make their private spirit the only means of all. SECT. IIII.
Catholics advantage of the Protestants.
THE fourth consideration is to reflect upon the advantage, which we Catholics
have against the Protestants, and the difference that is between us and them,
in these means of Faith; and how that the Protestants do substitute one only
deluding and deceitful means, that is, this their private Spirit, in place of
all the six former means of faith.

And first for the material object, they profess to believe, ^. In the
material object believed, as believing, not only what is revealed in scripture
interpreted by their own spirit:
1. only the doctrine which is revealed in scripture. 2. that only which is
revealed, in that one part of Scripture, which they are pleased to accept as
Scripture by their spirit. 3. that only, in that part of Scripture, which is
according to their preco^ceaued opinion, so interpreted by their spirit: so
that Scripture alone, and that not in whole, but in part; and that part of
Scripture, as it is expounded by their private spirit, contains all the
articles of their faith. We Catholics do profess to believe, first, all that
which have been wrote by the Apostles, or Prophets in holy Scripture, and that
in the whole books of Scripture, as anciently they were by a Council of
Carthage, But what is revealed, or declared in Scripture,
S. Augustine, and others received, and all in that sense as it was by ancient
Church expounded. 2. all that which has been by the same Apostls delivered to
posterity, by word of mouth, and tradition. 3. all that which has been
declared to us out of Scripture or Tradition, Tradition,
by definition of general Counsels. Counsels,
4. all that which by continuance of practice has been by holy Church ever
revealed. Church-practise,
5. all that which by unanimous consent of holy and learned Doctors, Fathers,
and Saints, has been believed: in this we differ and have the advantage for
the articles we believe. Fathers.


Secondly, for the formal object of final resolution of Faith, they believe
what they believe, 2. In the formal object which we make, not sense reason, or
the private spirit.
either for that their sense does so perceive it, or for that their reason does
so persuade it, or for that their private spirit does so suggest it, and so
they make their sense, or their reason, or their own private spirit and
fantasy, the formal motive, and final resolution of their Faith. We believe
what we do believe, for that God has revealed it, and that not a new, and to
some one in particular, but anciently to the Apostles, But revelation.
and by them generally to all their successors, and by succession to us, so
that our doctrine, and our belief of it, is grounded not upon any our own
sense, our own reason, our own private conceit, all most fallible and most
subject to illusion and deceit; but upon Gods divine revelation, as he is the
prime verity, and verity it self; and that not newly, but of ancient ever
since Christ revealed; that, not personal, Ancient.
made to me or one alone, but Apostolical, first revealed to the Apostles
themselves; that, not private to every one severally, but general to all
faithful universally; that, General.
not interrupted, and at certain times, and by fits, and to certain persons
made known, but continued, Continued.
and by succession, at all times by all faithful, and in all places received;
that, not fallible without ground and subject to private illusion, but most
infallibly grounded upon divine revelation and Church proposition, and subject
neither to be deceived, Infallible.
nor yet do deceive: and in this we differ, 3. In the internal assistance of
grace, Protestants depend only upon a motion of private spirit.
and have the advantage for the means of Faith eternal.

Thirdly, for the inward assistance of Gods grace, and the cooperation of it,
they challenge only certain motions or flashes of a fickle spirit, which
whether it be by illumination, or illusion, whether of grace, or nature,
whether supernatural of God, sensual of nature, or diabolical of Satan,
they have no means to discern, or ground to be certain, and by it, as dust
by a whirle wind, they are carried up and down in a round, without freedom,
reason, We upon a permanent gift and several helps of Grace.
or operation of their own, to what fancy and conceit, it violently wheels and
forces them. We are assisted and enabled by the divine gift of an internal
and permanent spirit or habit of faith, which infused into us, and always
remaining in us, is, at any instant, ready with us, and the cooperation of
grace in us, to work both a pious inclination of the will, to dispose it
without obstinacy, obediently to consent; and also an actual assent of the
understanding, illuminating and enabling it, firmly to assent to what is
revealed and proposed. Also we admit and receive, besides this habitual Grace,
other actual, and diverse motions of grace, and of it, some either excitant,
first to excite and move us; or adiuuant, to assist us, being moved; some
either operant, which works in us without us, and our cooperation; or
cooperant, which works in us, together with us, and our cooperation with it;
some either sufficient, by which we are enabled to be converted; or efficient,
by which we are actually converted. And in this we differ from them, and have
the advantage for the means of faith internal, both for the will and
understanding.

Fourthly, for the credible testimonies and motives of persuasion, 4. In the
credible testimonies, they have none.
which may in reason persuade any man prudently to accept any religion, as
worthy of credit; They have not any which may, either induce any which was
never of it, nor reduce any which are fallen from it, or establish any who are
entered into it, that their faith, doctrine, and religion is credible, as is
before proved. We have many, and those forcible reasons, persuasions, and
credibilities which may in prudence persuade any Pagan never admitted to it, or
Heretic revolted from it, or Catholic settled in it, that our faith, doctrine,
religion, and Church, may and ought prudently to be accepted, is credible, and
worthy of belief. We have, We have Unity with the ancient Church.
Unity with the ancient and primitive Church, with the learned and holy
Doctors, and Fathers, with the holy Saints, and Martyrs, whose faith and life
we profess, to embrace and imitate. We have Unity with one head, our chief
Bishop and Pastor, whose definitive sentence does resolve our doubts, With one
head.
does decide our controversies, and does end our contentions in faith and
manners. We have Unity of faith among our selves, With our selves,
all of us, though distant in place, though different in manners, though
contending for temporal state, or dominion, yet living, and agreeing in
obedience, to one spiritual Superior, in unity of one faith, in conformity of
one service, sacraments, and ceremonies. We have Sanctity and Holiness, both
of doctrine, which gives holy precepts, Sanctity of doctrine.
and rules to avoid sin, for the love of God, and fear of hell, to seek
perfection, by mortification; internal, supressing our self-will, self-love,
and self-conceit; and external, taming our passions, and affections, with
penance of fasting, watching, discipline, and the like. And also of Good life,
Sanctity of life.
by frequent exercise of prayer, meditation and contemplation; by daily
practice of penance, and of patience in persecution; and by perfect
resignation to holy Obedience, Poverty and Chastity. We have Miracles, Of
miracle^
and those frequent and apparent, of prophesying, and curing of all diseases,
raising dead, dispossessing of Devils and the like, all wrought in confirmation
either of our faith, or sanctity, all for the conversion of Pagans and
Heretics; of which in all ages and times, we have many, and memorable of most
nations now Christian converted to our Religion. We have Universality,
Vniuersaliry of name.
not only of Name by retayning the title of Catholics, by which we are usually
distinguished from al sects, and no sect does usurp it, to distinguish them
one from another; but also of Place, Of place.
as being generally dispersed in all the parts of the world, Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America; and also of Time, Of time.
as being reputed the old Religion, and being indeed so old, as have been years
since Christ and his Apostles, who institued and embraced it. We have continued
Succession and Ordination of Prelates, and Bishops manifestly and orderly
deduced, Succession of Ordination, and Doctrine.
without interruption of persons or chang of doctrine, by a perfect enumeration
of successors, and Apostles, and Apostolical Seas, until this present time,
and these our present Prelates, Patriarchs, and Popes. We have the rare
examples of millions of Martyrs, Exampls of Martyrs, Co^fessours, Doctors, and
Virgins*
Confessors, and Virgins, who have with their blood and life defended and
honored our confessed Faith, and Doctrine; and the strange punishments of
persecuting Pagans, Jews, Heretics, who have with their sword and cruelty,
opposed and persecuted it. In all which we differ from them, and have the
advantage of them, in credible motives.

5. For infallible proponent cause, as they do not require or assign any, 5.
In the infallible propone^t cause they have none at all.
yea (as before) do expressly reject all, chiefly the true, that is Church
authority; so they cannot produce any which either can be a proponent cause, or
if it could, is yet either infallible, or so much as credible, for them selves
and their Religion. For their scripture is not to them a proponent, but (if it
were true scripture) a revealing cause, because in it is revealed truth, of
which revelation there is need of a proponent cause to declare, which is
scripture, and which is, among many, the true sense of it. Their private spirit
(which yet they make their proponent cause) is so far from being either
infallible or credible, that it is not only most fallible and subject to
deceive, yea and actually does deceive, and has deceived so many; but also
most incredible without any appearance of probability, either to them, who have
it, or to others who follow it, that it can be true, or direct, We have
infallible Church authority.
and declare any truth at all. We have a proponent cause, so certain and
infallible, which is Church authority, that it has for the infallibility of
it, the predictions of Prophets, the promises of Christ, the declaration of the
Apostls, the confirmation of miracles, the approbation of holy Fathers, the
practice of all antiquity, and what not? all to prove the verity, and
infallibility of it, in directing, and declaring to us, what, and why we are to
believe. And in this proponent cause also we differ, and that principally from
the Protestants: and so have the advantage and prerogative over them, in the
external means, and so in all the means required to faith.

For the private spirit, in particular, if it were a sole and necessary ground,
The private spirit might as well be challenged by Catholics, as Protestants.
and means of faith (as the Protestants without ground suppose it;) if every
Christian lawfully might, and necessarily ought to rely upon it (which yet none
can) for the certainty of his Faith and Religion; if it were a secure ground to
build upon, and a certain means (as it is not) to attain to true faith and
salvation: yet with as great reason, yea and with more probability, might we
Catholics both challenge it, and rely upon it, then the Protestants may or ca^.

And 1. for the certainty of the spirit, that they have infallibly the spirit
of God more then we, what can they challenge for it more then we? What certainty
can they claim more then we? If they allege their bare word, and say they
have it, we can allege ours, and say also we have it. If they allege
Scripture, and say, they have it for them; we also can allege the same, and
say we have it for us, yea, and had it before them, for that they had, what
they have of it, from us. If they allege they have the true sense of
Scripture for them, and their private spirit, we can allege, we have the same,
and the same means to attain it, as they: many of us have as great learning
and knowledge in tongues as they, as great a care and desire of truth as they,
as diligent pains and industry as they, as fervent prayer and devotion to
find, and obtain it as they. If they allege the sense and feeling of this
spirit within them; we can allege, and feel as much sensible devotion, and
more spiritual; as many inspiratio^s, and illuminations, and these more
certain; as great promptnes and readiness, to obey Gods motions, and that with
more humility then they; yea in all these, we have and can allege more then
they. 1. The conformity in judgment, with the ancient Fathers, Councels, and
Church, with whom we agree. 2. The direction, and authority of our holy Mother
the spouse of Christ, our Church, which we obey. 3. The subordination and union
of our selves, with our Pastors and Superiors of the Church to whom we are
subject and subordinate. And all this have we more then they, all making us
more certain then they, all better grounded then they. 2. Cor. 11.^^
So that we may confidently say with the Apostle, In quo quis audet, audeo and
ego. What they dare, we dare; what they can, we can; what they may challenge
for the probability of their spirit, we can and may challenge the same, yea more
then they, plus ego, with more reason and probability, upon better safety and
security. In the certainty therefore of this spirit (if it be secure) we are
equal with them, yea many degrees above them.

Secondly. About the necessity of the spirit.
For the necessity of having the true spirit of God in us, and the efficacy or
effect of the operation of it with us, we Catholics are so far from denying
either, that we hold a necessity, and that absolute, of both; affirming and
that as a principle of our faith, that no person whatsoever ca^ truly and duly
believe any article of faith, much less al, nor do any one work auailable to
salvation, Catholics, and Protestants agree.
much less save his soul, without the special presence and assistance of the
grace or spirit of God in him. In as much therefore as concerns the necessary
being, and working of this spirit of grace of God in us, in some things, we,
and the Protestants agree, and in other we differ. We agree, 1. In that both
of us grant, and require an operation and assistance of this spirit of God,
not only to true faith, but also to good life, 2. In that both of us do grant,
and require this operation to be so necessary in every one, that neither right
faith, nor upright life, can be attained, or performed, but by it, and that as
the prime, and principal cause, and agent. 3. In that both of us do grant, and
require this necessary and operating spirit, to be so private, particuliar, and
internal in every one, that it has an effectual operation, or cooperation in
him: and that so effectual, that to it is attributed the effect of our
conversion, and salvation. And thus far we agree.

Thirdly. We differ from them, in these. 1. In the name and usual manner of
appellation; for we call it the grace of God, which as before, Differ, 1. in the
name.
is of diverse sorts; some gratis given, as the gift of languages, cures etc.
some justifying, as Faith, Hope, and Charity; some actual, as excitant,
adiuuant, operant and cooperant, sufficient, and effectual, and the rest before
mentioned. They call it, the spirit, or private spirit, or motion of God, as
inspiring and working, whatsoever good is wrought in them. 2. We differ in the
extension of it; for we affirm this grace to be extended, offered, and given
sufficiently, though not effectually, 2. In the universality of it.
to all; so that all, and every one of reason have sufficient means, and
ability to know God by Faith, and to love him by Charity, so far as is needful
for their salvation. They affirm their spirit, to be restrained, offered, and
given, only to the elect, and faithful (whom they make all one) and that all
others neither have, nor can have it; 3. In the manner of operation of it.
but are by the absolut will and decree of God debarred from it, and thereby
made incapable of it. 3. We differ in the manner of operation of it; for we
affirm that grace does work, or cooperate with us, and we with it, so that
the grace of God, and our Free Will, as two concurring causes (though Grace the
more principal) do jointly effect, and produce every good work of Faith,
Hope, or Charity, or the rest in us; whereby our good works have of grace, that
they are divine, and supernatural, and of our selves that they are voluntary,
and free, and of both, that they are meritorious, of more grace present in us,
and of glory in heaven, to come to us. They do attribute so much to the work
of their spirit in them, that they take away all cooperation of our free will
in us, whereby they make man as dead, without all action, or operation, to any
spiritual, and good works; and make the spirit so^e, and whole worker of all,
in man.

Fourthly. We differ in the nature and permanency of this grace, or spirit; 4.
In the permanency of it.
for we acknowledge grace to be an inherent quality, and permanent gift
infused into our soul, which does enlighten, and enable our understanding to
give assent by faith to the divine mysteries proposed, and inspire our will to
be sorrowful by contrition for our sins committed; which gift once infused,
is not so permanent, and perpetual, but that the habit of Charity is lost by
mortal sin against Charity, the habit of Hope, by desperation against hope,
and the habit of faith, by infidelity against faith. They, or many of the^,
deny all infused gifts of faith, hope, charity, or the rest, and admit only a
transeunt motion, or operation of the spirit, which working in man, without
man's cooperation, when, what, how, and in whom it pleases, is never totally
or finally lost after it be received, does make a man always faithful and
beloved of God, and does give that virtue to all his works, though never so
bad, that they make them grateful and acceptable to him: so that according to
them, no work of a faithful man, though never so bad, can make any enmity
between God and him, God neither imputing it as an offense to him, 5. In the
effect of it, what Catholics assign.
nor man incurring the displeasure of God for it.

Fifthly. We differ in the effect and operation assigned to it; for we assign
the function, and office, for example, Of the gift of faith, to be the
elevation, and enabling of our Understanding to give assent to what is revealed
by God, delivered in scripture, or tradition, and proposed by Church authority:
Of the gift of hope, to be the inflammation of the soul, to love God as our
chiefest end, to desire him, as our greatest Good, to hope for him, as our good
absent, and to delight in him, as our good present: Of the gift of charity, or
grace, to be the forgiveness of our sins, the sanctification of our soul,
adoption to be the sons of God, title and right to the kingdom of heaven,
and a value, and dignity of merit to our good works. What Protestants assign.
They assign to their private spirit a double effect, the one of proposing the
object; the other, of working in the subject. In respect of the object it
proposes to them, In respect of the object.
what they are to believe, and why they are to believe it, and how they are to
know both. In respect of the subject, it works in them (say they) a firm and
infallible assurance of all the former things believed, so that they stand
sure and certain, not only of the Scripture and the sense of it, In respect of
the subject.
and of their doctrine, and verity of it; but also of their spirit, that it is
of the Lord, and of their salvation, that it is as due to them, as it is (to
use Caluins own words) due to Christ, and that they can no more loose heaven,
then can Christ, ^alu. 4. Inst. 17.2. in the French editio^.
nor be no more damned, then can Christ. In which they attribute to their
private spirit all the reason of credibility exterior, and all the operation
interior, both in the will and understanding, which they have of the certainty
of all their faith, and salvation. By all which is apparent, that as they made
it the sole ground and foundation (which is in the former part at large proved)
on which their faith is built: so they make it the sole means (as is here
proved) and the total cause, material, formal, final and efficient, both
exteriourly revealing, proposing, and persuading, and interiourly working, or
rather deluding them in the obstinacy, rather then certainty, of their supposed
faith. And this private spirit, and this effect of it, is that, which they rest
upon, and that which in this second Part we intend, by the assistance of Gods
grace, to confute, and disprove.

THE PRIVATE SPIRITS INTERPRETATION OF HOLY SCRIPTVRE, Deciding of
controversies, and judging of mysteries of Faith, confuted by holy Scripture.
CHAP. II.
Out of 1. S. John 4. 1. S. Paul 1. Tim. 4.11. Act. 20.30. 2. S. Pet. 2.
describing this Spirit. SECT. I.
THE holy Ghost, in holy Writ borh foreseeing, and also forshewing to us, the
abuse of this private spirit, the better to forewarne us of it, and to arm us
against it, does not only in general, as it does many other abuses: but even
in particular, and as it were on set purpose, both plainly decipher, and
describe it, and also fully confute, and condemn it. Out of it therefore, we
will draw our first arguments of confutation, and by it convince of falsity,
this deceitful, and deceauing spirit. And first to begin with the new
Testament, for the more full instruction of our selves, and the plainer
confutation of this spirit, I will for one proof conioine in one argument, the
testimonies of the chiefest Apostles, that is, of S. John, S. Peter, and S.
Paul.

First S. John 1. epist. chap. 4 v. 1. does plainly give admonitions against
this spirit, The private spirit not to be believed
(1) Believe not every spirit; (2) but try the spirits if they be of God.
Secondly both S. John, and S. Paul do give the reasons why we should not
believe, but try these spirits. The reason.
S. John v. 2. Because many false spirits are gone out into the world. S. Paul,
1. Tim. 4.11. Because in the last times certain shall depart from the faith,
attending to spirits of error, and doctrine of Devils. Again, 2. Cor. 11.14.
For that Satan himself, does transfigure himself, into an Angel of light,
that is, does make show of works of piety, justice, and devotion, thereby to
allure men, by opinion of him, to his traps of errors and damnation. The
effect of it.
Thirdly, both S. Peter, and S. Paul, do show in what sorts of persons is this
spirit, and what fruits and effects it produces in them. S. Paul briefly calls
the persons, Act. 20.29.3.
Ravening wolves, who after his departure will enter among them; and men who
arising out of themselves, will speak perverse things, and draw many
disciples after themselves. S. Peter more fully describes the effects of it,
showing, 2. Pet. 2.1.
That it makes false Prophets, and lying masters, who bring in Sects, or (as
it is in the Greek) heresies of perdition. v. 2.
Who blaspheme the way of truth; v. 10.
walk in the concupiscence of uncleanness, contemn dominion; v. 14.
allure unstable souls; v. 19.
promise liberty; v. 18.
speak proud things of vanity; v. 20.
entangle those, who fly from co-inquinations of the world; v. 21.
and turns from the holy Commandment, and known way of Justice; 2. Pet. 3 16.
and being unlearned, and unstable, deprave the Scriptures to their perdition.
These are the effects of this spirit, which that we should not believe, for the
foresaid reasons, the Apostle did give the foresaid caveat, or admonition.

Reasons why it cannot be believed.
In which we may note. First, for the former admonition, that there are diverse
reasons, why we are not to believe every spirit. 1. Because there are so many,
and diverse spirits: As one 1. Cor. 2* 12.
the spirit of God, which is of God. Another 1. Cor. 2.11.
the spirit of man which is in man. Another 7. Cor. ^^12.
the spirit of the world, which is of worldly things. Another 1. Reg. 16.14.
the spirit of the Devil, which is evil. One Joan. 15.16.
which is the spirit of truth. Another 2. Paral. 18.22. 1. Tim. 4.1
the spirit of lying, and error. One Es. 11.2
the spirit of wisdom and understanding. Another Es. 19.14.
the spirit of giddiness. 2. Because the effects of these spirits are often
doubtful, and not certain of what spirit they proceed. 3. Because the
similitude and manner of their operations, and motions is many times great, and
hard to be discerned. 4. Because the art and means how to discern, and judge
of them, is very hard, and not certain. 5. Because the gift of discerning
them is extraordinary, rare, and given to few (of all which is fully treated in
the ensuing Chapters,) therefore great reason there is, not to believe the
suggestion of every spirit: great danger there is in following the direction of
every private spirit, and great discretion must be used, before that any man,
though learned and holy, much more simple and sinful, can either in wisdom
and prudence give credit; or with safety, and security, rely himself, his
faith, and salvation upon any private spirit, or motion of it. Reason therefore,
and experience confi^mes the doctrine, and caveat of S. John, That we should
not believe every spirit.

Secondly, we may note for the trial of these spirits. 1. How and by what rule
spirits are to be tried.
How, and by what rule, this trial is to be made. 2. Who, and what sort of
persons, are to make it, and apply the rule. For the rule and mean of trying
these spirits, Catholics assign it to be the spirit of Gods Church, or of the
chief Pastors in it, and governors of it, as consenting, Catholics rule.
or at the least not dissenting one with another: and as united, and no way
separated by schism, or heresy from their head; so that what spirit soever is
squared by this spirit, directed by it, and conformable in faith, and manners
to it, is infallibly the spirit of God. And what spirit of whomesoeuer is
contrary to it, divided from it, or separated from communion or society of it,
is certainly not the spirit of God, but of man, the world, or the Devil. And
this is a way certain to try spirits, and discern which is true, or false;
good, or bad; of God, or the enemy. For since the spirit of God is (as God is)
one and not divided, 1. Cor. 12 4.11.13.
One God, one Lord, one spirit, one and the same spirit. In one spirit we are
baptized into one, and in one spirit made all to drink; And since the Church of
God is directed by this one, and the same spirit, this spirit of truth, this
Joan. 14 16.26.
Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, which shall teach all truth: It follows that
whosouer are parts of this Church, and members of this body 1. Cor. 12 2.
You are the body of Christ, and members of member; must have their spirit
united with it, ordered by it, and subordinate to it. And see whatsoever spirit
is contrary to it, or divided from it, cannot be the spirit of God, but the
spirit of the enemy of God. This is apparent out of authority of holy Scripture.

Protestants rule.
The Protestants for the most part will have this rule of trial to be
Scripture; for so is their common Tenet, that al spirits are to be tried by the
word of God: yet some of them, of more quick insight, finding this to be
insufficient ( Because (says Calvin) they who say thus, Call. in 1. Ioa. 4. v.
1.
say somewhat, but not all; for except we have the spirit of prudence to
discern, it will little avail to have the Scripture on the fingers ends)
therefore they assign the consent of Church, or Council, for unity sake (thus
says Calvin) to be this public rule, or means, against those mad men who
brag of the spirit. But being urged (yea Calvin vrges it himself) whether a
man shall rest on the Councels determination? he resolves, Noe. For (says he)
every spirit of every private belieuer shall judge of this decree, and
determination of the Council. If so, then as the public Council shall try
and judge the spirit of every private man, so the spirit of every private man
shall again try and judge the spirit of the Council. And then what end or pause
will be of trying and judging, between every private man's spirit, and the
Counsels spirit? And what certainty can be in either? This therefore is a
round, or circle, no means or rule to try spirits, if they be of God, as in
the eight Chapter is more fully declared. And this for the rule of trying
spirits.

Who are to try spirits according to Catholics.
For the persons who by office have right to try spirits, and apply this rule
and means; though the Catholics prohibit none, yea persuade all for their
own satisfaction, to do it, so they do it by the direction of the former rule,
and according to the model of it: yet the proper office, and function to do
it, they assign only to the Pastors, and directours in Gods church, who by
the authority of their function, and the ability of their learning, should in
reason be more fit to discern these spirits, and direct the people, in the
discerning of them, and also by this direction, establish and keep a
subordination of inferiors to Superiors, or of the sheep to the Pastor, and
nourish and maintain an unity of of Faith and doctrine among both. According
to Protestants.
The Protestants give this right and office of discerning spirits, to all, and
every faithful person, to whom they give liberty every one to try and judge
their Pastor, yea all Pastors, Prelates, Councils, and their spirits.
Whereby, as they infringe all Ecclesiastical subordination, so they are
expressly contrary to S. Paul, who does assign for one of the gifts of gratiae
gratis given, (which is not common to all) the gift to discern spirits; and
thereby also do open gappe to all confusion, and dissentio^: and thus fail,
not only in the means how, but also in the persons by whom spirits are to be
tried.

Out of all which* I reason thus; Conclusion.
That spirit which we are forewarned not to believe, which is to be tried by
another spirit, and that spirit by another in infinitum: That spirit into which
Satan Matt. 24 4.5.
transfigureth himself, deceauing many, and making many false Prophets and
ravenous wolves: That spirit which brings in 2. Pet. 2.1
Sects of perdition, drawing many out of the Church, which causes so many to
Ib. v. 2.
blaspheme the way of truth, to walk in concupiscence, 2. Pet. 2.10.
to contemn dominion, Ib. v. 14.
to allure unstable souls, Ib. v. 19.
to promise liberty, to speak proudly, 2. Pet. 3.16.
to deprave Scriptures, Ibid.
to turn from the Commandment, Act. 20.30.
and to draw disciples after it: That spirit which cannot be discerned, whether
it be the spirit of God, man, or the Devil; whether of truth or falsehood; of
wisdom or giddines, and in regard it has so great similitude, in effect and
operation, one with another; That spirit, I say cannot be an infallible rule
and judge to interpret Scripture, judge of faith, decide controversies, and
direct every man in the way of his salvation; this is evident, and needs no
proof.

But such is the private spirit, which every private person, and sect-maister
challenges to himself, as is before proved, and by experience confirmed; in
that every Heretic, ancient, or late, has by force of it separated himself
from Gods Church, broached so many blasphemous opinions, contemned so highly
all Church Authority, promised licentious liberty of the Gospel, depraved so
fowly holy Scriptures, and drawn so many into perdition after them, (all which
shall more at large afterward be confirmed:) Therefore it does follow, that
this private spirit, cannot be a rule of faith, able to assure and secure every
one in his belief, and salvation. And thus much of the first proof out of
Scripture, against this private spirit.

Out of 2. Pet. 1.20. making the same spirit author and interpreter of
Scripture. SECT. II.
THE second proof is out of S. Peter, who, 2. Pet. 1.20. The second proof out
of S. Peter.
proving the power, and present coming of Christ, first by the eyewitness of
some, in his Transfiguration, next by a more firm testimony, in respect of the
Jews, that is, The scripture is to be interpreted by the same spirit, by which
it was penned
the holy Scripture, (which he commends for the effect, which is to lighten, as
light in a dark place, and for the author which is the Holy Ghost) has among
the rest, these words: Understanding this first, that no prophecy of
Scripture, is made by private interpretation, for not by man's will, was
prophecy brought at any time, but the holy men of God spoke, inspired with the
Holy Ghost. In which words S. Peter makes first a serious premonition,
Understanding this first, as a point of principal, and important
consideration. Secondly, he lays down his assertion in words plain and
powerful, against this private spirit, That no prophecy of Scripture, that is,
no sense and meaning of Scripture (for so are they called, Ephesians. 4.
some Prophets, because they did expound the secret hidden mysteryes of
Scripture, and foretell the joys of heaven to the just, as S. Ambrose, Chrysostom.
hom. de spir. sanct. adorando.
and S. Anselme, with all others do expound it) is made by private
interpretation, that is, according to S. Chrysostom, Not by the spirit, which
many brag of, as the spirit of God, but falsely pretending it, do speak that
which is their own. Clem. ep. 5.
According to S. Clement: Not according to the proper understanding of our own
wit. Yea according to Calvin: Not by our own proper sense; for what we produce
out of it, is profane. Call. in Co^m. in hunc locum
The sense therefore according to the plain words, and general consenting
interpretation of all, is, No private spirit, of any private man expounding
Scripture, according to his own private sense, and proper conceit, and fancy,
is a fit means to interpret Gods holy word, of which thirdly he gives this
reason, because not by man's will, or by any self seeming humane conceit, was
prophecy brought at any time, that is, the sacred and holy sense of Gods holy
word, never at any time brought forth and penned, but the holy men of God, the
Prophets, and Apostles spoke, and dictated, what they wrote, inspired with the
Holy Ghost: that is, Because the Holy Ghost was the author of the words and
sense of holy Scripture, in the mouth, and hands of those, who first penned
it; Therefore must the same holy Ghost be the expositour of the sense of it, in
the mouths of them, who rightly understand it. And this to be the true sense
of this place, witness, besides the former testimonies, not only the Rhemists,
Bellarmine, Bellar. l. 3. c. 6. de interpr. verbi Dei.
and others, but also Calvin himself, saying: The spirit which spoke by the
Prophets, is the only interpreter of himself.

Out of which place and words I infer, first, that as the true text of
Scripture it self, so also the true sense, Inference.
and meaning of it, is a mean and ground of Christian religion, first and
principally to be known. Secondly, that this true sense is not to be made by
any private interpretation of the private spirit of every private person.
Thirdly, that it is to be made by the same spirit of God, which was the first
author, and dictatour of it. Conclusion.
And out of this inference and evidence of words I argue thus. That spirit
which must be the true and infallible interpreter of holy Scripture is, and
must be the same, which was the first author and writer of it, as is here
proved; but that spirit which first wrote the text of holy Scripture, was not a
gift or spirit communicated to every private person, though faithful, but
only to the Prophets, and Apostles, the first and prime pillars, and Pastors
of Gods Church, as is evident. Therefore this, and the same spirit, or gift,
which is given to expound the same scripture, is not a spirit given to every
private belieuer, but only to the Pastors and pillars of Gods Church, who as
they are the successors of the former first pillars, and Apostles: so also they
receive the same spirit, to interpret the same Scripture, which their
Predecessors wrote. As therefore the true spirit resided chiefly in the first
Pastors, and pillars of Christ's Church, to write holy Scripture; so also the
same spirit resides chiefly in their succeeding Pastors and Prelates to
expound it, and not in every faithful, and simple belieuer, who can only read
it.

Out of 1. Cor. 12.18. proving the interpretation of of Scripture to be a
gift, gratis given, not common to all faithful. SECT. III.
THE third proof is taken out of those places of Scripture, The third proof
out of S. Paul.
which attribute this gift of interpreting Scripture, not gratiae
gratificanti, or to justifying grace, which is common to all faithful
belieuers, and adopted children of God: The gift of interpreting scripture is
gratia gratis data.
but, gratijs gratis datis, or graces freely bestowed, which are special to
some persons only, and those not always Saints, and holy men. For which we may
note, that S. Paul, 1. Cor. 12.18. of the 9. gifts of the Holy Ghost which
there he recounts, and of which four, to wit, 1. curing diseases, 2. working
miracles, 3. prophecy of future events, 4. discerning of spirits, are transeunt
motions; and five, to wit, 1. Wisdom, 2. Knowledge, 3. Faith, 4. Kinds of
tongues, 5. Interpretation of languages, are according to Deuines, permanent
habits: of these I say does S. Paul assign 5. both them, and their proper
function, to be about the deciding, or explicating of matters of belief, and
interpreting of holy Scripture, that is, 1. Wisdom, which is to explicate the
high mysteries of the Trinity, Incarnation, predestination, and the like. 2.
Knowledge, which is to explicate either matters of manners, what we are to do,
and how to live; or mysteries of faith, by examples, comparisons, and
philosophical reasons. 3. Faith, which is either without fear to profess,
and preach what is believed, or by contemplation, to penetrate and explicate
the deep mysteries of belief. 4. and 5. to wit, Kinds of tongues, and
interpretation of languages, which is to explicate obscure and hard places of
Scripture, to interpret hymns, and prophecies in strange languages, and to
translate the Scripture into other tongues. All which in their several
function, and in diverse manners, are employed in discerning judging, and
interpreting of mysteries of faith, and difficulties of scripture.

Secondly, we may note, that these gifts, do not necessarily depend, and
follow upon justifying Grace, It is not common to all faithful.
and so are not common to all faithful, or true children of God, but are
special gifts and graces bestowed, some upon one person, some upon another,
every one as the spirit of God pleases. v. 11. not all upon every one. This is
apparent, first out of the text, which says: That to one, certes, by the
spirit, is given the word of Wisdom; to another the word of Knowledge; to
another Faith; to another Interpretation of languages; to another Grace of
doing cures, of miracles, of prophecy, of tongues, of discerning of spirits. v.
8.9.10. etc. Again: Are all Apostles? as heads; Are all Prophets? as eyes;
Are all Doctors? as tongues; Are all miracles, and having the grace of doing
cures? as hands; Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret the Scripture?
as Masters; no surely. For he has given some, not all, to be Apostles; Some,
not all, to be Prophets; Other some, not all, to be Evangelists; Other some,
not all, to be Pastors, and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, into
the work of the ministry etc. Ephesians. 4.11. Secondly the same is apparent by the
comparison of this mystical body, with a natural body, which also the Apostle
uses, v. 14. etc, for as all members have not the same operation, but some
have one, some another, the eyes to see, the hands to work, the feet to walk,
the head to discourse; so in the mystical body, all and every one though
faithful, have not the same and all guiftes, but some one, some another; as
some have the gift of cures, some of miracles, some of tongues; so also some
have the gift of Wisdom, Science, and Interpretation, but all have not every
one of them; therefore some must as Masters, teach; some as Scholars learn;
some as heads direct and instruct; some as members be directed, and
instructed: so that, as all members, are not one member, so neither has one
member all operations, or functions; but according to division of graces, is
also division of ministrations, and operations. v. 4.

Inferences.
Out of which it does follow, first; that the gift of interpretation of holy
Scripture, and explicating of high mysteryes of faith, is a gift, not general
and common to all the faithful, as depending and following necessary upon
Faith, or grace, but special and particular to some, as gratis given, to whom
it pleases God to give it. Secondly, that all faithful, and just persons,
cannot be directed by this extraordinary guifte, in their judgment of faith,
decision of controversies, and interpretation of scripture, because it is not
given to every just man, as is proved: not yet only to the just, Matthew. 7.22
but sometimes to the unjust, as to those who cast out Devils, in our Saviors
name, and yet he knew them not, that is, Conclusion.
did not approve, and commend them. And out of these I argue thus.

To interpret Scripture, and decide Controversies of Faith, is a gift, not
given generally to all the just or faithful, by virtue of their justification:
but extraordinarily bestowed upon some only, as a grace, gratis data: but the
private spirit, according to the Protestant doctrine, is a gift given to all,
and every faithful, by virtue of their justification, not gratia gratis data:
to some therefore the Protestant private spirit cannot be a gift, given to
interpret, in every one, the holy Scripture, and judge of all controversies of
faith. The Mayor, is the doctrine of the Holy Ghost. The Minor, is the doctrine
of the Protestants. And so the conclusion following out of both, is most
certain.

Out of Ezech 13. describing, in false Prophets, this private spirit, with the
effects and punishment of it. SECT. IIII.
THE fourth proof is out of the Prophet Ezechiel, who chap. 13. does describe,
and decypher to us, 1. This private spirit what it is. 2. the persons in whom
it is. 3. 4. Proof out of Ezechiel.
the effects which it works. 4. the punishment which ensues upon it.
Therefore he describes, that spirit to be the same, with this private spirit,
that is, The spirit of their own heart, By whom is described.
which the Prophets follow. v. 3.2. This spirit is in the men-prophets, The
Prophets of Israel, that prophecy. v. 2. The spirit.
and in the women-prophets, The daughters of the people, which prophecy v. 17.
both of them being the people of God, The persons.
and chosen Israelites. 3. The effects of it, The effects.
are. 1. Blindness, they see nothing* v. 3. 2. Vanity, They see vain things.
3. Lies, They divine lies, saying, Our Lord says, whereas I have not spoken,
v. 7. and chap. 22.28. saying: Peace, and there is not peace, v. 10. 4. Fraud,
which, as Foxes in the deserts, v. 4. tied by the tail of malice, and severed
in the heads of doctrine, do destroy the vinyards of Christ. Cant. 2. as
dawbing of a wall, made by the dawbers of clay or morture, but without temper
of chafe or straw, v. 11. As cushions and pillowes, made by delicious women,
and laid under men's heads to lull them in security, and catch their souls. In
both which with fair exterior show, and hopeful promises they deceive the
people, feeding some with a security of future good, and terrifying others with
danger of future evil, that they might kill the souls, that is, denounce that
they shall be killed: who dye not, and viuificate the souls, that is, declare
that they shall live: which live not, lying to the people that believe lies. v.
19.4. The punishment of it.
The punishment it brings with it, is woe to the foolish Prophets, v. 3. woe to
them that sow cushions, and make pillowes: I will destroy the wall, and
accomplish my indignation in it: my hand shall be upon the Prophets; in the
council of my people, shall they not be; and in the Scripture, of the house of
Israel, they shall not be written; neither shall they enter into the land of
Israel. v. 9. They shall divine no more, and I will deliver my people out of
their hands. v. 21.23. Lo, here is described the nature, the author, the
effect, and the punishment of this spirit.

In all which, if we compare spirit with spirit, person with person, effect
with effect, and punishment with punishment, The spirit of false Prophets and
Protestants compared.
we shall find the private spirit of the Protestants properly described, in
this false spirit of the false Prophets. This false spirit of the false
Prophets was a spirit of their own, a spirit of their own heart, that is, of
their own invention, according to their fancy, because, as says the Prophet
Hieremy: Hierem. 29.8.
They did falsely prophecy to you in my name, and I sent them not, says our
Lord. The private spirit of the Protestants, is a spirit of every man's own,
and his own heart, every one has his own spirit, and that private, and
singular to himself. Every one says, his spirit is of the Lord, whereas our
Lord has not sent either them, or their spirit. These false Prophets were some
men, some women, all Prophets of Israel v. 1. Daughters of my people, v. 17.
all reputed among the faithful children of God, and yet false Prophets, and
false Prophetesses were they both. The Protestants, who challenge this spirit,
The persons.
are all Prophets, that is, interpreters of the word of God: they are (in their
opinion) all faithful and elect children of God, all endued with this spirit,
which is given to all, and common to al men and women, and by it every one of
them does prophecy, and interpret Scripture. The fruits and effects of this
spirit, were Blindness, Vanity, Lying and Deceit, by which they in hypocrisy
made fair show of piety: but within wanted temper of good mortar, of true
piety to daw be their wall; and with flattery laid soft cushio^s of hopeful
promises under the elbowes of every man's humor, to please their fancy, and
all to catch souls, and deceive Gods people. v. 10.18. The Protestants spirit
which vaunts so much of knowledge, verity, sincerity, and piety, what is it,
but a trappe baited with so many fair baits, to catch so many souls? Their
Church, what is it, but a wall without temper, or mortar of the true spirit, or
word of God, to vphould it from falling and erring? Their doctrine, what is it,
but cushions, and pillowes of fair promises, of certainty of truth, and
salvation, deceauing all who believe it, Killing or denouncing damnation to
them who dye not, and Viuificating, or assuring salvation to them who live not?
Their Preachers or Prophets, what are they, but as their blind, vain, lying,
and deceitful spirit, by which they are guided? that is, men most blind in
errors of doctrine, most vain in oste^tation of truth, most lying in falsely
accusing others, and most deceitful in shifts and euasions, against manifest
truth. The effects.
Lastly as the punishment which fell upon these Prophets, and their blind,
lying, vain, and deceitful spirit, was not only a woe and a curse of Gods
indignation against them, a division, and dissolution of the wall among
themselves: but also a separation of them from the council of Gods people,
from the house of Israel, and from entrance into the land of promise; so the
punishment which falls upon this spirit, and them who are deluded by it, is no
less then a dissolution of all unity in Religion; a separation from the Church
of God, from the body of Christ, from the society of Saints; from the unity of
whose spirit, by the singularity of this their private spirit, as they are
separated in this life, so by incurring the woe and indignation of God against
them, as well as the former Prophets, they must needs be divided from him, and
his kingdom in the next life. And this is the fruit of this spirit in all
Prophets, and professors of it: and the end, and punishment of them who are
conducted by it.

Out of which it follows. 1. That as this private spirit, Inferences.
was in the old Prophets; so it is in these new Preachers, and interpreters of
the word of God: as in them it invented new and false prophecies, and
predictions; so in these it deuiseth new and false errors in faith, and vain,
and deceitful expositions of scripture. 2. That as in them, it was a spirit of
blindness, lies, vanity, and deceit, by which many were lead into dangerous
and damnable errors, and fell into great and grievous punishments; so in these
Preachers and interpreters, it has the same effect, and brings upon them the
like punishments. 3. That as then, before Christ, Women seducers.
this spirit possessed, and seduced both men, and women, prophets and
prophetesses; so now, and ever since Christ, it has done the same, Hier.
epitom. 1. epist. ad C^esiph.
as S. Hierome notes of the times before him: Simon Magus had his Helene;
Nicolaus his troops of women; Marcion, his Minion, sent before him to Rome;
Montanus, his Prisca, and Priscilla; Ptolomeus, his Flora; Apelles, his
Philomela; Arius, the Emperors sister; Donatus, his rich Sucilla; Elpidus, his
Agape; and Priscilianus, his Galla; all prophetesses of like spirit with the
prophets, all hands and helpers to diuulge their heresies. So in these our
later days, every new master had his mistress, and every Preacher his partner,
all participant of the same spirit; thus had Dulcinus his Margaret; Luther his
Catherine; Calvin his Ideletta Buraea; Beza his Candida; and every new Doctor,
as Carolostadius, Oecolampadius, Bucerus, Martyr, Conclusion.
Sanctius (and who not?) every one his sister, and yoake-fellow in the spirit
of the Lord. Out of all which I conclude and argue thus. That spirit cannot be
a fit interpreter of scripture, nor a sufficient judge of controuersyes, which
is a spirit of every ones own heart, a spirit blind, lying, vain, and
deceitful, a spirit seducing men, and women, a spirit which separates from the
society of the faithful, and infers a woe and indignation of God. But such is
the private spirit which in the old Law seduced false Prophets, and in the new
Law deludeth the false Preachers, as holy Scripture of the former, and
experience of the later do both testify: Therefore this private spirit cannot
be a sufficient judge of Faith, and a fit interpreter of holy Scripture.

Out of Job 32. declaring in Eliu, his friends spirit, the manner of proceeding
of this private spirit. SECT. V.
The fifth proof out of Job.
A Fifth proof is out of Job 32. The patience of Job having been tried in the
loss of his cattle, his family, his children, and in the vexation of his body,
and vpbraiding by his wife, was after all this assaulted by his friends. These
(says the Gloss) represent the fashions of Heretics, who under the show of
aduising, use the art of seducing; for which, Job before he began to dispute
with them, said, he would show them to be Fabricatores mendacij, Eliu the
Busite his private spirit.
and cultores falsorum dogmatum. 13.4. Framers of lies, and worshipers of false
opinions. Of these, three of them being convinced by the speeches of Job, and
made silent thereby, the fourth, Eliu the Busite, a young man of a more fervent
spirit, the son of Ram, that is, Excelsus, or Proud, a new master, rises up
angry against Job, because he said, he was just before God, v. 2. and against
his friends, because they could not answer Job with reason v. 3.5. And
beginning first to commend himself, and his silence: Because I was young, I
was afraid to speak; and then to condemn his elders, saying, That the
ouldest are not the wisest, neither do the old wen understand judgment; And
lastly (to show of what race he is come, and to our purpose) he says: As I see
the spirit is in man, and the inspiration of the omnipotent does give
understanding, v. 8. and I also will answer my part, and will show my
knowledge; for I am full of words, and the spirit of my belly streyneth me:
behold my belly is as new wine, without a vent, which breaks new vessels. I
will speak, and take breath a little; I will open my lips, and will answer.
v. 18.19.20. God has made me, as he has made thee, chap. 33. v. 6. Hear ye
wise me^ my words, and ye learned harken to me. cap. 34. v. 2.

Here is a description of a new spirit, Eliu, and the Protestants spirit alike.
and of one full of it, a Caluinist, or Puritan in the highest degree, he has
the spirit of God, the inspiration of the Omnipotent, understanding above
others; his belly is full of the spirit, and words, seeking vent, as wine out
of a new vessel; he will speak, talk, and answer that, which his
Ancestors and wise men could not; he has reason, which they had not; he is
inspired by the Omnipotent, which they are not; he is inspired that Job is
unjust, because he said, He was just before God. v. 2. that the ancients are
destitute of wisdom and judgment, of the spirit of God, of all truth and
verity; that he has the spirit of truth, and that all truth is to be learned
of him; this spirit, in a hot Puritan, says, as Sedechias the false Prophet
(who had a lying spirit in his mouth) said to Micheas the true Prophet: Has
the spirit of the Lord left me, 3. Reg. 22.23
and has it spoken to thee? No sure; for the spirit of God has forsaken the
whole Church (to which yet it was promised by Christ) so that it has erred, is
fallen, and become Antichristian; but the spirit is certainly in me, it
infallibly teaches me truth, tells me the meaning of scripture, assures, me of
salvation; it cannot depart from me, and my mouth, and the mouth of my seed for
ever: thus says the Caluinist out of his spirit, as this Eliu, and Sedechias
said out of theirs.

Out of which I argue thus, That spirit which is the same with the spirit of
these false Prophets, who were so seduced and armed by it, against the Saints
and Prophets of God, cannot be a fit spirit to interpret Scripture, judge of
doctrine and to make a sole ground of belief: but such is the private spirit
now, and always has been in all former Heretics and false Prophets,
therefore it cannot be a fit judge of controversies, and an infallible
interpreter of Scriptures.

The sixth proof out of S. Paul, admonishing, Who is an Heretic. Sanct. lib.
2. mor. c. 7. n. 1.
Out of Tit. 3.10. showing the spirit of an Heretic. SECT. VI.
THE sixth proof is taken out of an admonition given by S. Paul, against
Heretics, Tit. 3.10. in these words: A man that is an Heretic, after the
first, and second admonition avoid, knowing that he, that is such an one, is
subverted, and sins, being condemned by his own judgment. In which words
we are to note. First, who is an Heretic, that is to be avoided. Aug. ep. 162.
Qui sententiam suam, qua^uis falsa^ and peruersa^, nulla pertinaci animo sitate
defe^dunt; praeser tim inquam non audacia presumptionis pepererunt, sed a
seductis and in errorem lapsis parentibus acceperunt: quaerunt aute^ cauta
solicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati cum inuenerint, nequaqua^ sunt inter
haereticos, deputandi.
2. The reason why he is to be avoided. First therefore as Heresy is a voluntary
error in the understanding against some verity of Faith, obstinatly defended
by him who has once believed; so an Heretic is he, who having once professed
the Christian faith, does err in some article of it, and does with obstinacy
defend his error: for which is requisite. 1. That he have received the
Christian faith, at least in Baptism by professing it. 2. That he err in some
point, or points of faith, not in all, for then he is an Apostata. 3. That he be
obstinate in his opinion, or error, of which sort, are not they who according
to S. Augustine, defend their opinions, though false and perverse, with no
stubborn stomach, or obstinate heart, especially if it be such as themselves by
bold presumption broached not, but received it of their deceived parents: Aug.
l. 18. de ciuit. Dei c. 51. Qui in ecclesia Dei morbidu^ aliquod prauumque
sapiunt, si correpti vt sanum rectu^que sapia^t, resistunt co^tumaciter, suaque
pestifera and mortifera dogmata eme^dare nolu^t, sed defensare persistu^t,
haeretici fiu^t and for as exeuntes, habentur in exerce^tibus inimicis.
and do seek the truth warily and carefully, being ready to be reformed, if
they find it such. These are not to be reputed among obstinate Heretics. But
those according to the same S. Augustine: Who in the Church of God have any
crazed and perverse opinion, if being admonished to be of a sound and right
opinion, they resist obstinatly, and will not amend their pestiferous opinions,
but persist in the defense of them, are thereby become Heretics, going forth
out of the Church, and are counted for enemies that exercise us. Again: He i^
an Heretic, that when the doctrine of the Catholic faith is made plain and
manifest to him, had rather resist it, and chose that which himself held.
According to whom, and the Doctors of our time, he is said to be obstinate in
heresy, who willing, and witting does maintain any thing against the Catholic
Church, or which is all one, who knows and reflectes that his opinion is
contrary to the sentence of the Catholic Church, and yet neglecting the
authority of the Church, which proposes it for true, does persist in his
opinion. And this is an Heretic, who after admonition being grown thus
obstinate, is to be avoided, rejected, and refuted.

Secondly, the reason why we are to avoid an Heretic is, because that such an
one sins in obstinacy, and is subverted without hope of amendment, being
condemned by his own judgment, (...), that is, says Tertullian: Aug. l. 4.
de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 16.
Because he chose that, for which he is damned, by wilfully adherring to his
own opinion, and conceit, where the origin of his sin, subversion and
condemnation is his prefering his own selfe-seeming conceit, Why an heretic
is to be avoided.
before the determination of the whole Church of God; which is proper to those
who rely upon their own spirit, and prefer it before all, even the whole
Church of God. Out of which it follows first, Tert. de prescript. cap. 6. quia
in quo damnatur sibi clegit.
that the origin of all heresies, is a man's own proper and private conceit,
which he preferring before the judgment of the whole Church, chooses to
follow his own opinion, rather then the determination of the Church. And out
of this I argue thus. All who rely and build upon their own private spirit,
judgment, and opinion, Conclusion
for matters of faith and religion, preferring it before the sentence of the
whole Church and Pastors of it, are Heretics sinful, subverted, and to be
avoided, according to S. Paul: but such are all those, who make their private
spirit the rule, and judge of their faith, religion, and exposition of
Scripture, as is apparent, because neglecting the direction of the spirit of
God, which directs his whole Church, they prefer before it their own private
spirit, which directs themselves; therefore are justly condemned, and so to be
avoided as Heretics.

Out of diverse places of Scripture, condemning the relying upon our own
judgment. SECT. VII.
The 7. and last proof out of diverse places of Script.
THE last proof which I will use, is out of these places of Scripture, which as
in general they exhort us not to be wise in our own conceit, nor to trust in
our own opinion and judgment: so in particular they do condemn this relying
of every man upon his private spirit, which is nothing else, but his conceit and
opinion. First the Wiseman says: Prou. 3.5 7.
Lean not upon thy own prudence, be not wise in thy own conceit. Job. 12.15.
The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he that is wise, hears
counsel. Prou. 14.12
There is a way that seems to a man just, but the later end thereof leads to
death^. I say says: Is. 5.21.
VVoe to you that are wise in your own eyes, and prudent before your selves.
Moses says: Deuteronomy. 12.9.
You shall not do there the things that we do here this day, every man that
which seems good to himself. Of all which S. Paul gives a reason, and
denounces a punishment, because Romans 1.22.
having not glorified God, they are become vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart has been hardened; for saying of themselves, that they be
wise, they are become fools. And Romans 2.8
to them that are of contention, and obey not the truth wrath, and indignation.
These. 1.8.
In the flame of fire giving revenge to the^ that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel.

Inference.
Out of which places I argue thus: They who lean on their own prudence, are
wise in their own conceit, are upright in their own eyes, are wise and
prudent before themselves, do that which seems good to themselves, say,
themselves are wise; these become vain, foolish, contentious, hard-harted,
know not God, obey not truth, resist the Gospel, and are cursed, according to
holy Scripture. But such are all they who in mysteries of faith, in matters of
religion, and in expositions of Scripture forsake the direction of the spirit
of God, promised and given to his Church, and rely and depend upon their own
spirit, or self seeming conceit, who by it choose their faith, and upon it
ground their salvation, as all Protestants do who are guided by this private
spirit: therefore in this miserable, and desperate case of ignorance, vanity,
folly, obstinacy, and cursednes are all those who in their faith, religion, and
exposition of Scripture, are thus guided, directed, and instructed by their
private spirit.

And if these sayings of Scripture be verified in affairs moral or
domestical, public or politic, which are in the compass of our natural
judgment, and reason (of which they are properly understood) and in which
experience also teaches, that they who in any art, science, or negotiation,
most rely upon their own judgment, and follow their own ways, do often
commit the greatest errors, and fall into the deepest dangers; whereas they,
who are advised by others, and go the ordinary way, do for the most part
proceed more securely, and succeed more prosperously: Then much more is the
verity of them confirmed in mysteries of faith, which are above our capacity;
in verities of religion, which are not measured by reason; and in explication
of Scripture, which is a Is. 19.11.
book sealed, and that Apoc. 5.1.2.
with seven seals, which none in heaven or earth could open, or look upon,
but the Lamb, 2. Pet* 1.20.
nor any spirit interpret it, but that which did make it. In all which every
man's proper judgment must needs be weak, and every ones private spirit
doubtful, whether it can attain to the true and proper understanding of them.
All which is confirmed by the authority of that famous Doctor S. Augustine,
who says: Quis mediocriter intelligens, Aug. l. de vtilit. credend. cap. 12.
non plane viderit, etc. Who, though of mean capacity, does not plainly see,
that it is more profitable and secure, for the simple to obey the wise, then to
live according to ones own direction: and if this course be safer in small
matters, as in tilling of ground, marrying of wives, education of children, and
ordering of ones family: much more it is in religion; for humane things are
more easy to be known, and in divine things there is more danger of sin, and
offense. And again: No science or trade, Cap. 17.
though mean and easy, is learned without a Master; what therefore can be
more audacious, and temerarious, then to seek to understand books of divine
mysteries, without Interpreters? And again: Men to understand a Poet, do seek
for a master, Cap. 7.
Asper, Cornutus, Donatus, and others: and dare thou without a guide,
adventure upon the divine books, which be full of divine mysteries, as all
confess? and dare thou give thy judgment, or interpretation of them? And
thus is this private spirit, defining of faith, decyding of controversies, and
determining of religion, confuted by authority of holy Scripture, expressly
confuting and condemning it, and the aforesaid function assigned to it. He who
will see more testimonies to prove the right Judge of controversies, and the
infallible interpreter of Scripture, which are the authority of Gods holy
Church, and the chief Pastors of it; let him read Bellarmine, Bellarm. l. 3.
c. 6. de interp. ^erbi Dei.
where he shall see the practice and testimony of antiquity, and the evidence
of reason, all at large cited for the same.

THE PRIVATE SPIRITS INTERPRETING OF HOLY SCRIPTVRE, AND Judging of Mysteries,
and Controversies of Faith, confuted by the testimony of holy Fathers. CHAP.
III.
WE have confuted this pretended power, and authority of the private spirit, by
the authority of Gods holy Word; it remains that we do the same by the
testimony of ancient holy Fathers. What Fathers are cited.
For which we may note, that as S. Augustine alleging the Fathers before him
against the Pelagians, said: That he would not assume to himself to allege
the sentences of all Fathers, Aug. tom. 7. contr. Iuliae. pelag. l. 1. c. 2 Sed
pauca paucorum, quibus tamen nostri contradictores coguntur erubescere, and
cedere, fi vel in ijs Dei timor, vel ^ominum pudor, tantum malum peruicaciam
superauerit.
nor yet all the sentences of them whom he alleged; but some sayings of some
few, which yet are such as will cause our adversaries to blush, and yield, if
either fear of God, or shame of man, will overcome so great an obstinacy in
them. So we will not undertake to allege either all the Fathers, or all the
testimonies of those* whom we allege, no more then we have done all the
Prophets or Apostles, or all the authorities of them whom we have cyted (which
labor in both, we leave to the^, who are more expert in both;) yet I hope we
have collected some, and those in every age such, as being well pondered, and
seriously discussed may suffice to satisfy the Reader, that in their judgment,
this private spirit is an unfit Interpreter of holy Scripture, and an unable
judge to decide matters of Faith.

Secondly, we may note, that though none of the ancient Fathers did in
particular write of this subject, nor yet on set purpose confute it: What
authority they have.
yet these sayings and sentences of theirs sought, and picked out, as so many
dispersed flowers of their several gardens, and coupled together as into one
nose-gay, may serve for a taste of their general opinions, and judgment in
this matter, especially since their assertions were never contradicted, nor
their persons ever censured by any for them.

What proofs they bring.
Thirdly, we may note, that those Fathers, who do either attribute this
prerogative of interpreting Scripture to the Church or Pastors of it (as the
most cyted by Bellarmine before quoted do) or derogate the same from all
humane, and proper wit and judgment (as some of these here cyted in their
words do) do both of them as much, as if in express terms they had done it,
condemn this private spirit, and power of it, as incompetent for a Judge of
Faith: 1. because they who interpret Scripture, and assign the Fathers,
Counsels, or Church for approved and authorized Judges in this case, must
needs condemn those who forsake them, and oppose themselves and their
judgment against them: which all they do, who rely upon their private spirit,
and prefer their judgment of it, before the judgment of the Church, and
Fathers. 2. Because all who are guided by this private spirit, and rely upon
it, do in effect rely upon their own judgment, and opinion; and so either
erroneously mistaking themselves, or abusing the spirit, do instead of the
spirit of God, make their own conceit, fancy, or imagination the judge and
vmpire of all. These being supposed we will descend to particulers, and cite
some of these Fathers and their testimonies in their several ages. Testimonies
of the Fathers in the first age


First therefore to begin^ (...) the first age of the Apostles, and to descend
down (...). S Clement Clem l. 10. recognit. Obseruadu^ est, vt cum lex Dei
legitur, non secundum proprij ingenij intelligentia^ legatur: sunt enim multa
in diuinis scripturis, quae possunt trahi ad eu^ sensu^, quem sibi vnusquisq,
spo^teprae sumit: sed fieri no^ potest.

In the second age.


the scholar of S. Paul, and coetaneall with the Apostles, says: It is to be
observed, that when the law of God is read, it ought not to be read or
understood, according to the meaning of every man's own wit; for there are many
things in holy Scripture, which may be wrested to that meaning, which every
one volu^tarily presumes to frame to himself: but this cannot be. Lo, the
sense which every ones wit and judgment, which they call their spirit,
presumes to frame, cannot be a true and infallible sense of Scripture.

In the second age; Irenaeus a Doctor and Martyr (who^ S. Hierome calls,
Virum Apostolicum, an Apostolical man) speaking of the Heretics of his time,
says: Every Iren. Vnusquisque fictionem quam a semetipso adinueuit, illam esse
sapientiam dicit, seque indubitate, incontaminate, and sincere absconditum
scire mysterium.
one says, that his own fiction, which he has devised of himself, is
wisdom, and that he undoubtedly, vnspottedly, and sincerely does know the
hidden mysteries. These Heretics made the invention of their own brain, the
undoubted spirit of wisdom, to understand the hidden mysteries of Faith.
Tertullian speaking of Heretics who differ among themselves, says: Every
Tertul. l. de prescrip. c. 42. fol. 400. which book he wrote an. 197.
Vnusquisque pro suo arbitrio modulatur quae accepit, quemadmodum de suo
arbitrio composuit qui tradidit.
one does tune what he receaues, according to his own liking; in the same
manner as he, who taught them, made it according to his own liking. Again,
showing that diversity of doctrine brings corruption of scripture, he says:
They Idem cap. 38. fol. 399. Quibus propositum fuit aliter docendi, eos
necessitas coegit aliter disponendi instrumenta doctrinae: vnde aute^ extranei
and inimici Apostolis haeretici, nisi ex diuersitate doctrinae, quam
vnusquisque suo arbitrio, aut protulit, aut recepit?
who are resolved to teach otherwise then the Church, must change the means of
doctrine, that is scripture; since, how came the heretics to be strangers and
enemies to the Apostles, but by the diversity of doctrine which every one,
according to his own liking, either made or received? Again: Who Idem c. 4.
f. 49. Qui lupi rapaces, nisi sensus and spiritus subdoli, ad infestandum
gregem Christi intrinsecus delitescentes?
are ravenous wolves, but subtle senses and spirits, that lie close to molest
the flock of Christ? Who are false Prophets, but false Preachers? Who are
false Apostles, but adulterous Ghospellers? Again: Idem c. 1 Haereticus
destinari potest is, qui deserto quod prius fuerat, id postea fibi elegit quod
retro no^ erat. Idem. Haereses dictae graeca voce ex interpretatione
Electionis, qua quis sieve ad institue^das, sieve suscipie^das eas vtitur: ideo
and damnatu^ sibi dixit Haereticum, quia in quo damnatur sibi elegit: Nobis
vero nihil ex arbitrio licet inducere, sed nec ^ligere quod alius de arbitrio
suo indux^rit.
He is to be counted an Heretic, who forsaking that which was first, does
choose to himself that which was not before. Again: Heresy is called in Greek
of Election, by which one chooses to begin, or follow it: therefore S. Paul
said, that therefore an Heretic was damned, because he chose to himself that,
for which he is damned. It is not lawful for us, to introduce any thing upon
our own opinion, nor to follow that which others introduced upon their own
opinion. And Idem. lib. 2. cont. Marc. cap. 2.
he calls Adams sin, an Heresy, because he chose it rather upon his own, then
Gods election. Here are deceitful spirits, every ones own spirit, liking,
will, purpose, resolution, opinion and election described to be that which
makes men Heretics, and strangers from God, ravenous Wolves, false Prophets,
and adulterous Ghospellers, and damned Heretics, and changes the sense of
Scripture. Out of which the same Tertullian Id. lib. 4. ad Marci. cap. 4.
Humanae temeritatis, non diuinae authoritatis est haeresis negotiu^, quae sic
semper emendat Euangelia, dum vitiat.
affirms, That heresy is a matter of humanae temerity, not divine authority,
which always so amends the Gospel, until it corrupt it. That all doctrine
is true (not which came from a private spirit, but) which agrees with the
Apostolical mother, and original Churches; and that is without doubt to be
held, which the Church received from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ,
Christ from God; all other doctrine is preiudicated, as that which sauoureth
against the verity of the Church of Christ. Again: That Idem de praescrip. c.
p. 17. fol. 393. Nihil proficit congressio scripturaru^, nisi plane vt stomachi
quis ineat auersionem aut cerebri. quid promoue bis exercitatissime
Scripturarum cum fi quid defenderis, negatur ex aduerso; fi quid negaueris,
defendatur: and tu quidem nihil perdes nifi vocem in contentione, nihil
consequeris nifi bilem ex blasphematione.
to deal with Heretics by Scriptures, is but to turn ones stomach, or
break his brain, to loose his speech by contending, and to raise choler by
hearing their blasphemy; since what the most expert Scripturist can allege
they will deny, and what he denies they will defend, either by denying
Scripture, or by adding, or detracting from it. Valentinus, says he, Valent.
non materia^ ad scripturas, sed scripturas ad materiam excogitauit. fol. 399.
c. 38.
received that which was most for his purpose, and formed the Scriptures to his
own opinions, but not his opinions to Scripture. And so, as S. Augustine
says: They Aug. de Genes. ad literam lib. 1. cap. 18.
contend not for the true meaning of Scripture, but for their own opinions,
making that which is the opinion of their own, to be the meaning of Scripture.

In the third age, Clemens Alexand. in his learned books Stromatum, which he
wrote (according to Baron.) anno 204. showing not only that Heretics allege
Scripture, but also how they use it, says: Though Clem. Alex. libr. 3.
Quanqua^ ij* qui haereses sectantur, audeant vti Propheticis scripturis: tamen
primum neque omnibus vtuntur, neque integre, sed quae ambiguae dictae sunt
intelligentes, transferunt illas in priuatas suas opiniones.
they who follow heresies, presume to use the prophetical Scriptures, yet they
neither use all of them, nor these they use entirely, but choosing those
sayings which are doubtful, they draw them to their own private opinions. In
the 3. age
This is one of the chiefest sleightes of this their private spirit, to wrest
doubtful sentences to their own advantage, and make that which is uncertain
in it self, certain, and a point of Faith.

In the same age, S. Cyprian, that Doctor suauissimus, and Martyr beatissimus,
as Aug. l. 2. de doct. Christ. c. 42.
S. August. calls him; speaking of some whom the Devil leads from one
blindness of the world, to another darkness of error, says: They Cyp. de
unit. Ecclesiae. Christianos se vocant, and ambulantes in tenebris, habere se
lumen existimant; blandiente aduersario atque fallente, qui secundum Apostoli
vocem, transfigurat se in Angeli lucem, velut Angelum lucis, and subornat suos
velut Ministros iustitiae, efferentes noctem pro die, interitum pro salute,
desperationem sub obtentu spei, perfidiam sub pretextu fidei, Antichristum sub
vocabulo Christi.
call themselves Christians, and while they walk in darkness, they think they
are in light, the Devil flattering and deceauing them, who transfigures
himself into an Angel of light, and subornes his own Ministers, as Ministers
of justice, affirming night to be day, damnation to be salvation, and shadowing
desperation under pretense of hope, and perfidiousnes under pretense of Faith,
Antichrist under the name of Christ. Again, showing how heresies and schisms
arise out of disobedience of the people, to one Pastor, and Judge in place of
Christ, he says: No Tom. 1. epist. 55. Nemo aduersus sacerdotum collegium
quidquid moueret, nemo post diuinum iudicium, post populi suffragium, post
coepiscoporum consensum, iudicem se* ^on iam Episcopi, sed Dei faceret. Nemo
dissidio vnitatis Christi ecclesia^ scinderet; nemo ^ibi placens, and tumens
s^or^im foris haeresim nouam conderet*
man should make any stir against the college of Priests; no man, after
divine judgment, after the suffrage of the people, after the consent of
fellow-Bishops, should make himself judge, not now of the Bishop, but of God.
No man should divide the unity of Christ's Church by discord; and being proud
should by himself coin and set abroad a new heresy. Again: Idem. ep. 65.
Haec initia Haereticorum, and ortus, atque conatus Schismaticorum male
cogita^tium, vt sibi placeant, vt praepositum superbo tumore contemnant* ab
Ecclesia receditur sic, altar foris collocatur, pace^ and ordinationem and
vnitatem relinqunt.
The beginning and endeavor of Heretics, and Schismatikes, is to please
themselves, and to contemn their Superior, with swelling pride; they go out
of the Church, and set up a new Altar, break peace and unity. Again: In Tom.
3. praefat. de Card. oper. Ta^ in diuinis quam in philosophorum doctrinis, nec
tutu^, nec honestum in^ruditos, and ignaros se^suum ad literas illas
pertinentium, consilire ad discussionem eorum quae nesciunt, and de his sibi
vsurpare magisterium quae ignorant. In the fourth age.
doctrine as well divine as philosophical, it is neither safe nor fit that
persons unlearned, and ignorant of that which belonges to those sciences,
should venture to discuss that they know not, and to be masters of what they
are ignorant. In all which the effect of the private spirit is described to be;
to question and examine that which is determined by Bishops and Councels, to
make it self judge of all, to divide the unity of the Church, to broach new
heresies, and in conceit and respect of it self, to contemn all superiority,
to teach that they know not, and to be masters of what they understand not.

In the fourth age, S. Ambrose a man so worthy, that S. Augustine Aug. tom. 7.
cont. Julian. lib. 1. c. 2.
reverenced him as his Father, who begot him in Christ; so praised him, that he
not only, calls him happy, and the flower of latin writers, but all the Roman
world (says he) with me admire him, his grace, constancy, labors, and perils,
both in works and words: Yea (says he) Pelagius the Heretic so extolled
him, that he durst not reprehend him, and his exposition of Scripture, but
acknowledged that in his books, above others did shine the brightness of the
Roman faith. This holy Saint and Doctor says: Those Amb. in Tit. cap. 3.
Haeretici sunt, qui per verba legis, legem impugnant: proprium enim sens^m
verbis astruunt, vt prauitatem mentis suae legis authoritate comme^dent.
are Heretics, who by the words of the law, impugn the law; for they set a
proper sense upon the words, that they may commend the wickedness of their
own opinion, by the authority of the law. Again: It Magni periculi res est,
si post tot Prophetarum oracula, post Apostolorum testimonia, post Martyrum
vulnera, veterem fidem quasi nouellam discutere praesumas; and post tam
manifestos duces in errore permaneas, and post morie^tium sudorem otiosa
disputatione contendas: veneremurergo in Sanctoru^ gloria fide^ nostram.
is a very dangerous thing, if after so many prophesies of the Prophets, after
the testimonies of the Apostles, after the blood of Martyrs, thou dare
presume to discuss the ancient faith as new; after so many guides, do
remain in error, and after the toiles of so many departed this life, dare
contend in idle disputation: let us reverence therefore our own Faith in the
glory of Martyrs. Here is this private spirit, and two effects of it; the one
to interpret Scripture, according to every man's own liking; the other to
examine, and question again that which has been judged by the Pastors of
Gods Church, and to censure them, and their judgment; both condemned by S.
Ambrose.

S. Hierome, one whom Prosper calls, Vitae Prosp. lib. de ingrat^.
exemplum and mundi magistrum. An example of life, and the master of the
world; whom S. Augustine Aug. ep. 903. ad Hier
calls, One most learned and skillfull in three tongues, desires to confer
with him, to adhere to him, and to be instructed by him, sent his books to be
censured of him, and commended others, as Orosius Oros. lib. 7. hist. c. 43.
who traveled for that end from Spain to Palestine to learn of him. And whom
Damasus Dam. ep. 124.
the Pope, and many from all the parts of the world, consulted with, about
obscure places of Scripture. This great lamp of Gods Church says: Heretics
Hier. ad Paulin. ep. 2. Haeretici quidquid di xerint lege^ putant, nec scire
digna^tur quid Apostoli quid Prophetae se^serint, sed ad suum se^sum incongrua
aptant testimonia, quasi grande and non vitiosissimum docendi genus, deprauare
sententias, and ad voluntatem suam scripturam trahere re^pugnantem.
whatsoever they speak, they think it to be the word, or the law, neither do
they vouchsafe to know what the Apostles or Prophets thought: but do apply
certain incongruous testimonies to their own sense and meaning, as though it
were not a great and most wicked manner of teaching, to deprave the sentences
of Scripture, and to draw them contrary to their sense, unto their own will. A
devise proper to this spirit, to think all it says to be Scripture, and to
wrest all scripture to its own liking. Again, he says: That Idem in cap. 5.
Amos. and 10. Ose tom. 5. Haeretici adeo acumen and sensus ingenij
percipientes, vt bona naturae in Dei cultum verterent, fecerunt sibi ex his
idola: nullus autem potest haeresim struere, nisi qui ardentis est ingenij, and
habet dona naturae: talis Valentinus, Marcion, isti quia terrae bona verterunt
in titulos mortuorum, quia omnis doctrina eorum non ad viuentes refertur, sed
ad mortuos, tam eos quos colunt, quam quos despiciunt.
Heretics, of the gifts of Nature, have made to themselves Idols, not which
they received of God, but which they made out of their own brain. That Idem
tom. 4. in 8. Ose. Sermones and sensus sacros verterunt in Idola, quae de suo
cord finxerunt.
they have turned the holy speeches, and senses of Scripture into Idols, which
they have framed out of their own heart. That Idem in c. 4. Os. tom. 1.
Perdito mentis iudicio, adorant idola quae de suo cord finxeru^t:
fornicationis spiritu possidentur.
having lost their judgment, they worship the Idols which they have framed of
their own heart, and are possessed with the spirit of spiritual fornication.
That Sensus, and eloquia Scripturae Haeretici posueru^t infomentum
superstitionis, and imagines diuersorum dogmatum and abominationes
offendiculoru^ suorum feceru^t ex ijs.
of the sense of Scripture, they have made Idols of diverse opinions, and
abominations of offenses. That In 5. Dan fol. 45. Haeretici assumunt
prophetarum verba, and testimonijs diuinae scripturae vtuntur ad suum sensum,
and dant bibere his quos decipiu^t, and cum quibus fornicati sunt.
they use the divine words, and testimonies to their own sense; and do give
them to drink to those whom they deceive, and with whom they have
fornicated. That In cap. 5. Os. Omnes gentiliu^ and Haereticorum questiones
eaedem sunt, quia non scripturarum authoritate^ sed humanae rationis sequu^tur.
in all questions, they follow not the authority of Scripture, but the opinion
of human reason. That In Ez. 16. tom. 4. Nostra Jerusalem visio pacis ab
haereticis scinditur, quando vnum laterum testimonium scripturae de proprijs
carpentes locis conantur assuere his, quibus non queunt coaptare: vae qui suunt
ceruicalia sub omni cubito.
they snatch certain sentences out of Scripture, and sowing them together,
do set them to that matter to which they cannot agree; and so do set them, as
pillowes under every ones elbow to delude them. Thus In Ezech. 13. tom. 4. Vae
Haereticis his, qui doctrinis requiem pollicentes, omnem aetatem, sexumq,
decipiunt, vt capiant animas miserorum propter pugillum hordei, non panem
integru^, seu solid a testimonia scripturarum, sed quae haeretica prauitate
fracta, dissecta, and sanctos quosque decipiunt, and ad mortem trahunt, and
peccatores varijs promissionibus consiliare contendunt.
do (says he) all heresies deceive, and draw to death, by fair promises, all
sorts of ages, and sexes, giving them not solid bread of Scripture, but
broken, and cut pieces of crummes. Thus Epist. 16. ad Joan. Hieros. Manichaei,
Marcion, Hebion, Gnostici, quae de purissimo scripturarum font assumunt
testimonia, non ita interpretantur vt scripta suut, sed simplicitatem sermonis
Ecclesiastici id volunt significare quod ipsi sentiunt.
did the Manichees, Gnostikes, and Marcion take testimonies out of the pure
fountain of Scripture, but did not interpret them, as they were written, but
converted the simple meaning of Gods word, to signify that which themselves
would have. All In Os. 9. Aliqui qui se Deum videre iactant, and non spiritu
sancto reguntur; sed daemoniaco in parts varias circu^ferente etc. In 1. Gal.
tom. 6. Philomelam Apellis virginem Angelus quidam diabolici spiritus and
peruersus impleuit.
this they did, bragging of their receiving the spirit of God, which yet they
had not; but the spirit of the Devil, by which they were carried into diverse
factions. Such an Angel and diabolical spirit did possess, and fill
Philomela Apelles his virgin. Concerning which spirit he concludes, that, It In
Gal. 5. tom. 6. Haeresis ad opera carnis refertur, graece ab Electione dicitur,
quod scilicet eam sic sibi eligit vnusquisque disciplinam, qua^ putat esse
meliorem. quicunque aliter scripturam intelligit quam sensus Spiritus sancti
flagitat, Haereticus appellari potest.
is called Heresy, ab (...), of election, by choosing every one that doctrine,
which seems to him better, understanding the Scripture otherwise, then the
Holy Ghost meant it, by which he is an Heretic. The su^me of which gathered
out of these dispersed places, is, that all Heretics being deceived by the
spirit, by their own opinion, and their own self seeming conceit, do choose
to themselves what sense of Scripture seems most pleasing to them, and thereby
make it an Idol of their own invention, In the 5. age
by which they deceive themselves, and delude others. Eusebius Eusebius. l. 1. c.
27. hist. Quod sens^s scripturaru^ arbitratu suo interpretantur.
confirms the same, saying of the Seuerians, That, they interpret the sense of
Scripture according to their own liking.

In the fifth age S. Augustine, one so highly commended both by ancient
Fathers, and late Protestants, that (as before is at full cyted) they both
count him, as a master of all learning, as a fountain incorrupted, a Doctor
among the Interpreters of Scripture, as a Sun among Planets, as the greatest
of the Fathers, the worthiest Divine that ever Gods Church had. This great
Doctor, and Saint says: Heresies Non aliunde ortae sunt haereses quam quod
quisque Haereticorum priuata^ sententiam a proprio spiritu hausta^ co^muni
Ecclesiae sente^tiae anteponat.
have no other origin then this, that every Heretic prefers his own opinion,
drawn from his own proper spirit, before the common opinion of the Church.
Again: Nothing De Geness lib. 7. cap. 9. Non ob aliud sunt Haeretici, nisi
quia scripturas no^ intelligentes, suas falsas opiniones contra earum veritatem
peruicaciter asserunt:
makes them Heretics but this, that misunderstanding the Scriptures, they
obstinatly defend their own opinions. The Tom. 8. Psalm. 158. Conc. 1. Diuina
eloquia periculosa sunt his, qui ea velint ad cordis sui peruersitatem
detorquere, haec est magna and inusitata peruersitas, quia cum debent ipsi
viuere secundum voluntatem Dei, volunt viuere secundum voluntate^ suam, rectam
arbitrantes, non quod Deus vult, sed quod ipsi volunt.
holy Scripture is dangerous to these who will wrest it to their own perverse
heart, who when they ought to live according to the will of God, they live
according to their own will; and they will have that to be the meaning of
Scripture, which is their own, when that which is the Scriptures, ought to be
theirs. Again: Aug. Confess. l. 12. cap. 25. Veritas tua Domine, nec mea est,
nec illius, aut alius, sed omnium quos ad eius communionem public vocas;
terribiliter admonens nos, vt nolimus eam habere priuatam, ne priuemur ea. Nam
quisquis id quod tu fruendum omnibus proponis sibi proprie vendicat, and suum
esse vult quod omnium est, a communi propellitur ad sua, id est, a veritate ad
mendacium.
Thy truth, O Lord, is neither mine, nor this man's* or that man's, but all men's
whom thou call publicly to the communion of it, and whereby thou do
terribly admonish us, that we seek not to have truth private, least we be
deprived of it; for whosoever does challenge to himself that which thou do
propose to be enjoyed by all, and will make that proper to himself which is
common to all, that man is driven from the common to his own proper, that is,
from truth to falsehood. Whereupon he reprehends Aug. de na ^ gra. c. 42. Quod
scripturas ones secundum priuatos se^sus legerunt
the Pelagians, because they understood the Scripturs according to their own
private sense: the Donatists, because Lib. de Baptis. cont Donat. Nimis ama^do
sententiam sua^, vel inuidendo melioribus vsque ad praecide^dae co^munionis,
and condendae schismatis vel haeresis sacrilegium peruenire diabolica
praesumptione.
either by too much loving their own opinion, or envying their betters, they
went so far upon their diabolical presumption, as sacrilegiously to separate
holy communion, and bring in schism or heresy: and the Manichies; You Videtis
vos agere, omnis vt e medio scripturarum auferatur authoritas, and suus cuique
author animus fit, quid in quaque scriptura probet, and improbet, id est, non
vt authoritati scripturarum subijciatur ad fidem, sed sibi scripturas ipse
subijciat.
see that your work is to take away all authority from Scripture, and make
every man's mind and conceit, author of what is to be believed, or not to be
believed in holy Scripture, that is, that you will not subject your selves to
Scripture, but will make Scripture subject to your selves. Thus does S.
Augustine condemn this spirit, for that it does prefer it self, and own
opinion, before the common judgment of the Church, does falsely interpret
Scripture, does draw the meaning of Scripture to its own will, yea the will of
God to the same. And he condemns the Pelagians, Donatists, and Manichies, for
that by it they expounded Scripture, and divided themselves from the communion
of holy Church.

With S. Augustine, agrees Cyrill of Alexandria: Cyril. Alex l. 2. thesaur. c.
3. Probe facerent haeretici omnes, si vndique studerent verum scripturarum
sensum venari, nec ad voluntatem suam omnia vert^re.
Heretics should do well if they would seek the true sense of Scripture, and
not turn all according to their own will. And with them both, Vincentius
Lyrinensis: If V^c. Lyr. commonit. Si quis videtur Propheta esse, aut
spiritualis rerum ^piritualium magister, su^mo studio vnitatis and aequalitatis
cultor existat, vt neque opiniones suas ceteris praeferat, and ab vniuersoru^
sensibus non recedat.
any would seems a Prophet or Master, that is, master of spiritual things,
let him chiefly desire unity, and equality, that is, that he do not prefer his
own opinion before others, nor do depart from the general opinions of all
men. Because Scripturam sacram pro ipsa sui altitudine, non vno eodemque sensu
omnes accipiu^t, sed eadem eloquia aliter atque a^iter, alius and alius
interpretatur, vt pene quot homines sunt, tot illic sententiae erui posse
videantur: and id^irco multum necesse est propter tantos ta^ varij erroris
a^fractus, vt Propheticae and Apostolicae interpretationis linea secundum
Ecclesiastici and catholici sensus norma^ dirigatur.
all do not take the holy Scripture in one and the same sense; some do
interpret one way, others another way, the same sentences, so that as many
senses are made, as there be men. Therefore it is very necessary by reason of
many turninges and windinges of errors, that the line of Catholicall, and
Apostolical interpretation be directed, according to the rule of the
Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. Here is advise given not to wrest all to
our own liking, and spirit, but to keep unity, and direct the interpretation
of Scripture according to the rule of Catholic sense.

After all these, Venerable Bed. in 2. Pet. 1. Queadmodum Prophetae non sua
propria, sed Dei verba scribebant, tradebant, praedicabant: ita and Lector
eorum non sua propria interpretatione potest vti, nec a sensu veritatis
exorbitet. Ideo dicimus, ne quis ad libitum suum scripturas exponere audeat.
Beda, Beda.
the honor of our Nation, in the eight age, says: As the Prophets did write,
deliver, and speak, not their own words, but the words of God; so also the
Reader of them, must not use his own proper interpretation, least he decline
from the sense of the truth. Therefore we affirm, that no man presume to
expound Scriptures, according to his own pleasure. What more plain?

I will add to these the testimonies of Luther and Calvin uttered in
confutation of others, but against themselves. Luther (x) Luth. vt Coclaeus a.
15.24. page 125. Neque nos impedire debet quod alij gloriantur de spiritu, and
scripturas parui faciunt. Sed, bone amice, spiritus huc, spiritus illuc: ego
quoque fui in spiritu, atque etiam vidi spiritus (si omnino de proprijs
gloriandum est) forte plusquam illiipsi intra annum videbunt, quotiescumque
etiam gloriantur; and spiritus meus etiam in aliquo se ostendit, cum tamen
spiritus little in angulo fit tacitus.
speaking against Swenkfeldius, says: It must not trouble us, that some do
glorify of the spirit, and little esteem the Scriptures. But, says Luther,
good friend, the spirit goes this way, and that way: I also was in spirit, and
have seen spirits, if I may glory of my own, perhaps more, then they shall
see in a year; and my spirit does show it self in something, where theirs is
yet in a corner. Note, that the Swenkfeldians, and the Caluinists agree, in
that both of them rely on the Spirit, and make it the ground of their Faith:
they differ, in that the former refuse scripture, and rely only on the spirit;
these later admit scripture, but, both for canon and sense of it, subject it to
their spirit: so that the spirit in the one reiects scripture, in the other it
censures, and Lords it over scripture. Whether is worse, let any be judge.
Calvin also speaking of the same Swenkfeldians, Of Calvin.
says: If that spirit was good, it would be the same with the spirit of the
Apostles, and ancient faithful people, but their spirit would not be judge
without scripture: so say we; If Caluins, or the Caluinist spirit were true, it
would be the same with the spirit of the ancient Church and Fathers. Also
against the Vbiquitarians, he says: Satan Call. l. 4. instit. 17.19. Horribili
fascino Satan mentes eorum deme^tauit. Satan perturbulen tos spiritus hodie
quoque molitur.
has bewitched their minds with horrible witchery etc. And, Satan by
turbulent spirits does endeavor etc. Man's Calu. l. 3. Instit. 2.10. Tot
vanitatis recessus habet, tot mendacij la tebris scatet cor humanum, tam
fraudulente hypocrisi obtectu^ est, vt seipsum saepe fallat.
heart has so many secret places of vanity, is subject to so many holes of
lies, is covered with so much fraudulent hypocrisy, that it often deceaues it
self. Again: Many Calu. in 1. Joan. 41.. Multi falsi doctores titulum
spiritus mentiuntur. Insurgunt multi fanatici homines qui se temere iactant
spiritu Dei praeditos esse.
false Doctors belie, or counterfeite the title of the spirit; many mad men
start up, who rashely make ostentation, that they are endued with the spirit of
God. They Stulti sunt qui ad honorifici tituli strepitu^ attoniti* etc.
are fools who amazed at the honorable title of the spirit, dare not enquire
after the matter it self. Many Loquuntur priuato suo nomine, prodeunt priua to
suo nomine, proferunt ex proprio sensu.
braggo of the spirit, yet speak in their own private name, go out in their
own name, utter out of their own sense. Thus do these Patrons, and practisers
of this private spirit wound themselves, in thus stabbing the same in their
adversaries. For what they affirm against them, is verified against themselves.

But what can these Spiritualists (as we may call them) say to all these
testimonies of Fathers? Or rather what shall we say to them about the same? I
conceive nothing can be said better, then that which S. Augustine in the like
case of original sin, says against the like Heretics the Pelagians: for
having cyted most of the Doctors before his time, both of the Greek and Latin
Church, as Irenaeus, Athanasius, Cyrill, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Basil,
Olympius, Reticius, and fourteen more, whose works are not now extant, as
Eulogius, Ioannes Ammonianus, Porphyrius, Fidus, Zozimus, Zoboenus, Nimphidius,
Cromatius, Iouinus, Eleutherius, Clematius all greek Doctors; and Cyprian,
Hilary, Ambrose, Innocentius, yea Hierome, of his own time, all Doctors of
the Latin Church, and all to prove original sin, and necessity of grace,
against Julian the Pelagian, he speaks of the Fathers in this manner: These
Tom. 7. cont. Julian. Pelag. lib. 2. prope finem. Eorum ergo appende
sententias, nolo esse plures, vt eas te pigeat numerare, sed non sunt leaves, vt
eas dedigneris appendere, imo tam sunt graves, vt te videam sub earum onere
laborare.
Fathers I have cyted, and no more, least it should be too tedious to read
them, yet such, as are not so light, that you may scorn to weigh the^, yea so
great, that you may groan under the burden of them. These Hic sunt and
ceteri, quorum te mouere debet tanta consensio. non est ita, sicut stylo
maledico scribis, conspiratio perditorum: in Ecclesia Catholica, doctrinae
sanae studijs claruerunt spiritualibus armis muniti, and accincti: strenua
contra Haereticos bella gesseruut: perfunctis fideliter suae dispensationis
laboribus in pacis gremio dormierunt.
are they, whose so great consent ought to move you, and who are not a
conspiracy, as you call them, of ill tongued men, but who flourished in the
Catholic Church, are sound in doctrine, and armed with spiritual weapons; who
fought stoutly against heretics, and have passed over their labors and slept
in the bosom of peace: Who Finge te nescire quid dicunt Ecclesiae sanctae tot
tantique Doctores, qui vita optime gesta debellatisque suoru^ temporum
erroribus, gloriosissime de hoc saeculo, antequam vos ebulliretis, exierunt.
having lived holily, and overcome the errors of their time, and departed
gloriously out of this world, before you came into it. These Tom. 7. cont.
Julian. Pelagianum lib. 2. prope finem. Veru^ etsi tales no^ fuerunt in his
causis, quas ad s^ delatas, and inter parts cognitas, cu^ hic viuere^t, suo
iudicio definierunt; ad hanc tamen causam tales erant, quando de illa
sententias protulerunt: nullas nobiscum, vel vobiscum amicitias vel
attenderunt, vel inimicitias exercuerunt, neque nobis neque vobis irati sunt;
neque nos neque vos miserati sunt: quod inuenerunt in Ecclesia, tennerunt; quod
didicerunt, docueru^t; quod a Patribus acceperunt, hoc filijs tradiderunt.
Nondum vobiscum apud istos iudices aliquid agebamus, and apud eos acta est
causa nostra: nec nos nec vos eis noti fueramus, and eorum pro nobis latas
contra vos sententias recitamus; nondum vobiscum certabamus, and eis
pronuntiantibus vicimus.
though they were not then present, when this Controversy began, and is now on
foot, and so could not by word of mouth give a definitive sentence; yet when
they wrote, and said these things, they were then such as had not any either
friendship, or falling out with you or us. They were angry, neither at you, nor
us, had compassion of neither. What they found in the Church, they kept; what
they learned, they teached; what they received from their Fathers, they
delivered to their children. You and we did not plead before these Judges, and
yet they decyded our cause; neither you nor we were known to them, and yet we
do produce their verdict for us, against you; we did not about this matter
contend with you, and yet they pronounce us victors. That Tom. 7. cont. Julian.
P^lag. lib. 1. cap. 2. circa medium. Quod credunt, credo; quod tenent, teneo;
quod docent, doceo; quod praedicant, praedico. Istis cede, and mihi cedis;
acquiesce istis, and quiescis a me: postremo, si mihi per eos amicus fieri non
vis, saltem peto, ne per me illoru^ efficiaris inimicus: sed quomodo non
efficieris, si in isto errore permanseris? Quantum ergo melius, vt his accedas,
ab illo recedas? Tantumne apud te possunt Pelagius and Caelestius, vt a solis
ortu vsque ad occasum, tot ac tantos Catholicae fidei Doctores, and defensores
antiquos, and nostrae aetati contiguos, dormientes and manentes, non solum
deserere, verum etia^ Manichaeos audeas appellare?
which they believe we believe; what they teach, we teach; what they preach, we
preach; yield to them and yield to us; consent with them, and consent with us:
if you will not by them be a friend to us, yet be not for us an enemy to them,
which yet you must be, if you remain in this error, therefore leave it, and
lean to them. Can Tom. 7. cont. Julian. Pelagian. lib. 2. prope finem Et vsque
adeo permiscuit ima su^mis longus dies, vsque adeo tenebrae lux, and lux
tenebrae esse dicuntur, vt videant Pelagius, Caelestius, Iulianus; and caeci
sunt Hilarious, Gregorius, Ambrosius?
Pelagius, and Celestius (Luther and Calvin) so far prevail with you, that
for them you dare forsake so many, and so great ancient Doctors, and defenders
of the Catholic faith over all the world? Has time made such a confusion of
great and small matters? Is darkness so become light, and light darkness, that
Pelagius, Celestius, Iulianus etc. do see; and Hilary, Gregory, Nazianzen,
Ambrose etc. are blind? Were Tom. 7. contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 2. sub
finem. Vt inuante meliore atque fortiore, te vinceres; and animositatem, quid
aliud, quam humanam, qua cupis tuam qualiscunque sit, quoniam tua iam facta
est, praeualere sententiam, potentiore pietate superares?
it not better to yield to them, who are better and stronger, and to master
your own presumption, then to insist upon your own animosity and conceit,
which you desire should prevail, because it is your own? Were Ibidem. Sed
istis Sacerdotibus, vel potius in eis ipsi Domino Christo, non velut qui nunc
primum veneris, traderes, fed velut qui recesseras redderes?
it not better to yield to these Christian Doctors, or rather to Christ in
them, and to restore your self to them, from whom you are departed? How Tom.
7. contra Julian. Pelag lib. 2. versus f^nem. Quanto tibi essent isti Iudices
optabiliores, si teneres Catholicam fidem; tanto tibi sunt terribilio^es, quia
oppugnas Catholicam fidem, quam in lacte suxerunt, quam in cibo sumpserunt,
cuius lac and cibum paruis magnisque ministrauerunt, quam contra inimicos,
etiam vos tunc nondum natos, vnde nunc reuelamini, appertissime ac fortissime
defenderunt. Talibus post Apostolos sancta Ecclesia plantatoribus, rigatoribus,
aedificatoribus, pastoribus, nutritoribus creuit: ideo prophanas voces ve^^rae
nouitatis expauit, and cauta ac sobria ex admonitione Apostolica; ne sicut
serpens Euam seduxit astutia sua, sic and men's eius corrumperetur a castitate
quae est in Christo: Catholicae fidei virginitati infidias vestri dogmatis
surrepentis exhorruit, and tanqua^ caput colubri calcauit, obtriuit, abiecit.
His igitur eloquijs and ta^ta authoritate sanctorum, profecto aut sanaberis,
Dei misericordia donante, quod quantu^ tibi optem, videt qui faciat; aut si,
quod abominor, in eadem quae tibi videtur sapientia, and est magna stultitia,
perduraueris, non tu iudices quaesiturus es, vbi causam tuam purges, sed vbi
tot Sanctos Doctores egregios, atque memorabiles Catholicae veritatis accuses,
Irenaeum, Cyprianum, Reticium, Olympium, Hilarium, Gregorium, Ambrosium,
Basilium, Ioannem, Innocentium, Hieronymum, ceterosque socios ac participes
eorum, insuper and vniuersam Christi Ecclesiam, cui diuinae familiae Dominica
cibaria fid eliter ministrantes, ingenti in Dominogloria claruerunt. Aduersus
hanc autem miserabilem, quam Deus auertat, insaniam, sic respondendum esse
video libris tuis, vt fides quoque aduersus te defendatur istorum, sicut contra
impios, and Christi professos inimicos etiam ipsum de fenditur Euangelium.
grateful would these be to you, if you did believe the Catholic faith: and
how terrible must they needs be against you, when you oppugn the same
Catholic Faith, which they sucked from the teat, which they eat with their
meat, which for milk and meat they gave to little ones, and great ones,
which they plainly and stoutly defended against their enemies, even you not
then borne? By such planters, waterers, builders, Pastors, nurses, the Holy
Church increased, therefore stood amazed at the profane terms of your
nouelty, and as the head of a serpent, abhorred, troad under foot, bruised and
kicked away your new opinions, which did lurk, and crawle to deceive the
virginity of the Catholic Church, and corrupt the chastity of it, which it
has in Christ, as did the Serpent seduce Eve. The Faith of these is to be
defended against you, as is the Gospel, against wicked and professed enemies
of Christ; even that Catholic and Christian faith, which as it was first
delivered in Scriptures, so by these Fathers it has been hitherto kept and
defended, and shall by Gods grace, ever be kept and defended. Thus S. Augustine
against the Pelagians, and their new doctrine, for the Fathers; and thus we
against the Protestants, and their private spirit, and new doctrine, for the
same. And this may suffice for the testimonies of Fathers.

THE PRIVATE SPIRITS INTERPRETATION OF HOLY SCRIPTVRE, Deciding of
Controversies, and judging of matters of Faith; Confuted by Reasons drawn from
the difficulty of discerning of Spirits. CHAP. IIII.
Of the diversity of Spirits. SECT. I.
IN the former Chapters we have confuted the Protestant private spirit by
authorityes of holy Scripture, and by testimonies of ancient Fathers: it
remains that we do the like by evidence of reason; and in this Chapter, by
reasons drawn from the difficulty of discerning of spirits, of which if the
private spirit be not able to discern and judge which be good or bad, which
true or false; much less is it able to discern and judge the motions and
effects of them, that is, which Scripture, and the sense of it, is true or
false, which faith and doctrine is good or bad.

Diversity of Spirits.
For the better understanding of which difficulty of discerning of Spirits, we
may note first how many sorts of varieties and distinctions of spirits there
be. 1. According to the nature and property of spirits, S. Gregory
distinguishes them thus. Greg. lib. 4. Dial. cap. 3.
Some are without mixture of body, some with mixture. In nature and essence.
Spirits without mixture, are either increate, as God the Father a spirit, God
the Son a spirit, God the Holy Ghost a spirit, all one God, al one spirit,
good without quality, great without quantity, every where without place,
always without time, doing all without action, moving al without motion,
containing all, and contained in nothing, and present in all by his essence,
power, and presence, and yet above all: or else create, which are either happy
in glory as the Angels in heaven, which are as Heb. 1.14.
administering spirits for us; or else damned in hell, as the Devils, who as 1.
Pet. 5.
roaring Lions seek to devour us: both which do differ either in specie or
kind, or at the least in degrees of power and greatness, some being in the
highest, some in the middle, some in the lowest Hierarchy, every Hierarchy
having his order, and every order his particular Angels, and Devils belonging
to it. Spirits mixed with bodies and flesh, are either such as are mixed with
flesh, and dye with it, as the sensual soul of birds and beasts; or such as
are mixed with flesh, but dye not with it, as the reasonable soul of man, which
is a mean between Angels to whom he is inferior, and beasts to whom he
is superior, communicating with the one in the immortality of soul, with the
other in mortality of flesh. 2. According to their estate, In state and
condition.
and condition; these spirits are some good, as God, Angels and Saints; others
bad, as Devils and men wicked, alive, or damned in hell; others indifferent, as
the natural spirit of man, and sensual of beasts: some are blessed in heaven,
as Angels and Saints, others damned in hell, as Devils, and the damned souls;
others in the way, and out of danger, as the souls in purgatory; or in the way
and in danger, as the souls of men living; some are mere intellectual, as
God and Angels; others more sensual, as beasts; others rationable mixed of
both, as man; some always without bodies, as Angels and Devils; In work and
operation.
others always with bodies, as beasts and birds; others sometimes with body,
and sometimes without, as the soul of man living, or dead, before and after
resurrection. 3. According to the effect and operation, S. Bernard. sermon. de 7.
spiritibus.
S. Bernard distinguishes six kinds of spirits. 1. Divine, of God, 1. Joan.
4.2.
the spirit is God. 2. Angelical, of Angels, Psalm. 103 4.
he has made spirits his Angels, which always work good. 3. Diabolical, of
the Devil, Psalm. 77.49.
he sent immissions by evil Angels. 4. Carnal, of the flesh, Psalm. 77.49.
puffed up by the sense of the flesh. 5. Worldly of the world, Col. 2.18
you have not received the spirit of this world, which work always bad. 6.
Humane, of man, 1. Cor. 2.11.
the spirit of man which is in man, which of all is indifferent, and when it is
assisted with grace is good, when stained with sin is bad. 1. Cor. 2.12.
To which may be added the spirit of truth, and of lying, the spirit of
wisdom, and giddines, and the spirit of the knowledge of truth, and error,
of which is spoken before cap. 2. Of which spirits for our purpose, these
chiefly are to be noted, that is, the spirit of God, of Angels, of Devils,
and the spirit of the soul of man dead, in heaven, in hell, or in purgatory;
and of man living, according to the dictamen, either of our natural reason, or
of the light of divine faith and grace. And thus much of the variety and
differences of the nature of spirits, which are to be discerned.

Secondly, we may note, that these several sorts of spirits have several
sorts of operations in man, and do several ways manifest and show themselves
in him and to him; for as in the natural life of man, besides the powers
vegitatiue and sensitive, by which he lives and moves, God and Nature has
provided certain more subtle spirits, that is, the vital spirits in the
heart, which passing through the arteries, do help to vital operation, as
nutrition, and augmentation; and sensible spirits in the brain, which passing
through the veins do assist to the sense of feeling, touching, and the rest:
so also in the spiritual life of a Christian man, besides the permanent gifts
of the Holy Ghost, and habits of faith, hope, Diverse sorts of apparitions.
and charity, infused in Baptism, and Penance, together with grace; God does
communicate also certain extraordinary helps and gifts to the soul, which
as certain beams of his divine light, and sparkles of his celestial love,
assist and enable it to a higher knowledge of God, and good things, and to a
more perfect practice of virtue and perfection: and these are divine
illuminations, inspirations, or visitations and visions, which are of two
sorts, the one mere spiritual, and internal; the other sensible and
external. Spiritual and internal.
The first sort of spiritual motions, arise immediately from four heads. 1.
From God, who (illuminating the Understanding with a heavenly light, clearly
to discern what is true or false, what good or bad; inflaming the will with an
ardent desire to love sincerely him and his goodness, and to do his holy will
and commandment; and enabling the rest of the faculties with an invincible
fortitude, to perform courageously what is to his greater honor and glory)
does, when, or how he pleases, and by means, and in time best fitting, as
prayer, meditation, reading, or such spiritual practices, speak, instruct,
and direct the soul by special illustrations, inspirations, and
confortations. 2. From the good Angel, who by good cogitations and motions,
exciting the dullness and drowsinesse, conforting the infirmity and weakness of
the soul; and conseruing the same from danger of enemies, is always ready to
assist us in prayers, and good works, and to defend us from all occasions, and
temptations. 3. From the Spirit of grace, which with the light of faith, and
flame of charity inhabiting in us, does continually knock at the door of our
heart, and in our sleep awakes us, in our sickness strengthens us, in our
distraction so recollects us, that with alacrity we may proceed in all
exercises of piety, and with facility overcome all assaults of our enemy. 4.
From the Dictamen of reason, and light of nature, which pricked forward by the
synderesis of a good conscience, does as a Preacher continually exhort and move
to a prosecution of good, and an auersion from evil; and as a Master does
still direct and instruct us how to behave our selves in our combat against the
law of sin, and the Angel of Satan, which make continual opposition
against it; all which, as a vigilant watchman, do still watch at the superior
part of the soul, to wit, the Memory, Will, and Understanding, either by an
infused light, or by species, formed and framed in the fantasy, and do
inwardly knock, awake, admonish and incite our soul, to the knowledge of
truth, and the operation of God.

The other sort of Spirits is sensible, and visible, Sensible and external.
by visions, and apparitions; and these are sometimes Imaginary, presenting
inwardly to the fantasy, and imagination, In the imagination.
a show and apparition either of words spoken, or of persons appearing in
their own person, or in some other like to the^, or in some figure representing
them: others sometimes are Visible and corporal, seen, heard, or felt in some
corporal body, formed and framed of the air, and assumed and moved by a
spirit which in them speaks, walks, and exercises sensible actions, as though
it were a true and living person, both which kinds happened often to the
Patriarchs and Prophets of old, and to many in these later times; sometims
waking, sometimes in their sleep, By Oracles.
and are both of them, either by way of Oracles (as S. Augustine calls them)
when some grave person appears and fortells what is to be done, Aug. de spir.
and lit. c. 25.
as did Onias, and Hieremy, to Judas Machab^us; or by way of visions, By
Visions.
when things have the event indeed, as they appear in show, as happened to S.
Peter, who Act. 15.
saw an Angel, when indeed the Angel did free him out of prison; or by way of
Dreams, By dreams
when apparitions of mysteries are shadowed in figures, not understood in sense
and signification, such as was Pharao his Ears of corn, and Nabuchodonoz^r
his Statua.

All which, whether interior or exterior, though they be properly divine, of
God, and good Angels (of which is frequent mention, and examples both in the
old and new Testament) yet because they are sometimes diabolical, of the
Devil, who by suggestions and illusions does imitate them; and sometimes
natural dispositions or diseases of body, whose affections and imaginations
are not much unlike to them: And because of the later sorts, that is, visions
and apparitions, of which is the greatest difficulty, examples in scripture,
and ancient histories (for I will forbear latter times) are many and
authentical, how sometimes God, sometimes Angels, sometimes Devils,
sometimes Souls out of Limbo, Paradise, Purgatory, Hell, and Heaven have
appeared: therefore I will first produce some examples of every one,
Apparitio^s of God.
and then show, what difficulty there is in discerning one of them from
another. 1. For apparitions of God, we have examples, how he appeared to Genesis 3.
Adam in Paradise, to Genesis 6.
Noe in the Arc, to Genesis 17.
Abraham in Haram, in Ma^bre, in the mountain, to Exodus 3. Genesis 6. Genesis 20.
Moses in the fiery bush, in Aegipt, in the mountain, and in the Tabernacle,
and to Genesis 32.
Agar, in the desert, to Exodus 11.
Samuel in the Temple, and to all the Prophets, and many of the Patriarchs; in
all which it is said, Our Lord spoke, our Lord appeared, which he did in the
shape, now of a man, as to Adam; now of three men, to Abraham; now of a
Wrestlar; to Jacob; now of a fire, to Moses; now of a Cherubim to Ezech. 6.
Ezechiel; now of Isa. 6.
a Thorn, to Isaias; now of Dan. 7.
an old man in a white Vestement to Daniel, (though it be more probable, that
not God in person, but an Angel representing God, did appear.) 2. For
apparitions of Angels, we have examples expressly of them, how they appeared to
Genesis 21.
Lot, to forewarne him of the destruction of Sodom; to Genesis 23.
Jacob, to encourage him against Esau; to the Iosue 2.
Israelites, to direct them through the desert; to Iudic. 6.
Gedeon, to make him Captain against Madian; to Tobie 6.
Tobie; to accompany him in his journey; to 4. Reg. 1.
Elias, to send him to reprehend Ochozias; to 2. Reg. 14
David, punishing and killing the people; to Luc. 1. In what places.
Zachary, and to the Virgin Mary, revealing secret mysteries to the^. Which
apparitions, if we respect the place, were made either in the garden, as to our
Luc. 22.
Savior; or in the fields as to Genesis 32.25.
Jacob; or in the desert, as to Genesis 32.
Agar; or in the house, as to Iud. 6.12
Gedeon; or in the furnace, as to the three Dan. 3.
Children; or in the Temple, as to Luc. 1.
Zachary; or in prison, as to Act. 10.
Peter; To what kind of persons.
or at the Sepulcher, as to Mary Magdalene. If the state of persons, they were
made to our Savior himself; to Christians, as S. Peter; to Jews, as Joseph
and the Patriarchs; to Gentiles, as Heliodorus, and the three Kings; to men,
as Zachary; to Women, as the Mary's; to old persons, as Abraham, and Sara; to
young, as Daniel; to good persons, as Lot; In what times.
and bad, as the Sodomites. Also some before Christ, some after Christ, some in
Christ's time, some in the law of Nature, some of grace: so that in all times,
and at all places, Apparitio^s of Devils in the shape of beasts.
and to all sorts of persons these revelations of Angels have bin made.

Thirdly, for apparitions of Devils, (whereof some are said to be Pythonici, or
South-sayers, some Paredrij, or Familiars, some Catabolici, or possessors and
tormentors of men, Delrio disqu. lib. 2. q. 30.2. p. 160.
some Oniropompi, or dream makers) we read of their visible apparitions (to
omit their imaginary) how they have appeared often, and in many shapes;
sometimes of Beasts, as of a serpent to Genesis 2.
Euah, and Leonard of Mar^l l. 5. cap. 7.
Corbie; of a Dog following them, to Iouius in Elench.
Simon Magus, and Cornelius Agrippa; of a Horse, to an Earl of Hugo Flor.
Chron. Pet. Clun. lib. de mir.
Mascon; of a Cock, to Metaphr. apud Surmense Maij.
S. Pachomius; of a Crow, to Damian. in eius vitae.
S. Romualdus; of a Fox, to Hieron. in Hilar.
S. Hilarion; of a Dragon, to Marulus lib. 5. cap. 7.
S. Margaret, and to Gonzales of Castile; of Lions, Bulls, Bears, and Wolves to
Athan. vita S. A^.
S. Anthony; of a Dog, to Su^. eius vita Maij mense.
S. Dunstan; and ordinarily of a Cat to Witches, and of Wolves Remig. c. 13. l.
1. daem.
to terrify, and of Bees, and flies to trouble and distract Joan. Nid. l. vlt.
Forniicae.
men. Sometimes of men or women, (and to Sozem. lib. 6. cap. 28. Of women and
men.
Apelles like a beautiful woman) as to our Savior Christ, like a Venerable
man Matthew. 4. Beat. Vincen. mag. hist, Stel. in Lucam. Genesis concord. Caiet. 3.
part q. 7.
in his tentation; to Saul (in some opinion) as Cyp. de ador. Anast. l. 3. q.
37. 2. Reg. 28.
Samuel, by the Pythonise; to Sulpit. vita Martin.
S. Martin, as a King with a Diadem; to a Boy (in S. Gregory) as a black
Greg. 4. Dial. 10.
More; to S. Robert the Abbot, as a frisled Sur. t^m. ^. Inn. 7.
Ruffin; to S. Maximus, as a Mariner with a ship; to Euagrius, as a Clergy
man; to Macarius, as a reaper of corn, and an Apothecary; to Nathanael, as a
Carrier whiping his Marul. l. 5. c. 7. Sab. exemp. lib. 10. c. 23.
horse. In all which he always appeared in some deformity, as either in a body
black, pale, durty, stinking, or terrible, or with a face foul, black, and
deformed, or with a nose hooked, a mouth wide, eyes hollow, or fiery, feet club
or cloven, toes like claws, or some great deformity of body, as is Tyreus lib.
1. de apparit* c. 5. Seba^t. Michaelis pneumat. c. 4. Binsfeld. confess.
malefic. praelud. 12.
observed, God not otherwise permitting it, the better to discover him;
sometimes in the night to men, either waking, as to Luth. de Missa abrog.
Luther, when he taught him to abrogate the Mass; or sleeping, as to Zuing. de
supplem. Eucharistiae.
Zuinglius, in what color he knew not, when he taught him to expound the
words of the Sacrament, figuratively; and to Luth. sup.
Oecolampadius, when he killed him in his bed: sometimes in the day, as to Luth.
lib. cont. Carol.
Carolostadius, when in the pulpit he stood by him; sometimes he appeared in
shape of Saints, Angels, and Christ, and God himself, Of Saints, Angels,
Christ and God.

Of Incubi*

Of Chimera's.

As God.

As servants. Apparitio^s of souls in Limbo.


of which see examples afterward; sometimes of Incubi, and Succubi, lying
with men, or women, and by art getting of children; sometyms of Centaur's,
Scylla's, Chimera's, Gorgons, Cerberus, Harpyes, and other monsters terrifying
me^; sometimes seeking adoration, to be worshipped as Gods, which they require
of Witches; sometimes showing a serviceable obedience, as when to Magicia^s
they either at certain words of Magic, or at certain constellations of
stars, or upon certain days of the week, as Friday at night, they rise up,
appear, and disclose things secret, as treasures; or foretell things to
come, as the events of batels, or the like. All which in what shape they
please, and to who^ God permits, the Devils perform.

Fourthly, for apparitions of souls out of Limbo, before Christ, we have the
examples of Moses from Limbo, and Elias from Paradise, to our Savior, and the
three Apostles Math. 1^
in the transfiguration; of Onias the high Priest, and Hieremy 2. Match. 15.
the Prophet to Judas Machabeus* and the people; of Samuel the Prophet Eccl.
46.23. 1. Reg. 28.
(according to Aug l. de cura pro mort ^.15. Ambr. lib. in Luc. Basil* ep. 80.
martyr.
S. Augustine, and others) to Saul the King, telling him, says Ecclesiasticus,
the end of his life, and exalting his voice out of the earth in prophesy, or as
it is in the Greek, after he had slept, or was dead, prophesying.

Fifthly, for apparitions of souls out of Purgatory, we have ancient exampls;
of Paschasius a Deacon seen by Germanus* Capuanus, in the Bath of Angulanus;
of Iustus freed by 30. Masses of his brother Copiosus; of another helping a
Priest at the Bathes, and helped out of Purgatory by his Masses, al three cyted
by S. Gregory Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 4. and 55.
the Great; and of the sisters of Bern. vit. S. Malachiae.
S. Malachias, and Anton. 3. p. Chron. tit. 23. cap. 7.
S. Thomas of Aquine, both appearing and relating themselves freed by their
Brothers masses. With many other of later times, too long to be set down.

Sixthly, for apparitions of the Damned in hell (to omit the apparitions of
Infidels, such as are related of Romulus to Plin. de viris illustr.
Proclus, exhorting the Romans to worship the Gods; of Homer, to Appion the
Plin. l. 3. cap. 2.
Gra^marian, telling him his own Country, and friends; of Achilles, to
Apolonius; of Seuerus to Philostr. vita Apolonij
Heliogabalus; of Castor, and Pollux Phil. in Anton. Val. lib. 1. cap 6.
in the Latin War; of the Ghost at Athens related by Pliny, to be lean
faced, long haired, and hands and feet Plin. lib. 8. epist.
chained: To omit, I say these Infidels, we have of Christians, the examples of
Theodoret Greg. Tur lib. 8. cap. 5.
the Arrian King, carried between John the Pope, and Symachus the Senator
(both whom he had killed) into Vulcans forge; of Chilpericus Greg. l. 4. dial.
c. 51.
the wicked King of France, seen by Guntran the King, carried between three
Bishops into a hot caldron; of a Bishop of Marulus lib. 1. c. 11.
Ancona, seen by Elias an Hermit standing before Gods Tribunal, and carried to
hell; of a Nun Ado. in chron. aetat. 6 Apparitio^s of Saints.
in S. Laurence Church cut in pieces before the altar; of (*) Eubronius an
Apostata, appearing to one, whom he had used cruelly, and carried into
hellfire. And so many more too pitiful to be remembered.

Seauenthly, for the apparitions of the souls in heaven, we have the examples
first of our Savior, to S. Paul in his way to Damascus Act. 9.4.^2.7.26.14 1.
Cor* 15.8.
; to S. Peter flying from Rome, and saying he went to Rome to be crucified
again Ambros. Anxiat. Bafil de noua trad. Greg. in 4. psalm. poenit.
; to Carpus Bishop of Crete Dion. Al. ad Demoph.
with multitudes of Angels, reprehending him for too seuerly punishing a
lapsed Brother; to Peter Bishop of Alexandria, complaining that Arrius had
torn his coat Sur^ tom^ 5.15. Noue^b
; to S. Martin in the half coat which the day before he had given, for his
sake, to one naked: next of our Blessed Lady (I recount only those which are
ancient) to Benterus chro^. hisp. c 23
S. James in Spain at Saragossa, for erecting there a Chapel, now in great
veneration; to Greg. Nis in vita eius.
S. Gregory Thaumaturgus in a glorious shape; to Greg* 4. Dial. 14.
Musa a Virgin, in S. Gregory his dialogues, for the amendment of her life; to
Joan. Hieros. eius vita.
S. John Damascen, restoring his hand cut off for defending Images; to Niceph.
14. hist. 24.
S. Cyrill, admonishing him to be friends with S. Chrysostom; to Niceph. l. 1^
hist. c. 1^.
Narses, in all his battles against Totila; to Prat. spirit. c. 14.
Cyriacus an Abbot, for the burning of Nestorius writings; to the Greg. Turo.
gloria martyr. c. 8.
Architect of Constantine the Great, building a Church; to the Son of a Greg.
Tur c. 8.
Jew cast into an heat Oven, by his Father, for receiving the Blessed Sacrament
among Christians; to Pope Liberius, and Anton. p. 4. lit. 5.
Patricius, about building S. Maria ad Niues; to Trith. l. in Monast. Herson.
Rupertus an Abbot, giving him a quick wit, and understanding of Scripture.
All which are of our B. Lady. Of other, Saints we have the apparitions of
Synod. 7. cap. 2.
S. Peter and Paul to Constantine, and curing his leprosy; of Niss. eius vita.
S. Philip, and S. John Evangelist to Gregory Thaumaturgus, showing a work of
piety to be done; of the Procop. l. 6. de aedific. Justin.
Apostles at Constantinople, in thanks of Justinian building them a Church; of
Rudolph. Babe^burge de veter. Princ. Germ. zelo.
S. James to Charles the Great, helping him to recover Galicia from the
Sarazens, and to Rainerus, and Alphonsus Kings of Spain, against the Moors;
also of Amb. ser. 19. de pas. S. Agnetis.
Saint Agnes, to Constantine the Great his daughter; Geruasius Oros. l. 7. cap.
36.
and Protasius, to S. Ambrose; Potamiena Eusebius. hist. cap. 5.
Origens scholar to the torturer, foreshewing his martyrdom; Aug. lib. de
cura mort
Felix Nolanus, defe^ding his City Nola; Metaphr. in Theod. martyr.
Thoodore Martyr, admonishing Euxouius to avoid meats sacrificed to Idols;
Niceph. 10.12.
Cosmas and Damian, curing Justinian sore sick; Procop. aedific. Justin.
Delrio disqu. lib. 2. q. 26. sect. 5.
Peter and Paul terrifying Attila from sacking of Rome; to omit what is related
in this kind by S. Basil of Mamant, by S. Nazianzen of his brother Caesarius,
by S. Hierome of Paula, by S. Paulinus of S. Ambrose, by Euodius of S. Steven,
by Prudentius of Fructuosus and his company, by Lucianus of Gamaliel, by
Palladius of Colluthus, by Theodoret of S. John Baptist, by S. Athanasius of S.
Ammon. And who desires to see more, may read in Delrio, the like apparitions in
every age of christ, how some appeared, as our Savior, and Valeria in the
first. How Potamiena, and others in the second. How our Blessed Lady, S. John,
S. Cyprian, and diverse African Martyrs in the third. How our B. Savior, our B.
Lady, S. Peter, P. Paul, S. Agnes, S. Agatha, Spiridion, Artemius, Caesarius,
Triphillus, two Bishops and others, in the fourth age. How S. John Baptist, S.
Martin, S. Geruase and Protase, S. Ambrose, S. Eulalia, S. Fructuosus, S. Felix
in the fifth age. How our B. Lady, S. John, S. Peter, and Paul, S.
Bartholomaeus, S. Steven, S. Eutichius, S. Tetricus, S. John Silentiarius, in
the sixth age. How our B. Lady, S. Iuuenall, S. Eleutherius, S. Leocadia, in
the seventh age; and so downward in all ages until this present time, or
near. All which being not only ancient for the time, as being within the first
600. years, but also made credible, by the sanctity of them who did appear, by
the grant of them to whom they did appear, and by the authority of them who
believed, and related that they did thus appear; may in prudence and piety be
credited, and cannot without leuity and temerity, be condemned or rejected. And
thus much of the variety of spirits, and the certainty of their apparitions. It
remaynes that we show the difficulty in discerning these spirits, and the
apparitions of them, and by the same convince the insufficiency and inhability
of Private Spirit to discern good spirits from bad, revelations from
illusions, and true faith and doctrine, from false and erroneous.

Of the difficulty to discern these Spirits. SECT. II.
THE first difficulty of discerning these spirits arises upon the difficulties
which are in particular about these several sorts of spirits, and the
apparitions visible made by them. Difficulties in discerning of any spirit.
And first of the spirit of God, great difficulty has anciently been made,
whether God did appear in his own proper body, or in one assumed, that is,
whether he had such a body, About the spirit and apparitions of God.
or such parts of a body as appeared in show, and are by scripture attributed
to him; that is, whether he had head, eyes hands, feet, and the rest of the
parts of a body, or not? Also as yet great difficulty is made, supposing (as
it is most certain) that he is a mere spirit, whether God himself did
appear in assumed bodies, or some Angel in his place, representing his
person: and if himself should have appeared, whether the Father, the Son, or
the holy Ghost? And if the holy Ghost, whether he assumed that flesh of a Dove,
or of Tongues (for example) in which he appeared? In the like manner as the
second person assumed the nature of man, and of this Dove thus assumed, whether
it may be adored and prayed unto, as God, and the holy Ghost, which assumes it?

Of the spirits of Angels, Of Angels.
great difficulties are made of their nature, whether it be corporal or mere
spiritual: if spiritual, whether all be of the same, or of diverse species, or
kinds, whether all be incorruptible by nature or by grace, whether made before,
or with the world; how they can know God, and things on earth; how they know
things to come or contingent; and how they can understand one another; how, and
by what virtue they move themselves, and other things; how they are
distinguished in orders and Hierarchies; how they have and perform the custody
of men. Concerning their assumed bodies, it is doubtful and difficult whether
they inform them, or assist only in them; how, and of what matter they do
make, and frame them; how, and what operation or motion they exercise in them;
whether any vital or external operations, as of eating or drinking; or any
sensual, or external, as of hearing, or seeing; or any internal, as of passion
or affection; or any intellectual, as of discoursing and discussing, of sinning
and meriting; how they illuminate one another, the higher the lower; how they
present visions, and cogitations to men; whether to their fantasy only, and
by the fantasy to the soul, or imediately to the superior part of the soul
also.

Of Devils.
Of the Devils, great difficulties be made, how they fell from grace, by what
sin, of pride or envy, into what place; of hell only, or the air and earth
also; in what number, more then the blessed, or fewer; how they are tormented
with material fire; and how they carry their torments with them, while they
torment others, and yet the fire torments not those others in whom they are;
how they enter, possess, and torment men, in what number, by whole legions; in
what manner, with such instruments of tortures; how they frame and assume
bodies, whether of dead men, of beasts, and the like, or made of the air; how
they can abuse women, and beget children; how they cause thunders, lightenings,
and storms; how they tempt men, oppose the Angels, hate God, and all good; how
they are divided into orders, and Hierarchies; how a subordination, and
confusion stands among them, with many such like?

Of souls departed.
Of the souls departed are many difficulties; as whether in person Samuel
himself, or a Devil for him, appeared before Saul; whether Moses from Limbo,
and Elias from Paradise before Christ; whether their apparitions be internal
only to the fantasy, and imagination, or external corporally to the senses
also? If internal, whether the souls can, or Angels for them do, produce these
fantasies? If external, whether their apparitions be personal, in their own
presence, or representable by Angels for them? If personal in their own
presence, whether the souls in Purgatory only, or those in heaven, and hell
also, do in presence personally appear? If all of them, whether present in
their own bodies in which they lived, or in others by them assumed? If in
assumed and made bodies, whether made by themselves, or by Angels for them? If
in bodies made by Angels, whether they can inform and give life, or else
inhabit, and give only motion to them? If only motion, what quantity they can
move, greater then their own body was, or less? to what distance, further off
or nearer? By what virtue, natural, or superadded they can move them? What
operation they can exercise in them, whether natural of working and moving; or
vital also of eating and sleeping; or sensual also of delectation, or
auersion, and which is most intellectual, of reasoning and speaking? If they
use reason, whether they know what is done on earth, how they know it, by
revelation from God, or by relation from Angels, or by Species or forms of
their own retained of old, or acquired anew? Whether they understand where
they are, and what they do? Whether they in Purgatory can by prayer and
satisfaction be freed? Whether they who are in heaven, or hell, can increase
their joys, or pains? With many more such like.

Of all which, if one should ask any ones private spirit, or the diverse
spirits of diverse ones, and seek for a certain resolution of them; what
answer would their spirit affoard? Or what agreement would be among them, or
their answers, or what certainty can be builded upon any of them? Surely such
is the difficulty in all these, and many more doubts, that let any one spirit
of one man, or many spirits of many men resolve them, the hearer shall find
such opposition in their resolution, and so great difficulty in discerning
which of these is a good spirit, which a bad; which vision is imaginary, which
corporal; which effect is of God, which of the Devil; which is to be believed
and followed, which to be forsaken and abhorred, that he shall find himself
more doubtful then before, and deeper plunged in difficultyes, the further he
proceeds in inquiries. And thus much of the first reason of difficulty, to
discern the difference of spirits.

Of the difficulty, and uncertainty of the rules of discerning Spirits. SECT.
III.
Difficulties of discerning spirits upon the uncertainty of the rules of
discerning them.
THE second difficulty of discerning these spirits arises upon the variety and
multiplicity of the rules and means, which on the one side men, holy, learned
and experienced, after much practice of devotion, great labor of study, and
long experience of time, either by illumination from God, or by diligence,
industry, or by subtility of observation have made, observed, and in large
Treatises left to posterity, for the discerning of these Spirits. Vincent.
Ferr. tract. de vita spirit. cap. 22
And which, on the other side are so uncertain and doubtful, that what by the
infirmity of man to discern them, what by subtilty of the evil spirit to
deceive in them, few can with any certainty, and infallibility rely,
Turrecremat. praefat. defens. reuelat. D. Brigittae.
and depend upon them.

First therefore for my own, and the Readers instruction, I will set down the
rules, out of diverse and large treatises collected, which usually are given for
discerning these spirits; Carlerius p. 1. sportae fragment.
and next, show the grounds and reasons of the uncertainty and fallibility of
them; and out of both, infer the insufficiency, and inability of every man's
private spirit, to make an infallible estimate and judgment of them, and thereby
to rely, Ferrar. compend. revel.
for himself and his estate of salvation, upon this his spirit, and the
opinion of it. Joan. Francis. Picus lib. vltimo de praenotion. Ribera lib. 1.
vitae S. Teresae. Gerson tract. de distinct. verarum reuelat. lib. de probat.
spirituum. Bonauentura process. relig. tract. 1. Puent. dux spiritual. tract. 1.
cap. 23.24. Delrio disquisit. lib. 4. c. 1. quest. 3. sect* 1.


SVBDIV. I. Rules to discern which are good spirits, and which are bad.
AND first for the means, signs, Signs of evil spirits.
or rules of discerning these spirits good, or bad, though there be no great
difficulty, or uncertainty in discerning spirits which are evil, as the spirit
of the Devil, and his instruments the flesh, and the world; for that the good
spirit of God, of an Angel, or of grace cannot suggest those wicked
cogitations, nor perform those unlawful actions, which the bad spirits both
can and do; as for example, they can neither lie, deceive, blaspheme, nor
persuade heresy, infidelity, perjury, and sacrilege; nor commit uncleanness,
and lewdness, by way of Incubi, or Succubi; nor obey Inchaunters, Magicians,
Witches, for wicked uses; nor work and leave in good souls, doubts, troubles,
and despair of God, and salvation; neither use they to appear in horrible and
deformed shapes of beasts and monsters: All which, and such like are proper to
the bad spirit, and sufficient rules and signs to discern him by these fruits
and effects. Yet because the bad spirit, the Devil, both can, and does often
counterfeit, and in show perform the same exterior actions, which the good
spirit does (as by examples shall afterward be showed) therefore I will propose
only the Rules, and signs which are given for the discerning of the good
spirits (of which is the most difficulty and uncertainty) and of their motions,
illuminations, and inspirations.

First therefore for the discerning of the good spirits, Rules to discern good
spirits.
under which title I include all sorts of motions which come imediatly either
from God, or from Angels, or from grace (the difference of which does not much
import, since they are all good, and of God mediatly, or immediately) the rules,
and signs to discern them, are taken, some from the object, Puent. dux
spirit. tract. 1. cap. 23.24 25.
and matter which is proposed, some from the manner, and circumstances how it
is proposed, some from the fruits, and effects which it works.

The rules, and marks drawn from the object and matter, are. First that the
good spirit inspires, and moves only to verity, The good spirit moves to Verity.
and true faith, not to falsity and heresy, nor to any thing which is contrary
to the grounds and rules of true faith. And so whasoeuer is contrary to faith,
and the grounds of it, as scripture, tradition, Church, Councels, and consent
of Fathers, is not from the good, but the bad spirit.

Secondly, that it moves only to matter of piety, Piety.
and sanctity, and to nothing contrary to good life and manners, or to the law
of God, or natural reason. Therefore what is sin, and impiety by commission,
or omission, against reason or grace, is from the bad, not the good spirit.
Whereupon it follws that, as the Prophet says, the spirit of God is Corn,
and Fire, Ierem. 23.29
and a Hammer, because it nourishes, and strengthens with verity and virtue,
as Food; it enlightneth and enflameth with illuminations and infla^mations, as
Fire; and beats and mollifieth, with contrition and mortification, as a
Hammer: but the spirit of Satan is as a Dream, and Chafe, because it
follows things apparent, not true; and things vain and not solid; things
that tend to ill, not to good. Wherefore when it proposes things either true, or
good, it is neither to be believed in the one, nor followed in the other,
because in the end and application it does deceive, and brings danger in both.

Sometimes in general.
Thirdly, that it moves sometimes to these verities and virtues, as to know,
love, and follow God in general, only leaving the application, and particulers
to the direction of others, for the matter, the manner, the time, the place, or
the like, as it did S. Paul to be a Christian, leaving him to Ananias to be
instructed what he should believe and do. And Iephta to make a vow, according
to the Prophet Isay, who yet by his own spirit, Isa. 11.29. Ambr. lib. de
virginit. circa medium.
as faith S. Ambrose, choosing the particular, erred and did amiss.

Fourthly, that when it moves in particular to extraordinary works, as for
example, of penance and fasting, as it did S. Antony, Sometimes in particular
Simeon Stelites, and S. Katherine of Siena to fast many weeks, and months;
or of obedience, as it did Abraham to offer in sacrifice his son; and others
to walk on the water, set upon Lions, or the like; or of martyrdom, as it did
some Virgins, and Martyrs to cast themselves into the water or fire, to prevent
tentation, or confound the Tyrants; al which it did for the fuller trial of
the persons, the greater honor of God, or more edification of others: When I
say, God moves or inspires to these extraordinary works, then ordinarily he
does it with that sense of certainty, that he leaves no doubt of it in the
soul; with that vehemence of motion, that the soul presently proceeds to
execution; with that subtility of attention, that in the operation, the soul
can hardly attend to any thing else, but that which is good, and of God.

The rules and marks drawn from the manner of proceeding of the spirit, are.
First, In the superior part of the soul.
That when the spirit does work any good motion immediately in the superior
part of the soul (as in the Understanding, revelations and illuminations of
truth; In the will, inspirations, and inflammations, and ardent desires of good;
In the Memory, attention, and adhesion to God in the same manner as it does the
habits of faith, hope, charity, and the rest) all, without any mediatio^, or
ministry of any species in the outward senses, or of fantasies in the
interior imagination (to which the power of the bad spirit is limited;) that
then it is the spirit of God, which sometimes enters in, knocking at the door of
the soul by holy vocations and admonitions to call it from sin to grace,
from vice to virtue: sometimes having got entrance does work and labor in the
soul, either inlightening the darkness, or inflaming the coldness, or
moistening the dryness, or righting the crookedness, or mollifying the
hardenesse, or awaking the drowsinesse, or curing the sickness, and reviving
the senslesnes, which it finds in the same. Somtims it proceeds so far, as now
to infuse a copious light of knowledge, revealing secret senses of scripture,
deep mysteries of faith, high points of contemplation; now to instill a
pleasant dew of consolations, and comforts in spituall practice, and of content
and sweetness, in enduring afflictions; now to perfume it with a fragrant odor,
either of the incense of Devotion, or of the myrrh of Mortification, or of the
sweet sent of all heroical virtues and perfections, wherewith the soul is
rapt, as it were, out of the sense of bodily feeling, up to a glimpse, to a
taste, to a sweetness, to an union with God, so far, that it is no more where
it lives but where it loves, now wholly absorpt, ravished, and inflamed, and
transformed into God, and God into it. All which are a sign of the spirit of
God,

With pure intention.
Secondly, that the spirit of God thus settled in the soul, does as it were with
two eyes look out, and abroad, into all things. That is, with the one of pure
intention, which seeks, not our own honor, profit, pleasure, and content in
any thing but God, and his honor, glory, and praise in all our words, actions,
visitations, consolations, or desolations: The other of discretion, With
discretion.
which proceeds in measure, not going further in any practice, then our ability
will extend: In weight, valewing things of necessity, before things voluntary,
of justice before charity, of obligation before supererogation: In degree,
first moving, then walking, then running, and lastly flying, and that by step
to step, from the botome to the top, embracing first the feet, next the knees,
then the hands, and so to the face, and presence of our Savior: In order,
contenting our selves with ways ordinary, plain, facill, usual and
commodious to our selves and others, not aspiring to works and effects
extraordinary high, prodigious, miraculous, beyond reach of our reason, and
without benefit to any. And in all, it perseuers, and proceeds with vigilance,
and diligence, without stop, interruption, or retiring in the course of virtue
and perfection.

The rules, and signs drawn from the effects and operations of this Spirit,
With a spiritual taste.
are: That the spirit of God, for the most part, has, and does cause such a
spiritual savor, and taste in the soul where it is, that as a man is known
by his voice and visage, as honey is discerned by the taste and sweetness: So the
motions, illustrations, and the voice, and speech of God are discerned, and
known by a certain proper, divine, and spiritual taste and sweetness, which,
men accustomed to them, and practiced in them, can by a supernatural instinct
of grace (as a child does his mother, by a natural instinct of nature) better
discern in themselves, then express to others; and fullier satisfy and
content themselves with them, then give any reason of them; saying with the
Prophet Psalm. 33.9.
David, that they taste, and see, that our Lord is sweet; and with the Apostle,
that they Phil. 1.9.10.
abou^d in knowledge, and all understanding approving the better things; and
yet they know not with the Evangelist, Joan. 3.8
whence it comes or whither it goes, why it is caused, or how long it
remains, but only they taste and feel it, and so rest satisfied in it.

Thirdly, that the spirit of God does work in the heart a true and solid
humility, Humility.
whose acts and effects are, 1. To fear, refuse, or at the least unwillingly
accept these extraordinary visitations being offered, preferring the ignominy
of mount Caluary, before the glory of mount Thabor. 2. To conceal, and hide,
not relate and speak of these gifts being received: but discovering them only
in confession for counsel, and that less willingly then sins. 3. To desire,
to be conte^ned in matters not only honorable of the world, but spiritual, as
to be reputed wicked by persons not wicked but good, so long as no scandal is
thereby likely to ensue. 4. To wonder that so worthy gifts should be in so
unworthy a person, and that God should bestow so much good upon one so bad. 5.
To feel rather a shame and confusion for the deformity of sin, then a joy
and content in the dignity of the gift. 6. Not to desire these great and
extraordinary visitations, but more ordinary acts of love, purity, and
humility. 7. Not to esteem of ones self better for them, but to account
others more holy without them. 8. Not to presume upon any security or favor
for having them, but rather to fear greater obligation, unworthiness, and
ingratitude for not well using them.

Fourthly, that the spirit of God does work a perfect obedience: Obedience.
first of the will, against self love; secondly of the understanding, against
self conceit; both of them, first to the will of God, to run the way of his
commandments; secondly, to the will of man, that is superior under God, to be
ruled by him. Thus did the holy Hermites accept it as a sign of Gods spirit in
Simeon Stelites, when being commanded to come to them, and give an account of
his austere life, he presently obeyed, and prepared to descend from his rock
to them.

Fifthly, that the spirit of God does work upon this resignation, Resignation
a true mortification. First exterior of the body, to tame the pride of the
flesh. Next, and chiefly, interior of the mind, to assuage the rage of passion
and affection; and both for that end to attain to purity, not only of mind,
but also of body, Bonauentur. processu 7. relig. cap. 18.
because visions and apparitions (much more motions and inspirations) though
they come, says one, in the likeness of Saints, of our Lady, or of Christ,
are always suspicious, if they bring impurity of sensual motions.

Sixthly, that the good spirit of God does bring with it peace, Peace.
and tranquillity, joy and gladness, comfort and consolation of the mind,
expelling fear, bridling passions, supressing affections, and subiecting all
manner of perturbations, to reason and grace. And though it cause some terror,
desolation or perturbation, yet it is at the first entrance when it begins, and
that in sinners, in whom it finds resistance, whom yet in the end it leaves in
comfort and consolation. And though it be short, and for the most, not of long
continuance, yet it is not only frequent, often coming and often going, and
always leaving a good relish after it; but also effectual, in every one
according to his state, as in an incipient in the purgative way, rooting out
vices; in a proficient in the illuminatiue way, planting of virtues: in a
perfect man, in the perfect way, exercising perfection of action and
contemplation. And these and such like be the rules and signs they give to
discern good spirits.

SVBDIV. 2. Difference between good and bad Spirits.
Difference between good and bad spirits.
THE same holy men the better to distinguish these spirits give also certain
distinctiue signs, by which comparing the effects of the good and bad spirits
together, the difference between them may the better be discerned. And first
for exterior visions, apparitions, Apparitio^s.
and shapes or shows of good and bad spirits, they assign difference. First
in form, Form.
that good spirits appear always in the shape of man, and that comely and
beautiful; the bad spirit in the shape often of beasts, and monsters, and
these ugly and deformed. 2. In matter, Matter.
that the good spirit persuads always to verity and virtue: but the bad spirit
always to falsehood and wickedness, either in the beginning or end. 3. In
works, Effects.
that the good do help and assist us in doubts or infirmityes: the bad do
revenge and punish our defects or iniquities. 4. In place, Place.
that the good appear in places holy, in which piety is practiced: the bad in
places profane, where wickedness is committed. 5. In time, Time.
that good appear ordinarily in the light, as Angels of light: but the bad in
darkness, as Angels of darkness. 6. For persons, Persons.
that the good appear to good men, to encourage them in goodness: the bad, to
bad men, to draw them to more badnesse. 7. For holy things, Holy things
that good do affect and desire: but the bad do fly and abhor things holy
and consecrated, Thyraeus de apparit. lib. 1. these. 411. Delr. de mag.
disquisit. l. 6. cap. 2. q. 3.
as the presence of the Blessed Sacrament, of Relics, Agnus deies,
Holy Water, the sign of the Cross, the name of Jesus, the invocation of
Saints, with many other; of which, examples are copious, and certain in diverse
good Authors.

Secondly, for the internal motions of the good and bad spirit, they assign
these kinds of differences: Differences between inspirations and suggestions.
That the good spirit observes an order, and conueniency of age and state in
persons; of times and seasons in affairs; communicating wisdom, grace, and
gifts agreeable. 1. To the state of persons, Religious or secular. 2. To the
dispositions of years, for those which are young or old. 3. In order of time,
and season.
To the conueniences of times, joyful or sorrowful; reducing by degrees and
means, in order and season, all sorts of persons from great sin, to great
perfection. The bad spirit observes no such order, but confusedly, and upon the
sudden seems to eleuate to high thoughts, and wondrous actions, which are
nether ordinary nor profitable for the present, and makes show to exalt on the
sudden, from the deepest of sin, to the highest step of perfection, thereby
to exalt them to pride and self-conceit, and to feed them with nouelty and
curiosity.

In the end of Gods honor.
That the good spirit desires nothing in particular for it self, and own
profit, or delight, nothing with importunity and impatience, but all with
resignation to the will of God, so far as it may be to his honor and glory:
The bad spirit desires much for its own will and pleasure, and all with
importune, and unseasonable vehemence, and perturbatio^.

In humility
That the good spirit moves to inward humility, and contempt of ones self, and
the more it increases in virtue, the meaner conceit it works of ones self,
and the better of others: The bad spirit moves to outward humility in exterior
things, that it may seem humble and lowly, but works an inward conceit of
ones self, and wilfulness in all actions and proceedinges.

In confidence in God.
That the good spirit causes one to confide much in God, and distrust much in
ones self: The bad spirit causes one to esteem highly of his own conceit, to
presume much upon ones own force, and little to fear his own state and
danger. That the good spirit is willing to suffer much for Gods cause, and the
more it suffers, the more it is contented: The bad spirit murmurs, and repines,
and is impatient at al crosses and afflictions, and is disquieted and vexed
against those, by whom they are any way caused or procured.

That the good spirit is merciful and compassionate, showing pity and mercy,
In mercy.
where it may show justice and severity: The bad spirit is severe, fierce,
cruel, and reuengefull, even upon those who do subject, and humble themselves.

In reverence to Saints
That the good spirit shows a respect and reverence, even to the Saints and
servants of God, for the honor it bears to God; and also to their Relics,
and Images, for the respect it bears to them: The bad neglects both, and
refuses to give any respect, or honor to either.

In observing the Commandments.
That the good proposes the yoke of Christ as easy, and the grace of God as
sufficient, and superaboundant to keep his Commandments, thereby to enable men
to performance thereof: The bad, proposes the performance of Gods commandments
as impossible, and Gods mercy as facill before sin is committed, thereby to
allure to sin; and his justice as rigide and terrible after sin be
committed, thereby to draw into desperation.

That the good spirit, if it work any miracles, illuminate with any
revelations, or reveal any secrets of the heart, In works of miracles, or
revelations.
or events to come, does do all peaceably, without any extraordinary motions of
sobbing, sighing, exulting, or grieuing; without ostentation of any such gift,
or grace; moderatly, without any vehemence of desire of them, or conceit of
ones self, or contempt of others for them; compassionatly, without aggravating
of offenses received, or benefits exhibited; and humbly, with submission to the
judgment of superior authority, and with conformity to their censure, and
correction. The bad does all contrary; it proceeds in perturbation without
peace; in vehemence without discretion; in exagerations without measure; and in
obstinacy without relenting in any thing from that which it once conceaues.

That the good spirit uses those ways and spiritual means, which God has
for that present age, time, In the conueniency for times.
and place accommodated, as most fit for the spiritual good of souls then
living. Therefore as in former ages he prescribed the instinct of natural
reason in the law of Nature, the use of ceremonies in the law of Moses, and
either strange gift of miracles, and languages, or ardent desires of
martyrdom, or rigide austerity of penance in the primitive ages of the law of
Grace: so now in these ages, not communicating so frequently the gift of
miracles, nor affoarding so usually the benefit of martytdome, nor exacting so
severely the former austerity of penna^ce, it moves us to a more zealous
performance of these devotions, which in this time the Devil more violently
oppugnes, to wit, frequentation of Sacraments, use of meditation, duties of
obedience, veneration of Saints, visitation of Relics, and holy places, and
the like. The bad spirit peruerts all this order, it affects nouelty, it seeks
curiosity, it follows after rarities, it ayms at singularity, it looks for
prodigiosities, and contents it self with nothing, but strains to
extrauagancy, it seems to know all, strives to do all, seeks to go beyond
all, and flies in his own conceit, above all both measure, reason, and
discretion.

That the good spirit keeps in all, a tranquillity of the mind, In peace and
tranquillity.
with a conformity in all things to the will of God, whether it be the rooting
out of vices, the planting of virtues, the exercise of mortification, and
devotion, all conjoined with a pure iniention of not seeking ones own, but
Gods honor; and with a discreet moderation, in being neither too credulous, in
believing all, nor too obdurate, in believing nothing, but with advice, and
temper, to examine all, and not rashly to receive, or reject any. The bad spirit
runs in all, the contrary race; in some things it is troubled and disquieted
with fears and scruples; in others loose, and dissolute without care, or
conscience; at sometimes fervent and headlong in devotion beyond measure; at
others, stupide and dull, without sense, or feeling; in some practices of small
importance, violent, vehement, and impatient without reason; in others of
moment, negligent, careless and heedlesse without any esteem or regard; in
purposes of good, wavering, and inconstant; in judgment of others, credulous,
and temerarious. All which (omitting much which might be said more) may suffice
to discern the multiplicity of signs of good spirits, and the difference of
them from bad. It remaynes to show, that neither these rules to discern good
spirits from bad, nor the difference between good spirits and bad, are so
certain, nor the applying them to every particular event so easy, that the
spirit of every private man, can of it self proceed in it, and securely rest
himself upon it.

SVBDIV. 3. The difficulty to judge of these rules and differences of Spirits.
NOtwithstanding therefore that these rules and signs of a good spirit, and
these differences from a bad, be by spiritual men, well and truly thus
assigned; and notwithstanding, that it be true, that they serve for good, and
moral directions, to discern those spirits, and that any man may proceed
probably in his judgment upon them: yet that they neither are in themselves so
certain and infallible, nor yet are for so certain assigned, that every man
may infallibly rely, and rest upon them without any further directour, but that
these, both may, and often do fail in many particular events, and that many
are deceived in the use and application of them, is by these reasons, here
briefly, and by examples afterward more at large produced, evidently proved.

First, because such is the excellency both in nature and operation of these
spirits, especially Angels, 1. In respect of man's infirmity to apply them:
Which
and Devils above the nature and capacity of man; and such is the weakness and
obscurity of man's understanding, in these sensual organs of our corporal
frailty; and such is the inconstancy and uncertainty of every private spirit in
every particular person, that admit these rules and differences were certain;
yet neither is the understanding of every man so intelligent that he knows
them, nor his spirit so quicke-sighted that it can discern them, nor his art
and cunning so skillfull, that he can always upon every occasion duly and
infallibly apply them: but that necessarily upon ignorance, error, or
partiality, and affection, in many cases he may, and must needs fail in them.
For as all sciences, Law and Physic, Cannot apply the rules of sciences.
Mathematicke and Music, Logic and Rhetoric, with the like; and all arts
and trades of navigations, negotiation, military, or manufactory, and the rest,
have their principles and documents, and these some of them demonstratiue and
certain, which yet few or none can out of their own wit and industry, without
both a master to teach, and time to learn, apply and use certainly in the
practice of particulers: so in this science of discerning of spirits (which yet
is so much more difficult then the former, by how much the spirits are more
subtle, the operations more like, the rules more uncertain, and the danger of
erring more great) a simple, and unlearned man may, yea often many most
learned, and intelligent Doctors (witness, for example, Origin, Tertullian
and all learned Heretics ancient and modern) have been grossly deluded, and
dangerously deceived, while instead of the spirit of God, of truth, and of
light, they have followed the spirit of Satan, error, and darkness, and by
it have been conducted, not only themselves, but also millions by their
examples, into the pit of perdition and damnation.

For as the Apostles being troubled with the storm of the sea, when they saw
our Savior walking upon the water, Matthew. 14.26. Mar. 6.44.
did think he was a Ghost: so there be some, who either upon perturbation,
pusillanimity, scrupulosity, tentation, or malice, do imagine every motion of
God in themselves, and every vision, Takes inspirations for illusions.
revelation, or extraordinary work or miracle in others, to be either mere
fancies, and imaginatio^s of man, or else Ghosts and illusions of Satan.
Others there be, who on the contrary upon too much leuity, and credulity of
disposition, or upon too much weakness, and infirmity of the brain, or upon
too much pride and presumption of themselves, Illusions for inspiratio^s.
do conceive every idle imagination of their own spirit, and every false
suggestion of the spirit of Satan to be a vision, inspiration, or illumination
of Christ, in which being persuaded that evil is good, and good evil, that
darkness is light, Isa. 5.20.
and light darkness, that bitter is sweet, and sweet bitter, they do sometimes
believe, and adore a Ghost instead of Christ; other while neglect and contemn
Christ as a Ghost; sometimes do believe and preach errors and falsehood, as
though they were truth; otherwhile condemn truth, and divine verity, as though
it were Idolatry and superstition; sometimes do embrace vices and sins, as
virtues; otherwhile censure works of zeal, charity, and humility, as acts of
passion, baseness and hypocrisy; sometimes do give credit to their fancies, and
imaginations of their own, or Satan's spirit, as if they were the spirit of
God; otherwhile reject the inspirations, illuminations, and vocations of God,
as illusions of Satan. And thus, while they walk in two extremes, both a like
perilous, that is, to neglect Christ as a Ghost, and to follow a Ghost as
Christ, to refuse that which is of God, as if it were of the devil, and to
follow that which is of the Devil, as if it were of God; they believe falsehood,
and condemn truth; they embrace painted and shadowed vices, and contemn solid
and true virtue; Prou. 14.12 16.25.
and so follow Away which seems to them just, but the later end thereof leads
to death; and are themselves those wicked, Who are so secure, as though they
had the works of just men. And this is the first reason, Eccles. 8.24.
drawn from the infirmity of man, why these rules cannot be to us certain and
infallible.

The second reason is, because such is the craft, 2. In respect of Satan's
subtility, who has deceived.
and subtilty of Satan the wicked spirit, that as he can transfigure, and show
himself in the glory of an Angel, so can he transform his actions into the
actions of an Angel, and do the same which the Angels do. Therefore whatsoever
exterior actions either of charity, humility, or piety, devotion,
mortification, or other virtue, a good man by the inspiration of God does; a
bad man by the instigation of Satan, can do the like. In which, though a
difference will appear in the intention, and the end (both which in the good
are good, and in the bad are bad,) yet in the exterior action, the Devil can
so cunningly carry himself, and so craftily cover his intention, that a quick
eye shall hardly of a long time discern him. In this manner has he carried
himself in all or most Heretics, ancient and modern, covering himself under
the veil of the honor of God, zeal of souls, verity of doctrine, sanctity
of life, word of God, and the like; of all which in many of them he made a
fair show, and thereby deceived many. Wherefore S. Paul foretells, 1. Tim. 4.1.
That many should come in later times, who shall give ear to spirits of
errors, and doctrines of Devils. And S. Chrysostom did affirm: Chrysostom ho.
12. in 1. Tim 4.
That all heresies, and all opinions of Heretics, are from the Devil. And S.
Polycarpe did call Hier. scr. Ecclesiast.
Marcion, the firstborn of the Devil. Thus does Cassian. collat. 7. c. 31.
Ioannes Cassianus avouch, that himself was an eare-witnesse, hearing the
Devil confess, that he was the author of the heresy of Arius, and Eumonius.
Thus does Clem. To. lib. 2. ^ecogn.
Clemens Romanus, and Justin. Apol. 1.
Justinius Martyr, living in their time, witness of Simon Magus; that by the
Devil, and magic he was counted a God, and had his statua to Simon the great
God; and that Menander his scholar deceived many of Antioch by Magic. Thus
I^n. lib. 1. cap. 8.21.24.
Irenaeus auerres of Marcus Anaxilaus, and others, that by a familiar Devil
they did wonders, and tell things to come* Epiphanius Epiph. de haeres.
of Carpocrates and the Gnostickes, that they did by familiar Devils, and
enchantments allure to lust, dominiere over the people, and make show of
wonders. The like does Theod. l 1. and 4. fab. hist. lib. 5. c. 23. Cyril. lib.
3. Catech. Epiph. haer. 27. Caesar. l. 9. c. 12. mirab. Malmsb. de gest. Angl.
lib. 3. Baron. anno 1018. Bredenb. lib. 7. collat. c. 41 Luth. lib. de abrog.
missa. Zuing. de suplem. Euchar. Calu. epist. ad Bucer.
Theodoret, of Basilides and Massilianus; and Eusebius, of Theodotus and
Montanus; Cyrillus of Buda; Innocentius of Marcion; Hierome of Priscilianus in
Spain; and Seuerus, of one Anatolius, who made himself first Elias, then
Christ, and by counterfeit miracles deceived Rufus a Bishop in the same
country. Caesareus affirms of the Albigenses, that by the Devil they walked
on the water, to confirm their doctrine, till a priest, extraordinarily moved,
cast the Blessed Sacrament into the water, at which they suncke, and the B.
Sacrament was by an Angel preserved. Malmesbury and Baronius witness, that
Fuldo Bishop of Chartres saw the Devil stand by Berengarius, and as it were,
with his hand calling many to come to him. Thus did the Emperor Maximilia^ the
first (witness Bredenbach) see the Devil in a bodily shape sit on the
shoulder of Luther at Auspurge, anno 1518. and thereby foretold what troubles
should arise after his death. Thus does Luther confess of himself, that he
had his doctrine, of abrogating the Mass, of the Devil. Zuinglius, that he
had his figurative doctrine from the spirit, black, or white he knew not.
Calvin, that his vein of railing was not Ingenij, but Genij, not of his
nature, but his spirit, which cannot be a good spirit, because it is a spirit
of railing, therefore a bad. Luther affirms of Luth. con. Carolost.
Carolostadius, of Lib. de missa angul.
Oecolampadius, of Colloq. VVittem. an. 1537.
Bucer, of Synops. cap. 37.
Marcus Cauikanus, of Lib. con. Anabap.
the Anabaptists; Alberus of Alber. lib. cont. Carol.
Osiander, Lindan of Lind. lib. de fugienda Idolatria.
Campanus, that they had commerce and directions from the Devil. King James
often did affirm of Knocks, witness Bark. paraen. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Barkclay, that he was a Magitia^. And this of the Anabaptists, by many
experiences, is consta^tly related, that to read, and remember the Scripture,
they are taught by the Devil, by whom they are thought, to be willingly, and
without torments so possessed, that he speak and continue in them, till they
return to the Catholic faith. By all which examples, and many more most
lamentable, is proved not only the craft and subtilty of Satan (which is more
fully showed in the next Section,) but also (which is by them here intended)
the uncertainty, and fallibility of the former rules and means to discern
these spirits, since Satan can so cunningly transform himself into an
Angel, and his suggestions into Gods seeming inspirations, that it is hard to
discern viam Colubri super Petram, Prou. 30.2^*
the way of this adder upon the Rock of man's heart, and to find out his
turninges and windinges among so many his tricks of deceit and subtilty, of
which more in the next Section.

Of the subtilty of Satan in deceauing, by the similitude of Spirits. SECT.
IIII.
THE third difficulty of discerning these spirits, The Devils subtilty.
arises from the subtilty, the malice, and the power of the Devil; for as the
Devil is in subtilty of knowledge a serpent, which was more subtle then all
the beasts of the earth; in venime of malice, a Dragon, out of whose mouth
Apoc. 16.13.
frogs (of venime* and poison) did proceed; and in power, that great
Behemoth, Job. 40* 11.18.
whose tail being as trees of Cedar, and his bones as bars of brass, does
devour rivers, and swallow Jordan, in at his mouth: So whatsoever the deepest
Understanding that ever discoursed, can invent, whatsoever the extremest malice
that ever was conceived, can exagerate, and whatsoever the greatest power that
ever was preualent in any creature can execute, all joined with the longest
experience that time can affoard; the same is couched together in this our
mortal and potent enemy, the Devil; who as Job says of him, Job. 1.^.
Compasses the earth: And as S. Peter says, Seeks whom he may devour like
a Lion; 1. Pet. 5. ^*
all which is employed to deceive us poor, and miserable men, against whom,
in envy to God, whose image we carry, he lays his trapps, Job. 1. 1. Pet. 5.
and sets his snares to catch our souls, and carry them into the pit of
perdition.

SVBDIV. 1. Satan's subtilty, by inward suggestions.
THIS subtle, malicious, and powerful Serpent, 1. By inward suggestions,
persuading.
Dragon, and Behemoth, the Devil, does by three ways of subtilty counterfeit
the spirit of God, and good Angels, by which he makes the discerning of these
spirits doubtful, and difficult. The first is by a secret and lurking manner
of temptation, According to every ones disposition.
for the most shrouded under the habit of some kind of piety, or devotion, in
which with a subtle progress he proceeds by a certain gradation from
public and apparent temptation, to a secret fraud and illusion, by which
searching the veins, and feeling the pulse of every man's disposition, and by
his exterior words or gestures, sauouring the state of his soul, whether he
be in sin or not, and in what sin, carnal or spiritual; the disposition of
his mind, to what he is inclined, to heaviness or mirth, idleness or
voluptuousnes, ambition or covetousness; the inclination of his passions and
affections, in what they are most vehement, to passion or affection, to love or
hatred, revenge or lust; the infirmity of his mind, in what part he is most
weak, in his understanding or will, his irascible or concupiscible, or
sensible part; and the opportunity, or occasions of sin, in which he is most
easily catched. He craftily observes when he is idle and vacant from some good
employment, in what he is watchlesse and careless, in the custody of his
senses or fantasies, to what he is inclined or affected in his delectations or
auersions; and there he sets the snares of his subtilty and lays the engines
of his powers toward that part, where he finds him most weakly sensed, most
negligently guarded, or most apt to bite at his bait.

1. To public sins.
First therefore he plainly propo^es public and known sins, as murder,
adultery, blasphemy, and the like; if they suffer the repulse, he closely
suggests secret, and interior sins, as envy, hatred, contempt, obstinacy, or
such like; if these take no hold, he watches oportunities and occasions of
familiarity, and company to sins sensual and delectable, and uses means and
instruments to avarice and ambition; and if none of these will draw men to
bite, he baits a fresh with the memory of sins past, or possibility of
sins to come; 2. To memory of sins past.
if none of these catch, he fishes for lesser sins, and smaller
imperfections; he labors to work a conceit of an impossibility of perfection,
a neglect of virtue, and an omission of smaller duties; 3. To lesser sins.
which if they fail, he rests and forbeares to tempt, and so lulles the soul
into a sleep of security, that there by he may at unawares catch it in a trick
of treachery, 4. To a security from sin.
that while it least apprehends the danger of sin, he may more easily catch
it in a trape of sin; with which trick if he do not catch it into his
trappe, he baits a fresh with a new device of subtilty, he comes as a new man
in a shape, disguised in a new manner of fashion, 5. To vices in show of
virtues.
he shapes himself a painted coat of virtue and perfection, and comes out now
disguised in a coat of piety and devotion, that thereby he may allure to
impiety and superstition; now veiled under the mask of humility and meekness,
the better to cover his pride and tyranny; now clothed with a cloak of equity
and justice, the easier to exercise his revenge and cruelty; now painted with
fair colors of zeal and charity, and beautifyed with the fairness of the
word of God, and truth, thereby the more cunningly to conceal his deformity of
malice, and heresy, and to intrude his own word of falsity and impiety. And by
this art, he makes slacknesse in ones charge seem mildnes; prodigality in ones
estate show as liberality; avarice, appear as frugality; obstinacy, to be
accounted constancy; baseness, to stand for humility; sloth for quietness;
rashness, for fortitude; perturbation of mind, for solicitude of others good.
And thus as he clothes vices with the robes of virtues, so he disrobes virtue,
and stains it with the infamy of vice; as mortification with a note of
dissimulation; piety, of hypocrisy; charity, of impiety; zeal, of revenge;
obedience, of servitude; devotion, of superstition; adoration, of idolatry; and
Christ, of Antichrist. When none of these shows, and shapes of virtue will
prevail, 6. The (...) and effect of the Devils subtilty.
he will not stick to persuade good things and pious actions: but then it is
either to the less, to withdraw from the greater good, as by too much rigor
of exterior, to forget the interior mortification; by too exact performance
of ceremonial observations, to omit interior perfection; by too excessive
care and solicitude for the zeal of others good, to forget or neglect the
obligation of their own good. Or if he persuade to any greater good, then it
is either with too great vehemence and fervor to consume ones ability without
discretion; or with too much obstinacy and pertinacity to adhere to ones own
opinion against obedience; or with too vehement perturbation and disquietnesse
of mind, to distemper the peace and tranquillity of reason; or with too timorous
scrupulosity of imagination of sin, to the disquiet of conscience. By which,
and such like, he intends to make men unconstant in good purposes, slow in
heroical resolutions, fearful in pious executions; he makes them dull in
devotion, careless in amendment, precipitate in proceeding, and obdurate in
custom of sin and wickedness. In all which the Wolf in sheeps clothing, the
Serpent with a woman's face, and the Lion with a lambs skin, that is, the
Devil in the show of an Angel, Greg.
deceaues many, and makes, as S. Gregory says, Vices seem virtues, and
virtues vices; makes men look for a reward, when they deserve a punishment;
and makes of high Cedars of perfection, unprofitable branches of hell fire.

SVBDIV. 2. Examples of Satan's inward suggestions.
BY this subtilty he persuaded the Jews, under pretense of sanctifying the
Sabbath, to condemn our Savior for curing diseases on the Sabbath. Exampls of
Satan's illusions.
He prevailed with Judas, under color of relieuing the poor, to censure Mary
Magdalene, anointing our Savior, for wast. He deluded Nicolaus, under color
of community of all things, to make also wives common. Of heretks.
He wrought with Origin, under show of perfection of continency, to geld
himself; and in pretext of piety and mercy, to grant a general salvation of
Devils, and all damned. Matthew. 26.
He drew the Montanists, and after them Tertullian, under pretext of more
mortification, of fastes, and continency from second marriages, to forsake the
Church and condemn it of liberty, and looseness. He prevailed with
Nouatianus, in show of greater detestation of sin, to deny remission of
sins after relapse. With the Apostolickes in imitation of the Apostles
themselves, to allow no marriage at all, and to oblige all to make all things
common. With the Messalians, or Eutichs, in estimation of prayer, to pray
always, and make that alone sufficient to salvation. With the Pacificatours,
for the good of peace, to tolerate the Orthodoxe, and the Eutichian doctrine
together. Thus he persuaded the Donatists, in desire of Martyrdom, to kill
themselves. The Flagellantes, in esteem of disciplining themselves, to prize
discipline as Baptism. Of later times he induced the Anabaptists, as aspiring
to extraordinary holiness, to have women, goods, and all in common: and makes
in them show of revelations and visions. And as yet, he persuades many, for
fear of dishonouring God, not to pray to Saints; for fear of Idolatry, not to
worship Relics; in estimation of Scripture, to refuse all Traditions; and in
show of attributing more to Christ, to take from a man all merit and
satisction, from Saints all intercession, from Angels all custody, Of other
religious persons.
from the Church all superiority. Thus under the wings of piety has the
Devil hatched many Heresies, and under the veil of perfection, shrouded his
most wicked abomination of all falsehood and impiety. We read also in
particular, how he persuaded one Hierome a Monk, in Cassians time, Cass. col.
2. cap. 3.
upon presumption of Gods delivery for his merits, to cast himself into a
Well. And another, in imitation of Abraham, Cass. col. 1.^ cap. 7.
to attempt the killing of his son, which he had done, if the child had not
run away. We read also of ancient times, how in a solemn festiuity of the
Gentiles made at Caesarea Philippi, he caused a certain Pagan victime cast into
a fountain, first to vanish out of sight, and then carried it up into the
air, till by the Prayers of S. Asterins, Eusebius. lib. 7. hist. cap. 14. Bernar.
Lutzenbergus catalog. haeret. Prateolus Elench. haeret. lib. 7. haeres. 17.
the same remained, and did swim on the water. Also in later times he so
far prevailed in one Guido an Heretic, that in his life, and at his death,
he was esteemed a Saint, and after his death being discovered for an Heretic,
and his body to be burned, the Devil defended it from the fire, and elevated
it into the air to astonishment of all, till being subdued by holy things, he
cried out; We have defended thee Guido so long as we could, now we must leave
thee.

SVBDIV. 3. Satan's subtilty, by imaginary Illusions.
THE second way of his subtilty is, by an inward kind of suggestion, which
appearing in the show of divine revelation, does lead many into the pit of
eternal perdition, making them believe they are inspired by God, when indeed
they are deluded by Satan, Exampls of false revelations.
whose suggestion in their apprehension runs current for Gods revelation. Of
which we have examples both ancient and modern, most frequent. 1. How he
deluded Cerinthus with many revelations, as from certain of the Apostles,
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 22. and lib. 7. c. 10.
witness Caius, and Dionysius Alexandrinus. 2. Marcus an arch-heretike of that
time, with many prophesies, witness Irenaeus. 3. Montanus, with many both
visions, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 8.9.
revelations, and prophesies, by Maximilla and Quintilla, and with much seeming
devotion, and mortification, which deceived even that learned Tertullian,
witness Apollinaris, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 15.
Miltiades, Apollonius, and Serapion in Eusebius. 4. Martiades and Martianus
arch-heretikes, who made Archangels creatours of the world, with many
Harmonies, Symphonies, Epiph. haeres. 40.
or prophetical Revelations, witness Epiphanius. 5. Manes the Author of the
Maniches, Julian the Apostata, Vincentins the Donatist, with many such like,
witness S. Augustine, Aug. ep. 165 and lib. 3. de origin^ animae cap. 2.
Theod. lib. 4. ^aeret. fabul.
and Theodoret. In like manner he has deluded many of late, with such like
feigned revelations; as the Lollards in England; as the Begards or Beguines in
Belgia; the Illuminated in Spain; as Munzer the founder of the Anabaptists,
and many of his followers; Campanus Vel^ius in Germany, Francis de la Crux in
India. Yea many in England, who either would have sacrificed their children, as
in Crauen in Yorkshire, Delrio Disquisit. lib. 4. cap. 1. q. 3. sect. 2. page
263.
diverse anno 1520. questioned for it at York, attempted; or else did sacrifice
them, as one Gray a Lincolne-shireman, who for killing and cutting in pieces
his own son, and uttering treasons against King James, was executed at
Dublin in Ireland.

In which kind of illusions, he has gone so far, as to persuade some that
they were saints, our Lady, our Savior, yea the B. Trinity it self. Thus in
India he persuaded a famous Doctor, Exampls of false Christ's
deluded by the familiarity of a woman (who was instructed, as she feigned,
from an Angel) that he should be not only a King, and Pope, who should
translate the Popedom to India, but also was more holy then Angels, had the
hypostaticall union of God offered him, Acosta de nouiss. tempor. lib. ^. cap.
11
and was the redeemer of the world ( quoad efficacia^) and for that end should
work miracles, which by Scripture and show of miracles, to the admiration of
al, even to the fire and death he defended. Thus in Spain he persuaded
Gondisalues, that he was the son of God eternal, immortal, and the Savior of
all, even the damned, Delrio Proleq Disquit. In Spain.
which he Bernard. Fuxen. catal. lit. G. and N. In France.
published in a book pretended by him to be dictated by the Holy Ghost. In
France, he deluded one Neubrigenfis l. 1. de rerum Brita^. cap. 19. In Poland.
Eun, a Britain, another at Bourges, a third at Bordeaux, all of them to
think that themselves were Christ. In Poland, he persuaded one Mart. Bitl. in
Anal. Guagn. in vita Sigism. Delrio disqu. lib. 2. q. 9.
Melstincke in the time of Sigismonde, at Cracouia, to make himself Christ,
and with twelve Apostles to pass up and down the Country, and make show of
miracles, in dispossessing of Devils, raising of the dead, and doing by magic
things to the vulgar strange and admirable, till discovered, they by whiping
were forced to confess their illusion. In the Low-countryes he persuaded
Prateolus Lindan. Genebrad. Florimund. Gualter. an. 1600. In Belgia.
David George, that he was the nephew of God, borne of the holy Ghost, a third
David, the true Messiah sent to adopt men, children of God, and to fill heaven.
Also a Delrio lib. 4. disquis. c. 1. q. 3. sect. 3 In England. Stow 3. Eliz.
Religious woman, that one while the Devil, another while Jesus Christ did
speak in, and that she had power to consecrate (which she presumed to do) the
body of Christ, by the power of our Savior speaking in her. In England he
persuaded, in Queen Elizabeth's time, one Moore, to believe himself to be
Christ, and Geffrey his companion to preach it, till by whipping at a Cart they
both disclaimed it. And Hacket also after them, to believe that he was also
Christ, come with his fan in his hand to judge the earth, which Coppinger and
Arthington defended, till Hacket was hanged for it. By all which most
lamentable examples of Satan's deluding so many, and some so learned, Ann.
1591. Elizabeth.
it is more then apparent, that notwithstanding the former rules of discerning
spirits, yet Satan can so assimilate himself, and his suggestions to the
spirit, and inspirations of God and good Angels, Prou. 30.19.
that it is hard to discern viam Colubri super petram, the way of this Adder
upon the Rock of man's heart, and to find out his turninges and windinges among
so many his tricks of deceit, and subtilty. Of which yet in the next Section
more are discovered, and by variety of more examples confirmed.

SVBDIV. 4. Satan's subtilty, by exterior Visions.
The Devils subtilty*
THE third art the Devil uses, is by illusion of sensible visions, and
apparitions, that when his inward motions either to sin known, or secret, or
to sin under the shadow of virtue cannot prevail, or his suggestions instead
of revelations are discovered; By apparitions exterior in the shape
then he transfigures himself into visible shapes and apparitions, not of a
Serpent as he did to Eua, but sometimes of a holy man. Sometimes of an Angel,
sometimes of our Lady, and our Blessed Savior himself, and the B. Trinity,
and appearing in the form of the^ as though he were one of them. He by that
dissimulation seeks to lure souls to his whistle, and to catch them in his
net of perdition. Of men.
In this manner he appeared to our Savior in the shape of some venerable man,
as is before proved, and tempted him to know if he were God, He presumed to
approach to the presence of God, Of Angels.
and stood among the sons of God to assist before our Lord, Job. 1.6.2.8
as though he had been one of them, to obtain license to persecute Job. Thus he
clymed up to the Throne of God, and intruded himself among the host of heaven
(as Micheas saw him) about our Lord, and his Throne, 3. Reg. 12.19.22.
and offered to go forth, and be a lying Prophet in the mouth of all the
Prophets, to deceive Achab, and make him believe, that he should fight
prosperously against the King of Syria. Thus in imitation of the Angel in
Zachary, Zach. 1.19.
he made to Zedechias, the false Prophet of Achab, horns of iron, and
prophesied, though falsely, 3. Reg. 22.11
With these Horns shall thou strike Syria, till thou destroyest it: And so
brought to Achab, and Iosaphat to fight, to both their dangers, and Achabs
destruction. Thus did he appear to the Virgin and Martyr Iuliana, in the
midest of his torments under Dioclesian, Lip. Feb. 16. out of Metaphrastes.
in the shape of a glorious Angel, telling her he was the Angel of our Lord,
sent for that end, to wish her to avoid the torments, by counterfeiting the
offering of sacrifice, because God was not so cruel as to expect the fortitude
of brass in mortal bodies, and had deceived her, if God had not by her
prayers, sent a voice from heaven to bewray him, and confort her. Ephrem. vi^.
Abrah. E^e.
Thus he appeared to S. Abraham an Hermit, witness S. Ephrem, in the shape of
an Angel shining like the Sun, at midnight in his Cell, while he was singing,
and told him he was so blessed that none was like to him, thereby to exalt him
to pride, had not his humble confessing him to be a sinner, and calling upon
Jesus, mad^ him vanish away in smoke. Anton. vitae Simeon Still.
Thus he showed himself to S. Simeon Stylites upon his pillar, witness
Antonius his scholar, in the form of an Angel with a fiery Chariot, and
Horses, saying he was sent to take him, as another Elias, to heaven, because
the Angels, Apostles, Martyrs, and Prophets, with our B. Lady, desired to see
him; and had deceived him, if with the sign of the Cross which he made, as he
was about to set his foot into the Chariot, he had not driven him away. In the
like sort he appeared to S. John the Hermit, who foretold Theodosius of his
victory, and would have had him to adore him. Thus he deceived a certain Monk
(witness Cassianus) to whom, after many false revelations, Cassia. col. 2. cap.
2.
he showed the Christians with the Apostles mourning, and Moses with the Jews
rejoicing, and thereby persuaded him to circumcise himself, and become a Jew.
Thus in the shap of Moses (witness Socrates) he persuaded many Jews in
Creete, to cast themselves from a Rock into the Sea, Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 36.
Miscel. lib. 3.
in assurance to pass the Sea dry foot, and so to enter again into the Land
of Promise.

Sometimes this audacious dissembler has not been afraid to assume to
himself (thereby the easier to deceive) the shape and representation of the
Mother of the son of God, and of God, of the B. Trinity it self. Of Christ.
Sulpitius Seuerus in vitae S. Martin^ cap. 25. dial. 1. Greg. Turon lib. 2. de
vitis* Patrum, cap. 10. apud Sur. August. 1.
Thus of ancient we read, how he appeared to S. Martin, glorious like a King,
richly adorned and crowned, saying to him: I am Christ, who am descended from
heaven to visit thee; and had deceived him, if S. Martin inspired by God to
know him, had not said: I will not believe that Christ will come in any form,
but that in which he was crucified, at which he vanished away. How he appeared
to Secundillus a Deaco^, in the shape of Christ, in his Cell, saying: I am
Christ, to whom thou so much prayest, and thereby not only persuaded him to
leave his Cell, and to go abroad into the Country and do good, but also did by
him cure diseases and do strange cures; whereupon being by his Superior
reprehended, became penitent, commanding the Devil, that if he were Christ, he
should show the Cross on which he suffered, Bonau. lib. de profect. spirit.
cap. 19. Gerson. apud ^ont. supra. and Dauroltiu^ cap. 2. tit. 26 exempl. 3.
he thereupon, and at the sign of the Cross vanished away and left him. How
he appeared to other two mentioned by Gerson, and S. Bonauenture, in the same
form, saying: I am Christ, to whom the one shutting his eyes, and saying: I
desire to see Christ in heaven not on earth; and the other saying: I am not
worthy to see Christ, because I am a sinful man, the Devil vanished. How he
appeared to S. Pachomius, saying: I am Christ, and am come to thee my faithful
servant, Dionys. vita Pachomij.
which the holy man by the perturbation of his mind, perceauing to be a Devil,
with the sign of the Cross made him to vanish. How to Valens a Monk he
appeared like Christ, Pallad. c. 31.
accompanied with many Angels, and caused him to come forth of his Cell, and
adore him, and left him so distracted, and raging, that they were forced to
bind him.

Of examples of later times, we read, that he molested the holy man S.
Ignatius, in the founding of his Order of the Society, Ribadineira ^ita Ignatij
lib. 1. cap. 3.
not only interiourly by suggestions, which he did at his study, when by high
and mystical illuminations, he withdrew his attention from his learning the
Grammar rules, to which he had seriously applied himself; but also by visible
apparitions, Orlandinus hist. Societa^. lib. 1. c. 22.
when at Manresa in his first entrance into a spiritual course, he appeared in
the form of a beautiful person with many colors, and eyes, compassing the
Cross before which he prayed, which S. Ignatius by the pensiuenes and
perturbation of his mind discovering, caused him by his prayer to vanish. 2.
That in the Alps, the Devil having seduced a Priest, Picus Miran. de
strigibus.
who had the B. Sacrament about him, to go in curiosity with him to see a
wonder, brought him to a palace most beautiful and pleasant, where a Lady in a
throne was presented by many, prostrating themselves before her with rich
guiftes, until the Priest offering the B. Sacrament to her, thinking it was
our B. Lady, she and all vanished away, and left him in a strange place, many
miles distant from his habitation. 3. Thirdly, to an Hermit, Thom. Cantiprat.
anno 1523.
and a Religious man, deceived by him in Germany in a desert place to which
they were carried, he appeared in the shape of Christ a King, and our B. Lady a
Queen, both glorious, set in a rich palace upon a shining throne with
thousands of Angels, and Saints about them, and received al adoration from
them, till by the B. Sacrament, which the Religious had in a Pixe, offered to
them, al vanished away. Bencius Annal. Societat. anno 1590.
That he appeared to certain women about Milan the year 1590. in the habit
now of a Monk, now of S. Vrsula with many Virgins with her, and now of our B.
Savior, among whom he persuaded one to be Religious, and leave the world, and
would not desist, till she told him, Surius 6. Iu^ cap. 19.
she would not do any thing without the advice of her Ghostly Father. And to
conclude, we read, how while S. Norbert the fou^der of the Praemonstratenses
was meditating upon the B. Trinity, Of the B. Trinity.
the Devil appeared with three heads, telling him, that for his devotion he
had deserved to see the B. Trinity, which by the perturbations of his mind, he
perceauing to be the Devil, defied him, and so was rid of him. All which, with
many more the Devils apparitions and illusions in histories most authentical
recorded, what are they, but so many conuincing arguments to prove both the
difficulty of discerning spirits, and also the impossibility of every private
spirit to do it?

The difficulty to discern Spirits, proved by scripture. SECT. V.
THE last reason, The difficulty to discern spirits proved by authority of
scripture.
to prove the difficulty of discerning spirits, is authority (which is a
confirmation to all the former experiences and examples) of holy Scripture, and
holy men, placing the gift of discerning of spirits among the gifts of graces
gratis given ( to some the discerning of spirits) does show, that as the rest
of the gifts, to wit, miracles, tongues, prophesies, and interpreting of
Scripture (of which before) and the rest, are rare, extraordinary, and given to
few, and that usually and necessarily conjoined with grace, or faith in every
faithful belieuer: so also this of discerning spirits is in like manner, a
gift not communicated to every faithful belieuer, who has the spirit of God,
but rarely and extraordinarily to some, who have the priuiledg of this benefit
bestowed upon them, for the benefit of others. For as it is proper to God both
to be, and to be called. Pro. 16.2
Ponderator spirituum, The weigher, and discerner of Spirits, in the same
manner as he is the knower of hearts, 3. Reg. 8.39.
Who only knows the hearts of all the children of men: so does he communicate
this gift to some special persons, whom he makes, as the Prophets call them,
Iere. 6.27
Proouers, and strong proouers in my people, who shall know and prove their
ways, in the same manner as in the common wealth are tryers of gold to
discern true, from false. And to these by a special prerogative he gives this
gift, that they 1. Joan. 4 1.
may prove spirits if they be good, and Psalm. 63.10.
try them, as Gold is tried in the fire, and Iere. 15.19.
separate the precious, from the vile, declaring when it is good, or a good
Angel who knocks at the door, and when it is Satan, and the bad Angel, who
transfigures himself into an Angel of light. And as this gift is rare, and
given only to some; so it is for the most part given to Superiors, 2. Cor 11.14
who are to direct others in the way of virtue and perfection; and among these,
to them who are men humble, as Cassianus affirms, and very spiritual also,
because, Not the sensual man, but the spirit of God perceaues the things
which are of God. 1. Cor. 2.11.14.
These partly by long experience, partly by wholesome documents, partly by
divine inspirations, attain to this perfection of discercerning spirits. By
which is apparent, that the science of discerning spirits is hard and
difficult, because it requires so special and supernatural a gift, which is
so rare and extraordinary, and that to special kind of persons for the good of
others,

Of holy men.
Which is also confirmed by the testimony of holy men, who have labored much,
and been experienced long in this science. S. Bernard, a man extraordinarily
spiritual, confesses that he knew not, When the spirit entered, or when it
departed; which way it came, or which it went; Bernar. sermon. 74. in Cant.
sometyms he could perceive it to be present, or to have been present; but
neither when it came, or how it went. Gerson a man learned, who labored and
writ much about this discerning of spirits, Gers. de probat. spirituu^.
Difficillimu^ est tam multos decern^re, cum in diuersis spiritibus multa
similitudo reperiatur.
after much discussion, says: That it is a most hard thing to discern among
so many spirits, since in diverse and contrary spirits there is sush a
similitude of inspirations. Thomas a Kempis, one much enlightened in spiritual
affairs, says: Mark the motions of thine own nature and my grace; for in
very contrary and secret manner these are moved, and can hardly be discerned,
but by him that is spiritual, and inwardly enlightened. Ludouicus Puentes also
a master in spiritual ways, says: That it seems often an inspiration of
God, which is an impulsion of Satan, and it often carries a show of spiritual
love, which is indeed false and carnal love. Puentes dux spiritu. tract. 4. c.
2. sect. 1.
And thus it remains convinced by reasons drawn from the verity and
similitude of spirits by the subtilty and craft of Satan, who so often and
many ways, transfigures himself into an Angel, by the infirmity of man's
understanding so unable to penetrate them; and by authority of Scripture, and
testimony of holy men so experienced in this science, that the art of
discerning of spirits is most hard and difficult in it self, and above the
reach and capacity of every private man's ability. Inferences.


Out of all which it does follow. First, 1. What visions and apparitio^s are
not to be much esteemed.
that visions and apparitions are often times doubtful and dangerous, and so
rather to be feared, whether they be true or false, and to what end they do
tend, then to be desired, or esteemed as signs of holiness and perfection.
For as the gifts gratis given, Prophesy, Curing of diseases, and Dispossessing
of Devils etc. are given sometimes to persons less perfect in virtue, if not
vicious in life, and unbelievers for faith: witness the prophesyes of the
Sybils (being Gentiles) of Christ; Of Number. 24.17.
Baalam a sorcerer, of the star of Jacob; Of Joan. 11.50.
Caiphas most wicked, of Christ dying for all; Of 1. Reg. 1^ 6. and 2. Reg.
22.12.
Saul a reprobate, who had the spirit, and was among the Prophets; All which
had the gift of prophesy. Witness also the sons of the Matt. 1^.2.
Pharisees, who cast out Devils; and the seven sons of Act. 19.13.
Sceua, with the exorcists of the Jews, who dispossessed many of Devils; so
also these visions and apparitions are neither so proper to holy men, but that
often they are communicated to bad and wicked, nor yet so certain that they
are always of God, or good Angels, but that they often proceed from Satan;
and as the visions of those spirits, so also the gift of discerning the same,
is neither so proper omni, and soli, to all, and only the good and faithful,
but that it is sometimes given to them who are less holy, and more wicked of
life. Whereupon holy, and wise learned men, as S. Augustine, S. Bonauenture,
and Gerson, advise and persuade, that not only such visions and apparitions are
to be feared, yea avoided, and not desired; but also ordinary persons who have
them, and make show or ostentation of them, are not to be applauded or admired
for them as pious, but severely to be reprehended suspected as proud and
dangerous, who are not content to tread the high way and beaten path to
perfection, but will seek out new by-ways, and walk in wonders above
themselves. Also many holy persons who have been extraordinarily visited from
God with them, have always with that wariness accepted of them, that they did
use great diligence to examine them, before they would confide in the^. Thus
Genesis 37.12.
Jacob secretly and diligently considered the visions of Joseph his son
related to him. Ios. 5.13.
Iosue doubted, and thereupon examined the Angel who did appear to him like an
armed man, whether he was of their side, or of the adversaries. 1. Reg. 3 9.
Samuel heard our Lord when he called him in the night, Samuel, Samuel, but did
not answer till he rose and went to Heli the high Priest, to know what he
should do. 3. Reg. 19 12.
Elias seriously deliberated whether our Lord did appear in the whirle wind,
or in the commotion, or in the fire, or in the soft whispering wind. And our
Luc. 1.19.
B. Lady (cogitabat) did muse or study, that is, maturely, and long (says
Euthymius) consider what kind of salutation that was, whether of God, or the
Devil. And the like did the Bishop of Cyprus, at the apparition of S. Barnaby.
And S. Ambrose at the inue^tion of Geruasius and Protasius. And other holy
Saints in all such like occasions, fearing always illusions of Satan instead
of apparitions of Angels.

Secondly. It does follow, that it is necessary, to avoid all these and such
like dangers, Necessity of a spiritual master.
to have every one a spiritual directour and Master, on whom as better
experienced by practice, and more illuminated by God in his place and function,
he may more securely rely, then upon his own spirit or judgment. For as the
ways in which men walk are many, and the right way to heaven not easy to be
found; as in the way being found there are many either pits to fall in, or
thieves to rob, and spoil us; as the science we are to learn is very heard
and intricate, to which our natural wit cannot attain, and the diseases and
infirmities of our body are many and great for which we are unable to travel
so long and laborious a journey: So have we need, and great need of a guide to
lead us in a way so uncertain and dangerous; of a Master to instruct us in a
trade so hard and unknown; and of a Physician to cure us of so many
infirmities and diseases. And as no man has power to absolve himself of his
sins, as no man is made Judge in his own cause, as no man is permitted to
minister physic to his own body; so God has ordained that no man shall be
instructor and directour of his own soul, nor conductour of himself in his
way to life, but still depend upon others to direct and instruct him in the
same. For thus our Savior first himself, for example, Luc. 2.4^.
would sit hearing and asking among the Doctors, as though he were a scholar.
For this cause he sent his vessel of election S. Paul, Act. 9.6.
to be instructed by Ananias, and would not immediately himself direct him what
to do. For this, God would not instruct Moses in the mountain himself, but
sent him to Iethro a gentill, by him to receive direction, how to govern his
people. Exodus 18.2^
For this S. Augustine being old refused not to be instructed by his Companions
yet young. And thus we read that some who have had familiar conuersations with
Angels, Sophron. pra. spiritua. cap. 109.
were yet permitted by them to hold some errors in doctrine, till they
humbled themselves to others, and by them were instructed. For which it is a
general rule, that he who will not be a disciple to another shall be a master
of error, and that he who makes himself master to himself, puts himself to
be scholar to a fool. All which if it be true in moral sciences, and
mysteries of faith; most true it is in discerning of these spirits, in which
the difficulty is greater, and the danger of error no less.

3. To conclude, it does follow, that since there is such variety of spirits,
some good, as of God, of Angels, and of Saints; Conclusion That the private
spirit cannot be a discerner of spi^its.
and some bad, as of devils, of the damned, of the flesh, and of the world:
Since there be so diverse kinds of motions, and apparitions of these spirits,
some intellectual, some imaginary, some sensible and visible: Since there are
so great difficulties to be resolved about these several apparitions, so great
similitude in their motions, and apparitions, so many rules and differences,
upon long experience, have been given to discern them, and so great skill and
cunning is requisite to apply them: Since there be so many, and so dangerous
ways to take, as of Pagans, Jews, Turks, Heretics, all differing and
condemning one another, all depending upon the motions of these spirits: Since
such and so high is the excellency of the nature of these spirits to be
discerned, such and so weak the infirmity of man to discern them, and such
and so subtle, malicious, and powerful is man's enemy the Devil, to deceive
in them, by counterfeit dissimulation of piety, or by forged illusions instead
of revelations, or by outward apparitions in form of Saints, Angels, or God,
all by verity of examples confirmed: Since so special and extraordinary, so
rare and unusual is this gift of discerning these spirits: Since, I say, all
this is so as is proved; with what reason and judgment can any man make this
private spirit, or rather selfe-seeming conceit of his own brain, a competent,
sufficient and infallible judge to discern and decide al these questions and
difficulties arising upon them? What braine-sicke madness, and senseless
presumption is it, for every silly, simple and unlearned person, man or woman
(all of which challe^g this spirit) to assume so much to themselves, and
presume so far upon their own conceit, as to discern, and declare which of
every one of these spirits is of God, the devil, or nature? which is good or
bad? which true or false, either in themselves or others? and upon this
presumption, to ground the certainty of their religion, faith, and salvation?

What greater temerity and rashness can there be, then to build a work so great
and important, as is the eternity of salvation or damnation, upon no more solid
and certain a ground, then is the proper conceit of every private motion of an
uncertain spirit? Surely, if men were not blind, or bewitched, and that either
wilfully or foolishly blinded or bewitched, and both so deeply, that they
either will not, or cannot see what both sense and reason does dictate to their
own conscience, what both authority and testimony of God, and holy men does
lay before them, what both examples and experience of so many ages does
confirm unto the^; surely, they could not but often doubt, and distruct, and
many times stagger and relent (their own judgment and conscience, doubtless
pricking them) in this their ostentation of the certainty of their spirit; they
could not but sometyms enter into consideration, yea and feel a sensible touch
of trepidation in soul, and stand in a wonder and amazeme^t at themselves, how
they dare venture so far, and stand so confidently in so weighty a matter, upon
the judgment of so uncertain, unconstant, and unwarranted, yea corrupted,
deceitful, and partial a Judge, as is this their private spirit, conceit, and
imagination. What man of reason and discretion, or of care and conscience, will
not hold it far more secure and safe in these points of eternity, with every
good Catholic, to join his spirit with the spirit of the Saints and servants
of God, now reigning in heaven, to subject his spirit to the spirit of Gods
holy Church here on earth, guided infallibly by an infallible spirit of God,
and by conforming themselves to this spirit, to embrace and follow that Faith
and religion, that doctrine and discipline, that sacrifice and sacraments,
which so many Saints and holy men, so many Confessors and learned Doctors, so
many Churches and Counsels in all ages, throughout all Countries, believed in
their hearts, professed by their lives, defended by their writings, and sealed
and confirmed with their lives and blood? And thus much for the first reason
against the private spirit, drawn from the difficulty to discern spirits.

THE PRIVATE SPIRITS AVTHORITY To interpret Scripture, and judge of Faith,
confuted by reasons, drawn from the true and infallible authority, and means
of interpreting holy Scripture. CHAP. V.
What Interpretation, Authority, and means are necessary and infallible for
the sense of Scripture. SECT. I.
SVBDIV. 1. What Interpretation of Scripture is necessary?
THE better to understand the reasons drawn from the infallible authority, and
means of interpreting of Holy Scripture, by which the private spirits
authority is confuted, we may consider, 1. What interpretation that is, which
is required as necessary. 2. What authority, as infallible, is required to this
intetpretation, and in whom it is resident. 3. What means are to be used and
followed, as certain by these Interpreters to this interpretation. Out of all
which may be inferred and proved the insufficiency of the private spirit, to be
either author, or means of this interpretation of Scripture.

First therefore, when we speak of the sense and interpretation of scripture,
What interpretation of Scripture is required as necessary and infallible.
we speak not of that sense and interpretation which is only probable and
credible, but of that which is certain, and infallible. Not of that which is
only for the pulpit and documents of manners, or which is for the schools and
subtiltyes of divinity; but of that which is for doctrine of Faith and articles
of belief. Not of that which is only to confirm and increase us in that faith
which we already believe, but of that which is to persuade and produce faith a
new, either in our selves, when, and why we first believe; or in others, whom
we persuade, first to believe. And this is that sense of Scripture, which as it
is (being rightly understood, in the sense which the holy Ghost intended) a
firm and solid foundation of true faith; so being falsely understood, and
wikedly perverted by false teachers, it is the Mother or nurse of al heresies.
For as nothing is persuaded as worthy of belief, but which is true, or under
the show of truth, and as the scripture is by all granted to be most true: so
all use the text of Scripture as a mean to persuade, that which they would
have to be believed as true; the true teachers in the true sense, the false in
the false sense, both cyting the words and text, but the one in that sense and
meaning which the holy Ghost intended, Scripture abused by Satan.
the other in that which they themselves invented. Which course of false sense,
as the Devil first began, when he would have by Scripture persuaded Christ
to cast himself down headlong, saying, It is written, Matt. ^.6*
he has given his Angels charge over thee: So the members of Satan follow the
same way, and labor by the same Scripture to seduce the members of Christ, as
the faythlesse, the faithful; the sacrilegious, the religious; the Heretics,
the Catholics. For the Jews would by Scripture have proved that Christ was
not only not Messiah, saying, Search the Scriptures, and see that from Gallilee
a Prophet ryseth not, but also that he was a malefactor, and such a one as
ought to dye, Joan. 7.52. Jews. Joan. 19. Turks. Marfil. Ficin. lib. de vera
religione, apud Stapl. Princip. fidei controu. 7. l. 10. cap. 1. Vincent. Lyr.
cap. 37. Heretics. Matthew. 7. Vincent. Lyr. cap. 36. 1. Cor. 11. Gal. 1.6. 1.
Pet. 2.3.
saying, We have a law, and according to our law, he ought to dye. And the
same is continued both by Turks, who receive both the old and new Testament,
but interpreted according to Mahomets Alcaron, and also by all Heretics, who
seek to fill their books not only with words of Scripture, but (says Vincent.
Lyrin.) with thousands of testimonies, thousands of examples, thousands of
authorityes, out of the Law, the Psalms, the Prophets, the Apostles, which
expounded after a new and ill manner, would thereby throw down souls from the
tower of Catholic faith, to the pit of wicked heresy; being as our Savior
says of them, false Prophets, or teachers, who under the garments of sheep,
that is (says Vincent. Lyrin. the words of the Prophets and Apostles) are
ravenous Wolves infesting the fold of the Church, and devouring the flock of
Christ, and saying, Christ is here or there, that is, as Origin expounded it,
in this or that text of Scripture; who thus transfiguring themselves into the
show of Apostles or preachers of Christ, do labor to transfer the people into
another Gospel; who deprave the Scripture to their own and others
destruction: And by the words of the Law, says S. Ambrose, Ambros. ad Tit. 3.
impugn the Law, and do frame a false sense of the words of the Law, that
they may confirm their own perverse opinions by the authority of the Law.
Against al whom we may note the words of S. Hilary, Hilar. lib 2. de S.
Trinit.
saying: That Heresy is about the understanding, not the text of Scripture; the
sense, not the words, is the sin. And of S. Hierome; That the Gospel is not
in the words, Hier. Coment in 1. Gal.
but the sense of scripture; not in the outward rine, but in the inward marrow;
not in the leaves of words, but in the root of the sense.

SVBDIV. 2. Who have authority to make the Interpretation of Scripture?
Authority of Pastors necessary to infallible exposition of scripture.
SEcondly, this sense and meaning of scripture, because it is not facil and
easy to be known to all, by reason of the great obscurity in the words, the
great fecundity in the sense, and the great profundity in the mysteries, or
articles believed, (which cannot by every one, nor by any one, without the
assistance of the same spirit which penned it, be understood) therefore is
necessary some authentical, certain, and infallible authority, for the true
understanding of this authentical, certain, and infallible sense of
scripture. This authority, because it is in the Catholic Church, and chiefly
in the Pastors and Prelates of the same, for the better government of it in
true doctrine, upon whom God has bestowed the infallible assistance of his
holy spirit, (as is afterward proved) therefore their authority is necessary for
the finding out the true and certain sense of scripture. Whenever therefore
the chief Pastor, or Pastors of the Church using the means for it appointed
(of which in the next proposition) do, either ex Cathedra, or in a Council
confirmed and approved, or by a general consent, propose, deliver, and declare
any sense or exposition of scripture as true, and to be believed as an article
of faith in any controversy against heretics, then is that sense to be
received, for their authority, as authentical, certain, and infallible.

From whence ensues, that though in matters of Philosophy and reason we must
rather attend what is said, the^ by whom it is said, and respect rather the
force, then the authority of the person who says it; yet in matters of faith
we must first respect them who preach, and the authority and commission of
their person, and by it judge of their doctrine preached. For if the person be
lawfully sent, if he have lawful commission, if he be a lawful pastor, not
divided by heresy or schism from the whole body; then the people are to attend
to him, and for his commission to receive his doctrine: but if he want mission
and commission, if he teach of himself and his own authority, if he produce
the doctrine not of the Church-proposition, but of his own invention; let him
teach what he will, prove it how he will, he is not to be heard nor believed by
the common and vulgar people; to whom it belonges to be obedient and subject to
the authority of their Pastor, The people is to obey, not judge his Pastor.
not to judge of the verity of his doctrine more, then in general, whether it
be consonant or dissonant from the universally received doctrine of the Church
(for they are to Heb. 13.17.
obey their Pastors, to remain in the same rule Philip. 3.16.
in the faith first delivered, Coloss. 1.6.
in that which they heard from the beginning, 1. Joan. ^.7.
to avoid profane novelties of words, 1 Timothy 6.20.
and not to receive any other Ghospel Gal. 1.
or doctrine, Romans 16 17.
but that which they learned and received from the beginning) leaving the
particulars to the testimony of others, either equal to their pastor in
function, or superior to him in authority. Which point is to be noted against
the Manichees of old, and the Protestants of late, who respect not the
authority of the Preacher, but the force of his reason: and attend not to the
commission of the Pastor, who he is that teaches, but to the plausibility of
his doctrine, what it is, and how far it is pleasing to their private spirit,
disposition, or judgment.

SVBDIV. 3. What means are to be used to make this Interpretation: and of
four Rules of infallible interpreting of scripture.
The means to find the true sense of Scripture.
Thirdly. The means which are to be observed, used, and followed by these
Pastors or Prelates for the securing us of this true sense of scripture, are
these. 1. The rule of faith, that is, the Catholic and universally received
doctrine of faith and piety which was delivered by the Apostles, and received
by posterity. 2. The general practice, or observation, custom or tradition of
the whole Church in points where the doctrine is not certain. 3. The ancient
exposition, or consent of the holy fathers and doctors of the primitive
Church, where the former do not appear. 4. The decrees and definitions of the
Councels, either general, or prouincial, approved by general, and the
conformity to them in all expositions doubtful. Th^se are as so many rules or
conducts, according to which the certain, and authentical sense of scripture
is, by the Pastors of gods Church, to be squared and guided.

1. The rule of faith proved.
First, that the rule of faith is to be presupposed, observed and followed in
the finding out the true sense of scripture, is proved. 1. This rule of Faith
is by S. Paul (who often does mention it) called sometimes a rule which
brings peace, Who Gal. 6.16.
have followed this rule, peace be on them. Sometimes a rule in which they are
to remain to avoid dissentions, Let Philip. 3.16.
us remain in the same rule, that we may judge the same. Sometimes his rule
which he delivered to them and by which they are to increase in faith, Your 1.
Cor. 10.15.
faith increasing according to our rule. Sometimes a reason of Faith, according
to which is given the gift of prophesy, or interpretation of scripture,
Donations Romans 12.16.
or prophesy, according to the rule of Faith. And in effect it is no other, but
the Romans 16.17.
doctrine they received; Colos. 1.6.
the faith preached through the whole world; 1. Tim. 6.20. 2 Tit. 1.3
the disposition or form of true doctrine, which they had learned, and is
committed to them, The 1. Joan. 1.
doctrine which they received from the beginning; Which Gal. 1.
was first euangelized to them; Or Act. 15.^
the precepts of the Apostles and ancients; Or (...)
rather of our Savior delivered by the holy Prophets and Apostles; And 1. Pet.
1
the word of God which remains for ever. That the knowledge of this rule or
doctrine of faith is presupposed to the true knowledge, and understanding of
scripture, is proved both by scripture, and reason. By scripture, the Prophet
Isay says, as S. Cyprian, 1. By scripture. Isa. 7.9.
and S. Augustine do both of them read and understand it: Except you believe,
you cannot understand, that is, says S. Cyprian, the Jews cannot understand
the scripture, except they first believe in Christ. S. Augustine says: There
be some of you, who understand not, and therefore they understand not, Cypr.
lib. con. Iudae^s. Nihil possunt Iudaei de scripturis intelligere, nisi prius
crediderint in Christum. Isaias enim dicit, Nisi credideritis non intelligetis.
August. tract. 27. in Joan. Sunt enim quidam in vobis qui non credunt, and ideo
non intelligunt, quia non credunt. Propheta enim dixit, nisi credideritis non
intelligetis; per fidem copulamur, per intellectum viuificamur; prius
haeraeamus per fidem, vt sit quod viuificamus per intellectum. Fides debet
praecedere intellectum, vt intellectus sit Fidei praemium.
because they believe not; let us first adhere by Faith that we may be revived
by understanding. And in another place: Faith must go before Understanding,
that the understanding may be the reward of Faith. Therefore Faith, and the
rule of faith, is necessary before the understanding of Scripture.

Secondly, the Scripture for the sense, is a Book sealed with seven seals:
these seals none can open, but he, who has the key of David. This key of
David is given only to them who are faithful with David, therefore the key of
faith is requisite to the opening the sense of the book of scripture: which is
confirmed by S. Hierome, Hier. ep. ad Paulin. Lex spiritualis est, and
reuelationeopus habet vt intelligatur; and reuelata facie gloriam Dei
contemplamur. Liber in Apocalypsi septe^ ^gillis signatus oste^ditur, quem si
dederis homini scienti literas vt legate, respondebittibi, non possum, signatus
est enim Quanti hodie puta^t se nosce literas, and tenent signatum libru^, nec
aperire possunt, nisi ille aperuerit qui habet clauem. Eunuchus cum librum
teneret, cogitatione conauerit, lingua volueret, labijs personaret, ignorabat
enim quem in libris nesciens venerabatur: venit Philippus, ostendit ei Iesum
qui clausus latebat in litera, eadem hora credit Eunuchus, baptizatus, and
fidelis, and sanctus factus, ac magister de discipulo.
who alleging the same words says; The Law is spiritual, and requires
revelation, that it be understood. For proof of which he produces the example
of the Eunuch, who read, but understood not the scripture, till Philip did
expound it to him, made him faithful, and so became of a scholar, a Master.

Thirdly, Every learned Scribe in the Kingdom of Heaven is like to a man, the
master of a family, who brings out of his treasure new and old. The Scribes
were the Masters and Interpreters of scripture, but they were in the kingdom
of heaven, that is, in the Church, by Faith, and so did interpret the new and
old Testament; which S. Augustine alleging to the same purpose against the
Manichees says: You Aug. cont. Faustum lib. 4. cap. 2. Non enim estis eruditi
in regno caelorum, id est, in Ecclesia Christi vera Catholica: quod si essetis,
de diuitijs scripturarum sanctarum, non so^um noua, sed etiam vetera
proferretis.
understand not because you believe not, as says I say, for you are not
instructed in the kingdom of heaven, that is, in the true Catholic Church of
Christ; for if you were, you would produce old and new out of the scriptures.
Therefore one must be a scholar in the Church by faith, before he can come to
understand the scripture, as a Master.

Fourthly, S. Paul says to Timothy: Thou have learned holy scriptures from thy
infancy, which are able to instruct thee to salvation by faith, which is in
Christ. If the scriptures instruct by Faith, then Faith is prerequired before
we can be instructed by them, or understand them.

Fifthly, the holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church have, by the breach of
this rule, as a sign, discerned Heretics, and by the authority of it, as a
strong argument, confuted the same. Thus were discerned Marcion, Valentinus,
C^rinthus, and Basilides, by their deprauing the rule of truth; witness Iren.
l. 3. cap. 3.
Irenaeus. Thus Paulus Samosatenus, by his forsaking the Canon of the Church,
and flying to strange and adulterous doctrine. Thus Montanus, by his uttering
strange words, contrary to the custom of the Church, derived by tradition and
succession from the Apostles, witness of both Eusebius. l. 7. c. 24. l. 5. cap. 15.
Eusebius. Thus Nestorius, by forsaking the ancient doctrine, and introducing
of new, witness Socr. l. 7. cap 31.
Socrates. And thus all Heretics, by their forsaking the rule of Christianity,
witness Aug. de vera relig. c. 5
S. Augustine. They being all esteemed to have truth on their side, who walk
according to the rule which the Church received from the Apostles, the Apostles
from Christ, witness Tertul. de praescrip.
Tertullian. Thus did S. Hierome Hier. d^al cont. Lucif.
confute, and confound the heresy of the Luciferians, by the light of the Sun
of the Church. Gregor. Nazian. lib. de Theolog.
Gregorius Nazianzen the same, by the doctrine abhorring the same. Basil. de
Spirit. sancto cap. 27.
S. Basil the Eunomians, by the vnwritte^ tradition of the Church. Atha. ep. ad
Epictet.
Athanasius the Arians, by the authority of the Orthodoxe Church, and his
ancestors opposite to them, and abhorring their doctrine. Epiphan. haeres. 5.
S. Epiphanius the Melchisidechians, by the tradition of the Apostles, and
succession of doctrine. The Haer. 75.
Millenarians, by their transgressing the limits of the holy Church of God, and
the hope of Prophetical and Apostolical tradition in faith and doctrine: And
the Haer. 77
Demer^s, and other Heretics, by the style of Christianisme, and the phrase of
the Apostles received from the Fathers. S. Augustine Aug. ep. 28. and 105.
the Pelagians, by the grounded custom of the Church, hastening to baptism
infants. Aug. de peccat. meritis lib. 3. cap. 5.
By the most ancient known and undoubted rule of Faith, and truth. Lib. 1.
cont. Iul. c. 1
And by the authority of the Church so commended in scr^pture. The Lib. 2. c.
7. and 1. de Baptis.
Donatists, by the authority of the Church, and by apostolical Tradition. And
both Irenaeus, Origin, and S. Augustine did confute all Heretics, by the
tradition of the Apostles, manifest to the whole world in the Church, says
Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Irenaeus. By the Ecclesiastical tradition dissented off by none, says Orig.
pro^mi^ de principijs.
Origin. By the Catholic Church, whose not receiving any opinion is sufficient
(says Aug. de haer. ad Quod vult.
S. Augustine) to confound any heresy. Therefore the doctrine and practice of
the ancient Fathers was to discern and confute all Heretics by this rule of
Faith.

Sixthly, the same is proved by Reason, because the scripture is the book of
the faithful, not the faithless; therefore as it was writ to the faithful,
as the converted Jews, Romans, By reason. Stapl. contr. 6. lib. 11. c. 3.
Vinc. Lyr. c. 2. Vt diuinu^ Canonem secundum Ecclesiae traditiones, and iuxta
catholici dogmatis regulas interprete^tur. Quia scripturam sacram pro ipsa sua
altitudine in vno eode^que sensu accipiunt, id circo multum necesse est,
propter ta^tos tam varij erroris a^^ractus, vt propheticae, and Apostolicae
interpretationis linea secundum Ecclesiastici and apostolici sensus normam
dirigatur.
Corinthians etc. so it is understood truly, only by the faithful, as the
Christians, not by the Infidels, as the Jews, Turks, and Heretics, who have,
and read the words, but understand not the sense, and meaning, because the
veil is yet over their eyes, in the reading of it, for want of faith;
therefore the letter, that is, the words and reading of it does kill them, and
is to them a ministration of death; and only the spirit, that is, the
understanding of it does give life to them who have faith. Of which necessity
of Faith, prerequired to the understanding of Scripture, see Stapleton de
principijs Doctrinalibus, where the same is further proved out of the ancient
Fathers testimonies, to wit, S. Augustine, Irenaeus, Origin, Athanasius, Cyrill
of Alexandria, Theodoret, and Vincentius Lyrin. who says, that the holy and
learned men did interpret the holy Scripture, according to the traditions of
the Catholic Church, and the rule of Catholic faith. And again, That the
line of prophetical and Apostolical interpretation must be directed according
to the rule of the Catholic and Ecclesiastical sense. Which, and much more he
alleadges against the custom of Heretics, who have always the Scripture in
their mouth, and out of it do confirm their errors.

Out of which may be inferred, how untruly and fraudulently the Protestants do
generally auerre, that in the scripture the spirit of God is, and is to be
sought and found; and that by industry and reading of the words and text the
spirit is to be found. Whereupon they make the words of scripture, as they are
heard or read, not only the organ or instrument of faith, as much as we make
the Sacrament instrument of grace; but also the sole instrument, which with
diligence read or heard, they prescribe as the only means to receive faith and
salvation.

For first, as a man consists of body and soul, and the body of it self being
senseless and dead, is the inferior ^^rt; the soul being life and giving
life, is the principal part, without which he is not man: So the Scripture
consists of the words or text which is read or heard, and is only the body,
bark, The Scripture consists of 2. parts.
or covering of Gods word, and of the sense and meaning which is understood and
believed, and is the life, soul and substance of the scripture. Now the words,
as they are written or spoken, consisting of letters, syllables, and words, are
dead without life, and common to Gentiles, Jews, and heretics, with the
faithful: yea in the same manner as the law is called a law of sin; so are
they by S. Paul, 2. Cor. 3.6.7
said to Kill, and to be ministration of death. Because according to S. August.
the letter read and not truly understood, Sermon. 21. de tempore.
or not performed, is occasion of heresy and sin; some gathering out of it,
as out of the flower, poison of heresy like the spider; others honey of faith
like the be. The sense and meaning, as it is truly understood and believed
(which is properly the word of God) is an effectual means more piercing the^
any two-edged sword, and an operative virtue to salvation, but to whom? Heb.
4.12.
to all that believe. And to whom it is so proper, Romans 1.16.
that it is by faith only conceived and attained, and by faith only believed
and understood?

Secondly. As the bare letter, words, The Holy Ghost is not inherent in the
letter of scripture.
and text of scripture without true sense are not the word of God, so they do
not contain the spirit of God or the holy ghost in them, neither is the holy
ghost thus inherent, resident, or to be sought and found in the scripture, but
in the heart and soul of the writers of scripture, that is, the Prophets or
Apostles, in whom as it did remain, and dictate to them what they writ, so did
it reveal and manifest to them the true sense and meaning of the same, though
perhaps not always the whole and complete meaning, and all senses of the
scripture (for by reason of the fecundity of senses in Gods word, many, Aug.
lib. 12. Confess. c. 18 and de Genes. ad literam.
or al of them were not, according to S. Augustine always revealed to the same
Apostles or prophets, but some reserved to the author of it the holy ghost it
self.) And as the spirit of God is not inherent or resident in the bare words,
sillables, or text of scripture; so the spirit or spiritual true sense of
scripture is not to be sought or found only in, or out of the bare words, The
sense of scripture to be found by the rule of Faith.
and their grammatical signification, but out of the rule of faith expounded
according to the Ecclesiastical and Catholic doctrine of belief. Not by
humane labor and industry of study, but by the mean of faith and divine
revelation. For the words are translated into other languages different from
that in which they were originally written, and have diverse and various
significations and senses, as litterall, moral, allegorical, and anagogicall;
and are by several expositions drawn to suport diverse several, yea contrary
faithes, and religions. Also great labor, diligence and study have been used
by many men of great wit, learning, and knowledge in the expounding and seeking
out the true sense of scripture, who yet have been so far from finding it, as
that they have invented many false and heretical meanings, and thereupon
grounded many wicked and damned heresies.

Out of al which it does follow, that the words of scripture, and the diligent
and frequent reading or hearing of it, are so far from being a necessary means
of faith, much less the sole and whole means to it, that faith is a means
necessary and presupposed to the understanding of scripture. For if the
scripture consist not in the words and letter only, but in the sense and
understanding principally; and if the sense depend not upon the bare words, but
upon the Ecclesiastical and catholic rule, and tradition of faith, as is
proved; then must faith be prerequired, as a help and means to find out the
true sense of scripture. And they who will read scripture must bring faith with
them, as a help and means to understand the scripture, and not ground their
faith upon their reading of scripture; which being diligently read, though it
may serve to confirm and nourish faith in ones self, or to illustrate and
defend it to others, and in both being, according to the rule of faith
interpreted, a light to direct them in the way of piety, and to inflame them
with the heat of Charity: yet it can neither be a first, and firm ground to
cause and produce first and certain faith in any (for a man must bring faith
to believe it) nor a sufficient means to resolve all points of faith necessary
to salvation, as besides other reasons, the practice of so many heresies,
divided, and pretended to be grounded all upon it, does convince; and the
experience made (for example) of three persons, Jews, Turks, or Pagans, all
ignorant of Christian religion, all turned to a bare text of the bible, all
willed to seek out, and resolve in particular articles, formerly or presently
controuerted in Christian religion, will no doubt, by their several and
contrary resolutions, confirm the same. And thus much of the rule of faith as
a necessary means of expounding scripture.

The second means of expounding the holy scriprure, 2. The practice of the
Church a means to interpret scripture.
is the general practice or observation, the public Custom or tradition of
the whole Church, in the exercise of any religious service or worship, or in
the practice of any sacrifice, sacrament, or ceremony, in which as the Church
it self cannot err, so it may be a guide in expounding the scripture to keep
others from error, that where the doctrine of the Church is not evident, there
the practice and observation of the same may serve. This practice we will prove
by the practice of the chief Doctors in Gods Church, for by this did the
ancient Fathers expound many places and convince many Heretics. By this
practice admitting the lapsed to penna^ce, did Epiphanius convince the
Nouatians who rejected them. By this practice, of saying Glory be to the
Father, Epiph. haeres. 59.
the Son, and the holy Ghost, did S. Basil convince Origin about the deity of
the holy Ghost, urging his own practice with the rest, against Origens own
doctrine against the rest. Basil. de spiri. sancto cap. 29
By this practice of baptizing in the name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, did Theodoret convince Arius, Theod haeret. Fabul. lib. 4.
who denied the equality of the Son with the Father. By this practice of
exorcising, and breathing upon Infants in the Sacrament of Baptism, did S.
Augustine affirm the Bishops of Palestine to have expounded that of Romans 5. in
whom all sinned, August. cont. Julian. lib. 1.
of original sin, derived from Adam by propagation, not imitation only. Aug.
de bono perseuerant. lib. 2. c. 22, and 23.
By this same practice of the Church praying for the conversion of Infidels,
and perseverance of the faithful, did he prove against the same Pelagians,
grace of predestination and perseverance. By the same practice did he reconcile
those places of Scripture, of eating all that is set before us, 1. Cor. 10.25.
1. Cor. 5.11.
and of not eating with sinners. And to omit many other, by the same practice
of the Church, not rebaptizing them baptized by Heretics, did he refuse to
adhere to S. Cyprian and his opinion, and confuted him, and all the Bishops of
Africa, Aug. de Baptism. contra Donat. l 2. cap. 7.
Cappadocia, Bythinia, and the rest, who maintained the contrary. And to
conclude, by this practice, which he had learned publikly (...) Eusebius Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 27.
, did also allege Justinius, Miltiades, Tatian, Clemens, Irenaeus, Meliton,
and others against Artemon.

The practice of the general Counsels. At^an. epist. ad Aphros. Council. Ephesians
epist. ad Nest. Vincent. Lyr. cap. 41. Council. Calc. a c. 5.6. Council. Constable. a
c. 4. Council. Nic. 2. a c. 10.
The same that did these Fathers, did also the general Councels. The first
Council of Nice, by the testimonies which they had from the Fathers (witness
Athanasius) did decree against Arius. The Council of Ephesus following the
confessions of the Fathers (says it self) and alleging (says Vincent Lyr.)
in particular, Most of the East and West Doctors as Masters, Confessors,
witnesses, Judges, held their doctrine, followed their counsel, believed their
testimony, obeyed their judgment, and so pronounced their sentence of faith
against Nestorius. The Council of Calcedon, following (says it self) the
holy Fathers, the faith of the Fathers, the exposition of the Fathers, does
determine what is pious and Catholic faith, against Eutiches. The sixth
general Council (witness both the letters of Pope Agatho, and the Synod it
self) does produce the testimonies of Fathers for the exposition of scripture,
and thereby condemned the Monothelites. The seventh general Council, and the
second of Nice does the same, witness the letters of Pope Adrian, against the
Image-breakers. And the Council of Vienna, witness the letters of Pope
Clement, in their definitions. So that all antiquity, whether in private
disputations, or in public definitions, has always used the testimony of
Fathers, as a mean in declaring the authentical sense of scripture, against
Heretics.

The decrees of general Counsels a mean to interpret scripture.
The fourth, and most infallible mean of expounding the Scripture, is a
Council either general, or provincial confirmed by a general, in which
whatsoever is not obiter, by the way, nor as a proof only, but on set purose,
and as a conclusion or definition delivered and defined, that is without all
question or examination, to be received as a certain, infallible, and
authentical sense of scripture. Which (to omit all testimonies before cyted
for the authority of Councels) is proved by the practice of the faithful in
all Councels; Proved by the Council of Nice.
for in the Nicen Council were many places of scriptures for proof of the
consubstantiality of Christ produced and discussed, and the Orthodoxe Fathers
urged and pressed diverse Texts of the same. The Arians answered and interpreted
them, and urged likewise many against the same. The conclusion was, the Fathers
of the Council prevailed, and concluded both the doctrine of Christ's divinity,
and the sense of the places of Scripture alleged for it. This definition was
to all posterity so forcible, that though the Arians used all force of
temporal power, Athan. ep. ad Afric. Episc.
(which afterward was wholly for them) though they summoned (as Athanasius
says) above ten Councils or Conuenticles against that one; though they sought
in a Council at Jerusalem to restore their Bishops deposed, and in a Council
at Antioch to bring in a new form of faith couched in words, not unlike to the
Nicene form; and in a Council at Smirna did affirm craftily the Son to
have been before his mother, and before all times, and not a creature like to
others; though in the Council at Ariminum they deceived many Catholic
Bishops, and cunningly obtruded (...), for (...), like substance, for the same
substance, which in greek differed only in a letter; though they sent Legates
into Italy, France, and al places with fair shows and promises of union of
subscribing, and of submitting themselves: (but cunningly and disemblingly, as
the Protestants did at the first, and chiefly Melanchton and Bucer, about
Transubstantiation) yet to all posterity and succeeding ages those places of
scripture have ever been received and believed in that sense which the
Council then interpreted, and urged them: so that, that Council has been a
rule ever since for the exposition of them, to all faithful and true belieuers
in Christ. In like manner in the Council of Ephesus, By the Counsel of Ephesus.
having discussed diverse places before controuerted, whether they were spoken
of the natures or persons of Christ; resolved that they were to be understood
of plurality of natures, not persons in Christ. And though Nestorius, the
eloquent Patriarch of Constantinople, and many Bishops with him, withstood the
Council; and though Theodoret, the most learned Catholic Bishop of that age,
long opposed S. Cyrill about the same; yet the authority of the Council so far
prevailed both then and ever since, that all faithful ever after have always
received, and expounded them in the same sense, as true, and condemned the
contrary as false. And the like might be produced of other places for the
humanity of Christ, against the Manichees and Apollinarists. For his two
natures against the Eutichians and Monothelites. For the holy Ghost against the
Macedonians and Eunomians. And so for transubstantiation against Berengarius,
and the Sacramentaries, which for breuity are omitted.

And thus much of these four rules or means, to wit, 1. The rule of Faith. 2.
The practice of the Church. 3. The consent of Fathers: and 4. The decrees of
Councels, by which the Pastors and Prelates of Gods Church are to be directed,
and upon which we may infallibly rely for any true, certain, authentical, and
infallible sense of scripture. There be other helps which are good and
profitable, Other profitable rules of Faith.
as the consideration of the antecedents and consequences of places, the
conference of one place with another, the observation of Scripture-phrases, and
the skill and examination of the original texts: but because they are neither
certain nor infallible, but only probable, yea often doubtful, and sometimes
deceitful, nor yet proper and peculiar to Christians, but common to Jews,
Pagans, Heretics, and all sorts, and also not to our purpose for the present;
therefore we will omit them, and show, that the private spirit, which the
Protestants most insist upon, and which we undertake to confute, neither is,
nor can be any certain and infallible means of interpreting scripture, as
they do both in doctrine and pactise mantaine.

That the private spirit cannot have this infallible authority, and be this
infallible means. SECT. II.
THESE being supposed for the finding out the authority certain, and means
necessary, for true interpretation of holy scripture; it remains to be proved
that the private spirit of every particular man, neither has in it any
certainty or authority, nor yet can be a fit means upon which any certain and
authentical exposition of scripture can be grounded. Which is to be performed
two ways. 1. By reasons drawn from the property and condition of the holy
scripture, and the sense and meaning of it. 2. By reasons drawn from the
property and condition of the private spirit, and the uncertainty, and
deceitfulnes of it.

SVBDIV. 1. By reasons drawn from the nature of holy Scripture, which is to be
expounded.
FIrst therefore for the holy Scripture, The private spirit cannot assure.
such is the difficulty of it (which arises partly from the ambiguity of the
words including diverse significations, partly from the fecu^dity of the
significatio^s affording multiplicity of senses, partly from the profundity of
the matter inuolued in mysteries obscure and exceeding our capacity) such, I
say, is the difficulty of the scripture which aryseth out of these grounds that
no private man, nor any private spirit of any man, can secure himself of the
certainty of any, much less of all of them. For if we respect the words and
text of scripture, Which text is scripture.
this spirit cannot upon any ground assure any man, that either this book
rather then another, is the divine word of God; or of this book, that this is
the true and complete Canon; or of this Canon, that this is the first and
original text; or of this text that it is the right and authentical
translation; or of this translation, that any one, rather the^ another, is the
true and Canonical sense; or of these senses, that one more then other
contains all articles and points necessary to salvation; all which are yet
necessary to be expounded. This spirit cannot express and assure what book is
Canonical, and what not. It cannot accord the Lutherans and Caluinists,
whether the Epistle to the Hebrews of James, 2. of Peter, the 2. and 3. of
John; nor the Catholics and Protestants, Which books be scripture.
whether the books of Machabees, Toby, Judith, Hester etc. be canonical or
not. It ca^ give no reason why there should be admitted into the Canon of
scripture, the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and not the Gospels of
Thomas, Nathanael, Matthias, Thadaeus, Bartholomew, James, John etc Andrew,
Paul, Nicodemus, the Hebrews, the Egiptia^s, with that of Peter, or the
Nazarits. It can give no reason, why the Epistles of S. Paul, James, John,
Jude, and Peter should be admitted, and why not those of Barnabas, of Luke, and
the rest of S. Peter, and of S. Paul, that to the Laodiceans, the 3. to the
Corinthians, and the 3. to the Thessalonians. It can give no reason, why the
Acts writ by S. Luke should be admite^d, and not the Acts writ by Peter and by
Paul, and by Andrew, Thomas, John, Philip, and Matthias, nor the Periods of
Paul and Thecla, nor the Constitutions of the Apostles, or the book of Hermes,
or Enoch; why the Apocalypse of S. John should be amittted, and not the
Apocalypse of S. Peter, Paul, Thomas, Stapl. princ. fid. doct. Controu. 5. lib.
9. c. 5.6. and 7.
Stephen, Elias, nor the death of our Lady, the circuit of S. John, the
sentences of Bartholomew, the ascension of Esie: all which have been extant,
and by some challenged as Canonical, as may be seen in Doctor Stapleton.

It cannot resolve, and assure what books were originally writ in Hebrew,
Which language the scripture was writ in.
what in the Chaldean, what in the Greek, or Latin tongue; who they were that
writ the books of the old Testament, and whether they be the same which were
first written, and the same sound, and uncorrupted. Whether this Hebrew text be
the same, either in Character or letter (of which is question) or in words (of
which many doubt) which was first written. What is the sense, signification,
phrase, or style of any Hebrew word. Whether the Greek of the Septuaginte,
which the Apostles followed, be sound and incorrupted, and to be preferred
before the Hebrew. Whether the ancient Latin vulgar, or others of later
translation, as of Erasmus, Luther, Oecolampadius, Bibliander, Beza, Castalio,
Tremelius, and others, be to be followed. Whether of any English translations,
the Catholic translation of the Rhemist, or the Protestants of Tindall, of
King Edward, of the Bishops, of Geneua, or of King James, are to be received as
true, and which is to be rejected as false. None of these can the private
spirit in every ordinary man, nor yet in the learned Protestant certainly
decide, and resolve. It cannot satisfy, and assure when the words are in the
literal or mystical sense to be understood. Which sense is literal.
And for the literal, when it passes from speaking of things carnal, to
things spiritual, from temporal to eternal, from the kingdom of Israel, to
the kingdom of Christ, as often in the Psalms and Prophets it does. As for
example, from the Kings of Syria and Israel, to our B. Lady and Es. 7.
Christ. From the King of Babylon to Es. 14.
Lucifer. From Solomon to Psalm. 71.
Christ. From the barley Bread, to the sacramental Joan. 6.
Bread. And for the mystical sense, when it is to be understood morally for
manners, when allegorically of Christ, or the Church militant, when
anagogically, of glory, or the Church triu^phant. When the same words bear a
proper, Which is figurative, and what figures are used.
and when a figurative sense; and of the figurative sense, when the figure is
Synecdoche, the part for the whole. When Metonimya the sign or cause for the
effect. When it is Catechresis, by which the inuentour of a thing is called
Father, Cittyes are called Daughters, posterity is called House etc. When by
Hiperbole or exageration the whole world, is put for much, all for many. When
by Liptote, or diminution, Idols are called vain things, ^oxious,
unprofitable. When by Analoge, one person, time, number, gender, or
signification is set for another. When by Hend^adis, two things are put for
one, as signs and times, for signs of times. When by Prolepsis or
anticipation, places and cities are named by names, which afterward were given
them. When by Analoge or mutation, one sense, as seeing, is set for another, as
hearing, tasting etc. When by Hetorosis, the abstracte, as abomination, for the
concrete, as abominable. By Haebraisme, causalites or similituds ar omitted,
tenses are changed, persons or matters are supposed: when an occasion is set
down for a cause, the event for the effect, the devil for sin, eternity for
a long time. When sin is meant for sin it self, or for a sacrifice or
punishment of sin, God for an angel, a desire, of doing for the deed, an
act, as of seeing, for the object, of fear, for the thing, or person feared.
When laws are called by names of precepts, statutes, justice, judgment,
testimonies, or testament. When works of the law of nature, or of faith, are
termed only works or faith. When Christ is taken for the person of Christ the
head, or for the body of Christ the Church, or for both. When father is meant
essentially for God, or personally for the first person only. When by the
Church is meant the Church militant or triumphant; the whole body, or principal
members. When Predestination is to glory, or to grace. When obduration is
active by our selves, or permissiue by God. When Christian liberty, is for
liberty from sin, or misery from the law of Moses, or Christ, or from
obedience to Princes or Prelates etc. All which and many more are difficulties
usual, and controuerted in the scripture both of the old and new Testament.

This private spirit in every man cannot explicate when the figure is not only
in the words, but in the matter; when one thing is a figure of another, as the
paschall lamb, of Christ, the red sea, of baptism, the ma^na, of the
Eucharist, mount Sion of the Church; or when one thing is a figure of many
things, as Jonas of Christ and the Jews; the rock, of the baptism of the
faithful, and the punishment of the unfaithful; the flood of Noe of baptism,
and of damnation. When one and the same thing is a figure in one sense, not in
an other, as the fornicating wife of Osee, was of the Jews, as she sinned in
fornication before marriage, not as she lived chaste after marriage.

This spirit cannot explicate in every one many seeming contradictions; as that
Ezech. 18 20.
the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, and Exodus 20.5.
that God does visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the Children to the
third, and fourth generation. That Romans 11.29.
the gifts of God are without repentance, and 1. Reg. 15 11.
God repented that he made Saul King. That 3. Reg. 8.9.
In the Arc was nothing else but two Tables of stone, and Heb. 9 4
In the arc were the pitcher of manna, the rod of Aaron, and the Tables. That
Prou. 26.4.
Do not answer a fool according to his folly, and Prou. 26.5.1. Wisd. 1.13.
answer a fool according to his folly. That (i) God made not death, and
Eccles. 10 15.
life and death are of God. That Math. 10.10.
The disciples should take nothing in the way, not a rod, and Marc. 6.8.
should take nothing in the way but a rod. That Joan. 5.31.
If I give testimony of my self my testimony is not true, and Joan. 8.14.
If I do give testimony of my self my testimony is true. That Joan. 20.1.
Mary came to the monument when it was yet dark, and Marc. 16 2.
She came when the sun was risen. That Romans 3.18.
A man is justified by faith without works, and Jacob. 2.20.
A man is justified by works, and not by faith. That (t) If I did please men I
should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10.
and 1. Cor. 10 33.
I please al men in all things. That Act. 9.7.
S. Paul's companions at his conversion with many others did hear a voice, and
Act. 22.9.
did not hear a voice. All which, with many more, many very learned, both
ancient, as S. Augustine, and modern, as diverse Interpreters have with great
pains, in great volumes, labored to reconcile.

This spirit cannot unfold many books, Chapters, and places in scripture most
difficult, as the first Chapter of Genesis about the creation of the world, the
books of Kings, Nor explicate difficult places.
Paralipomenon, and the Acts of the Apostles* about Genealogies, and reigns of
Kings. The Prophesy of Daniel about the seauenty weeks. Of Ezechiel about the
Temple. Of S. John in the Apocalips, about the Angels, the seals, the
trumpets, the phyals, Which are in computation of times.
the dragon, the whore, and the rest; in which, says S. Hierome, are as many
mysteries as words. If one should ask this spirit in every ordinary
Protestant, how it will explicate and reconcile Moses, who according to the
Hebrew and vulgar edition, omits Cainam between Arphaxad and Sala, Genesis 11.12.
and with him 130. years in the genealogy of Adam, with S. Luke who following
the greek of the Septuaginte does add Caina^. Luc. 3.35.
How it will accord the Hebrew text, which accounts but 292. years from Noe to
Abraham, with the Septuaginte who account 942. years, adding more then the
hebrew, 100. years almost to every generation or person. How it will accord
the hebrew text which from Adam to Noe reckons up but 1656. years, with the
greek of the Septuaginte which reckons up 2242. years, sometimes adding,
sometimes detracting from the former. How it will make an agreement betwixt the
history of Moses in Genesis, and the relation of S. Luke in the Acts. 1. in
Abraha^s departure out of Haram, Moses, Act. 7.10.
by computation, affirming it to have been before the death of his Father
Their (for Abraham Genesis 12.4.
was 75. years old, when he departed, and was borne in the Genesis 11.26.
70. year of his Father Their, who lived Genesis 11.32.
205. and so Abraham departed out of the Land when Their his Father was 141.
years old, that is 60 years before he dyed) and yet S. Steven says Act. ^.4.
he departed after Their his fathers death. 2. In the time of the Israelites
mansion in Egypt, Moses by computation affirming it to have been but 215.
years (which S. Paul Gal. 3.17
confirms accounting from the promise to Abraham, till the departure out of
Egypt, but 430. years, that is, 215. before the entrance, and 215. after the
entrance, till their departure; and yet S. Luke Act. 7.6.
and S. Steven affirm, from the entrance till the departure to have been 400.
3. In the number of persons that entered into Egypt with Jacob, Moses saying
that they were but Genesis 46.26.
66. or Exodus 1.5.
70. and S. Steven and S. Luke saying that they were Act. 7.14
75. 4. About the burial of Jacob, and in this, 1. in the place, Moses saying
it was in Hebron over against Genesis 23.10. Genesis 50.13.
Mambre, and S. Luke and S. Steven saying it was in Act. 7.16
Siche^. 2. In the seller of the field or sepulcher, Moses affirming Abraham
to have bought it of Ephrem the son of Genesis 93^8.
Seor; and S. Luke and S. Steven of the sons of Act. 7.16
Hemor: Which Hemor, says Genesis 33.19.
Moses, sold it to Jacob, not Abraham, and was according to Moses the Father
of Sichem; not, as S. Luke and S. Steven say, the son of Act. 7.16
Sichem. 3. In the buyer of the same sepulcher, Moses affirming that Genesis
33.19.
Jacob, S. Luke that Abraham bought it of them. 4. In the price of the said
sepulcher or field, Moses affirming Jacob to have bought it for a 100. Genes.
19
Lambs, or to have got it by the sword, or bow from the Genesis 48.21.
Amorrhoites; S. Luke and S. Steven affirming him to have bought it for silver.

If one should ask, how the books of the Kings and Paralipomenon, and the
Acts, can by this spirit be explicated, and made agree. 1. In the years of
Saul, who 1. Reg. 13.1. is said, to have been a child of two years old when
he began to reign, and to have reigned two years; and yet 1. Reg. 9.2. he is
said before his reign to have been higher by the shoulders upward then any in
Israel; and Act. 15.12. to have reigned 40. years. 2. About the computation
of time, from the division of the land under Iosue to Samuel, which according
to S. Luke and S. Paul in his speech in the Synagogue at Antioch, Act. 13.20.
according to the Greek and Protestant edition, are 450. years; but according
to the computation made by reign of the Judges, are but 345. For 3. Reg. 6.1.
the Temple was built 480. years after the departure out of Egypt, from which
if there be deduced 50. from the departure till the division of the land, and
also 40. of Samuel and Saul's reign, and 40. of David's, together with 4. of
Salomons reign (which in all make 134. as they are collected out of Scripture)
there remains from the departure out of Egypt, till the building of the
Temple, not 450. years, as S. Luke relats, but only 345. 3. About the reign of
Ioram King of Judah, and Ochozias his son after him; for Ioram began to reign
when he was 32. years old, and reigned 8. years, which 4. Reg. 8.^^.
for his whole life is 40. and yet Ochozias his son, who succeeded him, is
said to have been 42. years old when he began to reign, 2. Para. 22.2. by
which he (being 42. years old when his Father dyed, being but 40.) should be
two years elder then his Father, who begat him; a question to S. Hierome
inexplicable. 4. About the reign of Ioachim, or Iechonias King of Judah, who is
said, 2. Paral. 36.9. to have been but eight years old, and 4. Reg. 24.8. to
have been eighteen years old, both of them when he began to reign. 5. About
Ioram King of Israel, who is said to have begun his reign, 4. Reg. 1.17. in
the second year of Ioram King of Judah, and yet 4. Reg. 3.1. to have begun the
same in the eighteen year of Iosaphat, who was Iorams Father, and reigned 25.
years. 6. About the supputation of time, as it is counted by the reign of the
Kings of Judah, and of Israel; for from the beginning of the kingdom of Israel
in the first of Roboam King of Judah, till the end of the same in the sixth of
Ezechias, when Samaria was taken, are 260. years, according to the reign of
the Kings of Judah; and yet in the same time, according to the reign of the
Kings of Israel, are only 240. years.

To all which, if we add the difficult places, which according to S. Peter,
are in the Epistles of S. Paul, Which are in S. Paul.
as for example, how are to be interpreted that of 1. Cor. 3.11. Gold, silver,
hay, stubble, the day of our Lord, fire; and to be saved by the fire. That of
1. Cor. 15.29. How to be baptized for the dead. That of Hebr. 6.4. It is
impossible for those that fall, to repent. If we add the difficult places,
which in the Evangelists are hard, as for example in S. Mark, Mat^. 1.2.
who cites the Prophet Esaias for Malachy. In S. Matthew, who cites Jeremy for
Zachary. In S. Luke, who adds a generation of Cainam to the same, cyted by
Moses, Luc. 3.36.
and makes 40. Generations from David to Christ, Joan. 19. Matthew. 27. Marc. 15.
where S. Matthew makes but 28. In S. John, who maks the day of Christ's
Passion, the day before the festival day; the rest of the Evangelists, the day
of the feast. If we add the difficult places of which many holy and learned men
of ancient time doubted, Which many have doubted of.
and sent for explication, some to S. August. as Marcellinus, a Noble man, and
Martyr, Volusianus governor of Rome, and Paulinus, Simplicianus, Euodius, and
Honoratus, all Bishops. Some to S. Hierome, as Marcella, and Principia, Suna,
and Fratella, Hebidia and Algasia noble and religious women; as Vitalis,
Dardanus, Euagrius, and Damasus holy and learned Bishops. And lastly, if we
add all those places, which all ancient and modern Heretics have in so many
articles of faith abused and corrupted for the establishing of their new
invented heresies: If I say we add all these to the former, it will by them
appear, that the private spirit in every man can be neither a competent, nor
yet a sufficient means to expound and interpret the true and certain sense
of Scripture, neither, in places difficult to be understood, nor in points
necessary to be believed. And this is the first kind of reason, drawn from the
nature of scripture, against the private spirits interpretation of it.

SVBDIV. 2. By reasons drawn from the private spirit, which should expound
Scripture.
SEcondly, other reasons are drawn from the nature and condition of the
private spirit, The private spirits exposition of scripture is,
which, whether it be in a private person who wants lawful ordination and
authority, or in public Doctor, Pastor, or Bishop who divided by heresy or
schism does not conform his spirit to the common spirit of Gods Church, and
general rule of Faith, yet that it cannot be a competent Judge of faith, and
decider of controversies, is proved by these reasons.

Against scripture.
First, because this private spirit is excluded as unable and unfit to
interpret the scripture, and that by scripture it self, for S. Peter having
commended the prophetical word, or the words of Scripture made by the
Prophets, 2. Pet. 1.19
as being a candle shining in a dark place, does give this Caveat, as
principally to be understood, that the sense of it, is not to be made by any
private interpretation; that is, though the scripture be a light, yet as it is
a light not to Gentiles, Jews, or Infidels, who understand it not; so it is not
a light to Heretics, who by the private spirit make a private interpretation
of it: and why? Because by man's will Prophesy was not at any time brought, but
the holy men of God spoke inspired by the holy Ghost; that is, as the holy men
of God, the Apostles, inspired by the holy Ghost, spoke and dictated the word
of God, when it was made; so the interpreters of the same word, ought not to
bring in any exposition of the same word of God, upon their own will and
sense, but upon the inspiration of the same holy Ghost, when by them it is
interpreted: so that we should receive the sense of scripture from the same
spirit, from which we received the text of Scripture. As therefore no private
spirit but one and the same spirit of the Prophets, and Apostles of Christ made
the scripture; so no private spirit, Vide Stapl. princ. fid. lib. 10. c. 4.
page 36.
but the common spirit of Pastors and Prelates of Christ's Church, should
determine and judge of the sense of Scripture. Of which place, and others, see
more in the first Chapter.

Secondly, because as truth and faith is not private to one, Is false and
naught.
nor singular in any, but common to all, and generally received by all the
faithful (for so says S. Augustine; Thy truth, O Lord, is neither mine, nor
this man's, or that man's, Aug. l^b. 12. Confess. cap. 25. Veritas tua, Domine,
nec mea est, nec illius, autalius, sed omniu^ quos ad eius communionem public
vocas, terribiliter admonens nos, vt nolimus eam habere priuatam, ne priuemur
ea; nam quisquis id, quod tu fruendum omnibus proponis, sibi proprie vindicat,
and suum esse vult, quod omnium est, a communi propellitur ad sua, id est, a
veritate ad mendacium.
but all men's whom thou call publicly to the Communion of it, terribly
admonishing us not to have it private, least we be deprived of it; for
whosoever will challenge that as proper to himself which is given, as common
to all, and will have that only to himself which is for all men, that man is
driven from the common to his own, that is, from truth to falsehood:) so also
the spirit of truth is not private to any one, but common to all the faithful;
for if the spirit of the teacher be not common with the spirit of all teachers,
it is not a spirit as it ought to be, which is one, keeping an unity of spirit
in the bond of Ephe. 4.3
peace, and making me^ of one mind, in one spirit laboring together for the
faith of the 2. Phil. 1 27.
ghospel; but it is a spirit of dissentio^ 1. Cor. 14 35.
which comes in his own name Joan. 5.43.
, speaks lies of it self Joan. 8.44. Act. 20.30.
, leads disciples after it self, and seeks, as a thief, to kill and
destroy Joan. 10.10.
. And if the spirit of the hearer be not conformable to the teacher, then it is
not a spirit of God, nor of truth, because he who is borne of God, hears the
voice of the spirit Joan. 3.
: and to hear the voice of us 1. Joan. 4 2.6.
says S. John, that is, of the Pastor, is a sign to discern who knows God,
and who has the spirit of truth, not falsehood. But if he, on the contrary, do
follow a stranger Joan. 10.5.
; do hear the voice of strangers 1. Cor. 11
; and do harken to a Prophet who arises and says, let us follow strange Gods,
whom thou know Deuteronomy. 11.28.
not, that is, new Pastors unknown who they are, or whence they come; it is a
sign of a spirit which follows not God, nor is directed in truth. Therefore
the spirit of God, is not a spirit private and singular by it self: but a
spirit common and general to all the faithful, uniting the shepherd with
the flock, and the flock with the shepherd, both in the fold of Jesus
Christ, in unity of one spirit, and faith.

Thirdly, Because this private spirit is not only evil, but also most
uncertain and fallible: for it is uncertain in whom it is, Is uncertain and
fallible.
whether in Luther, Calvin, Seruetus, or Rotma^, and why not as well in
Bellarmine, as in any of them? It is uncertain to him, who imagines he has
it, whether it be the spirit of God, of nature, or of Satan; and most
uncertain and altogether unknown to any, but him who challenges it. It is
uncertain whether that sense it suggests be the certain meaning of the holy
Ghost, or the invention of ones own brain. It is uncertain whether those
interpreters of scriptures which follow it, and others who follow them, as
Calvin, Luther, Osiander, Beza, or others, do expound the scripture in the
sense of the holy Ghost, or of their own. It could not accord the Lutheran
Deuines of Saxony in the Conference at Altemburge 1568. whether the scripture
was to be received as interpreted by Luther only, as the Duks Deuines of Iene
and Lipsia prescribed; or as by Luther and Mela^cthon also, as the Electours
Deuines of Wittemberge resolved. It could not agree Luther and Melancthon, with
Zwinglius and Oecolampadius at Marspurge, 1529. about the sense of these words,
Hoc est corpus meum, whether they are meant properly or figuratively. It could
not combine in unity at Worms 1557. the twelve Catholic Doctors, with the
twelve Lutheran, about many points of controversy; nor the Lutheran Doctors
among themselves, of whom seven (the mayor part) excluded five (the lesser)
that is Amsdorpius, Gallus, and others the rigid Lutherans. It cannot pacify to
this day the dissentions about the sense of scripture between the Lutherans,
Swinglians, Caluinists, Vbiquitaries, Osiandrians, Swenk feldians,
Trinitarians, Puritans, Familists, Anabaptists, and others in number infinite,
and in contention unplacable. So uncertain it is in all, and so uncertain it
leaves all.

Fourthly, Is contrary* to the spirit of the Church.
Because it is not only false and uncertain in expounding the scripture: but
also it is opposite to the spirit and judgment of the whole Church, of all
general Councels, and of all ancient Fathers, rejecting and condemning them,
and preferring it self in every preacher, or Parochian before them. It will in
every unlearned Protestant, Calu. 3. insti. 9.
with Calvin, examine all the spirits of all men* according to the rule of the
word of God: it self, I say, will examine and judge them. It will, with
Luther, affirm, and stand to it also, Luth. primo libro contra Regem Angl.
that it will permit none to be judges, but all to be obedient to it. It will,
with Whitaker, resolve, that all judgment of Fathers, Councels, and Church is
only humane, and only its own is divine, of which contempt of Fathers and
Councels, see the first Part, Chap. 5. Whitaker. co^trou. 1. q. 7. cap. 7.


Fifthly, Because it is not only false, fallible, and opposite to the spirit of
Gods Church: but is the very author and supporter of all heresies, as Stapleton
well notes, saying: Is the author of all heresies.
Out of this private spirit, to which they stand stiffly for the exposition of
scripture, have issued and flowed all the stincke of heresies and new opinions
which have infected the whole world. And indeed, Stapl. princ. doct. l. 10. c.
4.
as every heretic divided himself from the Church, and forsook the spirit
of it; so by his new spirit he invented a new heresy of his own, and sought to
draw people after him. All which both concerning heresies and rebellions, shall
in the third Part at large be demonstrated.

Sixthly, Because all the parts and properties of an infallible Judge are
wanting in this spirit, as shall appear in the next Chapter. And thus much
against the private spirits authority of expounding scriptures, by reasons
drawn from the obscurity, fecundity, and profundity of scripture, and from the
falsity, fallibility, and uncertainty of this spirit.

Inferences.
Out of which it does follow, first; that since the Protestants build their
salvation only upon faith, and their faith only upon the scripture, and the
scripture and the sense of it only upon the spirit, That the Protestant faith
is doubtful.
which is so uncertain, fallible, and doubtful, therefore their whole faith,
and state of salvation is very uncertain, fallible, and doubtful, as builded
upon a ground so uncertain, fallible, and doubtful. 2. It follows, That they
rely not upon scripture.
that they who in show rely so much upon scripture, who extol it so much, read
it so diligently, and seem to be so cunning in it, and to build so much on it;
do not indeed rely, and build upon the scripture, but upon their own spirit or
conceit, by which they set upon the scripture what sense they please, and draw
the sense to what doctrine they please, and make the doctrine to serve to what
times and turns, That Catholics do more securely depend on scripture then
Protestants.
to what ends and uses they please. 3. It follows, that the Catholics, whom
the Protestants so much accuse of neglect of scripture, do more solidly and
safely rely on it then the Protestants do, and do with more security and
certainty ground their faith upon it then they do: for the Catholics receive
the scripture as the word of God, as much as they, and more parts of it then
they; they reverence it as much as they, and have kept it from corruption
longer then they. They ground their faith and belief upon it as strongly as
they, and did the same before it was known to them, yea delivered it to them,
and to many mo besides them. For the true sense and right understanding of it,
they do not rely upon every man's private spirit or conceit as they do, but upon
the judgment of the Church, infallibly assisted by the holy ghost; upon the
testimony of the catholic and apostolic rule of faith; upon the conformity
of the ancient practice and observation of the Church; upon the general
consent of the holy and learned Fathers and doctors of ancient time; upon the
infallible decrees of general and oecumenicall Councels; all of impartial and
authentical authority, which they do not. And by this, Catholics are more
secure of the true sense of scripture, then they; have their faith better
grounded upon the scripture, then they; and have their spirit better warranted
by God, more secured that it is from God, and surer combined with the spirit of
the ancient Catholic and Apostolic Church, with the spirit of the holy and
learned Doctors and Saints of God, with the spirit of the general and
received Councels of Gods Church; none of which they have. And by this we have
our belief grounded upon a certain, infallible, and authentical sense of
scripture, which they have not. And thus much of this private spirit, that it
cannot be a fit, and certain Rule, or means truly, and infallibly to
interpret the holy scripture.

THE PRIVATE SPIRITS AVTHORITY To judge Controversies of Faith, confuted by
Reasons, drawn from the nature of a Judge of Faith. CHAP. VI.
The properties of a Judge of Faith. SECT. I.
THOUGH the Judge of the sense of Scripture, and of controversies of faith, be
all one, and therefore that which has been spoken of the one, might also
suffice for the other: yet because faith extends it self larger then the
scripture, and because the true Judge of faith, from the false, may be the more
clearly discerned, and the functio^s of this private spirit may be also more
plainly confuted; therefore I add in this Chaprer these reasons, drawn from
the office of a Judge of Controversies, to show the insufficiency of this
spirit to be a judge of the^. In which we may note, for this judiciary power
and authority. 1. What it is, and what properties, and conditions it requires.
2. In whom it is, and who are to exercise this authority. 3. How it is to be
ordered, and what rules are to be followed in the exercise of it: which being
distinctly and fully considered, the inability, and insufficiency of this
spirit, to make a Judge of faith, will more clearly appear.

First therefore, we may note, that as in a temporal Commonwealth (where
contentions arise, A judge of faith necessary.
offenses are committed, and tittles are questionable) that besides the laws
established, there are necessary also Judges to determine causes, to decide
titles, and to punish offenses: so also in the spiritual Commonwealth of the
Church, where controversies are of a higher nature, questions no fewer in
number, and the offenses more grievous in quality, some personal Judge, or
judges are no less, yea more necessary to discern verity in all doubts, to
establish unity in all contentions, and to punish obstinacy in persons who
offend. Some Judge therefore is necessary, as well in spiritual causes, as in
temporal; as well for matters of doctrine, as of justice; and as well in
points of faith, as of manners. This Judge, because all faithful belieuers
are obliged to believe, How far the judge of faith is to be obeyed.
and obey his sentence as true and just, though not in consequences, and
appendixes of faith, yet in material and substantial foundatitions of faith;
though not in school questions, and pulpit conceits which infringe not the
solidity of faith, yet in maine articles and principal mysteries of faith,
upon which is composed a complet edifice of true religion; though not in
probations, and allegations for the proof of points of faith, yet in the
determinations, and conclusions of the points, or articles themselves; though
not in case, when is intended only to confirm the weak, to satisfy the
curious, or to confound the proud, yet in case when is intended to condemn any
doctrine as heresy under anathema, and to declare and define expressly, for the
common and public good of the whole Church, any verity of doctrine, formerly
by the practice of the Church received, or by the assent of the faithful at
the least, virtually believed. Because, I say, all faithful are obliged to
believe and obey this Judge, and his sentence in points, and articles
substantial, defined, and concluded by sentence definitive against heresy, for
the good of the whole Church; therefore it is necessary that this Judge (upon
whom depends the verity of belief, and the salvation, or damnation of so many
who by a true, or false faith are saved, or damned) have these properties or
conditions in him, and in his authority. 1. That he be visible, and manifest in
person, so that he may know, and be known, hear and be heard, speak and be
spoken unto, and thereby have a public Court, give public audience, examine
public causes, and pronounce public sentence between parties who contend,
and in contentions which are debated. 2. That he have power, and authority,
warrant, and commission, to give Judgment, pronounce sentence, and to compel
parties to obedience, and performance. 3. That he have warrant of infallibility
in this his sentence, that he cannot err, or determine error, deceive, or be
deceived in this his verdit, corrupt, or be corrupted by partiality in his
judgment. All which, are as it were essentially necessary for this judge; for
if he be not public and known in person, others cannot have access to him,
nor he understand the causes of others; if he be not certain and infallible in
his sentence, he cannot determine matters of certainty, nor can others be
secured by him; if he want authority, and power to oblige, and compel, he
cannot end the controversy, and establish peace, and unity in the Church, which
is the end of his judgment.

Further, because this Judge is to have this infallible authority, The
properties of a rule to judge by.
and that all are obliged to rely upon him, and his judgment, that he may the
more securly proceed in his judgment, and others more confidently rely upon it;
therefore he must have some Rule likewise infallible, and certain, by which he
may be directed in his judgment; and some solid foundation, upon which he may
build his definitive sentence. This rule, or foundation, because it is to be a
rule and ground of judgment, and that for persons in number so infinite, and for
causes in substance so important, therefore it can require no less then these
and such like properties, for the solidity of it, and the security of judgment
by it. In respect of it self. 1. That it be so certain and infallible that it
can neither deceive, or be deceived. 2. That it be so continued, and not
interrupted, that it cannot decay, or perish. 3. That it be so firm, and
immutable, that it cannot be changed, or corrupted. In respect of the persons
whom it is to direct. 4. That it be so known and visible, that it may be
discerned by all sorts who have need of it. 5. So markable, and notable that
it may be a sign distinctiue, to distinguish true, from false believers. 6. So
necessary and important that without it, no certainty can be had. 7. So
universal and general, that it may satisfy all sorts of people, Jews, or
Infidels, Heretics, or Catholics, young, or old, unlearned, or learned. In
respect of the matter or mysteries which are to be determined. 8. That it be so
fundamental, that it be contained among the chief articles of the Creed, or
plainly expressed in scripture. 9. So sufficient, that it be able to explicate
and determine all articles and doubts in religion. 10. So complet, that it
contain virtually, and be able to resolve plainly all questions, and
conclusions of Faith which may at any time upon any occasion arise. All which
are necessary for such a rule, and foundation, upon which so important a
matter, as faith and religion, is grounded. And this is the first thing to be
observed for the properties, and conditions both of the Judge, and his rule of
faith.

The whole body of the Church cannot be this Judge. SECT. II.
SECONDLY, We may note, that this infallible authority, to judge of
controversies of faith, is given, neither to the whole body, and congregation
of the Church of God, as the rigid Lutherans with Brentius do hold* nor to the
secular Princes and Parlamentes, as all the Lutherans at first, and the
State-Protestants of England do yet defend; nor to the lay people, and private
persons, as Calvin, and the Caluinists do maintain; nor yet is it residing in
the words, and text or scripture, as the ordinary preachers pretend: but only
is given to the Pastors, and Prelates of the Church of Christ, who are
lawfully, by authority from Apostolical succession, ordained, and Catholickly
continue, without division of heresy or schism, in the same; and among them,
principally to the chief head, and Pastor, the successor of Peter, and Bishop
of Rome. All which, concerning every one, shall be briefly proved.

First therefore, although the whole body of the Church collected, The whole
body of the Church is not Judge of faith.
have the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost that it cannot err, or be
deceived in faith; yet has it not the same assistance, that it may, and ought
to be judge and determiner of faith. For as in a natural body the soul does
inform and give life to the whole body, and every member of it; but does not
discourse, and give use of reason to the whole, or every part, but only to the
head: so the spirit of God assistes the whole Church with the privilege of
freedom from error in faith, but does not likewise give to it the priuiledg^
of authority to teach, and judge of faith, and direct others in the same; for
which cause God has given a measure of donation, Ephesians. 4.7. 1. Cor. 12.4.5.
Ephesians. 4.11.
divisions of graces, and ministrations, and made some, not al, Apostles,
Doctors, and Prophets, that some may rule, and others be ruled; some teach,
and others be taught; some be superiors to judge, and direct, others be
inferiors to be judged and directed; and so an order, and subordination, a
peace, and unity, may be observed and kept in the whole body among the members
of Christ's Church. Whereof see more in the next fourth Section.

Secular Princes cannot be this Judge. SECT. III.
Secular Princes, Kings, Emperors, are not judges of faith.
THIRDLY, That this infallible authority is not in secular Princes, or their
Assemblies, and Parlaments, either as particular members of the Church, against
Melancthon, or as Princes, and Superiors among the rest, against Brentius, so,
that they can, and may lawfully, and infallibly judge of Controversies, make
ecclesiastical laws, give authority to preach, and prescribe a form of
doctrine, a manner of service, and an order of Sacraments and sacrifice; though
it be largely by many proved, against the supremacy of Princes in causes
Ecclesiastical, and requires a treatise more large, yet in brief it shall by
these reasons be proved.

First, They are sheep not Pastors.
because Kings and Princes are in the Church of God, and spiritual affairs,
as sheep, to be ruled and ordered; not as sheepheardes, to rule and govern:
they are Joan. 21.15.
Lambs to be fed by Peter; Joan. 10.1.
Sheep of the fold of Christ; Members of the Church of God, and servants of the
family of Christ. Thus did the ancient and holy Fathers freely tell, and
admonish them, and the Christian and good Emperors themselves acknowledged it.
S. Gregory Nazianzen Naz. ora. ad subditos timore perculsos, and Imperatorem
irastentem. Non suscipitis sermonem liberum, and quod lex Christi vos meae
potestati, meoque subiecit tribunali: scio te ouem esse mei gregis sacri sacra^.
told Valentinian, That the law of Christ did subject them (Emperors) to his
power, and Tribunal, and that they were holy sheep of his holy fold. S.
Ambrose Amb. ep. 31. Quid honorificentius quam vt Imperator Ecclesiae filius
esse dicatur? Imperator enim bonus intra Ecclesiam, non supra Ecclesiam est.
told Theodosius the Great, that he was a son of the Church, and that a good
Emperor is within, not above the Church. Theodoret Theod. lib. 1. hist. cap.
1. Tanquam filius amantissimus, Episcopis and Sacerdotibus velut Patribus
proposuit.
says of Constantine the Great, that as a loving son, he did propose business
to the Bishops and Priests, as Fathers. Constantine himself co^fesses, that
God gave Priests power to judge of Emperors, witness Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Vobis dedit de nobis iudicandi.
Ruffinus: that they were bishops within the Church, he without it, witness
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 14. Vos intra Ecclesiam, ego extra Ecclesiam a Deo
constitutus sum.
Eusebius. Valentinian the elder confesses, that he, as a lay man, might not
interpose himself in Church affairs, but the Bishops and Priests had care of
such affairs, witness Zozem. lib. 6. c. 3. Sibi qui vnus e numero laicorum erat
non licere, se eiusmodi negotijs interponere, and ideo Sacerdotes and Episcopi
quibus haec sunt, inter se conueniant.
Sozom. And that himself was to submit himself to them, witness Paul. Diac.
lib. 7. cap. 12. Eligant Episcopos quibus nos qui gubernamus imperium, sincer^
capita nostra submittamus.
Paulus Diaconus. And Theodosius the Great obeyed S. Ambrose Ambr. epist. 32.
his excommunication, departed out of the Chancell at his command, and
confessed, that thereby he had learned to know what difference there was
between an Emperor, and a Bishop, witness Theod. l. 5. cap. 17. Se didicisse
quid inter Imperatore^ inter^it, and Episcopum.
Theodoret, and Nic. l. 12 cap. 12. Their authority is temporal, not
spiritual.
Nicephorus.

Secondly, because the offices of the Bishops and Emperors are diverse, and
distinct, the one of bodies and goods, the other of souls, and faith; the one
of life, and death for offenses against the King, and commonwealth; the other
of sins, and sacraments belonging to Gods laws, and man's conscience; the one
is temporal of the kingdom and commonwealth, the other is spiritual of the
Church, and flock of Christ; which the heretical Emperors forgetting, were
stoutly and zealously admonished, and reprehended by the holy Bishops under
them, for the same. As for example Co^stantius the Arian, 1. by Hosius Athan.
ep ad solitariam vitam agentes. Ne te misceas Imperator, rebus Ecclesiasticis,
neque nobis inhoc genere praecipe, sed potius ea a nobis disce: tibi Deus
imperium co^mifit, nobis quae sunt ecclesiae concredidit.
of Corduba, willing him not to meddle with Ecclesiastical affairs, nor to
command them, but to learn of them; because to him God had committed the
Empire, but to them the Church. 2. By Suidas verb. Leont. Miror quomodo ad alia
vocatus, alijs rebus te imisceas militaribus enim and politicis rebus
praefectus, in his quae ad solo; Episcopos pertinent praeesse vis.
Leontius of Tripolis, because being ruler of military and politic affairs,
he should not rule in things that belong only to Bishops. 3. By Hilar.
Prouideat tua Clementia vt ad o^nes vbique Iudices prouinciarum ad quos sola
cura publicorum negotiorum pertinere debet, scribatur, ne posthac praesumant
atque vsurpent cognoscere causas Clericorum.
S. Hilary of Arles, wishing him to writ to Judges of Prouincies, that they
should not presume, or usurp to intermedle with the causes of Clergy men. 4.
By Ath^. ep. ad solit. vitam agentes, versus finem. Quid hic quod Antichristi
fit, omisit? Siquidem iam denuo in locum Ecclesiasticae cognitionis suum
Palatium tribunal earum causarum constituit, seque earum litium summum
Principem and authorem facit. Et paul^ post. Quis videns eum in decernendo,
principem se facere Episcoporum, and praesidere iudicijs Ecclesiasticis, non
merito dicat illum eamipsam abominationem desolationis esse, quae a Daniele
praedicta est.
S. Athanasius of Alexandria, that he, and such who will be Presidents in
ecclesiastical judgments, who will make the Tribunals of the Court the seals
of deciding ecclesiastical causes, and themselves Princes and Authors of
Church affairs, are the abomination of desolation, yea even Antichrist
himself. Valentinian the younger seduced by his wife, was told by Ambros.
epist. 33. Noli te grauare Imperator, vt putes te in ea quae diuina sunt
imperiale aliquid ius habere: noli te extollere, scriptum est, date quae Dei
sunt Deo, quae Caesaris sunt Caesari. Ad imperatore^ Palatia pertinent, ad
Sacerdotem Ecclesiae.
S. Ambrose of Milane, That he had no Imperial right in things that are
divine; for the Court does belong to the Emperor, but the Church to the
Priest. Si tractandum est, tractare in Ecclesia didici, quod Maiores fecerunt
mei: ^i conferendu^ de fide, Sacerdotum debet esse ista collatio, ficut factum
est sub Co^stantino, qui nullas leges ante praemisit sed liberum dedit iudiciu^
Sacerdotibus. Quando audisti, clementissime Imperator, in causa fidei laicos de
Episcopo iudicasse? Ita ergo quadam adulatione curuamur, vt Sacerdotalis iuris
simus immemores? Et quid Deus donauit mihi, alijs putem esse credendum? At
certe, si scripturarum seriem diuinarum, vel vetera tempora retractemus, quis
est qui abnuat in causa fidei, in causa inquam fidei, Episcopos solere de
Imperatoribus Christianis, non Imperatores de Episcopis iudicare? Athan. epist.
ad solit. vitam agentes. Si iudicium est Episcoporum, quid cum eo habeat
Imperator? Sin contra ista minis Caesaris conflantur, quid opus est hominibus
titulo Episcopis? Quando a condito aeuo auditu^ est, iudicium Ecclesiae ab
Imperatore authoritatem suam accepisse? aut quando un quam hoc pro iudicio
agnitum est? Plurimae antehac Synodi fuere, multa iudicia Ecclesiae habita
sunt; sed neque Patres istiusmodi res Principi persuadere conati sunt, nec
Princeps se in rebus Ecclesiasticis curiosum praebuit. Paulus Apostolus amicos
in Caesaris familia habebat, non tamen eos in iudicio socios assumpsit. Theod.
lib. 4. cap. 16. Nunquid cum imperio est etiam sacerdotij dignitatem Imperator
consequutus? Nos vero pastorem habemus, cuius nutum sequamur. Gelasius epist*
ad Anast. Nosti sili clementissime, quod licet praesideas humano generi
dignitate rerum terrenarum, tamen Praesulibus diuinarum deuotus colla
submittis. Subdi te debere cognoscis religionis ordine potius quam praeesse.
Nosti itaque ex illorum te pendere iudicio, non illos posse redigi ad tuam
voluntatem.
And being called by the Emperor to reason with Auxentius the Arian, he
answered: That if a conference was to be made of faith, it was to be made by
the Priests, as it was under Constantine, who prescribed no laws, but gave
free judgment to Priests. That it was never heard, that in a cause of faith
Lay men did judge of Bishops. That if we look into Scripture or ancient times,
Bishops used to judge of Christian Emperors, not Emperors of Bishops. Thus S.
Ambrose imitating S. Athanasius, who said: When was it ever heard, that the
judgment of the Church did receive authority from the Emperor? Many synods
and judgments have been, and yet did neither any Bishops persuade any
Emperor any such thing, nor any Prince show himself curious in any
Ecclesiastical affairs. Valens the Arian, was asked by Eulogius the Priest in
Edessa, Has the Emperor the dignity of Priesthood? we have a Pastor, whom
we must obey. Anastasius the Eutichian, was told by Gelasius the Pope, That
though he did rule over me^ in earthly things yet he did subject his neck to
the Prelates in divine things. Thou know that thou ought to be ruled,
nor to rule in order of religion; Greg. l. 4. ep. 31. ad Ma^^. Sacerdotes esse
quosda^ Deos inter homines, and propterea ab omnibus etiam Regibus honorandos.
thou know that thou art to depend of this judgment, not they to be brought
to thy will. S. Mauritius was admonished by S. Gregory the great, That Priests
are as Gods among men, and therefore ought to be honored of all Kings. And
Michael was let understand the same by the Nicolas 1. Leo the Image-breaker was
told by S. John Damas. orat. 2. de imagine. Non Regijs regulis, sed Patrum
institutis, tam scriptis, qua^ non scriptis Ecclesiam censeo constitui and
gubernari oportere.
Damascene, That the Church ought to be ruled, not by laws of Kings, but by
the written, and not written, institutions of Ancestors. And to conclude, S.
John Chrysostom said freely to his own Deacon: If any Duke, Consul, or the
Emperor himself come unworthily, repress, repel him, thou have greater
power then he. Where we may note, that these Emperous were thus by these
Fathers reprehended, for assuming Ecclesiastical judgment, either as Heretics,
or as Tyrants; nor yet for doing it alone without the Bishops, but only and
simply as Emperors, who having only temporal power, over the commonwealth,
did assume Ecclesiastical over the Church. Which also is further proved by the
confession, and practice of the best of the Christian Emperors; for
Constantine the Great acknowledged, that Ruffn. lib. 1. c. 2. hist.
the Bishops had power to judge him, and when he did judge of the cause of
Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage, he did it so, that he asked pardon of the
Bishops for Aug. ep. 262. Sacris Antistibus veniam petitur.
it. Valentinian the elder would have them to judge in a cause of faith and
ecclesiastical order, who are not vnlik either in office or title, that is,
Priests of August. epist. 32. Sacerdotes de Sacerdotibus voluit iudicare.
Priests. Marcians commissioners referred themselves to the Council of
Calcedon to be taught in faith, and himself wills that Priests determine what
is to be observed in Council. Chal. act. 3. Concilium ipsum nos docet de fide
sancta, Sacerdotes quod in religione obseruari debeat perspicua decisione
docuerunt. Act. 5. Non ad ostendendam potentiam, sed fidem confirmandam ad
praesent^m synodum venimus, exemplo religiosi Constantini. Amb. ep 32. Nullas
leges praescripsit, sed liberum indicium sacerdotibus dedit, seipsos
interpretes constituit Sacerdotes.
Religion. And though he himself went to the Council, Chrysostom. hom 83. in
Matt. Si Dux quis piam, si Co^sul, si is, qui diademate ornatur indigne adeat,
cohibe and coerce; maiorem tu illo habes potestatem. Emperors themselves
reclaim this spiritual authority.
yet it was not to determine, but confirm the faith, not prescribing laws
(says S. Ambrose) but leaving the Priests free judgment, and making the
Priests themselves Judges, as he did in the Council of Aquileia. Cyril. tom.
4. ep. 17. Great. did. 6. c. Satis. Misit comitem Candidianum* sed in nullis
quae facienda sunt, de pijs dogma tib^s quaesti one^ communicare. Ilucitum
namque esse eum qui no est ex ordine Episcoporu^ Ecclesiasticis immiscere
tractatibus.
Theodosius the second sent to the Council of Ephesus, but not so much as to
talk of matters of Faith, holding it unlawful for those who are not of
Episcopal order, to meddle in Ecclesiastical affairs. The same did Justinian
in his Constitutions, and Basil in the eight general Council.

Thirdly, because power not only to preach, but much more to judge of doctrine
of faith (for the authority to judge, is Heb. 5.14
the strong meat of perfect men, whose senses are exercised to the discerning
of good and evil) was committed to Bishops (as of greater difficulty then the
office or preaching given to Priests) and is a spiritual grace, or gift,
given by imposition of hands, to spiritual men, according to that of the
Apostle: Neglect 1. Tim. 4 14.
not the grace that is in thee, which is given thee by prophecy, with
imposition of the hands, of Priesthood. Therefore as power to minister
Sacraments, is proper to Priests: so also to judge of Controversies, is proper
to Bishops, lawfully ordained by authority, successively descending from the
Apostles. For which cause, to Priests and Prelates, not to Kings and Princes,
it is said: Thou Mat. 2.7
shall seek the law out of the mouth of the Priest. My Isa. 9.21.
words shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed,
and out of the mouth of thy seeds seed for ever. I Luc. 21.15.
will give you mouth, and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be
able to resist. It Math. 10 20.
is not you that speak but the spirit of my Father which speaks in you. He
Luc. 10.16.
that hears you, hears me. He 1. Joan. 4.6.
that knows God, hears us. He Joan. 11.50.
that is not of God, hears us not, says one of the spiritual Pastors; for
which gift, Caiphas prophesy was a gift of his function, or priesthood,
according to Aug. tra. 49. in Joan. and 16. cont. Faust. 23. Hoc in eo egit per
propheticum Chrisma, vt prophetaret hoc e vita impia, vt nesciens prophetaret.
S. Augustine, though his ill life was the cause of ignorance of what he
prophesyed.

Lastly, because many inconveniences, and absurdities would follow, if this
authority were annexed to the kingly Scepter, not to the priestly function; for
it would follow, that Faith could not continue one and the same, neither in all
persons, nor in all times, nor in all Countries, because Princes, in all times
and places, are of disposition various; in judgment different; in faction
opposite; and in subordination neither depending one of another, nor always
respecting Religion, or Religious persons, more then may besteed them for their
temporal and private ends, and uses. Wherefore as Jeroboam of old, and Queen
Elizabeth of late, Absurdities that follow upon regal authority to judge of
Faith.
did relinquish the old, and introduce a new Religion, for reasons more
politic then divine, rather to establish their doubtful titles, then
religiously to serve God; so would Kings by virtue of this their authority (if
it were in them) either in policy, or upon affection, be still altering
Religions, and setting up new, most for their own ends and dispositions; by
which we should have as many alterations of Religion, as of Kings, and as many
Churches as are Kingdoms, and as great opposition in Faith, as is in States,
and Commonwealths. All which may appear by an example in England, where
while the authority in judging in matters of faith was in the Prelates, religion
continued 900. years the same, from Ethelbert till Henry the eight; but after
that power of judging was assumed to the scepter by King Henry the 8. the
supremacy by one and the same King, was in three years thrice changed, from
the Pope to the Clergy, from the Clergy to the Archbishop, from the Archbishop
to the King, and afterward as many religions were a new brought in as Kings
were a new crowned, to wit, one by King Henry, another by King Edward, a third
by Queen Mary, a fourth by Queen Elizabeth; and a fifth of Puritans would have
been under the same Queen, if power had not prevented it; and what may be, yet
lies in the power of the King and Parliament. It would also follow that a man
should be obliged always to follow the religion of the King, to change with
the King, and so should not be obliged to be certain of any, or to die, or
suffer for any religion, but should believe and preach, observe and practice,
what the King prescribes, and the Parliament ordaines: all which are against
unity and certainty of al faith and religion. Lastly, it would follow that for
300. years after Christ, when the Emperors were pagan and not Christian,
either pagans must be judges and deciders of the true sense of scripture, and
of all controversies of faith, or that there was, for that time, no judge of
them at al: also when Princes become heretics, as Constantius and Valens did,
or Apostata's as Julian did, that either true Christians should be obliged to
obey, and follow Pagans and Apostata's, as judges and vmpiers of their faith,
or else, that they, by falling into heresy or apostasy, should loose their
regal power and authority, and subjects should be freed from their duty and
obedience to them. None of which our Protestants will admit, as being indeed
too too absurd.

The Lay People cannet be this Judge. SECT IIII.
FOURTHLY, that this infallible authority is not in the lay people, and private
persons of the Church, The Lay People are not judges of Controversies.
is proved. 1. Because they want knowledge, and understanding to discuss, and
penetrate, either the articles, which are believed, or the means, for which
they are to be believed, as being, for the most part, men simple, and
unlearned; for which cause they were never admitted to any Councels, as
Arbitrators, or Judges of faith: but always directed by their Pastors in
their obedience to faith. 2. Because they have no warrant, or commission given
them for this end, either expressed in any Scripture, or approved by any
Tradition, or practice of the Church, or mentioned by any testimony of Fathers,
or Councels; therefore are not to assume or exercise it, till they prove it. 3.
Because of al sorts they are the most fallible, uncertain, and unconstant in
their opinions, and practices, and therefore are left always to be ruled, and
ordered, as the people are in the temporal commonwealth, and not to rule and
govern as Magistrates, and Judges. 4. Because it would follow that all should
be Judges, and Pastors to determine, none should be subjects to obey, or
sheep to be fed; that the Church government should be Democraticall, of people
which of all is the worst; that every man should have a religion of his own,
without any union with any, or subordination to any; that the people should
preach, and minister Sacraments, as well as Priests or Prelates; should
excommunicate, censure, and punish one another, as well as Bishops, and make
decrees for faith and manners, as well as Councels. In respect of all which
inconveniences, and absurdities (which are so many testimonies against this
authority of the people) our Savior did speak to the people in parables, Mat.
13.34.
and without parables he did not speak to them: but to the Apostles and
Pastors Math. 13.11. Matthew. 20. Joan. 14.
he gave knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. To the people he
spoke of things easy, and public, as their sins, and vices, virtues, and good
life; but to the Apostles (and that, separated from the people,) of his death,
resurrection, the holy Ghost, the day of judgment, and such like mysteries.
With the people he did converse before his death, not after his resurrection;
he Act. 10.6
manifested not himself to all the people, but to the Apostles as Pastors,
and witnesses preordained of God; he appeared after his resurrection Act. 10.42.
did eat, and drink with them, and commanded them only, not the vulgar sort,
Act. 10.43.
to preach to the people. To the people it is said, Obey Heb. 13.17.
your Prelates and be subject to them: but to the Pastors, take Act. 20.28.
heed to the whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to
rule the Church of God. To the people it is said, suffer Math. 13 30.
the cockle to grow: but to the Pastors, 1. Cor. 5.13.
take away the evil one, from among your selves. To the people it is said, do
Math. 23 3.
that which they (the Pastors) say: but to the Pastors, He Luc. 10.16.
who hears you, hears me; and he 1. Joan. 4.6.
that knows God hears us. By hea^ing of them is known which is the spirit
of truth, which of error. Of the people it is said, How shall they believe him
whom they have not heard, how shall they hear without a preacher? But of the
Pastors, Romans 10.19.
. How shall they preach, unless they be sent? All which convince that our
Savior intended to make the people, not Pastors, but sheep; not rulers, but
subjects; not judges to command, but servants to obey, in matters of faith,
and religion.

The Scripture cannot be this Judge. SECT. V. The scripture is not a Judge of
faith.

FIFTHLY, That the scripture cannot be this judge to determyne and end al
controversies is proved. 1. Because this scripture, in respect of us, requires
a judge it self to determine, and assure us which is true Canon, true
original text, true translation, true sense, and the rest as before; therefore
to us it cannot be a judge. 2. Because all, or the greatest difficulties; all,
or the maynest questions; and all, o^ the hoatest contentio^s which have passed
either among Catholic Doctors, or between Catholics and Heretics, are
about the scripture, and the sense of it, none of which scripture it self
could ever yet end, and decide without some other judge and vmpier, plainly to
pronounce sentence in the cause; and immediately under punishment to oblige the
parties to believe, and obey the sentence. 3. Because the scripture is mute,
dumb, and unable to speak, hear or pronounce sentence, and is apt, not only
to be lost, alteted, and corrupted, as de facto it has been; but also to be
drawn, wrested, and interpreted to contrary senses and opinions, by any sort
of interpreters, in any cause, and question; as the lamentable practice of so
many hundred of heresies, and heretics in all ages does witness. 4. Because
the scripture in it self is neither clear, and evident, nor does evidently
and expressly contain, and declare all the senses of it self, all the
mysteries of belief, all the questions of controversies, all doubts in
divinity, many things being both now by Protestants, and Catholics believed,
and having been by all faithful in all ages practiced, which neither for
practice were grounded upon only scripture, nor for the doctrine of the^ are
expressed in any scripture. 5. Because many have been converted to faith
without any reading, or knowledge of scripture, many controversies have been
decided without any sentence of scripture; many faithful have lived in the
world, and been directed in their faith before any writing of scripture. As
for example; all in the old Law for 3000. years before Moses, all in the new
law for a good time after the sending of the holy Ghost, and dispersion of the
Apostles; and many nations after Christ for 200. years, who (witness Irenaeus)
never did see, nor hear of the bible; and many thousands of saints and souls
who did never see, read, hear, or understand any Scripture at all, and yet did
live holily in earth, and do reign gloriously in heaven. 6. In the scripture
are two things, Aug sermon. 7. de temp. lib. 3. de doctrina Christ. cap. 5.
the letter, and the sense; as the body and the soul. The letter, according to
S. Augustine, does kill, that is, the external litterall sense of the words
sometimes does kill, and cause error: but the spirit, that is, the true sense,
which the holy Ghost intended, 2. Cor. 3.6.
does quicken, and avails to salvation. But that neither the letter, nor the
spirit, can be a compete^t judge of controversies, The letter of scripture is
not judge as having deceived,
is proved. 7. Not the letter, because the letter, or the words in the bare
literal sense are occasion of error, and heresy, for so they were to the
Jews, who in reading of Moses and the Law, had the veil set over their eyes,
and understood not Christ contained and signified in the Ceremonies of the law.
Jews.
And so it has been to all Heretics, who forsaking the sense intended by
the holy Ghost, and proposed by the Church, 2. Cor. 3.15. Heretics.
and following the letter expounded by their own spirit, have falsely
understood the scripture, and grossly fallen into errors. Sabellians. Joan.
10.30
Thus the letter deceived Sabellius, who expounding that of S. John, I and the
father am one, of unity of persons, not of substance; falsely defended, in the
deity to be not three, but only one person, which had three names, offices, or
properties of the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, creating, redeeming,
and sanctifying mankind, and, as the Patripassia^s defended, the Father to have
suffered on the Cross as one and the same person with the son. Thus the
letter deceived the Arrians, Arians. Joan. 14.28.
who expounding that of S. John, The father is greater then I, of Christ
absolutely and completely as whole Christ, not as man according to his humanity;
did thereupon deny Christ to be God, equal to the Father. Macedonia^s 1. Cor.
2.10
Thus it deceived the Macedonians, who expounding that of S. Paul, The spirit
searches all things, even the profoundites of God, concluded, not as they
ought, that the spirit pierces and co^prehendeth all things as God; but thus,
that he who searches doubts, who doubts is ignorant, who is ignorant, is not
God; and so the holy Ghost, who searches all, is not God. Manichees.
Thus it deceived the Manichees, who held the old Testament to be contrary to
the new, because, for instance, the old said, that Genesis 1.31
God created all things; That God ceased from labor Genesis 2.2.
the seventh day; That Genesis 1.27
Man was created according to the Image of God. And the new said the contrary,
that Joan. 1.3.
the Word created all things; That Joan. 5.17
God works until now; And that you Joan. 8.44.
are of your father the devil. Not conceauing, according to the spirit and
true sense, that God created all things by the word, as by an Idaea; that God
rested from his work of creation, and yet works by conservation; that man
was created to the Image of God by nature, and of the devil by malice. Thus
the Pelagians denying original sin to have descended from Adam to us,
literally interpreted that of Ezechiel, (The Ezech. 18 20.
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, Pelagians.
) not only of sons who are not partakers, but also of sons who are
partakers of the iniquity of the father, as all are of Adams sin, in whom
Romans 5.12.16.19.
all sinned, and who received, as head, the promise of keeping, or losing
paradise by precept of for bearing, or eating the apple for himself, and his
posterity after him. Thus it deceived others, who applying literally that of S.
John (The flesh profits nothing) some, Protestants and others.
in the Apostles time to the resurrection of the flesh, others of late to the
real presence in the B. Sacrament; the one thereupon denied the resurrection of
all bodies; the other the real presence of Christ's body; both upon one ground,
not distinguishing the spiritual from the carnal manner of one and the same
body. By which they might as well infer, that the flesh of Christ by his
incarnation and passion profits no more, then (according to them) it does by
his resurrection and manducation. By which proof of authority and examples it
is apparent that the external letter of scripture cannot be judge of
controversies.

That the internal sense of Scripture cannot be judge, The sense of scripture
cannot be judge
is likewise proved, because this true sense intended by the holy Ghost is often
obscure, hard, and uncertain; as is certain, and before proved. This
obscurity breeds controversies, as experience daily teaches, and that these
controversies cannot be ended and judged by scripture-sense, is proved. 1.
Because scripture-sense is the thing in question, and contention, therefore is
the thing to be judged, and decided; The sense is the thing in question.
not the judge who is to give judgment, and resolve the parties contending in
judgment. As for example, a question is about the sense of those words of the
Gospel, this is my body, and of those of the Creed, He descended into hell;
Catholics understand them as the words import, of the real presence, and of
the local descension, both, of Christ's body: Protestants expound them of a
figurative presence by remembrance of him in the sacrament; and of an infernal
suffering of hel-paines in his soul upon the Cross. Now of these senses which
is true, which false, the sense of the words cannot judge between Catholics
and Protestants, but some other judge is necessary to confirm the one, and
confound the other, and so to end the controversy. 2. Because many places of
scripture are so hard and obscure, Is obscure and hard.
as the true sense of them cannot be truly discerned, but by Church practice
and tradition, as for example, whether those words of S. Matthew, Teach all
nations, Matthew. 28.19
baptizing them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
Ghost, do prove a necessity of the vocal pronuntiation of these words, for
the form of baptism, as all Protestants with us do grant; or require no more
but a mental intention, it sufficing only to baptize in the name of Jesus, as
Act. 8.26. Joan. 3.5.
does insinuate. Whether those of S. John, Except a man be borne again of
water, and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God, infer a
necessity of water for the matter of baptism, as the Lutherans with us grant,
and the words import; or that the water and the holy Ghost be all one, as
Calvin expounds. Also why the Protestants should not infer as well a precept
and necessity of a sacrament of washing of feet out of those words of our
Savior, And you Joan. 13 14.
ought to wash one another feet, after the example of Christ, who did, and
commanded it; as they do, out of those of S. Matthew, Matt. 26 26.
Eat ye, and drink ye, infer a necessity of receiving under both kinds,
because our Savior did, and commanded the like. Now these, and such like,
require a Judge to judge of the sense, A Judge is necessary as well in
spiritual, as te^porall causes.
and reason of them, and cannot themselves judge, and decide themselves to us.
By which is evident that neither the letter, nor the sense of scripture can be
a competent judge of all controversies of faith, and scripture.

Lastly, the same is proved by the analogy of a temporal Judge in causes
civil, with an Ecclesiastical Judge in causes spiritual; for as
Controversies arise in civil causes, and the commonwealth: so do they arise
also in matters spiritual, and the Church. As therefore there are customs,
laws, and Judges to decide causes civil: so there is Tradition, Scripture,
and a Judge to decide causes spiritual: and as customs and laws are a rule,
not a Judge, to decide the one; so also are tradition, and Scripture, a rule,
not a Judge to decide the other. As well therefore is requisite, besides
Scripture, some other living and speaking Judge in matters of faith and
religion, to judge and end the Controversies among Christians, as is necessary,
besides Law, some other personal judge in affairs of the Commonwealth, to
debate and decide contentions among Neighbors. The necessity of both which
chiefly appears, when either the parties are contentious and not willing to
yield, or that the law is obscure, and wantes explication, or seems
contradictory, and requires reconciliation, or is penned in terms general,
and stands need of some restriction in causes particular. All which since they
fall out as well in Scripture, as in common, or civil laws, some judge or
judges are as well necessary to expound Scripture, as they are to interpret
Laws, and thereby to end Controversies. And thus is sufficiently proved, that
neither Scripture, and the word of God, nor Princes, and Kings, Governors of
the Commonwealth, nor the Lay and common people among the Faithful, nor yet
the whole body and congregation of the Church of God, can be a fit judge to
pronounce sentence, and determine matters of faith and religion.

Bishops and Prelates of the true Church, are this Judge. SECT. VI.
IT remains to prove, that this judiciary power, Bishops and Prelates are
Judges of controversies of faith.
and authority to hear, and examine, to decide, and determine as a Judge
authentical and infallible, in matters of faith, belongs only to Pastors, and
Prelates of the Church, and that they having received lawful ordination by
power successively descending from the Apostles (by which they enter as
sheepheardes, not thieves) and still remaining in unity, without heresy or
schism (by which they continue true Pastors, not Wolves) that they, I say,
thus ordained and united, are the only and true Judges of faith and Religion.
This position as much importing for the certainty of faith in all persons, and
mainly confuting the authority of the private spirit in every private person,
is fully to be proved. 1. By the authority of the old Testament, and the
practice of the Priests in it. 2. By authority of the new Testament, and the
practice of Christ, and his Apostles in it. 3. By authority of the Church ever
after Christ, and the practice of all Bishops, and Prelates in it.

First, therefore out of the old Testament, we have an express law made by God
himself for this judiciary authority of Priests, Deuteronomy. 17.8. Priests, and the
high Priest, were Judges in the old law.
in these words: If thou perceive that the judgment with thee be hard and
doubtful between blood and blood, cause and cause, leprosy and not leprosy,
and thou see that the words of the Judges, within thy gates, do vary; arise,
and go up to the place, which our Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall
come to the Priests of the Leuiticall stock, and to the Judge that shall be at
that time, and thou shall ask of them* who shall show thee the truth of the
judgment: and thou shall do whatsoever they that are Presidents of the place,
which our Lord shall choose, shall say and teach thee, according to his law;
and thou shall follow their sentence, neither shall thou decline to the right
hand, nor to the left hand, but he that shall be proud, refusing to obey the
Commandment of the Priest, which at that time ministers to our Lord thy God*
and the decree of the Judge, that man shall dye. In which words, 1. The
Priests have authority, and commission to judge of all causes. 2. The people
are willed to go to them, for judgment in doubtful causes. 3. Under pain of
death they are commanded to stand too, and obey their judgment, without
appeal to any higher Court of Prince or other. The beginning of this tribunal.
In which we may note, 1. The institution, and beginning of this authority of
the Priests in the old Law. 2. The progress, and continuance of it. 3. The end
and cessation of it. 1. The institution of it Paral. 19.^0.
was for all cases of the Law, of Commandment, of Ceremonies, of
iustifications, that is, of the law moral, of the ten Commandments,
ceremonial of serving God; and judicial, of governing the people, though in
this place be mentioned only two causes, that is, of blood, and leprosy. These
causes were determined in two Courts, or Counsels, the one greater at
Jerusalem called Synedrion, consisting of the high Priest as chief, and 70.
with him as assistantes, in which, greater causes were judged, and appeals
from the lower Council were admitted, and this was by God himself Number. 11* 16.
instituted. The other lesser in every City, consisting of 23. persons, who
had the hearing, and determining of smaller causes, and was by Moses, Exodus
18.13.
at the advice of Iethro his Father in law, instituted. By these two Counsels
were all causes judged, of these the Priests were Presidents and Judges, and of
the greater the high Priest, for the time, was supreme Judge, whose sentence in
all causes, The continuance of it.
and under pain of death all were obliged to obey. 2. The continuance of this
law and tribunall-seat does appear. 1. By the facts of some of the Kings,
chiefly of 2. Paral. 19.11.
Iosaphat King of Judah, which repaired this Council being decayed, and made
Amarias the high Priest, President for those things which belonged to God, and
Zabadias, for the office of the Kings. 2. By the words of the Prophets,
especially of Malachy, who sends the people to the Priests, Mal. 2.7.
to require the law from his mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord of
Hoasts. Of Aggaeus, who bids them Agge 2.12.
ask the Priests ^e Law. And of the Wiseman, who Eccle. 12.11.12.
wills his son to seek no further, because the words of wisemen are as
pricks, and as nails deeply stricken in, which by the council of Masters,
are given of one Pastor. Therefore this sentence is the last judgment, which
admits no appeal. 3. The end and cessation of this law, The end of it.
and Tribunal of Moses, does appear by the beginning of a new Tribunal of
Christ. For, as with the death of Christ, the obligation of the law, the
sacrifices of the Law, and the prophesies under the law ceased, and the verity
of them being in his passion fullfilled: so also the judiciary power both of
the Priest, and of the Law diminished, as the greater power of the new
lawmakers Christ, increased. And the assistance of the holy Ghost, by degrees
failed them, and their Council, as by degrees the power of Christ was more
plainly manifested, and the grace of the holy Ghost more abundantly bestowed:
of which out of Scripture we have this proof, Three Councils of the Jews in
Christ's tym about Christ.
and experiment; whereas the high Priest, with the Priests, Scribes, and
Pha^isies gathered three Counsels in the life of Christ, all about the person
of Christ, 1. In his infancy, at the coming of the Wisemen, to consult where
he was borne, when Herod would have killed him, 2. Before his passion, after
the raising of Lazarus, Matthew. 24.
to advise about his apprehension, when Caiphas upon malice advised his death,
and as Priest prophesyed of the Jews salvation by his Joan. 11.49.
death, 3. At his passion, when by false witness they condemned him as guilty of
death, and thereupon procured his Math. 26* 57.
death: In the first, the holy Ghost fully assisted them, and their Council,
that their determination was both true and just: In the second, the holy Ghost
assisted in part the high Priest, in that his verdict of the Jews salvation by
one, which verdict proceeded from the gift of prophesy annexed to his Priestly
function; and in part forsook him, in that is was iniust, for that he did upon
malice condemn him: In the third, the holy Ghost quite forsook them, both in
verity of the sentence, as falsely accusing Christ of blasphemies; and in the
justice of the same, as wrongfully condemning him to be worthy of death. By
which is declared how far the Priests judiciary power before Christ did
extend it self, how long it did endure, in what manner by degrees it did cease
and end; and out of all is convinced, that neither Prince, people, or private
person, but the Priest in that time had power to decide, and judge all
Controversies of the law, and of faith.

Secondly, this authority of Priests and Prelates is proved out of the new
Testament, Prelates authority to judge of controversies, proved out of the new
Testament.
and that two ways. 1. By the commission, and authority which our Savior gave
to the Apostles, and by their practice of it. 2. By the same Commission given
to the same Apostles, not only for themselves and their own time, but also for
their successors, and all times, and ages. That our Savior gave this
judiciary power to his Apostles, and to them only, is proved, 1. By the
authority, and commission he gave to S. Peter, as the head. 2. By the same
which he gave to the rest, as the principal members and directours of the
Church under this head. Authority to judge, given to S. Peter. Matt. 16.19
To S. Peter as head, he first promised it, the^ he prayed to confirm him in
it. 1. He promised it, in that he promised to make him the foundation of the
Church, by giving him the title of a Rock, saying: Upon this Rock I will
build my Church; for what a master is in a house, what a governor is in a
City, what a King is in a kingdom, and what a head is in a body, the same is
a foundation in a building, and Peter in the Church; therefore to Peter was
here promised, to be the head, the foundation, and the Governor of his
Church. 2. In that he promised to make him the Governor of the Church in a
representative manner, giving him keys of it: Matt. 16.19
To thee I will give the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. For as the delivering
up the keys of the City to any, is a sign of giving up the charge and
government of it to him: so the promise of giving to Peter the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, was a promise of giving power and authority to govern, as
a Judge, the Kingdom of heaven, that is, his Church. 3. In that he gave him
power to bind and loose, that is, to retain, or remit, by way of absoluing, or
not absoluing; to command and punish, by way of dispensation, censure,
sentence, or judgment, not only persons whomesoeuer, but also causes
whatsoever, whether of crimes, and offenses against laws, or in doctrine and
opinion against faith. And so the promise was made, 1. To the person of S.
Peter. 2. Of authority to be Judge and Governor. 3. In all causes of doctrine,
or offenses whatsoever. 4. Christ prayed to his Father for confirmation of this
authority upon S. Peter: I prayed for thee, Luc. 22.32.
that thy faith fail not, and thou once converted, confirm thy Brethren, that
is, that he might be firm in his faith, and thereby with his power confirm,
and settle others in the same. Bellar. lib. 3. c. 5. de verb. Dei scripto.
Out of which Lucius, Felix, Marcus, Leo, Agatho, and Paschalis Popes with S.
Bernard after them, cited by Bellarmine, do gather the infallibility of S.
Peter, and the Popes power in judgment of faith. Lastly Christ invested S.
Peter in this authority and jurisdiction, when he gave him commission and
charge to feed his sheep: Feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs; Joan. 21.16.17.
in which he gave authority to Peter singularly, as to one who^ he calls Simon
the son of Iohanna, and from whom in particular he draws before hand a
triple confession of his singular love to him, above the rest. He gives also
him authority to feed, that is, to exercise all pastoral charge and function,
which requires, 1. That he feed with spiritual food, all his sheep within the
fold of his holy Church, according to Ezechiel, Ezech. 34.2.
Are not the flocks fed of the Pastors? And Psalm. 22.1. Our Lord does govern
me (in greek, feed me) nothing shall be wanting to me: he has placed me there
in a place of pasture. 2. That he cure the sheep that are sore, gather those
who are dispersed, reduce them that wander, and defend those who are assaulted
by the wolves, Ezech. 34.5.
according to that of Ezechiel: And my sheep were dispersed because there was
no Pastor, and they came to be devoured of the beasts of the field, and were
dispersed. My flocks have wandered in all mountains, and in every high hill.
That which was lost I will seek, Verse. 16.
that which was cast away, I will bring again, and that which was broken, I
will bind up, and that which was weak, I will strengthen; and that which was
fat and strong, I will feed them in judgment. 3. That he rule, govern,
discern, judge, and chastise, according to that of Scripture: Thou 2. Reg. 5.2.
shall feed (that is govern) my people Israel, and be Captain over Israel.
Thou Psalm. 2.9.
shall rule them in an iron rod. Behold Ezech. 34 17.
I judge between beast and beast, of Rams, and of Bucke goats: Between Verse.
20.
the fat beast, and the lean. Out of which is apparent, 1. That our Savior
gave to S. Peter, in these words, feed my sheep, a pastoral charge over al
his sheep, that is, all Christians who are the sheep of Christ. 2. That this
pastoral charge consists in collecting, curing, directing, defending and
judging these sheep of Christ. 3. That Peter, by this charge, had power to
preach, minister Sacraments, correct offenders, and judge of all doctrine, as
chief head, and Governor in the Church of Christ. And so it is convinced,
that this judiciary authority was given to S. Peter, as head of the rest.

The same given to the Apostles.
That the same was given also to the rest of the Apostles, is proved, because as
Christ did communicate to his Apostles power, and authority which was proper to
himself, to forgive sins: Whose Mat. 16.18.
sins you forgive in earth, shall be forgiven in heaven; and to offer
Sacrifice, Luc. 22.27.
Do this: So also to the same did he communicate these privileges proper to
himself, that as he was Master of all, One Mat. 23.10.
is your Master Christ: so also he made them Masters, not Romans 2.20.
only of Infants, but also 1. Tim. 1 11.
of Nations, that they should Math. 28
teach all Nations. As he was light of men; so Joan. 1.4.
they should be the light of the world. As he gave Math. 5.14.
testimony to the truth; so Joan. 1.17.18.
they should give testimony, and be witnesses of him to the end of the earth.
That Act. 1.8.
as the Father did sanctify him; so Joan. 10.36.
he prayed to his Father to sanctify them. As Joan. 17.17.
he was sent by his Father into the world; so he sent them. As by a voice from
heaven it was said of him, Joan. 20.21.
hear him; so by his own mouth he said of them, Math. 17 5.
he that hears you, hears me. The Apostles therefore were appointed for
Masters, specially sanctified, made the light of the world, ordained witnesses
of his truth, and sent with authority, and commission, as himself was, for
that end that they should be heard, and obeyed as himself was: and the same
power they received from him, not only themselves challenged and practiced
after him, and with him; but also their Successors after them, and with them.
For as Christ was given Luc. 10.16.
a light of the Nations; so they, says S. Luke* were Act. 13.47.
also the light of the nations. As Luc. 4.18.
the spirit of God was on him to euangelize to the poor; so God chose them,
says S. Luke, that Act. 15.7
the Gentiles by their mouth, should hear the word of the Gospel, and
believe. As 2. Cor. 5.19.
he did reconcile the world to himself; so he, says S. Paul, placed 2. Cor.
5.19.
in them the word of reconciliation. As he came an Ambassador from his Father,
to Mat. 12.18.
be a messenger of judgment to the world; so, says S. Paul, we 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ephesians. 6 20.
are Legates for Christ. As our Savior said of himself, He Joan. 8.47.
that is God, does hear the words of God, therefore you hear not, because
you are not of God; so does S. John say of them* He 1. Joan.
that knows God hears us, and he that is not of God, hears us not.
Therefore as Christ thought it no robbery to be equal to his Father in
divinity; so they thought it no injury to him to be in some sort, participant
with him, in his power, and authority.

And that Christ gave this authority to the Apostles, not only for themselves,
and their own time; but also for their successors, The same given to the
successors of the Apostles.
and for all ages, so that it is to reside and remain in the Pastors, and
prelates of holy Church their successors continually till the end of the world,
is evident: for if he have this authority as necessary for the peace and
government of his Church, and if the Church stand as great need of it in all
ages, as in that time of the Apostles, as it is certain it does; then without
doubt it was as well given to the Pastors of the future times of the Church,
as to them of the present: for which end, Christ (says S. Paul) gave Ephesians.
4.11.
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors,
and for what end? For Ibid. v. 12.
the consummation or perfection of Saints, that is, of all faithful, for the
work of the ministry, to teach his truth, for the edification and propagation
of his body, to conserve and increase his Church, for Ephesians. 4.13.
the unity of faith until all concur in one; least Ibid. v. 14.
men be wavering and uncertain in faith like little ones; least they be
carried with every wind of doctrine; least they be circumuented by craftines in
error. All which dangers as they remain in all times, so the remedy prepared
against them must remain for all times. Whereupon S. Peter did not only
himself exercise this authority, but at his departure gave the same to the
Pastors of Pontus, Galatia, and Bythinia, to whom he writ his Epistles,
willing them to 1. Pet. 5.2.
feed the flock of God, which is among them. S. Paul did not only practice it
himself, but also left it to the Pastors of Ephesus Act. 20.28.
to rule the Church of God. To Titus, to Tit. 1.5.
ordain Priests through all Cities in Creet, as he had disposed. To Timothy,
to 2. Tim. 2.2.
commend to faithful men, what he had heard of him, and willed the converted
Jews, to Heb. 13.17.
obey their Governors* and be subject to them because they watch as being to
give an account of their souls. Whereupon, not of the Apostles only, but of
all Pastors, and only of Pastors, it is said: Isa. 59.21
My spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, from this present for ever. What is this word, my
Joan. 14.16.
spirit which is in thee; but (to compare the prophesy and the performance) the
Paraclete, the spirit of truth, which the Father will give to you? What are,
the words in thy mouth, but the words and understanding Joan. 17.8.
which thou (Father) gave to me, I gave to them, and they received of me?
What is, thy seed, and seeds seed, but those who are to Joan. 17.20.
believe by their word in me? What is, from this time for ever, but that, I
Mat. 28.20.
will be with you even to the consummation of the world? And so does the
prediction of the Prophet concur with the performance of our Savior. To all
Pastors, and only of Pastors it is said: Sons Aug. enar. in Psalm. lib. 4.
epist. 9.
are borne to thee for thy fathers, and thou shall make them Princes over all
the earth, that is, according to S. Augustine, for Apostles, thou shall have
Prelates. To al Pastors and only to Pastors it is said: He Luc. 10.16.
that hears you, hears me. And, He Joan. 4.6.
that knows God, hears us, and he that is not of God, hears us not. That is
(says S. Cyprian) all Cyp. epist 166.
Governors who by subordination succeed the Apostles. Because, says S.
Augustine, In Aug. lib. 4. cont. Don. cap. 43.
the chair of unity he has placed the doctrine of verity. Of al, and to all
Pastors it is said: How Romans 10.15.
shall they preach except they be sent? No Heb. 5.4.
man assumes to himself honor, but he that is called of God, as Aaron. To all,
and only of Pastors it is said: If Mat. 18.17.
he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen, and Publican, that
is, says Chrysostom. and Theophil. in hunc locum.
Chrysostom, and Theophilact, if he hear not the Pastors of the Church. And
if he be worthy to be esteemed so, who despises them, that admonish him of his
fault; much more worthy is he to be deemed so, who despises him who instructs
him in faith. To all, and only Pastors it is said: That Mat. 16.18.
the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church. In so much, that all
the promises of Church-stability, and perpetuity in faith, co^sists chiefly in
this infallible authority of the Pastors, who are to instruct in faith, direct
in faith, and to judge of faith, and what promises are made to the Church, are
made chiefly to the Pastors, as the principal parts of it, and by the^ to
the rest as inferior. To them therefore is given the 2. Cor. 4 19.
word of reconciliation, the 1. Cor. 4.1.
dispensation of the mysteries, the Math. 2^
function of Embassages, the Act. 1. Matt. 24.14.
testimony of truth to all Nations. They are the Fathers who beget spiritual
children by the preaching of the word, who nourish them with the food of the
Sacraments, who rule them by good laws and discipline, and who defend them
with their spiritual power and authority. They only have the Isa. 22.22.
Keys of the house of David, which they shall open and none shut. The Mat.
16.19.
keys of the Kingdom of heaven, against which hell-gates shall not prevail,
and the 1. Pet. 2.9.
kingly Priesthood. All, because in, and by their priestly function and
authority, Christ does forgive sins, does reconcile to him the world, does
make laws, does exercise his power, and establish his kingdom of heaven, and
does Luc. 17.35.
reign in the house of Jacob for ever. And thus is the judiciary authority of
the Church in the Pastors, and Prelates of it, lawfully ordained, and
peaceably united, proved by the testimony of holy Scripture.

The same ever practiced in the Church.
The same is further proved by the practice of the Church in all times, and
ages; for when any Controversy did arise, any new opinion did start up, or any
practice was doubtful, and questioned; the decision and judgment was referred,
neither to the whole body of all belieuers, nor to the Princes, Kings, and
Emperors, the chief Protectours of the Church, not to the Lay People the
greatest number in the Church, not to the Scripture and written word only,
which is a rule, not properly a Judge in the Church: but to the chief
Pastors, and Prelates, the Directours and Governors of the Church, In
counsels provincial.
who collected together in some Council, either provincial (which sufficed
in cases where the cause was either not important, or other could not be
collected) or general (which was gathered when the cause was great, the
adversaries potent, and the assembling convenient) had the hearing, examining,
and judging of the cause referred to them, and did censure the persons, and put
a final determination to the cause, and question. Thus we read, that the
question about the observation of Legal Ceremonies, was determined in the
Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem. Act. 19.
The Controversy about the observation of Easter on the 14. day, as the Jews
used, or the Sunday after, as is now by Christians used, was by diverse Councels
decided, as at Rome under Pope Victor, at Jerusalem under Narcissus, in France
under Irenaeus, in Pontus under Palma, at Corinth under Bachillus, and lastly
at Nice under Pope Syluester. Thus was the Nouatians and their sect, denying
penance and absolution to them who failed in persecution, condemned by the
Prelates, and Bishops of Italy at Rome, of France at Arles, and of Afric at
Carthage. Thus was Sabellius, and his heresy, Ann. 255*
denying the Trinity of persons, condemned by the Prelates of Egypt at
Alexandria. The Donatists, and their schism, Ann. ^19.
denying the validity of Baptism ministered by Heretics, condemned at Rome,
Arles, and Carthage, and other places by the Bishops of the same Countries.
Paulus Samosetanus, Ann. ^66.
and his error, affirming Christ to be pure man, was condemned by the Bishops
of Asia, in two Synodes at Antioch. Thus were the Manicheans condemned at
Ancyra, the Archontickes at Neocaesaria; Eustachius at Gangra in Armenia;
Priscillianus at Toledo in Spain; Pelagius in Palestina, Melitum, Carthage,
and Constantinople. And Macedonius, Apollinaris, Photinus, Sabellius, and
Eunomius at Rome; Berengarius at Vercells, and Rome; Luther, and his fellows
at Ments, Treuers, and Colen in Germany, and Macline, Cambray, and other places
in the low-Countryes. All which, and many more were censured, and judged by the
Bishops called in Synodes Provincial.

In like manner by the Prelates collected in general Counsels, In councels
general.
were censured and judged the causes of greater heresies, and contentions: As
that of Arius, in the first Counsel of Nice, and the divinity of Christ
defended. Ann. 317.
That of Macedonius, in the second general at Constantinople, Ann. 383.
and the deity of the Holy Ghost confirmed. That of Nestorius in the third
general at Ephesus, and the unity of one divine person in Christ decreed. That
of Eutiches, Ann. 430.
in the fourth general Council of Chalcedon, and the verity of two natures in
Christ concluded. That of Peter and Seuerus of Antioch, Ann. 454.
Petrus of Apamea, Cyrus of Edessa, Anthymius and Acatius of Constantinople, in
the fifth general at Constantinople, Ann. 553.
and their persons, with Origens errors, condemned. That of Cyrus of
Alexandria, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus of Constantinople, and their
Monothelite heresy of one will in Christ, Ann. 681.
in the sixth general at Constantinople condemned, and the two wills in Christ
determined. That of Leo, and Copronymus Emperors, and the Image-breakers with
them, in the seventh at Nice, censured, and the worship of Images defended.
Ann. 781.
That of Photius, and the deniers of the procession of the holy Ghost from the
Son, Ann. 870.
in the eight general at Constantinople, rejected, and Ignatius the Patriarch
confirmed. All which were in the Greek Church. In the latin and West Church
Bishops also proceeded, Ann. 1121. Ann. 1139.
and judged in the general Councels, as in the ninth and tenth general at
Lateran against the Sarazens, Ann. 1180. Ann. 1228.
and Anti-popes, under Calixtus II. and Innocent II. In the eleventh and
twelfth also of Lateran against the Waldenses, and Ioachim the Abbot, under
Alexander the III. and Innocent III. Ann. 1265. Ann. 1274.
In the thirtenth and fourtenth of Lions, against Frederick the Emperor, and
the error of the Greeks under Innocent IV. Ann. 1311. Ann. 1439.
and Gregory the X. In the fifteenth at Vienna, against the Begards, and
others, under Clement the V. In the sixteenth at Florence, against the Greeks,
under Eugenius the IV. Ann. 1512.
In the seventeenth at Lateran, under Leo the X. against Schismatikes. And
lastly in the last at Trent under Paul III. Julius the III. Ann. 1563.
and Pius the IV. against the Lutherans, and all Heretics of late. In all
which, and others, examination was made, and judgment given, not by Princes,
Lay People, or the whole body of the Clergy, but only by Bishops, and
Prelates, the chief Pastors of the Church, who only, and not the former,
were, as appears by authority of Scripture, and the continued practice of the
Church, the true, authentical, and infallible Judges of controversies of
Faith, and Religion.

The private spirit cannot be this Judge. SECT. VII.
IT remaynes to prove, that this infallible and authentical authority to judge
of controversies of Faith, neither does, That the private spirit cannot be a
Judge of controversies of faith.
nor can reside in every particular faithful person, nor that the private
spirit of every one (which is here intended) can be a competent Judge of all
controversies of Religion. This is convinced by diverse proofs drawn from
diverse heads. The first proof is drawn from the former reasons, which
disprove this authority to reside, either in Princes, or in the lay people, or
the whole community of all faithful belieuers; for all the reasons which prove
against them, and their spirit, prove much more against every private person,
and this spirit in particular.

The second proof, is drawn from the former reasons, which prove this
authority to be communicated only to the Prelates and chief Pastors of the
Church; for if the spirit of God, for this end, be given only to them, as it
was to Moses, to judge the people, then it was not for the same end given to
all and every one of the common people, and every ordinary faithful person
among them.

The third proof, is drawn from the essential parts of an authentical, and
infallible Judge, because in this spirit are to be found neither ability to
know persons, nor authority to judge causes, nor infallibility to pronounce a
certain sentence, and judgment. First therefore, this spirit cannot know, and
examine the state and disposition, The private spirit wants ability to know and
be known.
the cause, and question of the person who is to be judged, neither can the
person who is to be judged, know that this spirit remaynes in him, who is to
judge, or that authority by it is given to judge. For this spirit, say they who
challenge it, is known, that it is the spirit of God, only to them who have it;
how then shall it be known to others, who are to be judged by it? How shall
the people know the spirit of the Pastor that they may be directed by it; or
the Pastor know the spirit of the people, that he may direct the^? How shall
any conversation in discipline of good life, any communication in doctrine of
faith, any subordination in obedience to laws, be observed among these person,
uncertain one of another spirit, and authority by it? How shall the sentence
of absolution upon the faithful, or of comdemnation upon the faythlesse be
justly denounced? How shall the doctrine of truth be preached, or the doctrine
of falsehood be confuted, and the people obliged to believe the one, and to
forsake the other? How shall justice be ordered, obedience observed, authority
maintained, laws executed, and penalties inflicted, where neither the
inferior can know the spirit of the superior, upon which spirit his authority
dependes; nor yet the superior can any way force, or compel the spirit of the
inferior, who yet will challenge an equality of pre-eminence, and privilege of
the spirit with him.

Secondly, this spirit cannot challenge to it self any such power, or
authority, or show any authentical warrant from God, 2. It wants authority to
judge.
that it is the spirit of God, either in Scripture, Tradition, or practice of
the Church, all which, a^ before, do reject and condemn it. It cannot exercise
any function which belonges to this authority, as to censure, or absolve, to
oblige or unity, to punish or reward any fault committed, or person committing
it. It cannot with equality of trial, hear or examine the cause, nor
denounce, and pronounce any sentence which can oblige. It cannot admonish,
threaten, terrify, and enjoin any punishment by the rod of justice. It
cannot compel, correct, and punish any delinquen^ by way of exterior justice,
or enforce the one party to yield, subscribe, and submit to the sentence of
justice. It cannot bridle, in the hand of the one, the fury of injustice, or
deliver to the hands of the other, the right of justice. It cannot convince
the one of his error against truth, nor secure the other of his possession of
truth. It cannot compel the one to cease from wrong, or give redress to the
other in his wrong. What power has the spirit of one man, to threaten, to
command, to correct, or punish the spirit of another? What authority can one
spirit allege, which another cannot as well challenge? What prerogative of
spirit can the Pastor assume, of which the spirit of the people may not as
well presume? Upon what privilege can any superior stand, upon which, and the
same, any inferior may not, or will not as well insist? The inferior can as
co^fidently assure himself, as certainly avouch, and as resolutly resolve
himself, that he has received the Romans 8.11.
spirit of the Son of God dwelling in him. That he has the Gal 4.6.
spirit of his son abiding in his heart, by which he cries Abbae Father.
That 2. Cor. 5.5.
God has given him also the pledge of the spirit; The Romans 8.15.
spirit of adoption; Which Romans 8.16.
does give testimony of his spirit. That 1. Cor. 2.10.
his spirit does search all things, yea the profundities of God. That 1. These.
1 6.
his spirit does try all things, yea prophesyes; Does 1. Joan. 4.1.
try all spirits if they be of God; And that he is 1. Cor. 2.15.16.
a spiritual man, does judge of all things, and himself is to be judged of
no man, because he has the sense of Christ, and knows the sense of our Lord,
that may instruct him. Where is then the authority of the Pastor over a flock
endewed with this spirit, or the power of the superior to correct a people
full of this spirit? How shall the one compel to obey, and the other have the
liberty of the spirit not to obey? What order or subordination, what discipline
and government can be established among such spirits, or men ruled and
directed by such spirits?

Thirdly, this private spirit cannot give any certainty, 3. It wants
infallibility to judge certainly.
or infallibility of the verity of his judgment; for it cannot assure and
secure any, that it is a spirit of God not Satan, of light not darkness, of
truth not falsehood, of a true not a false Prophet. It cannot assure and secure
any, that his judgment, for example, of predestination, justification,
certainty of salvation of only faith, is not a presumption, and illusion, and
rather heretical, then Catholic doctrine. It cannot assure and secure others
either that the spirit is true, or that the judgment of it, is upright, or
that the doctrine of it is true; all sects, and heresies, whether Caluinist or
Lutheran, rigid or milder, whether Protestant or Puritan, whether Brownist or
Familist, whether Anabaptist or Arian, whether Swenkfeldian or Libertine,
challeng it for the certainty of their doctrine as true, are taught, and
directed by it as true; and yet some, or all of them must needs be false, as
being contrary every one to another, every one condemning another, and all
condemned by the authority of Gods Church, and by the spirit of God,
instructing and assisting it. By all which it is apparent that the private
spirit wanting visibility to be known, authority to judge, and infallibility
to secure, cannot be an authentical judge of controversies of Faith.

Fourthly, 4. It wants the properties* of a rule of Faith.
the fourth reason against this private spirits infallible authority to judge
of faith, is drawn from the properties of a rule, and foundation of faith,
before assigned; all which are wanting in it. For first, it wants the promise
of any certainty, and infallibility; it has no promise, 1. Certainty
or warrant in Scripture, that it is the Pillar 1. Tim. 3 15.
and ground of truth* the Math. 12 46.
house, the temple, the kingdom of Christ; that hell gates shall not prevail
against it; that Math. 13 44.
he who hears it hears Christ; who Luc. 10.16.
contemns it contemns Christ; and Mat. 18.17.
who obeys it not is as the Heathen and Publican; that Joan. 14.16.26.
it shall remain with every man, shall teach every man all truth, and instruct
every man in all which Christ shall speak to him. All which yet are promised
to the holy Church, and the spirit of God in it.

Secondly, It wants continuance, and duration; for as it is a private spirit in
every one, and can continue no longer, then the person in whom it is, and with
whom it begins and ends, 2. Duration
lives, and dies; so it has no promise of Scripture to endure from age to age*
from generation to generation, from Saboth to Saboth, Isa. 34.10. Isa. 66.23.
Psalm 71.8. Ephesians. 4.
as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure, till the end of the world, to the
seed, and seeds seed, for all generations. All which are yet promised to holy
Church, and the spirit of God in it.

Thirdly, it wants immutability, and freedom from alteration or change, for as
we see it changes in every place, time, 3. Immutability.
and person, yea as often as the Moon, breeding, as S. Hilary said of the
Arians, a monthly and yearly faith: and as one of them confesses, What to day
they hold you know, but what to morrow, Duditius apud Bezam ep. theol. page 13.
neither you, nor they can know, in what head of religion do they agree, who
oppugn the Bishop of Rome: if you examine all from the head to the foot, you
shall almost find nothing affirmed by one, which another will not auerre to be
wicked; the Deuines do daily differ from themselves, coining a monthly faith.
Thus it changes in all doctrines, and in opinions of Scripture, some affirming
this part to be scripture, which others deny; some inuenting one sense, and
others a contrary; and it so alters from sect to sect; from heresy, to heresy;
from Catholic, to Lutheran; from this, to Caluinisme; from that, to
Anabaptisme; from thence, to Arianisme; and so on to Iudaisme, Turcisme, and
Atheism. And as this alteration de facto works in Protestants; so also it
has no promise of constancy, that it is Math. 16.18.
a Rock; a 1. Tim. 3.15.
pillar, a foundation; as Psalm. 88.38.
the Sun before God; as sure as Isa. 33.
the day, and the night; that it has Isa. 21.4
an everlasting covenant which shall stand for ever, and for an eternal glory,
and not be given over. All which is yet promised to the Church, and the spirit
of God in it.

Fourthly, it wants Visibility, 4. Visibility.
and public manifestation to us, not only that it is the spirit of God, of
which before, but much more in whom it remains: for as that which is in one
cannot manifest it self to another; so others cannot manifestly know that it
is in any one. Ask, for example, the Lutherans who follow Luther, and his
spirit; the Caluinists who follow Calvin, and his spirit; the Anabaptists, who
follow Rotman, and his spirit; the A^ians, who follow Seruetus, and his spirit;
the Libertines who follow Quintinus, and his spirit; or any Precisian who
follow a precise preacher, and his spirit, how they know that Luther does enjoy
this spirit, more then Calvin; or Calvin more then Rotman; or Rotman more then
Seruetus; or Seruetus more then Quintinus; or any one of them, more then the
Pope, and Catholic Church under him? They can give no reason more for one,
then for another, show no cause, why they follow one spirit, more then another,
or why they should be persuaded, confirmed, and directed to the faith of any
one more then another. This spirit therefore has not the conspicuity and
visibility of being Psalm. 18.^
as a tabernacle in the Sun; Psalm. 8^ 38.
the Sun in my light; Math. 5.16.
a candle upon a candlestick; or Apoc. 2.
seven candlestickes in the Temple; a Math. 5.1^.
city upon a hill; Isa. 2.2.
a mountain in the top of mountains elevated above the little hills, that it
may be seen, and known of all the world. All which yet are agreeable to the
Catholic Church, and the spirit of God in it.

Fifthly, this spirit wants combination, or connection, by which it may combine
all faithful in one bond of Unity, and Concord; 5. Vanity.
and so distinguish a true Church from a false; a right believing Catholic,
from a deceitful heretic, and a right way to heaven, from an erroneous path
to perdition. It is private, and particular in every man, diverse and contrary
in most men. It did suggest of old one belief, for example, in Sabellius,
another in Marcion, another in Nestorius, another in Apollinaris and Eutiches;
and it has suggested of late, one in Luther, another in Zuinglius, a third in
Calvin, a fourth in Munzer, a fifth in Seruetus, and above 220. in this last
age, in so many new Masters, and founders of new sects, Os. 10.2.
all whose hearts are divided, and Isa. 19.2.
like the Egyptians, run together against the Egyptians; and Luc. 11.17.
by division make the kingdom of Christ desolate. And yet all of them call
this, their spirit of the Lord, all build their belief upon it, all are
directed by it in their contrary doctrine and belief. Ask any one or all of
them how they are instructed, who they follow, by what they are directed; all
answer by this spirit, all appeal to this private spirit, and yet all want
that spirit, which Ephesians. 4.2.
keeps unity of the spirit in the body of peace; Phil. 1.27.
which should continue them in one mind; A^t. 4.32.
in one agreement and judgment; Ierem. 32 Ezech. 11.
in one heart and soul, in one way and path; Joan. 14.10.
and make them all one, as Christ was one in his Father. Which spirit
notwithstanding resides, and dwells in the Catholic Church.

Sixthly, this spirit wants Universality, as unable to resolve all doubts and
questions which arise, 6. Universality.
either about Scripture, in the obscurity, profundity, and multiplicity of
senses, or in the seeming contradictions, figurative locutions, and several
interpretations of the words, the various Texts, and reading, the many
dissonance^ of years in numbering, the different translation of words from the
original, or which arise about the mysteries believed; as the unity of the
Godhead; the Trinity of persons in the Blessed Trinity; the person, the
natures, the wills, the body, the soul of Christ; the nature of grace,
free will, sin, justification, sacraments, Church, prayer to Saints, for the
dead, Purgatory, and thousands such like, which this spirit could never decide,
and end, either in times ancient, or of late, but with contention it begun
all these differences, in contention it proceeded in them, and never ceased
till by contention it consumed it self, and ended them. It cannot sufficiently
convince any one, either Pagan or Infidel, either Turk or Jew, either
Heretic or obstinate Person, that they are in error, and have not the spirit
of God, as well as true Christians. It cannot convert, reduce, or confirm any
to the verity of true faith, who is either ignorant of Faith, or staggering in
his faith, or obstinate against faith. It can give no probable reasons of
persuasion, propose no credible testimonies of inducement, deliver no
conuincing arguments of certainty of faith, and doctrine, and in effect can
show no grounds sufficient in prudence to persuade any judicious man to accept,
as credible, the religion of Christians, more then of Jews, Turks, or Pagans,
therefore it cannot extend it self to all Nations, Isa. 54.2
enlarge the place of his Tents, stretch out the skins of his Tabernacles; Isa.
60.16.
increase the sea with knowledge; Isa 6^.21.
suck the milk of Gentiles, and be nursed with the Tette of Kings; 60.6.
it cannot convert the multitude of Isles; Isa 2.2.
bring in the riches of the Gentills; Psalm. 88.
preach penance, and remission of sins; Luc. 24.47.
from Jerusalem to the uttermost of the earth; 7. Warrant and commission.
Isa. 66.23
from North to South, from Sabbath to Sabbath; Act. 1.8.
from the ends of the earth. All which yet as they were promised to holy Church
so are they performed in it, and by the spirit of God in it.

Seauenthly, this spirit wants all warrant, and Commission from God, either
expressed in holy Scripture, or mentioned in the Creed of the Apostles, or
delivered by any Tradition, or defined by any Council, or contained in any
rule of Faith, or deduced out of any principle of Religion, or confirmed by any
practice of antiquity, that all men must rely on it, be ruled by it, and be
obedient to it for the certainty of their Faith and Religion: we find no
pre-eminence, or prerogative attributed to it, that it is either Mat. 13.44.
the Kingdom, Matthew. 5.15.
the City, Psalm. 22.12.
the Inheritance, 1. Tim. 3.15.
the House, 1. Cor. 3.17.
the Temple, Cant. 4.8
the Spouse, or Romans 12.5.
the body of Christ; which yet the Church of God, by his spirit in it, has. We
read of no authority it has, either Mat. 16.18.
to bind or loose sins, Joan. 16.13.
or to offer sacrifice, or to minister Sacraments, or to instruct in all Truth;
1. Cor. ^ 21.
to teach all Nations, or to punish offenders with the Rod of correction, of
censure, of excommunication, and giving up to Satan, which yet the Church of
God by his spirit has. We have no express warrant, or command to do Math.
23.2.
what it shall say to us, do; to hear and obey it, as Christ himself, and
that Luc. 16.16.
under pain of despising Christ; Math. 18 19.
of being an Ethnicke, and Publican, Marc. 1^* 16.
and of damnation. All which yet we have of the Church of Christ, and of the
spirit of God, dwelling in it, and directing it. All which properties and
conditions since they ought to be in a rule and judge of faith, as is before
showed, and are all, and every one wanting in this Protestant private spirit,
as is here manifest, it remains evident, that for these reasons it cannot be
a sufficient, or competent Judge of all controversies of Faith and Religion.

THE PROTESTANT PRIVATE SPIRITS AVTHORITY, To judge of Controversies of Faith;
confuted by Reasons drawn from the nature, and certainty of Faith. CHAP. VII.
The properties of Faith, with the private Spirits manner of proceeding. SECT.
I.
THIS private spirits authority to expound Scripture, and to resolve questions
of Faith, we have confuted by reasons drawn from the nature of an infallible,
both Interpreter of Scripture, and Judge of faith. It remains, that we confute
the same by reasons drawn from the nature, and infallible certainty of Faith,
of which this spirit is assigned by the Protestants to be a principal, if not
a sole, and whole means, or instrument to cause it.

For which we may note, that the Protestants do 1. ground their salvation upon
only faith, which say they, does only justify. 2. They ground this their faith
upon only Scripture, The private spirit is the Protestants ground of Scripture,
sense, faith and salvation.
which according to the^, contains al things necessary to be believed. 3. They
ground this their Scripture, and the sense of it, only upon the private spirit,
by which alone, excluding all authority of Tradition, Church-Councells, or
Fathers, they expound the Scripture; so that the private spirit is to them the
principal, or sole ground of their sense of Scripture, their Scripture-sense,
the principal or sole ground of their faith, and this their faith the principal
or sole ground of their salvation. What certainty therefore they have of
Scripture, Faith, or Salvation, dependes upon the certainty they have of this
their spirit, which if it fail, and prove not to be true, and of God, but
deceitful, and of Satan; then fails with it, the truth of their sense of
Scripture, the truth of their Faith, and Religion, and the truth of their hope,
or certainty of salvation. Whereupon it follows, 1. That they can have no more
certainty of their faith, and salvation, then they have of this their spirit,
which is the ground of their faith and salvation. 2. That what conditions, or
properties are required to certainty of Faith, the same are required in this
spirit, which is to them the prime, main, and in effect the sole means, or
grounds of faith. 3. That if we demonstrate, that the properties, and
conditions which are necessary to faith, are wanting in this private spirit,
then we convince that this private spirit cannot be, either a sufficient
ground, whereon to build faith, or a competent Judge, whereby to determine
controversies of Faith.

Which being supposed, let us examine these properties of faith, Faith
necessary to salvation.
what, and how many they be, and applying them to the private spirit, show that
they are all every one wanting in it. 1. Therefore this divine, and
supernatural faith, as it is necessary to salvation, (for according to S.
Paul, Without Heb. 11^6.
faith, it is impossible to please God. And according to S. Augustine, It is
certain that none can come to true happiness except he please God; Aug. sermon.
8. de tempore.
and hat none can please God, but by faith, for faith is the foundation of all
good things, faith is the beginning of man's salvation, without faith none can
come to the fellowship of the children of God, because without it, neither in
this world does any man obtain the grace of justification, nether in the next
shall he possess eternal life:) so also it must necessarily have these
properties, or conditions, that is, it must be one, certain, entire, and
Catholic faith, manifested by divine revelation, di^ulged by Apostolical
mission, and preaching, confirmed by miraculous operations, and made credible
by conuincing testimonies of credibility. All which, as they are peculiar to
true faith, either connexed to it, or concurring with it; so are they all
wanting to this private spirit, and have no affinity or similitude with it; as
in particular shall be showed.

The private spirit cannot be a mean of unity in Faith. SECT. II.
THEREFORE Faith is one, witness S. Paul, One Lord, one Baptism, one Faith:
witness S. Leo, Faith is one
Except it be one, it is not Faith. Witness Irenaeus, Ephesians. 4.5. Leo sermon. 4.
de natiuit. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 3.
All believing in one and like manner all points; all teaching and delivering
in one and the same manner all things; and all having one soul, and one heart,
which though it differ in language, yet is the same in tradition. One, I say,
in all persons, both in the material object, because the same articles of
Faith are believed by all; and also in the formal object, because for the same
motive, and in the same manner, they are believed by all, in all places, and
times. Which one faith, as one soul in many parts of the body, does make one
Church in all the parts of the world.

But that this private spirit neither is, nor can be, one in all, who claim
and challeng it, as neither inclining, and moving them all to believe, either
one, and the same thing, or in one, and the same manner, or for one, and the
same motive: nor yet combining them in any unity, either of one, and the same
Church, or of one, and the same discipline, The private spirits many and
contrary.
or government, or of one, and the same scripture, and sense of it; is apparent
and proved.

First, Because this spirit is private, proper, and peculiar in every one,
without subordination to any, without connection with any, or without dependence
upon any. It is singular, and several, in every one, having a kind of
operation, which is; for the manner, singular; for the motive, different; and
for the effect, opposite in every one. It wants one, and the same, either
authority of God for warrant, or revelation from God for motive, or proposition
by Church for surety; or direction of one visible head for government, as a
link and combination of all the spirits in one unity, either of Sacraments,
service, or ceremonies; or of faith, discipline, and exposition of scripture.
Whereupon it withdraws al men from the high way of unity, diuerts them into
by-pathes of division, G^alt. Cronolog. saecul. 16. and 17.
conducts them into the downfall of schism, and heresy; and so precipitates
them headlong into a gulf of infidelity, and perdition.

Claud. Sanct. repetit. 1. de Eucharistia.
2. Because, as experience teaches us, it has hatched all the viperous sects,
schisms, and heresies which this last age in such abundance brought forth
into the world. It upon the first breathing of the new Gospel, divided the
followers of it into Lutherans, Gordo^. controu. 1. cap. 28. page 202. de
Ecclesia.
Sacramentarians, and Anabaptists, and subdeuided the Lutherans again into the
Zealous, the Civil, and the disorderly Lutherans; and subdeuided yet again
the zealous into 14. the civil into 20. and the disorderly into 7. Calvin.
Comment. in 1. Joan. 4^1. Hoc nostru^ saeculu^ horrendasectarum potte^ta
protulit, qua occasion multi attoniti haere^t, and quorsum vertere debent
nescientes, om ne^ pietatis curam^biecerunt. neque enim melius inuenerunt
co^pendium sese extricandi ab errorum periculo.
subfactions and petty heresies. It subdeuided the Anabaptists into 13.
several factions: and the Sacramentaries into so many new opinions, in
several Countries, invented by so many several new masters, as that within
the space of an 100. years and fewer, some, as Gualter, reckon up 117. others,
as Rescius 170. and others, as Hedio a Protestant, within 30. years after
Luther 130. all invented, and nourished by this spirit. And for multiplicity of
scripture senses, it devised, as one 50. years ago collected, no fewer then
80. and as another since has observed, no fewer then 200. several
expositions, all out of four words, Hoc est corpus meum. Which dissension,
and division was even in Caluins time so memorable, and markable, that he
himself confesses, that this age has brought forth horrible monstrous sects,
so that many staggering, and no^ knowing which to follow, have cast away all
care of any religion at all. By which is apparent, that this Scripture neither
does, nor can beget any unity, or concord in faith and religion, and so cannot
be a fit instrument to beget, and conserve faith.

That it cannot be a means of certainty of Faith. SECT. III.
SECONDLY, Faith must be certain, Faith is certain.
and infallible to us, more certain, says S. Chrysostom, are we of things we
see not, then of things we see. Yea so certain, as that it admits no
deliberate and voluntary doubt, not only actual, Chrisost. ho^ 12. in epist.
ad Romans
but not so much as possible. For as Faith is an inward assent of the mind
which we give to that which God (who is the prime verity, and can neither
deceive, Luth. tom. 5. enar. in 1. Pet. 1.
nor be deceived) has revealed to us by means of the preaching, and teaching
of the true Church: so our assent must be as certain as is the verity of God,
upon which it dependes; that is, so certain, that it admit no more deliberate
doubt, Calu. 3. inst. 1.16. Zuing. tom. 1 in actus despu. Tigur. says: Deum
Patrem tantu^ fauere sidelibus, ac ipsi Christo, and tamen certum essenos
damna^i no^ posse, quam Christum non posse.
incertainty, or fallibility, then does the word of God, upon which it depends.
Which certainty of faith, because Luther, Calvin, and Zuinglius extend to every
man's particular salvation, they consequently affirm, that every man must be as
certain of his salvation, as he is certain there is a God, and that he can no
more loose his salvation, then Christ can loose it.

But that no such certainty can be in this private spirit, I prove (besides
that which is in the former Chapter showed) by these reasons. First, because no
certain and infallible rule, or ground can be given, certainly and infallibly
to know that this spirit, in any man, is a spirit of truth, not of error; of
light, not of darkness; of God, not of Satan, or not humane; therefore there is
no reason why any should build upon it as certain.

Secondly, because that they who admit a certainty of it, admit it only in the
persons who have it, The private spirit most uncertain.
not in others who follow them who have it; whereupon all who follow the spirit,
and doctrine of any other whosoever (as the common, both people, and preachers
do) follow that which to them is fallible and uncertain, and so build upon a
ground fallible and uncertain.

Thirdly, because experience conuinces that this spirit has deceived, and does
daily deceive many; for whatsoever either sense of Scripture, or doctrine of
faith, or certainty of salvation the spirit of one man does certainly assure
him as true, the spirit of another man does as certainly assure him that the
same is false: as for example, the spirit of Zuinglius, Oecolampadius* Calvin,
and other Sacramentaries assures them, that the sense of Hoc est corpus meum,
is figurative, that the body of Christ is not really, and corporally present in
the Sacrament, and that they in this faith are infallibly sure of their
salvation: but the spirit of Luther assures him, that the sense of the words is
literal, that Christ's substance is really and corporally present with the
substance of bread, and that the Sacramentaries are heretics, and damned who
hold the contrary. The like does the spirit of the Anabaptists, Libertines,
and others assure them of other such places against both Lutherans, and
Caluinists. And the spirit of the Arians assures them of the like, against all
the former. And all this is wrought by this spirit, all conceauing a certainty
in it, and yet all opposite and condemning one another by it. What certainty
therefore can there be in any of these spirits, what infallibility more in
Luther then in Calvin, what in Calvin more then in Rotman, what in Rotman more
then in Seruetus, or what in any one of them more then in any other Sectary?
What can any one claim, or challenge for the certainty of his spirit, which
the other cannot as infallibly claim, and challenge for the certainty of his?
Every one of these assure themselves that their spirit is of God. Every one of
them, and all are certain of their sense of scripture, of their faith, and of
their salvation by it, and yet every one defends a contrary faith, inuents a
contrary sense of scripture, condemns the contrary part of heresy, and is
certain by his spirit of the others damnation; as the other conceive
themselves certain of their own salvation. What certainty therefore can there
be amongst so opposite certainties? Surely none, but to be certain, that all of
these spirits are most uncertain and fallible, yea wicked, and damnable; and
that the state of all who depend of them, is pitiful and miserable.

That it cannot be means of the integrity, and perfection of Faith SECT. IIII.
THIRDLY, Faith as it is one and certain, Faith is entire in all points.
so it must be entire and Catholic, that is, the doctrine of it must both in
all points be wholly and entirely believed, and also by all persons be
universally and Catholikly professed. It must be in all, and every point
completely believed, because every point by God revealed, and by the Church
proposed to us, is of equal verity, certainty, and necessity of belief.
Therefore as the keeping of all the Commandme^ts does oblige all, and the
breaking of any one, is a transgression of the Law: so the believing of all
articles of faith, either actually and expressly, as the learned do; or
virtually and implicit as the unlearned do (who expressly believing the
principal and most necessary to be expressly known, do in not doubting or
oppugning the rest, virtually believe all the rest, in that they believe them as
the Church does teach them) does in like manner oblige all; and the voluntary
doubting, or misbelieuing of any one, is an heresy against faith, and does
violate the integrity which should be in Faith: of which the fundamental
reason is, because all articles of faith are believed for one and the same
infallible motive and reason, that is, for the revelation of God made known by
infallible proposition of the Church, of which whosoever denies the authority
in one point, infringes the infallibility of the same in all points; for if the
revelation of God, or proposition of Church may fail in one, it may fail in
all, and so can give no certainty of any Out of which follows, that an
Heretics, who obstinatly misbelieues one article revealed and proposed, is
intensiue no less an Infidel, that is, as destitute of any divine faith, as
is ^ Pagan, who belieues not any one Christian article at all; because what he
belieues in any, he belieues not upon a right true and solid motive of belief,
that is, the revelation of God, and proposition by Church, which if he did, he
would for the same believe also the rest.

It must likewise be Catholikly and universally believed, Catholic in all
persons
that is, what was by the first faithful, the Apostles, and others in the
first ages believed, must also be by the succeeding faithful in the next ages
likewise believed; and what is in most places, and Countries, and has been by
the most faithful in most Countries generally believed, the same must also by
others likewise faithful in other Countries be generally believed. By which
Catholic belief of the same doctrine in all, or the most places, persons, and
times, is made one Catholic Church among all persons, in all places, and all
times.

But that this Protestant private spirit cannot produce any such one, The
private spirit cannot cause an entire and Catholic faith
and the same faith, either entire, and whole in every point, or Catholic and
general in all persons, places, and times; that it cannot incline all persons,
in all times, and places, to believe all points of one entire Catholic faith,
is proved. First, because it is neither one in all persons, neither has any
lincke or combination of any unity, to combine in one all persons, as neither
proposing to all persons all articles of faith by one and the same motive, nor
combining all persons dispersed in time, and place, in one lincke of one Faith;
for it is singular, several, private, and proper in every one, without any
subordination, or connection among any, as is apparent by the former insta^ces
of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Rotman, Osiander, Illyricus, Quintinus, Seruetus,
Blandrata, and others; who all, as so many ruptures out of one River, having
broke the banks of Catholic unity, did at several times, and places, divide
themselves into several currents of opposition, and run al a course contrary
one to another without means, or hope of ever meeting, or reuniting again.

Secondly, because it is a spirit of separation, division, and disunion; in
that, whomesoeuer it possesses, it does separate them as disioynted members
from the union of Gods holy Church, the spouse and body of Christ; and does
divide, and cut them into several pieces and mammocks of sects, schisms, and
heresies. For as every one receaues a new part, or portion of this new spirit,
he chooses to himself a new opinion of doctrine, labors to erect and set up a
new Conuenticle of new belieuers, and makes himself the head or follower of a
new sect, or heresy; and so all sect-maisters or Heretics, who in all ages
from Christ downewardes, have separated themselves from his Church and erected
a new faith and Synagogue, have had their origin and beginning from this
spirit, have made their progress and proceeding by this spirit, and have ended
themselves and their doleful and desperate presumption in the obstinacy of
this spirit. In all which the scope and mark they aimed at, was thereby to
free themselves from all order and subjection, thereby to arrogate to
themselves all authority, and dominion; thereby to exercise what liberty they
best affected, and to believe and teach what doctrine they most fancied, and
best fitted their conceit and humor.

Thirdly, because this spirit is invisible, insensible, inperceptible, and
unable to be known, or understood (as they grant) by others, or any, save
only they who imagine they are possessed with it. And as it is invisible and
unknown, so it is composed of an invisible and unknown company, meeting in
invisible and unknown congregations, ministering invisible and unknown
Sacraments, making an invisible and unknown Church, consisting of invisible
and unknown both Pastors who preached, and people who heard the doctrine of it
for many ages together, of which they can assign neither time when, nor place
where, nor people who were taught by them; can produce no acts, or monuments,
no records, or registers either of people who believed, and professed this
their faith, or of Princes who did honor and defend it, or of persecutours who
did oppose and persecute it, or of any men, women, or children who were
baptized, and lived, or dyed in it. They can nominate no City, or Country, no
Priest, or Prelate, no Prince or Potentate, no Confessor or Martyr, who
believed, professed, honored, and defended in paper, or pulpit, by word, or
sword, the faith of this spirit: and why? Because the directour is a spirit
invisible, which compasses a Church of persons insensible, who preach a
doctrine incredible, and perform actions not memorable. All which is nothing
else, but an inuinsible argument of an impossible fiction, invented in the idle
brains of braine-sicke spirits to disguise the nouelty of a new, and new
devised Religion. And this is all the integrity or universality of Faith, that
this private spirit can effect or affoard.

That it cannot be a means of Faith which is got by hearing. SECT. V.
Faith is by hearing and preaching
FOVRTLY, This Faith which is thus one and certain, thus entire and Catholic,
is also ordinarily by one and the same way and means, imparted unto us, that
is, by Hearing: this hearing proceeds from Preaching, and this preaching is
derived from Mission, Romans 10.15.
according to that of S. Paul, How shall they believe him whom they have not
heard? how shall they hear without a preacher? how shall they preach except
they be sent? So that faith it by hearing, hearing is by preaching of Pastors,
and preaching is by mission from the authority of Superiors. Of which the
reason is, because faith is an argument or proof of things that do not
appear, either to our sense, or reason, but are above our understanding, and
capacity; therefore we cannot attain to it by evidence of reason, but by credit
of authority. To this authority, that we may give credit, we must conceive, and
hear it; this hearing, that we may be obliged to accept it, must by
Church-Pastors be proposed, and preached to us; and this preaching, that it may
the better secure us of it, must be from lawful mission by ordinary succession
derived; and so lawful mission from apostolical authority, infallible
preaching or proposition of Pastors, and a pious disposition in us to hear
and believe what is thus proposed, are the means by which, according to S.
Paul, true faith is attained.

But this private spirit quite overthrows all this excellent order, and
subordination ordained by Christ Jesus, The private spirit overthrows all
hearing and preaching.
and proposed to us by the holy Ghost. For first, it alone without any
disposition of hearing, without any proposition, or preaching of Church
Pastors, without any authority of apostolical mission, and ordination,
teaches and directs, in particular, every one, man, woman, or child, which is
true Scripture, which is true sense of it, and which is true doctrine collected
out of it, therefore every one thus made faithful by this spirit, stands need
neither of disposition to hear what is to be believed, nor of preaching to
believe what they hear, nor of mission, and ordination to secure them of what
is preached; because this spirit supplies the effect of all both ordination,
proposition, and disposition of hearing, therefore all order and discipline, all
subordination, and subjection, all sacraments, or preaching, are needless, yea
fruitless in Gods Church. As this spirit secures alone; so without Sacraments
it sanctifies alone. As it instructs all in faith; so it corrects all in
errors against faith* And as it is directed by none, but God; so it is
subordinate to none, but God alone, obliged to none, obedient to none; it is
immediate (as they which have it imagine) from God, and it will be subject only
to God, it will be directed only by God; it alone inspires all what they are to
believe, alone works all what they are to do, and alone secures all that they
cannot fail of their end and salvation; and so alone to all is all in all,
that is, the beginning, progress, and end of all grace and goodness. Thus is
the spirit to them, if you will credit them.

Secondly, It alone has warrant, and commission, power, and authority, in
whomsoever it is, whether he be young or old, simple or wise, unlearned or
learned, secular or spiritual, to examine and censure, to give sentence, and
judgment in any cause or Controversy, over any Pastor, or Prelate, upon any
Council or Church, particular or general, present or past, late or ancient.
For as Calvin, and Kemnitius, for example, by the prerogative of this their
spirit, took upon them to censure and correct, by their Examine and Antidote,
not only the late general Council of Trent, but also the ancient general
Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Chalcedon, and Ephesus, yea and the whole
Church of God, and all Doctors in it for many ages together, (as is before
showed;) so every bible-bearing Ghospeller, who has got but a taste of this
spirit, and can but read the Scripture in English, will by the same prerogative
of this spirit, assume to himself the same authority to examine the same
examiners, to censure the same censurers, and to judge the spirit of the former
judges, yea to examine, censure, and judge all Pastors, Doctors, Fathers,
Counsels, and Churches, and to determine which of them have erred, what sense
of Scripture is to be preferred, and what Faith, and Religion is to be
embraced. All which as these new Protestant Masters first practiced upon the
ancient Fathers; so these their new discipls have learned to practice the same
upon them their masters, and do as well censure them, as they did their
Predecessors: and that worthily; for what they taught and practiced against
their Fathers, is a just punishment that their children should learn, and
practice the same against them.

That it cannot be a means of faith, which requirs credible testimonies. SECT.
VI.
FIFTHLY, this faith as it is obtained by piously hearing the infallible
preaching of Pastors lawfully ordained and sent; Faith by credible testimonies
made probable.
so also it requires, besides divine revelation, reasons and motives of
credibility, forcible to move the Understanding to accept, as probable, this
doctrine of Faith, thus by preaching proposed, and by God revealed: for (as
before) He that gives credit quickly, Eccles. 19.4.
is light of heart. And reasons of credibility (such as are miracles, sanctity,
unity, conuersions of Nations, Cap. 1. sect. 3*
and such like, before mentioned) do make a true faith more credible,
according to that of David: Thy testimonies are made too credible. Psalm. 92.5.


But that this private spirit cannot give any such credible testimonies, The
private spirit destitute of any credible testimonies.
or produce any probable motive to convince any one, that it is a true spirit
of God, or a certain means of faith, is proved; Because it cannot allege any
consent of people, and nations, nor any authority of miracles, to use S.
Augustines words, nourished by hope, increased by charity, and confirmed by
antiquity, Aug. lib. cont. epist. Fund.
such as confirmed S. Augustine in his faith it: cannot allege any unity
which it causes either with the head, Christ, or with his body, the Church;
not any sanctity which it works, by works memorable for piety, or miraculous
for power and virtue; not any consent of universality, by which it has been
embraced in all places, at all times, by all nations, and persons, no not in
ancient time, by any persons renowned for holiness and learning; not any
succession of Pastors, prelates, doctors, or saints who have relied
themselves, their faith, and salvation upon it: it cannot produce any one
evident, either authority of holy scripture, or any one tradition of
apostolical time, or any one practice of ancient Church, or any one decree of
general Councels, or any one testimony of learned Doctors, or any one
probable, much less conuincing argument of reason, that either all, or any one
man must, or may settle his belief in it, interpret the Scripture by it, rely
his salvation upon it, deduce all resolutions of faith, all questions of
Controversies, all doubts of Religion from it, and give peremptory judgment and
sentence of all Pastors and Prelates, of all Saints and Doctors, of all
Churches and Counsels, of all doctrine and religion, according to the
suggestion of it, which yet the precise Protestants do both in doctrine
profess, and in practice perform.

That it cannot be a means of faith, which obliges all to believe and accept
it. SECT. VII.
SIXTHLY, fatyh, to whom it is by God revealed, by Church proposed, and by
credible testimonies convinced, obliges them to accept it, Faith obliges to
hear and accept the means of Faith.
and to give credit, and testimony to it, to be directed and ordered by it, and
to submit their judgment in obedience of faith unto it, according to that of
S. Paul, bringing into 2. Cor. 10 5.
Captivity all understanding unto the obedience of Christ; and 1. Pet. 1.14.
as children of obedience, Romans 1.5.
receiving grace for obedience to the faith. Whereupon it is said, Marc. 16* 16.
He that does not believe, shall be condemned. Because when it is sufficiently
delivered and declared what we are to believe, and do, they who by negligence
do not embrace and follow it, are inexcusable, and so deserve damnation. And as
they who are obliged to attain to the end, are obliged to use and apply the
means necessary for that end, without which the end cannot be attained; so,
because we Catholics for our part, do hold a pious disposition to hear that
which is authentically preached, and proposed by Pastors lawfully ordained:
And because the Protestants, for their part, do hold the motion, and suggestion
of the private spirit to be a necessary means for the attaining unto faith; it
follows that as the one is bound to give audience, and obedience to al
preaching of Pastors lawfully sent, and proposition of Church defining what is
to be believed and practiced; so the other is bound to hear and obey every
motion, and suggestion of this their private spirit speaking in them, and
inspiring them what to do, and believe.

The private spirit cannot oblige to accept it.
But that this spirit cannot under any precept natural, or divine, oblige any
one, much less all men to accept, credit, and rely upon it, and to make it
their rule, and foundation; their judge, and vmpier, the assurer and securer of
their scripture-sense, their faith, their religion, and their salvation; as it
is of it self more evident; so by these reasons it is confirmed.

First, because as it is often before touched, no man has any certain means,
or ground, whereon to build a certain resolution of the certainty, either of
this spirit, or of every motion of it, that it is of God, not of nature, or
Satan. 2. Because no such precept is intimated in any Scripture, Tradition,
Council, or Church-command. 3. Because it would follow, that men should be
obliged to believe and follow spirits contrary, and motions of them contrary,
and so senses of Scripture contrary, Fayths and Religions contrary, and
opinions of salvation contrary: for as Luther had one spirit, and one motion of
it; Calvin another spirit, and a contrary motion of it; Osiander a third
spirit, and an opposite motion of it: and so ^n like manner Swenkfeldius,
Rotman, Seruetus, Quintinus, Dauid-george, Moore, Hacket, and an hundred more
Sectaryes, had every one of them distinct spirits, and contrary motions of them
in the sense of Scripture which they expounded, in the articles of their faith
which they believed, and in the certainty of their salvation upon which they
presumed; so every one being obliged to believe and follow their own spirit,
and the motion of it, in the Scripture-sense, faith and salvation; diverse
should be obliged to believe, and follow contrary spirits, and contrary motions
of contrary spirits, and so contrary senses of Scripture, contrary faithes and
religions, and contrary certainty of salvation, which is as absurd, as in
religion absurd may be. Also, because as the wind blows, so the spirit moves,
sometimes one way, sometimes another, sometimes to this thing, sometimes to to
the contrary, suggesting now one meaning of Scripture, now another, now one
Faith, then another, and sometimes doubts of all Faith, and suggests no faith
at all, and often dispaires of all grace, and leaves no hope of assurance of
any salvation at all: It would likewise follow that men should be obliged
sometimes to believe no faith at all, sometimes to despair of all grace,
goodness, and salvation, and sometimes to have as deep a conceit of their
damnation, as other times they have of their salvation. Whereby still following
a wavering spirit, and tottering motions of it, they should waver and totter
between vncertaintyes, and contrarietyes, and remain always uncertain in
themselves, and contrary to others, and so be like Clouds without water,
carried with every air, like waves of the Sea tossed with every wind, foaming
out their own confusion, like wandering stars, Iud. v. 12.
to whom a storm of darkness is reserved for ever. And thus much of reasons
drawn from the nature, and properties of Faith, which may suffice to convince,
that this private spirit, and the motion of it, are so far from being any
necessary means of Faith, and Religion, that they cannot so much as consist
with any, but are opposite to all true Faith and Religion.

THE PRIVATE SPIRITS AVTHORITY To judge of Faith; confuted by circular
absurdities which follow thereupon, in the grounds of their Faith. CHAP. VIII.
Of the nature of a Circle, and the differences of Circles. SECT. I.
NOTHING does make more pl^ine, to a plain understanding, the absurdity of
this private spirit, then the absurdities which do follow upon it, against
both faith, and reason. These absurdities are of two sorts. The one Circular,
inuoluing an absurd manner of proof, and proceeding by way of a Circle,
condemned by all principles of Philosophy, and Divinity. The other Doctrinall
(as we may term them) inferring a doctrine absurd, and dissonant from all
principles of Faith, piety, and reason. In this Chapter we will show the
Circular absurdities, in the next the Doctrinall which do follow upon this
private spirit, and the Protestants doctrine taught by it.

For the Circular absurdities we may note. 1. Of a circle, what a Circle, and a
Circular proof is. 2. The difference between a circular proof lawful, What
a Circle is.
and unlawful: and 3. thereby judge, and make an estimate of the Catholic and
Protestant mutual objection, the one against the other in this kind. First
therefore Aristotle, in his demonstrations having proved that in every
demonstration we must come to some principles or propositions imediatly known
of themselves, Arist. lib. 1. posteriorum resolut. cap. 3.
and not demonstrable by another medium, or proposition; disproues two sorts
of Philosophers, the one affirming that there can be no demonstration of any
thing at all; the other contrariwise affirming that there may be demonstrations
of every thing eue^ of the first principles or propositions, which by a
circular demonstration (say they), may be demonstrated by the conclusion, as
the conclusion is demonstrated by the premises; admitting thereby a Circular
demonstration of the conclusion by the premises, and of the premises again by
the conclusion. This latter error of Circular proof he co^futes by three
reasons. 1. Because it would be petitio principij, Arist. 2. lib. priorum
resol. cap. 5. and. 18.
or the begging of the question, which, as before in his former books of
Resolution, he resolved, was when the medium, or proposition proving any thing,
is either the same which is to be proved, or more obscure, or as obscure, or
known after the thing to be proved. All which inconveniences this Circular
manner of probation does infer, making the probation either the same, or
equally, or more obscure then the thing to be proved. 2. Because it would
follow, that idem should be prius and posterius, notius and ignotius respectu
eiusdem, known and unknown, first known and after known in respect of the
same. As when the premises do demonstrate the conclusion they must be first and
better known then the Concl^sion. And again* when the conclusion does
demonstrate the premises it should be first and better known then the premises
and so the same conclusion shall be prius and notius, as demonstrating the
premises, and posterius and ignotius, as demonstrated and proved by the
premises, both being understood of the same premises. 3. Because this Circular
proof, is to prove the same to be the same, because it is the same; as the
conclusion to be true, if it be true, or because it is true. As (says
Aristotle) Si A est, B est; si B est, A est; ergo, si A est, A est. In which as
A is proved to be A, because it is A; so the conclusion is proved to be true,
because it is true. Whereupon Aristotle concludes, that every Circular proof
and demonstration which is regressus ab eodem ad omnino idem, that is, when we
return from one thing to the same thing again, and from one proof to the
same proof again, is vicious and unlawful in Logic. And thus much of the
nature of a Circle.

Secondly, for the difference between a proper Circle, Difference between a
Circle lawful and unlawful.
which is bad, and an improper which is good and lawful, we may note also,
that every kind of Circular and reciprocal proof is not unlawful; for some
is reciprocal between the cause and the effect, as between rationale and
risibile, between the Sun and the Day. And thus may be proved the effect by
the cause a priori, as Est risibile quia est rationale: est dies quia Sol
lucet; or on the contrary, the cause by the effect a posteriori, as Est
rationale quia est risibile: or Sol lucet quia est dies. Other proofs are
reciprocal between two causes of diverse kinds, as between the efficient
cause and the final, in which sense we prove Physic to be good because, as
the efficient cause, it causes and works health; and health to be good,
because as the final cause, or end it moves to take Physic. Or between the
efficient and material cause, as when we prove the entrance of the wind to be
the cause, that is efficient of opening the window, and the opening of the
window to be the cause that is material of the entrance of the wind. Or when
we prove the abundance of rain by the abundance of vapors, as by the
material cause; and the abundance of vapors, by the abundance of rain, as
by the effect. All which kind of reciprocal or Circular proof, of the cause
by the effect, and the effect by the cause, or of one cause by another, is good
and allowed in Logic, as being improperly a Circle. Only that which is
disallowed, and by Aristotle, and all condemned, is that proper manner of
Circle, which is, 1. when in the same kind of cause one thing is proved by
another, and this again by the former, which is either idem per idem, or
ignotum per ignotius. 2. When this reciprocal proof is made by one and the
same cause, in one and the same manner of proof. 3. When to one, and the self
same person this one thing is thus proved by another, and this again by the
former, the one mutually proving the other: as when the premises demonstrate
the conclusion, and the conclusion again the premises, both being otherwise
unknown. As when the master proves the servant to be innocent, and the
servant the master, both being before suspected as guilty. In which the same
thing is notius and ignotius, prius and posterius, that is, more known and
less known, first known and after known, both in one and the same respect,
and in respect of one and the same person, and so a thing unknown is proved by
another more unknown, which is that unlawful Circle or Circular manner of
demonstration disallowed and condemned by Aristotle. By which is manifest what
a Circular proof is, and of Circular manners of proofs, which is improper and
lawful, and which proper and unlawful.

Thirdly, Both Catholics and Protestants, do mutually accuse one another of
this vicious and Circular arguing, and manner of proof. The Protestants accuse
the Catholics because they prove the authority of the scripture by the
authority of the Church, and the authority of the Church by the authority of
scripture. For ask a Catholic how he knows the Scripture to be infallible
and true, he will answer, because the Church tells him it is so: ask him how he
proves the Church to be infallible and true, he will answer because the
scripture says it is so; and so he proves the Scripture by the Church, and the
Church by the Scripture. The Catholics accuse the Protestants because they
prove the scripture by the spirit, and the spirit by the scripture: for ask a
Protestant how he knows the scripture to be true, and the true sense of it, he
answers because the spirit so tells and assures him: ask him how he knows the
spirit that it is of God, and speaks truth, he answers because the scripture
tells and assures him so; and so he knows the Scripture by the spirit, and the
spirit by the Scripture.

The Catholics cleared from the objected Circle, against their doctrine. SECT.
II.
THE question therefore is, whether the Catholics between Scripture and
Church, The Catholics fall not into a circle between the proof of scripture by
the Church, and of Church by Scripture.
or the Protestants between the Scripture and the Spirit, and otherwise, do
fall into this kind of vicious argumentation, and proof, in manner of a
Circle. And that the Catholics are free from this fault, and do make their
proof to several sorts of persons in several kinds of causes, and by a
partial manner of proof, and thereby do still prove one thing unknown by
another more known to those persons, is first to be proved.

For which we may note, that the Catholics require to Faith (for so much as is
for our purpose) two things. What is required to Faith.
First, a preparation, to prepare us to accept the things believed as
credible, and in prudence worthy to be believed, which is wrought by credible
testimonies, such as are miracles, consent, sanctity, antiquity, and the rest
before mentioned, by which our understanding is evidently convinced to judge
and accept of the Christian Religion, as more worthy or credit then any other.
Secondly, they require a firm assent or belief to the articles of faith,
proposed as true, and of infallible verity, which is wrought by the habit of
faith, and dependes upon the divine revelation of God, declaring in Scripture,
or Tradition, and proposing by holy Church, what, and why we are to believe:
upon which revelation thus proposed, we settle our last resolution of faith,
and the certainty of it, as upon the former credible motives, or humane faith
we settled our preparation, or acceptance of faith, and the credibility of it.
Now, if we compare or apply these together, it will evidently appear, that in
neither is committed any Circle, because the former, that is, the acceptance
depends upon credible motives which are as the Samaritan woman's word, making it
seem probable that Christ was the Messiah; and the later, that is the assent
to Faith, dependes upon divine revelation, which is as our Saviors word
revealing to them, that he is the true Messiah, and so both have several
grounds and principles on which they depend; the one credible testimonies, the
other divine revelation: whereby comparing them together, no appearance of any
circular proof can be found between them.

For the actual assent and belief it self, whereby we infallibly believe the
mysteries revealed, though we believe the verity of Scripture revelations by
the authority of Church proposition, and Church proposition for the authority
of Scripture revelation, whereby Scripture revelation does give us testimony of
Church proposition, and again Church proposition of Scripture revelation; Yet
that this reciprocal testimony and proof, is not any proper and vicious
Circle, is proved. First, because it is in diuerso genere causa, The mutual
proof of the scripture and Church.
in diverse kinds of causes (which before out of Aristotle is admitted for good
and lawful:) for the testimonies of Scripture revelation to the infallibility
of Church proposition is causall as a cause, 1. In a diverse kind of cause.
and that formal, why we believe and assent to Church proposition. But Church
proposition is only conditional, as conditio sine quae non, to know Scripture
revelation; and so they are reciprocal in a different manner of proof, the
one, that is Scripture, a priori, as including divine revelation; the other,
that is Church, a posteriori, required only as a condition. The former, as a
formal precedent cause; the latter, as a subsequent annexed condition. Both of
them not much unlike to our Saviors testimony of S. John Baptist, and to S.
John's testimony of our Savior: the one as of God and infallible, the other as
of an holy man, and credible: or to the testimony of our B. Savior, and the
woman to the Samaritans: the one as giving certainty, the other as proposing
credibility of his being the Messiah: Or to the former example of rationale and
risibile, of the Sunshine and the Day, of the Vapors and Rain, of the
opening the Window and the entering of the Wind. All which reciprocally prove
one another, as the cause and the effect, or as several causes. And all which
do much resemble the testimony of Scripture to the Church, and of the Church
to the Scripture, which is likewise in a several kind of causality, and a
different manner of probation.

Secondly, because this reciprocal proof is not ad omnino idem, as Aristotle
requires to a proper Circle, that is, 2. Is partial and not wholly, and solely
of the same.
the one is not the total and sole cause of knowing the other. For Church
proposition is not known only by Scripture revelation, and no other way; but
also by other proofs, signs, and credible testimonies, conuincing that Church
authority is necessary and infallible to distinguish true sense of Scripture
from false, and to end Controversies about Scripture. And therefore as
Aristotle admits, that though the premises have proved the conclusion, yet the
conclusion may again prove the premises, and that in eodem genere causae, so
that the conclusion be proved by another medium then by the premises. So,
though the Scripture revelation prove Church proposition, yet Church
proposition may again reciprocally prove Scripture revelation, so it be known
by another means (as we see it is) then only by Scripture revelation; for
this, according to Aristotle, is only an improper Circle, and not a bad, and
unlawful Circle.

Thirdly, because this reciprocal proof is not to one and the same person who
is ignorant or doubtful of both: but to diverse persons, and such as suppose the
one. For to a Catholic who admits, as believed, Church proposition, we prove
by it Scripture-sense, or revelation, and so an unknown thing to him, by
another thing supposed and known to him: but to a Protestant who admits, as by
him believed, Scripture revelation, we prove by it Church proposition, and so
to him a thing unknown by another more known. But to a Pagan who admits
neither Scripture revelation, nor Church proposition, we prove neither of them
one by another, but both the one and the other by other probable motives and
credible testimonies, more agreeable to his natural capacity, and by them
persuade him, first to accept as credible, Church proposition, and by it
Scripture revelation: by which Scripture and Church, or scripture expounded by
Church, we persuade him to assent, and believe the articles revealed. In all
which we prove ignotum per notius, the unknown by the more known to him, and
so preparing him to give credit to one, do by that induce him to believe the
other. By which means, we still proceed from a thing known, to an unknown to
that person, and so avoid the Circle, and begging of the question, into which
the Protestants run, and there stick fast. In which, note the difference
between them and us, for they prove reciprocally and circularly the Scripture
by the spirit, and the spirit again by scripture in the same kind of proof,
to wit formally, as shall be showed: We prove scripture by Church, and Church by
scripture, in diverse kinds of cause, to wit, the one causall, and the other
conditional, as is showed. 2. They prove the one by the other, no otherwise
known then by the other, as the scripture by the spirit, which spirit is only,
and by no other means, known then by scripture, and e contra, as shall be
showed: But we have more means to know the Church then by scripture, as is
showed. 3. They prove one by the other to the same person, to wit the
Protestant, doubtful of both: we to diverse persons who suppose and believe the
one, and so ( ad hominem) by that we prove the other. Al which as it is true as
presently shall be showed, so it shows an apparent difference between the
Protestant circular manner of proof of scripture by spirit, and of spirit by
scripture; and of our Catholic improper Circle, and lawful manner of proof
of scripture by Church, and of Church by scripture. And thus much to clear the
imputation laid upon Catholics for their circular manner of proceeding in
their proof of scripture by the Church, and of Church by scripture.

The Protestants diverse manners of Circles. SECT. III.
SVBDIV. ^. The Circle between the Scripture, and the Spirit.
IT remaynes to show, that the Protestants do several ways fall into this
unlawful Circular manner of probation, for which we may note, how the
Protestants for their doctrine of faith, justification, and salvation, The
Protasta^ts diverse Circles.
do make this gradation and concatenation of one point with another. The first
ground of all, they make Gods free and irrespectiue election, or predestination
of some to his grace and salvation, and his like reiection and condemnation of
others to damnation. Their gradation and conexion of doctrine, of salvation.
2. To these elect, and only to them, God gives true faith, and certain
assurance of their salvation. 3. To these faithful, and only to them, he gives
the infallible assistance of this his private spirit. 4. To this spirit, and
only to it, he gives the true and certain understanding of the holy Scipture,
and the sense of it. So that 1. Election, 2. Faith, 3. The spirit, 4.
Understanding of Scripture, is as a chain of many lincks, whereof all are so
connected, every one with another, as he that has one, has all; and he that
wantes one, wantes all. For (say they) the understanding of scripture is given
only to them, and to all them who have the spirit; the spirit is given only to
them, and to all them, who have faith; Faith is given only to them, and to all
them, who are elect; and so all, and only the elect, are faithful; all, and
only the faithful, have the spirit; all* and only they that have the spirit,
understand Scripture. And so a primo ad vltimum, all, and only the elect, must
have true faith, spirit, and understanding of Scripture. In which, election is
the mother and foundation; the understanding of Scripture, the fruit and top of
al their perfection. This is the connection of their doctrine concerning their
faith and salvation. Now as concerning the knowledge and infallible assurance
of all these, which (according to their grounds) every one of them must have
of himself, to wit, that he is elect, faithful, and has the true spirit of
God, and the right understanding of scripture: As concerning (I say) the
assurance of all these, and the means of this assurance, whereupon depends
their salvation; if any shall demand of them, whereupon they ground this their
certainty, and assurance of all these, that is, their election, faith, spirit,
and scripture-sense (which are inseparable, and infallibly according to them,
ensuing one upon another) it will appear by their answer, that they have no
grounds at all; but that they run in a round, and Circle, rolling and
wheeling from one ground or principle to another, and from that to the former
back again, without any firm or settled ground and resolution whereon to stay
themselves, and their faith; whereupon they skip forward and backward, from one
to another, that is, from the scripture to the spirit, and from the spirit to
the scripture again; from the spirit to faith, and from faith to the spirit
again; from faith to election, and from election to faith again; and so from
election to scripture again, and from scripture to election back again. For
ask a Protestant, how, and by what means he understands the Scripture? He
answers; by the spirit. And ask him, how, and by what means he knows that he
has the true spirit? He answers by Scripture. And so knows the scripture by
the spirit, and the spirit by scripture. Again, ask him how, and by what
means he is assured of his faith? He answers by his spirit, and scripture: but
how is he sure of his spirit and scripture? by his faith back again. Further,
ask him how, and by what means he is assured of his election? He answers by
his faith, his spirit, or the scripture, and yet his election is the ground of
his faith, spirit, and understanding of scripture. So that, 1. The scripture
proves the spirit, and the spirit the scripture. 2. The spirit proves his
faith, and his faith the spirit. 3. His faith proves his election, and his
election is the ground of his faith, and with it, of his spirit, and knowledge
of scripture also. So that as many linckes as are in their chain, so many
Circles and circular proofs are made by them, and all in vain, and to no
purpose at all, as shall be showed.

And first of their first circular proof, between the scripture and the
spirit, it shall be plainly proved, that they fall directly and headlong into
Aristotle's proper, The first Protestant Circle, between the scripture and
spirit.
and so much condemned Circle, proving the scripture by the spirit, and the
spirit by the scripture again, in one and the same kind of cause, to one and
the same person, and by one sole and whole manner of proof. In all which we
have before cleared our selves, and our doctrine from the objected Circle
against us. For which we may observe two principles of Protestant doctrine: the
one, that the scripture only is the rule and means to come to the knowledge of
the certainty of all things to be believed; whereupon they reject all Tradition
and unwritten word of God, and rely only upon the written word for the sole and
complete rule of faith. The other, that this written word is to be interpreted,
and understood only by the spirit of the Lord, which, as it is particular and
private in every man, so every man must be directed by his private spirit in
the understanding and interpreting of the scripture, and in the collecting out
of it what he is to believe; whereupon they reject all authority of Church,
Councels, or Fathers, and make only the private spirit the Rule and Judge of
interpreting scripture, as in the first part is at large proved.

Which being supposed, it will evidently appear, how the Protestants run
this Circle, between this private spirit, and scripture. For ask a
Protestant, how he knows infallibly which is scripture, and which is true
sense of it? He answers, by the internal testimony of the private spirit
assuring him it is so. Ask him, how he infallibly knows this his internal
testimony of his spirit, is the testimony of the holy Ghost? He answers, by the
scripture assuring him it is so; for my sheep hear my voice. Ask him again,
Joan. 10.27.
how he knows infallibly this is scripture, and this the true meaning of this
scripture? He runs back to the testimony of his spirit. And again, how he
knows that this his testimony of his spirit is the spirit of God? He returns
to the scripture again. Thus he wheels in a round between scripture and
spirit, proving the scripture by the spirit, and the spirit by the scripture;
an unknown spirit by an unknown scripture, and an unknown scripture by an
unknown spirit, one unknown, by another as unknown. And if Aristotle did
hold it an absurd demonstration and proof to prove the Conclusion by the
premises, and the premises again by the conclusion in the same manner of
proof, which was, as he reasons, as much as to prove A by B, and again B by
A. which is either idem per seipsum, or ignotum per aeque ig notum; And if S.
Augustine did count it absurd for the Manichees to prove their Fundamental
Epistle to be Canonical, because Manes held it to be so, and Manes to be a
Prophet or Apostle, because his Fundame^tall Epistle did affirm him to be so,
wherein he himself gave testimony to his Epistle, and his Epistle to him; as
the master gives to the servant, and the servant to the master, when both are
in question; And if it were absurd for any to believe Simon Magus and Selena,
or Hellena, or Montanus and his Priscilla and Maximilla Prophetesses, or
Mahomet and his Sergius the Arian to be true Prophets, because one did affirm
and prove the other his companion to be a Prophet, both being suspected and
unknown, and both wanting other kind of proof, then mutual and Circular
affection one of another: Then in like manner, it is as great absurdity and
folly for one to believe the scripture and sense of it, because the private
spirit affirms it to be the true sense; and again the private spirit to be
the true spirit of God, because the Scripture interpreted by that private
spirit, affirms it to be so. In which manner of proof, all the conditions do
concur, which Aristotle requires to a proper and unlawful Circle, or
circular demonstration. For 1. They prove circularly and reciprocally one
another, as the spirit proves the scripture, and the scripture again the
spirit, in which is regressus ab eodem ad idem. 2. They prove circularly one
another in eodem genere causae, for the spirit is the formal cause, why they
believe the sense of the scripture, and that sense of scripture is the formal
cause, why they believe that to be the spirit of God. 3. They prove one another
totally and wholly, that is, the sole and whole reason why they believe that is
the sense of scripture, is the spirit; and the sole and whole reason why they
believe this is the spirit, is that sense of Scripture framed by that spirit.
4. They prove one another not only circularly, wholly, and in the same manner of
causes, but also to one and the same person. For as this spirit can assure only
him who has it, not another, that this is true sense of scripture, and this
true sense of scripture can assure only him, not another, that this is the true
spirit (for according to their doctrine no man can be assured of another
spirit, that it is of God, but only himself who has it;) so does this private
spirit, and this scripture both assure one person, to wit, him that has it,
and that circularly, that this spirit is of God, and that this scripture is
truly understood by this spirit, which is most proper to that Circle, condemned
by Aristotle for unlawful. And thus much of the first proof.

Secondly, the same absurdities which Aristotle infers upon a circular
demonstration between the premises and conclusion do follow upon this Circle
between the scripture and the spirit. For, 1. The same thing does prove it
self. For if by A, I prove B, and again by B, I prove A, then I prove A by A:
or if I prove the conclusion by the premises, and the premises again by the
conclusion, then I prove the conclusion by it self, as Aristotle reasons. So,
if I prove the spirit by the scripture, and the scripture again by the spirit,
then I prove the spirit by the spirit it self: for the spirit which proves
that the scripture is true, by the same scripture proves that it self is the
true spirit; therefore the same is proved by the same. 2. The same thing is
prius notum and posterius notum in respect of the same thing. For as the
conclusion is known after the premises, as it is proved by them, and therefore
the premises as it proves them; so the spirit is known after the scripture as
it is proved by scripture to be the spirit, and known also before the same
scripture as it proves it to be scripture; and so it is posterius and prius
cognitum respectu eiusdem, first known and after known in respect of the
same. 3. The same thing unknown is proved by another unknown. For as, when
Simon Magus unknown to be a Prophet, is proved to be a Prophet by his Selena
as unknown: Or when Montanus is so proved by his Maximilla: Or Manes by his
Epistle, and Mahomet by his Sergius, the one unknown Prophet is proved by
another unknown: So when this scripture and sense of it is known by a spirit
as unknown and doubtful, as is the scripture and sense it self, then one
unknown is proved by another as unknown; which is against all manner of
lawful proof, where one ignotum unknown, must be proved by another notius
more known. Whereupon follow these absurdities. 1. That the spirit does prove
it self. 2. That it does prove ignotum por ignotum, that is, the unknown
sense of scripture by the spirit unknown. 3. That this spirit is prius and
posterius notum in respect of the same scripture. By which absurdities as
Aristotle did disprove the Philosophers circular demonstration of the
conclusion by the premises, and of the premises again by the conclusion; so we
disprove the Protestants circular proof of the spirit by the scripture, and of
the scripture by the spirit. And as S. Augustine did reject the Manichees
proof, who by Manes did prove their Fundamental Epistle, and by their Epistle
Manes: And as the Fathers rejected the Mon^anists proof, who by Montanus
proved Maximilla to be a Prophetess, and by Maximilla Montanus to be an
Apostle: So do we reject the Protestants proof, who by the Scripture will
prove their spirit to be of God, and by the spirit the sense of scripture to be
true. And as a Judge should be partial and unwise who should admit the Master
to clear the servant, and the servant to clear the master, when both are
accused as guilty of the same crime; so should we be partial and unwise, if we
should admit their spirit to prove their sense of scripture, and their true
sense of scripture to prove their spirit, when both are in the same Circle, and
both unknown and doubtful. By which we see that Protestants walk in a
circle, and perform that which David says, Psalm. 11. In circuitu im pij
ambula^t Aug in Psalm. 139. Quis est circuitus eorum? vt circumeant and non
ste^t: in gyrum eunt erroris, vbi iter est fine fine. Qui enim in longu^ it,
aliunde incipit, alicubi finit. Qui in gyrum it, numquam finit. Ipse est labor
impiorum, que^ demonstrat in alio Psalmo euidentius: In circuitu impij a^bulant.
The wicked walk in a Circle. And that which S. Augustine out of the 139.
Psalm. says: What is this circuit? To go round not to stand, to go in a round
of error, where they travel without end; for they, who go on forward, begin
in one place, and end in another; but he who goes in a round never ends. This
is the labor of the wicked, as is showed in another Psalm; The wicked walk
in a round. Thus S. Augustine, and that truly; for they have neither beginning
from which to derive, nor end whereon to rest themselves and their grounds of
doctrine, but caput circuitus, the head, the ground, and foundation of their
doctrine consists in a Circle, in which they still wheel in a round, out of
which they can never unwind themselves, and by which they can never prove any
thing to be true, as Aristotle says. And thus much of the first kind of Circle
made by the Protestants between the spirit and the scripture: let us proceed
to the second, between the spirit and faith.

SVBDIV. 2. The Circle between the Spirit and Faith.
SECONDLY, that they commit another the like Circle between their spirit and
faith, The second Circle between the spirit and faith.
is likewise proved, if first we consider and compare two of their points of
doctrine generally received. The one, that they are justified only by faith,
and that upon it does depend their spirit, by which they interpret scripture;
so that faith is the root and origin of the spirit, and presupposed to it. The
other, that the scripture interpreted by the spirit of God, or the spirit of
God interpreting scripture is the only and whole means to attain to faith;
and so is the ground and means of faith, and therefore presupposed to faith.
Which supposed: ask a Protestant how, and by what means he assures himself
that he has true and certain faith? He answers, by his spirit interpreting
the scripture, or by the scipture interpreted by his spirit, which is all one,
for so they answer: but I reply, that that cannot be, because his faith, and
the knowledge of it, as the mother and origin of his spirit which interprets
scripture, is, according to the former principles, precedent and presupposed
before the spirit and the knowledge of it, therefore the spirit cannot be a
ground and means of faith, which is precedent and presupposed as the cause of
this spirit. Again, ask him how, and by what means he assures himself that
his spirit thus interpreting scripture is the true spirit of God? He answers,
by his faith: but I reply that cannot be, because the scripture interpreted by
this spirit, or this spirit interpreting scripture, is, according to the latter
principle, the sole and whole means of faith; therefore it cannot be known by
faith, since it is the means of faith, and presupposed to it. Either therefore
must their principles be false, that a man is justified by Faith, which is the
origin of the spirit, and that the scripture is the sole means of Faith, or
else if they stand to this their doctrine, this Circle and absurdity must
follow, that faith is first presupposed, and known before the spirit, as the
cause of it, and the spirit is likewise first presupposed and known before
faith, as the means to it, and so faith is before the spirit, and the spirit
before faith; and faith is known before the spirit, and the spirit known
before faith. And so both faith and spirit are prius and posterius, each of
them, both first and last known in respect of the other, which is to incur
the former Circle, and also the absurdities by which Aristotle confutes it.

SVBDIV. 3. The Circle between Election, and Understanding of Scripture.
THIRDLY, that a third Circle is committed (to omit a fourth between Election
and Faith, of which the same may be inferred as was between faith and the
spirit) between the first and last lincke of this chain, A third Circle
between election and understanding of Scripture.
that is, between Election, and the certainty of it, and the Scripture, and
the understanding of it, shall out of two other principles compared appear. The
first, that only the elect and predestinate are endewed with faith, and all the
reprobate excluded from it. Whereupon also follows that only the elect have the
true spirit of God and right understanding of scripture, which according to
them are the effects and fruit of faith, and that election is the ground of all
faith, spirit and understanding of scripture. The second, that they have
certainty by faith of their election, and that by the word of God, which does
assure and secure them that they are predestinate; so the word of the Lord is
the means of their knowledge, and certainty of their election. Out of which
two positions, I reason thus: Election is the ground of faith, of the spirit,
and of the understanding of scripture, according to the former principle,
because only the Elect have faith, the spirit, and true sense of Scripture;
therefore it is presupposed as known before faith, the spirit, and sense of
scripture, and is the ground of them all, which once supposed, the rest do
necessarily follow upon it; and failing, the rest must also fail with it. On
the contrary, scripture, and the true understanding of it, is their means and
only means to know the spirit, faith, and election, according to the latter
principle, because all their faith and assurance both of faith and election is
grounded upon scripture, therefore true understanding of scripture must be
precedent and presupposed as foreknowne before the knowledge and assurance of
Election, which is to be known only by scripture, as the only means to know
it. Now, according to these principles, ask a Protestant, how he knows his
election? He must, and does answer, by scripture, which is his only means to
secure him of his faith and election; therefore the true meaning of scripture
must be first known before either spirit, faith, or election can be known and
assured, because it is the only means to know them, and the last resolution
whereon to setle them. On the contrary, ask him how, he comes to know, and be
certain of his true understanding of scripture? He must return back again,
and does answer, by the spirit, which assures him which is scripture and true
sense of it. Ask further, how he is certain of his having the true spirit? He
answers by faith, by which he belieues, that he has the true spirit. Ask yet
lastly, how he knows, and is certain of his faith? He answers, because he is
elect and chosen, and therefore must needs have faith: Here then is Election,
which was before the thing in question, now made the last ground of resolution,
upon which all the rest, as faith, spirit, and scripture, are to be grounded,
and by which they are resolved and known, as before scripture was made the
first means, and last resolution upon which spirit, faith, and election are
grounded, and by which they are known. Hence then appears the Circle between
election and scripture; whether shall be first known, and be as the means to
know the other. Shall Election? That cannot be, because it must be known by
faith; faith by the spirit; and the spirit by scripture; then scripture should
be first known. Shall scripture be first known? That it cannot be, because
the understanding of scripture depends upon the spirit, the spirit upon faith,
and faith upon election; therefore election must be first known. Scripture
therefore must be first known, as the means to know the spirit, faith, and
election; and election must be first known as the ground of all faith, spirit,
and scripture. Scripture therefore must prove election, as the means to know
it; and election must prove scripture, as the ground of the true understanding
of it: as the premises must prove the conclusion, and the conclusion the
premises; as Maximilla did prove Montanus, and Montanus Maximilla to be
Prophets; as Manes did prove his fundamental Epistle to be Apostolical, and
the Epistle him to be an Apostle. Scripture therefore must be first known
before election, and election must be first known before scripture, both first
known, and both means to know first each other. If both be first, which shall
be last? If both go before, which shall follow after? Let any Protestant by his
spirit unfold this ridle, solue the argument, and so leave leap out of the
Circle. And thus much of the third Circle, and circular manner of proceeding
between election and scripture.

SVBDIV. 4. The Circle between the Spirit of every man, and a general
Council.
FOURTHLY, one Circle more, which I observed out of Calvin in his Commentaries
upon S. John upon these words Try spirits, I cannot omit, because it is
notorious and important, as being between spirit and spirit, that is, between
the spirit of every private person, and the spirit of a general Council: and
with it I will close up this Chapter of circular absurdities. Calvin Calu. in
1. Ioh. 4.1. Multi falsi Doctores titulum spiritus mentiuntur. Insurgunt
phanatici homines qui se temere iactant spiritu Dei praeditos esse.
in the foresaid place affirms, 1. though against himself, and his own
fellow Sectaries, That many false Doctors do belie, and counterfeit the title
of the spirit. That, Mad men rise up who rashly brag that they are endewed with
the spirit. That, They are fools who amazed at the empty sound of an
honorable title of the spirit, dare not inquire after the matter it self.
That, Many boast of the spirit, yet do come in their own private name, and do
speak out of their own proper sense and meaning. All which is true, but
proper to the Protestants. 2. He says, Because of these so many false and
counterfeit spirits, he enquires how we shall prove, and try these spirits? To
which he answers, that they who assign the word of God as the mean and rule
to discern these spirits, Neque nihil, neque totum dicunt, say somewhat, but
not all. For except (says he) we have the spirit of prudence, it will little
or nothing avail to have the Word on our fingers end, whose interpretation or
sense is not certain to us. Therefore according to Calvin, the scripture alone
is not the complete rule or means to try spirits. What then? 3. Therefore he
says: Stulti sunt qui ad solu^ honorifici spiritus strepitum attoniti, ipsam
materiam non andent inquirere. Quiloquuntur priuato suo nomine p^odeunt in
medium priuato suo nomine. Nisi adsit spiritus prudentiae paru^ aut nihil
proderit verbum Dei habere ad manum. Penes singulos erit ius and arbitriu^
iudicandi
Every private man has power and freedom to judge of spirits, that is, every
faithful. The faithful therefore by their private spirit shall try and judge
of spirits. But here he objects, if so, then there will be no certainty of
faith, but all Religion will perish, because there are so many mad spirits
which brag of themselves that they are the spirit of God, that, Quot, capita
tot sensus, how many men so many opinions. What then must be the remedy? 4.
Therefore he admits, that the public judgment of the Church, and the
determination of an holy Council, is necessary to suppress mad spirits, and
to settle unity. This is well; for so have Cou^cells some authority: but how
far shall al men, and their private spirits be obliged to rely themselves,
and rest their judgment upon this determination of the Council? Shall there be
a pause, and rest of trial, and all spirit here rest, and be silent? No
surely, that he will not adm^t. Wherefore 5. he adds, and concludes (in which
he ouerthrows all) that God will not have us tied to the decrees of every
Council, Hic quoque valere det examen, quod praescribit Apostolus, vt spiritus
probentur
though holy and pious, because (says he) it may be they did not call rightly
upon God, and it is certain that they for the most have erred. What then?
Here must be an examen of the Council, that the spirit of it may be tried.
The Council therefore which was made judge, must again be judged: but by
whom? By every faithful man who by his private spirit has, as before, power
and liberty to try all spirits, even of Councels; and to call (as he says in
another place) in question all spirits of all Prelates, Bishops, and Councels
to the rule of gods word. Lo here his circular vain and deluding manner of
proceeding. There are many mad and bragging spirits; it is true. These spirits
must be tried: it is true. The Council is the fittest, and surest means to
try them; it is true. But what? Shall this Council which has power to try and
judge of these spirits, be again tried and judged by every one of these
spirits, which will (as all will) Judge it self the spirit of Prudence?
According to Calvin it must. Then which, what is more fond or frivolous? What
more circular and endless? That which tryes shall by the same be tried again.
He that did judge shall, by him whom he judges, be judged again. The Council
shall try and judge every private spirit, and every spirit shall try and judge
again the Council. And why? Because forsooth, it may be doubted whether the
Council did rightly call upon God. As though forsooth, the same may not as
well, and much more, be doubted of these private spirits? Among which are so
many mad, foolish, and bragging spirits which need a trial, and that by a
Council, as is granted. Surely if this be admitted, then are trials
endless, and circles will run on forward and backward in infinitum. The
Council shall judge the spirit, and the spirit shall judge the Council
again, and the Council it again; and so again and again without end, one
shall judge and re-iudge another. If this be not a Circle, what is? If this be
not a work endless and infinite, what can be? If this be not a mere
illusion, and deluding of man, and a ground groundless, a question endless, a
Circle infinite, and a proceeding vain and senseless, (in which yet the
Protestants proceed in their grounds of Faith) I will refer it to the judgment
of the indifferent reader: and so conclude that the Protestants run in a round
of Circles, proving one thing by another, and this other by the same; and that
in the first grounds and principles of their Faith and salvation.

THE PRIVATE SPIRITS AVTHORITY To judge of Controversies of Faith, confuted by
Doctrinall absurdities following upon it, against Faith. CHAP. IX.
Idolatry and Heresy compared; and of four heads and origens of all late
heresies proceeding of the private Spirit. SECT. I.
IN the last Chapter we have showed the Circular absurdities which do follow
upon this private Spirit, in the proof of Protestants grounds of their Faith
and salvation. In this we are to proceed to the Doctrinall absurdityes, which
follow upon the same against all faith, piety, and reason. Wherein first we
will lay down the principal points of the Protestant faith, and the
consequences ensuing upon it; and afterward we will show what absurdityes do
follow, first in general, out of the same heads and doctrine; next what in
particular do follow, 1. Against the articles of the Creed, and all faith. 2.
Against the petitions of the Pater noster, and all hope and prayers. 3. Against
the ten Commandments, and all moral virtue and good life. And lastly by
comparing the Catholic and Protestant doctrine together, we will show how the
one does give all honor and glory to God, to Christ, to his Saints, his
Church, his Sacraments, his law, his grace, and to man also: and that the other
does as much derogate and take away all honor, and give all dishonor to the
same.

Which, that we may the better understand, we may conceive how the Devil (that
Rebel against God, Idolatry what it is.
and the enemy of man) as he labors by all means to auert man from the love
of God, and to convert him to the love of the creature: so his chief desire is
to deprive God of his honor due to him, and to derive the same to his
creatures, thereby to draw man to an affectation of Deity, to rob God of his
honor, and to give it to man. Thus in paradise he persuaded our first Parents,
that they should be as Gods, as himself had before in heaven attempted to be
like to the highest. For this end this Pluto or Lucifer, of his Proserpina,
that is, Infidelity his spouse, begat two daughters; the first and eldest is
Idolatry, the next and second, Heresy. Idolatry he begat in the law of Nature,
which reigned long, from soon after Adam until some years after Christ.
Heresy he begat in the law of Grace, which presently after Christ rebelled and
sought to tyranyze against Christ's Church. Idolatry instead of one God made
many, and the true honor of one God divided to many false Gods. Heresy,
instead of one faith, introduces many false opinions, and diuides the unity of
Christ's Church in many sects. Idolatry, was engendered, as snakes of dunge, out
of the corruption of virtue and piety, and out of the increase of lust,
ambition, and cruelty. Heresy, in like manner sprung up out of disobedience,
pride, and lust, and being like (as one egg is to another) to Idolatry, of one
Viper begat another; of one Heresy, many, till at length a whole brood and
sink full of viperous Heresies, burst out and infected a great part of the
Christian world. When therefore, by the light of justice Christ Jesus, Idolatry
the elder sister, and with her the long night of Pagan darkness was expelled
(according to that of Apollo, Me puer Hebraeus diuos Deus ipse gubernans,
cedere sede iubet tristemque redire sub arc^m) and the true light of Christian
verity and piety shined in the Church of Christ, then began the second sister
Heresy, as an obscure mist, to cover the sun of true faith, and to bring in a
new darkness of novel and erroneous opinions into the Church of God.

And as Heresy is a kind of idolatry, Heresy is a kind of Idolatry.
both being vipers of one venture, or rather idolatry it self (for so do S.
Cyprian, Tertullian, Hierome, Augustine, and other Fathers expressly term it,
because not only the author, Cyp. de unit. Eccles. Tert praescr. cap. 40.
Hier. in Ezech. 8. and in Abac. 2. Aug lib. 18. de c^uit. Dei cap. 51.
but the work being all one and the same, Heresy does frame out of man's brain
a new Idol of false opinions, and proposes them as divine revelations from
God, whereby it either detracts from Christ and his truth, which is simple,
total, and indivisible, some point of verity; or else adds to the same some
falsity, in the same manner as Idolatry takes from God his true deity, and
honor due only to him, and gives the same to man to whom no deity or Godhead
is due) so this heresy, following the stepps of Idolatry, has in this our late
age made the same manner of beginning and progress as Idolatry did in the
first age. Wherefore it will not be amiss to observe the manner, and to
compare the progress and fruit of both.

First therefore Idolatry, the first borne of Satan's imps, and the greatest
enemy of God, having raised upon earth a general commotion and rebellion
against the only true God and Lord of heaven and earth, Idolatry what number of
Gods it begat.
and wrought in man a conceit of deity and an affectation of the divine
excellency, thereby to deprive God of his only and all due honor, and to
derive the same unto man his creature and vassal, Clemens lib. ^ec^gnit.
Petri, and itiner. Clem. lib. 10. cap. 6.
did first feine in the minds of men an imagination, that before the world was
made, all was a Chaos; that this Chaos made to it self finem and fundum, a
depth and a bottom, like an egg, which being sitten and hatched, brought
forth a man-woman called Planeta; this man woman broughr forth substance,
motion, and generation; of these was begot Caelum and Terra, Heaven and Earth.
Heaven begat six men called Titans, that is, Oceanus, Ceus, Tyus, Hyperion,
Iapetus, and Cronus who was Saturn. The earth begat six women, Thya, Rhea,
Themis, Mnemosyna, Thetis, and Hebe, which marrying one to another, of Saturn
and Rhea were borne Pluto, Neptune, and Jupiter. Saturn receiving from some
Oracle, that he should be expulsed by his sons, devoured Pluto and Neptune,
and intended to have done the like to all his male children, but Rhea to save
Jupiter, gave a stone instead of the child, to be eaten by Saturn, which stone
being devoured thrust out of Saturns belly Pluto and Neptune, the one into
Hell, the other into the Sea, whereby they were made Gods, Pluto of Hell, and
Neptune of the Sea, and Jupiter being sent by Rhea his mother to Heaven, was
made the God of heaven. Thus were Saturn and Rhea made parents of Gods,
Jupiter the chief of Gods.
and Jupiter the chief God; this Jupiter was notorious, first for cruelty, for
he not only killed his Uncles the Titans, and devoured his daughter Medea, and
tormented his sons Tantalus and Titius, His cruelty.
but also butchered and tormented his own Father Saturn; secondly, for lust,
he passed so far, that by incest of his own sisters Juno and Ceres, His lust.
he begot of Juno, Vulcan the God of Smithes, and of Ceres, Proserpina the
Queen of Hell, as likewise out of his own brain he begat Minerua, and out of
his thigh Bacchus. Also by adultery of other men's wives, he begat Mercury of
May the wife of Atlant, Apollo, and Diana of Latona the wife of Cea; the
graces Thalia, Euphrosine, and Aglia of Hermion the wife of Cleanus; Eudimion
of Phenissa the wife of Alphion; Musaeus of Helena the wife of Pandion, with
many others. Not thus content he transformed himself into diverse shapes, as of
an husband, and begat of Alcmena, Hercules; and of Cassiopeia, Andromedes; of a
Shepherd, and begat of Mnemosyna the nine Muses; of a Satyr, and begat of
Anthiope, Amphion and Zetas; of an Eagle, and begat of Egina, Eacus; of a
Vulture, and begat of a Nymphe the Palisci in Sicily; of a Swanne, and begat of
Hellen, Leda, and of a Goose, Nemesis; like a Bull, he begat of Europa Minous,
Rhadamantus and Sarpedon; like a Bear, he begat of Mantea Arctos; and like a
pismire Mirmedon of Euradremusa; being also transformed and showing himself as
a star he begat Castor and Pollux of Leda; as Gold, Perseus of Danae; as a
Shower of rain, Ganean of Manta. Thus a man as wicked as great, was made the
greatest God, and his chief actions of wickedness, cruelty, parricide, incest,
adultery and fraud, were deifyed for divine. And as the God Jupiter, so also
the other Gods begat young Gods, and made them like themselves Gods; thus
Neptune of a Sea-nimph begat Trito^, of Amphitrite the Cyclopes, Brontes,
Sterape, and Pyracmon. Thus Venus had by Vulcane, Cupid; by Bacchus, Priapis.
Thus Mars begat Cygnus, Apollo, Phaeton etc. And so the Gods begat so thick
and so fast young Gods, that the number of the Gods increased, according to
Varro to the number of thirty thousand, according to others, to many more, yea
to an infinite number. For when thus Idolatry had once taken root in men's
imagination, it grew up to that height that it made Gods some greater, some
lesser, some of men, some of women; as of the greater Gods of men, Mercury,
Mars, Neptune, Saturn, Jove, Vulcan, Apollo. Of women, Juno, Vesta, Venus,
Ceres, Men Gods.
Minerua, Diana: as of the lesser Gods, Bacchus, Eolus, Hercules, were
men-gods; and Thetis, Aurora, Bellona women goddesses. Women gods.
And it made Gods and adored with divine honor, not only good men, but bad
also, and them for their bad actions, as Jupiter for his former vices, Saturn
for parricide, Mars for cruelty, Mercury for fraud, Venus for lust, Juno for
envy, and dedicated to them, in sign of divine honor, certain Creatures, as
to Jupiter a Goat, to Diana a Heart, to Ammon a Ram, to Ceres Corn, to
Bacchus Wine, to Vulcane Fire, to Osiris Water, and to others a fish etc. from
which creatures in honor to them, they did either always, or at certain
times abstain. Likewise they honored their sepulchers, as the monuments of
Gods, as the Syrians did that of Adonis, the Egyptians that of Osyris* the
Trojans of Hector, the Lenconissi of Achilles, the people of Pontus that of
Patroclus, and the people of Rodes that of Alexander the Great.

Thus did Idolatry deify bad men and women, and for their bad actions make them
Gods, and give them divine honor: thus it made Gods some common for all, some
special for particular actions, Cicero de natura Deorum. Eric. de genealog.
Deor. Pul^o de Dijs antiquis. Guauerra dial of Princes lib. 1. c. 22. Special
Gods of particular things.
and occasions. Of the special Gods it made Esculapius a God of the sick,
Februa a goddess for agues, Pauor a God for courage, Bacchus for drunkenes,
Siluanus against dangers in sports, Meretrix for harlots, Fessoria for
travelers, Fortuna for good luck, Simula for good memory, Quies for rest,
Murcia for fatnes, Genouia against sloth, Thetrica for actions and comedies,
Esculanus for gold and silver, Pecunia for metals, Iugatinus against thunder,
Tutellina against hail, Flora against frost, Rubigo against worms and
locusts, Agrestis for the fields, Pelonius against the enemies of the earth,
Spinenis against weeds in corn, Segetius for sowing corn, Matura for ripening
corn, Ruana for reaping corn, Belus for war, Victoria for victory, Honorius
for Inne-keepers, Lamentina for dore-hammers, Cadrea for door bars and
hinges, Cloatina for the priuies. And which is most to be admired, this
Idolatry so far deluded the wise and valiant Romans, that it persuaded them to
build temples and offer sacrifice to these Gods and goddesses for any commodity
or necessity, as to Volumnus and Volumna for espoused persons, to Cantius for
wise children, to Lucina for safe childbearing, The Gods of Rome.
to Opis for the child newborn, to Vaginatus to keep it from crying, to
Ganinus for safety of it in the cradle, to Runinus for good sucking and
nursing, to Stellius to preserve it from lamenesse, to Adeon that it might love
the mother, to Mentalis that it might be witty and studious, and to Berecinthea
the mother of all these Gods. And one of the Romans a Philosopher most famous
in Camillus time among the^ for his piety and temperance (for it is said of him
that for sixty years (he lived 113.) he never went out of the walls of Rome,
never was heard speak idle word, never spent idle hour, never had contention
with any, never was noted of any public crime) by name Bruxellus did so
increase and multiply the number of the Gods in the city of Rome, that whereas
he found only five Gods received among them, that is, Jupiter, Mars, Ianus,
Berecinthea, and Vesta, he left among them 2800. as many as there were
families. Thus did Gods multiply and increase among that warlike people, every
family having a special God, and many still new Gods upon any new occasion.

Neither did this Idolatry thus rest, but proceeded on further, first to deify
and make Gods of the passions of men, Men's passions made Gods.
as of Ira, Fuga, and Voluptas, which they adored; next to give divine honor
to beasts, yea and to sensles creatures: thus did whole nations worship for
Gods the Philistines Dagon a fish, the Egiptians Apis an ox, the Babilonians a
dragon and golden statua, the Israelites a golden calfe and a brazen serpent,
the Persians the Sun, the Acacians the Moon, to which they offered sacrifice
in like manner, as the Romans did to Jupiter, Beasts made Gods
the Grecians to Juno, the Africans to Mars, the Macedonians to Mercury, the
Corinthians to Apollo, the Armenians to Bacchus, the Ephesians to Diana.

Quis furor est, quae tanta animas daementia cepit,
Vt volucrem, turpemque bouem, toruumque Draconem,
Semi-hominemque Canem, supplex homo pronus adoret?
says Sedulius. Thus did others for want of greater, adore as Gods, some (as
the Chaldeans) the planets of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars Sol, Venus and Mercury;
others (as the Grecians) Oceanus of the sea, Stix and Acaron of rivers: others
(as the Egyptians) Eolus of the winds, Herbs in the garden, as of Leekes,
Garlike and Onions, yea says one, the basest wind, Crepitus ventris.

Felices gentes quibus hac nascuntur in hortis.
Numina. --
says Iuuenall of the Egiptians. Of diverse of which in holy scripture mention
is made, as of 1. Reg. 31 10.
Asteroth the goddess of the Sidonians, of 3. Reg. 16 31.
Baal the God of the Samaritans, of Number. 25.3.
Belphegor the God of the Moubites, of 4. Reg. 1.2.
Beelzebub of Acaron, of 3. Reg. 11 7.
Chamos the God of the Moabites, 4. Reg. 15 8.
Rhemnon of the Syrians, of Iud. 17.5.
Norgal of the Cutheans, 2. Reg. 17 39.
Micha in mount Ephraim, 3. Reg. 15 13.
Priapus the God of Maaca the Mother of Asa, 2. Machab. 4.19.
Hercules the God of the Tirians, Ezech. 8.14.
Adonis of the Israelites which many others. In all which this Idolatry, as we
see, ouerflowed so far the banks of all reason and religion, that having
once made a breach, and robbed God of his honor, it bestowed the same upon the
vilest and meanest sort of creatures, and that so unreasonably and senslesly
that it is a wonder, how men of reason could be so void of reason as to
believe, profess and follow it. This was the proceeding of Idolatry.

Heresy in like manner, as the second impe of Satan which succeeded Idolatry,
and was raised of her ashes and corruption, that it might the better sow the
seed of infidelity, Idolatry and Heresy compared.
and root it self stronger in worldly and carnal affections, did in
imitation of her elder sister Idolatry, seek to rob Christ Jesus of the verity
of his divine revelations, and his spouse the Church of the sincerity of true
faith and Religion, and transferred the same unto erroneous and heretical
falsities. For which it invented and framed in men's conceits an opinion of a
private spirit which it made the mother and deviser of all errors and
heresies; of which as in the primitive ages of Christ's Church it begat in the
brain of Manes, Marcion, Sabellius, Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches and
others the wicked errors against the B. Trinity, of one God and three Persons
in the Deity, against the sacred Incarnation of one person, and two natures in
the person of our B. Savior Christ, by which, as by so many bastardes of
impiety, such an infinite brood of heresies have since that time been inge^dred
in the Christian world, that the increase of the^ has filled, or rather
defiled a great part of the East Church both in Asia and Afric, and left
behind them the stincke of no fewer then 300. rotten heresies, and heretical
opinions: So also in this last age of Christ it begat in the brains of an
Apostata Friar Martin Luther, which it coupled with a like Apostata Nun, and
of other Apostataes, Bucer, Martyr, Bale, Knox etc. whom it wi^ed in like
incestuous bed of double Apostasy, and of all sort of impurity, such a number
of brats or rather vipers of heretical opinions, and errors, as neither the
number of them can be recounted (of which some have found out 300. and more)
nor can the mischief of dissension and cruelty be conceived, with which they
have pestered the most flourishing Kingdoms of Europe, and brought in an
horrible confusion and desolation in place of former piety and religion.

In which we may observe, that as Idolatry made Chaos, or confusion the mother
of all; so has Heresy made the private spirit (which is nothing but a Chaos,
or confused conceit which every one has of his own opinion) the mother and
conceauer of all heretical opinions. As Idolatry divised that out of Planeta
the Man-woman, or fruit of Chaos, issued Heaven and Earth, and of them so many
Gods and Goddesses; so has Heresy caused, that out of the commixtion of a
Friars and Nuns concupiscence, such a number of heretical opinions, and wicked
practices should receive their origin and progress. As the Pagans made
Jupiter, a man of life most wicked and exercised in all practice of cruelty,
and incestuous carnality, a God, and the chiefest among the Gods; so do the
Protestants canonize Luther, a man of a most carnal, proud and envious both
disposition and course of life, as an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, and a
man of God. As Saturn the false God by Idolatry was made the Father of many
Gods, chiefly of three, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, who also begat many petty
Gods, and filled the world with many innumerable false Gods, whereby adoration
was given even first to men, then to the basest and meanest creatures: so
Luther the false Apostle and Prophet, by the instigation of his private spirit,
did beget and devise four most monstrous imps of heretical doctrine and
impiety, out of which as so many vipers, such a number of erroneous and wicked
opinions have flowed, that the light of true faith and Religion has been
obscured, and the beauty and splendour thereof has been attributed to most
false errors and fond heresies. And thus has Heresy succeeded and imitated
her elder sister Idolatry.

Now these four heads or principal heresies, The private spirit the mother
of all heresies.
which the private spirit, the eldest daughter of Heresy, did beget in Luther,
and his followers brains, and out of which as sequels issued such a number of
falsities and heresies, are these. The first is, that the Church and Bishop of
Rome is fallen from being the spouse of Christ, to be the very Antichrist
himself, as wholly opposite to Christ, The first daughter, contempt of Church
authority.
and corrupted with all abominable errors of idolatry and superstition, out of
which have issued these and such like brats of heresy, that therefore the
visible and known Church was latent, invisible and not extant for many ages,
and that true faith and doctrine was banished from the same visible Church,
which was only the Roman Church, and that for many ages, some of them say six,
some ten, some twelve, some fourteen ages, even since the Apostles time, all
which time, truth lay smothered, overwhelmed and buried in the dregs of
Antichristian error, superstition, and idolatry. That all the Councels
Provincial or General, were the assemblies of Antichrist. All the Fathers,
and Doctors were deceived and subjected to Antichrist. All the Christian
people, Princes, or Prelates, lived in the external obedience of Antichrist.
That no lawful mission or vocation, no right ordination or consecration, no
continual succession or deriuation of Pastors was for all this time to be
found in the Church. That no preaching of the word of God, no administration of
Sacraments, no offering of sacrifice, no saying of service, no discipline of
Church orders and government, was holy and lawful for so many ages, till God
extraordinarily raised up Martin Luther, and by his spirit reformed all.
Whereupon, since that time has ensued, as the fruits of the womb of this
private spirit, and new doctrine, all neglect and contempt of Church orders,
laws, or obseruances, as of Mass, and Mattins, of fasting, and festival
days, of single life and chastity, of obedience, and poverty, of penance, and
mortification, of confession, and satisfaction, of benedictions, and
peregrinations, and of all Works of austerity, piety, and devotion. Hence has
ensued all rapine, and robing of Churches, Church-goods, and Church-ornaments,
all destruction of Monasteries, and Religious houses, all profanation of holy
things, all cruelty against Priests, and Religious men, all incestuous and
sacrilegious lewdness against vowed persons, all rebellion against Princes for
Religion, all contempt of them, and their laws as not obliging in conscience,
and all liberty of life and manners, to practice whatsoever profit, or pleasure
proposed as most plausible to every man's humor, and disposition.

The second and next offspring of this spirit was Justification by only faith
The second daughter sole Faith.
in which as they all agree in general; so it has been the mother of many
notorious new impietyes, from whence, as out of a Troian-horse, issued these
and such like profane paradoxes; as that this faith is a sole faith, not
informed with charity or good works, Confess. Saxon. cap. de remiss peccat.
Confess. Auglican. art. 11 Belgi^. art. 22 Bohemica art. 6. Augustan^ cap. de
f^de Gallica art. 20. Luther. de liber. tom. 2. fol. 4. and in Gal. 2. tom. 5.
fol. 305. Calu. in Gal. 2.16. and in Act. 13.39. In confess. fidei page 109. de
vera Ecclesiae reform. page 318. In Antidot. Council. sess. 6. Can. 9. Beza in
Romans 3.20. Pet. Mart. in 1. Cor. 1. f. 32. in 8. Witak. ad rat. 1. Came. page 7.
Perk. Catathes. tom. 1. Col. 487. The third daughter, Concupiscence is
original sin. Luth. in confut. La tom. fol. 220. and tom. 5. in Galat. 1.
fol. 227.228. in cap. 2. fol. 231. ibid. de bonis operib. fol. 581. in natal.
Christi fol. 374. Calu. lib. 2. cap. 1.. 8. and lib. 4. cap. 15.. 10. and in
Antidot. Council. Trid. ad sess. 5. and lib. 3. Instit. cap. 11.. 3. and lib. 3.
Instit. cap. 1.. 8. and cap. 14.. 9. lib. 2. Instit. cap. 11.. 8 and 9. and
lib. 3. cap. 11.. 2. and 3. Vrb. Regius in locis tom. 1. fol. 358. Witak. de
peccat. orig. lib. 2. cap. 3. page 656.
a special faith, assuring certainty of salvation, a perpetual faith never
lost, a rare faith given only to the Elect, a faith covering, not curing
sins, imputing, not making us just, apprehending, not possessing the justice
of Christ. A faith that admits no good works, no merit, no profit, no
necessity, yea no possibility either of being justified by any, or of having
power to do any good works at all; because all works, even the best works of
the best men, are sins, and that mortal, deserving eternal damnation,
though by faith not imputed to the elect. Hence it is, that the keeping of the
law is impossible, that no laws oblige in conscience, that grace is not
sufficient, that man has no free will, and cannot but sin and offend, that
Sacraments are not instruments and means, but seals and signs of this
justice, and justification by faith; that Baptism is to be given only to the
faithful, and children of the faithful, that the Eucharist is a sign or
figure of Christ's body, received only by the faithful, and Elect. With many
such like, which hang upon the former principle.

The third, and next borne impe of this spirit, is the doctrine of Original
sin, which against the Pelagians, Luther admitting, did yet, against the
Catholic Church, maintain to be natural Concupiscence, which in the state of
corrupt nature remaining in man, is very Original sin it self. This
Original sin, say they, does corrupt and infect the whole man, and all, and
every action in man proceeding from it with sin, does cause that a man in
all, even in his best actions does sin, and can do nothing but sin; and so
can neither merit by any good work, nor satisfy for any sin, does hinder all
internal grace, and justification, which should abolish sin, and does take
away all ability of free will, all possibility of keeping the Commandments, or
so much as any one of them; all obligation to perform any precept of the love
of God, or man, moral or divine; and so all endeavor and labor to do
penance, to seek perfection, to take up the cross of Christ, and mortify our
passions, and follow him, as being needless, The fourth daughter,
Predestination to damnation. Calu. lib. 1. Inst. cap. 18.. 1. and lib. 3 cap
23.. 6. and 9. and lib. 2 cap 4. 2. and lib. 1. cap. 18.. 2. and. 4. and lib.
3. cap 23.. 9. and lib. 1. Inst. c. 17.. 5. and 18.. 1.2. and lib. 3. cap. 4..
2. and lib 1 Inst. cap. 18.. 3. etc. 2.. 10. and lib. 1. Inst. cap. 14.. 2. and
lib. 2. cap 4.. 5. and lib. 3. cap 23.. 14. etc. 24.. 13.14. and lib. 3. cap
24.. 12. Vide plu^a infra sect. 5 Subdus. 4.
fruitless, and impossible by the infection of this concupiscence, which they
make to be original sin.

The last and youngest bastard-brood of this spirit, is the doctrine of
predestination, of which though Luther laid the egg; yet because Calvin did
hatch the brood, and maintain above any other before him, it is imputed to him
as the first hatcher of it, and as his bastard, is by many Lutherans and
Arminians rejected. The doctrine of which is this, that God out of his absolute
and irrespectiue will, as he predestined, ordained, and created some to
salvation, so by the same will he like wise predestined, ordained, and
created others to damnation; the one because it was his will that they should
be saved; the other merely because it was his will (without any fault, sin,
or demerit in them foreseen) that they should be damned. To which damnation
that he might bring them, he did for that end create them, and ordained that
first Adam, then all his posterity should sin, that for this sin he might
execute his sentence of damnation; for which end he did cause Satan to tempt
them to sin, to move and force them to sin, yea did himself take from them
all liberty not to sin, and work in them immediately by his operation all
their sin, and obdurate them in that sin; and for that end that they should
have no remedy or help against sin, he denied them the benefit of the death
of Christ, and his merits, the benefit of vocation to grace, of sufficiency of
grace, of justification by grace, or of glorification by the means of grace,
to all those whom he had thus appointed to damnation, and to sin. On the
contrary, to them whom he had ordained to be saved, he ordained likewise the
death and Passion of Christ as a mean for that end to them only, and by it
gave effectual vocation, sanctification, and glorification to them only, and
of these only (who are his only children) he maks his Church. To these only,
let them do what they will, he imputes no sin, but couers all their sins
with the cloak of the justice of Christ, accounts them just, and
notwithstanding all their sins, loves them as his children, esteems them as
his darlinges, and enthrones them as heirs in his Kingdom of heaven, among
his Saints and Angels. All which and such like opinions in number infinite, and
in impiety horrible, as so many swarms of locusts and gnates, engendered out of
the corruption of all good christianity, and conceived in the womb of double
Apostasy, and sacrilege between a Friar and a Nun, by the heat and smoke of
this fiery spirit of frensy, have as so many clouds shaddowed the light of true
Faith, as so many Foxes devoured the Lambs of Christ's sheepfould, as so many
roots of ill weeds ouergrowne and choked the harvest of Christ's fields, and
as so many vipers poisoned the souls of an infinite number of Christians:
Whereby is left nothing, but ruin and vastation of all ancient monuments of
piety, nothing but horror, and confusion in all discipline, and orders of
Religion, nothing but impiety and desolation of all Faith and belief in many
flourishing kingdoms of Christianity. Of which as any one in former ages would
have sufficed, as a plague, to have infected any Country with heresy; so al of
them compiled in one bundell, can bring no less then a general mortality of
all goodness in so many Countries infected by the^.

Of absurdities which follow upon the first head, of contempt of all
Church Authority, and relying upon the private spirit. SECT. II.
BUT let us proceed and consider in particular what fruits and consequences,
and what absurdities, contrary to all reason, honesty, and piety do flow, and
follow out of these principles and positions. And first to begin with their
first principle, Absurdities which follow upon contempt of Church Authority.
and the issue following from it, which is their contempt of Church Authority,
their condemning the Roman Church, as Antichristian, and theit bold affirming
the true Church of Christ, for so many ages, to have decayed, and perished, and
to have been invisible not known, and wholly overwhelmed with errors of
superstition, idolatry, and Antichristianity, 1. The want of a true Church,
faith, and salvation.
1. It follows that for so many ages, that is, 8.10.12. or 14. as before, was
neither true Church or congregation, neither lawful Pastors and Preachers,
neither right Sacraments or Sacrifice, neither any divine service or worship of
God among any visible company of people in any part of the Christian world. 2.
It follows, that in all those ages, all the Fathers and Doctors, all the
Bishops and Prelates, all the Confessors, Virgins, and Martyrs, and all the
Councels general or provincial: that all the four Doctors of the Latin
Church, and the rest with them, all the Doctors of the East Church, and all the
learned among the^, all ancient Bishops of the Primitive church, and all the
Clergy under them, all the four first general Councels, and the other twelve
after them, with the provincial Councels confirmed by them, 2. The misbeliefe
of al Prelates, Princes, and people.
and the Bishops, and Confessors in them; that all the Holy Virgins,
Confessors and Martyrs in time of most of the ten persecutions, and of the
Arian, and image-breaking Emperors; that all the Emperors of Rome,
Constantinople, or Germany, of the East or West, all the Kings of Italy,
Spain, France, England, Scotland, Swethland, Denmark, or Poland, all and
every one, who before Luther were Christians, and professed the christian
Religion; that all these with the people, who professed the same Christianity
with them, and under them, were all seduced by a false faith, and false
Christianity, and all lived and dyed in the service, not of Christ, but
Antichrist. Into what heart of any Christian can it enter, that for so many
ages, no Doctor with his pen, no Prelate out of the pulpit, no Confessor in
prison, no Martyr at his death, no Council by their decrees, no Emperor with
his sword, no people, or Pastor in any parish should have publikly professed*
maintained, and confirmed the true faith of Christ, and true doctrine of
salvation, but all of Antichrist and damnation.

Thirdly, it follows that all the predictions, 3. The falsehood of all
prophesyes and predictions.

Castalio in his preface of the great Latin Bible dedicated to King Edward 6.

2. Tim. 3.15* David Georg in hist. Daui. Georg. printed at Antwerp: an. 1568
by the Divines of Basil. and in a Protestant book entitled, Apocalipsis
infigniu^ aliquorum Haeresiarcharum. printed Lug duni Batauorum ann. 1608.

See the Protestants Apology Tract. 2. cap. 3. p. 307. 4. The pre-eminence of
Jews and Gentiles above Christians.


and prophecies of the prophets before Christ, all the promises and assurances
made by Christ himself, or by his Apostles to his Church, either of the
extension, and amplitude of Christ's Church from sea to sea, from North to
South, to the uttermost end of the world, to all people and nations, to all
Isles and Kingdoms, to all Kings and Princes, or of continuance and succession
of the same as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure, from Sabbath to
Sabbath, from age to age, from generation to generation without interruption,
or discontinuance from that time till the worlds end; or of the Holy Ghosts
assistance, and continuance with it, as the Pillar, and ground of truth against
all the waves and storms of the sea of this world, against all the swords and
violence of persecutors and Tyrants, and against all principalities and powers
the governors of this darkness, and the very gates of hell it self: It
follows, I say, that all these predictions have been false, and not verifyed,
as Castalion, and David George both Protestants, convinced by experience of the
not being of a Protestant Church, have confessed; it follows that the Prophets
of the old Testament who foretold them, were false, not true Prophets, that
the Apostles of the new Testament who confirmed them, were unlawful and
faythlesse messengers, and that Jesus Christ who planted, watered, and promised
to give increase to this his Church, was not the only true omnipotent God, but
either a false deceauer, who promised that he knew should not be performed, or
else a weak worker, who could not perform that which he had promised, to wit,
this amplitude, succession, and firmity of his Church, thus wholly frustrated
and made void, according to the former principle and doctrine. All which is
wikedly confessed upon the former grounds by David George, Ochinus, and others.

Fourthly it follows, that Turks, Jews, and Gentiles have had a more
flourishing state of a Church, Kingdom, and Professors, as having been more
visible, potent, and dilated, for many continued ages, in many distant parts
of the world, then the christians, who have had neither Prince, Prelate,
people, or scarce any public Professors of true Christianity, for one age
together, under any one King, in any one province of the world. That Mahomet,
and Antichrist or the devil by them, did with more prudence, and power with
more piety, and policy, establish, enlarge, and protect their faith and common
wealth which so long continued, then Jesus Christ, who is true God and man,
did, or could do his faith and Church, which so soon after his departure
erred, failed, and decayed. Where is the greater glory of the second temple,
Aggeus 2.10.
then of the first? Where is the Psalm. 2.8
ends of the earth given to it for a possession? Where are the Isa 49.23
Kings and Queens who as nursing fathers, are to have protected it? Where are
the people and nations, who with the Psalm. 71 10.15.
gold of Arabia and Saba were to have enriched it? Where are the Isles, and
kingdoms who from the uttermost Isa. 42.4.60.9.
ends of the world were to have waited upon this Church of Christ, more then
any other of Jews, Turks, or Pagans? What, was Christ less true, less good,
less faithful, less able and potent, in the establishing, and preserving his
kindgome, then were Moses, or Mahomet, Cyrus, or Romulus in settling and
enlarging their Synagogue, Sect, or Commonwealth? Surely it follows (O
horror and blasphemy) if these positions, and points of the Protestants
private spirits doctrine, were true and warrantable.

Of absurdities which follow upon the second head of sole Faith. SECT. III.
SECONDLY, Out of the second principle, and doctrine depending on it (which is
that a man is justified by only faith, Absurdities which follow upon only faith.
which is a faith, special of every ones own predestination, justification,
and glorification; so certain, and so sure as that there is a God, or that
Christ is saved; so perpetual, that it can never be lost, and peculiar only to
the elect, depending upon their private spirit, and the rest before mentioned)
it follows, First. That a man is not only without all doubt, or so much as any
fear, certain of his predestination past, justification present, 1. That
every Protestant is more certain of his salvation, then Christ was of his own.
and glorification to come, but also that he is more certain of it then he is
of the B. Trinity, of the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, ascension, and
coming of Christ; which he belieues only by a faith not supernatural, and
divine, but historical, general, and common, as they say, to the reprobate
and devils; yea more certain, then Jesus Christ was of his salvation, whom
they affirm to have feared, doubted, distrusted, and despaired, before his
death of his salvation, as is afterward showed. Yea as certain must they be,
as certain they are that God is one God, or that Jesus Christ is in heaven or,
as if Jesus Christ were present, and so told them; which are their own words,
and comparisons, which is both absurd and impious: absurd, because they have
scripture to avouch the being of one God, and the salvation of Christ; but
which auouches to every man this his salvation in particular they have neither
scripture nor reason: Impious, because what greater impiety, and blasphemy can
be conceived, then to make Christ, God and man, doubtful of his salvation, and
themselves, sinful and wicked wretches, certain of theirs?

Secondly it follows, that every Protestant may, and must by faith believe as
certain, that, of which neither authority of scripture, testimony of Church,
2. That their faith is not grounded upon any scripture or authority.
or evidence of reason does yield any argument of certainty; but only his own
private spirit and conceit does suggest, and persuade this certainty of every
one his own justification and salvation; and yet that the same Protestants may
doubt, yea refuse to assent and believe such articles of faith, as both
express authority of Scripture, evident proposition of Church and confessed
testimony of ancient tradition, Fathers, and Councels does fully and
frequently deliver and approve: such are many articles now in controversy, as
Freewill, merit, good works, real presence, prayer to saints, for the dead,
and such like. All which, for example, Calvin and every Protestant do as firmly
(notwithstanding all the former confessed testimonies) reject and condemn, as
they believe the certainty of their own salvation, which (notwithstanding that
it be not mentioned or motioned in particular, in any such, or the former
testimonies) they do most undoubtedly and firmly apprehend and believe. In
which among all absurdities what can be more absurd then without any other
reason or testimony, but ones own conceit, so firmly to adhere to a thing of
importance, so uncertain both in it self, and in experience; and yet not
believe many things in themselves so probable, and so mainly by so many
testimonies confirmed and approved? Which what is it else, but to believe what
every one will, and best likes, and to reject what he will not believe, or does
dislike him; and so to make every ones own will, conceit, or affection the
rule of his faith and belief.

3. That all Protestants are as just as Christ.
Thirdly, it follows, that every Protestant is not only as sure of his own
salvation, as he is of Christ's, and that he cannot be damned except Christ be
damned, which Luth. tom* 5. enar. in* 1. Pet. 1.
Luther, Zuing. to. 1. in art. disp. Tigur. fol. 628.
Calvin, and See Kellisons examen part. 2. exam 13. cap. 8. Call. Turcis. l. 3.
cap. 12.
Zuinglius expressly, though absurdly, hold: but also that he is as just and
holy, as any Confessor, Martyr, Apostle, or the Mother of God, yea even as
Jesus Christ himself. For since all are just, according to them, not by any
justice internal and inherent in the soul; but external and imputed by Faith
(which faith, apprehending the justice of Christ which was in him, makes it the
justice of every one in particular, for which he is accounted just) it follows
that this justice of Christ which is equally imputed to all the just, does
equally cover all sins, maks equally just all persons, yea all as just as Jesus
Christ, whose justice is theirs, and with whose justice they are equally
covered, and thereby counted equally just before God. Whence ensues, that all
are as just at the first instance of their justification, as Christ was both at
first and ever till his ascension, and that they cannot increase in justice,
Apoc. 22.11.
and be made more just, and justified still; because from the first instant of
their justification they have all the justice imputed to them, which Christ had
ever inherent till his ascension in him, Luther. sermon. de natiu. virginis, and
comment. in 1. Pet. 2.
and are as just at the first as he ever was at first or last. Which, though
absurd, senseless, and impious, yet it has not wanted express defenders
among them, as Luther who affirmed all faithful to be as just as Peter, Paul,
our B. Lady, and all Saints. As ^ucer in Matthew. 3.
Bucer, who affirmed every minister to be as just as was S. John Baptist, then
whom was not by the testimony of our Savior Math. 11.11.
a greater among the borne of women. And Zuin. to. 1. in art. dis. Tygur. f.
628. 4. That all the world shall be saved, proved by diverse Protestant positions.
Zuinglius, who affirms that God favors no less every faithful Christian
then he does Christ himself, and that every one has as great right to heaven,
as Christ has.

Fourthly it follows, that not only all faithful Christians, but that all
people, whether good or bad, Jews o^ Gentiles, Christians or Pagans, yea all
who ever have lived or ever shall live in this world, shall be all saved as sure
as Christ is saved. This is deduced out of the Protestant doctrine, two ways;
first out of diverse their positions, which by many of them, chiefly by Calu.
Inst 6.24. Infa^s a matris vtero in foedore continetur etc. Filiorum haud dubie
loco habet eorum filios, quorum semini in patre^ se for^ pollicitus est etc.
Calu. in Antidot. Concilij Trid. sess. 6.9.5. Verum infantes a regno Dei arcere
libuit, qui ante erepti sunt ex hac vita, quam offerri ad Baptismum potuerint.
Quasi vero de nihilo dictum sit eos nasci sanctos qui ex fidelibus nascuntur.
Imo quo iure ad Baptismum eos admittimus, nisi quod promissionis sunt haeredes?
Nisi enim ante ad eos pertineret vitae promissio, Baptismum profanaret quisquis
illis daret. Quod si Deus in regnum suum eos adoptauit, quanta iniuria fit
promissioni, quasi per se ad eorum salutem non sufficiat? Inclusa est infantium
salus in promissione, qua Deus Fidelibus testatur se fore illis, and semini
eorum in Deum. Hac ratione sibi nasci pronunciab at, qui ex Abraham ducebant
originem. Huius promissionis beneficio recipiu^tur ad Baptismum, quia censentur
Ecclesiae membra. Non a Baptismo igitur initium habet little salus, sed quae iam
in verbo fundata erat Baptismo obsignatur. Calu. ep. 147. and 149.
Calvin, are believed, and taught, as 1. That only faith does justify, and that
it being once had cannot be lost. 2. That this faith is promised to all
faithful and their seed, as it was to Abraham and his seed, and that therefore
all the children of the faithful are sanctified in their Mothers womb, as
being within the Covenant made to their Parents and their seed, as Calvin
stiffly maintains. 3. That the Sacraments, and chiefly Baptism, are seals or
signs of faith, and so are to be ministered only to the faithful, and the
children of the faithful; for which Farellus at Geneua refused to baptize a
child, whose parents were Papists, and Calvin approved the fact. 4. That
therefore the children of the faithful shall be saved, though they never be
baptized, as the English Catechism teachs, because they are borne of faithful
Parents, and so are in the covenant, and sanctified before they be borne. If all this should be true, it would follow that, because the covenant and promise of
faith and salvation was made, for example, to Abraham and his seed, and that
because Abraham had faith, was sealed with the sign of faith, was just by
Faith, must continue in faith, and was saved by faith, that therefore his seed
Ismael, and Isaac; and as Isaac, so his seed Jacob and Esau; and as Jacob, so
all his seed, all the twelve Patriarchs his sons, were likewise included in
the covenant, were all borne of faithful parents, all sanctified in their
Mothers womb, all sealed as faithful with the Circumcision, the sign of
faith, all made just by faith, all continued in the same faith, and so all
saved in heaven by virtue of that faith. And as they, so their seed, and
children, and their childrens children, from generation to generation must be
likewise included in the Covenant; be likewise sanctified in their Mothers
womb, be likewise sealed with the sign of the Covenant, or Circumcision; be
likewise just by faith, continue just in faith, and be likewise saved by faith.
And the same which it inferred of Jacob, and his children, and childrens
children unto the worlds end, may also be inferred and avouched truly either
more generally of Adam, and all his posterity, or more particulerly of any one
faithful, and his posterity for ever. For if Adam and Eve, or this particular
faithful person were faithful, just, and saved, then their children after
them, and their childrens children for ever were likewise faithful, just and
saved, because as the Parents had the promise of faith made to themselves, and
their children; so their children were borne sanctified of these faithful
parents, were sealed with the sign of faith, Circumcision or Baptism; were
made just, continued just by faith, and were saved as just by faith; and as
these children, so also all their children and childrens children by the same
reason were all included in the covenant or promise of Faith, were al born
sanctified by faith, were all to be sealed with the sign of faith, were all
made just by faith, all continued just by faith, and so are all saved by faith;
and so all the posterity of Adam, Nati natorum, and quotquot nascentur abillis,
as they were included in the promise of faith made to their parents and them,
and thereby were all faithful, and continued and ended all faithful, so were
they all saved. By which it should follow also not only, that all the whole
world should be saved and none damned; but also that faith, justification and
salvation should descend by inheritance from generation to generation as Lands
should by entayle, which cannot by any fine or recovery be cut off, sold, or
lost. And as they are all thus faithful, and just by faith apprehending the
justice of Christ, and had the justice of Christ equally imputed to them for
their justice: so are they all equally just, as justified by the same justice
of Christ, and all equally just with Christ, as having the same justice theirs
which was Christ's; and so are all just and perfect as any Saint, or Christ, are
all as certain of salvation as any Saint, or Christ, and shall be all as blessed
in heaven as is any Saint or Christ, with whom as they had the same justice in
earth, so for the same they shall have the like glory in heaven. Which
absurdity as of all absurdities it is most absurd, so does it follow out of the
same absurd doctrine.

Secondly, the same absurdity is inferred out of another of the Protestants
usually received position of doctrine, The same proved out of their doctrine,
by special and only faith.
which is, That every man shallbe saved by only Faith, and that by a special
Faith, by which he is bound infallibly to* believe that he shall be saved if he
will be saved: out of which their received doctrine I reason thus. Whatsoever
every man in particular is bound to believe as an article of Faith necessary to
his salvation, that is true and certain, whether he do believe it or no. But
every man in particular is bound to believe as an article of his faith
necessary to his salvation, according to the Protestants, that he shall be saved.
Ergo, That every man in particular shall be saved, is true and certain,
according to the Protestants doctrine, whether he believe it, or no.
The Mayor proposition is true, and not deniable in any divinity, because all
articles or points of Faith, which all are bound to believe as necessary to
salvation, and under pain of damnation, are most certainly true, and aeternae
veritatis antecedenter, and before they be actually believed, whether they be
believed or not by them, who ought to believe them. For so, that there is a
blessed Trinity of three persons and one God, an Incarnation of the Son of
God, a Resurrection of the body and the like, is certainly true in it self,
though the Arians, Nestorians, and other Heretics do not believe it, which
yet they are bound to believe as necessary to salvation. Therefore if every man
be bound in like manner to believe his own salvation as certainly, and as
neccessarily as he is bound to believe the B. Trinity, Incarnation, and
Resurrection, and that as an article of his faith; it follows that his
salvation is as certainly true as his Resurrection whether soever he do
believe, or not believe either, or both of them; and so it is inferred that he
shall be saved, as well as rise again, though he do not believe it: which is
confirmed, because the object of Faith, or thing to be believed has in it
eternal verity, before the act of man's Faith do conceive or believe it, and
therefore is believed because it is and before was true, but is not made true
because it is now believed; faith not making, but supposing his object, which
as it houlds true in the verity of the Resurrection, Incarnation, Trinity and
others point of faith which are believed, because they are true, and are true
whether they be believed or not; so it must hold true in the verity of every
man's salvation if it be a point of every man's faith. For if the certainty of
his own salvation be the object of every man's faith which he ought to believe,
then the same certainty or object is true before it be believed; and so it is
true that he shall be saved before he do believe, and true it is whether he so
believe or no.

Remission of their sins and salvation an article of Protestants Faith.
The Minor Proposition or subsumption that according to the Protestants, every
man is to believe his own Justification and Salvation, is so certain that it
is their common received doctrine, that Only Faith does justify, that this Only
Faith is a Special Faith, that this Special Faith has for his only object
which it belieues, remission of his sins, his Justification and salvation by
Christ, that this belief is a divine faith, a saving faith, as certain a
faith, as that by which we believe that there is a God, a Jesus Christ, a
heaven or hell, so certain that it admits no doubt or uncertainty, but includes
an infallible and assured confidence of the promises of God to us of our
salvation. Thus says Calvin Calu. cathec. c. de fide.
that Justifying Faith is a certain knowledge of Gods favor to us; that Ibid.
in ^ Matt. 21.21
every one must undoubtedly be sure that God is merciful unto him. Beza, Beza
in confess. cap. 7. sect. 8. p. 60.
that Faith is not to believe in God, or in the word of God, which Faith the
Devils have; Idem. in Tim. 4.15.
but a firm persuasion of our election in Christ: A Idem in confess. cap. 4
sect. 18. p. 15*
certainty by which we are more certain then of any thing, that life
everlasting is due to us. Luther, Luth. postil. in Domi. 3. Aduent. f. 31.
that Faith is a constant and firm persuasion without doubt or wavering of
Gods grace and good will due to us; Idem in Psalm. 14. tom 3. fol. 247.
so certain, that it is above all other certainty. Bucer, Bucer in Matthew. 16.
that Faith is nothing but a certain persuasion of our salvation of Christ.
The Confess. August. 1531 art. 4. Saxon. cap. 16. Luth. disput. tom. 1. f. 53.
Call. in Romans 10.10. confess. fidei. Lobecius. Par. lib. 3. de Iustif. cap. 4.
page 643. VVhita. ad r^t. 8. Camp. page 36. l. 8. contra Dur. sect. 47. conc.
vltim. Per. de Bapt. tom 1. col. 810. Reinol. these. 2. p. 71. Jew. defenc.
Apol. part. 2. cap. 6. sect. 3. p. 149. Par. vbi supra. Luth. tom. 5. enar. in
1. Pet. 1. Zuing. tom. 1. in art. disput. Tygur. f. 628. See Kellison exam.
part. 2. exam. 13. c. 8. Calu. Turcis. l. 3. c. 12. See above chap. 7. sect. 3.
Confession of Auspurge, of Saxony, Luther, Lobecius, Pareus, Whitaker,
Reynoldes, Perkins, That a man is justified by believing, and that without
wavering or fear of his own infirmity, that his sins ere forgiven, that he
is just, and shall be saved. Yea (says Jewel) he must be so certain, as if
Christ was present and so told him; says Pareus, as certain as that Christ
dyed for the remission of our sins; says Luther, and Zuinglius, as certain
as he is of Christ's salvation, yea so certain, that except Christ be damned,
he cannot be damned. Whereupon they all hold that the object of Justifying
Faith, is not to believe that Christ is God and Man, was borne, dyed, and rose
for us, nor to believe the Scripture and the word of God in it, which is a
general or historical Faith, and common to the reprobate, and the Devils;
but to believe that himself has his sins pardoned him, is just and shall be
saved, and that God is merciful to him, does account him just, and will save
him, the certainty and assurance of which does justify him before God. All
which may be seen in the Authors own words in D. Smiths Collation. This is
that special Faith by which alone Protestants hold that every man is
justified and saved, and without which every one is damned. Therefore this
Faith is necessary to salvation necessitate medij, and as a thing so necessary,
does oblige every one in particular under pain of damnation to have it,
because by it all are saved, and without it, all are damned. Therefore true is
the Minor Proposition, that as according to the Protestants, this faith alone
is necessary for every one to salvation, so every one is bound to have, and so
to believe it upon pain of the loss of his salvation.

Upon which premises, which in the first mood and figure infer the
Conclusion, follows, that according to this protestant position of
Justification and Salvation, by only and special Faith, that every one
whethersoeuer he believe or no, whether he be faithful or infidel, elect or
reprobate, must be saved. Which absurdityas it is most absurd, so is the same
more fully illustrated and deduced out of the same principle after this manner:
As well the reprobat as the elect obliged to believe all articles of Faith.
Special Faith, or infallible assurance of salvation is necessary to
salvation, as well to Judas a reprobat, as to James an elect; and as James is
saved by it, so is Judas damned for want of it, according to the Protestants:
therefore under pain of his damnation Judas is as well bound to have it, as
James is; because it being a necessary mean to salvation, the want of it is
Judas damnation, as the having of it is James his sauation. Judas therefore (and
that which I say of Judas, I say of all the reprobate) is as much obliged under
pain of his damnation, to believe as an article of his faith, that he shall be
saved, as James, or any elect is? But whatsoever Judas and all the reprobate or
infidels are bound to believe as an article of faith necessary to their
salvation, as well as James and the elect, must needs be true, and that
certainly and infallibly true, whethersoeuer they do believe it or no:
Therefore it must needs be true, that as well Judas and all the reprobate
shall be saved, Particular salvation an object of Protestants faith revealed.
as James and the elect. The fundamental reason of which is this: All divine
Faith (of which kind, and that the most chief the Protestants will have this
their Special Faith to be) depends upon divine revelation from God, this
revelation supposes truth in the object or thing revealed, the object of truth
or thing revealed, is aeterna veritatis and true in it self before it be
believed, and so true whether it be believed or no. The object therefore of
this special faith, which every one as well reprobate as elect, is bound under
pain of his damnation to believe, and which is the remission of his own
sins, his Justification and salvation; is, and must be aeternae veritatis,
is, and must be true before it be believed, is, and must be true whether it be
believed or no; and so it is and must be true, that every man, as well
reprobate as elect, has remission of sins, justification and salvation, and it
is, and was eternally true before it was believed, and so is true whether it be
believed or no, and so, that his sins are remitted, he justified and saved,
whether he believe or no. And as there cannot be given an instance in any other
article of faith necessary to salvation, in which this reason (which indeed is
the ground of all faith) does not convince that the article is true
whethersoeuer it be believed or no; so no reason, nor answer in any reason
according to the same ground of true faith, can be given why it should not hold
good also in this act and object of this Special Faith, which if it be divine
faith must participat of the nature and essence of all divine faith. Therefore
it must follow that either this special faith is no divine faith, but an
illusion and phantasy, or if it be divine, that this absurd absurdity must
follow upon it, that man may be saved without any faith, and that all shall be
saved whether they have any faith or none.

Which is yet confirmed further by these two parities, the one divine, the
other humane: the former thus: As the Resurrection so the particular salvation
of every one an article of faith.
As the Resurrection of every man being an article of faith which every one is
bound to believe, is true, that is, every man shall rise again whethersoeuer
he do believe it or no: so the Justification and salvation of every man being
likewise an article which every one is bound to believe or else is damned, is
likewise true, that is, he is justified or saved whethersoeuer he do believe or
no. The reason of both is, because remission of sins, justification, or
salvation of every one, being as well an object and article of ones faith, as
the Resurrection of every one is, they are both presuposed as true to faith,
not composed and made true by faith, and so both alike eternally true, both
alike true antecedent and before the act of faith, and so both true whether
they be believed or no. The later thus: As King Charles for example (whom God
preserve) is right and lawful King of England, whether he be by all subjects
for such believed and received or no, and the obligation that al subjects have
so to acknowledge and receive him under pain of treason, does suppose him to
be their true King, for else it were not truly treason to refuse him: so all
articles of faith, and amongst the rest this of proper salvation, are true
whether they be believed or no, and the obligation that every one has to
believe them; and so this, under pain of damnation, does suppose them, and
this to be true, for else could none under pain of damnation be bound to
believe either them, Zuing. tom. 2. in Exposit. fid. Christ. f. 159. b. circa
medium. Whi. his also defended by Gualt* in Apolog pro Zuing and operib. eius,
praefix. tom. operum Zuing. f. 27. a. b. and 28.29. a. b. Vide Simleru^ in vita
Bulling. and see Bullengers allowa^ce of Zuinglius his forsaid Treatise. in
Zuing tom. 2 f. 5^0 b. in it.
or this of his Salvation. Therefore as King Charles his title and right of
being King (supposing that all are bound under pain of treason to receive him)
is good whethersoeuer every one of his subjects do believe it, and so receive
him or no: so the truth of every man's salvation, supposing every one is bound
under pain of damnation to believe it as true, is certain and infallibly true
whethersoeuer every one do so believe it or no, and so shall be justified and
saved whether they believe or no. Which absurdity as it is most absurd, so the
Protestant principle of sole and special faith, out of which it necessarily
follows, must needs be absurd and false.

The same absurdity may be inferred, and is seconded by other like absurd
positions of some particular Protestants, as by that position of Zuinglius, who
maintained that Theseus, Hercules, Socrates, and Aristides, all Pagans, are
equally with Peter and Paul in heaven; by that of some of M. Fox his martyrs,
who as himself records of them, taught that even a Mohammedan, Turk, or
Sarazen may be saved if he trust in God and live well; by that of Puccius in
Germany, of Sir William Hickman, and some of his fellows in Lincolnshire here
in in England (which is also too common in the simple peoples mouths) that all
men at the last shall be saved, Fox Martyr. page 495.
and that God will suffer none to be damned, whom he created. All which as
absurd, do infer and second the former absurdity.

That a man is justified by a false Faith.
Fifthly, it follows that a man is justified by a faith which is in it self,
1. False, 2. Contradictory, 3. Sinful, 4. Rash, 5. Presumptuous, 6.
Preiudicious to all Hope, Charity, and good life, and 7. Injurious to Christ as
he is a Redeemer, a Lawgiver, a Judge, a Priest, and also does make him
ignorant, sinful, and damned, as shall be proved by every one of these heads
in particular. And first, that this Special Faith, is a faith not true, but
false, is proved thus. First, because a true faith is of things revealed by
God in scripture or tradition, and proposed by the Church in practice or
definition, but that either so many of so contrary religions as Lutherans,
Caluinists, Anabaptists, Familists, Arians, or, that any one, in any one of
these professions is predestined, justified, and glorified, as they all
believe, is neither revealed in any Scripture, or Tradition from God, nor
confirmed in any practice or declaration of holy Church, therefore not a true
but a false faith. 2. A true Faith cannot persuade and propose beliefes and
doctrines which are contrary, and condemn one another: but this special faith
persuades a belief, doctrine, and certainty of salvation which is contrary,
and condemns one another, as the faith and salvation of the Lutherans,
Caluinists, Anabaptists, and the rest in number above 100. which are all
opposite in faith, all condemn one another, and yet are all sure of their
salvation by this faith: Ergo it cannot be true.

Secondly, That a man is justified by a contradictory faith.
that this faith is contrary or contradictory in it self, is proved thus; That
certainty of Faith is contradictory which belieueth a faith and doctrine
contrary or contradictory; but by this certainty of Faith the Lutherans,
Caluinists, Libertines, Anabaptists, Trinitarians, and the rest, do believe
faith and religions contrary and contradictory, as is manifest by the former
instances, Ergo. Again, that faith is contradictory which does make the same
man believe co^tradictories; but this special faith makes men believe
contradictories, as that it does make him just, and does not make him just,
Ergo. That it maks a man just they affirm, because by it a man is justified;
that it makes not a man just, is proved, because by it he belieues that he is
just, therefore he is just before he belieues it, in the same manner, as God is
God before he is believed to be God. Or thus: A man is just before he believe,
because his justice is the object of his faith, and so presupposed to faith,
and yet he is not just before he believe, because this justice is the effect of
his faith, by which he is justified, and so is after faith: but to be just and
not just both, before he believe, is co^tradictory, Ergo. Again, that is
contradictory which is good, and not good, which does make a man just and not
just; but this special faith is good, because it iustifyes, and not good,
because it is a sin, and that mortal, Ergo. Again, it makes a man just,
because by it he is justified, and not just, because by it he is made sinful,
it being a sin as every good work is in their grounds. Again, this faith
does alone justify, and does not alone justify; alone justify, because Calvin
and all Protestants affirm it, and it alone does not justify because the same
Calvin affirms, that Baptism is a sign of remission of sins past and to
come, which remission of sins to come, dependes upon the memory of Baptism
past, and so not upon faith only. Again, this faith according to them being a
work of man wholly infected with original sin, is a sin, and so makes a
man sinful, and this faith does justify, and so is a good work: but to make
a man sinful and just, are contrary, or contradictory, Ergo. Again, it
affirms that every good work, even the least of the best person, is a sin;
and so there are no good works but all sins; and it affirms that faith
cannot be without good works, and so there are good works; but to affirm
that there are good works, and that there are no good works, are
contradictory, Ergo.

Thirdly, that this faith is a sin, and makes a man sinful, is proved thus.
Every good work, even the best work of the best man, according to them, is a
sin, because it proceeds from a fountain corrupted with sin: but this
faith which justifies is such a good work which consequently is a sin,
therefore it makes a man sin, and so a man is saved from sin by a work
which is sin; made just by an act which is iniust, adopted the son of God
by a work which offendes God, and is made partaker of heaven by an act which
deserves hell.

That a man is justified by a rash Faith.
Fourthly, That this faith is temerarious, is proved thus. That is rashly and
lightly believed which is believed without any authority of scripture, which
according to them is the only means of belief: but there is no Scripture that
assures, for example, that either Calvin, Knox, or Tindall is predestined,
has his sins forgiven him, and shall be glorified in heaven, which yet they
believe, say they, more certainly by this special faith, then they do the
divinity birth, death, resurrection, or ascension of Christ, which they believe
only by an historical faith, therefore they rashly and without ground do
believe it. Which is confirmed, because to believe things they see men have
sense, to believe moral or mathematical conclusions, they have reason and
demonstration, and to believe articles of faith they have revelation of God in
scripture: but to believe every one that his predestination, justification, and
glorification is certain to him, is made known neither by experience of
sense, nor by evidence of reason, nor by revelation of scripture, or any way
else; therefore it is rashly without ground believed.

Fifthly, That this only special faith is presumptuous, That a man is justified
by a presu^ptuous faith.
is proved thus: As that is desperation which will not hope for salvation by
grace; so that is presumption (both the extremes of hope) which will hope for
it without good works, good life, observance of the Commandments, and merits,
to which life eternal is promised: but only and special faith excludes all
good works, all merit, ^ob. 4.10.11 Psalm. 17.25. Romans 5.19. 2. Tim. 4.8. 1.
Cor. 3.8.9.
all observance of the commandments, as any means of salvation, and as not
possible to be done. 2. It is great presumption to expect so great and eternal
a reward, kingdom, and felicity without any labor, and pains for it, without
any promise, or warrant of it, and that without any doubt, or fear of the
obtaining it; all contrary to express scripture, which wish us, with fear and
trembling to work our salvation Phil. 2.12.
: Not to be without fear of sin forgiven Eccl. 5.5.
: And assures us, that no man knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred
Eccl. 9.^.
. And all contrary to the practice of all saints, who have used such
continuance, and fervor of prayer, such rigor, and austerity of penance, such
retirement and forsaking of the world, all to obtain and purchase it at Gods
hands. Which yet this special faith will obtain by only assuring and securing
a man, most certainly of it, without either condition of works, and good life,
without any works of penance or satisfaction, or without any doubt or fear of
loosing it, or failing in it.

Sixthly, That this only faith destroys all hope, Charity, prayer, and good
works, is proved thus. No man can hope for that which he has; no man prays,
and makes suit for that which he has, That a man, is justified by a faith,
destroys hope and Charity.
and cannot loose; no man labors to practice that which he deems impossible to
perform. But this faith assures them of their predestination, that they are
predestinate, and cannot be damned; assures them of Gods favor that they have
remission of sins, and justification, and cannot loose it: and assures them
of glorification, that they shall enjoy heaven, and salvation, which is as due
to them as to Christ, and can no more fail them then it can fail Christ;
where is then any place for hope? It assures the^ that good works, and the
keeping of the law is impossible; that penance, and satisfaction is
fruitless, yea derogating from the merit of Christ; that all merit by grace,
or hope of reward for our good deeds is excluded. That such a love of God is
required (to wit, an intensiue love with all the force of our soul, and an
only love which admits no kind of love of any thing else) as is possible only
in the next life, not factible in this life: therefore by this faith is
excluded all hope of reward for good works, all necessity of prayer for
obteining the Kingdom of heaven, all use of saying the Lords prayer for
remission of sins, all fruit of penance, or satisfaction for the punishment
of sin, all possibility of doing good, living well, and loving of God above
all things, and withal is included a necessity of breaking Gods Commandments,
of sinning mortally, and offending in all actions, even in the best actions of
the best men, as Calvin expressly affirms; and yet withal this infallible
assurance of the Kingdom of heaven is by this faith obtained and confirmed.
Who will therefore, or needs, (according to these principles) to pray, to fast,
to do penance, to forbear sin, to bridle his concupiscence, to do good
works, to love God, and live piously, since all are needless, fruitless, or
impossible by this doctrine? Surely whosoever does either preach this doctrine
of good life, works, penance, and charity, as many moderate ministers do, or
do practice in their life, and conversation the same, as many well intending
Protestants do, they cannot do it either out of the principles and grounds of
their religion, which we see require no such thing, as all opposite to it; but
either out of the engrafted light of natural reason, which does teach it; or
out of the good inclination of their natural disposition, which does move them
to it; or out of the principles or moral virtues which moral Philosophers
have laid for it; or out of the doctrine, or example, and imitation or others
who^ they see* practice it, and for the practice to deserve a laudable
comendation and worthy esteem among men by it.

Seauenthdly, That a man is justified by a faith, which is injurious to Christ.
that this special and only faith does derogate from the virtue and perfection
of the incarnation and passion of our B. Savior Jesus Christ, is proved thus:
that faith which makes our blessed Savior neither general Redeemer of all,
nor so much as to be their sufficient Redeemer, and which makes him neither
lawgiuer, nor ^dge, nor physician, nor true savior of mankind; and also does
make him ignorant, impotent, unjust, sinful, desperate, and damned, does
derogate from the virtue of the incarnation, passion, resurrection, and
ascension of Christ: but this only and special faith, and the assurance of
justification by it, does all this, ergo.

And first, that it makes Christ no general Redeemer of all mankind is proved.
1. Which does derogate from the generality of Christ's redemption*
Because it takes away from him the universality of his redemption, and the
extension of his charity to all men. For though Christ shed not his blood for
the Angels, neither was a Redeemer of them, whose fall was not general of all
Angels, either in indiuiduo, or in specie (as was man's, who wholly fell and
sinned, especially in Adam) and whose sin was more voluntary, and very
pardonable, in that their understanding was greater, and their temptation
lesser then was man's, whom the Devil seduced, and whose sin was not
voluntary in their own person, but in Adam their first father: yet least
Christ should either seem impotent that he could not, or unmerciful that he
would not show his mercy to any estate wholly either of Angels, or of men, it
did beseem, and befit the property of his power, and goodness that it should
show and extend it self to the whole race of mankind at the least; and that he
should offer up his blood sufficiently for the redemption of all, and chiefly
(as he did) of those who sinned, not actually and willingly, but by the sin,
and in the will of another, as all by original sin did in Adam. And as it
was convenient, so it is testified of him, That 1. Tim. 2 6.
he gave himself a redemption for all; that 1. Joan. 2.2.
he is a propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
whole world; that 1. Tim. 2.4.
he would have all saved and come to the knowledge of the truth; that John.
1.29.
he is the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world; and Joan.
3.16. Calu. 3. just. 22. and in
whom God gave, his son, for the world. Which word ( world) includes rather
the wicked, and reprobate, then the elect and just. But this his general
redemption, and dying for all men is by this special Faith quite overthrown;
in that the defenders of it affirm that Christ dyed only for the elect, not
the reprobate; that this faith is given only to the elect, not to the wicked,
which infers that Christ was either weak and unable, and the value of his
passion insufficient, Colo^. 1. in 1 Joan. 2. Beza colloq. Mont. Pesul. f.
211.214. etc. Sanch. misc. l 2. page 180
to recompense the debt of all men's sin* and that the malice of the sin was
more great in all men, then the virtue of God was powerful in Christ; or that
Christ was more cruel in rigor of his justice to condemn the greatest part
of the world for sin, then he was merciful in the tender bowels of his
compassion to offer up his pains, and passion for the redemption of al from
sin.

Which faith derogates from the perfection of Christ's redemption.
Secondly, That special faith makes Christ no perfect redeemer of any, no not
of those elect and just, for whom, according to them, he was borne and
suffered, is proved by these 3. reasons. 1. Because they believe not that
Christ who as man did suffer, did also as God ordain himself thus to suffer:
nor that Christ, who, as man, did offer his sufferings to God justly offended,
and required satisfaction in justice equivalent to the offense, did also, as
God, accept of this suffering for the redemption of man's offense, though
performed by a person who was without offense: nor that Christ, as man did
undergo all pains and torments which the malice of Satan, and man could
inflict for the more copious redemption of man, (to show thereby the goodness of
God, the greatness of sin, and the ingratitude of man, whereas any one action,
or any one drop of blood had been of more worth in dignity and goodness, then
all the sins of all men were of value in malice and baseness; did also, as
God, give such a dignity, worth, and value to these sufferings, that the least,
or any one of them, as proceeding from the person of God, was a price
sufficient to have redeemed all the sins of all men, and of as many worlds
besides as are men, if so many had been: (because, I say, they will not
believe this worth and value in the works and sufferings of Christ, God and
Man, to be so much infinitely greater then all the gravity of all sins of all
men, as the goodness of one God is infinitely greater the^ the malice of all men;
therefore they require in the Passion of Christ the self same pains, and an
equal degree in the same pains of Christ's suffering for men, which was due,
and should have been inflicted upon man. Therefore, say they, as man was to
suffer in body and soul, so was Christ to suffer, and did suffer, not only in
body, by shedding his blood, which as corporal auailed little: but in soul
also, which for the sins of the soul was to suffer the pains due to the
soul. And as man was to suffer the pains of hell in body and in soul, so was
Christ to suffer, and did suffer all the same pains of hell, which man should
have suffered, and so was presented before the tribunal of God for man, as
guilty of sin, Feared the judgment of God against this sin, Calu. harm. in
26. Mat. 37.46. and in 27.2. Instit. 16. Luth. in Psalm 22. tom 3. Witten. ann.
1585.
doubted and feared the sentence of his damnation for this sin, and wauered
between blessing and cursing of God, between praising and blaspheming of God,
uttered words not only of inconsideration and perturbation, but even of
desperation, and at last suffered all the pains and torments of hell in his
soul upon the Cross, which any damned does suffer, or ought to suffer in his
soul for the same sins in hell. In which, 1. They deny the fullness and
perfection of Christ's redemption, even of the elect, in that they deny the
infinite excess of dignity and value in every action and passion of Christ, as
proceeding from his divine person above the malice of sin. 2. They do
derogate from the virtue of Christ's blood shed by his passion (of which the
Scripture affirms, that Romans 3.24.25. Rom 1.9.
he justified us in his blood; 1. Pet. 1.10. Act. 5.9.
that he redeemed us in his blood; Apoc. 15.22.14.
washed us in his blood; Col. 1.10
pacifyed for us in his blood; Act. 20.28.
purchased us with his blood; 1. Cor. 11 25. Luc. 22.20. Mat. 26.28. Ma^c.
14.24.
and made his new test^ment in his blood; in that they affirm Calu. 2. Instit
16.20.
nothing had been done if Christ had dyed only a corporal death. 3. They do
extenuate the merit of Christ, in that they auerre, ^alu. 2. Instit. 17.1.
that in the judgment of God there is no place of merit for Christ. 4. They do
impose upon our B. Savior horrible impiety, and blasphemy, in that they avouch
him to have doubted, feared, and wauered in his salvation, to have been ready
to curse, and blaspheme, and to have despaired, and suffered all the torments
of the damned in hell. In all which as they impose this horrible blasphemy upon
our B. Savior Jesus, and make him more sinful and uncertain of his
salvation, then they are of theirs; so they do most impiously derogate from the
virtue of his death and passion, and from the perfection of his redemption, and
in the effect thereof, even in those elect who according to them, he only by
his death saved and redeemed.

Secondly, because to be a perfect, and full Redeemer of the elect, is
requisite that he redeem them from the servitude, and misery into which by
sin they fell, which was the servitude and misery, 1. Of sin, into which
being deprived of grace, they of themselves cannot but fall, and of themselves
cannot rise again; you Rom 6.17. and 11.
are servants of sin. 2. Of Satan, to whom by sin they are made captive,
and 1. Tim. 2
cannot of themselves resist his will. 3. Of sensuality, and the Romans 7.23
law in the members repugning to the law of the mind, which of themselves they
cannot master. 4. Of the law of works, which of themselves they cannot
perform, but by it remain under Gal. 3.10
the curse. 5. Of hell, which for their own demerit is due to them, we Isa.
28.15.
have made a covenant with hell. But by this doctrine of sole faith, that
Christ did not redeem even the elect from any of these captiuityes, and
miseries, especially of sin, Satan, sensuality, and law of works, nor yet
from Hell, is proved. Not from the servitude of sin, because the best man in
his best works, according to Calvin and Luther, Calu. Instit. 14.4. and 9.
Luth. confut. Lat^m.
cannot but sin, as before, and because the just has no inherent grace or
justice to sanctify him from sin, but only imputative, covering his sin,
and making him seem and show just. Not from the servitude of Satan, because
he wants Free Will to resist him, and so cannot but yield to his instigation,
and because he still remains in sin both original and actual, and so by
sin remains Satha^s slave. Not from the concupiscence, because it still
remaynes in him, infects every action proceeding from him; and because,
according to Calvin, not to have concupiscence is impossible, and according to
Luther, Calu. 2. Insti. 7.5. and 6. Luth. tom. 5. sermon. de Matrimon^o.
to have a Woman is as necessary for a man, as to eat, drink, sleep, or as
to be a man. Not from the servitude of the law, because the performance of the
law and the doing of good works is impossible, and because man, though just,
remains still guilty of the disobedience of the law. Not from the misery of
hell, because while a man remains a worker of sin, a seruer of
concupiscence, a transgressour of the law, and a slave of Satan (as according
to the former confessed doctrine, even the just and elect do) he cannot but be
subject to hell, and hell be due unto him: therefore if Christ redeem not even
the elect, and just from the servitude either of sin, Satan, sensuality, the
law, or hell, as by this their doctrine he does not, he cannot be a perfect and
complete Redeemer, even of those elect, whom only, say they, he came to redeem.

Thirdly, that this doctrine makes Christ a bad Phisitia^, Which makes Christ
no good Physician of souls.
and worse Surgeon of souls, to cure them of their sins, is proved:
Because he infuses neither grace into our soars to cure them, nor gives
strength to our infirmityes to enable us, nor extinguishes the poison of
original sin which still infects our actions; but only couers our soars,
and wounds with a fair cloak of his own justice, presents us thus covered
before God as just, and imputes no sins unto us; though inwardly indeed we
remain unjust, and wicked, in soul, in heart, and in all cogitations, words,
or actions. What does Christ therefore? Surely no more then a Surgeon, who
finding a man wounded, and his wounds festered, and infecting the rest of the
body, should only cover the same with a fair cloth, produce, and show him to
the people thus covered, and for this cure accountes both the man safe and
sound, and also himself a perfect Surgeon or Physician worthy of honor and
reward for his pains. Such a Physician or Surgeon, according to them, is
our Savior, and such a cure does he work upon all his elect, whom he cures,
and redeemes; and no beter, for he cures not by grace infused, either the
ignorance of the understanding or the malice of the will, or the concupiscence
of the affections, or the infirmity of the exterior faculties: but only couers
and hides them with the cloak of his justice, and so imputes them for no
sins, and accounts the persons just, which is all the cure that our Physician
Christ works on us in their new doctrine.

Which makes Christ an unjust ^aw-giuer
Fourthly, that this doctrine makes Christ either no lawgiver at all, contrary
to the Prophets who call him a Lawgiver, and to his disciple S. John who
says, he gave a new commandment, or else such a lawgiver as makes laws which
are neither just, upright, nor agreeable to reason, and equity, is manifest;
Isa. 33.22. Joan. 13.34.
for either they hold that Christ made no laws, and was no lawmakers at al,
but a Savior only, who tied us to none, but freed us from all laws, and
cleared our conscience from all obligation to all laws, from all obedience to
all laws, and from any scruple, or punishment of transgressing any law
natural, moral, or divine, of Church or commonwealth, of God, or of man, and
by the liberty of his Gospel gave us freedom to do what we will, to omit, or
commit what we will, without condition or obligation, but only to believe, and
assure our selves that we are sure to be saved. Or if they admit any obligation
of keeping any laws, as the moral law of the ten Commandment, or other, they
auerre it to be impossible to keep them, even for the just and perfect, though
assisted with the help of grace, whereby they make God cruel in imposing that
upon us, which we are not able to perform; unjust in punishing us for that
which he enforces us to commit; and unreasonable, in charging us above our
ability, and in punishing us for not doing that which we could not do. As
afterward is more at large showed. Which makes Christ an unjust Judge.


Fifthly, That this faith does take from Christ all authority either of judging
at all, or of judging uprightly, and so makes him either no judge, or an unjust
judge, is proved; Because in a judge is requisite, 1. That he impartially
discuss, and examine the cause. 2. That he duly reward the just. 3. That he
justly punish the offender. But this doctrine leaves no place for discussion of
sins, because, according to it, all works are sins, as proceeding from
original sin, and infected with original sin, and all sins are a like
great as equally forbid by the law of sin, which forbids as well, and under
as great penalty (at least in general) of death and damnation, the theft of a
pin as of a pound: therefore all discussio^ of this difference is needless
where no difference among them in greatness is admitted. 2. It leaves no place
for reward of God works, in that it admits neither any works to be before
God good, nor any persons to be inwardly just, nor any merit to be possible by
any work, or person, nor any reward to be due to any merit; but where neither
work is good, nor person just, nor merit deserving, there can be no justice of
remuneration in rewarding either good works, or just persons. 3. It leaves no
place to the just punishing of the wicked, for where all persons are either
already judged, Joan. 3.1^*
and sure to be punished, as the Infidels and Pagans are, for he that belieues
not, is already judged; or shall not at all be judged, nor punished, as all
faithful (Protestants) shall not, who are sure to be saved; where the thing
commanded is impossible to be done, or the law commanding does not oblige to
the doing; where God does ordeine that thing to be do^ne, and compels the
person to do it; where the person commanded has neither ability to do the
thing commanded if he would, nor yet fredome of will to do it if he could,
there can be no place of justice in the lawmaker to punish the fact thus
committed, or the person committing it. But so it is according to the former
Protestant doctrine. Therefore, according to the same, Christ cannot at the day
of judgment judge any, or at the least not justly; and cannot be either a
judge, or at least not a just judge, according to every man's works.

Sixthly, Which makes Christ no Priest.
That this doctrine does bereave Christ of his priesthood, and power of
sacrificing, and offering for sins, is proved thus: As in all states of
nature cerimonall, or grace, sins were committed; so in all states were
sacrifices ordained for remission of sins, and priests appointed to offer for
the same. In the law of nature the sacrifice was voluntary, and the priest was
the eldest of the family. In the law of Moses the sacrifice was determined to
certain beasts, birds, and meats, and the priests were Aarons posterity, and
the tribe of Leui. In the law of grace the sacrifice is the body and blood of
Christ, and the priests are Christ's Apostles, and who are consecrated by
lawful orders from them. Christ, as in person so in his Priesthood and
sacrifice, he surpassed both the eldest of the family in the law of nature, and
the Leuiticall priests, and the sacrifice of both; for they were only men, he
was God and man; they were men sinful, he was not polluted with sin, they as
men and sinners are far distant from God, to whom, and like to men in sin for
whom, they offer; he as participating of God to whom, and of man for whom, he
offers, is one, and imediate with both. They offered often, and many times, as
wanting one full price able to make a full redemption at once; he offered once
for all, and that a full price and satisfaction sufficient for all. They were
anointed with material oil of olives; he with internal oil of Deity above
his companions. They offered sacrifices many in kind, and mean in quality, all
inferior to themselves; he offered one and that most just even himself, and
his own body and blood: of which sacrifice himself was, 1. The priest,
anointed by his incarnation to offer. 1. The sacrifice ordained by himself,
an host to be offered. 3. The temple consecrated to God for his holy offering.
4. The Altar in his body which was sprinkled with the blood of this offering;
for all which reasons Abraham, and the Leuit^all priests in him* and in his
soines as inferior, offered tithes to Melchisedech as superior, and in
Melchisedech to Christ figured by him as the chief of all. The sacrifices
Christ offered were of two sorts, both of them one, and the same in substance,
to wit, his own body and blood, but diffe^ing and diverse in the manner of
offering; the one on the Cross, the other at the supper; the one bloody, the
other unbloody; the one, in his own form of man, visible, the other, in the
form of bread and wine, invisible; The one once, and not reiterated, as being
a sufficient price of our redemption, the other often, as the application of
the former, and that often repeated as sins are often committed. By the one
purchasing to himself his Church in his blood, by the other conseruing and
sanctifiyng the same to himself by his grace. By the one, as a cause
meritorious deserving grace, pacifying God, and reconciling man to God; by the
other as an instrument causing grace, sanctification, satisfaction, and actual
remission of sins; for by it, as by Baptism, is wrought remission of sins,
and, as by faith, hope, charity, and other virtues, is obtained grace and
salvation,

Now since it is evident that Christ was, 1. a Priest. 2. According to the
order, not of Aaron, but of Melchisedech. 3. For ever. Psalm. 109.4. Heb. 5.6.
Since it is evident also, 1. That a Priest and sacrifice are correlatiue and so
mutual, that where the one is, there the other must be. 2. That Melchisedech
was a Priest, Genesis 14.18*
and his sacrifice was in bread and wine. 3. That Christ is compared to
Melchisedech, not only in his kingly authority, as King of justice and peace as
Melchisedech was, nor only in his genealogy, as being without Father as man,
and without mother as God, or without predecessor before him, or successor
after him in the office of redeemer, as Melchisedech is said to be without
Father and mother Heb. 7.3.
; but also in priestly function (concealed on purpose by S. Paul Heb. 5.11.
for the incapacity of the Jews, as a thing of which he has a speech great and
inexplicable to utter) and in his priestly sacrifice by offering bread and wine
as Melchisedech did, and that not for one time, but for ever. Since, I say, Genesis
14.18.
all this is evident, it follows, 1. That Christ is a priest, not according to
Aaron in offering blood, but according to Melchisedech in offering bread and
wine, and that not once by himself, but for ever by his Apostles and Priests,
to whom he gave commission to offer the same sacrifice which himself had done.
2. It follows, that to verify Christ's being priest for ever according to the
order of Melchisedech, there must be a succession of priests and sacrifice in
Gods Church to offer the same sacrifice for ever, and so to make his priesthood
continue for ever. But by this former Protestant doctrine is excluded all
sacrifice for sin, all priesthood to offer sacrifice, and all holy orders to
consecrat priests; and so this perpetual priesthood and sacrifice of Christ
according to Melchisedech, is rejected. First in Christ himself and his own
person whom they deny to have offered any sacrifice at his last supper.
Secondly, in his Priests and deputies, to whom they deny all authority of
Priesthood, and all power to offer sacrifice, and so admit no sacrifice at all
according to the order of Melchisedech, either by Christ, or his Church, and
why? Because only Faith does justify, satisfy, and apply the merit of Christ,
only Faith does cover all sins by the apprehension of the justice of Christ,
only Faith does assure all that they are just, shall continue, and that they
need no other work, Sacrament, or sacrifice to make or keep them just, but
only Faith, and so this Faith destroys all sacrifice, and thereby the
Priesthood of Christ.

By a faith which makes Christ ignorant.
Lastly, that this doctrine bereaues Christ of his knowledge, both beatificall,
by which from the first instance of his conception he did clearly see God; and
also infused, and that not out of things natural, and by accidents infused,
which by nature, and industry may be obtained, but also of things
supernatural, and per se infused, of things which are by faith revealed to us,
such as are the mysteries we believe, and the secrets of hearts, all which by
ancient Deuines is admitted to have been in Christ from the first instant of
his conception: That, I say, they deprive Christ of all this excellency and
knowledge, and make him ignorant, and more ignorant then Adam, who was created
as in perfection of stature, and strength of body, so also in perfection of all
philosophical and theological knowledge in soul, by which he gave names to
all beasts; 3. Reg. 4.30.
and more ignorant then Solomon, who was the wisest of men before or after him,
is proved: Because they affirm that he Luth. c^nc^ de natal. Christ. fol. 67
assumed our ignorance, that he was ignorant like other children, was
instructed as boys are, increased in knowledge not only experimental, but
also habitual as others do, learned and profited in arts and sciences humane
and divine as children do; that he was iignorant of the place of Lazarus his
bur^all, Zuing. in cap. 2. ^uce. Beza in Heb. 5.7. and in colloq mont. page
177. Bucer. in cap. 2^. Lucae. Danaeus cont. 2. page 143. ^o^st. in anti.
Bellarm. page 36. Whitaker. ad ^ation. 8. Camp. p. 35. Serranus co^t. Hayu^.
part. 3. page 284.285.289.290. Call. harm. in Mat. 9.2. Matt. 21.18. Matt.
24.36. Matt. 26. Luc. 2.40. Paraeus l. 5. de amissi. gratiae etc. cap. 14. page
836. and in Coll. The^l, 9. disp. 6.
of the Jews faith who offered the man sick of the palsy; of the Fig Tree,
both of what kind it was, and what fruit it bore; and of the day of judgment,
not only to reveal it to others, but to know it himself; that he made
farre-fetcht-similitudes, and needless illations nothing to purpose, wrested
the words and sense of the Prophets, weakly confuted his adversaries, failed
in memory, and made prayers and petitions unadvised, and not premeditated,
forced with the vehemence of sorrow in the garden: all which are by Calvin
imputed to him. But if Christ was thus ignorant and blind in his understanding,
then might he be deceived in his judgment, and so deceive others, and fail in
truth of that he said, or revealed in Scripture; then may the scripture be
false, his faith and doctrine be false, all Christians be lead into error and
blindness; then may he be infirm in his operations, and sinful also in his
actions. For if the understanding, which is the light to lighten, and the guide
to direct the other faculties of the soul, may be blind, ignorant,
inconsiderate, and erroneous; then may the will which does follow the light,
and direction of the understanding, and wills nothing but that the understanding
knows, also fail in the election of good, and so will that is ill, and commit
sin; and so may Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, fall into
error, falsehood, and sin, and so err, deceive and commit sin.

To all which if we add the detestable, and blasphemous assertions boldly
auerred by prime Protestants Luther, Calvin and their fellows against Christ,
to wit, that God made him a sinner, unjust, guilty and hateful to himself,
that he was culpable, a sinner true, and most truly a sinner as other men,
Sinful.
a sinner most great, most vile, and obnoxious to the anger of God, that he
carried himself discourteously, and not like a son to his mother, that he made
a prayer vnpremeditated, a vow abrupte, inconsiderate, contrary to his
vocation, to be corrected, retracted, and renounced; that he renounced his
office of mediator, was forgetful of our salvation, and the charge committed
to him; that he confessed his effeminate niceness, esteemed himself not to be
sent of God, did waver between praising and blaspheming of God, did stagger
among the waves of tentations, uttered words of desperation, was overcome with
desperatio^, did renounce his salvation, knew God was angry at him; that he
stood in need of Baptism, was cursed and execrable as commonly the damned are;
Damned.
that he suffered the horror of a conscience feeling Gods eternal wrath, did
fear, and highly despair in his soul in the same manner a^ the damned, did
waver between hell and life, struggle with the horror of eternal pains; had
an horror of eternal punishment, was tormented with the fear of horrible
damnation, was horribly afraid of the profound abisse of death, was in fear to
be absorpt by death, was stricken with the horror of the divine malediction,
was tortured with anxiety as if he had God his enemy, feared his salvation, was
persuaded that he was undone, and was stricken with the horror of Gods
judgment more then ever any man was, or could be, in which his horror
consisted the sum of our consolation; that he suffered the same pains of
hell which the damned do suffer, tasted, felt, In the pains of hell.
and suffered the true pains or dolours of hell, the infernal pains and
sorrows of hell, was in the midst of the torments of hell, suffered the
pain of hell, the same pain and punishment with the damned, the horrible
torments of a damned man, the eternal pains for the time, the execrable
death, the second death which is the death of the soul, the separation from
God, felt, tasted, and endured the eternal death, the anguish of hell, the
torments in hell after death both in his body and soul: All which are the very
sum, and abridgement, without adding or agrauating of any one word, of the
more ample speeches and sentences of the most famous Protestant Doctors, and
masters, as Luther, Melancthon, Illyricus, Reineccius, Lobecius, Hutterus,
Vrsinus, Paraeus in Germany; of Calvin, Smitheus collat. doctrine. de Christo.
cap. 2 art. 11.12.^3. and 22.
Beza, Daneus in Geneua; of Tilenus Piscator, Molinaeus, Polanus in France; of
Vorstius, Homius, in the Low Countries; and of Whitaker, Perkins, and Parkes in
England; and may be seen at large in the learned Collation of the Right
reverend Bishop D. Smith.

If I say we add all these execrable, horrible, and blasphemous assertions
against the eternal Majesty and goodness of the son of God, and compare them
with the infallible certainty, and assurance which they make every one of their
own predestination, justification, and glorification, of which by faith they
make themselves so certain as if Christ had been present and said they shall be
saved; so sure as they are sure that there is a God, or that Christ is saved,
which are likewise at large in the same Author faithfully collected: Smith
coll^^. doctrine. lib. 1. cap. 16. art. 10. page 4 47.
If, I say, we add all this impiety, blasphemy, and infidelity which is
vented, and invented by this private spirit, and both practiced, preached, and
printed by the chief professors of the same, and so diuulged to the view of the
whole world to be believed and professed of all as the word, and the pure word
of God, as the honor, and greatest honor of God, and Jesus Christ; I see not
what greater hypocrisy, and dissimulation, what deeper blasphemy, and
abomination can be uttered, or by what means a readier or broader way to the
subversion of all Christianity, and piety, and the erection of all Atheism,
and Barbarism can be made, and prepared. And thus much of the absurdities
which ensue upon the private spirits doctrine, of sole, special, and certain
justifying faith, and the conseque^t points of doctrine depending upon it.

Absurdities which follow upon the third head, that is, of Concupiscence being
original sin. SECT. IIII.
OVT of the third principle, or progeny of this private spirit, and the
doctrine hanging upon it, which is, Absurdities which follow upon Concupiscence
being original sin.
that original sin (which they make to be Concupiscence) does remain in the
regenerate, and just, is not remitted, or abolished by Baptism; but only not
imputed, and covered by faith; does corrupt the whole man, and all his actions,
internal and external, does stain with sin all good works even the best of
the best men; does strike dead all freewill, liberty to do well; does strangle
all inherent justice and sanctification; does stope all merit, satisfaction,
and penance; and does set a stay to all possibility of keeping the
commandments, with such other like now paradoxes ensuing upon it: out of this,
I say, it follows, first. That the whole Protestant Church, and their spouse
of Christ which consists only of such elect, 1. That the whole Church of the
Protestants, is a congregation of great sinners.
and regenerat persons as these, is (if we may so term it) a kingdom, a
City, a temple, a house, a spouse, a body of Christ (by which terms the true
Church of Christ is styled) consisting of subjects, Citizens, servants,
persons, and members, who in every action, every good work, even in the best
work of the best of them, do sin, nothing but sin, and cannot but commit
sin, and that mortally; all whose thoughts, words, and deeds are sins,
mortal sins, damnable sins, and they by these sins are unclean, polluted,
unjust, and full of malice in the sight of God; who are not able to observe,
keep, or perform any one, much less all the commandments of God, as
impossible, and not obliging upon any condition to salvation; who are
idolaters, blasphemers, forswearers, breakers of the sabbath, adulterers,
murderers, thieves, false witnesses, either in external action, or in
internal desire, in which they must needs break every commandment; who
cannot by any one act, once in all their life, believe, fear, praise, or love
God, as they ought; who have no inward grace, virtue, or justice inherent, and
infused in their souls; but all sin, deformity, pollution, rebellion, and
contumacy against God, and his commandments (which are also the very words of
the foresaid Protestants cited by the foresaid author;) who are as pointed
faces, Smit. collat. l. 1. cap. 13. art. 9. p. 246. art. 9. page 446. cap. 18.
art. 1. p. 474.476.
of themselves deformed, and only by colors made to show fair; as sepulchers
of dead men outwardly whited; but within dead bodies; As wolves covered with
the woll of sheep, but inwardly ravenous; As foolish virgins who have no oil
in their own lamps, but think that others oil shall suffice them; As bodies
stemed, and stinking with corruption of rottenesse, leprosy, and ordure, and
only covered with fair clothes made of the silk of Christ's justice: Such are
all elect, just, regenerate, and holy Protestants; of such consists their
congregations, and Church, and with such is filled their kingdom of heaven,
and by such are Catholics condemned and persecuted here in England.

Secondly, it follows that any faithful, just, and regenerate Protestant may
(in respect of any pit of damnation) as well commit theft, murder, adultery,
perjury, idolatry, sacrilege, incest, and all enormous vices, 2. That every
Protestant may as well commit great sins as do good works, in respect of
avoiding damnation.
as exercise himself in abstinence, continency, justice, almsdeeds, or, as
read the Bible, hear a sermon, receive the Communion, say his prayers,
believe, love, or praise God, and the like. For as both the one, and the other
proceed from original sin, and are infected thereby with the stain of
sins, and that mortal, deserving eternal damnation; so are neither the one,
nor the other kind imputed to him for sins, nor are punished with damnation
as sins. As both the one, and the other are damnable in the reprobate, and he
for both shallbe punished in hell, so neither the one nor the other are imputed
to the elect, nor he for either can be hindered from heaven. As in both the
elect, and reprobate, works are not distinguished by the object, but by the
person, being all mortal sins in themselves; so in the reprobate all are
mortal; in the elect all venial, all pardoned, none imputed, none punished.
And as the good works in the elect do not merit any reward of glory, nor
satisfy for any punishment of sin; so the bad works in the same elect shall
not receive any infliction of punishment, neither deprive him of any benefit of
justification; both therefore the good and the bad are in themselves great
sins, as proceeding from concupiscence, which is sin, and as violating the
law, but both are by faith not imputed, both by the justice of Christ covered,
and so both in a sort indifferent to be committed or omitted, as both
deserving, and neither receiving punishment; both being sins in themselves,
and neither imputed for sins by God. Upon what motive or ground therefore of
religion, either of displeasing God, or of hope of reward, or of fear of hell,
can a regenerate Protestant be induced to avoid sins, rather then good
works, 3. That the grounds of Protestant Religion admit great sinners to be
perfect Protestants.
or to live virtuously rather then vitiously, since both are mortal sins,
both mortally offend God, and both equally are not imputed, neither punished.

Thirdly, it follows, that any faithful and regenerate Protestant may
according to the grounds of his faith, commit any, or all the former sins,
yea all the sins which any reprobate does commit, and yet remain a just,
regenerate, and perfect protestant. For if faith only does justify, and once
had can never be lost by any sin whatsoever, and if no sins be imputed, but
all be by the same faith remitted; then may he commit any, or all the said
sins, and yet retain faith and justification, and keep his assurance of
salvation, and so continue still a perfect regenerate Protestant, and is as
high in perfection, as strong in faith, and as sure of salvation as any Saint
is in heaven who never committed any of the same. What conscience therefore, or
scruple will he make of any the said sins, since he shall receive by them no
loss of faith, no detriment of justice, no displeasure of God, no punishment
of hell?

4. That in vain and to no end, are 1. all penna^ce, mortification, and
austeri^y of life.
Fourthly, it follows, that in vain, and to no end is all penance and sorrow
for sins, all chastising of our bodies, which S. Paul used for sin, all
fasting, sackcloth, hairecloth, or ashes, with David, the Ninevites, Manasses,
Achab, and others before Christ used for their sins; That in vain, and to no
end is all forsaking the vanities, and pleasures of the world, all abnegation,
resignation, mortification, and taking up the cross of Christ in deserts.
Monasteries, and places secluded from the world, and chosen for practice of
poverty, obedience, and chastity, which S. Mark, S. Hilarion, S. Paul, S.
Anthony, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Basil, S. Augustine, S. Benedict, S. Bernard,
and so many ancient and holy Saints, and Religious persons since Christ have
ever used 1. because only faith does justify, and secure them of salvation, and
does take away all imputation of any sin, or pain due to sin, and so makes
needless all satisfaction for sin. 2. Because Baptism, which (according to
Calvin, is to be ministered only to the faithful) does remit all sins past
and to come. 3. Because all these acts are sins, and that mortal, as well
as feasting lusting, deceauing, killing, and the rest.

Fifthly, it follows, that in vain, and to no end are all laws either of God,
Church, or Commonwealth; in vain are all Tribunals, 2. All laws and Precepts
of God, or man.
and Courts spiritual, and temporal; in vain are all Judges, and
Magistrates appointed to correct and punish malefactors; in vain is all
power, and jurisdiction of Princes or Prelates; in vain is all Regal
authority, and command of Emperors, Kings, and Princes, because all
observance of any law, or of any one commandment, even the least, is
impossible, and a burden (says Calvin) greater then Aetna; because no Prince
or Prelate has any authority to make any law which shall oblige in conscience;
because by the liberty of the Gospel every Protestant is freed from any
obligation in conscience, and from any laws of any Prince, whereupon any
malefactor guilty of murder, theft, or the like, may answer the Judge, and
allege their doctrine, that the laws did not oblige in conscience, and were
impossible to be performed, no freewill to do otherwise the^ God had
determined, no obligation in conscience to obey the Kings Laws, being freed
by the liberty of the Gospel; that the Judge has no authority to execute
that which the King had no authority to decree; no justice to punish him for
that which God forced and willed him to do, and which he had no liberty, or
power but to do; no reason to hinder the liberty of his spirit granted by the
Gospel. The traitor and Rebel may answer his King, and allege out of the
same liberty of this Gospel, the same reasons, and say, that he is as free
from obedience to his own Prince as to a forain Prince, or from the laws of
his own Country as of a foreign Country, may resist his Prince and his laws,
rise and rebel against him, oppose and depose, yea kill and murder his person
in case he do not justice, observe not his own law, defend not the
commonwealth, or give not free passage to the preaching of their Ghospel.
Which (as after shall be showed) they have in Germany, France, Scotland, Belgia,
Geneua, and other countries, according to these grounds practiced, and
approved; and which the Trinitarians, and Anabaptists do according to the same,
yet positiuely maintain and defend. In vain therefore did God give Sap. 6.4.
to Kings power from himself and virtue from the highest. In vain do Prou.
8.15.
Kings rule by God and makers of laws decerne iu^t things. In vain is Romans
13.1.
all power from God, and higher powers, to be obeyed. In vain are we to be
Romans 13.5.
subject to higher powers not only for anger, but for conscience. In vain are
we admonished to 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
be subject to Kings and Rulers, and sent from God; to be Tit. 3.2.
subject to Princes, and powers, to be Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22.
obedient to carnal Lords, and Masters in fear and trembling; to 1. Tim.
6.1.
honor them with all honor; to Matt. 22.21.
give to Caesar that which is Caesar's. In vain is the King made the head, and
ruler of the commonwealth. In vain does he make laws, inflict punishments,
appoint Judges, justices, and Magistrates, since subjects have no liberty to
obey, or not obey them; no tie in conscience not to violate them; but by the
liberty of their Gospel, are freed from all, and the things also are either
impossible to be done, or if omitted, it is without any sin, more then
venial at the most, that is, not imputed. In vain and foolishly do they
condemn Popes for assuming power to declare Princes deposed, or to depose them
in case of extreme necessary to conserve the true faith of God, and the right
authority of the Church, or to prevent the grievous calamity of the common
good, since every one among them may do the same, and more upon his private
authority, to right his own private wrong. In vain and foolishly do they
accuse, and condemn Popes for deposing Emperors, and Kings, as Gregory the
second did Leo Isauricus, Zachary did Chilpericke the King of France, Gregory
the 7. did Henry the 4. Innocent the 3. did Otho the 4. Alexander the 2. did
John of England, and the like, since they themselves in so short a time have
deposed two Queens in Scotland, one Bishop of Geneua, and by arms labored to
depose one Queen of England, two Kings of France, three Kings of Spain,
three Emperors of Germany from their temporal right, and dominion. All which
are lawful, and warrantable, according to these grounds of their Faith, that
no laws are possible, or oblige in conscience, that no bad works are imputed,
or hinder salvation, that the liberty of the Gospel makes all actions free
and voluntary, that only faith does justify, and cannot be lost, that no man
has freewill, nor can do otherwise the^ God has decreed. Which positions
overthrow all duty of obedience, and all obligation of duty to any Prince.

3. All consultations, exhortatio^s and threats.
Sixthly, it follows, that in vain, and to no end are all consultations, and
deliberations of things to be done, either by private persons in their private
affairs, or by public Councillors of Princes for the public good, because
all in both must be as God has decreed, and man has no more free will to do
otherwise then he is determined, then he has not to be a man as he was
created. In vain are all precepts, and laws of doing or not doing, going or
staying, bargayning, buying, or selling, because man has neither freedom of
will, nor obligation in conscience to do them, more then to reach heaven with
his fingar. In vain are all exhortations either private or public, in
sermons or in familiar speeches, by preachers, parents, or friends, either from
evil, or to good, to one study or other, to one course of life or other, to
one work or other, because man has no more power, or freedom of will to
choose any of them, then he has freedom to cure himself of the gout, or an
ague, or restore his arm that is cut off. In vain and to no end are either
terrors, and threats of punishment, or promises, and hopes of reward either,
praises and commendations of good, and dispraises and reprehensions of bad
deeds, because neither are any deeds in themselves good, but bad before God,
nor is any man more free, and able to do the one, rather the^ the other, then
he is to move mountains, or to add height to his stature. To what end
therefore are Masters offended with the negligence of servants? Do parents
correct the vndutifullnes of their children? Do Princes punish the rebellion,
or offenses of their subjects? Do Preachers reprehe^d the vices of their
auditors, or exhort them to works of piety, and charity, dissuade them from
actions of sin, and iniquity? Since the works be both alike sins, do both
alike violate the precept, and are both alike forgiven, and not imputed, since
the laws do not oblige in conscience, and are impossible to be kept, since the
parties have no power, or freedom to do the one, more then the other; but all
as by the decree of God, and force of their original concupiscence are forced,
and necessitated to do it.

Seauenthly, it follows, that in vain, and to no end, 4. All cases and
scruple of conscien^.
does any Protestant make any scruple of conscience (which needs not, as a law
to direct, as a thousand witnesses to accuse, as a judge to condemn or clear,
as an executioner to torment and torture him, as it does other men for their
sins vnrepe^ted) because where no sin is imputed, where no Free Will is
admitted, where no good work, or observation of any commandment is possible,
where no law of God or man does oblige in conscience to performance, what needs
any conscience to torment, or trouble it self with the guilt of any law
infringed, with the sting of any injustice committed, with the scruple of any
good work omitted; since neither the law could be fullfilled, nor the act
could be prevented, nor any punishment shall be inflicted, nor God offended? Why
should therefore be studied any cases of conscience? Why should be admitted any
Chancery, or Court of conscience? Why should there be any confession of sins
secret, or any restitution of debts, and monyes secret, any forbearance of
wrong secret, when there is no fear or shame of man? Why shall therefore any
Protestant in life, or at death trouble his conscience, or have any scruple of
any good work omitted, of any secret murder committed, of any injustice,
rapine cruelty, perjury, bribery, sorcery practiced, or of any heresy,
idolatry, or infidelity, of any Iudaisme, Turcisme, or Atheism believed,
followed, or persuaded? Surely he needs not, for one dram of faith, of
special faith, of apprehension of Christ's justice, compounded with an
impossibility of performing the law, with the necessity of man's will, with the
liberty of the Gospel, and with the certainty of present and future
justification, will purge all this melancholy, fear and scrupulosity, and
leave the soul clear of any doubt, fear, timidity, or uncertainty of heaven,
for any whatsoever sins, and offenses howsoever, or by whomesoeuer committed.

Out of all which former absurdities, we may observe these differences between
a Protestant and a Catholic, and a just man of the one, The difference between
a just Catholic, and a just Protestant.
and a just man of the other; that, 1. A Protestant belieues a faith which
never any Prince, Prelate, or people, never any Doctor, Confessor, or Martyr,
never any Council provincial, or general believed for 1500. and more years
before Luther. The Catholic belieues the same which all Princes Christian, all
Prelates and people reputed true Christians, all Confessors, Martyrs, and
Saints, all Councels general no fewer then eighten, and all provincial above
100. have ever since Christ professed and believed. Secondly, a Protestant
belieues a faith which falsifyeth and frustrateth the predictions of the
Prophets, the promises of Christ, the preaching of the Apostles, the mission of
Pastors, the succession of Prelates, the ordination of Priests the virtue of
miracles, the constancy of Confessors, the purity of Virgins, the blood of
Martyrs, and the unity, sanctity, antiquity, and universality of the Catholic
Church* the Catholic belieues and professes a faith which verifies, and
confirms all the former, and in which they agree in belief, and profession
with them all. Thirdly, the Protestants believe a faith which has less
authority, credibility, and motives of persuasion, such as are miracles, unity,
universality, and others to persuade, and make it credible, then has the faith
of Jews, Turks, or Pagans: the Catholics believe that which has unity,
visibility, universality, antiquity, sanctity, prophecies, miracles, monuments
of piety, charity, bounty, and all reasons of probability to persuade, and make
it credible. Fourthly the Protestant is made just by a special faith, of which
is no mention either in any Scripture, Tradition, Council, or Father, and
which neither Doctor, Father, Prelate, Prince, Province, people or person in
the world before them believed, and professed as a saving, and justifying
faith: the Catholic is made just by a Catholic faith which has been
general, universal, and wholly by all people, Prelates, and Princes, in all
times and places acknowledged, and professed. Fifthly, the Protestant is made
just by a faith, by which all the seed and posterity of Abraham, Noe, and Adam,
yea all Jews, Gentiles, Turks, Heretics, and wicked blasphemers, idolaters,
murderers, sacrilegious and incestuous persons which have been, or shall be
till the worlds end, may as well be saved and assured of their salvation, as
they themselves: the Catholic is made just by a faith, by which only they who
believe truly, and live piously, or repent and amend faithfully, can be
justified and saved. Sixthly, the Protestant is made just by a special faith,
which is false, as believing many points for true which yet are contrary one
to another; which is contradictory, as houlding positions contradicting one
another; which is sinful, as being a sin and that mortal, as all their
good works are; which is presumptuous, presuming without grace to be made holy,
without merit to attain a reward, without ma^s own labor, and concurrence to
be crowned with the glory of heaven; which is injurious to hope which it
destroies by certainty; to charity which it maks impossible to do good works,
all which it turns into sins, and that mortal: The Catholics are justified
by a faith which admits none of the former absurdities, but is true, humble,
uniform, pious, and a foundation for hope, charity, and good life. Seauenthly,
the Protestant is justified by a faith which derogates from the redemption of
Christ, making it neither universal for all, nor perfect for any, nor able to
cure one man; but is only an apprehension of justice, only a cover for sin,
only a conceit that a man is just, when he is assured he is unjust; which makes
Christ neither upright lawyer, for that he makes laws impossible to be kept;
nor just Judge for that he gives neither reward, or punishment according to
deeds and deserts; nor perpetual Priest, for that he offers no sacrifice at
all, or but only that one of the Cross; which makes Christ ignorant, getting
by degrees knowledge as other men; impotent not able to satisfy sin but with
suffering all the pains even those of hell due to sin; inconsiderate, as
making prayers and vows unadvised, and not premeditated; sinful in
staggering between praising, and blaspheming God, between hope and fear of
salvation, doubting and despairing of his own salvation, and lastly damned in
hell, and suffering all the pains therein which any damned do: The Catholic
is justified by a faith which makes Christ a perfect Redeemer (of his part) of
all men from all sins, and from all both guilte, and pain of sin; a just
law giver in his laws, which are easy, and in his judgments which are
according to every man's works; a potent Savior, who by one action of his
divine person is able to satisfy for all sin; a person always perfect in all
knowledge, always immaculate without any the least spot of sin, and always
blessed, and glorified with the vision and fruition of God even from his
conception. And thus much a Protestant and Catholic differ in the points of a
justifying faith.

Look further yet into the soul, and persons of the one and the other. 8. A
just Protestant has original sin remaining in him; a just Catholic has it
taken away from him. 9. The one is inwardly infected, corrupted, and rotten in
sin; the other is inwardly pure, sound, beautiful, and adorned with grace.
10. The one has all his actions stained polluted, and made damnable by the
infection of his original sin; the other has many of his actions gracious,
lively, and made meritorious by grace. 11. The one in all his actions even the
best does offend and displease God; the other in all his actions which are not
bad does honor and please God. 12. The one by his good actions deserves
nothing but eternal damnation; the other by his good deeds deserves eternal
salvation. 13. The one is just only before man, and by God esteemed just,
though he be internally and indeed unjust; the other is just before God, and
internally, and really indeed just. 14. The one has no deformity, or guilt of
sin washed, cured, or taken away, but only not imputed; the other has all
guilt washed, cleansed, and abolished by inherent justice and grace. 15. The
one has neither power, nor liberty to do any good work; the other assisted by
grace, has free-to do good. 16. The one cannot perform any one commandment;
the other by grace can perform them all. 17. The one cannot resist but yield
to every motion of concupiscence; the other can, and does by grace resist ill
motions. 18. The one cannot love God, praise him, fear, or honor him in any
action; the other can do it, by Gods grace in all his actions. 19. The one
cannot increase in justice or grace, but is as just at the first instant of his
justification, as ever; the other can, and does become more just, patient,
humble, and charitable. 20. The one may commit any sin, though of murder,
adultery, blasphemy, heresy, or idolatry, and yet remain just, and not loose
his justice, nor the favor of God; the other may, and must avoid all the same,
or the like sins least he loose grace, and be damned. 21. The one, let him do
what he will, is sure he shall be saved, and cannot by any sin be damned,
except Christ be damned; the other with fear and trembling does labor to make
his election and salvation, by good works sure. 22. The one needs to make no
conscience of breaking any law of God, or man; because neither oblige in
conscience, and both are impossible to be performed: the other thinks himself
tied in conscience to perform both. 23. The one, though he sin, needs no
more but only by faith to assure himself his sin is covered by the justice
of Christ, and not imputed to him: the other, if he sin, must have hope,
charity, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, penance, and purpose of
amendment to sin no more. 24. The one lays all the burden of his sins
upon Christ, and his satisfaction, and himself rests idle and secure: the
other by the virtue of the same merit of Christ labors with all austerity to
satisfy himself, as far as by grace he can, and to do his endeavor to pacify
God. Now whether of these two estates, the former of the Protestant, or the
later of the Catholic be more honorable to God, more agreeable to piety, more
worthy to be esteem in themselves, and so more to be preferred by man, let the
indifferent Reader judge, and make choice.

Of absurdities which follow upon the fourth head, that is, of absolute
predestination to damnation. SECT. V.
SVBDIV. 1. Protestants doctrine of Predestination makes men desperate, The
fourth daughter or progeny of the private spirit, which is predestination to
sin, and damnation.
and Atheists.
OVT of the fourth principle, or daughter of his private spirit, and the issue
or consequences ensuing thereupon, which are, that God has decreed and
ordained, and that without any foresight, or respect to any sin, original of
Adam, or actual of man, that those who are damned, should be damned only
because it was his will and pleasure, and for that end did likewise ordain
that they should sin, did by his will and decree excite and compel them to
sin, by his motion did effect, and work in them that sin, and obdurate and
harden them in sin, necessitate them without free will to sin, command the
devil to solicit them to sin and both the devil, and other wicked persons,
and the sinners themselves being only as instruments to effect this sin,
himself only being the chief worker of sin; whereby man has no power but to
sin, no means of Christ's merits to help him out of sin, no benefit of
vocation, faith or grace possible to cure his sin; and so upon necessity, do
what he will, he must sin, be damned, and go to hell for his sins. Out of
this doctrine, which in express words is Caluins and his fellows, follow
many absurdityes, both in respect of man who sins and is damned, and also in
respect of God who makes him sin, and damnes him. In regard of man two
absurdities follow; the one whereby some are made mere politicians and of no
Religion at all, but libertines of any: another whereby others are made
desperate without any hope or care of salvation, by any means in any Religion
at all.

The first absurdity of Politicians, is this: God from all eternity has
appointed, and determined of us, without any respect of us, or our works,
whether we shall be saved or damned. Absur^^ies which follow upon it in respect
of man.

1. Of Politicians and Atheists.


If we shall be saved, he will save us: if damned, he will damn us; both which
as he has decreed without us, so both he will effect without us. Infallibly,
therefore as God has decreed without us; so shall we be saved, or damned do what
we can. What therefore have we to do with eternity of salvation or damnation?
What with faith, or Christ the means thereunto, but leave that to God, and
his ordination; let us follow our temporal commodities, and embrace our
sensual pleasures, which are in our power, let us cast off all consideration
of heaven, or hell, and leave that to God as he ordained, disposed, and
reserved to his own will and power. Thus may they reason, and that
consequently out of the former principle; and thus have both Libertins, and
Politicians reasoned, and thereupon inferred that with Catholics they may be a
Catholic, with Lutherans a Lutheran, with Caluinists a Caluinist, with Jews a
Jew, with Turks a Turk, and so with any may be of any Religion. Upon this
ground sprung Atheism, which acknowledges neither any God, nor any religion;
Paganism which worships many Gods, and is of any Religion; Samaritans who made
a religion mixed of Jews and Gentills; Turcisme which observes a Religion mixed
of Jews, Gentills, and Christians; Libertines in S. Augustines time who made
no important difference between the Religion of Catholics and Donatists: and
many both Libertins and Politicians in this time, Aug. epist. 48
who admit salvation in any Religion and profession, and thereby infer, and
practice a contempt of all piety, and religion, a liberty of all sin and
dissolution of life, and a carelessness of heaven, and all heavenly
cogitations. All which as fruit of one tree, do by necessary sequel follow out
of this doctrine of predestination which the private spirit invented, Calvin
diuulged, Machiauell confirmed, and the Devil by all liberty of sin, and
rebellion has increased and propagated.

The second absurdity, which is of men made desperate by this doctrine, 2. Of
desperate men.
which is the mother of desperation, is this reason and consequence by which
they infer thus: I am either predestinate, or reprobate; if predestinate it
auails nothing to live well or ill, because necessarily I shall be saved; if
reprobate it auailes as little to live well or ill, because certainly I must be
damned: necessarily therefore live I well or ill, I must be saved or damned.
What therefore need I care or do, but enjoy my lust, and liberty, since neither
good life can hinder hell, or help to heaven if I be reprobate; nor bad life
hinder heaven or further hell, if I be elect: if therefore I be reprobate
necessarily shall I be damned, what hope therefore can I have of salvation?
Aug. de bono perseuerant. cap. 15.
Thus out of this ground did a Religious man of S. Augustines Monastery in his
time reason, and by the force thereof foorsooke his Cloister, returned to the
world, lived wickedly, Caesar. li. 1. c. 27.
and dyed desperately. Out of the same motive did Lewis a Lands-graue in
Caesarius time live wickedly, and reason thus desperately: If I be predestinate,
no sins can bar me of Heaven; if reprobate, no good works can help me to
heaven; if I be appointed at a certain day to die, I can neither by good life
make longer my life, nor by bad life prevent my death. And he was in danger to
have dyed thus, if a wise Physician had not in his sickness by this reason
cured his soul: If your day be come, certainly you must dye, if not, you need
not my help. Upon which the Landsgraue yet pressing him for help of physic,
he further inferred: If you can preserve your life by physic, though your day
be appointed, why can you not save your soul by Contrition, though your end be
predestinate? By which reason the Landsgraue saw his error, and was brought to
Contrition, and confession, and that perhaps with better success then if he
had answered as a Divine might, and should, thus: That if you be predestinate
to salvation by means appointed by God, then certainly you shall be saved if
you use and apply those means, as by Gods grace you may; and if you be
reprobate, and appointed to be damned it is for your sins freely committed, and
then certainly you shall be damned if you commit these sins which you may avoid
if you will. By which solution as a just man cannot presume; so a sinner needs
not despair, but both, with fe^re and trembling ought to work their
salvation, howsoever by God they be predestinate.

Thirdly, It follows, because a man is thus by the decree, and hand of God
necessitated to do what God has by his immutable, and inevitable will
determined and appointed; that he h^th no freedom of will; freedom, I say,
not of grace as just, by which he is freed from the servitude of all sin, nor
of glory, as blessed, by which he is freed from the miseries of this life, both
which are in the next, not in this life: but no freedom of nature, by which
his will having al things prerequired to do, may yet freely do, or not do. No
freedom either in things natural, as to speak, or to be silent, to walk or
stand: or in things moral, as to give or not give alms; or in things
supernatural as by grace to love God, or not love him, to sin or not sin
against God. No freedom either of contradictio^, or quoad exercitium, by which
he may do or not do any action, as to move, or not move: or of contrariety, and
quoad specificationem, by which he may prosecute any object good, as to love
his neighbor; or bad, as to hate him. It follows, I say, that a man has no
freedom or liberty either of contradiction, or of contrariety, either in
things natural moral, or supernatural. And as man has no freewill at all in
any action (which both follows from their positions and they grant;) so it
follows, that in vain is all labor in man, either to exercise virtue, or to
avoid vice. In vain is all penance or mortification to bridle his
concupiscence, or passion. In vain are all exhortations to piety, and
devotion, and all disswasions from sin and iniquity, because man has no
freedom of will, nor power and ability to do either the one or the other, or
the one, rather then the other: but all necessarily must be done as God has
appointed, and does work it. It follows, that no laws or precepts of God or
man to bid or forbid, can be just. No tribunals of Princes or Prelates to
punish offenders, and reward well-doers, can be upright; because they are
imposed on them who have no liberty to do, or not do them; and leave neither
possibility nor obligation to be performed by man. It follows that there can
be no virtue in doing well, or vice in doing ill, no just iugment in rewarding
of good, or in punishing of bad, no crown of glory in heaven for just actions,
or torment of pain in hell for unjust; because in man is no indifferency,
liberty, or freedom to do the one rather then the other; but is necessitated
by the will of God to do that to which he is ordained. It follows, that no
contracts of marriage, which require a free consent without fear or force, can
be valid. No temptation to sin, against which is no power or liberty, can be
avoided. No laws against malefactors for any crimes, because they are not in
their power not to do them, can be executed. That no difference remains
between a man and a beast, for where is no free election there is no will,
where is no will there is no reason, where no reason, there is no difference
between a man and a beast; why therefore are sins prohibited, laws
established, sermons preached more to men then to beasts, since men have no more
liberty to do or not do, to obey or not obey them, then beasts? Why are actions
of lust, killing, and murdering punished in men, not in beasts, since men have
no more freedom to abstain from them, then beasts? Why is man rather
commanded to abstain from concupiscence, then the fire is from burning? Why
more from swearing then the sun from shining? Why more from lying and
stealing then the sea from ebbing and flowing? Why is he commanded to love God
above all more then to touch heaven with his fingar; to keep the sabbath from
working, more then to keep his years from increasing? Why not to sin rather
then not to be sick, since to the one he has no more power, or ability,
liberty, or freedom, then to the other? Which doctrine how high it blocketh up
the way to all virtue, and piety, and how wide it opens the gappe to all
vice, and liberty shall after be showed. How contrary it is to al authority of
holy scripture, how injurious to God, and preiudicious to man I leave to be
seen in other authors; how forcible the common consent of all sorts of people
is against it, S. Austine shall witness, who says that the sheepheards in the
mountains, the Poets on the stages, Aug. lib. 2 de animabus c. 11.
the people in the market, the learned in the libraries, the masters in the
schools, the Prelates in the pulpits, and all mankind in the whole world do
blase out the freedom of man's will, which is so certain that, says he, if
there be sin there must be freedom, because sin is so voluntary, Aug. de
vera Relig. c. 14.
as that it is no sin if it be not voluntary. How evidently, even by common
sense, and experience, it is to be proved, Scotus 1. demonst. 39.
I will refer him who will deny it, to Scotus his sensible demonstration, who
with blows not reasons, with cudgels not arguments would have it proved to him
till he confess he has liberty, and freedom to cease from beating him. And
how little credit is to be given to the teachers of this doctrine in other high
points of faith above reason, who so grossly fail in this so manifest both to
reason, and sense, I will refer to the judgment of the indifferent reader:
and so pass from the absurdities of this Protestant Predestination touching
man, to the same as they concern God, and his goodness.

SVBDIV. 2. Protestant doctrine of Predestination, makes God the author of
sin.
HOW injurious, Absurdities which follow upon this doctrine of Predestination.
and blasphemous this doctrine of Gods absolute Predestination to sin, and
damnation, is to God, and how much it does derogate from his nature, goodness,
and justice shall by these ensuing sequels, and absurdities appear, in that it
makes God, 1. The author of sin. 2. Sinful. 3. Only sinful, 4. A lying and
dissembling sinner. 5. A most cruel tyrant. 6. Not a God, but the very devil
himself. All which shall appear as evidently deduced out of the former
doctrine: so that if it be true, which many of them teach, that, as we believe
scripture, so we must believe consequences evidently deduced out of it, both as
points of faith; so in like manner as they believe the former doctrine of Gods
absolute and irrespectiue decree of man's Predestination to damnation, and
sin; they must also believe these consequences evidently deduced out of the
same: first. That God is made by this doctrine the author of sin, and, not
only as the Manichees made him a bad God, the author of bad; nor as Florimus
did make him the good God, the author of a bad substance: but as Simon Magus
did make him the author of al bad actions and wicked works, is proved. 1.
Because God, according to the defenders of this doctrine, does by his absolut
and irresp^ctiue (as M. Montague calls it) Will, 1. That it makes God the
author of sin.
Aug. haeres. 46. Epiph. hom. 66. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 19.
predestinate men to eternal damnation. 2. Because God by a secret motion does
compel and necessitate the same men to all sins that thereby he may have an
occassion to condemn, and punish them. 3. Because God does command, urge,
and incite the devil to tempt, and induce them to sin. 4. Because that
therefore God is the author of all sins which are by these men committed. 5.
Because God not content with this cruelty does diverse ways delude men in show,
exteriourly calling, and offering his grace; Becanus opus. theol. com. 1.
^ract. de pr^destin. page 2. de authore pec cati page 99. de Apho^ism Caluinist
^ru^ page 249. and^ de diff^rentia inter Caluinistas, P^lagianos and Caholi^os.
but interiourly denying, and detaining them from grace. 6. Because God for
that end to damn them depriues them of freewill that they cannot repent, and
of all benefits of the merits of Christ, and of grace, that they can have no
means to be saved. 7. Because God never frees them from original sin, into
which he had cast them; but leaves it in them to corrupt al their actions, and
make them sinful. 8. Because God for these sins made them unable to keep
any the least commandment. 9. Because from these sins God never frees them,
but only couers the sin, imputes the person just, and so saues all the elect.
All which reasons are positions in express words affirmed, especially by
Calvin (cited at large by Becanus) by Luther, Melancthon, Sanctius, Martyr,
Beza, Whitaker, Perkins, and other prime Protestants, cited in their own
words by Doctor Smith, Smith. collat. c. 1. de Deo.
and are confessed by Doctor Montague, in his appeal to Caesar, and condemned
by Lutherans, as well as Catholics. Out of which doctrine it follows, 1. That
those actions which we esteem sins, as idolatry, perjury, adultery, murder,
theft* pride, malice, and the rest, are no offenses against God, because he
wills, commands, and works them himself. 2. That they are no sins, because
sin is against the will and law of God, but these are according to the will,
decree, and commandment of God, which is the rule according to which all
actions are to be squared. 3. That sin is nothing but, as the Libertins
confuted by Calvin do hold, an opinion of men, because it is not contrary, but
conformable to the will, decree, and commandment of God. 4. That God in words
forbidding sin, and these actions as sin, does either dissemble, as
inwardly willing and working that which exteriourly he prohibits, or else is
contrary to himsele, as willing, and not willing the same sins. 5. That if
there be any sins at all, then God who is the principal author, and agent,
and not man who is the instrument only, is the sinner and offender. 6. That men
are excusable in committing any or all the foresaid actions, because they do
that which God wills and works, and which themselves cannot but work. 7. That
no credit can be given to the word of God in Scripture, because God may as well
lie in it, as he does in other books of Pagans or Heretics, of both which he
is equally the principal author and dictatour. All which absurdities as they
are most horrible and blasphemous, so do they all necessarily follow upon the
former Protestant positions, and must needs be true, if the former Protestant
doctrine, and positions be true.

SVBDIV. 3. Protestant doctrine of Predestination, makes God a sinner.
SECONDLY, 2. That it makes God a sinner.
that God is by this doctrine not only the author of sin, but a very sinner,
and worker, not only of the material entity, or action by which sin is
committed, but also of the formal malice, or defect of goodness in which
sin consists, and so is formally a sinner, and committer of sin according
to this doctrine, is proved. 1. Because the teachers of this doctrine, as
before, call God the principal author, actour, and the worker of sin: but
as sin is (in like manner as a picture) a denominate concreet, including the
malice as the form, and the action as the matter of sin, as the picture does
the form of a man, and the matter of colors of which it is made; so he that
affirms God to be the author or worker of sin, does as properly affirm him
to be the author of the malice in sin, as the painter is said to be the
author and worker of the form of the picture: and so God is as properly a
sinner, by being the author and worker of sin, as the workma^ is a painter
by being the author, and worker of the picture. And though in the Catholic
doctrine God is no more a sinner in that he is in somesort the efficient cause
of the real entity of the sinful action (to which as the author of Nature,
he concurs with man as an universal and indifferent agent to any action) then
the soul is the author of the lamenesse in the leg, or the writer the cause
of the ill writing of the pen (the defect o^ formality of sin proceeding
from the particular agent, man, who is the deficient cause, as the formal
lamenesse, or ill writing proceeds from the leg, and pen, in whom is the
defect of lamenesse, or writing:) Yet in the Protestant doctrine (which makes
God the author of sin formally as sin, thereby to show his justice in
punishing sin as sin, and sinful men for sin) it cannot be avoided but
that God is a sinner, as the author of sin, and that formally as sin: and
if it would excuse God from being a sinner in that he wills, and works sin
for a good end to show his justice, then it would also excuse man from sin in
that he sinned for a good end, as if he stole to give alms, or killed a man to
send him to heaven, by which reason evil might be committed that good might
come thereupon, which is contrary to S. Paul. Romans 3.8.


Secondly, because the same teachers make God the principal willer, commander,
and worker of sin, who, that he may justly punish men for sin, (whom he
has upon his own mere will, without any preuision of their sin, ordained,
and created to be punished, and damned) does therefore ordain, will, command,
and work sin, and does force, and necessitate them to sin, that for the
same sin he may execute his decree of damnation upon them: but whosoever is
the principal willer, commander, and worker of sin must needs be a sinner,
and more properly a sinner the^ the instrument which is used, or the subject in
which the sin is committed, that is, man. Therefore God must be a sinner,
properly a sinner, and more properly a sinner then man, yea and the greatest
sinner of all sinners, as the chief willer, commander, and worker of all
sins: which is a horrible blasphemy.

SVBDIV. 4. Protestant doctrine of Predestination, makes God the only sinner,
THIRDLY, that God is by this doctrine not only a sinner, but also the only
sinner, and that the Devil, 3. That it makes God alone, the only sinner.
and Man are innocent, and no sinners at all, is proved. Because if the Devil
in tempting to sin be ruled by the will of God, to whose command he obeyes; If
in alluring to sin, he be compelled to obey, and do what God does compel him
to do; Calu. 3. Inst. 14.17.
And if the wicked who sin are not excusable in that they cannot avoid the
necessity of sinning, which by the ordination of God is imposed upon them, as
Calvin affirms; If Judas did necessarily betray Christ, Calu. 3. Inst. 23.8.
and Herod and Pilate did necessarily condemn him, as Beza affirms; If the
thief be compelled to steal by the compulsion of God that for the theft he
may be hanged, as Zuinglius affirms: Zuing. ser^. de prouid.
then surely is not the thief who is compelled, but God who co^pels both the
Devil to set on the thief, and the thief who steals, the sinner who sins.
For if the goodness and badnesse of the work in every action is to be
attributed to the principal author, willer, and worker of it, not to the
instrument (especially such as want freewill) used in working it, as the well
building of the house is to the architect, not to the axe and tools; then is
the malice of sin to be imputed to God the principal and chief author, not
to man, only the enforced instrument of it, and so only God is the sinner, and
man innocent, and no sinner at all. Which is also confirmed out of that saying
of S. Augustine, that sin is so voluntary, that except it be voluntary it is
not sin: Aug. de vera Relig. c. 14.
but it is voluntary only in God, according to these teachers, not in man, in
whom it is necessary, therefore it is a sin only in God, not in man.

SVBDIV. 5. Protestant doctrine of Predestination, makes God alyer and
dissembler.
4. That it makes God a great liar and dissembler.
FOVRTLY, That God is, by this doctrine of these Doctors, a great liar, and a
deep dissembler, and deluder, that is, that either God, or these Doctors must
be liars, or dissemblers; is proved: Because the words of God in holy
scripture, and of these Protestant doctors in this point are contradictory;
therefore if Gods word be true, theirs must be false, or if theirs be true, then
must Gods be false, and so God must be either a lier in speaking untruly in
scripture, or a dissembler in speaking one thing and intending another, or they
strange liars in belying him. That Gods word and theirs are contradictory is
apparent by these instances. First, God says, that Psalm. 5.5.
he wills not inquity, that Psalm. 44 8.
he hates iniquity, that Zach. 8.17.
he hates sins, that Sap. 14.9.
both the wicked and his wickedness is hateful to him, that 3. Reg. 11 6.
Solomon did that which was not liked before our Lord, that 2. Reg. 11 27.
David did displease him, the one for his idolatry, the other for numbering the
people: but these Protestant Doctors say the contrary: Calvin says, that
Calvin. de pr^destin. page 727.
God wills and is author of sin; 1. Instit. 191. in Genes. 3.1.
willed the sin of Adam, and fall of man; that Depraedest page 726.
Pharao's cruelty pleased God Beza says, that Beza respons. ad Acta colleq.
Mon^is^. p^g. 51.
God wills and decrees evil and the damnation of man; that Depraedest. cont.
(...). vol. 1. Theol page 3.7.6
God wills and is pleased with that, which he does revenge, and punish. Peter
Martyr says, that Mart. in Sam. 1.4 fol. 32.
God wills sin, as a mean to his end, hates not sin which he works.
Perkins says, that ^erk. in Cred. page 7.33. of predestination p. 1.2.7.
God willed the sin and fall of Adam, wills that sin be committed. Bucana^
says, that Bucan. Instit. theol. loco 14. page 145.
God wills sin by his secret, and well-pleasing will* All which if they be
true, then the former sayings of God are false, and so God lies, or dissembles,
of if Gods be true, theirs are false.

Secondly, God says, Isa 53 9.
that he has not done iniquity; that Sap 3.5.
he will not do iniquity; that 1. Prou. 14.22.
they err that work evil; that 1. John. 3 8.
he who commits sin is of the Devil; that Eccl. 15.21.
he commands none to do wickedly; that Ierem. 32.35.
he did not command the building of the high place of Balaam; that Iac. 1.13
he does not tempt any man to evil; 1. Cor. 10.13.
Suffers none to be tempted above that which he is able. But contrary to all
this Calvin says; that Calu. 1. Instit. 17.11. and 18.1. in Rom 9.18. de
praedest. 7.2.7.7.3.9.7.4.6.
God not only permits, but commands evil, commands and compells the Devil to
be a lying spirit in the mouth of Prophets; 1. Instit. 14.17.
works the execration of the faithless; 3. Instit. 23.1.
Is the cause of obduration; De Praedest. p. 7.2.6.
of Pharao's obduration and cruelty; that page 7.2.8
wickedness committed by man proceeds from God* Luther says, that Luth. de
seruo arbitrio fol. 459. and fol. 433.
God works in us good and evil, and works evil by us. Melancthon says, that
Melanct. in Romans 8. de praedest.
the treason of Judas was as proper a work of God, as the conversion of S.
Paul Beza says, that Beza de praedest. contra Castal. page 3.9.9. in Romans 9.18.
God does work in us obduration, and is the cause of it. Sa^ctius says, that
Sanct. de excec. quaest. 1. page 204.
God is the chief author of obduration, does work good and evil in us; De
praedest^nat. Sanct. cap. 5. page 3.2.6.
does reward his own good, and punish his own ill works in us; that De
exce^at. quaest. 5. page 211.
sin as sin, and malum culpae, is preordained of God; that ^^b. 5. de
nati^. Dei c. 2. page 5.6.8.
God ordained men to damnation, and their sins to damn them, forsook them
and denied them grace that they might sin; de exce^at. quaest. 4. page 208.
compels to wickedness mediatly by himself, and by his special action.
Peter Martyr says, that In Iud. cap 3. fol. 52.
God does solicit to deceive; In Romans 1. fol. 34.37. and in Romans 9. page 6.3.
does compel to great sins, to lie, to seduce. All which if they be true,
then the former sayings of God in Scripture are false, and so God is a liar, a
deluder, or a dissembler, or they foul liars.

Thirdly, God says in Scripture, that Ezech. 33 11.
he wills not the death of the wicked; that 2. Pet. 3.9.
he will not have any to perish; that Matt. 18.14.
it is not his will, that one of these little ones perish; 1. Tim. 2 4.
but will have all to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. He
commands that Exodus 20.3.
none shall worship strange Gods, that none commit murder, adultery, and theft;
Ezech. 18 30.
he persuades the wicked to repent, to be converted, and repent from their
iniquity, and to sin no more; Prou. 1.24.
he inuiteth, calls, and stretches out his hands; and (y) would gather
sinners under his wings, as a Hen does her chickins; Math. 23 37.
he would have all to come to him. But Calvin says that Mat. 11.28.
God did ordain, and predestinate many, yea the most to damnation, and created
them for that end, for no desert or sin in them, but only for that his will
was so to have it; Calu. 3. Instit. 3.21.3. Inst. 23.2.
did create them as organs of his anger to destruction of death, and that they
might come to that end, did either deprive them of power to hear the word of
God, or did blind and dull them in hearing it, does direct his voice to them
not to that end that they may hear* but to that end that they may be made more
stupid; that Calu. Instit. 24.12.
he calls them only by word, and after a humane manner, not because he would
have them come. Beza says, 3. Instit. 24.17.
Beza colloq. Montisb. page 418.
he will not have the reprobate converted and saved, who are not able to have
any will to be converted. Piscator says, Piscator apud Vorstiu^ parasceue ad
collat. page 8.
he maks show in words to will that which he wills not, and not to will that
which he will, and so does he use holy dissembling. Beza says, Beza 2. part.
respons. ad act. Mont. page 226.
he commandes that which he will not have done, and promises that which he
will not perform; that De praedest. contra Castal. page 3^6.
he does not love all; Apud Schusselb. Theol. Call. art. 8. p 71.
never did, nor ever will have mercy on all; that Ad Call. Andr. vol. 3. theol.
page 125.
he would not have the death of Christ to profit the reprobate; Colloq.
Montisb. page
will not have the reprobate converted and saved, and that they cannot have any
will to be converted. Zanctius says, Zanct. suppl. ad Senate. Argentin. col.
57. De praedest. c. 4. col. 317. and 295.
He calls all according to his outward will, and preaching of the Gospel, but
according to his secret will, neither would, nor will have all to come, and be
saved. Perkins says, Perk. of predest. col. 139.
he will not, nor has so much as any will or velleity, no not conditionally,
that all be saved. And therefore it is not true to say, that God will have all
saved. And that when S. Paul says so, he speaks according to the charitable
opinion of men, not according to Gods will. All which words of these
Protestant Doctors, as they contradict the words of God (for that God does
not will, command, and work evil; and that he does will, work, and compel
to evil; that God hates, and is displeased with sin, iniquity, and sinful
persons; and that he wills, decrees, and ordaines the same; that God inuites,
calls, desires, and wills the salvation of all; and that he detaines, and
withouldes men from coming to be saved, are quite opposite and contradictory
one to another;) so therefore must either this Protestant doctrine be false if
Gods be true, or if theirs be true, Gods must be false, and God either a liar,
or a dissembler.

He that desires to see more of these express contradictions between the
express word of God in holy Scripture, and the Protestant Doctors in their
writings, let him peruse the foresaid Collation, Smith. Coll. lib. 1. cap. 6.
art. 1. ad art. 24.
where he shall find at large Gods express words, that God wills not
iniquity, their express words, that God wills iniquity; Gods words, that God
does not work iniquity, their words, that God does work iniquity; Gods
words, that he does not command man to sin; their words, that God does
command a man to sin; Gods words, that God does not tempt to evil; their
words* that he does tempt to evil; Gods words, that God does hate all who
work iniquity, and their words, that he d^t^ no^ have them; Gods words, that
he does not ^ustify a wicked man remaining wicked; their words, that he does
justify such a one; Gods word, that he is angry with the faithful when they
sin; their word, that he is not angry with them; Gods word, that God is
delighted with good works; their words, that he is not delighted with good
works; Gods words, that God is worshipped with good works; their words, that
he is not worshipped with them; Gods words, that God is pacifyed, and pleased
with good works; their words, that he is not pacifyed, nor pleased with them;
Gods words, that God will have his Commandments kept; their words, that he
will not have them kept; Gods words, that God will have mercy upon all men;
their words, that he will not have mercy on all men; Gods words, that God
does love all men; their words, that he does not love all men; Gods words,
that he will have all men to be saved; their words* that he will not have all
men to be saved; Gods words, that God wills not the death of a sinner; their
words, that God wills the death of a sinner; Gods words, that God made not
death; their words, that he made death; Gods words, that God has no need of
sinners; their words, that God has need of sinners; Gods words, that God
damnes men for their sins; their words, that he does not damn them for
their sins; Gods words, that God can do all things; their words, that God
cannot do all things. All which contradictions being in the forecited book,
and place expressed in the words of God in Scripture, and in the words of the
authors themselves out of their own writings, and that only in one article,
concerning God (to omit many other such like contradictions concerning Christ,
Scripture, Church, Sacraments, Faith, good Works in general and, particular,
Sins, Justification, Free Will, the Commandments, Heaven, Hell, and others
in particular to the number of 250. in the same author expressed in the words
of Scripture and the Protestant authors themselves) do evidently convince that
in most points of controversies express Scripture is against them (of which
also some particular instances are given in the former part of this Treatise)
and that they do make God, who is truth it self, a false, lying, or
dissembling God in his holy word, and holy Scripture which they would seem so
much to esteem, and honor.

SVBDIV. 6 Protestant Doctrine of Predestination, makes God a most cruel
Tyrant.
THAT this Protestant doctrine does make God cruel, most cruel, and more
cruel then any Tyrant in this world, 4 That it makes God a most cruel tyrant.
shall by these their positions, and doctrine, before proved, appear. 1. In
that they affirm God to have imposed upon man laws impossible by him to be
performed, as the ten Commandments; and for the breach of them to have
inflicted pains intolerable, as hell-fier. 2. In that they affirm, God to
have ordained, appointed, and created, and that upon his own mere will, and
pleasure, without any demerit so much as in them foreseen the greater part of
mankind to be damned for ever in the torments of hell. 3. In that he has taken
from these men freedom of will, and ordained, decreed, forced, and
necessitated these men to sin, that for this si^ne he might damn them, and
for the same has damned, and does still damn many. By which doctrine is taken
away from God his chiefest attribute of mercy which is above all his works,
and is attributed to him the chiefest property of the Devil, which is extreme
cruelty.

For first, More severe in his laws then Draco
if God do make laws which are impossible to be kept, and inflict punishment
which is intolerable to be endured for the breach of them; then are Gods laws
more severe then were the laws of Draco the Athenian, who made laws so cruel,
that he inflicted death equally upon all offenses as well less as greater,
Agellio lib. 2. cap. 18.
as well for taking a bunch of grapes, as for stealing a great treasure, as
well upon those who were only idle, as upon those who were murderous, because,
said he, the least offense deserved death, and a great offense could not have a
greater punishment then death; for which Demades said, such laws were to be
writ not with ink, but with blood; and Solon did after seauenteene years
abrogate them all, and made new: but according to this doctrine Gods laws
inflict a death not temporal but eternal, and pains not for an hour but for
ever, as well for every idle word as for an horrible murder, More cruel then
any Tyrant.
as well for stealing a penny as a thousand pounds, as well for an vnuoluntary
suggestion to sin; as a voluntary consent, act, or custom of sin* and
which is more, for not doing that which was impossible for them to do, or for
committing that which God himself forced them to commit. Memorable are the
tyrannies of the Herod's in holy Scripture. Of Herod the King, who to kill one
most innocent, killed all the innocent children about Math. 2.16.14.9.
Bethleem. Of Herod the Tetrarch, who to please a dancing Wench, cut off the
head of a holy S. John Baptist. And of Herod ^grippa, who to please the people
killed S. James, Act. 12.1.7.
and would have killed S. Peter if the Angel had not freed him out of prison.
Memorable are the crueltyes of Adonibezec, Iud. 1.7.
who cut off the fingars and toes of 70. Kings, and fed them with scraps under
his table. Of Abimelec, who killed upon one stone the seauenty sons of
Ieroboall. Of Amman, Iud. 9.5.
who would have killed all the Jews in all the kingdom of assuerus in one day.
Es^her 3.6.
Memorable were the cruelties of Hannibal, who of dead bodies of the Romans
made a bridge; Fulg^s. lib. 10 cap. 11. and Theatrum vitae humanae.
and of his wife, who said that a Ditch full of blood was a grateful
spectacle. Of Mythridates, who with one letter caused four score thousand
Roman Merchants to be killed at one time in Asia. Of the Hetrurians, who tied the
bodies of the living Romans to the dead, that the one might dye by corruption
of the other. Of Atrius, who killed, cut in pieces, boiled, and set before his
brother Thyestas his own children to eat. Of Ptolomy of Egypt, who killed his
own son Memphis borne of his own sister and wife, Cleopatra, and sent the
head, hands, and feet to his mother for a present. Suet. Ner.
Of the Emperor Ner^, who set Rome on fire, desired to see all the world on
the like fire, and wished that all the Citizens had but one head, that he
might cut it off at one blow. Suet. Call.
Of Caligula, who held that it was lawful for him to do what he list with any
man. Of Tiberius, who killed the most of the Senators of Rome, Suet. Tiber.
and left Caligula his successor, because he hoped he would kill the rest, and
exceed him in cruelty. Memorable were the tyrannies of Phalaris of Aegrigentum,
who tormented men in a fiery bull. Of Diomedes of Thrace, and of Busciris of
Egypt, who gave their guests to be devoured by their horses, and fed them
commonly with man's flesh. Of Dionysius of Syracusa, of Anno of Carthage, of
Eliarcus of Heraclea, of Hyparchus of Athens, all who devised torments the more
cruelly to kill their subjects; and of the persecuting Emperors, who sought
all new devises of tormenting by rack, wheels, renting, brusing, and by
lingering death, Marfil. Ficinus in epist. lib. 2.
the more cruelly to execute the bodies of the innocent Christians. Whereupon
the Philosophers said, Cruelty is hateful to God, a monster of madness and
misery; that cruelty, Agath. lib. 4.
and equity cannot be joined together; that cruelty is a wickedness not
humane, but bestiall, and which cannot stand with equity.

Seneca lib de clement. ad N^ronem.
But of all crueltyes the most memorable, yea horrible, and not imaginable, if
the Devil himself had not invented and devised it, is this cruelty which they
impose upon God, who is a God so good, so clement, so pitiful, and so
merciful, that Psalm. 144
his mercy is above all his works, and ^uc 1.50
from generation to generation; that he disposes all things in mercy, and does
with good things fill the earth, that he should not only impose laws upon man
above his ability, S^p 15.1
and for the breaking of these laws should inflict hell-paines, but also that
he should will, Eccles. 16 30.
ordain, decree, predestinate, yea and create, and that certainly, ineuitably,
and immutably, as the prime and principal cause, only because it was his m^ere
will and pleasure, the greatest part of mankind, that is, al who are damned to
eternal death, destruction, and damnation in those intolerable pains of
hell-fier for all eternity. And that he did will, command, work, yea and
compel and necessitate man to sin, that for this sin he might punish and
damn him eternally in hell. This certainly is such a cruelty, that if it were
true, it would follow that this good God was more cruel then the former
tyrants ever were; for they put men to a temporal death, God to an eternal.
They killed men whom they found in their kingdom, God created and made men that
he might damn them eternally. They pulled down them whom they had exalted, God
exalted these to his liknesse for that end that he might cast them down to the
deepest hell. They murdered a few only of their subjects, God the greatest part
of the world. They killed them, against whom they conceived displeasure, or such
as had offended them; God damnes the^ who have no way offended him, or sinned,
yea whom he forces to sin, that for that sin he may damn them. They
punished with great punishment small offenses, God with eternal punishment no
offenses. They punished with death men who did otherwise, one way or other,
both deserve death and must die; God damnes them who otherwise then for his will
and pleasure were not to be damned: as much therefore as the number is greater,
the punishment more grievous, and the cause of their damnation less; so much
is God by these doctors made more cruel, and tyrannical then any of the
former tyrants.

If it were a horrible cruelty for a King to call thousands of his subjects out
of the Country to the Court, and there to grace, and give them dignity, only
for that end, that, when he had thus graced them, he might presently, without
any fault committed by them, torture, torment, and with all cruelty by his own
hands murder, and butcher them alone after another; then surely a greater
cruelty it is in God to create, and bring out of nothing so many millions of
souls as are, or shall be in hell tormented, and to exalte them to the dignity
of his own liknesse, in memory, will, and understanding, and to enrich them
with so many benefits of nature, and grace, only for that end that without any
desert, or offense in them, he may in those intolerable flames eternally
himself torment them; yea to cause, compel, and force them to commit such
acts of sin, that for the same he may thus punish and damn them. Surely this
is a cruelty and tyranny so great, that a greater cannot be conceived to be in
the devil, nor yet be imagined by the devil himself: and yet these
Protestant doctors do not only impute it unto God, but will have it to be a
property of God, and to stand with his mercy. Indeed if to make laws not
impossible to be performed, if to oblige men to do things impossible to be
done, if to command men to do a work, and then to deny them means to do it,
if to command and will men, yea to force and compel them, to do some action,
and then to punish them for doing the same, and that with such horrible pains
as of hell: If this I say, be mercy and mildness, be grace and goodness, then
what can be severity, injustice, cruelty, and tyranny? If this be Gods mercy,
pity, clemency, longanimity, grace and goodness to man; what is his justice,
and severity? what is, or can be cruelty, and tyranny? If these be his ways of
mercy, what are his ways of justice? If to punish cura condignum, and to
reward vltra condignum, that is, to punish less and reward more then is
deserved, be a property of mercy, which all attribut to God; then to punish
without desert, yea to cause and force a man to do evil, and then to punish
him for it, is surely no mercy; yea no justice, but unspeakable cruelty, and
intolerable injustice. Surely if this may be accounted mercy, it is a mercy
which is merciless, a mercy which brings all misery, and makes millions most
miserable. A mercy which makes mercy ste^ more then severe justice, mercy and
most extreme injustice; mercy and most inhumane cruelty, all one; for what
greater injustice, and cruelty can there be in a tyrant, or a devil then to
choose, and pick out so many millions of souls, and without any cause given
by them, to ordain, appoint, and put them into eternal pains of hellfire,
there to fry for all eternity, and to debar them of all means, or ability
either of the merits of Christ, or of freedom in themselves, or of any other
helps, or means whatsoever to avoid the same, so that upon necessity they
must sin, and deserve damnation, and upon necessity must for that sin be
damned? O merciless mercy! O unjust justice! nay, O cruel cruelty of all
cruelties, the gre^test that cruelty it self could conceive, or the Devil
himself can either devise or execute. Far be it from thee, O God of mercy, who
works all in mercy, and whose mercy is above all thy works.

SVBDIV. 7. Protestant doctrine of Predestination, makes God a Devil.
LASTLY that this Protestant doctrine does transform God into a Devil, and so
does deprive him of his only, 5. That it makes God a Devil.
and all goodness, and thereby transpose him into the greatest and vilest evil
that can be, shall by these ensuing reasons appear. 1. It is the office or
property of Satan to ^empt man to sin, Because it makes God a tempter unto
sin.
yea as an adversary to lay traps to ensnare man in sin, for which in greek
he is called (...), a tempter, or (...), an entrapper or calumniator, and in
hebrew Satan, an adversary, and so he is called Matthew. 4.3.
tempter, is said to 1. Cor. 7.5.
tempt us, and to temp the heart to lie to the holy ghost Act. 5.3.
. But this is more proper to God according to this Protestant doctrine, then to
the Devil. 1. Because God does not only tempt and move a man to sin, but
which is more, does will, ordain, and predestinate a man to sin, and to all the sins which are committed. 2. Because God is not only our adversary to
oppose us; but so potently does oppose us in so weighty a matter as our
greatest good, that he directly excludes most from all felicity, depriues most
of all benefit of it, debarres most from all means to attain it, and entraps
most in all the snares, which may hinder their progress unto it; and the
Devil is but only his instrument to work that which he wills, and execute that
which he before had designed against us: therefore God is more our tempter, and
adversary then is the Devil.

7. It makes him the sower of the tares of sin. Math. 13.25
Secondly, The office and property of the Devil is to sow tares, or ill weeds
of sin in the field of our hearts, to choke up all the corn of grace and
goodness, the enemy comes and sowes tares. But God does this, according to this
doctrine, more then the Devil. 1. Because God does work inwardly in the
hearts of sinners, does excecate and obdurate the minds of men, Calu. 1. Inst.
18 1. 1. Inst 14.2. 4. Inst. 14.2.
does strike them with a spirit of error, giddiness, and madness, and that
not by permission, but operation, as Calvin in particular affirms. 2. Because
God does will, command, and work in us all the sins which are wrought, as
the principal cause and mouer, the Devil being only as the instrument, and
that not free, but forced; not moving but moved; and not able to do otherwise
then by God he is both commanded, and compelled, as before; therefore the chief
and principal sower of ill seeds, and weeds of sin is God, not the Devil.

3. It makes God the author of sin.
Thirdly, The office, and property of the Devil is to be author of all sins
in general sin is of the Devil: and of lying in particular, who speaks
lies of himself, and is a lier, the Father of lies. 1. Joan. 3.8. Joan. 8.44.
But this is more proper to God then the Devil according to this doctrine. 1.
Because the Devil did only in Adam, by tempting him to eat the forbidden
fruit, remove an impediment which did hinder ill, to wit original justice, by
which the inferior part was kept in order without rebellion to the superior:
Calu. 3. Inst. 23.4. and 7.
but God did by his will, says Calvin, ordain and decree the fall of Adam,
the ruin of all his posterity, and the miserable condition into which we are
all fallen. Therefore God was more properly the author of Adams fall then the
Devil. 2. Because the Devil does only tempt to sin indirectly and medially,
that is, either obiectiue proposing sinful objects to the phantasy, that the
will may consent, and delight in them, or dispositiue by altering and tempering
the organs of the senses that the appetites may with more facility incline unto
them, leaving always a freedom of the will to dissent, or assent: but God,
according to Calvin, does not only by his inevitable, and immutable decree, and
ordinance, will and command the same, but also by his immediate, effectual, and
irresistible concourse and operation to every actio^ of sin, so works the act
of sin in man, that he leaves in man neither any operation at all, God
working all; nor any liberty or freedom, God necessitating all, who is thereby
not only the permitter, Luth. de seruo arbitrio. Calu. sermon. de prouid. c. 6
Zuing. in ep.
but the author of all sins; the author as well of the adultery of David,
the treachery of Judas, the hardness of Pharao, the cruelty of Achab, the
incest of Absalom, the reproach of Semei, the idolatry of the ten Tribes, of
the Chaldean destruction of Judea, of the Jews and Pilates condemning of
Christ, as he is, of the conversion of S. Paul. Therefore God is more and
truly the immediate worker of sins and lies, then the Devil. O diabolical
doctrine!

SVBDIV. 8. Observations upon the former doctrine.
UPON good ground therefore did Castalio (who as Caluins scholar best
understood his masters mind, This doctrine condemned by Protestants.
not only by his writings, but from his own mouth) affirm, that this
doctrine of Calvin did transfer God into the Devil, Castal. de pradestinat.
and for the same forsook both him and Geneua, and writ against him, and this
his doctrine. Truly did Peter Vermilius a Professor of Tigure affirm, that
this doctrine of Caluins is a libertine, execrable, sacrilegious, abominable,
Vermilius in lib. 3. Reg. cap. 6.
and altogether diabolical doctrine. Justly did the Tigurin Sacramentaries
anno 1554 accuse Calvin for this doctrine of great impiety, cause his books
writ of this subject to be rent in pieces by the Hangman, and to be burnt
publicly in the Market place, and by special Edict, commanded that none should
diuulge in their territories any so horrible and detestable opinions.
Fcuardentius lib. 2. de Theomachia Calumistica cap. 12.
Upon good reason do as yet the Lutherans in Germany so detest this doctrine,
that to clear Luther of it, they did expunge out of his works these words, God
does work evil in us. And most worthily do the same Lutherans generally
disclaim both this doctrine, Tilmannus Heshusius lib. aliquot erroru^ Caluini.
and Calvin for it, in so much as one of them, Heshusius a great
Superintendent, affirms, that Calvin writ wickedly of the cause of sin, made
God the author of sin, and in his doctrine is horribly contumelious against
God, pernicious to man, and makes not the Devil, but God to be the authoisr of
lies. Another of them, Grauerus absurda absurdorum.
a Professor, auouches, that not God, but the Devil is author of this
predestination, and the God of the Caluinists.

Out of which doctrine, and sequels upon it, may be observed. Observations upon
the former Protestant doctrine.
1. That never any doctrine of Atheist, Pagan, Jew, or Heretic was so wickedly
pernicious, and abominable as this of Calvin, and his followers is; for though
some made God idle, as Epicurus, others impotent, as Lucianus, others the
author of evil, as the Cerdonists, Marcionists, and Manichees; others
miserable, afflicting himself, as the Thalmudists, others no God at all, as
the Atheists: Yet all these are more tolerable the^ these Caluinists; for it
is not so ill to be idle, as to be doing ill; better to make God do nothing
then to make him the worker of all wickedness. It is more tolerable to make
God unable to do good, then to make him the author and actour of doing ill; to
make him unable to requit good, then unjust to punish where is no desert of
ill. It is less blasphemy to make two Gods, the one author of good, and the
other the author of evil, then to make one God, and yet to make him the
author and worker of evil, and of all evil; to call him just, and yet to
make him the punisher of that in others, which he wills, commandes, and works
by himself; to account him merciful, and yet upon his mere will, and
pleasure without any cause or desert, to ordain, and create millions of men to
eternal torments, and damnation. It was not so great impiety in the Jews to
make God mourn and sorrowful for the punishment he wrought on Jerusalem, as
it is in the Caluinists to make him well pleased with the unreasonable
tormenting of souls in hell, and to make it one of the chiefest attributes of
Gods justice, to appoint men to sin, and then for that sin to punish and
damn them. It is not so foolish to say with the fool, there is no God at all,
as it is to say, Psalm. 13.1.
God is the Author and worker of all wickedness, and yet the punisher, and
revenger of the same; for they by the light of reason will condemn and avoid
thefts, murders, periuries, injustice as lying in their power to avoid; but
these will, and may by their own principles practice, and exercise them al, as
being by God forced, and necessitated to them, as wanting freedom to avoid
them, and as fearing no punishment for them. Though therefore most wicked, yet
less wicked were the former opinions of Jews, Heretics, and Atheists, then
these of the Caluinists.

Secondly, it may be observed, that no Caluinist can be certain, and assured
either of any verity of Scripture, or of any article of his Faith, or of any
assurance of his salvation by his private spirit; for though he may imagine
himself to be certain of the sense of Scripture, of the articles of his
faith, and of the infallibility of his salvation, that they are revealed from
God, yet he may with all according to his principles of faith, imagine that God
who reueales these, may reveal and tell him, which is false; for as God,
according to them, is he who effectually procures the sinner to sin, who as the
principal cause uses the sinner as an instrument to commit sin, who incites,
compels, and necessitates the sinner to sin, and who phisically, and
effectually works, and causes the act of sin; so the same God, according to
them may procure, and incite the Apostles, and Prophets as his instruments,
compel, and necessitate them as the chief author, and worker, and produce in
them as the principal agent, lies and untruths, and so may by them in
Scripture reveal an untruth, either of the belief of the mysteries of their
faith, or of the certainty of their salvation. What certainty therefore can
they have from God of revelations they receive from him, or of any thing
suggested by their supposed spirit, as from him? Again, God, according to
Calvin, has one will exterior, another interior; does call exteriourly whom
he withouldes interiourly, speaks to them, but to make them more deaf, gives
them light but the more to blind them, does teach them but to make them more
dull, does apply to them a remedy, but not to cure them; for so are Caluins
words. If so, then how can any be sure that the calling, Calu. 3. Inst. 24.13.
the speaking, the light, the doctrine, and the motion of their spirit (as they
suppose of God) is not rather to detain then draw them, rather to darken then
lighten them, rather to dull them then teach them, rather to increase then cure
their diseases? Surely, if the spirit of God may work, and does more
ordinarily work the bad then the good, does more usually make show to call
when he intends they shall not come, does more generally make blind then
enlighten, make obdurate, then mollify, make dull, then teach, and wound then
cure: And if God do more often intend bad the^ good, obduration then
illumination, damnation then salvation, of most whom he calls, inuites, and
makes show of intending their good: And if the greatest part of the world be
thus by God deluded and deceived; then why may not, or rather should not every
Protestant justly suspect the same of himself? Why may he not rightly fear
that God intends one thing by his inward will, and pretends another by his
outward will? that God does work error, and deceit in him, rather then truth,
and verity? That he is a lying spirit, rather then a true in him? Surely if God
has deceived more then he has taught truth, darkened more the^ he has
lightened, obdurated more then he has mollifyed, wounded more then he has
cured, and damned more then he has saved; justly may every one both suspect
and fear, that God may do the like to him, since no ground, reason, or motive
he has of the one rather then of the other, and no more assurance of his
salvation among the lesser number, then of his damnation with the greate^.

Thirdly, it may be observed, that the God of these Caluinists, and precise
Protestants is not the same with the ancient Christians and present Catholics,
but the one does so far differ from the other; The difference of the
Protestant God from the Catholic God.
that the one of the Caluinists does, will, decree, and predestinate all sins
which are committed by men, and so makes man sin by the will, decree, and
predestination of God; the other of the Catholics does will, decree, and
predestinate only good works, and all good works, and so does make man to do
good works according to the will of God, In ordaining sin.
and does suffer him to do evil according to the man his own will. The one
does command, urge, and compel Satan to devise sins, In compelling to sin.
and to solicit men unto it: The other does bind, hold and hinder Satan
that he do not tempt man, and does aid, help, and assist man, that he be not
by Satan tempted above his power. The one does himself secretly incite, move,
In necessitating to sin.
and necessitate man to sin: the other does dissuade, deter, and enable man
against sin. The one is the principal author, In being author of sin.
worker, and effectour of all sins as sins, and men only his instruments to
do that sin which he works by them: In predistination to damnation.
The other is no author, nor instrument, nor worker at all of sin as sin,
but only the efficient cause of that which is good, leaving man to be the
deficient cause of that which is malice and sin. The one upon his mere will,
because it is his pleasure, without any demerit, or sin in man, did ordain,
predestinate and create most men to damnation, and ordained and predestined
only some few to salvation: The other created all men to salvation, and had a
will and desire that all should attain to it and be saved, and ordained none
to damnation, but upon his foresight of their sin by which they would deserve
damnation. The one did will, appoint, In ordaining the end of sin
and decree the sin of Adam, and of all mankind, for that end only, that in
punishing the most for it he might show his justice, and in freeing other some
few from it, he might show his mercy: The other did only forsee, permit and
suffer the fall of Adam, and the sin of all his posterity, and that for the more
illustration. 1. Of his own goodness, by communicating himself to man. 2. Of his
power, by exalting man to be God. 3. Of his mercy, by making himself a
Redeemer of his enemies. 4. Of his clemency, in suffering all contumelies and
injuries at the hands of his servants, besides the benefit which redou^ds to
man by the liberty of his will, In denying means to be saved.
and the benefit of Martyrdom, and other sufferings for the honor of God. The
one does does excecate, obdurate and harden in sin those who^ he has thus
ordained to sin and damnation, and for that end does deny to them all
freedom of will, all benefit of Christ's merits, all help of grace, all means
of pardon of their sin, of doing good, and of attaining to salvation: The
other does call, inuit, and draw men out of sin, does stretch out his hands,
knock at the door of their hearts, offer the benefit of Christ's merits, the
light of his faith, the virtue of his grace sufficient, and the reward of his
glory abounda^t to all, In not remitting of sin.
that they may be converted, come to him, and save their souls. The one, not
only creates man to sin and works in sin, but also leaves him in sin
both original and actual, of which he never washes and cures the souls of
any, even the just, by infusion of any grace, but only couers their sin with
the justice of Christ, and so leaving him sinful and corrupted, only imputes
him for just and accounts him as clean: The other is so far from causing him
to sin, that he washes, cures, and sanctifyes him from sin infuses into him
grace and sanctity, by which he is really clean from sin, may actually
observe Gods commau^dments, and fruitfully do good works meritorious of life
everlasting. In being sinful.


Lastly, the one is the author and worker of all sins, is the only sinner,
is a most cruel sinner, and a deluding sinner, yea is one who has all the bad
properties and qualities of the Devil, and so is the Devil himself: The
other is good, all good, only good, and goodness it self, pitiful,
merciful, gracious and bountiful to all, calling all, seeking all, and
drawing al from vice to virtue, from sin to grace, from the by-path of hell
and damnation, to the hye-way of heaven and salvation, as much as in him lies.
As great therefore as is the difference between these two Gods, so much
different is the God of the Caluinists from the God of the Catholics, and the
religion of the Protestants short of the Religion of the Catholics. Of which
who will see more, may read a Protestant book lately set out by a Lutheran,
the subject of which is to prove, that the caluinists God is not the same with
the God of the Lutherans, and other Christians.

Of absurdities which follow against Faith, and the Creed. SECT. VI.
I Have at large showed (and that more largely then I intended, the fecundity
of matter still drawing me on) that as Idolatry, of God made many Gods, and
that these Gods still begat new Gods till the number of Gods was infinite,
incredible, and absurd; so Heresy by one private spirit got many private
spirits, and still every private spirit begat a new opinion, and doctrine, till
both the spirits and the doctrine or opinions grew so many and so absurd, that
so many horrible and foul absurdities have issued from them, as neither piety,
reason, nor common sense can endure to hear them. One only observation (of
which I would desire the readers patience) and that, to my judgment, not
unworthy the consideration, occurs; that is, to compile and bundell up, as into
one view, certain maine and principal opinions of these Protestants generally
received (which indeed are the chief points controuerted between us and them)
and to propose to the eye of every indifferent Reader how smoothly they plain
the way to the downfall of salvation, by taking away Faith, Hope, and Charity.

For whereas God created man for himself, as his end to honor him; and all
things for man, as means to help him to this end: so he gave him three helps
or means; one, Protestant positions which oppose Faith, Hope, and Charity.
to know him; another to desire him; and a third to attain him. Man has the
means to know God by Faith, to desire him by Hope, and to attain him by
Charity: those are three Theological virtues which have God their immediate
object, and are as three means to prepare man for his journey to heaven.
Faith, as the beginning, Hope, as the progress, Charity, as the end and
consummation of justification: and as three parts of our spiritual building;
Faith as the foundation; Hope as the walls; and Charity as the roof of our
salvation. The Protestant Doctors by their positions, and doctrine do oppugn,
and overthrow all these three, as in a brief su^me they are compiled, and
proposed to us; Faith, as it is delivered in the Creed which in twelve articles
shows us what we are to believe. Hope, as it is contained in the Pater noster,
which in seven petitio^s directs what we are to hope, and pray for. Charity,
as it is comprehended in the Decalogue, which by ten Commandments instructs us
what to do, and what to avoid. In this, and after ensuing Sections therefore we
will show how this doctrine does oppugn, and overthrow all faith in the
articles of the Creed; al hope in the petitions of the Pater noster; and all
charity in the ten Commandments, and thereby does prepare the way, and loose
the reins to all error in belief, to all despair or presumption against
Hope, and to all liberty of sins, and loosenes of life and manners against
Charity. And first we will lay down briefly the chief points and positions of
the Protestant doctrine, and next, out of them infer the rest.

First, the opinions, and doctrine of the Protestants are these. 1. That Luth.
de liberate tom. 2. fol. 4. and in Gal. 2. tom. 5 fol. 305. Calu. in Gal.
2.16. and in Act. 13.39. Beza in Rom 3.20. Whit. ad rat. 1. Camp. page 7.
Perkins in Catechis. tom. 1. Col 487.
only Faith does justify. 2. That Confess. August. edita VVittemb. ann. 1531.
art. 4. Calu. 3. Inst. 11.19. and 3. Inst. 14.16. and 17. Et in Antid. Council.
Trid. sess. 6. ad cap. 10.13.14. ad Canon. 14.15. and 16. and 4. Inst. 2.16.
VVhita. ad rat. 8. Camp. page 3.
this only Faith makes us certain and secure of predestination past,
justification present, and glorification to come. 3. That Calu. de praedest.
page 695. and 7.3. and in Antid. Council. sess. 6. Canon. 17. page 291. Zanct.
de perfect. Sanctorum cap 2. tom. 7. col. 113. and collat. 128. Whitaker.
contro. 2. quaest. 1. cap. 8. page 434. Perkins de dissertion. tom. 1. c^l.
1026.
this Faith is proper to all the just, and only to them, and the elect. 4. That
Calu. in Joan. 20.28. in Matthew. 13.20. in Luc. 17.13. Instit. c. 2.. 21. Beza
in Joan. 6.37. in Colloq. Montisb. page 380. Whitaker. lib. 8. contra Duraeu^
sect. 48. and contro. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 7. page 515. Perkins in Galat. 1. tom.
2. col. 51. Zanct. de perseu. tom. 7. col. 128. and in sua confess. cap. 17.
sect. 4. tom. 8. col. 522.
this Faith once had can never at any time be lost, nor by any sin be
expelled. 5. That Luther. in Gal. 2. tom. 5. fol. 229. In cap. 5. fol. 420. and
in cap. 8. Isa. tom. 4 fol. 53. Calu. in Joan. 5.29. and 3. Inst. cap. 4.. 28.
Beza. in epist. dedic. respons. ad Castal. vol. 1. Theol page 427. and 457.
Zanct. de persen. Sanct. quaest. 1. cap. 2. tom. 7. col. 360 Wotton. in
respons. ad art. papisticos page 92. Abbot in Diatrib. Thomsoni cap. 20. p^ 189
no sins, how many or great soever, be imputed to the elect, but all covered
with the justice of Christ by apprehension of faith. 6. That Of which see the
first part and last Chapter.
this Faith is obtained by the private spirit in every man, which assures him
of his faith and salvation. 7. That Luth. tom. 1. in disp. fol. 390. and tom. 2
de ration. confitendi fol. 26. de captiuit Babil. fol. 80. In confut. Latomi
fol. 220. and tom. 5. in Gal. 1. fol. 227. in cap. 2. fol. 231. Ibid. de bonis
operibus fol. 58 Calu. de lib. arbit. lib. 1. page 141 and 3. Inst. cap. 17..
1. Beza in confess. cap. 4. sect 19. and lib quaest. and resp. p. 670. Tindal.
apud Fox. in Act. p. 1139. VVitak. de pecc. orig. l. 2. c. 3. p. 656
all works of all men* even the just and best, are sins, and that mortal,
as infected with original sin, and as defective from perfect obedience, and
fullfilling the precept. 8. That Confess. Gallic. art. 18. Calu. in Romans 6.3.
in Gal. 3.6. in confess. fidei page 108. Hu^fred. ad ration. 2. Camp. page 142.
Beza in confess. c. 4.. 8.
there is no interior, and inherent grace or justice, but all exterior and
imputative. 9. That Apolog. Angl. in Syntag. confess. page 123. Luth. de
libert. Christian. tom. 2. fol. 4. and in 3. Gal tom. 5. fol. 329. Calu. in
Antid. Council. sess. 10. cap. 12. page 284. and lib. 1. de libero arbitrio page
148. Beza in Luc. 18.22. and in Romans 10.6. Perkins de Baptis. tom. 1. col. 833.
the fullfilling of all the Commandments, or any of them is impossible. 10.
That Luth. in 1. Pet. cap. 2. tom. 5. fol. 464. and in act. VVormat. tom. 2.
fol. 172. Calu. i^ Jacob. 4.32. Beza in confess. cap. 7.. 9. Whitaker. contro.
4. quaest. 7. cap. 1. page 715. and lib. 8. contra Duraeum sect. 103.
no humane laws do oblige in conscience to their performance. 11. That Calu.
4. Inst. cap. 15.. 3. Perkins in serie causarum c. 33. tom. 1. Col. 77. Beza
lib quaest. and respon. vol. 3. page 344. Whitaker. lib. 8. contra Duraeum sect.
101.
the Sacraments, chiefly Baptism are seals and signs of predestination to
glory, of remission of sins, and perseverance in Gods favor; and that in
Baptism are forgiven sins past, and to come. 12. That Luth. de seruo
arbitrio tomo 2. folio 460. Calu. 2. Inst. cap. 3.. 10. and 2. Instit. cap. 3..
5. Zuing. de prudentia cap. 6. tom. 2. fol.
man by reason of Gods decree and original sin, has no liberty, or freedom
of will to do, or avoid bad works. 13. That Zuing. in Elench. temo 1. folio
36. Calu. 3. Inst. cap. 23.. 4. and 8. and de praedestinatione page 704. Beza
in cap. 22. Luc. v. 22. and de praedest. cont. Castal. page 340. and 360. and
in Colloq Montish p 431 Mart. in Rom 9. page 397. and in lo i^ co^. class. 3.
cap. 1.. 34. Zanct. de praedest. cap. 3. tom. 7. col. 193. cap. 4. col 318.
^iscat. in these. lib. 2. loco 12 page 143. Perkins de praedest. tom. 1. col.
117. and in serie causarum cap. 52. and in cap. 1. Apocal. tom. 2.
God has ordained and predestined upon his mere will and pleasure, without
any cause given, or so much as forseene, all who are damned, both to damnation
and to sin. All which positions as they are auerred by the learned
Protestants, and preached to the people, so they do overthrow all the articles
of the Creed, all the petitions of the Pater noster, and all the precepts of
the Ten Commandments, and lead to all looseness, and dissolution of life, as
shall be showed.

SVBDIV. 1. In general, The belief of the articles of the Creed oppugned by
historical, general, and special Faith.
dectroying all faith.
AND first, that these Positions do quite overthrow, and take away all divine
and supernatural faith, which is the first foundation and cornerstone of our
spiritual building, the first preparation to life and justification, the first
root of all true virtue, and good works, the first gate by which God enters
into our soul, the first light which shines in our understanding, the first
true service which we offer to God, and the first step by which we begin to
walk our journey to heaven: that this doctrine does quite overthrow this
faith, and all the articles of the Creed proposed in it, is proved. 1. Because
they distinguish three sorts of faith. 1. Historical, of things revealed,
and related in scripture, and proposed by the Apostles in the Creed, such as
are the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ,
with all other articles which all Christians usually believe. 2. General, of
promises in general, and all graces promised by Christ to all, as the sending
of the Holy Ghost, the coming to judgment, the raising of the dead, and the
like, which are general for all. 3. Special, of the promise made to every man
in particular of his predestination, justification, and salvation, by which
every one is made infallibly certain that his sins are forgiven him, and
that he shall be saved. Whereas, I say, they make these three sorts of Faith,
the first and second of these Faithes, to wit, Historical and General (by
which they believe the articles of the Creed and promises of God in general)
they Kenn* in locis tit. de argument. tomo 2. page 95. Hun de iustifi^at. p.
220. Zuing. in Jacob. 2. v. eit. tomo 4. Calu. 3. c. 2.. 1.9.10. Inst. 3. c. 2.
28.29. Beza in Iac. 2.14. Mart. in locis class. 3. c. 3.. 23. Whitaker. l. 1.
contra Duraeu^. 13. Pareus lib. 4. de iustifi^^t. c. page ^157.
affirm to be feigned not true faith, a shadow of Faith, not a real justifying
faith, a Faith which is common to the reprobate, and damned, and even to the
Devils themselves; and only the third, or Special faith they assign to be the
true divine, and supernatural justifying faith, which has for his object the
special mercy of God, to them in particular applied, the certainty of
remission of their sins assuredly past, and security of their salvation
infallibly to come, by which they do as much or more assuredly believe their
justification and salvation, then they do the B. Trinity, Incarnation, or the
rest of the articles of Faith. Now, if this special faith be the only true,
divine, supernatural and saving faith, and by it is believed only one article
of the Creed (and that not truly as shall appear) to wit, Remission of sins;
and the Historical and General faith, by which the rest of the articles are
believed, be only a shadow of Faith, a faith of the damned, and Devils: then
we have no divine, and supernatural faith of the rest of the articles, but
believe them only by a Faith which is a fained faith, a shadow, and no more a
gift of God, then the faith of the damned, and the Devils in hell. Therefore
all true and divine belief of the articles of the Creed, is by this special
doctrine of special Faith, quite abolished and taken away from all Christians,
and nothing but a shadow of Faith, a fained and diabolical faith left to them,
and so by one position of theirs is cut off all divine faith or belief of all
the articles of the Creed.

Secondly, whiles they deny all authority of Tradition, The Creed oppugned by
the private spirit.
Church, Councels, and Fathers, and will believe nothing but what they
themselves find in Scripture, and that as their private spirit interprets it:
While they make their spirit, the judge of all faith, and all controversies of
faith, what is to be received or rejected, believed or condemned: While, I say,
Erasm. innuit, Lutherus irruit: Erasmus paritoua, Lutherus excludit pullos:
Erasmus dubitat, Lutherus abnegat.
they do thus, they may by the virtue of this spirit call in question the
authority, and credit of the Creed it self, with the authors of it, as not to
be found in Scripture, and the particular articles they may either reject as
counterfeit and intruded, or else expound and interpret them as their spirit
shall lead them. Thus Luther and Calvin following Erasmus (for Erasmus is said
to have laid the egg which Luther hatched; to have insinuated that which
Luther assured; Erasmus praefat. in Paraphras.
to have doubted of that which Luther down right denied) made doubt of the
authority of the Creed, whether it was made by the Apostles or not. And the
Seruetians in Transiluania (witness Canisius) admit it but so far, as it
agrees with the word of God, Caluinus 2. Just. 16:18:
interpreted (no doubt) by their spirit. Thus did Beza by his spirit affirm,
that part of the sixth article, he descended into hell, Canis. praefation.
corruptelis de verbo Dei. Beza. Apolog. 2. ad Zanct. page 385.
to have been thrust into the Creed. Thus Calvin and Zuinglius following
likewise Erasmus, by their spirit affirmed, that part of the tenth article, the
Communion of Saints, to have been intruded into this Creed out of some other
Creed, and not to have been found in the ancient Creeds. Thus Luther by his
spirit changed in his Germane Creed the word Catholic Church, into Christian
Church. And Beza rejected the same word Catholic as most vain and wicked. And
thus by their Glosses, Eras. lect. 5. in Symb. Calu. 4. Inst. 1.3. Zuing. sermon.
de Symb. Luth. Smyb. Germanico. Beza praefat. in nouum testam. 1565.
and expositions upon many articles as not pleasing their taste, they wrest
diverse, as shall appear, from their native and proper sense (for example, he
descended into hell, that is, he descended into the grave) and so make a new
Creed in sense, and meaning agreeable to their spirit, and the doctrine of it.
Of which who will have a full view, let him read Andr. Iur. his Nullus and
Nemo, and Fitzsimons upon the Mass where their many absurd glosses, and
expositions are at large discovered, and confuted.

SVBDIV. 2. In particular, against all the twelve Articles of the Creed.
THIRDL, Y because by this doctrine, and these Doctors are oppugned in
particular all the mysteries of faith in every article of the Creed, The
particular articles of the creed oppugned. Aug. sermon 115. Kellis. part. 2.
reform. exam. 1. Of God the Father: Calu. in actis Serueti. Beza confess.
Geneu. c. 1. Confess. Aug. impressa anno 1585. Stegius apud Genebrard. l.
contra Steg. page 108. Luth. vt de e^ Zuing. tomo 2. ad confess. Luth. f. 47^.
Melanct. locis editis anno 1545. and vt obijcit ei Stancarus l. 4. de Trin.
Sanctius de tribus Eleur.
which by this brief enumeration of every one shall be made manifest. And first
in the first article attributed to S. Peter (I follow the division of S. S.
Augustine, and Doctor Kellison,) is oppugned, 1. The faith and belief of all
the articles in general in the word Credo, by all who hold that it is only a
shadow, a feigned, and diabolical Faith, not a true, divine, and supernatural
Faith, tending to justification by which every Christian belieues these
articles. 2. Is oppugned the unity of God ( Deum) by Calvin, who houldes that
the Son has an essence distinct from the Father; By Beza, and Stegius, who
hold that the essence is divided into three persons. 3. By Luther, who houldes
that the Divinity is threefold. 4. By Melancthon, who houldes that there are
three Diuinities or essences in God: By Sanctius, who entitles his book, De
tribus Eloim, of three Gods. 5. By the Tritheits in Polonia, who expressly hold
there are three Gods, and three Eternalls. 6. Is oppugned the Godhead it
self, and his mercy and goodness, 1. By all those who make God the author,
willer, commander and worker of sin, and damnation, because so is his will
and pleasure: Who, make him a sinner, a great sinner, the only sinner: Who make
him a lier, a dissembler, a tyrant, and transform him into a very devil
himself; Cap. 9.. 5
as is before proved and deduced. 2. By those who make the divinity of God
passible, as with Eutiches the ancient condemned heretic, Luth. lib. de
Council part. 2. page 276. Melanct locis editis anno 1545. f. 43. Formula
concordiae anno 1580. Tigur. in ep. ad Polonos anno 1560. Iuel. against
Harding. art. 17.
Luther, and Iacobus Andreas do. 3. By those who affirm the divinity to have
been not only a mediator between God and man, as Calvin and Beza did; but
also to have been obedient to God, as Melancton, and after him many Lutherans,
and Tigurins also did. And further to have exercised the office of a Priest
offering sacrifice to God, as Jewel did affirm. All which opinions do make
many Diuinities in God, one inferior to another; because where one is a
mediator, is obedient, and does offer sacrifice to another, there must be a
subordination, subjection and distinction, there one must be inferior and
distinct from the other, and so there must be many distinct Diuinities, and
these inferior one to another, which is contrary to the nature of divinity,
and Godhead. 4. Is oppugned the person of the Father, Luth. vt Zuing. tom. 2
respons. ad co^fess. Luth. f. 47.4.
and with him the whole B. Trinity by Luther, who affirms that the divinity is
as well three, and of three sorts, as are the three persons; that the word
Trinity is an humane invention, a word which sounds coldly, and is not to be
used, but instead of it the word, God; and did thereupon thrust out of his
Letanies that prayer, Luth. postil. maiori enarrat. Euangelij Trinitatis. Luth.
en^hir. precum anno 1543.
Holy Trinity one God have mercy on us. And did leave out of his Germane bible
those words of S. John (alleged by Athanasius, Cyprian, and Fulgentius to
prove he blessed Trinity against the Arrians) There are three which give
testimony in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three
are one. To all which also Calvin subscribes, who not only affirms, that the
prayer, Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us, does displease him, as
sauouring of barbarism, Athan. lib. de vnitate Dei. Cypr. lib. de vnitate
Eccl. Fulg. respons. ad Arian. 1. Joan. 5.7.
but also wrests all those places (by which the Fathers out of the old and new
Testament did prove against Jews, and Arrians, the divinity of Christ) to a
contrary sense and meaning, as the Luthera^s Hunnius* Calvin. Iudaizans.
Antipareus, Antipareus alter
in diverse books on set purpose against him have convinced. And Danaeus Dan.
lib. contra Genebrardum.
his successor after Beza, follows him, who affirms that the same word
Trinity, and the same prayer, Holy Trinity have mercy on us, Calu. tractat.
Theolog.
is a foolish and dangerous prayer. All which are directly contrary to the
ancient orthodox, and Catholic doctrine of the B. Trinity, three persons,
and one God. 5. In the same first article is oppugned the omnipotency of God
almighty by Beza Beza col-Montisb. page 27. resp. ad acta Torgens. vol. 3 p.
60. l. 9. vol. 1. page 656. Martyr. cont. Gardin. resp. ad object. 11. col.
199.189 Dialog. col. 6. in 1. Cor. 11 page 159. Piscator the^ibus loco 2. p.
78. Sadelius de Sacrament. ma^duc. p. 300 Danaeus citatus ab And. colloq.
Mo^tis. page 178. ex suo dialogo. Tilenus suo Syntagmat. cap. 7. p. 75. Anton.
de Dominis l. 5. de republ. cap. 6. number. 178. Reinolds Conference p. 68.
Whitaker, and others who affirm, 1. That God cannot place one body in two
places by replication or other ways, that is, Christ's body in heaven, and on
the altar at the same time. 2. That God cannot place two bodies in one place by
penetration one of another, that is, that Christ's body, with the stone of the
sepulcher at his resurrection, with the doors of the house at the entering to
his disciples, and with the solidity of the heavens at his ascensio^, could not
be together in one place, but the stone, doors, or heaven were divided,
opened, or resolved into some liquid matter. 3. That God cannot draw a camel
or a cable-rope, as it is said in the Gospel, though a needles eye. 4. That
God has no absolute power to do any more then he has already done. 5. That
the position of the archangell Gabriel, Any word is not impossible with God, is
not generally to be believed, nor universally to be admitted. Al which if they
be true, that is, if the divinity be passible, be a mediator, be a priest, and
be three, and distinct as the person are; if God be the author and worker of
all sin and evil, if the word Trinity, and the prayer, Holy Trinity have
mercy on us, be to be left out as barbarous, foolish, and dangerous; if God
cannot place one body in two places, or two bodies in one place, cannot draw a
cable-rope through a needles eyes, can do no more then he has done; then is
the Deity, the unity, the Trinity, the goodness and the omnipote^cy of God (all
which are by this first article believed) by this doctrine and these Doctors
oppugned, and so the Faith of the first article rejected.

Secondly, in the second article attributed to S. John, is oppugned the work
of the whole Trinity, Whitaker. in his answer to ^. Reinolds Refutation p. 179.
and 180. Calu. Catech. and 3. Inst. 23 2. and in Isa. 23. Ber. lib. 2. c^^tra
Hessus. Luc. 1.37. The second article of the Creation oppugned* Calu. lib.
cont. Valent. Gentilem refut. 10. in Genes. 14.18. Harmonia in Matthew. 21.44.
and Matthew. 26.64. in Marc. 16.19.
the Creation of heaven and earth, 1. By Calvin, who will have only the Father
properly to be creator of heaven and earth, as to whom alone the name of God
by excellency is due, and the Son to be the Vicar of the Father, and to have
the second degree of honor after him. 2. By Stenberge, Seruetus, Blandrata,
Somarus, Francus, and others cyted by Kellison, who deny the Divinity of the
holy Ghost, Kellis. exeme^ part. 2. art. 2 Cred.
as the third person in the Trinity, and admit only a virtue from the father,
which they call the holy Ghost. But if the father be only God, if the son be
inferior as his vicar and second to him, if the holy Ghost be only the virtue
of the father, not a person distinct from him; then is only the father, and not
the son and the holy Ghost with the whole Trinity, the creator of heaven and
earth. Whereby the second article is oppugned. The third article of the Divinity
of Christ oppugned.


Thirdly, In the third article, attributed to S. James the greater is oppugned
the divinity of the son and second person, Jesus Christ his only son our
Lord. 1. By Luther who detested the word (...), or consubsta^tiall (signifying
the son to be of the same substance with the father) and made the divinity of
the son passible with Eutiches, Luth lib. con. Ia^. Lat^m.
as I have showed before. 2. By Calvin, Beza, and Whitaker, who admit Christ to
be son of the father, but not to be God of the father, Calu. ep. 2. ad
Polonos anno 156^. and lib. cont. Valent. Gentilem. Bez. lib. contra Hessus.
VVhita. resp. ad 3. ration. Camp.
or of the essence of the father, or God of God, as the Nicene Creed
expresses, but God of himself, and withal affirms that the father does not
continually and eternally beget the son. 3. By Calvin, Beza, and others
before cited who make Christ as God, a mediator and priest, and both to pray,
and to be obedient to the father; and distinguish in him a person of God
distinct from the person of a mediator, and thereby with Nestorius make him to
have two persons. All which if it be true, that is, if the son, or second
person as God, be not co^substantiall with the father; if he be not God of God;
Caluinus 1. Inst. 3 in vlt
if he be passible, the vicar and second after the father; if he be a mediator
and priest obedient to the father; if he have two persons: then is he not God
coequall and coeternall, Calu. 1. Inst. 31.9 and 24.
and the same in substance with the father, nor one only son of God, but two
persons. And so this third article, The fourth article of Christ's humanity
oppugned.
Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, is oppugned.

Fourthly, In the fourth article, attributed to S. Andrew, is oppugned the
humanity of Christ, and virginity of his mother, Who was conceived by the holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. 1. By the Vbiquitarians who make the humanity
to have omnipotency, immensity and all the properties of the deity, Brentius
lib. de maiestate carnis Christ.
and so to do all, to be all where, and in all places, which is proper to a
divine, Molin. 3. par Harmoniae. Bu^er. dial. de corpor. Christ. Calu. harm. in
Matthew. 2. Beza contra Smidelin. Willet synop. controu. 1. q. 1. in
appendi-Martyr. in Romans 4.
not humane nature. 2. By the Anabaptists, and others who make Christ to have
passed through the body of his mother, as water does through a conduct, and not
to have taken flesh of her womb. 3. By Molineus, Bucer, Beza Willet, and others
who affirm our B. Lady to have suffered detriment of her virginity in the
birth of our B. Savior, and so make Christ not to be borne of a virgin, which
this article affirms.

Fifthly, In the fifth article, attributed to S. Philip, is oppugned the virtue
of the death and passion of Christ, Who suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead, and buried. And that many ways. 1. In that the virtue of his
passion is not (according to them) general for all sinners and wicked persons,
but particular only for a few elect, The fifth article of Christ's passion
oppugned.
that is, for some certain Protestants, of some one sect who only are the
faithful among them, leaving all the rest destitut of any virtue from it, or of
any vocation or justification by means of it. 2. In that those elect it cures
not from sin, but only couers their sin; remits not sin, but only imputes
it not; washes not away the guilt or offense of sin, but only frees them from
the punishment due to it; and enables not a man to resist sin, but permits
him in every action to sin; strengthens him not to keep any one commandment,
but leaves him so that he must needs break all. 3. In that it gives to the
soul of man neither any life of grace, by which it raises him from spiritual
death to life, nor any inherent justice, by which it makes him just before God,
clean from any sin, or solid in any perfection of virtue, piety, and good
life, nor any virtue by which it enables him to do any good work, to satisfy
for any offense, or to merit any reward of glory, or increase of grace; nor any
inward unction, by which it adopts him to be, and to be called the son of
God, or to be inheritour of the kingdom of heaven. 4. It had in Christ, as it
was endured and offered by him, no dignity from his divine person, which did
give an infinite value and worth to every action; it had no virtue or validity
to satisfy Gods justice for any sin, to pay a price sufficient and equivalent
for any sin; it could not by all the pains and torments which Christ
suffered in body, even to the sheding of the last drop of his blood, avail
any thing for man's redemption, except he had suffered in soul also. It could
not redeem man from any sin, except Christ besides had suffered all the
pains due to sin, even the same torments of Hell, which any damned does
suffer for sin. It so far overcame Christ, that it made him troubled,
inconsiderate, abrupt, effeminate, doubtful of Gods favor, and forgetful of
his office of a Redeemer. It made him wavering, staggering, desperate, and
renouncing his salvation. It tormented him with horror of conscience, with
anxiety of mind, with sense of Gods wrath, and with feeling of the sorrows,
pains, and torments of eternal death and hell. All which as it is their
doctrine of the death and passion of Christ in their own particular words
before cyted; so it derogates from the virtue of Christ's blood, and diminish^
the dignity of his passion, and is dishonorable, sacrilegious, and blasphemous
to his person, and in all oppugnes this article of Christ's suffering under
Pontius Pilate. All which is contrary in our Catholic doctrine, as shall
afterward be showed, which attributes to the virtue and passion of Christ that
dignity, validity, and virtue, that every action, any passion, the least drop
of his blood was sufficient and superaboundant to have pacified Gods wrath,
satisfied his justice, paid the price of sin, and redeemed from sin and
hell, all the world and infinite worlds more; and that it did de facto merit for
all men inward grace to wash away and remit the guilt of sin, to give life
and beauty to the soul, to adopt it to the title of the son of God; that it
did give strength to man to resist sin before it be committed, and satisfy
for it in some sort after it be committed, to keep Gods Commandme^ts, and to
merit a reward at Gods hands. Of which doctrine whether does give more honor
and virtue to the death and passion of Christ, and his suffering under Pontius
Pilate for us, The sixth article of Christ's descension and Resurrection
oppugned.
let the indifferent Reader be Judge.

Sixthly, in the sixth article, attributed to S. Thomas, is oppugned both the
descension of Christ into hell, and his Resurrection from the dead: He
descended into hell, and the third day rose again from the dead. And first his
real descending in soul to Limbus Patrum to free the Fathers there, and make
them blessed, or (which is propable) to the place of the damned also, not to
suffer, but to confound the Devil, and show his Majesty, is oppugned. 1. By
those who deny that any Limbus Patrum was ever at all, and affirm that the
souls of the dead Patriarchs were locally in heaven, though not beatifically
blessed by the sight of God before Christ, as Calu. Psycopanichia
Calvin and Beza lib. cont. Brent.
Beza. 2. By those who deny that as yet there is any local place of hell at
all, or any real fire and torments of the damned there, as Luth. ser. de
Lazaro tom. 7. folio 267.
Luther, Bucer. ex Conrado lib. 1 art. 217.
Bucer, Brent. apud Hospin. part. 2. folio 308. anno 1562.
Brentius, Lohec. disp. 6. page 133.
Lobecius, Perk. in Apocal. 2. to. 2. col 90.
Perkins, Willet. in synopsi.
Willet, Calu. 2. Inst. 16.9.
Calvin, and the Deuines of (k) Heidelberge. 3. By those who deny his
descension to have been either in body or soul substantially, but only in
virtue and effect meritoriously, in that he merited the freedom both of the
Patriarchs before him, and of us after him, from the pains of hell, as
Bullinger, Zuinglius, the Divines of VVittemberge, and others. 4. By those who
affirm his descension to Hell to have been only in body, not in soul, and
that not to the lowest Hell, but only to the grave, or burial; and so Act. 2.
Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, they change soul into carcass, and
hell into grave, translating it, Thou shall not leave my carcass in the grave,
as Beza, and Bucer. 5. By those who admit his descension to have been in
soul, but yet suffering the very pains of hell, and of the damned, either
after his death in hell, Bulling. in 2. Act. VVittem-instruction. anno 1521.
Zuing. and alij apud Busaeum thesibus ^oll. anno 1586. Beza in cap. 2 annotat.
Buc. in Psalm. 10. and in Matthew. 17. Luth. tom. 3. VVittemb. an. 1553. sup. Ps.
16 p. 279. Gerla^h. cont. Busaeum apud. Call. lib. 3. c. 13. Beza in Act. 2.
Call. 2. Inst. 16.8.
as Luther, Gerlachius, and some other mentioned by Beza, or before his death
in the garden, and upon the Cross, as Calvin, Willet, and others before
cited. 6. By those who question this article as suspected to have been
intruded into the Creed, after it was made, as Calvin. All which opinions as
they either deny any Limbus Patrum to have ever been, or any real torments of
hell as yet to be; or, as they affirm, Christ to have descended only in virtue
and merit, not in body or soul, or only in body to the grave, or in soul to
suffer the pains of hell, either after death in hell, or before death upon the
Cross and in the garden, are all contrary to this part of this article, in
which is affirmed Christ's descending into hell, that is, in soul to Limbus to
free the Fathers, and Patriarchs there, and to carry them with him into heaven.

Secondly, his Resurrection from the dead, in the same article, is oppugned. 1.
By those who, according to Beza, Beza in 1. Cor. 15.
deny all resurrection as yet of Christ's body more then of other men's. 2. By
the Vbiquitarians, Brentius Ke^nit. etc. supra in the fourth article.
who affirm his body to have had immensity, and thereby to have been every
where in all places ever after his Incarnation. 3. By Calvin, Beza, and other,
who deny his Resurrection with the gift of subtility or penetration, and
affirm that his body could not pierce through the stone of the sepulcher, or
enter the doors to his Disciples without either the removing, or altering of
the nature of the doors, and stone, by resolving them into some liquid matter.
4. By Calvin and others, who deny the rising again of his blood, that was shed
upon the Cross, Andr. Iu. lib. Nullus and Nemo.
and thereby the resurrection of his whole and entire body. All which, as they
deny either any resurrection at all, or the complete Resurrection of Christ's
body, or the resurrection of the same with subtilty or penetration, do every
one oppugn this article of Christ's resurrection from the dead in such due
sense as it ought to be believed.

Seauenthly, in the seventh article, attributed to S. Bartholomew, is oppugned
both the ascending of Christ to heaven, The seaue^th article of Christ's
Ascension oppugned.
and his sitting at the right hand of God the Father, by power and dignity
equal to him in person and excelling all creatures in his humane nature. 1. By
the Vbiquitarians, who by the all-presence of Christ's body in every place, take
from it all possibility of ascending to a new place. 2. By Calvin, who by
giving to Christ a power not equal with God, Calu. 2. Inst. 14.5. and alibi
supra.
but Vicary, or deputary to him, and an honor, not the same, but only second
in degree to Christ after God the Father; and by denying al situatio^ either of
sitting or standing of Christ's body in heaven, does oppose both his Ascension,
and sitting at the right hand of God. 3. By the same Calvin, and others who
deny all Ascension through the heavens by way of penetration, and admit it only
by division, and by cutting off the heavens. 4. By those who yield the
Patriarchs a priority, and deny Christ the primacy of time in ascending to
heaven. All which, as they either affirm an every where presence of Christ's
body, or a difference of honor between^ Christ as God, and God the Father, or
as they deny either any penetration of Christ's body through the heavens, or any
priority of his ascending before other souls, are all opposite to the manner
of Christ's ascension, and sitting at the right hand of God in glory.

The eight article of Christ's judging the quick and the dead, oppugned.
Eighthly, in the eight article attributed to S. Matthew, is oppugned the Coming
of Christ to judge the quick and the dead, by their general doctrine, that
God is author and worker of all sins, that the Commandments of God are
impossible, that man has no freewill, that there is no reward for good deeds,
that all sins be mortal and damnable. For these supposed, no way is left to
discuss rightly the difference of sins, to punish justly men's sins, or to
reward duly their good deeds.

The ninth article of the holy Ghost, and Catholic Church oppugned.
Ninthly, In the ninth article, attributed to S. James the lesser, is oppugned
the belief of the holy Ghost, and of the Catholic Church (both which S.
Augustine makes one article). Of the holy Ghost, in that some, as has been
showed, make it only the virtue, not the substance of God; others, expung it
out of their Letanies. Others, as the Geneuians, deny the adoration of it.
Others, as before do make it the author and worker of all sin, the savior
of all sects, who by a persuasion they conceive of it, Geneuenses Clypeo fidei
f. 376.
do every one assure themselves of salvation; which authority, reason, and
experience convince to be false. Of the holy Catholic Church; in that some
reject the name Catholic as vain, and change it into Christian, others leave
it wholly out of the Creed as superfluous, and all of them do generally affirm
the Church for many ages to have been latent, invisible, erroneous,
adulterous, and antichristian, without either head to govern it, or authority
to end any controversies, and to conserve unity, or to punish offenders in it,
and without any sanctity in the professors of it, whom they make all to be
sinners, and that in all sins generally, and in great sins mortally; and then
how can such a Church be truly holy, universal, and infallible, in deciding
the belief of articles and determination of controversies?

Tenthly, In the tenth article, attributed to S. Simon, is oppugned the
Communion of Saints, and forgiveness of sins. The communion of saints is
oppugned. 1. The tenth article of communion of Saints, and forgiveness of
sins, oppugned.
The communion of saints in earth one with another, by denying all means of
unity in faith under one head and Judge. 2. The communion of saints in earth
with the souls in purgatory, by denying all prayer for the dead. 3. The
communion of Saints in earth with the Saints in heaven, by denying all honor
or praying by us unto them, and all knowledge, and praying by them either for
us in earth, or others in purgatory. The remission of sins is oppugned by
denying al power of priesthood in Gods church to pronounce any sentence of
absolution, all virtue in Sacraments to have any operation as instruments in
the remitting of sin, all infusion of grace to blot out and wash away all
uncleanness and deformity of any sin, either original or actual, which
according to them, are never remitted or taken away, but only covered, and not
imputed. The eleue^th article of the Resurrection oppugned.


Eleuenthly, In the eleauenth article, attributed to S. Judas Thaddaeus, is
oppugned the resurrection of the body, by all who before oppugned the
resurrection of Christ's body, and by many who now a days, even in England,
admit a resurrection in a like body, but not in the same body which was before.

Twelthly, In the twelth article attributed S. Matthias, The twelft article of
life everlasting oppugned.
is oppugned the life everlasting. 1. By Luther who one while affirms that the
soul is made by propagatio^ ex traduce, not by creation, and that the
immortality of it is a popish fiction out of the dunghill of the Popes decrees:
anotherwhile, Luth. tom. 2. VVitemb. an. 1562. p. 51.
that the souls of the just and of many damned do sleep senseless, until
the day of judgment, and that dogs, sheep, oxen, and fishes shall be in heaven
for our recreation. 2. Luth. tom. 2. page 44. and 45. Luth. colloq. mensal. c.
49. Calu. in Ecclesiast. Calu. 3. Inst. 20.10.24. Calu. 3. Inst. 25.6.
By Calvin who affirms that the souls of the blessed remain sleeping in the
porch, and are not as yet entered into the kingdom of glory, that faith is
remaining in heaven, that it is foolish and temerarious to enquire where the
souls of the just are, and whether as yet they be in glory, or not. All which
and many such like opinions of theirs, as they are the invention of this
private spirit, and are both absurd wicked or blasphemous; so are they all
plain contrary to the Apostles Creed, and do directly oppugn the articles of
it. And thus much of this private spirits doctrine as it oppugneth the articles
of the Creed, and in them all faith and belief.

Of absurdities against Prayer, and the Pater noster. SECT. VII.
SVBDIV. 1. In general, making all Prayer needless, or hopeless.
The petitions of the Pater noster and all prayer oppugned.
SECONDLY, This doctrine oppugneth the petitions of the Pater noster, and all
manner of prayer and devotion to God; for which we may note, that as by faith
we come to know God, and his revealed verities; so by this hope we are animated
to attain to the fruition of God, and all that is good for us. An effect of
this hope is prayer, by which we are emboldened (in hope to obtain) to speak
to God, and ask of him what we stand in need of. Prayer therefore as it is,
according to S. Augustine, an eleuating of the mind, and a sacrifice to God, a
relief to man, a terror to Satan, a safeguard to the soul, a comfort to the
Angels, the perfect glory, the certain hope, and incorrupted preserver of all
religion; As it is an incense mou^ting up to heaven; a messenger we se^d to
God, where our selves cannot yet come; a ladder by which we climb to the
throne of God, and God descends to our vale of misery; a hand which we reach to
heaven and which God returns filled with benedictio^s to us again: so it is
not only a special virtue commended unto us by Christ who wills us to pray, and
to pray often, yea without intermission, but also a chief practice, the
particulars whereof Christ himself did deliver to us both for the matter, what,
and the manner, how, we should pray and make our petition. This he did in the
Pater Noster, and the seven petitions of it, which being a compendium of all
we are to ask, as the Creed is of all we are to believe, we make in it,
besides the preparatory preface (which teaches us to have confidence in God, in
that he is to us not only a master but a Father, charity to our brethren, in
that he is our Father and we all brethren, his children by creation and
adoption, and a Reverence both to Gods Majesty as residing in heaven, and also
to his Saints and servants in whom specially as in the heavens he dwells and
reigns by grace, as S. Augustine expounds it;) besides, I say, this preface or
preparation we make seven petitions of seven several things unto God, in
which we desire blessings at Gods hands, The seven petition of the Pater
Noster.
either positive of good things to be obtained; or preservative from evil
things to be avoided. The positive blessings we crave are either spiritual or
corporal; the spiritual are, 1. the sanctification of Gods name in the first
petition, that is, either true knowledge of him, or right honor to him, or
constant perseverance in him. 2. The coming of his kingdom in the second, that
is, the dilatation of his Church on earth, the increase of his grace in our
hearts, and the obteining of his glory in heaven. 3. The obedience to his will
in earth, as it is in heaven in the third, that is, as Gods will is done by
Angels, so it may be done by man, as it is done by the just, so it may by
sinners, as it is wrought in the spirit, so it may be in the flesh. The
corporal blessings we crave, are our daily bread in the fourth, that is,
either temporal food for the body, or doctrinall for knowledge of the
understanding, or sacramental of the Eucharist, and whatsoever is convenient
for both soul and body, and these are the four first petitions of positive
blessings. The preservative blessings are from evils from which we desire to be
freed, and those either evils past as sin, forgive us our trespasses, in the
fifth against God, our neighbors, or ourselus, by commission or omission, by
thought, word or deed; or evils present lead us not into temptation in the
sixth, that is, permit us not to fall into any occasion or danger of sin by
concupiscence of the flesh, vanity of the world, and malice of the Devil; Or
evils to come, deliver us from evil in the seventh, that is, from all pain
due to sin original or actual, by affliction in this life, or by torments
in the next life either in Purgatory, or in hell, and from whatsoever may
hinder us from God, and all goodness in this or the next life. In which are
summarily contained all the things pertaining to the honor of God, or
necessary for our body or souls, in this life, or the next.

It remains to show, that the former positions of the Protestants do: make all
these petitions needless, All prayer made needless and fruitless by this
doctrine.
or fruitless; needless, as of things certain, which need to be asked;
fruitless, as of things impossible which cannot be obtained: which is showed
two ways, first in general of all prayer; secondly in particular, of these
petitions. In general thus, 1. That prayer is needless which prays for that
which is certain and cannot fail us, as either already past, or assuredly
possessed, or to come; as for example, that Christ should be borne or crucified
which is past, or that I should be a man, or an English man, which I am sure I
am, or that to morrow the Sun should rise, or that men should rise at the day
of judgment, which they are sure to do. Again, that prayer is fruitles which
prays for that which is impossible to be had, as for a mother to pray that she
were a Maid, and Virgin again, or for that an old man to pray that he were
young again, and might never dye, both which are impossible, though not both
equally. But, according to the Protestant grounds, such are generally all their
prayers, for if they pray for remission of sins, for the favor of God, for
perseverance in Faith, or for the glory of heaven, their prayer is as
needless, as to pray for the birth of Christ past, or for the day of judgment
to come, because every one by his special faith belieues as certainly that his
sins are forgiven him, as by his general faith, that Christ was crucified
for him; as assuredly that he shall persevere in faith and come to heaven, as
that there shall be a day of judgment and resurrection of his body; therefore
prayer for the one is as needless as for the other. Again, if they pray for
Gods grace to wash them from sin, to keep Gods commandments, to avoid
concupiscence and lust, and to love God above all, and not to offend him, their
prayer is as fruitless, as to pray for Gods grace to keep them ever being
sick or ever dying, or to leap over the sea, or fly to the stars, because
according to them, the one is as impossible as the other, therefore as
hopeless to be obtained by prayer as the other. 2. To pray for the preventing
of any evil, whether it be malum culpae, as sin, or malum poenae, as
punishment, and whether it be punishment temporal as loss of goods,
affliction of body, or death of friends; or spiritual as loss of faith, of
Gods favor, and of the joys of heaven, or to pray for the obtaining of any
good either temporal, as riches, health, or the life of friends; or spiritual,
as the good of Gods Church, the remission of our sins, and our perseverance
in state of grace, or obtaining the kingdom of heaven, is both needless and
fruitless, because all as well evil as good shall infallibly fall out as God
has, according to his own irrespectiue, immutable, and inevitable will and
pleasure, decreed and appointed it; therefore needless it is to pray for the
obtaining of good, and fruitless to pray for the preventing of evil, because
both must fall certainly as God has ordained and decreed. What end or use
therefore is there of prayer, since the event and the effect will be the same as
well without prayer as with prayer, all as God, without any respect or
foreseen consideration of us, or our deserts, or prayers, or other works, has
according to his own absolute will decreed and appointed to happen to us.

Thirdly, willingly to do any act which is believed and supposed to be a sin,
All prayers are sins.
and that mortal deserving eternal damnation is unlawful, sinful, and
damnable, and so not to be done with a good conscience: but such is all prayer,
even the best and deuoutest we can use, according to their principles, because
every work, even the good works of the best persons, according to Luther,
Illyricus, Calvin, Beza, Paraeus, Whitaker, Tindall, and others, are sins,
See above in the first subdiuision.
mortal sinnnes, damnable sins, and nothing but sin, even in the just and
elect, though no more imputed to them, then their bad works of adultery,
murder etc. which they say are not at al imputed to them. Therefore all prayer,
how good or devout soever, is a sin, and that mortal and damnable, and so is
unlawful, sinful, and damnable, and not to be used more then swearing,
lying, drinking, both being sins and neither imputed and punished as sins
in the elect, in whom they are covered, and both imputed and punished as sin
in the reprobate in whom they are never forgiven. All which is confirmed
diverse ways by the express words, first of Luther, who affirms, 1. That no
man obtaines any thing at Gods hand for any dignity, either in his prayer or in
himself, but only by the bounty of God. Luth postil. in Domin. 5. post Pasca
fol. 263.
Also, (which he constantly auouches) that the just man does sin even in
praying, according to that of David. Let his prayer be a sin. 2. By the
words of Illyricus, who affirms, that prayer is no good work but a begging
of wages. And of Bucer, Luth sermon. de Ascense.
and Calvin his scholar who both affirm, that Christ did not prescribe us to
pray in these very words of the Pater noster, but showed to what end, Illyr.
Claue Scripturae part. 2.
and with what affection we should pray. 3. By the practice of many Precisians,
or Familists in England, witness D. Smyth, who use to protest they will rather
dye, then say the Lords prayer. 4. By the practice of the purer forte of
Protestants, Smith c^llat. cap. 1. art. 13
who have left off, and condemn all saying of canonical hours and devotion
in the Church, and have not only turned all public praying into preaching,
never using any at all in their meetings: but also did for example, in France
pull down and destroy (witness Riche^me) in one six months no fewer then ten
thousand houses of prayer, Rich^om. idolitria Hugonotica l. 2. c. 28. page 177.
and cap. 29 p. 182.
or Churches in 400. Cities, which they by rebellion kept from their
sovereign King and Prince. By all which is apparent not only how little they
esteem either Prayer, or houses of prayer, but also that, according to their
grounds, all prayer in general is needless and fruitless, yea sinful and
damnable, and so not to be used and practiced.

SVBDIV. 2. In particular, opposing all the seven Petitions of the Pater
Noster.
IN particular, that by this doctrine is oppugned all and every part and
petition of the Pater noster, shall likewise be proved. For first in the
preparation Our Father which art in heaven, The Pater noster oppugned by the
Protestant doctrine.
how can they call or esteem him a loving Father, whom they believe to be a
cruel and unjust judge, who decreed and created them to sin, that, for that
he might damn them? Or what confidence can they have in the mercy of this
Father, who is thus rigorous to them in his justice* and more then justice? How
can they call or esteem themselves his children by adoption from whom they
receive no inward grace of justification? How can they call him our Father, or
the Father of all, whom they believe as a Father to have predestined,
called, and given means only to a few, and as a cruel Judge to have excluded
all the rest, and the greatest part (of which every one may justly fear
himself to be one) from any possibility of vocation, grace, or salvation? How
can they expect from him a crown of glory in heaven, of whom they believe
they cannot merit any reward in earth? Why should they not fear a heavy hand
of justice, yea despair of any kind of mercy from him, who beyond justice,
has proceeded so terribly as to predestinate so many to so great pains as are
the pains of hell, who had deserved or given no cause of any pains at all?
Who can imagine that God dwells in the just and elect as in the heavens, who
are so fowly stained in every part of their soul with the deformity of all
sin and iniquity, that no one part, or action of them is clear and unstained
from sin? Surely they who believe this of God, and his cruelty, and of man
and his deformity cannot confidently say neither Our Father which imports Gods
mercy to man, and man's confidence in God, or Which art in heaven* which
specifyes that as God dwells in the just, so they as the temple of God, should
be pure and clean, and bright like to heaven.

Secondly, how can they in the first petition say, Hallowed be thy name, and
hope that they by true love, honor, The first petition
and obedience to God can sanctify, and make holy his name by their life and
actions, who believe that every action they do, even the best they can do is a
sin, and that mortal, and damnable? Surely to pray that by actions which are
profane, we may sanctify Gods name; that by works which are offenses to God,
we may please God; that by deeds which are damnable and deserve hell, we may
praise God, and deserve heaven; is a prayer not only so hoplesse, as it is not
possible, but also senseless, that no reasonable man can be imagined to make it.

Thirdly, how can they wih confidence say, Thy kingdom come, that is, The
second petition.
that Christ may reign as a King either in his Church by faith, or in the
faithful by grace, or in heaven by glory, who believe and profess that Christ
was not able to preserve his Church for so many ages together, without error
of Antichristianity and Idolatry, no not so much as in extancy or visibility,
nor yet has power by grace so to reign in any his servants, as to master any
sin or temptation to sin, or to perform any one commandment, or to do any one
action, which is just and not sinful. Surely weak is that King, and poor
is that Kingdom, where neither the King has power to protect his subjects
from the invasion of the enemy, nor the subject has ability to perform any
action which may tend to the honor and service of the King. Again what needs
any man to pray that either Christ may reign in him by grace present, or that
he may reign with Christ in glory to come, who is certain and sure by his
special faith (as all Protestants say they are) that both he is for the
present in state of Gods favor, and also shall be for the future in state of
glory in heaven? Surely, he that belieues this needs not to pray either for
pardon of sins, which he is sure are pardoned, or for his obtaining heaven,
which he is sure to obtain.

The third Petition.
Fourthly, how can any one in the third Petition, say, Thy will be done in earth
as it is in heaven? Understanding that Gods will should by us be performed in
doing good deeds, and avoiding bad, and that we should conform our selves to
the will of God both in the material object, by doing that which he will have
done, and in the formal by doing it both for the end and after the manner as
he will have it done; who belieues, 1. That man has no freedom or power to
work the will of God. 2. That Gods will is wrought in every action as well bad
as good. 3. That the will of God in performing his commandments is impossible.
4. That good works in this life are neither meritorious, nor necessary, nor
yet possible. 5. That in earth every man, and every action of his is sinful
and unclean, and in heaven every Saint, and Angel, and every action of theirs
is good, pure, and perfect. For, as it is needless to pray, that Gods will be
performed, which ineuitably shall be performed both in good and bad actions, in
which man has no liberty or power; so it is bootlesse to pray that men may
either be freed from sin, or may do good works, or may fulfill Gods
commandments, or may do his will in earth, as Saints and Angels do it in
heaven, because according to their belief all this in this life is impossible,
and neither ever was, nor ever shall be by any, at any time performed. In vain
therefore is it for us to pray, that we may conform our selves to the will of
God either in the affirmative precept, in doing that which he commands; or in
the negative precept, in omitting that which he forbids; either in the
material object, in doing what he commands, or in the formal, in doing how,
and why he commands, since both, and all are either necessary, and so must be
done; or impossible, and so cannot be done.

Fifthly, how can any man say, Give us our daily bread? The fourth petition.
Understanding either of temporal sustenance for the relief of the body, or
of Sacramental food, the body and blood of Christ, who belieues either that
the decree, will, and ordinance of God does impose an infallible and an
inevitable necessity upon all things, whereby all things necessary will be
provided for us as God has ordained without our prayer; or that the Eucharist
is not the true body and blood of Christ but only a figure or sign of it,
because the belief of the former takes away all necessity of praying for
temporal sustenance, and the misbeliefe of the latter opposes all desire of
the supersubstantiall bread of the body of Christ in the Eucharist.

Sixthly, how can any man with confidence say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us? The fifth Petition.
Understanding by trespasses his debts or sins, by forgive, remit or take
away the same. For if Faith be precedent and presupposed to prayer, as it is
(for else how can we as we ought with faith and confidence ask and pray) and
the same faith (as they say) does assure us by a certain and infallible
persuasion that our sins are already forgiven or not imputed; then surely in
vain, needless, yea foolish is our petition to have them remitted or not
imputed. 2. If every good work be a sin (as they defend) and that mortal,
then by sin and that mortal (such as is the saying, though never so
devoutly, of this prayer and petition) is sin remitted, and so comitting of
sin should be a means to obtain remission of sin, which is most absurd,
as though the committing of a new offense should be a motive to pardon the old.
3. If no sin be remitted in this life, but only covered and not imputed, then
in vain, and hoplesse is our prayer for remission and taking away our sins,
as of a thing impossible, and needless; and bootlesse is our prayer for the
not imputation of the same, because (as before) in the elect, they are already
not imputed, and in the reprobate they never shall be imputed; either therefore
fruitless and hopeless, as a thing impossible, is the remitting and taking
away of our sins; or needless and fearelesse, as a thing certain, is the
not imputation of the same by this petition demanded, since the one is
impossible to be obtained, and the other is certainly already possessed and
enjoyed: needless therefore, or hopeless is this petition of forgiveness of
our sins, by their principles.

The sixth petition.
Seauenthly, how can any man with confidence, in the sixth petition say, Lead us
not into temptation? that is, into no danger or occasion of sin, into no
consent or act of sin to to come, who belieues, 1. That God wills and works
all sins and occasions of sins. 2. That as he has already decreed, so
every action and occasion must be. 3. That by no sin he can fall from Faith
or grace, or loose heaven; for if all sin be ineuitably determined, then it
shall infallibly be wrought by God as he has determined. And if every actio^
in man be a sin, then impossible it is to be freed from it, and so hopeless
is the praying for that end. And if no sin can hurt a faithful Christian,
nor hinder him of heaven, or deprive him of grace; then in vain and needless
is all prayer to be freed from temptation to sin, which can neither hurt, nor
hinder any faithful person from heaven. In vain therefore, and to no end or
benefit is the saying of this sixth petition, Lead us not into temptation.

Eighthly, how can any man with confidence say the seventh petition, Deliver us
from evil? Understanding it of the pains and punishments of sin, or
impediments of good things, The seaue^th petition.
to be inflicted, either in this life, or in the next, who belieues that no
temporal punishment, either in this or the next life, remains to be endured
after the guilt of sin be remitted, and that all pain or misery inflicted by
the Devil or man is from God, the Devil and man being only instruments, and
that forced and necessitated to it. For where no punishment remains as due
either in Purgatory, which they believe not, or in this life, in which only
faith satisfyes and remits; Where also the inevitable decree and hand of God
does will, and work all punishment in body or goods, and where all things do
fall out infallible as God has disposed, there all prayer to prevent
punishments for sins, or to remove impediments of good things, is both
needless, because, as well without as with prayer, the event must fall as God
has disposed, and also fruitless, because by it no punishment of sin, or
impediment of good things ordained by God can be prevented. To what end, or
with what confidence therefore can any, who belieues the former doctrine, say
these petitions of the Pater noster, since by virtue of it all prayer in
general, and this of the Pater noster in particular, is made either needless
as of things which are certain to succeed without it, or hopeless as of
things which are impossible to have any effect by it? And thus is showed how
the Protestant doctrine is opposite to all Hope, and does make frustrate all
manner of prayer, by which we come with any confidence to obtain at Gods
hands any benefit for us, or remove any evil from us.

Of absurdities against the observation of all laws, and chiefly of the ten
Commandments. SECT. VIII.
SVBDIV. 1. In general, how all laws are made impossible, and not obliging.
WE have showed how the Protestant doctrine overthrows the articles of the
Creed, and the petitions of the Pater noster, and in them all certainty of
faith and all exercise of hope by making of prayer: The Protestant doctrine
overthrows the ten Commandments.
it remains that we show how it likewise frustrates all precepts, and laws
which tend to good life by bidding good, and forbidding evil, and among them
in particular the Decalogue of the ten Commandments, and thereby opens the
gappe, and loses the reins to all liberty of sin, and looseness of life,
to the ruin of Charity. For which we may note, 1. That laws (which ever have
been, at all times among al nations, The praise of laws.
used as the chief means to withdraw men from evil, and to prepare them to
good (by punishing the one, and rewarding the other) have always by wise men
been esteemed of that dignity and necessity, that according to Pindarus, they
are the invention and gift of God, according to Chrysippus, Aristot. 3. Polit.
that they are very God himself, who gives them, and the Queen of all actions
divine and humane. According to Aristotle, they are the rule of justice and
injustice, which we must apply to all actions, and by which all businesses and
persons are ruled; the measure by which we must square what we are to do, and
what to omit; the Prince whom we ought to obey, Cicero. 2. de natura Deor.
and the Captain whom it is fit to follow. According to Tully, they are the
establishing of right, and the suppression of wrong. According to Demosthenes,
the sinews of the City, and the strength of it against the wicked. Without
which says Plato, Plato lib. 4. de Legibus.
a commo^-wealth is not a commonwealth. And according to which if men did not
live they would nothing differ from beasts. 2. These laws, are some natural
of reason, The diversity of laws.
and a man's conscience; some positive, divine of God, which were established
either by Moses in the old law, and were either moral, ceremonial, or
judicial; or by Christ, and his Apostles in the new law, and are yet of faith
and Sacraments, Charity or good life; some humane, which are either Canonical
of the Church, or Civil for all nations, or particular of several countries,
all which being just, promulgated, and known, do oblige, and that in
conscience under sin to the performance of them. 3. Among these laws the
chiefest and most in force are the Decalogue, or the ten Commandments, which
being laws moral of good manners, and agreeable to natural reasons, are not
with the ceremonial and judicial law (which were given only for that time and
estate of the law of Moses) abrogated, but stand still in force, The division
of the ten commandments.
and oblige all men and nations to the performance. 4. In these ten
Commandments we are commanded to perform our duty to God in the first table,
and to our Neighbor in the second table. To God, first, honor in our heart, by
adoring one, not many Gods, in the first Commandment. 2. Reverence in word, in
not profaning his name by vain swearing, in the second. 3. Obedience in fact,
by keeping his Sabbath and Festival day, in the third. 4. To our Neighbor, we
are to give, by affirmative precept, honor to our Parents and Superiors, in
the fourth: and by negative precept to avoid al wrongs done to our Neighbor,
1. By exterior fact, either to his own self by killing, in the fifth, or to
his second self, his wife, by adultery, in the sixth: or to his goods, by
stealing, in the seventh. 2. In word by false witness, in the eight. 3. In
heart by unlawful desiring either his wife by concupiscence, in the ninth; or
his goods by avarice, in the tenth Commandment. Which Decalogue of ten
Commandments does oblige to performance, not only Christians who profess the
name and faith of Christ; but also all sorts of men or women endewed with
reason, whether Jews, Turks, Pagans, or whomesoeuer.

Now, that the Protestants by their doctrine do abrogate all these laws, not
only of Church or Commonwealth, but also of God, of Nature, of the ten
Commandments, and whatsoever, and leave man obliged to the performance of none,
but by the liberty of their Gospel freed from all, as having it in their free
choice whether they will keep or break any Commandment of God, Church, or King;
and that they do thereby draw back from the practice of any virtue, and draw
forward to the practice of vice, and so remove al encouragement to virtue, and
propose all enticements to vice, by which they do open a wide gap to all
liberty and looseness of life, and give a free passage to all concupiscence
and sensuality of sin, to what any man's imagination, or affection shall lead
him: That this their doctrine (I say) does this, shall by these, and the former
positions, and illations upon them, be convinced.

For first they take away from the Christian-common-wealth all superiority, by
affirming that among Christians is no superior, that a Christian is subject to
none, but only to Christ, who only is his immediate superior, as Luth. de
saetul potesta. apud Collium tom. 1. lib. 7. art. 1. Delibertate Christiana
tom. 2. fol. 3. De votis fol. 270. and in 1. Pet. 2. some. 2 fol 3.
Luther. 2. They take away from Superiors all spiritual and temporal power
to make any laws, affirming, as Luth. lib. contra Regem Angliae tom. 2. fol.
346. De capt. Babyl. fol. 77.
Luther, and Call. 4. Inst 10.7. and 8. In 4. Iac. 12. Confess. Basil art. 10.
Calvin do, that to make laws and to rule by laws is proper only to God, and
that no man can forbid that which is not forbid by Christ. 3. That they take
from laws all obligation to bind in conscience, affirming all, as Luth. in 1.
Pet. 2. to. 5. fol. 464. de bonis operibus fol. 577. lib. de confess. ad
Francis. Act. VVormatien. tom. 2. fol. 172. Deseruo arbitr. tom. 2. fol. 431.
Calu. in 4. Jacob. 21. Refut. Catelin. page 384. De necessitate reform. Eccles.
page 58. Confess. Fidei page 209. Beza confess. cap. 7. sect. 9. Mart. locis
class. 4. cap. 4.. 5. Danaeus contro. 3. p. 509. contr. 5. page 1125. Whitaker.
co^ci. 4. quaest. 7. c. 1. page 715. Perk. anatomy of conscience tom. 1. page
1215. hic case^ of conscience cap 3. col. 1033. in Gal. 5. page 258.
Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza, Martyr, Danaeus, Whitaker, Perkins, and
others do, that no Magistrate or Laws are to be obeyed for conscience, that
all laws of men are to be abolished, that the laws of the Apostles oblige not
but for scandal, that there is no sin or obligation in conscience to any
law, but of God. 4. They derogate from Gods laws, holding that it is
impossible for any man though just to perform and satisfy the law, or to keep
the Commandments, or any one of them, that therefore the law commands things
impossible, which is a fundamental point of Christian religion to be believed,
and that the contrary, which affirms the keeping of the law to be possible,
and the gayning of heaven to be proposed co^ditionally if we keep the law, is a
wicked persuasion. So the Confession Confess. August. cap. 6. Apolog. confess.
cap. de impletione legis. Apolog. Anglic. in Syntagmat. confess. p. 123. Luth.
de libert. Christiana tom. 2. fol. 4. Melanct. apud Luth. tom. 2. fol. 507.
Calu. antidot. sess. 10.12. page 284. lib. de libero arbit. page 248. In Lucam
10.26. In Act. 15.10. Beza in Luc. 18.22. in Romans 10.6. Danaeus controu. de
Baptism. cap. 15. page 389 974 VVhita. 1. lib. cont. Duraeum sect. 6. controu.
2. q. 6. c. 3. page 563. Perkins de Baptism. tomo 1. ^^l. 833. Scharp. controu.
12. de iustific. p. 180. Adam Francis. margar. theol. loc. 5. p. 52.
of Auspurge and England, so Luther, Melancthou, Calvin, Beza, Danaeus,
Whitaker, Perkins, Scharpius, Adaemus Francisci, and others. 5. They abolish
the moral law of the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, affirming, that it is
free and nothing belongs to any just regenerate, and pious person, and that the
breach of it to any faithful shall not be imputed as a sin, nor punished as
a sin; thus Luth. ser. de Moyse. M^l. in locis apud Fabritium in harmonia
confess. August. art. 20. p. 364. Zuing. in explanat. art. 16 Mart. in locis
class. 2. c. 15.. 22. Call. 2. Inst. c. 7.. 14. and in refut. Serueti page 652
Beza in 1. Joan. 5.3. and in c. 2. v 7. Tindal. apud Foxum in actis edit. 1610
page 1140. Bucan loco 29 Bulling. Decade. 5. ser. 8.
Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Martyr, Calvin, Beza, Whitaker. Tindaell, Bucan.
Bullinger and others, whereupon they infer that the observation of the law is
not necessary to salvation: thus Luth. in cap. 2. ad Gal. tom. 5. fol. 311.
Call. in Matt. 19.17. and 3. Inst. cap. 17.. 7. and in Antid. Council. sess. 6.
page 218. in Act. 15.10. and in Matthew. 9.10. Perk. in casibus conscient. cap.
7. col. 1335. Piscat. loco 17. page 283. Paraeus lib. 4. de iustificat. cap 7.
page 1031. Mart. in 1. Cor. 10.12. and in 1. Cor. 7.19.
Luther, Calvin, Perkins, Piscator, Paraeus, and Martyr: That no Saint as yet
ever did fulfill the law and obey it, nor love God with his whole heart, as the
law requires; thus the Confess. Aug. cap. debonis operibus. Confess. Scot. art.
15. Confess. Bohem. art. 7. Luth. in 3. Gal. tom. 5. fol. 343. and in 4. Gal.
tom. 5. cit. fol. 393. Calu. in Romans 43.8. and 3. Instit. cap. 17.. 3. and 13.
and in Antid. Council. sess. 6. cap. 12. page 283. In act. 15.10. In Gal.
3.10.12. Brent. Homil. 1. in Dom. 13. post Trinit. page 777. Par. lib. 4. de
iustif. cap. 11. p. 1076. Danaeus contro. 5. page 973.
Confessions of Auspurge, Scotland, and Bohemia, Luther, Calvin, Brentius,
Paraeus, Danaeus, and others. And that we should not use any prayer for that
end, that we may fulfill the law, but only that we may endeavor to fulfill
it; thus Calu. in Matthew. 6.10. Perk. in 3. Gal. col. 135.
Calvin, Perkins, and others do affirm. To which assertions if we add their
other positions before mentioned. 1. About good works, that they are not
pleasing to God as any worship to him, but are all sins and that mortal, and
neither free, nor meritorious, nor necessary, nor profitable, nor possible, nor
any cause of salvation, and therefore can have no dignity, no merit, no reward,
no crown of justice. 2. About sin, that God wills, works, and is pleased with
sin, does predestinate, command, tempt, and necessitate to sin, and that no
sin is imputed to the elect, that no sin can be avoided, that no sin is
any cause of damnation. 3. About justification, that only faith does justify,
and that by assuring a man of his justification, which once had can never be
lost; that no justice is inherent but all imputed, that none does take away any
sin but only cover it, that none does make a man just before God but only
before man. If, I say, we add these their positions and doctrine (which are
their common Tenants, and before proved) to the former, it will evidently
appear that their doctrine of it self, without any wresting or forcing it, is
a spur to vice and a bridle to virtue, is a retractiue from good life, and an
attractiue to bad, and does stope the way to a mind inclined to moral honesty,
and open the gat to one disposed to loosnesse and liberty.

SVBDIV. 2. In particular, how many ways the Protestant Doctrine incourageth
to the breach of all laws, and to all lewdnes of life.
AND first, if a man should believe not only the articles and points revealed
in Scripture, but also the consequences deduced from them (as most Protestants
hold) the^ may every Protestant out of these their former principles, by
evident consequence deduced, believe and practice these, and such like
positions and practices which draw from all piety to impurity, and which do
evidently follow out of the former principles.

Absurdities which follow upon the impossibility of keeping Gods comma^dments.
First therefore, he may reason and accordingly practice thus: The observation of
the ten commandments, yea of any one, is impossible, and by the liberty of the
gospel I am freed from all obligation to any, as well moral as ceremonial
precepts, Ergo in vain do I labor to keep them, in vain do I e^deauour to
abstain from idolatry, perjury, profaning the Sabbath, disobedience to
Superiors, murder, adultery, theft, false witness, concupiscence, or the
like, because it is as impossible for me to keep the^ as for me to leap over
the sea: Because by the liberty of the Gospel I am freed from the obligation as
well of them as of the ceremonial precepts, and therefore may as well break the
Sunday as the Saturday, as well commit fornication as eat porke or bacon, as
well omit duty to parents or princes, as circumcision or the paschall lamb
since all are equally abrogated, and neither sin nor punishment of either is
imputed; Ergo, Why shall not I as well commit, as avoid swearing, drinking,
murder, adultery, or the rest? Why not as well yield to, as resist
concupiscence? Why not as well consent, as dissent, as well follow, as forbear
my pleasures, as well feed, as bridle my appetites and passions? because both
are against the comma^mandement which is impossible to be kept, and neither
imputed to me for sin, which by faith is fully remitted.

Secondly, He may reason, Upon the no^ obliging of laws in conscience.
and accordingly practice thus: No prince or Prelate has any power to make
laws which shall oblige the subject in conscience; Ergo I am not bound in
conscience and under any sin to obey them, but may, (so as public scandal
or punishment can be avoided) break them at my pleasure, so it be private and
unknown; therefore may I underhand break the Canons and injunctions of the
Church, and use simony, bribery, and the rest: Therefore need I not observe the
laws of the common wealth, but may bring in or trasport forbidden goods, deny
tolles, taxes or imposts, break any statute, either as a magistrate, or as a
subject, so I can avoid scandal and punishment, because under sin, and in
conscience I am obliged to none of these laws, and statutes.

Thirdly, He may reason and practice thus: Upon good works being sins.
No good works are meritorious, none are necessary, none are possible, all,
even the best, being sins, and that mortal, as infected with original sin,
and defective from the law; Ergo, in vain do I labor to do good works which
are impossible, in vain do I labor to serve and please God by them, since al
are sins, and that mortal; Why therefore shall I do rather good works, then
bad? Why live I piously, rather then wickedly? Why do I justice, rather then
injustice, make restitution, rather then commit rapine? Use praying, rather
then swearing? frequent Sermons, rather then Tauerns? because neither the one
nor the other deserve reward, or are pleasing to God, and both the one and the
other are damnable sins and deserve hell, but neither are imputed as sins;
but both covered by the Justice of Christ, apprehended by my faith.

Fourthly, He may reason and practice thus: Upon only faith justifying.
Only faith does justify, and justifying does infallibly make me as certain of
remission of my sins as I am of Christ's death, and thereby certain of my
perdestination, and election, (for none are truly faithful and justified but
the elect) and certain also of my perseverance and glorification (for faith
once had cannot be lost:) What then need I to fear, either for seruil fear,
any punishment of hell? because I am sure of heaven: or, for filial fear, any
offense of God? because I am sure that he imputes no sin or offense to me,
and that neither he will forsake me, nor I can fall from him: or, for
reuerentiall fear, any Majesty and goodness of God who will not be offended
for that which is wild and wrought by himself? And because his laws or
precepts are above my power, and, as impossible, do not oblige in conscience,
what need I to make any conscience of any sin either past, or committed, or
to come and in danger to be committed? because I am sure that none shall be
imputed, that none can take from me Gods grace and favor, that all by faith
are covered, and that my Baptism was to me a sign and seal of remission of
al sins past and to come? What need I either contrition or sorrow, either
penance or satisfaction, either fasting or good works, either prayer or
preaching, because I am sure that all satisfaction is made for me by Christ,
and that any sin of mine is impossible, that also my prayer and penance are
sins; that my sins are already forgiven, and that I am certainly the son
of God; and so certain to continue, and to come to heaven.

Upon want of Free Will
Fifthly, He may reason and practice thus: I have no free will or liberty either
of contradiction, to do or not to do; or of specification, to do good or bad,
but am by the decree and will of God necessitated to do what I do, and what God
has ordained me to do: Ergo, unreasonable is God, who has imposed upon me
precepts which I have no power or freedom to perform; unjust is God, who
punishes me for doing that which he wills me to do, and in which I have no
freedom of will to the contrary; Impious are magistrates and judges who punish
me for that which God wills, commands, and compels me to do; Impossible is all
virtue and vice in me which can be no more virtue or vice in me then in a
beast, if I want freedom of will; foolish am I, who labor to do that which I
have no power, or liberty to do. In vain do either laws terrify me, or
superiors admonish me, or preachers exho^r me to that which I have no power,
liberty, or freedom to omit or commit, to choose or refuse. All which follows
upon the want of my freewill, and ability to do good.

Sixthly, He may reason, and practice thus: God has decreed, appointed, and
predestined, of his own mere wi, Upon absolute predestination to damnation.
without any respect to me or my demerit, whether I shall be damned or saved, the
one or other as he has appointed; In vain therefore am I solicitous, or do I
labor for either, since, without my care or labor, that must be, which God
has appointed, and not my labor can alter, further, o^ hinder either. Again,
God does will, command, and work, as the principal agent, all sin which is
wrought in me, why shall I therefore detest that which God wills, or avoid that
which God commands, or not do that which God wills, commands and works in me?
Again, if I be an elect, God gives all means so certain of salvation that I
cannot reject them; if I be reprobate he denies me all means necessary, either
of the merits of Christ offered for me, or of grace and faith s^fficient for
me: In vain therefore is all my labor, because if God has prepared for me
means effectual they will be applied as they are decreed without me; if not,
they will not be obtained by me and my care: let therefore all care of heaven or
hell be left to God and his ordination, and let us live merrily, fare daintily,
spend freely, feed our sense and appetit fully, and leave all care or
cogitation of heaven or hell to Gods decree and ordinance, which according to
his will, not our care, will have the effect which he has appointed. This
follows in reason, and thus in reason may any one infer and reason, supposing
he believe the aforesaid false principles.

SVBDIV. 3. To what vices the Protestant doctrine leads. The Protestant
doctrine does nourish vices.

SEAVENTHLY, For vices in particular, how every one does receive life, grouth,
nourishment, and encouragement by this their doctrine, and how men may be
whetted and animated to the free exercise of the same vices by virtue of it,
may by these reasons appear. 1. Sloth (which, Of sloth.
says the wiseman teaches many evils Eccl 7.33 Bern. de considerat. lib. 2.
Chrisost. lib. de lapsu.
, and is the stepdame says S. Bernard, of virtue, the mother of sin; and the
root and nurse, says S. Chrysostom, of desperation) is by this doctrine
nourished. For who will labor who assures himself that his labors, works,
and sufferings have neither any reward, nor make any satisfaction; but that
they deserve hell and eternal punishment, and that by them he can no more
please God perform his will, or fulfill his commandments then he can reach
the stars or leap over the seas, and that he has no freedom or liberty of
will, but must do as by God he is appointed and compelled, and that only faith,
and apprehension of the justice of Christ will suffice to his justification and
salvation.

Of Lust.
Secondly, Chastity which is commended in scripture, as deserving immortal
praise by God and man Sap. 4.1.
; as of more worth then all weight Eccl. 26.20.
; as the fruit of the spirit Gal. 5.22 23.
; and as that which maks pages, or followers of the lamb Apoc. 14.4. Cyp. lib.
de 12. abusibus.
Christ Jesus; and is indeed according to S. Cyprian, the ornament of noblemen,
the nobility of mean men, the beauty of the deformed, the comfort of the
sorrowful, the augmentour of beatitude, honor of religion, the diminisher of
vices, the multiplier of virtue, and the spouse of the omnipotent, and which
was so embraced in the Primitive Church, that in some places a thousand, in
other two thousands, in others 3000. in others 5000. men, and in others as at
Ancyra, 10000. women professed it in one place, and preferred it before the
riches and pleasures of the world: This precious virtue and pearl is
debauched, and Luxury (which is, as one calls it, the gate to hell, Boethius de
scholast. disciplina.
the way to iniquity, the biting of a scorpion, the birdlime of wickedness,
and the fountain of perdition) is fomented and increased by this doctrine. For
who will labor to live chastely who belieues, as they teach* that Chastity is
impossible, Luth sermon. de Matrimonio tom. 5.
and no more in man's power then it is not to be a man; that a woman is as
necessary as to eat, drink, sleep or sneese; that marriage is as gold,
virginity as dung; that all are to be condemned as guilty of murder who do not
give themselves to beget children? Who will abstain from any sensual lust,
and brutish concupiscence, to which his affection leads him, who persuades
himself that a man or woman sins as much in having a suggestion or motion of
concupiscence, though resisted, as in consenting, delighting, or acting the
sin it self; that it is no more sin to yield, then to resist lust; that
the sin is pardoned before hand by virtue of the seal of Baptism, and no
more imputed by the means of faith then though it had never been committed.
He surely that is taught this, and belieues this, and withal that neither this
nor any sin can expel, or take away his faith, or damn him (Infidelity only
excepted) is foolish if he fear sin, and is senseless and labors in vain,
if he seek and labor to bridle his concupiscence, to mortify his affections,
to resist his temptations, or to restrain, or not give himself to all
sensuality his heart can desire; which freely and fully he may do, as by this
doctrine he is warranted and secured. Surely he that belieues thus, as thus he
is taught, needs not fear any detriment to his soul or any punishment of his
sin, or any offense of God: what therefore can, or at least will restrain
him from following his fleshly appetites, specially in secret?

Thirdly, Cruelty (which how odious it is, Of cruelty.
is by diverse examples before declared) with all rage, ire, and revenge, and
the practice of them is by virtue of this doctrine dangerously persuaded: for
who will not be encouraged to inflict any severe punishment and cruel tortures
for any little offense committed against him, who belieues that God ordaines
souls to such horrible punishments in hell for no offense committed, or
forseene to be committed against his Majesty? Who desirous to imitate God, will
not rather exercise, then detest actions of all cruelty and tyranny, when he
belieues that God is a judge so severe, cruel, and tyrannous, that he ordaines
and creates men to damnation and sin, and for the same sin which himself
commands and works in them does himself torment them with those horrible
torments of eternal fire in hell? Who may not be incited to lay upon subjects
and servants any command though never so heavy and intolerable, when they read
and believe that God lays upon al men precepts which are impossible to be
performed? Who will bridle his rage and fury of passion when he persuades
himself that he offends Gods as much in resisting, as in yielding to it; and
that neither Gods particular favor, nor his special faith and justice is
lost, nor any sin shall be imputed, or punishment inflicted upon him for the
sin, though in his rage he should kill, murder, and use all revenge upon his
enemies? What needs therefore any man to fear, or care in conscience what
secret murder or villainy he contriues or works, so he can but avoid the shame
or the world, or the punishment of the laws?

Of Pride.
Fourthly, Pride which is the sin Prou. 8.13.
which God hates, and is Prou. 16.5. Eccles. 10.14 15. Greg in Moralibus.
August. in Epistolis.
abomination to God, and the beginning of all sin, and apostasy from God;
Which is, according to S. Gregory, the root of all evil, and the queen of all
vices; Yea according to S. Augustine, the beginning, the end, and the cause of
all sins, and which makes us like to the devils, as humility does to the
Angels: This pride is by this their doctrine kindled, and as by bellows blown
and set on fire. For what a strong motive to pride and rebellion against all
superiors is it, for one to persuade himself that he is by his private spirit
immediately taught of God, understands all doctrine reueiled by God, needs no
instruction or direction from his Pastor, but may judge and censure him, yea
and with him all the ancient Pastors, Doctors, Bishops, and Saints of Gods
Church, and may prefer his own private judgment and opinion before the
general Judgment and doctrine of Gods Church? How forcible a persuasion to
pride and presumption is it, for one to assure himself that he is sure of Gods
favor, and of keeping it* of remission of his sins, Luth. tom. 5. mar. in 1.
Pet. 1. Zuing. tom. 1. actis disput. Tigu^ apud K^l^if. ex^m. part. ^. exam 13
cap 8. and Calu. Turcis. lib. 3. cap. 1.
and of perseverance in grace to the end, and that no sin or offense can
separate him from the favor of God and from heaven? yea that he is as just and
perfect as Peter, Paul, and the mother of God* that God favors him as much as
he did Christ, and will as assuredly free him from hell and bring him to heaven
a^ he has done Christ, and that without any his labor; that he has as much
right to heaven as Christ has, and can be no more damned then Christ can be.
Which, are Luthers and Zuinglius words. The assurance of all which cannot but
be a vehement persuasion to cause any man highly to esteem of himself, and to
neglect all humility and fear of himself, and all care with fear and
trembling to work his salvation. By all which is evident that this Protestant
doctrine is a great motive and incentiue to all idleness, lust, cruelty, and
pride, and so to all other vices; and a strong impediment to the practice and
exercise of all contrary virtues and perfection.

SVBDIV. 4. Bad life, 1. In the Common people, 2. In the Ministers. 3 In the
first Reformers of Protestant religion, confessed to be an effect of this
doctrine.
WHICH yet that it may more plainly appear, and the more fully by example and
practice be convinced, I will produce the open confession of many prime
Protestants by whom this fruit and effect of this private spirit, and the
doctrine of it, is confessed in their practice. 1. In general, of all the
common people. 2. More particularly of their Ministers and masters. 3. Most
specially of the chief founders and pillars of their religion. By all whose
conf^ssion is made apparent that lewd life, wicked works, and all licentious
and Epicurean liberty among Protestants is neither a corruption of the time,
nor an infirmity of man's nature, nor a National vice only, nor yet an abuse of
doctrine, or a defect of good order and discipline; The confessed bad life of
the Protestant common people in Germany.
but only and truly a proper fruit and effect, naturally issuing from the
substance of their doctrine, and conformable to the principles of it, being
borne, nourished, and increasing together with it, and by virtue of it gaining
breath, strength, and ability.

And first concerning the vulgar and common people* For Germany where the
Ghospel began, 1. Luther confesses that the world grows daily worse; that
men are now more reuengfull, covetous, licentious then they were ever before in
the Papacy Luth. postill. super Dom. 1. Aduentus.
. That, Before time when we were seduced by the Pope, every man did willingly
follow good works, and now every man neither faith nor knows any thing, but
how to get all to himself by exactions, pillage, theft, lying, usury etc.
Luther. Dom. 26 post Pentec^st. Luth. sermon. c^nniual. Ger fol. 55. Luth. in
Joan 15. tom. 4. Germ. Wit. fol. 220. sieve tom. 7. Ger. Ien. fol. 162. b.. 3.
Domestica Postilla Norinberg. concion. 8. Dom. S. Trinit. fol. 79.. 2. aut 87..
3. Tom. 2. Ger. Ien. in sente^t. de vtraque part f. 103. and tom. 7. Germ.
Wit. fol. 362. b.. 3. Melanct in c. 6. Matthew. Eras. Sar. l. de disciplina
Islebiae edit. apud Urban. Ga^besch. f. 39. Smid in ^. sua de Planetis concione
f. 1^1.
. That, It is a wonderful thing and full of scandal, that from the time in
which the pure doctrine of the Gospel was first recalled to light, the world
should daily grow worse. That no History of the Gentiles made mention of so
diabolical malice and hatred as is found among those to whom the word is
preached. The nobility, Husbandmen and all are grown so wicked, that whereas
before (in Papistry) they had some show of modesty, now they are grown so mad
and furious as though they were all full of devils. That, Men who brag now of
the Gospel and faith in their words, are, if they be inwardly examined,
nothing at all: therefore the greatest of those who hear the Gospel, do
deceive themselves, and with their false faith go to hell. That, In this only
we now show our selves professors of the Gospel, in that we will communicate
under both kinds, throw down Images, eat flesh* and neither fast nor pray.
This is the witchery of Satan, that he will draw men from the Pope, but not to
Christ. This Luther of his new conuertites the first fruit of his Gospel.

Melancthon, Luthers great friend and the glory of the first Protestants, says
that, The case is clear that in these Countries all time and care is spent in
drinking, banqueting, and cups; and that the people are come to that
barbarousnesse, that they think if they fast but one day they cannot live till
the next night.

Erasmus Sarcerius, a prime Lutheran, acknowledges that It cannot be otherwise
but that lust must prevail, since fornication and adultery are accounted among
us for no sins, for old and young do nothing but drink and dance. And whereas
among the ancient Germans an adulterer was not so much as heard off, now that
sin is grown so common that it is counted but a sport and jest, and often
Adulterers are more esteemed then honest and shamfast men.

Smidelinus, as famous as the rest, says, That, Since we have heard that to
fast is neither a good work nor pleasing to God, we have left all manner of
fasting and betaken our selves only to bankets and drinkings; so that if a man
mention but fasting he is suspected that he is turned papist. That, Our
Ghospellers are so far from mending their manners, that nothing but bestiality,
Epicur^sme, gluttony, usury, pride, blasphemy and profanation of Gods holy
name is among them. And, That the whole world may see that they are no Papists,
nor put any trust in good works, they do not any good work at all, instead of
fasting they drinck day and night, instead of praying they banne and curse
others. And do so horrible blaspheme the name of God, Smidel. in 4. Concion. de
Planet. f. 141
that the like is not heard among the Turks. And yet this must be so
Evangelical that they notwithstanding dare assure themselves that they have
faith in God, have God propitious to them, and are better then Idolatrous
Papists.

Brentius says, that, Joan. Brent. ad 3. Matthew.
Such is the corruption of manners in these times, and such the desire to do
wrong, that there is no occasion of confiding in good works: for why shall they
confide in them which they have not?

Joan. Spangenberge says, that, It is a true word, Spang. in Enarrat.
Beneficioru^ Dei.
and often repeated by many Doctors, that after the revelation of Antichrist
men will be so wild that they will neither acknowledge nor have any care of God,
but will do as they will, what the devil, and the flesh shall suggest. This is
now fulfilled, for since the lies and deceits of Antichrist and the Pope have
been revealed, men begin to believe nothing, and seeing they are free from the
bands of popery, they will be free from the Gospel and all precepts of God, and
make that right and just which every one will.

Calvin says, that, Calu. Concio. 10. gallic. scripta in ep* ad Ephesians.
Men of his sect are the most wicked and flagitious of all mortal men, yea so
wicked that words cannot be found to express their wickedness. They are
horrible monsters, and devils in men's form.

Wolphangus Musculus a prime Protestant confesses, Musculus loc. com. cap. de
Decal. expla. 3 praecepti p. 62.
that, To tell the truth they are become so unlike themselves, that whereas in
the Papacy they were religious in their error and superstition, now in the
light of the known truth, they are more profane then the very sons of this
world.

Andreas Musculus, another famous Lutheran, also says: And. Mus. Dominic. 1.
Aduentus.
The case thus stands at this present with us Lutherans, that if any be
desirous to see a great rabble of knaves, of persons turbulent, deceitful,
coseners, usurers, let him go to any city where the Gospel is purely
preached, and he shall find them there by multituds. It is more manifest then
daylight, that there never among the Ethnickes, Idem lib. de abusu Sacrame^.
cap. 14
Turks, and other Infidels were more unbridled, and unruly persons with whom
all virtue and honesty is quite extinct, then are among the Professors of the
Gospel at this day. That, to speak of fasting is but to loose paper and
time: the Germans care not now for fasting, but for bibbing and banqueting: if
any shall but mention fasting, though he allege never so much Scripture for
it, he shall presently be counted a Papist, or an Heretic.

Buc. his scrip. Anglican. page 24. med. lib. 7. de regno Chri^ti cap. 4.
Bucer, one of the first, and most prime reformers confesses, that the thing
which the greatest part do seem chiefly to have aimed at by the Gospel, is
to cast off the yoke of all whatsoever manner of discipline, penance, and
Religion which remained in Papistry, and to do all things according to the
will and lust of their flesh. For which it is not ungrateful to them to hear,
that a man is justified by only Faith, and not by good works, to which they
have no desire at all.

Paulus Eberus, a prime reformer with Luther, confesses, Paul. Eber. praefat.
Comment. Philip. in ep. ad Cor.
That our whole Evangelical congregation is so full of Schisms and offenses,
that it is nothing less then that it makes show to be, which while all see
with their own eyes, not without cause they doubt whether our evangelical
company be the true Church, in which so many, and so enormous vices are seen.

Iacobus Andreas, a great promotour of Lutheranisme, confesses that, Jacob.
And* concion. 4* in 21. c. 4. Lucae
Christian and serious discipline commanded by Christ, and required of
Christians, is esteemed among us new popery and monkery; for since we learned
to be saved by only faith in Christ, good works have been left of, since without
them we may be saved by relying upon Christ only and his grace and merits. And
that the world may know that they are no Papists, nor do put any trust in good
works, they will not do any good work at all: but instead of fasting, will
night and day lie bibbing and banqueting, instead of praying stand swearing.
And this kind of life is called by them Euangelicum Institutum, the institution
of the Gospel.

Wigandus a famous man, one of the Centurians, says, That the youth among the
Ghospellers become daily less tractable, and more bold to commit those vices
which in former times men of years knew not. Sim. Vien sermon. Dom. 13. Trinit.
Erasm. epist. ad Vul^^^ium Neo^omi^um Wit. anno 1529.


Simon Vion cries: VVoe upon Lub^cke, Hamburge, Rostocke for their adulteries,
fornications drunkenness, usury, lying, and all vices; and woe to Saxony for
keeping such a light of Evangelical truth in so wicked life and manners! So of
the rest.

To all which we will add Erasmus, though not one of their Religion, yet
esteemed by them as a favorer, and a present eye witness of them, and their
life, who pronounces this sentence of them: Look, says he, Erasm. ^p ad
fratres infer. Germ.
every where upon these Evangelical people, and bring me one whom this
Gospel has made of a drunkard, sober; of a ^eacher, chaste; of one
shameless, shamfast. I can show many who are become worse then they were
before, whom I knew pure, sincere, and without dissembling; the same I have
seen, after they gave themselves to this Evangelical sect, to have learned to
talk of wenches, to play at dice, to leave of praying, to be most ^mpatient,
reuengefull of all injuries, vain, viperlike in manners, B^ned. Morgenste^^^.
de Eccle. p. 221.
and destitute of all humanity, I speak by experience. Whereupon it grew to a
proverb, (witness one of their own) among them, that when they were disposed
to yield to their natural lust, they would say; To day we will live Lutheran
like. All which is spoken of the Lutherans in Germany.

For the Protestants of England (to omit for breuity other Nations, In England.
and their life) M. Geffrey a great preacher and trauailer, confesses
plainly: M. Richard Geffrey in his sermon preached at Paul's Cross 7. Oct. an.
1604. p. 31. Stubs in his motives to good works p^inted anno 1596. in his
epistle dedicatory to the Mayor of London. Page 44.45. The Puritans in their
mild Defense alleged in M. ^owels book of things indifferent page 136.
I may freely speak what I have plainly seen in the course of some trauells,
and observation of some courses, that in Flandres was never more drunkenness,
in Italy more wantonness, in Jury more hypocrisy, in T^rkie more impiety, in
Tartary more iniquity, then is practiced generally in England, and particulerly
in London.

M. Stubs, a like famous preacher, who traveled through all England to see the
ma^ners of the people, after all his journey pronounces this sentence: As
concerning the people I found them in most places, dissolute, proud, envious,
malicious, disdaineful, covetous, ambitious, careless of good works; that for
good works who sees not that they (the Papists) were far beyond us, and we
far behind them. In witness whereof he recounts what Monasteries, Churches,
Hospitalls, Bridges, Schools* Colleges* and Universities were builded by
Catholics, and pulled down by Protestants.

The Puritans in their mild Defense confess, and say: What eye so blind that
it does not gush out with tears to behold the misery of our supposed Church,
I mean, the great ignorance, the superficial worship of God, the fearful
blasphemies, and swearing in houses and streets, and the dishonor of
Superiors, the pride, cruelty, fornications, adulteries, drunkenness,
covetousness, vsuries, and other like abominations. O be hold and pity the
woeful and lamentable state of our Church in these things! And thus much of
the state of the vulgar and common sort of Protestants, in what kind of virtue
and perfection, this their new Gospel has trained them up for their
devotion, life, and manners, even in the first and purest time of it.

For the Clergy, the lamps and conductours of the rest, what, The confessed
bad life of the Protestant ministry.
and of what note has been their life and conversation in general both in
England and Germany, I will for England (to avoid both offense and
tediousness) refer the Reader desirous to know the^ to the Owls Almanac,
made by the Puritans against the Bishops, and to the Volume of Saints, Pasquill
unto Martin junior, Vide Apol. prot. page 593
and Pasquill and Marphorius, made by Protestants against Puritans, all printed
the year 1589. in Queen Elizabeth's reign; and to Doctor Sutcliffes answer
to a libell supplicatory, where the Puritans are described for their pride,
malice, cruelty, covetousness, usury gluttony, and their chamber cheer, and
other good matters kept for a rare banquet, too shameful, and eu^dently
appearing. All conuincing what is their life and manners, and all practiced
instead of fasting and other godly exercise. And for Germany I will only bring
two or three witnesses for the general, to wit Wolfphangus Musculus who,
speaking of their Clergy, Musc. de locis commun. cap. de Ministris verbi. Dei.
p. 180.
says; If they do any thing upright and just, they do it not sincerly with any
good intention, but obiter, and by the way, as altogether neglecting that
which is to be done by faithful ministers, and are so far from bringing in
errors and superstition of doctrine as formerly was done, that they do by
their manners give occasion to the people to fall into an indifferency of
religion and Epicurisme, and into such a neglect of all religion, that none
need to fear that by the example of the ministry men should become
hypocrites, superstitious worshippers of Images, and Iustice-workers, for from
this care they do abundantly deliver themselves, and others.

Joan* Wigandus says, that of the ministers many are parasites and flatterers,
VVigand. de bonis and malis Germaniae.
who fraudulently excuse the sins of great men, and kindle coals of
mischief by which Politicians do thrust out sincere preachers out of their
places, and make them suffer more then women in childbed.

Paulus Eberus says of them, that if we look upon the Evangelical Doctors,
we shall find that some moved with vain glory, Paul. Eber. praefat comment.
Philip. ad Corinth.
others with envious zeal, others with contentions, others with other vices,
do all destroy more with their wicked life, then they build with their true
doctrine. Which shall suffice for the generality of the ministry.

For particular persons, observing that we speak not of the declining and
worst age of their Church, The confessed bad life of the first founders of
Protestant Religion.
but of the reforming and best time, nor of the vulgar sort of ministers, but
of their prime men and principal pillars among their reforming ministers; nor
out of our writers, but out of their own accusation and condemnation of
themselves; we will in general look into the life of some of their principal
founders of their Religion, and se what life and manners in them their new
doctrine did together with their reformation beget and nourish. Vlenberg vita
Lutheri anno 1524. page 202.
Al which was ominously foreshewed by prodigious monsters, first of a calfe at
Friburge in Misnia with a head like to a monks hood, then of a hog at Hall
in Saxony with a shaven crown like a priest; both in the year before that
Luther cast of his habit, and afterward incestuously conjoined himself with
one of the nine Nuns which Koppen enticed out of the Monastery of Nimpsen in
Saxony.

And first for Luther that man of God, Of Luther.
that light of the world, that third Elias, that first Evangelist, and next to
Christ and S. Paul, with much more before noted (as they call him,) if we
consider his life and doctrine what it was while he believed and embraced the
Catholic faith, and compare it with the same what it was after he made his
reformation, we shall clearly perceive the fruit and effect of this their new
Ghospel for life and manners. And first for his life before his revolt he
confesses himself, and it is confessed by his own followers, that He lived
in his Monastery punishing his body with watching, fasting, and prayer Simon
Vion upon the Catalogue of Doctors englished, page 180. Luch in Gal. 1.14. f.
3^. englished.
. That he honored the Pope of mere conscience. That he kept chastity,
poverty, and obedience Luth. sup. fol. 35.
. Whatsoever he did, he did it with a simple heart, of good zeal, for the
glory of God, fearing grievously the last day, and desirous to be saved, from
the bottom of his heart Luth. sup fol. 35.
. Which are his own words. But after he invented his libertine Gospel, he
confesses himself, His Lust.
and the same is confessed by his followers. 1. For lust and sensuality, that
He esteemed nothing more sweet or loving upon the earth then the love of a
woman if a man can get it Luth. in Prou. 31.10.
. That it was no more in his power to be without a woman then to be a man, that
the act of the flash is as necessary, and more necessary, and no more to be
stayed or omitted then to eat, drink, sleep, purge, make clean the nose
Luth. to. 5. Wit. ser. de Ma^rim. f. 119.2. verse. finem. and colloq. mensal.
Germ. cap de Matrim. and tom. 2. VVittem. fol. 328.
etc. Whereupon he confesses that, I am burned with the great flame of my
untamed flesh, I who ought to be fervent in spirit am fervent in the flesh, in
lust, sloth etc. Eight days are now past wherein I neither write, pray, nor
study, being vexed partly with the temptation of the flesh, partly with other
troubles. But Luth. to. 1. Epist. latinar. fol. 134 ad Philippum.
says he) it suffices me to know the glory of the riches of God, and of the
lamb which takes away the sins of the world, from him sin cannot draw us
although we should commit fornication, or kill a thousand times a day. Upon
which his lust, neither respecting his vow made to God of chastity, which made
it a sin to commit any act of carnality, nor the Imperial law which made it
loss of ones head; nor the shame of the world, at which all wondered and many
were ashamed and scandalized, Luth. sup. fol. 345.
nor the calamities of the time in which by the insurrection of the Boores, or
common people, Zozem. hist. 6.3. Code^ lib. 1. de Episc. and Cleric.
incited by him were killed to the number of one thousand, and all Germany was
in misery: but impatient of staying so much as one night, he secretly at night,
having present only Pomeran the Priest, Luke the Painter, and Apell^s the
Lawyer, Sleidan. comment. lib 5. an. 1525. fol. 65. English. Fulk. answer to P.
Frarines declam p. 32. Luth. Colloq. latin. tom. 2. de Coniug. Melanct. epist
ad Joan. Camer. Erasmus epist. ad Manch. Vlman. Iustus Baron. lib. de
praescriptionibus apud Kellis. ^^men. part. 2. cap. 10 page 715.
without any communication with his friends, the year 1525. coupled himself
to one of the Runagate Nuns, enticed out of Nympsen by Leonard Koppen,
Katherine Bor^ by name, a beautiful young woman of 26. years of age, who
within few days after the marriage, as Erasmus says, was delivered of a child,
and so, as one faith of him, Luther was yesterday a Monk, to day a Bridgroome
to morrow a Husband, and the next a Father. Which was the first fruit, and one
of the principal motives of Luthers Reformation.

But let us hear his Examen of his own conscience, and his confession of
himself: What, says he, Luth. Colloq. Isleb. de creat. fol. 70. a.. 5.
have I done all this day? Two hours cacaui (too beastly to be englished)
three hours I eat, and four hours I was idle. Again, Ib. fol. 59. 5.
We eat till death* we drink till death* we eat and drink till we be poor,
and go to hell, cacamus ad mortem. Tom 1. ep. lat. ^en. fol. 334.
I sit here senseless and stupid in idleness, praying little, mourning
nothing at al for the Church. And laughing at the folly of S. Hierome,
Benedict, Bernard and Francis, who laboring to repress the heat of the flesh
by praying, fasting and afflicting their bodies, he says, Colloq. Isleb. de
Coniug fol. 411.
He has a more easy and ready way, so that a wench be not wanting, that is, to
have a wench always in the house, which is the most present remedy for that
disease, and she as a woman ought to help a friend in that case. And least he
should be thought to do otherwise the^ he taught, his doctrine was according to
his practice; for he taught, That to increase and multiply is not a precept,
but more then a precept, which is not in our power to slip or omit: but more
necessary then to eat, drink, purge and sleep* That, Lab de vita coniuga.
the Husband shall say to his wife, if thou will not come, let the maid or
another come, and if that will not suffice, dismiss Vas^hi and admit He^ter.
That Praefat. ^n Oecumenium Menij. tom. 4. Ger. fol. 463.
As God, severely prohibited ^o kill, and not commit adultery, so much more did
he command to marry.

For prayer and devotion, he taught, That Postilla VVatem. in Euang. explicat.
de diuite epulo^^ and Lazaro f. 92. a.. 2.
God has promised to hear our prayers, therefore after thou have prayed once
or twice, thou must believe thou art heard, and so must pray no more, least
thou tempt God, and abuse his patience in hearing thee. And writing to a noble
man, he affirms, that, Tom. 2. Germ. Ien. ep. ad Baron. de Ster^^gh. fol. 459.
If we pray often for the same thing, we show little trust in God; and so with
our incredulous prayer we more and more offend God; for to ask the same thing
often it nothing else but to conceive that before we were not heard, and so do
pray against the promises of God. Therefore Tom. 4. Germ. Ien. de Bello ant^
t^^ cico f. 435.
we must not use many words with God, but let such short prayers as these
suffice, Help us, O God. Father have mercy on us. etc. That In Postil. Wit.
f. 62.
Papists do foolishly teach men to pray, fast, and do penance; only say thou,
that all thou can do, is nothing, and this is to prepare the way for God,
though in the mean time thou do nothing but drink Malmesy and walk upon
Roses, and pray not word at all. That, when Tom. 2. Ger. Wit. de Orat. con.
Turcas. fol. 475.
thou prayest whether it be standing or kneeling, say boldly; Lord, I ask that
thou hear me, and I will that thou grant my request, and so it must, and
shall be; and thus pray and no otherwise, or else say thou, I will neither pray to
thee, nor have thee prayed unto. And lastly, that No Tom. 4. Germ. Wit.
comment. in Matthew. 5. fol. 37.
man can say, Our Father, except he join with it curses and execrations; for
Our Father, is not well said without banninges and cursings. This was Luthers
doctrine, and manner of Prayer.

For other good works, and good life, and both for obligation and practice of
them, he taught, 1. That, Tom. 1. Germ. Wit. in Comment. Gal. 2. fol. 47. b.
only faith does justify, and only that faith, which includes not, not has
annexed Charity. That Ibid. fol. 92.. 3.
Only faith is necessary to make us just, all other things being free, and
neither commanded nor forbidden. That Tom. 1. Germ. Wit. fol. 361. and Tom. 1.
lat. Ie^. fol. 47. b.
Faith except it be without any the least good works does not justify, yea is
no faith. 2. For good works, that Com. in Psalm. 5. to. 3. Wit. f. 171. b..
5. and to. 3. Ger. Wit. fol. 143. a.. 5.
This shall be a rule for understanding of Scripture, that wheresoever the
Scripture does command to do goods works, it is to be understood to prohibit
them. That, Tom. 1. Germ. Wit. comment. Gal. 3. fol. 147. vel 155.
though the Papists bring heaps of Scripture, as commending good works, yet I
care not for them, though they bring more; Thou Papist art very brag with thy
good works and scripture, yet scripture is a servant to Christ, therefore it
moves me nothing. Rely thou upon the servant, I will rely upon the Master and
Lord of Scripture: to him I yield, and I know that he will not lie, nor lead me
into error. I will rather adhere to him, then for all scripture to be altered
a hairs breadth from my opinion. 3. For the ten Commandments. Tom. Ger Wit.
common. Exodus 20. f. 212.
That therefore the ten Commandments do not belong to us Christians, but only
to Jews, which is proved out of the Text, speaking to them whom it brought
out of Egypt, who were Jews, not Christians. Tom. 1. Germ. Wit. comm. in
Gal. 5. fol 173.
We will not admit that any the least precept of Moses be imposed upon us.
Comm. in Gal. 4. fol. 215. a.
Therefore look that Moses withal his law be sent packing, in malam rem,
with a mischief, and that thou be not moved with any terror of him, but hold
him suspected for an heretic, cursed and damned, and worse then the Pope, or
the Devil. 4. Therefore to conclude up all, for sin he says, Coment in Joan.
17. tom. 4. Germ. f. 305. a.. 5
That true and right Saints must be subject to great and heinous sins* and to
continue such, as they may not be ashamed to pray, Forgive us our sins. That
Epist. ad Philip. tom. 1. epist. Ien. edit f. 345.
if it be true grace, let it bring true, not feined sin, God saues not feined
sinners: be a sinner and sin stoutly, but be more strong in faith, and
rejoice in Christ. It suffices us to know the Lamb, from him no sin can
draw us though we sin, and commit fornication or murder a thousand times in
one day. That, De capt. Pabil tom. 2. lat Wit. fol. 72.
a Christian is so rich, that though he would yet he cannot be damned by any so
great sins, except he will not believe, for no sins can damn him ^ut
infidelity. And that himself did confess to his Ghostly Father D. Staupitius,
not sins of women, but solid and horrible heinous offenses Colloq. Isl^b.
titulo de tentation. f. 291. b.. 3.
. This was the doctrine, and accordingly the practice of this Saint, Prophet,
Elias Evangelist, Angel, and light of the world, the singular, eminent, and
euer-admired organ of the holy Ghost, endewed with so great piety and gifts,
and such a Doctor and interpreter of scripture, as was not in the world since
the Apostles, as before he is by his followers extolled. Sciop. Eccles. cap.
2.11. etc
All which sayings of Luther are in these words cited by Gaspar Scioppius who
was a long time a follower and professor of Luthers doctrine.

Secondly, For his malice and envy not only against the Pope and Catholics,
which was implacable; Luth con. art. Louan. these. 27. tom. 2. f. 505. ep. ad
Ia^. presbit. and tom. 7. VVittenb. fol. 381.382. Zuing. tom. 2 resp. ad confess
Luth. f. 478.
but also against the Sacramentaries his brethren and fellow reformers, whose
part our english Protestants follow, he is so far charged by the Zuinglians
with breach of all Christian charity toward them* that he not only calls them
heretics, damnable and execrable fectaries, alienated from the Church of
Christ, whom he curses, and all concord with them, and refuses to have any
familiarity by word or writing* or spe^ch with them, or any of them for ever:
but also says, they are insatanized, supersatanized, and persatanized, in
whose mouth satan is infused, perfused, and transfused. For which says
Zuinglius of him, Satan does endeavor wholly to possess him. Tigur. confess.
Germ. Tig. an. 1544. f. 3
And, say the Tigurins, his book is full of Devils, immodest railings, anger
and rage. And say our english Protestants he does break all Christian modesty,
Answer to the defense of the censure attributed to Fulke p. 155.
and is far beyond the bounds of Charity Page 101
. 3. For his pride and vain insulting over all sorts of Princes, prelates, and
opposers of him, it is apparent not only by his intemperate writings against
Henry the 8. of England, and all the princes of Germany; but also by the plain
accusation of his own brethren. 1. By the Tigurins Tigur. resp ad part.
confess. Luth. Hospin. histo. Sacram. part. 2. fol. 188.
who expressly con^emne him for pertinacy, and too much insolency. His Pride.
2. By Oeco^^mpadius Oecolamp. confess. ad resp. Luth. Conrad Reg. l. cont.
Joan* Hosium de Coena.
who accuses him of being puffed up with pride and arrogance, that he is in
danger to be seduced by Satan. 3 By Conradus Regius, who lays to his charge
such pride by which he does extol himself in his writings, that God for it
took from him his true spirit, and in place of it gave him a proud, angry, and
lying spirit. Luth. locis Comm^ class. 4. fol. 53.
And to confirm all this, he was so arrogant and impudent that beyond all
ciuility he arrogantly auouches of himself, that he is such a one as the world
has not had these many ages. Luth. lib. ad Ducem Georgium, and in colloq
lat^n. cap. de consolation. and ad cap. 1. ad Gal. tom. 5. Wit. f. 290 b.
That himself is the only mortal man whom Satan foresaw to be hurtful to
him. That, Since the Apostles time no Doctor, or writer has so excellently
and clearly confirmed, instructed and comforted the consciences of the secular
states, as I have done, by the singular grace of God. This certainly I know,
that neither Austine, nor Ambrose, who are yet in this matter the best, are
equal to me herein. That, The Gospel is so copiously preached by us, that
truly in the Apostles time it was not so clear. Whereupon even Calvin himself
charges him to be subject to great vices, and wishes that he had been more
careful in acknowledging them. And himself confesses of himself, Luth. tom.
7. in sermon. de euersion. Jerusalem. fol. 271. a. Luth. loc. com class. 2. page
83.
that his profession is not of manners but doctrine. wishing that he were
removed from the office of preaching, because his manners and life did not
answer to his profession. Which may suffice for a conuincing example to show
what fruit this new doctrine and private spirit brought forth in the first
founder of it.

For Calvin, Beza, Zuinglius, and others the chief supporters of this doctrine
and new Religion, it might suffice to show their life and disposition for
manners, Calu. apud Schilleb lib. 1 theolog. Calu. fol. 126.
to remember that they were most of them, if not all, either Religious men tied
by vow to Poverty, Obedience, and Chastity; or else at the least Priests in holy
Orders obliged to Chastity, and yet every one of them by the liberty of their
Gospel offered up, as the first fruits of it, Sleid. lib. 3. anno 1524. folio
2229. english. and l. 2. an. 1520. fol. 22. a. med
themselves by execrable apostasy to all lust and sensuality in incestuous
copulation, either with like professed Nuns, or other women subverted and
enticed by them. Whereupon as Luther an Augustine Friar began the dance, so his
scholars Bucer a Dominican, Pe^er Martyr a Canon regular, and Bernardinus
Ochinus a Franciscan followed and joined themselves with professed Nuns; and
with them Oecolampadius a Brigittan Monk, Pelican and Spanberge Franciscans,
Knox a Friar, Zuinglius and Calvin Priests, Carolostadius an Archdeacon,
Gebardus an Archbishop of Colen, and Vergerius a Cardinal chose for their
mates other women. In like manner in England Cranmer, and Sands of Canterbury
and York both Priests, and Archbishops, Hooper of Worcester, Barlow of
Chicester, Downhan of Westchester, Scory of Hereford, Barkely of Bath and Wels,
Couerdale of Excester, all Bishops; Bale in Ireland, Bucer at C^mbridge, and
Martyr at Oxford, with infinite more, all Monks and Religious, did al of them
plant and disperse the new Ghospells doctrine through England by apostating
from their vowed chastity to sensual copulation, under the title of marriage,
with wantons like themselves. This in general, I say, may suffice to discern
the fruit of this new Gospel what it brought forth for sanctity and holiness
of life, and by what bellows it was first blown and kindled in the Professors
of it.

He that is desirous to see more particulers of Zuinglius, Zuingl^us.
and his fellow Ministers of Zurich, Leo, Jude, Erasmus, Fabricius, and eight
other, how they demanded of the Bishop of Constance liberty of marrying wives,
for the satisfying (to use their own words) of their lust, in which they
spent (say they) their whole thoughts and meditation to satisfy their burning
desires of the flesh; for which (they confess) they are made infamous before
the congregations have committed many things unseemly, and the people by the
example of them are scandalized, and speak ill of them. Who would see of
Calvin, Calvin.
what fine bread made of fine flower and rose water mixed with sugar, cynamon,
Anizseeds, and other spices made for him alone, he always eat, and had carried
with him wheresoever he dyned; what notorious sins he is convinced and
accused off, even by Protestants themselves, Conrad. Schusse^. theol. Calumist.
lib. 2. fol. 72. a. cir^a mod.
namely by Conrandus Schusselburg a learned superintendent of Rauespurge, and
the neighbor Churches in Germany, who record to the view of all the world with
constant asseueration thereof (to omit Catholic witnesses) his Sodomiticall
lust, for which he was burned publicly by the Magistrates of Noyon in France
on the shoulder with a hot iron, and his other notorious vices and
lasciuiousnes, and withal what a notorious death he dyed, not only stinking
with loathsome ulcers, worms, and lice in his members; but also swearing,
cursing, blaspheming despairing, and calling upon the Devil.

Who desires to read of Beza, Beza.
how shamefully he kept Andebertus a boy, as another Ganamed, and Claudia de
Mossa called by him Candida, as a strumpet, four years, and then fled with
her for infamy to Geneua, where he married her, and writ shameful Epigrammes
in comparing his love to them both; Hessus. lib. verae and sanae Confess.
S^huss. supra lib. 1. fol. 93. a initio.
and how being 69. years old, presently upon her death he married another young
widow Katherine. All which are witnessed of him by Hessufius a Protestant and
famous Lutheran, together with the aforesaid Schusselburge, who in general
besides the former particulers accuse him to have lived like a Hog in the dirt
of all obscene lasciviousness, flagitious lust, and wicked whoordome and
adultery, celebrated to his own shame by his own writings. Who desires to
read of Iacobus Andreas as famous a Lutheran in Germany, Iacobus Andreas.
for he was Chancelour of the University of Tubinge, as Calvin was at Geneua,
it is diuulged by his own fellows Seleucerus, Musculus and Hospinian, to have
never been seen so much as to say the Lords prayer, neither from bed nor to bed,
Hospin. hist. sacram. part. 2. fol. 380. and 389. Seleucerus, Andreas, Musculus.
nor to have shown any sparkle of godliness, but great lightness in his
words, deeds, and counsels; to have been guilty of most heinous
covetousness, adultery, sacrilege, robbing the poor, whose goods he carried
from Misnia and Saxony to Tubinge; to have been without any conscience or
Religion at all; and to have had no other God but Mammon and Bacchus. Who, I
say, will see these at large and more of them, and of many other prime
Evangelical founders (to omit Cranmer his carrying his wench in his trunk,
Knoxk his marrying his stepmother, and other marrying many wives, some having
to the number often or twelve alive) let him read the lives of these, and other
such like prime Protestants collected by Brereley, out of their own Authors,
Protest. Apology page 416.58.411.595.
and the Protestants Apology made by the same Author. By all which it will
evidently appear, that as the foresaid Protestant doctrine does blow the
bellows, and plain the way to this licentious liberty, and loosnesse of
Epicurean life and manners; so the followers of it, induced by the same, did as
notoriously practice and follow the same; so that their life was made agreeable
to their doctrine, and both did run on jointly together in all wicked and
abominable practice of all sin and iniquity.

To which, as contrary, if we oppose the good life of Catholics, as a mark of
their faith and Religion, confessed even by our adversaries, Catholics lives
commended.
the one will better illustrate the other. Of our first Apostles of England, S.
Augustine, Mellitus, Iustus, and John, it is confessed by Hollinshead, that
after they were received into Canterbury, they began to follow the trade of
life which the Apostles used, exercising themselves in continual prayer,
Hollius. Chro edit. last, part. 1. page 100. line 31. Stow Annals page 64
printed an. 1592. Godw. in the life of Austine page 117. etc. Fox Acts Mo^.
page 117. an. 1576. Tind. Revelation of Antichrist. Mela^. Apolog. Confess.
Aug. VVittomb. an. 1573 f. 221. Pant. Chron. page 95. Fox act. Mon. p. 70. next
after an. 1216. Hackl. in his book of nauigations 2. par 2. volum. p. 81.
watching, and preaching, despising all wordly things, living in all points,
according to the doctrine which they set forth. And the like is reported by
Stow, Godwin, and others. And both Godwin and Fox mention and confess diverse
miracles wrought by S. Augustine, through Gods hand. All contrary to the former
life of Luther.

Of S. Dominike, S. Francis, S. Bernard, and other such like founders of
Religious orders, it is confessed by Tindall, That they were holy men. By
Melancthon, that they used obedience, poverty and chastity, without any sin
or impiety. By Pantaleon, That they were men famous for learning and holiness.
By Fox, of S. Francis, that he cast away all things from him, outwardly
chastised himself, and lived so austerely, that he covered his body with ice
and snow, called poverty his Lady, and was so desirous of Martyrdom, that he
went into Syria, to the Sultan to seek it. All far different from the life
of the first Protestant Reformers.

Of S. Francis Xauerius a Jesuit, and an Apostle of India, it is confessed by
M. Richard Hackluite, That he was a godly Professor and painful Doctor of
the Indian Nation in matters concerning Religion. That, after great labors,
injuries and calamities suffered with much patience, he departed, endued with
all spiritual blessings, out of this life the year 1552. after many
thousands were by him brought to the knowledge of Christ. Of this holy man his
particular virtues, and wonderful works in that Religion, all the later
Histories of the Indian regions are full. And by another Protestant it is said,
that the Comment. rerum in Orient gestaru^ fol. 2.
King of Portugal, hearing of the great miracles he wrought, sent his
commission to his Viceroy there, dated in April anno 1556. to take examination
thereof by oath. Whereupon Page 36.
by certificate it was found that he had cured miraculously the Dumb, the
Lame, the Deaf, and with his word healed the Sick, and Fol 9.
raised sundry dead persons to life. That Fol. 14.
after his death they found his body, not only unconsumed, but also yielding
forth fragrant smells, from whence they carried it to Goa, and placed it there
in the Church of S. Paul, where yet to this day it remains free from
corruption: of which are witnesses all the inhabitants of that City, and
Travelers thither. And by M. Abraham Hartwell in his book dedicated to the
Bishop of Canterbury his Lord and Master, says, That it is reported, Abraham
Hartwell his discovery of Congo printed ann. 1597. l. 2. cap. 3.
how in the discovery of the kingdom of Congo the year 1587. by Odoardo
Lopez, that great and undoubted m^racls were showed by God, in the presence of
a whole army. Of which the Author says, that though this conversion of Co^go
was accomplished by Massing Priests, and after the Romish manner, yet this
action, which tends to the glory of God, shall it be concealed and not
committed to memory, because it was performed by Popish Priests and Popish
means? God forbid. Let the Germans show any such in the peruersion of Germany
to Protestancy.

Of the Catholic people of ancient time, it is confessed by the Centurists,
that although in this age (they speak of the seven hundred years after
Christ) the worship of God was darkened with man's traditions and superstition,
yet the study to serve God and live godly and justly was not wanting to the
miserable common people etc. they were so attentive to their prayers, as they
bestowed almost the whole day therein etc. they did exhibit to the Magistrate
due obedience, they were most studious of amity, concord and society, so as
they would easily remit injuries, all of them were careful to spend their time
in honest vocation and labor; to the poor, and to strangers they were
courteous and liberal, and in their judgments, and contracts most true.

Of the Catholic Prelates of ancient time in England he that desires to see
their virtues commended, let him read M. Godwin, Godw. Catalogue of Bish^ps.
then Chaplain to the Lord Treasurer, now one of their new Bishops, and he
shall find, given by him, rare and extraordinary comendations to the Bishops of
England, as S. Dunstan, Elphege, Lanfranke, Anselme, Rodulph Baldwine, Hubert
Walter, S. Edmund, John Peckam, Robert Winchelsey, John Stratford, Thomas
Bradwardine, Simon Sudbury, S. Hugh, Hugh Pateshall, Paulinus, Geffrey
Plantagenet, Richard Scroope, Richard Poor, Richard Fox, John Morton, Reginald
Poole, Cuthbert Tonstall, and others. Whereas of our late Protestant Bishops he
shall find little or no praise, and yet the writer one of their own Bishops.

Of the ancient common Catholic people of England, it is confessed by M Stubs,
a great enemy to Papists, Stubs his motives to good works p. 44.45.
that for good works who sees not that heerin they are far beyond us, and we
far behind them: for example what memorable, and famous buildings, and what
ancient Monuments have they left to the world behind the^? What Churches,
Chapels, and other houses of prayer did they erect, to the end the Religion and
service of God might be continued? Yea what Monasteries, Abbeyes, Priories, and
other religious houses? What number of good Bridges did they make? How many
Alms houses, Hospitalls, and spittles did they found? What high ways? What
pauements, and causies? In sum, What famous Colleges, Halles, and
Universities? What Schools, and free schools? etc. Also. Is it not a shame
unto us, that our Forefathers, living in the times of superstitions, etc.
should notwithstanding so far pass us in good works, that we may not be
compared with the^ in any small measure?

Of the late and present Catholics generally of all Cou^tryes Sir Edwin Sands,
that great Parlament-man says, Sir Edward Sands in his Relation of the
Religion used in the West parts of the world, sect. 48. paulo post initium.
that there are in great multitude on both sides (Protestants and Catholics) (
for so there are undoubtedly) men virtuous and learned, fraught with the love
of God, and the truth, above all things men of memorable integrity of heart and
affection whose lives are not dear to them, much less their labors to be
spent for the good of Gods Church. And some side of a leaf afterward, he
further faith: Let the Protestants look with the eye of Charity upon them (of
the Papacy) as well as of severity, and they shall find some excellent orders
of government, some singular helps for increase of godliness and devotion, for
the conquering of sin, for the profi^ing in virtue; and contrariwise in
themselves, looking with a more single and less indulgent eye, they shall find
there is no such absolute perfection in their doctrine and reformation etc. And
he further says of the Catholic Clergy: Sect. 6.
That in their sermons much matter, both of Faith and piety is eloquently
delivered by men surely of wonderful zeal and spirit. And Sect. 27.
that all Countries are full of the Jesuits books of prayer, and piety in
their own language, and wonderful is the reputation, which redoundes thereby
to their order. In so much as he Sect. 42.
says of the late Pope Clement the eight: He is reputed to be a man of good
calm disposition etc. devout in his ways, and thinks without doubt, that he
is in the right, he will weep very often, some conceive upon a weakness and
tenderness of mind, habitued therein by custom; others say upon piety, and
godly compassion; at his Masses, at his pr^cessions, at his fixing up of his
Iubilies, his eyes are still watering, sometimes streaming with tears etc. He
is an enemy to the licentious lives of the Friars, Stubbs his motives to good
works printed 1596 page 43.
to the pomp and secular bravery of Cardinals, etc. He is magnificall and
cerimoniall in his outward comportment, in his private austere and humble. And
concludes there that he was a good man, a good Prince, and a good Prelate.
Likewise M. Stubbes confesses, that certainly to speak the truth, there is
many times found, conscionabler and playner dealing among most of the Papists,
then among many Protestants; and if we look narrowly into the ages past, we
shall find more godliness, devotion, and zeal (though blind) more love one
toward another, more fidelity and faythfullnesse every way in them, then is
now to be found in us. Now co^paring, as the fruit of their doctrine, the life
and manners of the forecyted Protestants with the life and manners of the
Catholics, the ancient of the one with the ancient of the other, the modern
of the one with the modern of the other, the founders of religion of the one
with the founders of the other, the preachers and teachers of the one with the
teachers of the other, the common sort of the one with the common sort of the
other, and discerning both by their fruits, whether are in their life more
Christian, Deuteronomy. 32.31.
and are to Christian doctrine more conformable, Inimici nostri sint Iudices,
Our enemies (whose authority, as before is confessed by themselves to be a most
strong argument against themselves) as they are witnesses of both, so let them
be Judges, of both.

The Conclusion, comparing the private spirits doctrine, The Protest. private
spirits doctrine compared with the Catholic doctrine and showed.
with the Catholic Churches doctrine, whether leads to the greater honor of
God. SECT. IX.
ONE thing remains, for the accomplishing of this Chapter (which is (for
satisfying of an usual and triuial ostentation of the Protestants, that they
forsooth do more, in their religion, then we in ours, honor God and Jesus
Christ) to compare and pararell them and their private spirit with us, and our
Catholic Churches spirit in the principal points of their and our doctrine,
and thereby to propose to the indifferent reader a general view of both, whereby
he may discern how far they with their private spirit and doctrine do
dishonor and derogate, 1. From God. 2. From Christ. 3. From Saints and Angels
in heaven. 4. From holy Scripture. 5. From holy Church. 6. From Sacraments. 7.
From man and his means to salvation; which are faith, grace, justification,
good works, freewill, and the rest: In all which their doctrine is negative and
detractiue in every one. And on the contrary how we and our doctrine do honor,
and attribut to the same God, and Christ, all worthy and due respect of
veneration and honor in all, which as it is affirmative in it self, so it is
honorable to God, and agreeable to reason in all and every particular point and
opinion in controversy.

First, therefore for God, they dishonor and derogate, 1. 1. That theirs
derogateth from the blessed Trinity.
From the blessed Trinity, in that (as before) some of them do deny the
distinction of the three persons, some the unity of one nature, some the
consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, some the deity of the Son
from the Father, as God of God, some the deity of the holy Ghost as God, some
the prayer Holy Trinity one God have mercy upon us. We with the ancient Church
acknowledge three persons and one God, the second person God of God, and
consubstantiall with the father, and the third person of the holy Ghost
proceeding from both the father and the son, and in them one holy Trinity, 2.
From Gods mercy.
three persons and one God. 2. They and their spirit derogate from the mercy of
God, in that, according to them, he is cruel and tyrannical, in that he will
not have all saved, will not give sufficient means to all to be saved, has
willed, appointed, and ordained millions of souls to be damned, and to sin*
that for it he may damn them, and accordingly torment the^ for that sin
which he himself willed, ordained, wrought, and compelled them unto. We, and
our Catholic Church attribute honor to him and his mercy; in that, according
to us, he would have all saved, gives to all sufficient means to be saved,
creates and ordaines all to be saved, wills not the death and damnation of any,
nor does damn any, but those who for their own fault and sin by themselves
willingly committed against him, and his good will and goodness, do deserve*
3. They and their spirit do derogate from Gods goodness, 3. From Gods
goodness.
in that, according to them, he who is good and al good, yet is not pleased,
pacifyed, worshipped, or delighted with good works: but does will, ordain,
command, compel, and necessitate bad works, and so is the author of all
evil, and all evil works in men, and does esteem and impute that which is
wicked and sinful in men for no sin in them; but accounts that which is bad
good, and him that is wicked just. We and our Catholic doctrine do attribute
due honor to the same goodness of God; in that, according to it, God hates,
detests* forbids, and punishes all sin and sinful actions, conuerts,
sanctifies, purifies, and make clean, pure, and just all sinners by his grace
duly disposing themselves, and so reputes them as they are become truly just,
in that God is delighted, pleased, pacified, and honored by good works which
he does will, command, and reward in man, who according to his will by his
grace works them. 4. They and their private spirit derogates from his justice;
4. From Gods Justice.
in that, according to their doctrine, he is short of justice in rewarding none
who deserve well, and do him service; and exce^ds all justice, in that he
ordaines men to an eternal and intolerable pain who have deserved none. 2.
In that he punishes them for that which he himself not only willed and
commanded the^ to do, but also wrought and effected in them. 3. In that he
creats and dignifies them with his gifts and graces for that end that he may
himself cruelly torture and torment them, and that in hell, for no other end
but to show his power and justice over them. 4. In that he lays precepts upon
them which are impossible for them to perform, and commands them to abstain
from that which himself forces them to do, and wills them to practice that
which he gives not power, freedom, or sufficient means to practice. We and
our Catholic doctrine, do honor and give due respect to his Justice, 1. In
that, according to us, he rewards all who deserve well, and punishes none but
those who deserve ill. 2. In that he punishes all for their own fault which
they themselves committed, and none for that which himself willed. 3. In that
he created all to be saved, and gave them means sufficient to be saved, in
which he showed his mercy; and punishes with hell those who would not use
those means, in which he showed his Justice. 4. In that he gave precepts, and
made laws easy, gave means to perform them sufficient, and punishes only
those who willingly break them. 5. They and their private spirit derogate from
his omnipotency; 5. From Gods omnipotency.
in that according to their doctrine, he is not able to place one body in two
places in the B. Sacrament; nor two bodies in one place in his nativity,
resurrection, and ascension, nor to draw a Cable rope or camel through a
needles eye, nor by his absolut power to work any more the^ already he has
wrought. We and our Catholic doctrine do attribut to his omnipotency, that he
is able to do all the former, and what more he pleases to do, which is not
either wicked, and so is against his goodness, or not contradictory, and so
implies in it self an impossibility to be done. And in these do the
Protestants and their spirit, by their doctrine, derogate from God and his
Deity, from his goodness, his mercy, his Justice, and his omnipotency, and
impute to him wickedness, cruelty, injustice, and impotency. In all which we
in our doctrine do the contrary.

Secondly, for Christ our blessed Savior, That the Protestant doctrine does
derogate from Christ.
they and their doctrine of the private spirit do dishonor him, and derogate,
1. From his felicity and beatitude in this life, denying him to be viator, and
comprehensor, that is, enduring the pain and miseries of mortal men in his
body, and enjoying the felicity and blessedness of glorious Saints in his
soul. In which we do honor him, 1. From his beatitude.
believing that from the first instant of his co^ception, his soul had in his
body the same blessedness as now it enioyes in heaven by the perfect vision
and fruition of God, though, by dispensation for our redemption, the same did
not redound to the glory of his body till after his resurrection.

2. From his knowledge, they derogate and dishonor him, 2. From his knowledge*
in making him ignorant and defective of knowledge in many things, and as a
scholar to have profited in his book, and learning of sciences and trades as
other children do. In which we give him the honor to have had all the
treasures of knowledge and wisdom, to have understood all the perfection of
all sciences and arts, and to have perfectly conceived all things past,
present, or to come, by a divine infused knowledge from the first instant of
his conception in his mothers womb.

Thirdly, From his primacy, and supremacy over his Church, 3 From his
supremacy, and power.
they derogate and dishonor him, in that they deny him, as a man sensible and
visible, to have been the head and foundation of his Church, and to have had
any perpetual and visible monarchy of the same here on earth. In which we
honor him, believing that as man he is the head of men, of the Church, and of
the visible monarchy of the Church which he established for ever, and that
every knee ought to bow down and adore him as the Savior of it, and that he
has dominion over all by his death and resurrection, and did also leave a
visible Vicegerent after him, by whom we should be governed visibly, as by
himself inuisibly.

Fourthly, from his authority to make laws and judge us, 4. From his authority
in making laws.
they derogat and dishonor him, in that they take from him al power to make
any laws, or give any precepts of true faith, moral life, or good manners for
our instruction and direction; and deny him as a judge, to have exercised any
judgment upon the living and faithful. In which we give him the honor to have
been our law maker, our judge, and to have made a new law of grace (abrogating
the old of Moses) and in it to have prescribed unto us obedience to his
precepts of faith and good life.

4. From his sanctity.
Fifthly, From his Sanctity they derogatiue much, and dishonor him greatly; in
that they call him truly and properly a sinner, a great sinner, and the
greatest sinner of all sinners; who sinned in discurtesy to his mother, in
inconsideration in his actions, in forgetfulness of his function, in
staggering between praising and blaspheming God* between hope and despair,
and in renouncing his salvation, for which he was execrable to God, and cursed
with the damned, being in all these properly a sinner, and not only by the
imputation of our sins to him, as in their opinion even man is just by
imputation of his justice to him, and so as truly sinful as ever any man was
just. All which we abhor as blasphemy, believing that he suffered pains, and
paid thereby the price of our redemption, but was innocent, impolluted,
immaculate, incontaminat, and segregated from all sinners and sinful actions,
bearing the punishment of our sin in his body, but being free from all
imputation of the guilt of sin in his soul.

Sixthly, 6. From his redemption of mankind
From his redemption of mankind they derogate and dishonor him. 1. In that
they deny the virtue of his death, passion, and precious blood to have been any
full satisfaction or redemption of mankind, but only the in^ernal pains and
suffering in his soul to have been accepted as sufficient. 2. In that they
deny the universality and fullness of his redemption to have been offered for
all men, affirming him to have dyed only for the elect, and to have offered or
left no means of redemption for the wicked and reprobat. 3. In that they deny
the effect and efficacy of the same to have extended to the abolishing and
washing away of sin, and to the inward sanctification of the soul by any
inward and inherent grace and justice, which should enable it to keep the
commandments of God, and to avoid mortal offense against God. In all which we
honor him and his redemption, in that, 1. We believe and profess that his
precious blood shed upon the cross, and his death and passion offered up to
God, was a full price, and a perfect redemption from sin. 2. That the same
was a full price, satisfaction, and redemption for all the sins of all
persons in all the world. 3. That the same purchased (of his part) for all
sinners not only are imputative but also an inherent and real justification by
grace, which does wash away the deformity of sin, cure the infirmity of the
soul, and give strength to the keeping of Gods commandments, and to the
avoiding of sin, and so the meriting of a reward at Gods hands.

Seauenthly, from his merit and satisfaction they derogate, and dishonor him,
7. From his merit and satisfaction.
in that they deny him to have by it satisfied the justice of God for any one
sin, or to have merited to himself his own exaltation to glory, or to our
works either any satisfaction for sin, or any merit of reward by his grace.
In all which we honor the same, believing that he fully in justice satisfied,
and offered to God a sufficient price for our sins, that he merited for
himself and his own body the glory of his Resurrection: and to us not only
for our sins a full price and satisfaction, but also for our good works a
virtue by grace both to satisfy in some sort for sin, and to merit a reward
of more grace present, and glory to come.

8. From his corporal passion.
Eighthly, about his corporal death and passion, they shamefully derogate and
dishonor him, in that they affirm he suffered both in body and soul the
pains and torments of Hell, the death of the soul, the separation of the
soul from God, the same infernal and eternal pains which the very Devils
and damned do suffer for the time, and which in rigor are due to sin and all
sinners, which except he had suffered, he had not satisfied for us, nor
sufficiently redeemed us. In all which we do so honor his life and death,
that we attribute to every action and passion of his, even to the least drop of
his blood, that worth and value, arysing of the dignity of his divine person,
that it was sufficient to have satisfied for an infinite world of sins; and
that the pains he suffered were only in the sensible and inferior part of the
soul and body, but did not touch the superior part of his soul; that they
were voluntarily sustained and offerred up to God for us, and accepted by God
for us, as being of more dignity, then the offense of all our sins was of
indignity; whereby he neither suffered, nor needed to suffer, nor could in the
dignity of his person suffer any pains ot hell, but by the pains of the
Cross (though by the tenderness of his coplexion more painful to him then to
any other) did pay a sufficient price, make a full atonement, offer a perfect
satisfaction, and perform the part of a complete Redeemer and Savior for all
mankind* and the sins of all men.

Ninthly, in the certainty of his salvation, they blasphemously derogate from
him, 9. From the certainty of his salvation.
and dishonor him more then themselves, in that they affirm every one of
themselves to be infallibly certain of his salvation, and more certain by his
special faith of it, then by his general faith of the B. Trinity, or
incarnation of Christ; and yet that our B. Savior was fearful, doubtful,
wavering, and uncertain of his salvation, did strugle with the horror of
death, feared to be absorpt up of eternal death, was tormented with the
anxiety of Gods wrath and indignation, and that more then any man ever was, or
could be; in which his horror and desolation consists the sum of their
consolation, as their own words more fully before related do express. In all
which we do so far honor him that we affirm and believe that the pain^s he
suffered, he willingly offered up to God for us, that he was sure and secure
that God his father did always hear him, always love him, always assist
him, always comfort him, that no fear, doubt, wavering, or perturbation did,
or could ever enter into his will or understanding, yea that all that time of
his passion his soul had the perfect vision and fruition of God, and only his
sensible parts endured those pains and torments of the cross.

Tenthly, 10. From his descending to hell.
As for his descending into hell they derogate from it, and dishonor him, in
that they affirm he descended either only to the grave in body, or also to the
lower hell in soul to suffer the pains of it, either before his death on the
cross, or after it in hell; but not to have freed the Patriarchs from Limbus
by the presence of his soul there. We honor it in believing that he descended
in soul further then to the grave (to which he only descended in body,) but
not so far as to suffer the pains of hell in soul, but only to the Limbus
patrum where he gave the Patriarchs there detained present liberty and
fruition of eternal happiness, and afterward carried them with him to the
place of glory, and so triumphed over hell, and led aptiuity Ccaptiue.

Eleuenthly, 11. From his Resurrection and ascension.
From his resurrection and ascension they derogate, and dishonor him both by
denying him the subtility or penetration of his body, whereby he was able to
pass through either the stone of the sepulcher at his resurrection, or the
doors of the house at his entrance to his disciples, or the hardness of the
heavens at his ascension; all which they will have either dissolved, or opened,
or divided. We honor and attribut more dignity to the same, believing that by
the gift of subtility or penetratio^ his body did pierce and pass through the
stone, the doors, and the heavens at his resurrection and ascension (as it did
also his Mothers womb at his nativity) with out any division, dissolution, or
detriment to the nature of either the one or the other; in which also he showed
his subtility, and consequently his impassibility, or immortality.

12. From his adoration and intercession.
Twefthly, From his adoration, and invocation by us as he is now in heaven, they
derogate, and dishonor him in affirming that, as man, he is not to be adored
or inuocated by us. We honor him as man so far that we bow down at the name
of Jesus, praying to him with the blind man, and the Cananean, saying, Son of
David have mercy on us Marc. 10 47. Mat. 15.22. and 20.31
. And fall down with the Mat. 2.11
Sages, and Mat. 28.9.
the women and adore him* In all which and many more, as they by their private
spirit and the doctrine of it, do derogate and take from Christ his honor, his
power, his goodness, his beatitude, his knowledge, his sanctity, his certainty
of salvation, his adoration, and the virtue and power of his passion,
redemption, resurrection, and ascension; so do we in our Catholic doctrine
attribute to same due honor and dignity; and so both in our doctrine and
practice give more honor, praise, power, and glory to God and to Jesus Christ,
then they do either in doctrine or practice.

That the private spirits doctrine does derogate from Saints and Angels. 1.
Their Beatitude.
Thirdly* For the Saints and blessed souls in heaven, they dishonor them, and
take from them. 1. Their state of beatitude, affirming as Luther ^uth. Posti^.
Domini^. 2. post. Trin fol. 286. and tom. 6. in 25. Gen f. 322. tom. 4. in 9.
Eccl. c. 36. and 37. and in 2. Joan. Calu. in 2. Pet. 2.4. in Math. 22.23. in
Math. 27.43. in Luc. 16.12. 3. Inst. 25.6. Bu^an. loc 39 p. 44^. Dan. contro.
7. p. 1265. 2. Their sanctity.
and Calvin do, that they yet sleep, and neither know what we do, nor yet
enjoy any present glory and beatitude till the day of Judgment. 2. Their
perfection of Sanctity, in affirming, as Calvin Calu. in Coloss. 1.10. 3. I^st.
14.16. and 17.9. Conc. 16. in Job. page 68.
does both of Angels and Saints, that their obedience is imperfect, that their
justice is defective, and does not satisfy God, that their works require
pardon, and that in them is folly, 3. Their power.
vanity and frailty. 3. Their power of doing miracles by the gift of God, which
Beza in 1. Cor. 16. Vrsin. Catech. q. 99 p 944. Piscat. thes^l. 2. page 373.
Perk. in 3. Gal. 3. 4. Their difference of glory.

5. Their esteem with God.

6. Their knowledge of us.

7. Their charity to us.

8. Their honor by us. Luth Postil. in festo S. Joan. f. 378. and Ferijs
eiusde^ f. 9. die Epip. fol. 138. Calu. in 4. Joan. 10.

9. Their custody and help of us. That the private spirit does tak from the
word of God. 1. All the unwritten word. 2*21 parts of the written word.


Beza, Piscator, Vrsinus, and Perkins should to be a virtue proper only to God,
not communicated to any creature man or Saint. 4. Their difference and degree
or honor; affirming that all are equal in glory, beatitude, and reward, and
that no laurels or crowns of accidental beatitude are due to Martyrs,
Confessors, or Virgins. 5. Their respect and esteem with God, denying that
God does either apply in any sort their merits to us, or does help and respect
us for their prayers. 6. Their knowledge of us, and our affairs on earth;
denying that they hear, understand, or know us, or any thing we do here on
earth. 7. Their charity toward us; affirming they neither at our
intercessious solicit, or pray to God for us, nor offer up any petitions, and
miseries of ours to God. 8. Their honor, and invocation by us; denying it to
be lawful to worship them, to honor the^, to invoke them, or so much as,
says Luther, to imitate and follow their example. 9. The custody and ^uition
of Angels over us, and their hierarchies and orders in heaven; denying or at
least doubting of the custody of our Angel guardian, and the difference of al
Hierarchies and orders among Angels. In all which we and our doctrine on the
contrary, do attribute to them perfect and present beatitude in their souls,
complete obedience in their performing the will of God, upright Sanctity in all
their actions, extraordinary power in working miracles, notable difference of
degrees of glory, eminent knowledge in understanding our prayers, excellent
charity in making intercession for us, and due honor and veneration in giving
them adoration, invocation, and imitation, befitting both the Saints for their
prayers for us, and the Angels for their custody of us.

Fourthly, For the word of God, they abuse it and take, 1. From i^, one first
and principal part of it, to wit, all the unwritten word, or which is divine,
unwritten tradition. 2. From the written word, they chop and cut off from the
old Testament fourteen pieces or parts, and some of them from the new
Testament, seven whole books from the Canon of scripture. 3. The true
translation.
3. For the translation of scripture, they reject the ancient, and follow every
nation, every congregation, and every person a new translation which best
pleases them, 4. The certainty of the sense.
and thereby leave no certainty of the verity of any. 4. For the sense of
scripture, they contemn that which the spirit of God did inspire to the
ancient Fathers, Councels, and Church, and follow that which every man's private
spirit suggests, and thereby follow not the meaning of the spirit of God, 5. The
integrity of faith.
but that of their own spirit. 5. For their faith grounded upon scripture,
they believe only those points which their spirit finds in that part,
translation, and sense which they chose; and thereby make an uncertain,
imperfect, and mained kind of faith and religion. 6. For their Judge and means
to try which is scripture, 6. The authority to judge of it.
and which is true sense of it, they admit not any infallible Judgment either
of Church, or of Councils, or of Pastors; but leave to every man to choose
himself what he will believe, and to judge and follow whom he pleases in his
belief; whereby they can have neither any unity in faith, not any certainty of
scripture, of scripture sense. We in our doctrine do admit for the word of God,
not only that which was written in paper, but also that which was delivered in
preaching by the Apostles. We receive, without any addition or diminution, that
Canon which the ancient Church twelve hundred years ago received; that
translation which for as many ages has been approved; that sense which the
ancient Fathers, Counsels, and Church ever since Christ allowed; that Judge
which has an infallible warrant from God to judge truly and impartially of the
Canon, the text, the translation, the sense, all whatsoever is doubtful. And
all our practice is to follow the spirit of God speaking in the ancient
Fathers, Councels, and Church, by which we are secure from error or falsehood
about the scripture, The private spirit derogates from the Church of God. 1.
The authority.
and sense of it.

Fifthly, For the Church of God, they with their private spirit dishonor it and
derogate from it. 1. From the power and authority of it, as not having,
according to them, any visible head and governor assisted with the holy Ghost
to direct and govern it, and to judge of all causes and controversies in it,
and so make it headless and ungoverned. We honor it in acknowledging it to be
a visible and perpetual Monarchy, with a settled and spiritual both Governor
and government, having in it an infallible authority to judge, and decide all
causes and controversies. 2. They derogate from the visibility, perpetuity, and
infallibility of the same, 2. The visibility.
making it not only subject to error and corruption; but to have erred and
perished, or at least become invisible for many ages. We honor it, in
believing that it cannot err, fail, perish, become invisible, or be corrupted
in faith, but that it is the pillar of truth, against which, assisted by the
holy Ghost the gates and power of hell and heresy cannot prevail. 3. 3. The
marks.
They derogate from the unity, sanctity, universality, and succession of the
same, as notes and marks to distinguish it from all other congregations, which
they reject, and admit not. We reverence and respect it as one, holy, Catholic
and Apostlike Church, which no other congregation is, or can be. 4. 4. The
continuance.
They derogate from the uncontrollable authority and stability of the decrees
of Counsels, and from the infallible testimony of the vnanime consent of the
Fathers and Doctors of the Church, both which they at their pleasure censure
and condemn. We receive, embrace, and follow them as guids and directours to
truth, and as witnesses and testimonies of truth; believing that which they
believe, and rejecting that which they before rejected. 5. They derogate from
the splendor and beauty of the Church in the state of Prelates, 5. The beauty
and magnificence.
in the single life of the Clergy, in the retiredness of the Religious
persons, in the ornaments of the Churches, and in the variety of so many orders
and professions, all which they reject and condemn as needless or
superstitious. We reverence and honor the same, as tending to the external
honor of God, and the magnificence of his Church, thereby making the Church
beautiful as the Moon, elect as the Sun, and well ordered as an Army of men.
And to conclude, they make the Church the mystery of iniquity, a whore, a
harlot, 6. The purity and incorruption of doctrine.
and a strumpet, the whore of Babylon, drunken with all abominable filth of
superstition, and abomination of idolatry and antichristianity, with which she
has made all the Christian world, all Kings and Emperors, and that not for
one or two ages, but for seven, on ten, or twelve, or fourteen ages
(according to diverse opinions) drunk with the same cup of superstition,
abomination, idolatry, and antichristianity, and make it a body consisting of
persons, whoeuen the best, and purest, are in all parts, and in every action
stained, impure, sinful, unjust and wicked. We do believe and confess it
to be the kingdom, the city, the house of God, the spouse of Christ, the
temple of the holy Ghost, the pillar of truth which Christ has purchased and
washed with his precious blood, made immaculate, incontaminate, and unspotted,
pure, holy, and perfect before him, which no error of superstition or idolatry
can possess, no power of Pagans, or Heretics, or Schismatikes or other,
wicked Christians can suppress, no subtilty of heresy, infidelity, or Satan
himself can supplant, destroy, or extinguish.

Sixhtly, For the sacraments, they from the number of seven do curtaile five,
The private spirit derogates from the Sacraments. 1 The number. 2 The effect of
Baptism* 3. The substance of the Eucharist.

and leave only two, and from these two they take away from the one, that is
baptism, 1. The effect and virtue, making it only a sign or seal, no cause
or instrument of grace, and of no more virtue then the baptism of S. John
Baptist.. 2. They take away all necessity of it, making it not needful for
infants, whom they will have saved by the parents faith without it. From the
other, that is the Eucharist, they take away both the fruit and the substance
of it, making it not the real body and blood of Christ; but only a bare sign
and remembrance of it. Not any sacrifice offered to God but only a Sacrament
signing or sealing grace; and thereby rob Christ of all adoration by it as a
Sacrament, and of all subjection or acknowledgment of dominion by it as a
sacrifice; and they rob the Church of all benifit and comfort both by the
Sacrament and sacrifice. We do admit for several states of persons, several
sorts of benefits, by seven several kinds of Sacraments; all as instruments
of Gods power, causing grace which assists all sorts of persons in their
several states and functions; and all excel the Sacraments of the old law.
For the Sacrament of baptism, we believe it to be a means of regeneration
from original sin, by which all sin and punishment due to sin both
original and actual is fully remitted, and by which all persons are admitted
into the mystical body of Jesus Christ in his holy Church, and made capable of
the benefit of the rest of the Sacraments. And for the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, we believe that not only i^ conteines the fountain of Grace; but
also is offered to God as a sacrifice, to apply the virtue of his sacrifice on
the cross, for the remission of our sins, by which is given much honor to
God, and received great benefit by Gods Church, and much comfort to the
faithful both living and dead.

Seauenthly, for Faith, they and their private spirit admit many sorts of
faith, and in that none at all; The private spirit does derogate from Faith. 1
The unity of it.
and make as many faiths as there are private spirits in particular persons,
and in that destroy all unity of faith. We admit one holy Catholicall and
Apostolical faith, one in all, and general to all, who in all are directed by
one spirit of Gods Church. They admit a new and new-deuised faith, never
received by any but in some one or other point by condemned heretics, 2. The
antiquity of it.
in whom it was condemned. We receive an ancient and ever believed faith, ever
received and approved by general Cou^cells, ancient Fathers, and holy Saints in
Gods Church. They reject the grounds of faith, as Scripture, Traditions,
Church, 3. The grounds of it.
Counsels, and Fathers. We admit, believe and rely upon them all, as grounds
and foundations whereon we ground and build our belief. They admit none of the
necessary means of faith, neither any common revelation of God, 4. The means
of it.
but private of their own spirit; nor any proposition of Church, but their
own fancies; nor any credible testimony and motives of persuasion, to make
their belief probable; nor any habit of faith, to assist the understanding in
believing, nor any pious affection to incline their will to assent, nor any
assent by a divine, supernatural, and Christian faith; but by a general and
(as they call it) a fained and diabolical faith, by which they believe the
articles of their faith. We do settle, and rely, by our faith (in respect of
the object revealed) upon the revelation of God, the proposition of Church, the
motives of credibility; and in respect of persons believing, upon the infused
gift of faith, the pious inclination of the will by grace, and the infallible
assent caused by the former divine helps, and grounded upon the former
infallible foundations, as before is at large proved. 5. The purity of it.
They admit into the unity of their faith all heretics and schismatics,
collecting and scraping from them all rags and scraps of broken and condemned
opinions and heresies, and yet will not admit into the unity of their invisible
Church any sinners, wicked or reprobate persons, but all and only the elect and
predestinate. We reject from communion of all faith with us, all condemned
heretics and Schismatics, and condemn, with the ancient Church, them and all
their condemned opinions; and admit into the external communion of our Church
all those who not cut off by excommunication, agree with us in unity of Faith,
that therein their life and manners may be reformed and amended by the example
of others by virtue of Sacraments, and preaching of the Church and Pastors of
the same. In all which, they and their spirit take from faith all unity in it,
all grounds of it, all means to it, all supernatural virtue in it, all
dignity, all certainty, all necessity, and all virtue and efficacy following
upon it; and so leave no more but an human, feigned, and diabolical faith, or
a shadow of faith, and no theological divine faith at all. All which is
contrary in our doctrine of faith.

The private spirit derogates from man.

1. A freewil


Eighthly, for Man, they by their private spirit, derogate, and take away from
him, 1. All freedom and liberty of will, natural to him, as following upon his
being a reasonable soul, and distinguishing him from brute beasts. We
attribute that freedom by which he concurs with Gods grace, and his motions to
his own good, and is the author of his own evil. 2. All infused habits.
2. They take from him all infusion and habits of grace, which do give life,
beauty, and ability to the soul. All which we admit both of faith, hope,
charity, and all moral virtues to enable and assist us, in the exercise of all
piety. 3. They take from him all inward justification, adoption, 3. All
inherent justice.
and perfection, and leave him only an exterior imputation of the same,
supposing God to account and impute him just, but to leave him sinful and
unjust. We admit in man an inward, real, and true justification,
sanctification, or adoption by grace, which inwardly infused and remaining,
does expel and t^ke away sin, renew and revive our soul, and adopt us
heirs to the kingdom of heaven, by which God making us pure and just, does
therefore account and repute us such. 4. They leave a man after his
justification, 4 Alinward purity.
impure, unjust, sinful, and unclean in all the works of his soul, and in
every action of the same, making all the best works proceeding from him to be
sinful, and hateful to God, and deserving eternal damnation, and so leave
him destitute of any merit or reward. We make him pure, just, and clean by
grace, which does give life to the soul, as the soul does give life to the
body, and therewith does impart to it motion, virtue, beauty and power to do
good, to please God, and to merit a reward at his hands; by which man,
increasing in grace and merit, does also increase in perfection and glory. 5.
They take from man all benefit, all necessity, all possibility of doing good
works, of keeping Gods law, 5. All necessity or possibility of good works
of abstayning from sin, and thereby make him sinful as well in doing good
as evil, as well in refraining as committing evil. We attribute to him
ability to avoid all sins, possibility, by grace, to keep Gods laws, as easy
and sweet, and to do not only works of precepts, which are commanded, but also
works of counsel, and supe^erogation, more then are commanded. 6. All benefit
of prayer
They take from man all benefit of prayer, as of things either needless,
which otherwise are certain and sure to be obtained; or hopeless, as
impossible to be done or obtained by us, and thereby derogate from all virtue,
and fervor of prayer and devotion. We encourage men to prayer by affirming
that God has made our prayer a mean by which he will, and without which he
will not dispose many of his benefits to us, and that therefore he will have us
pray, that by our prayer we may obtain. 7. They take from man all fear, care,
and labor for his salvation, 7. All care and labor for his salvation.
by their assurance, that only faith iustifyeth and saves, and that says once
had cannot be lost; and make him idle, careless and presumptuous of himself
by their securing him by special faith, of his justification and salvation. We
do teach him, by our doctrine, with holy Scripture, not to be secure of the
propitiation of his sin, but with fear and trembling to work his salvation,
by good works, to make his vocation sure, and therefore to live piously, to
walk warily, to watch diligently, and to prevent carefully Satan and his
craft. In all which they rob man, and leave him so bare of all benefits
either of nature or grace, that they leave him neither liberty of will, nor
ability or concurrence to do good, nor infused grace and gifts to assist him
in good, to arm him against sin, to give due honor to God, to deserve
reward with God, to adopt him the child of God, or to give him any
encouragement in walking the way of God, in treading the path of virtue, and
avoiding the allurements to sin, and the snare of Satan. All which are
contrary in us, and in our Catholic doctrine.

Ninthly, For Sin, they and their private spirit make not only all actions
sins, but all sins mortal, and so all actions mortal sins, The private
spirit takes from sin. 1. All difference of mortal and venial.
and all, as well good as bad, deserving damnation; and thereby in a sort
dissuade as much from good as from bad actions, and make men desperate of doing
good, and prone to do all bad. We make of works some good, and some bad, and
of bad some mortal sins, depriving of grace and glory, some venial not
depriving of grace and yet diminishing the fervor of grace, and thereby do
persuade men in due sort, to avoid all sin, chiefly mortal sin, and
encourage them to do good and animate them to increase in grace, goodness, and
perfection. They make the avoiding of bad or the doing of good works, the
keeping of Gods commandments, 2. All possibility to be avoided.
or the performing his will to be impossible, and thereby disharten men from
attempting either to keep his precepts, or to obey his will, or to please him,
in any work or action. We believe his yoke to be sweet and his burden easy,
and the obeying of his commandments and avoiding of sin by grace to be
possible and facile; and thereby encourage all to labor that they may obey his
precepts, and perform his holy will and pleasure. 3* All imputation to
punishment in some persons.
They make no bad works to be imputed to the elect, and no good works to escape
punishment in the reprobate: and thereby make the one fearlesse and careless of
any bad, and the other hopeless and desperate to do any good. We make good
works in all to be good, and in the good to be meritorious; and bad works in all
to be bad, and to deserve punishment, and deprive men of Gods favor, till by
repentance they be washed and pardoned; and thereby inuit all to do good, and
to avoid bad, and repent them of bad. They hold that no sin in the faithful
can deprive him of faith, which once had can by no sin be lost; and thereby
lull men in a security of salvation, and allure them to a liberty of sin,
which they believe cannot deprive them of Gods favor. We hold that grace once
had may be lost, and is lost by mortal sin; and thereby warn men carefully
to keep Gods grace, and diligently to prevent sin before it be committed, and
presently to report after it be committed.

Tenthly, For good Works, they and their private spirit hold, that no good
works are good, just, perfect, The private spirit does derogate from good
works in general. 1. Their merit.
or meritorious, yea that none are necessary or possible, but that al are
sinful; and thereby make it bootlesse and needless to strive to do them. We
hold, that good works are not only good, but may be perfect and meritorious of
an eternal reward, whereby we animate all to the working of them. They hold
that co^tinency and virginity is no virtue, but a suggestion of Satan, wicked,
diabolical, and a rebellion against God in religious persons; and that
matrimony is a state more noble perfect, and spiritual then it, and thereby
induce all to marry. We hold that single life, chastity, and continency is a
virtue more perfect, noble, and holy then marriage, and therefore is preferred
by God, as more spiritual, before marriage, and more to be esteemed by men is
more honorable. They hold that fasting and punishing the body by
mortification, watching, and discipline is no virtue, is needless, and no part
of penance or satisfaction, but a killing of ones self; whereby they withdraw
men from austerity and strictness of life. We hold that it being used
discreetly and in measure, is good and pious, as commended in the old and new
Testament, and practiced by all Saints and holy persons; and thereby animate all
to it. They hold that the forsaking the world and living in a retired
Religious life, is a mere human tradition, and an unprofitable will worship of
God. We hold that it is a mean of perfection, and an imitation of an
Apostolical life; and therefore commendable in them who can undertake it. They
hold that vows of perfection are a curiosity, presumption, pride, contrary to
God, and not to be used by Christians. We hold that to vow obedience, poverty,
and chastity are grateful to God, and great helps and means to perfection, as
counseled in holy scripture, and laudable in all the professors of them. In
all which as they take from all sin all punishment due to it, all offense to
God inseparable from it, and all malice annexed to it; as they take away all
difference by which one sin is damnable rather then another, and all fear
which may bridle any from committing sin (in which they make men fearlesse of
sin, and careless to commit it:) so they take from good works in general
all goodness and participation of good, al justice and uprightness before
God, all value and dignity by grace, all benefit and grace of merit, all hope
or comfort of pleasing God, all necessity of doing them, and all possibility of
doing them without offense of God. And from good works in particular they take
away also from all vows their obligation to be performed from chastity all
possibility to be observed, from fasting, penance, and mortification all
necessity to be used, from prayer and devotion all means to obtain that they
ask, and from charity all efficacy to justify before God, and from all and
every one in their proper kind all power and necessity to do them, all courage
and alacrity to do them hopefully. Al which is contrary in us, and our
Catholic doctrine.

The private spirit does derogate from heaven 1. The reward of glory.
Eleauenthly, From the glory of heaven, and the joys of it, they and their
private spirit do derogate, in affirming. 1. That neither any reward is justly
given in heaven for any good done upon earth, nor any crown of justice in that
life for suffering of injustice in this, nor any laurel of Martyrs,
Confessors, or Virgins there, for the confessing the name of Christ. 2. That
in heaven are no differences of mansions, or diversity of degres of glory, 2.
The difference of glory.
and that all are like and al equal in glory and beatitude even to the
Apostles, and the mother of God; whereby they remove a strong motive to draw men
to labor for perfection in this life, that they may attain to a higher place
of glory in the next. We, and our Catholic doctrine do believe, 1. That God
does justly reward in heaven all our good deeds done on earth, and does give
crowns of glory for our sufferings for him, and bestow variety of glorious
laurels by gifts of accidental beatitude for our glorifying him in any eminent
manner of perfection. 2. That as stars, They take away from hell.

1. The difference of place.


so Saints do differ in clarity having their several mansions, places, and
glory, according to their degrees of grace and merit: whereby al are encouraged
to aim at perfection, in hope of so high a remuneration.

For hell, and the place and pains of it, they and their private spirit take
from it, 1. The difference of places, as Limbus patrum, puerorum, and
Purgatory. 2. The material and real fire of hell; denying, as many do, Calu.
in Matthew. 3.12. Danaeus controu. 4. 11. page 210.

Vorst. in Anti-bellar. page 269.

Perk. upon 2 Apoc. page 9. Lobec. disp. 6. page 133. 3. The suffering of the
souls.

4. The local place of hell

5. All fear of sin for hell.


, all true fire, 2. The fire of hell.
and admitting only a metaphorical and imaginary fire. 3. The suffering of
souls in it before the day of judgment. 4. The corporal place or prison of
hell, admitting only a torment of conscience before the day of judgment Luth.
ser. de diuit and paup. tom. 7. fol. 267. in cap. 9. Eccles. tom. 4. fol. 38.
Postil ^^ Domin. 4. post. Tri^it. fol. 286. Bucer. and Catheis. Hedalb. apud
Schusselb. theol. Calu art. 27. fol. 145. Brent. apud Hosp. part. 2. anno 1562.
fol. 308. and 230. and apud Bullinger. Lobec. disp. 6 p. 133. Perk. in c. 2.
Apoc. col. 90. Tylenus ^yntag. c. 6. p. 69. Call. Inst. 16.6.
. 5. The lawfulness to avoid sin for fear of hell, which they make a sin
and unlawful; by all which they make the pains and torments of hell to be
less feared, and sins for the fear of them less avoided. We and our
Catholic doctrine do hold, 1. The difference of places according to
different estates and deserts, as the Limbus puetoru^, for children dying
without Baptism, the Limbus patrum for the faithful dying before Christ, and
Purgatory for faithful dying without full satisfaction. 2. The local place,
and the material fire, and the real suffering of the present pains of hell
by the souls of the damned, and withal, that it is a work good, though not
the best, to avoid sin for fear of hell. In all which we extol the justice
of Luth. in 15. Genesis tom. 6. f. 321. sermon. de diuit. and Lazar^ tom. 7. f. 268.
Postil. in Domin. 2. post. Trin f. 268. in 2. c. Joan. f. 418. Calu. 4. Inst.
25.6. in 2. Pet. 2.4. Scult^t. 1. part. medul. in Tertul. cap. 42. page 305.
God mixed with mercy, in punishing al sorts according to their deserts, and
deter men from liberty of sin for fear of punishment in hell.

And thus we have in this second part confuted this private spirit, which in the
former part we proved to be the sole and whole ground of the Protestant faith
and salvation; 1. By authorities of holy Scripture. 2. By testimony of ancient
Fathers. 3. By reasons drawn from the difficulty of discerning spirits. 4. By
reasons drawn from a right interpreter of Holy Scripture. 5. By reasons drawn
from an infallible judge of controversies of faith. 6. By reasons drawn from
the nature and certainty of faith. 7. By Circular absurdities to which this
spirit leads. 8. By Doctrinall absurdities which follow upon it, and the
doctrine of it against Faith, and the Creed; against Hope and the Pater noster;
and against good life, moral virtues, the ten Commandments, and all laws of
God* Church, or Commonwealth. In which also we have made plain how this their
doctrine, grounded upon this their private spirit, does derogate from God, and
the Blessed Trinity, whom it makes the author of all sin, a sinner, liar,
dissembler, and tyrant, the only sinner, and a greater sinner then either the
Devil or man; does derogate from Jesus Christ, and his birth, life, passion,
and resurrection, whom it dishonours in making him neither Phisitia^, Lawyer,
Judge, Priest, or perfect Redeemer, or Savior, but one ignorant, impotent,
sinful, and damned; does derogate from the Church of God triumphant in
heaven, which it dishonours in taking from it knowledge and charity in Saints,
and Angels, and honor and reverence to them; and from the Church militant on
earth, which it dishonours, in taking from it all authority, visibility,
universality, perpetuity, or extancy, and being upon earth so many ages. How it
derogates from faith, which it dishonours in taking from it all grounds,
whereon it is to be builded, and all means whereby it is to be attained, and in
making it contradictory, rash, presumptuous, sinful, and preiudicious to all
Hope and Charity. How it derogates from man, whom it disables and depriues of
all Free Will, of all inherent grace, of all good life and works, of all
possibility to obey Gods Commandments, to abstain from sin, to merit any
reward. How it derogates from all moral virtues and good life, from which by
many principles it does withdraw, and withal does draw to all vice, and
wickedness, does give the reins to all Epicurean liberty and looseness. In
all which the spirit of our Catholic Church, and the doctrine of it is showed
to be contrary, and to give du^ honor to God, to Christ, to his Saints,
Angels, Church, to Faith, Sacraments, and the rest. And to be a means to
encourage all Christians to the practice of all virtue and perfection, and to
avoid all sin and wickedness. All this we have carefully and painefully
labored to perform in this second Part of the treatise of that pri-Spirit.

THE PROTESTANTS OBJECTIONS, and proofs, taken out of Scripture, for the
defense of their private Spirits authority to inrerpret Scripture, and judge of
Controversies; proposed and answered. CHAP. X.
Of certain observations, profitable for the solution of Objections. SECT. 1.
HITHERTO we have battered, and that I hope sufficiently, the maine fabric of
this imaginary edifice of the Protestant private spirit. It remains only for
this second Part, that we raze, and demolish the foundation upon which this
their conceit of their private spirits authority is built and erected, that is,
that we solue the reasons, or rather objections, taken out of holy Scripture,
upon which they ground their conceit* for which we may note, The true efffect
of the working of the spirit of God declared.
that as our Catholic doctrine does not deny either the being or permanency of
the Spirit of God in every faithful both person and Doctor (for all faithful
by the spirit of God have faith) or the effect and operation of the same, in
assisting the^ in the finding out of the true sense of holy scripture (for
neither are the faithful prohibited from all reading, nor the learned debarred
from all interpreting of holy scripture;) so there is a great difference
between the effect and operation of this spirit in the Protestant and
Catholic, as well simple as learned, as both do challenge it, and rely upon
it. For as (for better illustration, we may observe in a natural body, and the
spirit or soul of man, By the similitude of a natural body. 1. Cor. 12.12
in which comparison we imitate. S. Paul) the soul or spirit does give
information, or operation to the whole body, and every part thereof, yet* so
that every member has not every operation, all members have not one action;
but the head one, as to judge; Romans 12.4*
the hands another, as to work; the feet another, as to walk; and the mouth
is to receive, the belly to contain, The spirit gives to every one his proper
operation.
the stomach to digest the meat; and so it is proper to the eye to see, to the
ear to hear, and to neither to discourse and reason, which belongs only to
the brain: so in the spiritual body of the Church, and the faithful members
of it, the spirit of God does assist all, and every one in particular, Romans
12.5.
as well the meanest as the greatest, as well the most simple as the most
learned, Who are many, but one body in Christ: yet so, that as every member is
different one from another, so the operation of every one is different and not
the same, but as some are Lay, some Ecclesiastical persons, some secular, some
Religious, some simple, some learned, Ephesians. 4.7. Romans 12.3. Romans 12.6.
some common people, some Pastors and Prelates, so to every one of us is given
grace according to the measure of the donation of Christ; according to the
measure of faith, and to every one for his profit, that having all gifts
according to the grace which is given to us, 1. Cor. 7.20.
every one may remain in the vocation, in which he is called, whereupon all are
not Prophets, all are not Doctors, all are not Evangelists: All are not Judges
of faith, and interpreters of holy Scripture, Ephesians. 4.11.
though all have the spirit, but God, dividing to every one as he will, 1. Cor*
12.21
gives to some the spirit to hear and obey, to others to direct and command,
to some the spirit to labor and work by practical offices, to others to
contemplate and study by speculatiue functions, ^. Cor. 12.21
yet to all so, and in that manner, that as every member has need of another,
for the eye cannot say to the hand, I stand in no need of thy help: so every
one member has his gift, and the use and operation of it, for the benefit of
the whole body, with d^pendance and subordination to the whole, and according
to the order and proportion of the whole, that as the necessity and conueniency
of the whole body does require; so the operation and function of the part is
accommodated and applied: and so all the parts and members of the Church, being
by one spirit combined and united together as members of one body, and in
unity of one hody, do every one believe as they are directed by the head, and
do proceed in all with subordination to the head, and work in all for the use
and benefit of the whole, suffer for the defense of the whole; and so by a
communion both with themselves, and with the whole do all labor for the whole,
conserve the whole, and keep still an union and communion with the whole, and
are directed according to the faith, the rule, the reason, and the Judgment or
direction of the whole body or Church of Christ. As long therefore as every
member, and his spirit has this direction, subordination, and union with the
whole body of the Church and the spirit of it; so long does it prooced in order
and unity, and so far it is agreeable to the spirit of God directing his holy
spouse the Church: but when this spirit does begin to be singular of it
self, to devise a new doctrine, to teach otherwise then the rule of faith has
prescribed, or to assume the authority of a new master; When it deuides it
self from the spirit of Gods Church, and does oppose it self against it, or
extol it self above it: when it will not be subject and subordinate to it but
does erect a Cathedra of authority of its own, or an opinion of doctrine of its
own against it; then it is an evident sign that it is not a spirit of unity
and concord, but of dissension and division, and so not an inspiration of God
to be embraced, but a suggestion of satan to be rejected.

Out of which rule may be observed the difference between a Catholic and a
Protestant spirit in expounding of scripture, and withal, The different manner
of the spirits operations in catholics from Protestants.
the weakness or rather impertinency of the Protestant objections for their
manner of interpretation of scripture by this their spirit. For, first we
distinguish between them, who without offense lawfully may expound, and who by
authority have warrant infallibly to expound holy scripture. Of the former
sorts are all faithful Christians who having understanding sufficient and a
pious intention, do with humility begin, and according to the rule of faith
proceed in seeking out the right sense of Scripture, and so none, who are thus
able, and thus proceed, are barred from either reading, or expounding to their
own comfort the Holy Scripture, as our adversaries do falsely calumniate us. Of
the later sort, are the Pastors and Prelates of the Church, who having lawful
ordination and succession, In the persons who have authority.
and continuing in unity and subordination, do either deliver the sense of
Scripture, as it is taught by holy Church, or else confirm and explicate any
doctrine of faith when they are collected in a general Council. And these,
thus using the lawful means, and observing the usual rule of faith, have
authentical warrant, by the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, that they
cannot err in delivering any sense of scripture as a ground of faith and
belief. The Protestants do give not only liberty, but also authority to all,
not only Pastors and Prelates, but also Artificers and common people, as well
unlearned as learned, to frame to themselves such a firm assent to this or
that (seeming to them infallibly true) sense of holy Scripture (every one
according to his own preiudicate conceit or private spirit) that thereupon
they dare adventure the certainty of their Faith, and the hope of their
salvation.

Secondly, we make a difference between a sense of scripture produced in the
Schools, In the articles of faith of which exposition is given.
to prove or confirm a school question, and a sense declared ex Cathedra to
ground an article of faith, or between a preachers conceit delivered in the
pulpit to exhort to good life and manners, and a doctrine proposed by the
Church, as revealed by God, and necessary to be believed. In which for the
former, we give a liberty to any preacher to frame out of his own conceit any
sense which (not being opposite to true faith) may move the auditory to piety
and good life: but for the later we confine the ranging liberty of the wit,
Vincent. Lyr. cap. 27.
and invention, even of the Doctors and Pastors in Gods Church, and
prescribe, as faith Vincentius Lyrin. that* They teach that which is delivered
to them, not which is invented by them; that which they received, not that
which they devised; that which is of public tradition; not of private
usurpation; that of which they are not authors, but keepers; not beginners,
but followers; not leaders, but lead. In which cunningly caruing, faithfully
placing, and wisely adorning, like another Beezeler, the precious pearls of
divine faith, by adding splendor, grace, and beauty, they are to illustrate
more clearly that which was believed more obscurely; and to deliver to
posterity more fully explicated, that which by their forefathers, being not
understood, was with reverence believed. Always so teaching that which they
learned, Cap. 28.
that they teach after a new manner, but not a new doctrine. That is, as
afterward he says; That they interpret the divine Canon according to the
tradition of the whole Church, and the rules of Catholic faith, that is,
Universality, Antiquity, and Consent; and if any part do rebel against the
whole, or nouelty oppose antiquity, or if dissent of a few control the
consent of all, or the most, then m^st they prefer the integrity of the whole
before the corruption of a part, the veneration of antiquity before
profanation of nouelty, and the generality of a Council, before the temerity
of a few. In the points of faith expounded.


The Protestants give a liberty, by the privilege of their spirit, to every
not only Preacher, but private person, to expound the most difficult and
important places of Scripture, namely of the Apocalypse, and S. Paul's Epistles,
not only for the schools in scholasticall questions, or in pulpit for
exhortations to good life, but in deepest articles, and greatest controversies
of Faith, every one as his spirit shall suggest, and thereupon they direct them
to ground their faith and the salvation of their own soul, and of many others
who rely upon them. Vincent. Lyr.
Whereby, as says Vincentius Lyrinensis, They make it a solemn practice to
delight in profane novelties, and to loath all decrees of antiquity; and by
making ostentation of a false opinion of knowledge, do make shipwreck of all
faith.

Thirdly, the Spirit of a Catholic will not presume to expound any text of
scripture contrary to that sense which either the rule of faith, or the
practice of the Church, In the means or directions by which it is expounded.
or the decree of a Council, or the consent of Fathers has received as true
and authentical, but in all will receive and follow that which is determined
and decreed in the^. The Protestant spirit will censure, reject, and condemn
any sense, though never so generally received, or strongly confirmed by all
authority of any Church, Tradition, Council, or Fathers, and devise a new one
of his own invention, and thereby will build a new faith and religion, which it
persuades the followers to be the only way to truth and life.

Fourthly, the spirit of every Catholic will deliver his own interpretation
only as probable, In the infallibility or certainty of their exposition.
and submit himself to the censure and judgment of the spirit of the Catholic
Church, captiuating with S. Paul, his understanding to obedience of Faith. The
Protestants spirit will avouch their interpretation as certain, infallible,
and of Faith; and all with that obstinacy, that no reason or authority shall
remove them from it, or alter their opinion in it.

Fifthly, the spirit of a Catholic, being settled and grounded in a certainty
of Catholic and Apostolic faith, In the grou^ding ones faith upon this
exposition.
will expound Scripture according to the rule of the same, for the illustration
or confirmation of the same faith, as it is generally received: but will not
ground himself; and his belief in his own exposition, nor persuade and
introduce a new belief upon the same. The Protestant spirit will ground it
self, and his first belief, upon his own exposition, and by the same
persuade others to forsake their old faith, and to follow a new, and so change
the ancient religion, for a novel opinion grounded upon a new exposition of
any text of Scripture, framed according to the fantasy of the private spirits
conceit. And thus though Catholic Doctors and Pastors have the spirit of God
to expound holy Scripture, as much and more then the Protestants have, yet they
use and apply it either to schoole-questions and manners only, or as probable
and credible only; or if to doctrine of faith, they apply it, either to
illustrate and confirm their faith, or if to ground and settle it, they square
it according to the rule of faith, the practice of the ancient Church, the
decrees of Counsels, and the consent of Fathers. All which the Protestant
Doctor, in the settling and resolution of his Faith, reiects, and relies his
faith upon an exposition of scripture grounded only upon his own proper and
private conceit.

The objections answered. SECT II.
THE Objections which the Protestants Luther, Melancthon, Protestants
objections, for their private spirits authority, answered
Brentius, Magdeburgenses, Musculus, Whitaker, and other Protestants do usually
make for the power and authority of this their private spirit to expound
scripture, are drawn some from, those places which affirm the interpretation
of scripture to be a gift, and that gratis, and freely bestowed: others from
those places which require reading, prayer or meditation in every one, for the
obtaining of this gift. Of the first sort are these and such like.

First, they object those places where the gift of Romans 12.6. 1. Cor.
12.11.1.14.14
Prophecy, or interpretation of speeches, is attributed to the operation of one
and the same spirit, which deuides to every one as it will. Where also
Prophecy, that is, interpretation of scripture and preaching, is given to the
Faithful if all do prophecy. Every 1. Cor. 14 24. Verse. 26. Verse. 29. Verse.
31.
one has a Psalm, has a revelation has a tongue, has an interpretation.
Let Prophets two or three speak, and the rest judge. You may all, one by one
prophecy, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted. Therefore every one who
has the spirit and grace of God, has the gift to interpret scripture. To
which is answered 1. That in all those places S. Paul speaks of gifts
extraordinary, Gifts extraordinary and gratis given.
and gratis given for the time, such as are the gift of languages, the curing
of diseases, foretelling things to come, and interpreting of obscure
revelations, or mysteries, which were bestowed only for a time, and as
personal upon the Apostles; and first belieuers, with whom they decayed and
ceased: not of any gifts ordinary and general which are to be permanent in
the Church, and common to all faithful. Therefore these places can make nothing
for every faithful persons power and ability to expound scripture, Not given
every one to all persons
and that so certainly, that upon it he may build his faith and salvation. 2.
These gifts are not given any one of them to all persons, nor yet all of them
to any one person, and that for all ends and uses, for the gifts are given
according to the measure of faith, Romans 12.3. Romans 12.6.
according to the measure of the donation of Christ, according to the rule of
Faith. Therefore all these gifts are not alike given to every one, Ephesians 4.11.
but so distributed that some are Apostles some Prophets, some Evangelists,
others Pastors and Doctors: 1. Cor. 12.28
and not all Apostles, not all Prophets, not all Doctors, not all workers of
miracles, speakers with tongues, or interpreters of speeches. Given only with
subord^nation to the spirit of the Church and Superiors.
Therefore all and every faithful person has not the gift of interpreting and
expounding scripture, but those upon whom by special gift or function it is
bestowed. 3. They who have this gift, and the spirit of it, have it as
subordinate, and a part or parcel of the spirit of Gods Church, by which it is
to be directed, not as opposite, singular, or independent of the same, or of
any one but themselves; for so was the spirit of the Prophets subject to the
Prophets. That is, 1. Cor. 14.32
as S. Chrysostom expounds it, that both the Prophet and his gift was subject
to the college or company of the Prophets, which is, the whole Church; and the
spirit of every member is applied to the use and benefit of the whole body.
What spirit therefore is private and proper as of it self, and either divided
from the head, or not subordinate to the whole body of the Catholic Church,
and applied to the use and benefit of the same, that spirit is not the spirit
of unity and peace, 1. Cor. 14.23
but of division and dissension, and so not the spirit of God ( who is not the
God of dissension but of peace) but of Satan, Marc. 3.26.
whose kingdom thus by spirits divided will be made desolate and such is the
spirit of all Protestants, as is before fully declared.

According to which grounds are answered and explicated in particular all
places which are objected for this spirits authority. As first, 1. Cor. 12.11
That one and the same spirit does work all these, dividing to every one as it
will, is spoken first of revelations and gifts extraordinary, called gratis
given, not ordinary and permanent in the Church of God, such as is this gift
of interpretation of Scripture. ^uifts ex^raordinary given not generally to all.
Also it is spoken of persons private, and the vulgar sort, upon whom this
extraordinary gift is sometimes bestowed, not of the Councels and Prelates to
whose function, as proper to it, this gift or promise is annexed. And if any
private persons have had this extraordinary gift, as Amos a shepherd, Debora
a woman, who in the old Testament were Prophets, and Origin who not yet a
Priest was a Doctor and interpreter of Scripture, they were privileges
extraordinary, and a few only, which make not a general rule for all, and what
they taught, they taught not as Masters, who did either arrogate to themselves
any proper authority, or did teach any new doctrine, or did refuse any
subordination to Superior authority: but did it either to the consolation of
themselves, or to the instruction and confirmation of others, and all according
to the rule of faith and common received doctrine. In which manner any, though
not yet called, and having a talent sufficient may (as before) presume to
interpret holy Scripture, and deliver the sense of it to others, though he
have not yet the grace of holy Orders, nor Pastoral, or Episcopal function.

Gifts alike are not given to all, but are to be used by all as they are
given. Romans 12.3. Ephesians. 4.7.
Secondly, That of Romans 1.26. having gifts according to grace which is given to
us different, whether prophecy according to the reason of faith, or ministry
in administering, is not so meant that every one, according to the proportion of
his faith, has the gift of prophecy or interpetation of scripture: but that
every one who has these gifts should exercise them according to the talent and
gifts bestowed on them, not presuming to be wiser then he ought, but to be
wise unto sobriety, and according to the measure of the donation of Christ, and
not to intermedle in another office and function; as (to instance in the
Apostles example) he who has the ministry proper to Deacons and inferior
orders, which was to distribute alms and to take care of the poor, is not to
meddle in the function of Bishops, which is to preach and instruct in doctrine
of faith and to confer orders, but every one, according to the reason or
measure of faith, that is, not of his infused and supernatural faith by which
he is disposed to grace, but of his gift of understanding of scripture, and of
high mysteries of belief, is to proceed in his function, and to use that
talent bestowed upon them to the profit of the whole body. Which gift also, By
Episcopal and Diaconical function. Romans 12.7.8
as it is not a property inseparably annexed to grace, (for many who are in
state of grace are destitut of this gift, and others who are not so holy, but
for life wicked, often have the benefit of it) so it is not usually bestowed
upon the vulgar and common sort of people, but is proper to Ecclesiastical
persons, of whose function are two sorts, that is Episcopal, 1. Cor. 7.20.
to preach and explicate holy scripture; and Diaconicall, to minister in
external function of giving alms, serving the poor, and the rest, Hier.
contra Vigilan. Non est cuiusuis hominis aureos nu^mos and scripturas probare,
vina gustar^. and Prophetas and Apostolos intelligere. 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephesians.
4.11.
as is by the Apostle here expressed, in which every one remaining in his
vocation in which he is called, is to exercise his own office and function.
For, as says S. Hierome, It is not for every one to try gold, and expound holy
scriptures, to taste wine, and understand the Prophets and Apostles. And, as
says S. Paul, All are not Prophets nor Apostles, nor Doctors: but some
Prophets, some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Doctors, till the consummatio^
of the world. And so some, to whom by their function it belongs, not all
faithful of what sort soever, have this gift of interpretation of scripture
bestowed on them.

Thirdly, those places of 1. Cor. 14. are understood, as the whole Chapter is,
neither of any ordinary and infallible interpretation of holy scripture, nor
yet of any solemn and public office, sacrifice, or benediction of the Mass,
S. Paul. 1. Cor. 14. is understood, not of ordinary gifts to expound Scripture.
much less of any gift ordinary and common to al and every faithful person,
either for understanding of scripture, or for hearing the solemn service of
the Church (as all expositours both ancient and modern do confess, and the
very words of the text do convince) but of private prayers and praisings of God
in Hymns, Canticles, and spiritual songs, and of private gifts of speaking
with tongues, and prophesying, Nor of the public service of the Church.
or interpreting of holy scripture, and exhorting for mutual consolation and
instruction one another. All which as they were gifts gratis given, rare,
extraordinary, singular, But of extraordinary gifts gratis given for
languages* etc.
yea and miraculously bestowed upon several persons of sundry sorts in the
particular congregations and assemblies of the faithful in those times, and
only for that present time, and not to continue in the Church; so an order and
method is here prescribed in the use and exercise of these gifts by the
Apostle, that al may be done honestly and according to order, Verse. 40.
without confusion, and to edification, specially of Infidels not yet
converted, to whom coming to hear the exercises of the Christians, these were
signs and testimonies of the spirit of God among Christians. Whereupon it is
called (...), Verse. 23.
that, is thy proper, and private benediction: and the Prophets did speak
sometimes in languages, which neither themselves nor the auditors understood,
as v. 13. and 14. is expressed, where the speakers are willed to pray that they
themselves may understand, and the prophesying or interpreting of high
mysteries is preferred before the unknown and not understood languages. For
which we may note out of the ancient writers Iustine Martyr, and Tertullian
who lived in the age of the Apostles, Justin. Apol. 2. ad Anton. in fine.
Tertul. Apologet. cap. 39.
that the times then so requiring it at the first beginning of the Church, this
order was observed in the meetings of Christians which were then, for the
place, private, as in time of persecution; that is, 1. The Psalms were sung 2.
The Prophecies and scripture was read. The manner of the Christians assemblies
in the first age of the Church
3. The sermon was made by the Bishop. 4. The sacrifice (which consisted in the
oblation, consecration, communion, Canon, and some short prayers) was offered.
5. The Communion was given to all. 6. Some did sing Hymns and Psalms of
praise and thanksgiving, others did Prophecy and speak of high mysteries, and
show their gift of languages. 7. Others more spiritual, did, as they were
inspired by special gifts, interpret and expound scripture, which was used
even by women. And lastly, they concluded all with an Agape, or banquet of
charity, and hymns of praising God, and so brak up the assembly. Which
practice as it was only for that time, and in time when these extraordinary and
miraculous gifts were bestowed (for it was not observed in the future and
settled times of the Church) so with the cessation or ending of those gifts,
the order and manner partly ceased, partly was changed into a set order and
form for succeding times, which conformably is observed by our present Church
in practice, as may be seen in Cornelius upon the 1. Cor. 14. Nothing therefore
in this Chapter is intended, or spoken, of the general and ordinary power and
authority of all the common people, and every persons spirit to interpret
scripture, and judge of Controversies of faith.

2. It is answered, that the Prophecy, here spoken of, is not an
interpretation of Scriptures, but of languages, by which that which was spoken
in strange languages to the admiration of Infidels (for whose conversion the
gift of tongues was given;) was interpreted by this gift of prophecy in
others, for the instruction of the faithful (for whom this Prophecy was given)
for languages are a sign to Infidels, but Prophecy to the faithful Verse. 22.
. When therefore the gift of tongues ceased, this gift of Prophecy also
ceased, as being given only for the interpreting of tongues.

3. The matter and subject both spoken by tongue, and interpreted by Prophecy,
was not doctrine, or mysteries of faith, but either exhortation to piety for
edification and consolation Verse. 3.
; or of things secret, as future events, or unknown faults, or facts done, by
which the secrets of the heart of the infidel or idiot was made known, and he
convinced and judged of all Verse. 24. and 25.
: therefore it makes nothing for doctrine of faith, and interpretation of
scripture.

4. This manner of Prophecy howsoever, and of whatsoever it was, it was not
independent, and of it self free to interpret what, and how it will: but so,
that the rest do judge Verse. 29.
; and that the spirits of Prophets be subject to the Prophets Verse. 33.
. And so every private spirit must be subject to the judgment of the Church,
and the Churches spirit.

Fourthly, they object those places where it is said, that All thy Children are
taught of our Lord Isa. 54.13
; Al shall be docible of God Joan. 6, 45.
; Your selves have learned of God 1. These. 4
; I will give my law in their bowels and I will write it in their heart Hier.
31.33.
; All shall know me from the least to the greatest Idem. v. 34.
; If any will do his will who sent me, he shall understand of the doctrine
whether it be of God Joan. 7.17.
; My sheep do hear my voice and do follow me Joan. 10, 27.
; You have no need that any do teach you, but as his unction teaches you of
all things 1. Joan. 2.27.
. All these places, I say do not either jointly altogether, or particularly any
one, mention any privilege that every one has, by the instinct of his own
private spirit, to interpret holy scripture, to decide deep mysteries of
faith, and to judge of all controversies of divinity, which is the point
auerred by the Protestants, denied by us, Grace to be saved, not to interpret
scripture.
and in controversy between both. 2. In them is affirmed only that God will
give his inward gift of grace to all sort of persons, so sufficiently that
they may know him, his truth, and the true way to salvation, and by the same
may observe his Commandments, and come to be saved: (In which yet is neither
excluded, but rather supposed as precedent, and an exterior proponent cause,
the ordinary means of preaching by Pastors, and of instruction by them and
subordination to them:) But yet is not given to any one any power or privilege
to prefer his own spirit before the spirit of the whole Church, or to
censure the doctrine which is once adjudged by the same; which among the rest
this Protestant private spirit does assume to it self.

Not all who have Faith, have the gift of interpreting scripture.
For which we may note, that it is one thing to have faith sufficient for
salvation; another to have the gift of infallible interpretation of scripture.
The former is a gift general to all the faithful, and though they be as yet
Heb. 5.12 1. Cor. 3.2.
little ones who only suck milk; though they be as yet 1. Cor. 3.1.
carnal not spiritual; though they be 1. Cor. 14 38.
ignorant of many things; and have many 1. These. 3.10.
things wanting (to the perfection) of their faith: Yet they be sealed with
Epes. 1.13.14.
the spirit of the promise, 1. Cor. 3.16.
the pledge of our inheritance, 1. Cor. 14 37.
have the spirit of God dwelling in them, and so have the literal verity of
all the former places verifyed in them. The later is a gift peculiar and
proper only to them, who by place and function are Hebr. 5.14.
spiritual and perfect, have their 1. Cor. 12 10.
senses exercised to the discerning of good and evil. And have the gift of 1.
Cor. 14
discerning of spirits, and interpreting of speeches. And these are they who as
tryers and discerners of faith, interpreters of Scripture, and have the gift
and power infallible to direct others in the doctrine of faith, who are ex
officio the Pastors and Prelates of Gods Church, and are Act. 20.28.
as Bishops to rule; 1. Pet. 5.1.
to feed the flock of Christ; ^ Tit. 2.15.
to exhort and reprove with all authority; to Tit. 1.12.
control and rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith; and 1.
Tim. 1.3.
to denounce to certain, not to teach otherwise. And all by that power which
God has given them to 2. Cor. 10. v. 5.6.8.
edification, and to revenge all disobedience, and to bring into captivity al
understanding to the obedience of Christ. This is the office of the Prelates
and Bishops of Gods Church.

3. This inward gift of grace or unction of the Holy Ghost is only an
efficient, internal, and cooperant cause, and so necessary, to move the
understanding and will to assent to that which, as certain, is proposed: but
this judge or interpreter must be an exterior proponent cause, which must
deliver to us this sense as certain, which being proposed grace does enable us
to believe. Now all these and such like places are meant of the interior gift
of grace, which is necessary, but not ordinarily sufficient without a
precedent, exterior, and proponent cause, which is this infallible Interpreter
of holy Scripture, in Pastors of the Church.

Fifthly, to those places where it is commanded, not to believe every spirit,
but to prove the spirits if they be of God 1. Joan. ^.^.
; and to prove all things, and hold that which is good 1. These. 5 20.
, is answered. 1. That all, and every person of the body of the holy Church is
not directed to make this trial, but only the chief, Pastors, not the common
people are to try spirits.
that is the Pastors, and Prelates, as when a man is willed to discern and
see, not every member and part of the body is directed so to do, but the chief
members, as the head, which is to judge, and the eye to see, to whose function
it is proper and belonges, or as when an University is directed to examine and
judge of such a book, and doctrine, not every student, but the chief Doctors
of that faculty are so directed and willed; so that not every person and
unlearned party in the Church is to make this trial of spirits, but only
Pastors and Prelates, to whose function it is peculiar and proper to judge and
decide all such like questions and doubts. 2. This trial and judgment is to be
made, not of questions and doctrine already decided and determined by the
authority of the Church, but of such as are yet doubtful and undecided. For
that which is once determined by the general consent of the Church or
Council, is not again to be examined and judged by any private man's spirit;
for so the Decrees of Cou^cells were both vain and endless: that therefore is
to be tried which is not before both tried and judged, and that by those who
have both ability and authority to do it; which makes nothing for this private
spirit, which will both try what is before by any Council judged, and will by
every simple and unlearned person try, and judge it.

Sixthly, to that of 1. Cor. 2.15. The spiritual man judges all things, and
himself is judged of none: It is answered, that S. Paul to confound the
Corinthians, who standing upon their humane and worldly wisdom, How
spiritual men judge of spiritual things
contemned his unlearned manner of instruction, affirms that they being men
sensual can judge only of sensual things: but he being spiritual and
perfect in divine wisdom can judge both of things sensual and spiritual;
and so a spiritual man judges of all things in general, that is, both of
spiritual things which are divine and mystical, and also of humane things
which are terrene and sensual; but a sensual man judges only of temporal
things of the world, and not of spiritual which are of God. The reason
therefore is de generibus singulorum, that a spiritual man judges of all sorts
of things both divine and humane, but not de singulis generunt, that he can
judge in particular of all kinds or spiritual things, as when a man is said
to eat of all things, it is meant that he eats of all kinds of meat, both
flesh and fish, not of every particular piece of both.

2. Every spiritual man does judge spiritual things, but according to such
rules and directions as every thing is to be judged, that is, things manifest
and certain he judges according as they are judged already and determined,
things uncertain and obscure, according to the rule of Faith, and the
authority and testimony of Councels, Fathers, Tradition, and Church, as before
is explicated; not according to his own selfe-seeming spirit and conceit, in
which his spirit is still subordinate to the spirit of Gods Church, and
directed by it.

3. Because every faithful Christian is not always spiritual, that is,
perfect, having his senses exercised in the discerning of good and evil; for
some have need of milk and not of strong meat, and every one that is partaker
of milk it unskillful of the word of justice, for he is a child Hebr. ^5.23.
and 14.
. Therefore this judgment, especially of mysteries of faith, is not for all
imperfect, though faithful Christians; but only for persons spiritual, that
is, perfect, and understanding in spiritual learning and wisdom. Only
spiritual men judge of spiritual things and some of one, some of another
spiritual affair.
And so it makes nothing for the private spirits judgment in every faithful
Christian. And because spiritual persons have not every one a spirit for all
spiritual things, for to one certes by the spirit is given the word of
wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge according to the same spirit, and
to another Prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, all which one and the
same spirit works. And 1. Cor. 12. verse. 8.9.10.11.
all are not Apostles, Prophets, or Doctors, nor work miracles, do cures, or
speak with tongues Verse. 27.
And because some members are more, some less honorable, or base, some more
weak, some less; and some have offices and functions, some more honorable,
some less, some to see and direct, others to walk and be directed, Verse. 21.
and 22.
every one according to his nature and function, though one and the same spirit
work all these therefore all persons who are spiritual have not all
spiritual offices and gifts, but some the gifts of prayer, and
contemplation, some of mortification and humiliation, some of obedience and
patience, others of discerning of spirits, and others (to who^ by their office
it belongs) of judging of faith and scripture, as before. And therefore though
spiritual men judge all things spiritual and temporal, yet every spiritual
man does not infallibly judge and discern every spiritual thing, no more then
every faculty of the soul as sensitive, vegitatiue or rational, does perform
all and every function of feeling growing, and reasoning; but every one his
proper function. And as the function of the eye is only to see, and of the
hands to work, and the feet to walk, so they who will give the function of
seeing and judging of the sense of scripture and mysteries of faith to every
person in the body of the Church, do as much as if one should attribut the
function of seeing to the hands and feet: for as in a body natural, so in the
body mystical, (which is S. Paul's comparison) some are principal members, some
inferior, so every one has his proper function in the Church, as the bishops
are eyes to discern truth, the princes are arms to defend the body, and the
people are the rest of the parts of the body to be directed. The function
therefore of one is not to be attributed to another, but every one in his place
and degree is to exercise his own function in his proper office and work. By
which is apparent, that those and such like places of scripture do make nothing
for the authority and power of this private spirit in every one to discern and
judge of all places of scripture and mysteries of faith; except the
Protestants, as they attribut to every spirit power to do every thing, so they
will out of every place of scripture infer any thing, and so ex quolibet
prove quodlibet, as their spirit does direct and teach them. And thus much of
the first manner of arguments or objections drawn from the gift of the spirit
of God and grace, impertinently applied to prove this their private spirits
authority.

Other objections answered SECT. III.
THE second manner of objections are drawn from the means which are
prescribed in scripture for the due and right Understanding of holy scripture,
which are prayer, meditation, and diligent seeking and enquiring out the true
sense of scripture out of scripture, and such like; by which the Protestants
seem to back much their spirits proceeding, Calu. 4. Inst. 17.25. Nos vt in
tota scriptura sanam huius loci (Hoc est corpus meum) intelligentiam non minori
obedientia quam cura consequi studeamus, neque praepostero feruore teme^e
artipimus, and sine delectu quod temere se mentibus ingerit, sed sedula
meditatione adhibita sen sum amplectimur quam spiritus Dei suggerit, quo freti,
despicimus quidquid terrenae sapientiae ex alto opponitur. Psalm. 118.474
for so does Calvin profess to embrace that sense of scripture which by
meditation annexed, the spirit of God does suggest; by virtue of which spirit
he contemns all, what any humane wisdone can oppose. For which they object that
David did meditat day and night in the law of God. That Timothy did from his
Childhood learn the Scripture which might instruct him 2. Tim. 3.15.
. That S. Peter did will them to attend and look into the prophetical word as
to a candell shining in a dark place 2. Pet. 1.19.
. That S. Paul affirms that faith and faithful persons are built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles Ephesians. 2.20.
. That they of Beroea did search the scriptures, if the things were so Act.
17.11.
as Paul did teach. And that Christ did will the Jews to Joan. 5.39.
search the Scriptures.

For all which we are to observe, 1. That these means are good and profitable;
but not sufficient of themselves for a certain and infallible exposition of
scripture: for besides them is required the infallible assistance of the holy
Ghost for an infallible sense of scripture to be relied upon. 2. Means
necessary, but not sufficient to expound scripture.
That these means are to be used by those who have power and authority to
expound scripture; to whom, though they be necessary yet are they not of
themselves either sufficient, or infallible either to every private person, or
to others without other helps and assistances of the holy Ghost. 3. Are by
persons proper and fit to be applied.
That private persons, when they use and apply duly these means, may give a
probable exposition of scripture, either for their own consolation and
confirmation in faith, or for the edification and advise of others: but cannot
rely upon it either as a sole and solid foundation of their belief, Aug.
epist. 3. Tanta est Christianarumpro funditas literarum, vt in eis quotidie pro
ficerem, si eas solas ab ineunte pueritia vsque ad decrepitam senectu^em,
maximo ocio, summo studio, meliori ingenio conarer addiscere, Non quod ad ea
quae necessaria sunt saluti, tanta in eis perueniatur difficultate, sed cum
quisque ibi fidem tenuerit sine qua pie recteque non viuitur, tam multa tamque
multiplicibus mysteriorum vmbraculis opaca, intelligenda proficientibus
restant, tantaqueue non solum in verbis quibus ista dicta sunt, sed etiam in
rebus quae intelli gendae sunt latet altitudo sapientiae, vt annosissimis,
acutissimis, flagrantissimis cupiditate discen di, hoc cont^ngat quod eadem
scriptura dicit: Cum consummauerit homo tunc incipi^t. Epist. 119. cap. vlt.
Plura se in scripturis nescire quam scire.
or as a general rule for the true and certain exposition of all the
difficult and abstruse places of scripture. For, as S. Augustine, says, such
is the profundity of holy scriptures, that though his wit was better, his
leisure more, and his diligence greater, yet he might from his childhood ti^l
his old age profit in the understanding of them; not for that so much of them
as is necessary to salvation, is so hardly to be atteined; but for that when
once ones faith is grounded upon them, so many and manifold mysteries remain
for the more intelligent proficients, inuolued in the words, and the ma^ter*
that the most aged, witty, and industrious may say when he is become perfect,
then he begins. For which elsewhere he professes; that he is ignorant of more
things in scripture then he knows. Therefore only prayer, meditation, and study
will not surfice for every one to find out the true and certain sense of every
place of Scripture, which for every one to assume to himself would not be a
certainty of faith, but presumption of pride. And the same which is said of
Prayer, Meditation, See Staples. princip. doctrinalibus controu. 6. l. 9 c.
9.10. etc.
and study, may be said of skill of tongues, conference of original texts, and
other places, and of consideration of antecedents and consequents, of phrases
and the like. Of which see Stapleton. Which supposed, the answer to all the
former objections is facile.

First, David did read and study the Scripture, but he did it for his private
consolation and meditation; How David and Timothy studied scripture.
not for his foundation in faith, in which he was before grounded. 2. Timothy
did read and study them from his childhood, but to learn the sense and meaning
of them of his Masters and teachers, not to be judge and censurer of them, and
that for his instruction in manners, not for his doctrine of faith, which he
received from his Ancestors, not from his own reading of Scripture. How S.
Peter exhorts to interpret scripture.
3. S. Peter did will them to attend to the prophetical doctrine, but not to
interpret it according to every ones private spirit, and proper interpretation
(which he forbids, saying: No 2. Pet. 1.20.
prophesy of Scripture is made by private interpretation:) much less with a
neglect of the rules and grounds of faith, or with a contempt of the Pastors
and Superiors of the Church of God, preferring its own before their
exposition. 4. S. Paul affirms, that we must be built upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles Ephesians. 2.20.
, that is, not only upon the written word of the Apostles or Prophets (for many
had faith and were Citizens of Saints, and Domesticals of God before any
scripture or writing of the Apostles was extant, and many built their faith
upon the Apostles, who writ nothing at all) but upon the doctrine and faith
reueiled to the Apostles, and by them left by preaching or writing to
posterity, How our faith is built upon the Prophets and Apostles.
and as such by the Church proposed to us. Out of which nothing can be inferred
for making the scripture, much less the private spirit interpreting it, the
sole or sufficient ground of Faith. Again, taking the foundation either for
the doctrine or writings of the Apostles, and they who are built upon it, or
for principal parts, or for the body of the Church, we may consider first the
foundation of doctrine either in it self, and so, as being the truth revealed,
it is the ground of faith; or in respect of us, as by us it is accepted, and so
it relyes upon the Pastors and Prelates of the Church, by whom it is proposed
to us as revealed, and for whose authority we receive it as revealed.

Secondly, we may consider the Church, either as it is the whole body of all
faithful in all times, especially after the Apostles, and so it is built upon
the doctrine preached and written, or as it signifies the first heads and
directours of it, to wit, the Apostles, and so it is built immediately upon
Christ, and the holy Ghost, revealing to them that doctrine and scripture which
they have left to posterity, and which they preach and propose to us; and in
this sense the Church, that is, the Apostles and first Pastors, were before
the doctrine was either preached or written by them, and so were the foundation
of their doctrine and preaching of it to us, though to the rest of the
faithful the doctrine preached and written by them is the foundation upon
which their faith is built. Which answer does not only clear the Scripture
for having any private spirit as Judge over it: but also declares how the
Church is built upon the doctrine of the Apostles, or Prophets (taking the
Prophets, either for the writings of the Prophets in the old Testament, or for
the Interpreters of the Apostles writing in the new) and also how the Church in
the sense before declared, is the ground of the Apostolical and prophetical
doctrine revealed to the Church, and the first Pastors of it, and by them left
to us, who receive it from them, and their authority, and so from the Church.
5. They of Beorea did search the scriptures whether those things were so as
Paul declared Act. 17.11.
, that is, not so, How they of Ber^ea and the Jews searched Scripture.
that by searching the scripture they did make themselves, and their spirit
judge of the Apostolical doctrine preached out of scripture: but so, that
either being nor yet fully converted and satisfied, they would with diligence
and in humility enquire further of the doctrine preached, which is always
permitted, and advised to all (for otherwise he that gives credit quickly, is
light Eccl. 19.4.
of heart) or that being satisfied they would, as Catholic Doctors do, search
out, confer and understand those places of scripture which Paul did allege,
and thereby the more strongly confirm themselves, and better satisfy others in
Faith. In which as they did proceed prudently and piously, and we permit and
advise every learned Catholic to do the like: so they did no more make either
their spirit, or the Scripture interpreted by their spirit, judge of the
Apostles doctrine, then if one for searching the testimonies of S. Augustine,
which are cyted by Bellarmine, should thereby be said to make himself judge of
Bellarmine his doctrine, or as one searching the places cited by Calvin, to see
if they be as they are by him cited, should thereby make himself judge of
Calvin and his doctrine. Which to infer out of their actions, as it is
absurd, so is it to infer, that the Beroeans made themselves judges of S.
Paul's doctrine out of the Beroeans, seeking out the places which S. Paul
alleged. 6. Our Savior willed the Jews to search the Scripture: it is true,
but which Jews? to wit, Act. 17.11.
those who were learned; and how? Not so that he would make them, and their
private spirits judges of Scriptures, I^* 5.39.
or the truth found in them, but that he would have them, being yet
incredulous, studiously to inform themselves of him, being the true Messiah,
out of those Scriptures, which they believed already to be true, and to bear
true witness of the true Messiah; which is no more then to persuade any
Protestant to read Scriptures, Fathers, and Catholic authors, and out of them
to inform himself of the verity of Catholic Religion, which is to search out
the truth, and not to make himself, and his private spirit judge of the
grounds of truth, or of the truth which is to be found in the^. And this is all
that can be inferred out of these places: and this may suffice for the solution
of all such argumnets or objections, as are made out of Scripture by the
Protestants for the establishing of this private spirits power and authority to
interpret Scripture, and to judge of al controversies of Faith.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS handled in this Book.
A
S. Ambrose his commendations page 58. His authority against the private
Spirit. page 59. Angels apparitions page 74. Difficulties about them. page 81.
Apostles their authority to judge of Faith. page 166. Their power derived from
Christ. page 167. Their successors power to judge of Faith. page 168. The
foundation of Faith. page 390. Apparitions of God, or Angels; in what places;
to what persons. page 75. Apparitio^s of Devils in diverse shaps; of beasts; of
men; of Angels; of Christ; of the B. Trinity. ibid. and 140. Of souls in
Limbo, Purgatory Hell and Heaven. page 77.78. Difficulties to know which be
apparitions of God, Angels, Devils, souls. page 79. Apparitio^s of Satan
inward by suggestions, page 98. By imaginary illusions. page 102. By exterior
visions page 104. S. Augustine commended, against the private spirit. page 61.
For the profundity of holy Scripture, and authority of Fathers. page 64. For
necessity of Faith. page 182. against Circles. page 210.
B
BIshops and Priests, their office page 153. Their authority to judge of
Religion. page 162. Their Tribunal and power in the old Law, the beginning,
progres, and end. page 162. In the law of Christ. page 165. What their
authority is. page 166. Their authority proved by scripture. page 168. How for
it extends. ibid. Their authority for ever. page 168. In all Counsels. page
170.
C
Calvin his saying against the private spirit page 36.64. His Circle between
the spirit of every man, and a Council. page 215. His doctrine of the doctrine
of salvation. page 234.239. Of salvation of Infants without Baptism. page 235.
Of Christ's sin, and despair on the Cross. page 257. Of the B. Trinity. page
304 Of Christ's Divinity. page 305. Of Christ's descent into Hell. page 308. Of
his Ascensio^ page 3^0. Of beatitude before the day of Judgment. page 311.
Cases of Conscience, for fear of sin in vain according to Protestant
doctrine* page 26^. Catholics advantage above Protestants. page 24. In the
habit of faith. p. 15. In the credible testimonies of Unity, Sanctity,
Universality, Succession, Miracles, Examples. page 27. In the infallible
Church Authority. page 28. Catholics believe all Revelations, ancient,
general, infallible. page 25. Catholics may challenge all which the
Protestants may. page 28. Yea the private spirit. page 29. Difference between
just Catholics and Protestants. page 266. Good life-confessed in the ancient,
and late Catholics, in the people and the Clergy. page 347. Catholic and
Protestant doctrine compared in giving more honor to God, to Christ, to
Saints, Angels, Scripture, Sacraments, to Church, Faith, Good works etc. page
350. Christ, by Protestant doctrine no general Redeemer. page 248. No perfect
Redeemer from sin, and his suffering of Hell pains due to sin. page 249. No
Savior from sin, Satan, sensuality, the curse of the Law, or from Hell.
page 250. No perfect Physician. page 251. No law giver. 252. An unjust judge.
253. No Priest, or offerer of Sacrifice. 254. Made ignorant, 256. Sinful* and
suffering hell pains. page 257. Christian Asse^blies in the Primitive Church,
in what manner they were for that time. page 382. Church Authority necessary to
faith. page 10. infallible 11. proved by Scripture. page 16. Church, selected,
privileged, armed, established etc. obliges, p. 12. It consists of Pastors.
Ibid. Is proved by Fathers and reason. Ibid. Necessary to expound Scripture.
page 125. Church-practice A rule to confute heretics. page 125.
Church-pr^position and scripture-authority no circle. page ^02. Upon Church
falling and failing from faith what absurdities do follow, vz. That all ancient
Concels, and Doctors were Antichristian: That Prophesies are false. page 231.
That Turks, Jews, Gentiles, have a more credible Church, then Christians. page
230. Church-practice, a means to interpret Scripture and judge of Doctrine
page 125. Church of Christ a Congregation of great sinners. page 26^ Circle,
what it is. page 198. Difference between a lawful and unlawful Circle page
199. And between a Circle, as objected against Catholics and Protestants.
page 200 Catholics Circle cleared as being partial in diverse kinds of causes,
and to diverse sorts of persons* page 202. Protestants Circle between the
Scripture and the Spirit. page 206. Between the Spirit and Faith. 210.
Between Election and Scripture. 212. Between the Spirit of every person, and
of a Council. page 215. Protestants Circle unto the same kind of cause, and
that totally. page 208. Absurdities that follow upon it. page 212. Counsels 3.
of the Jews in Christ's time. page 164. How the holy Ghost assisted or failed
in them. page 164. Counsels a means to interpret Scripture. 128. Counsels
have been a means to judge of Faith. page 171. Concupiscence made original
sin, and what follows thereon. page 227.
D
Devils. Apparitions of them. page 75. Difficulties to know them. page 80.
Signs to know the motions of them. 83. Their subtility 95.97. Their deluding
of Heretics ancient and modern. page 95. Their tempting to sin, and to
virtue 99. Examples of their apparitions to Heretics. page 100. By
imagination and visibility. page 10^.
F
Faith. Six means to Faith. page 3. Material formal object proposition.
Ibid. Credible Testimonies, pious disposition, habit. page 4. Revelation to the
Apostles. Ibid. Necessity of a proponent cause Ibid. Credible Testimonies.
page,. 4.7. and 192. Faith requires a pious disposition supernatural, and frees
an infused habit permanent, not perpetual page 6 The order of these helps,
vz. credible Testimony, Church-proposition, grace actual, infused habit,
revelation. page 7.8. The Resolution of Faith, dispositiue, deriuatiue,
eff^ctiue, formaliter. page 8. Showed by the Samaritan woman and Christ page 9.
The helps to Faith, external, eternal, internal, pa. 14. Wanting in
Protestants, 15. Faith depends upon authority. page 117. Faith required to know
scripture and the sense of it. p. 118.120. The rule of Faith. page 146. Faith,
one. page 183. Certain. 187. By preachin^ and hearing. 190. By credible
testimonies. 192. Obliges to acceptance. 194. Special Faith, how certain in
Protestants. 185. Faith is of eternal verity, and presupposes the object.
page 228. Cannot stand with certainty of salvation, 233.240. vide Sole faith.
Faith by hearing, preaching, and mission page 190. Sole Faith, a Protestant
Principle, the effect of it. page 227. Sequells of Justification by sole Faith.
p. 222. makes Protestants more certain of their salvation then was Christ. 233
Makes Protestants as just as Christ. 234. makes all men to be saved. 235. Is
not grounded upon Gods word. 233. Is false, contradictory* sinnfull, rash,
presumptuous, preiudicious to Hope, Charity, and Good life. page 243. is
injurious to Christ as a Redeemer, a Lawgiuer, a Judge, a Priest; makes him
ignorant, sinful, and damned* page 247. Fathers, how esteemed by S. Augustine.
page 67. Their consent a mean to interpret scripture. page 126. Their
authority, how great. 12^. Their ancient Practice against Heretics 227.
Alleged by Fathers and counsels. ibid. consulted about scripture. page 138.
Freewill taken away by Protest. doctrine of Predestination. page ^74.
Absurdities following upon the denial of Freewill. ibid.
G
GOd, by Protestant doctrine made Author of sin, a Sinner, only a sinner,
page ^77. A liar and dissembler. page 280. A Tyrant more cruel then any
Tyrant. 284. A Devil, a tempter to sin, and Author of sin. p. ^89. Gods of
the Paga^s, how many, how vicious, how begot. page 220. Men-Gods, Women-Gods.
2^1. Gods for every thing: The Gods of the Romans. 2^. Passions, Beasts,
Herbs made Gods. page 223. Grace, general, actual, necessary page 30. How
Protestants and Catholics agree and differ about Grace page 31. And the
effects of it. page 32. Grace, gratis, and extraordinary. page 40.378. Not
given to all. 380. Not a sign of Holiness page 119.
H
K. HENRY the 8. how often he changed Religion. page 157. Heresy, what it
works. pa. 20.56. Why to be avoided. 48. The origin of it. page 2.49.61.225.
Begone by the private Spirit. page 141. Compared with Idolatry. page 218.
Heretics, how they abuse Scripture. 58. How deluded by Satan 100.102.
Examples of ancient Heretics. 10^. Modern. 100.103. How discerned by
Fathers, by practice of the Rule of Faith. page 120.127. By Church practice
confuted. 1^5. Deceived by women. page 46. S Hierome commended. His saying
against the private Spirit, page 59.
I
IVdge, as necessary in Faith, as in Laws: How far he is to be obeyed. page
145.161. What properties are required in a Judge, and what to a Rule of Faith,
by which he is to judge. page 146. Not the whole body of the Church pa. 147.
Not secular Prines. 148. Not the lay people. 155. Not the Scripture. 156. But
Bishops and Prelates, as is proved by scripture and Church-practice, are a
Judge. page 162.
L
Lay People, not Judges of Faith. page 155. Laws, Precepts, Instructions, and
Exhortations all in vain according to Protestant doctrine. page 162. Luther
against this private Spirit. 65. His bad Life, Lust, Envy, Pride, want of
devotion and good works confessed. page 339. Lutherans disagreeme^t about
Scripture-sense. page 140.
O
Objections for the private spirits authority answered. page 378. Original
sin, made to be Concupiscence. page 227. Absurdities that follow upon Original
sin remaining. page 259. That the Church of Christ is a congregation of great
sinners. page 261. That the elect may commit as well great sins as good
works. ibid. That in vain is all mortification and labor to overcome all
Temptations, ibid. That great sinners may be perfect men, and perfect
Protestants. page 261. That in vain are al Laws of Gods Church or Common
Wealth. p. 6^* All Consultatios, exhortations, all Case^ or care of Conscience
vain. ibid.
P
PAgans saved, according to Protestants. page 242. Predestination to damnation a
Protestant Principle, and the effect of it. page 2^8. Absurdities that follow of
it, vz It makes men Atheists. page ^71. Desperat^ Examples of both. page ^72
Takes away Freewil in all sort of actions: All desert of reward or pain. 274.
Makes God the Author of sin ^76. A sinner. 277. Vide God. And is the origin of
Atheism and liberty page 27^. Priests and Pastors of the Church are
interpreters of Scripture. page 117. And the triers of Spirits. page 1^7.118.
Princes, not Judges of controversies and Faith, page 148 They are sheep, not
Pastors, proved by Fathers pa. 149. Absurdities that follow upon making them
Judges of Faith. page 153. Protestants, want all means of Faith to confute
Pagans, confirm Catholics, and reduce Heretics, page ^5. Want all credible
Testimonies to the same, page 17. All Church infallible proposition, 19. All
pious disposition, ibid. All infused Faith. page ^0. Objects Material and
formal, ^1. All revelation made to the Apostles, page 23. Protestants rely
upon a motion of the private Spirit, page 25. In what they agree with
Catholics, page 30. And differ from them, about the Spirit in the Name,
Universality, Operation, Permanency, and effect of it. page 30. What they
believe of the Spirit. page 30.31. How they make the Spirit Judge and trier or
Counsels, page 36. Protestants compared with false Prophets, page 44. With
Eliu Jobs friend, 47. Protestants Faith and Salvation how doubtful: as relying
on the private Spirit, p. 14^. And more doubtful then Catholics ibid. Sects
and divisions among them, 184 Protectants doctrine in the connection of their
election, faith spirit, Scripture-sense, and salvation, page 205. Their Circle
between scipture and spirit, page 206. Between spirit and Faith, page 201.
Between Election and scripture-sense, 21^. How they make Scripture the sole
means of Faith, and the spirit the sole means to know scripture, 2^7.2^1 212.
Protestants doctrine reduced to 4 heads, that is* Church-contempt, sole Faith,
original sin, and Predestination. page ^26 Their doctrine of the certainty of
salvation, how contrary to Faith, and inferring a General salvation of all,
page 2^7 Their doctrine of Faith what it is, and how contradictory 243. Vide
Faith. Not grounded upon scripture, 243.245. They are made Just by sin. 244.
Presume upon Justice without ground, 245. Destroy all hope and charity, 246.
Teach good life, not out of their own principles, 247 Make Christ no redeemer
nor Physician of souls. Vide Christ, and page 247. etc Their doctrine and
scripture, in how many points contra^y, page 280* How it leads to bad life, to
flouth, lust, and cruelty, page 330. Derogates from the honor of God, of
Christ's saints Sacraments, Grace, etc. p 350 Protestants Church of what kind of
persons it consists, 260. Their doctaine of sin and good works, page 261. The
bad life of the Protestant common people confessed in Germany, page 335. In
England, 337 Of their Ministers, 338. Of their Founders Luther, Calvin,
Swinglius, Iacobus Andreas, etc. page 344 Protestant Reformers most of them
Friars, Priests, and Breakers of the vows of Chastity, page 346*
S
SEcts and divisions, how many mong Protestants, page 184. Selfe-opinion and
conceit condemned, page 50. Sinners perfect Protestants, page 261. Good
members of their Church, p. 261. Spirits, diverse and doubtful, not sy to be
discerned, but by special gift, page 35. By what Rule to be tried, ibid. By
vnio^ with the Church not by Scripture, page 36. By whom to be tried; that is,
by the Pastors, not the people, page 39. Spirits their variety and diversity in
nature, condition and operation, page 70. Spirits vital and natural, page 71.
Spiritual motions their origin, page 7^. some spiritual, some sensible, page
73. Spirits of God, of Angels, of Devils, of souls departed, how hard to be
discerned, page 74. Rules to discern their motions, page 83. Difficulty to
judge certainly of these Rules, page 93. In respect of man's infirmity, and
Satan's subtility, 93. Signs of good Spirits, 89. Difference between good and
bad spirits, ibid. How hard to discern them by scripture, page 109. Not to be
discerned by all faithful, ibid. Spiritual masters necessary, page 111.
Spirit of God, the Interpreter, as well as the maker of scripture, p. 38.39.
Gods Spirit how it works in every one, and what it is, 373. How it differs in
Catholic and Protestant doctrine in the exposition of scripture and certainty
of salvation, page 37. Spiritual men, how they judge of all things, ibid.
Private Spirit the mother of all heresies, page ^. May be challenged as well by
Catholics as Protestants, page ^8. What it works, page 30.34.38. Confuted by
Scripture, pa. 34. Why not to be believed, ibid. Why it cannot be a Judge, page
37. What it is, in whom it is, what it works, how it is punished, page 46.
Is blind, lying, deceytfull, page 44 Is confuted by scripture out of S. John, S
Paul, S Peter, Exechiel, Job, and other scriptures, page 33.40.48.50. By
Fathers in the six first ages after Christ, page 55. A Purita^ spirit described
out of Job, page 47* Is only a self opinion, page 50. The private spirit cannot
discern the difficulties about the Spirit of good Angels, souls, devils, page
80. cannot discern spirits good or bad, page 112. cannot be means to
interpret scripture, 1^1. cannot explicate what books are scripture, in what
language, figures, what seeming contradictions, what difficult places. 131.
Private Spirits exposition of scripture is against scripture, false, fallible,
contrary to the spirit of Gods Church, and author of all heresies, page 1^6 184
It cannot be a Judge as not able to know, and be known, page 17^. It wants
authority. 174. Infallibility, 175 Certainty, ibid. and ^8^. Duration,
immutability, Visibility, Vni^y, page 178.188.176. Universality, warrant to be
obeyed, page 178. Private Spirit is the Protestants sole ground of scripture
sense, faith and salvation, page 182. Author of al sects, 184. Upon what
ground it relyes, page* page ^87. Teaches and directs Protestants all in all,
page ^91. Cannot oblige others to believe any thing, 195. It can give no
credible testimonies of belief, page 195. Cannot make a known and visible
Congregation, 188. Nor teach an entyre and universal Faith, pag^ 186.
T
TEntations, vain to overcome them by mortification, or labor according to
Protestants, page 26^.
V
Unity wanting in the private spitit of Protestants, page 178.188.176.
Universality also wanting in the same, ibid. Visibbility, a like, ibid.
W
WOmen, seducers of ancient and later times, page ^^6. Works neither hinder
damnation, nor help to salvation, according to Protestants, page ^61.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
PAge 5. line 2. add it. page 6. l. 20. in, read is. page 24. l. 16. have,
read has. page 26.29. is read as. page 34. l. ^7. him read them. page 63 l.
23. glorify, read glory. page 76. l. 21. add to. page 103. l. 22. add her*
page 104. l. 30. dele to. Ibid. l. 32. his read her. page 107. line 33. after
men, add of which first S. Paul 1. Cor. 12. page 117. l. 22. after force add
of reason. page 121. l. 31. of read from. page 123. l. 14. whom read them, p.
129. l. 16. (...) read (...). Ibid. l. 27 dele in. page 136. l. 31. Act. 15 12.
read Act. 13.21. page 152. l. 3. dele S. Ibid. l. 1^. read were not thus. page
163. lin. ^4. dele and. page 174. lin. 10. unity read untie. page 183. lin. 15.
add First. page 187. lin. penult. Heretics read Heretic. page 194. lin. ^.
more read most. page 198. lin. 23. read known after and unknown, as etc. page
208. lin. ^3. affection read assertion. page 209. lin. 22. therefore read before
page 210. l. 13. the read their. page 215. l. ^9. spirit read spirits. page
216. lin. 10. add to be. page 241. lin. 7. read so it is true that every ones
sins etc. page 24^. add every one. page 244. lin. 2^ least read best. page
247. lin. ^0. read less pardonable. page 250. lin. 16. dele and in the effect
thereof. page 255. lin. 11. add and confession page ^56. lin. 2^. one read
only. page 259. l. penult. now, read new. page 260* lin. 25. pointed read
painted, Ibid. lin. vlt. dele pit of. page 263. l. 11. read that he had no
freewill. page 269. lin. 24. free read freedom page 270. lin. 20. esteem read
esteemed. Ibid. lin. 28. his, read thus. page 288. lin. vlt. dele stel page
293. lin. 18. read tell him that which. page 296. lin. 6. read in him sin.
page 311. lin. 22. add to, page ^14. lin. 3. read need not. Ibid. lin. 33.
read from ever. page 320. lin. 10. never read ever, Ibid. l. 21. dele to. page
324. lin. 11. dele all. page 329. lin. 6. we read will. page 330 lin. 29.
debauched, read debased. page 340. l. 21. read one hundred thou^and. page 346.
lin, 14. read he is diuulged. page 348. lin. 4. dele by.

In the Margent.
Page 4. Mat. read Marc. Ibid. Ephesians. 2.10. read Ephesians. 2.20. page 5. Psalm.
24.25. read 92.5. Ibid. Philip. 2.33. read 2.13. page 11. Ephesians. 25.29. read
Ephesians. 5.27. page 12. Matthew. 20.10. read 28.19. Ibid. Matthew. 15. read Marc.
16.15. page 15. confirm read convert. page 50. Job. 12. read Prou. 1^. page
60. Ep. ^6. read 60. page 65. read Tom. 7. cont. Julian. l. 1. c. ^. page 104.
3. Reg. 12. read 3. Reg. 22. page 182. Aug. sermon. 8. read 8^.

Other Faults, if any have escaped, it is desired of the gentle Reader to
correct them by his own judicious reading; the Author being far absent from
the Print, and forced to commit the same to strangers.


