A LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE POPE.

Wherein HE MAY SEE HIS own Face, the express Image of ANTICHRIST.

Together with THE POPES NEW CREED, containing 12. Articles of superstition
and treason, set out by Pius the 4. and Paul the 5. masked with the name of
Catholic Faith: Refuted in two Dialogues.

Set forth by LEONEL SHARP Doctor in Divinity, And translated by EDWARD
SHARP Bachelour in Divinity.

1. KING. 18. How long will you halt between two religions? if GOD be GOD
follow him, if Baal be GOD follow him.

LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN dwelling in the little old Bailey near the
King's Head. 1616.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY to the most Reverend Clergy of ENGLAND.
IT must not seem strange (most Reverend Fathers in GOD, and my much beloved
Brethren) if, seeing the Captains of Israel be gone forth to war against
Antichrist, a Soldier of a meaner rank, moved with the goodness of the
cause, enter the battle, and join himself to the standard. For all do see
the Pope renew the old wars, and cannot rest quiet, but assayes by all
means, Papistas nostros, nostras dicerem.
how he may recover the possession of GREAT BRITAIN being lost, and in a vain
hope thereof our Papists in the masculine, (I should have said in the feminine
but that I should seem to some to have spoken false Latin) are grown more in
number, and far more insolent then they were wont heretofore. Who then;
though he be the meanest servant of Christ borne under, or rather with the
Gospel restored, without which he would not deem Paradise it self to be a
pleasant Country; would not resist and withstand to his teeth Antichrist
himself renewing his forces, and taking courage unto him with such
earnestness, to recover that seat from whence aforetime he was justly cast
out? I was not ignorant what labors were to be undertaken, what wrongs were
to be digested, by them who enter combat, and maintain fight with so cruel
an enemy: so that it were better for them to be silent, if they thought what
were available rather for their own private, then for the public estate of
the Church of Christ. But that which usually falls out in war, that the
tried prowess of the Captains does by their ensample whet on the courages of
the Soldiers, and does stir up and prick forward their sluggish minds to
the effecting of some exploite: The very same does happen to Gods Ministers in
this spiritual warfare, to whom there is ability given from God, to some
greater, to some less, to all some. Whereby though they can add nothing to
the matters in controversy, and it may be they ought not: because not new
things are to be delivered by Divines, but after a new manner as Vincentius
wrote, nor with a diverse faith, but with a diverse style as Austen warns: yet
notwithstanding both by the consent of their testimony, and with the difference
of their gifts and the variety of discourse they can and ought give their
helping hand to the Gospel. That was also an encouragement that as soon as the
beast wounded with the kings spear began to grunt, Bellarmine Parsons.
Pacenius. Christano: Becan. Coquaeus, and many others.
it presently cast up out of his mouth a great swarm of Jesuits, who should
not so much refute with arguments, as traduce with slanders, written with the
hand of scorpions, the Kings majesty, being not only the best of Kings, but
the best of men, and undoubtedly the true Defender of the Faith. Right
Heretics; who murder men not with the sword, but with their wiles, as Jerome
writes: for a man's style may be counted as well a cutthroate, as a sword
drawn against Kings, whose honor seems to be more dear and tender unto them
then their lives. So that James Clement, or Francis Rauillacke, were no more
cruel in wounding the Kings body, then Bellarmine, or Pacenius in wounding the
Kings name. It is said that Ethnicke Rome did imprint that letter, whereof
Cicero makes mention not to the table of judges, as diverse interpret it, but as
Cicero and Pliny, to the head and forehead of false accusers; to the leaden
head, and iron forehead, that they may carry countenances as stigmaticall
slaves branded with the marks of those letters in disgrace of their slanderous
tongues, whom Plautus does therefore term litered men. Truly it may seem
very unjust, if I do not desire that those Jesuits should be accounted
litered, whom popish Rome does nourish and cherish within her, as those old
geese, and dogs, who by their cackling and barking, did pursue any that
assaulted the capital. Add that those two staves, whereof Zachary the
Prophet makes mention, the authority of Magistrates, and the obedience and
agreement of Subjects, Za: cap. 1. verse. 7.
calling the one the staff of beauty, the other the staff of bonds, These
graceless Jesuits endeavor to break them both, making rebellion an Arittle
of their faith, wherein they go so far that they be not only convinced of
our side, but even of their own. For of late certain secular Priests as they
are called, more moderate in show then the rest, that they may the more freely
disperse abroad closly among us the seeds of superstition, do cunningly
inueigh against the Articles of treason, brought in by the Jesuits; whenas Alan
and many other secular Priests do both command and practice treason. Our men
therefore both as good Patriottes and as faithful Ministers, being bound with
the double bond of warfare, every one of them for his Graces, for his time and
place, much more for his power ought to oppugn both these Articles, whereby we
may maintain according to our vocations the liberty of the kingdom, under
which we were borne, together with the truth of the Gospel by which we were
borne again. Wherein the most learned Bishop of Elye does very justly tax
the Ministers that are lukewarm and silent in a business of such importance,
Epist Dedicat. to the KING.
who do not bestow their pains in writing, when as this cause, as he says,
is to be reckoned among those, wherein he that gathers not with Christ, does
scatter abroad with the enemy of Christ; wherein if any man shall not deliver
his faithful knowledge, e^e shall not deliver his own soul. And does add
this, that in such a business you were better want power then will, and ability
then faithfulness. Which I remember was sometime told me of that most
Reverend Archbyshoppe D. Whitgift, then when the quarrel on both sides was not
so hot, when he wished that in so great a plenty of excellent Divines among us
there were more that would employ their spare times from their duty of
preaching, in the pains of writing. I am come therefore into the field being
thereto provoked with the goodness of the cause, the ensample of the
Captains, the injury of the enemy, the Oath of warfare, the encouragement of
the Fathers, that I might somewhat daunt the enemy, insulting so unworthily.

To which purpose I thought good to set this task to my self, that I might
lay open the new creed of faith, gathered out of the new Articles of faith
both open and secret by the Bishop of Rome himself, not so much for our own
Countrymen that are Papists, whom if so many books so excellently set forth
in English cannot satisfy, nothing at all can satisfy; as in a Latin
Dialogue for their sakes that are in foreign parts. And this Dialogue is
divided into three books, whereof two of them are now set forth, the third God
willing, which at this time lies in scattered papers, if my health will permit
shall be committed to print as soon as may be. In all which I first bring in a
certain Jesuit Robert Saturnine a turbulent and wicked fellow, who with his
choicest arguments does egerly defend heresy and treason: And I join with him
for an answerer Antonius Patriotta an Orthodoxall Divine. Cicero.
You know the manner of Dialogues, that men speak those things in them, which
they never spoke. Therefore Saturnine will happily complain, that those things
are laid to his charge which he never spoke, whenas I dare religiously affirm,
that this factious Priest does not use only the arguments of the chiefest
Jesuits, but their method and their words, chiefly of Alan, Bellarmine and
Parsons, that any of them in all things may seem to be Robert Saturnine.

I have prefixed before the Dialogue a true looking-glass for the Pope, i. a
lively picture of Antichrist prophetically drawn out by S. Paul and S. John,
expounded by the ancient Fathers as far as they could foresee, and by the new
more certainly by the event; I thought good to set it together with short
conclusions, pressed to that end, wherein the Pope with all his rabble may
discern himself. For the order of nature did require, that he should euict
the Pope to be Antichrist, which appears by the Glass, who had a purpose to
prove popery to be Antichristianity, which is taught in the Creed. I thought
good to set before them both, the Glass of Christ, and a short compendium of
Christianity, fetched out of the Gospel, and expressed in my Epistle to the
Christian Reader. For you know that two duties belong to the Minister, one that
he preach Christ sincerely: the other that he plainly lay open Antichrist, as
that worthy man and Martyr of God John Husse thought in his time.

Now all this (I know not how little or nothing) fathers and brethren, I submit
to your judgment, and commit to your patronage. For those reasons which seemed
equal to me to take in hand the defense of the business, should seem so to you
for the defense of my person. I, when I read that there was mention made of the
popish creed by our men, but saw that it was laid open by none to my knowledge
of set purpose with any of their discourses, I took the matter in hand not so
much in hope to perform that I should do, as for desire to try what I could
do, hoping thereby to stir up other men's cares who can deal in the business
more learnedly and eloquently. You have hitherto heard why I undertook this
labor: now if it please you understand, why I dedicated it to you. For when I
perceived that the whole body of Religion was to be handled by me in this
Creed, I thought good most humbly to call together the Religious Clergy to be
Patron of this work, of whom the Romish Clergy have taken so many deadly
blows, that they fear no Clergies forces and blows more; and whom it
greeueth them to see endowed of God with so many excellent parts of piety,
knowledge, tongues and prophecy. Therefore that great Tiberine fisherman, when
as his trade of fishing began to be laid aside, and wax cold, because that
certain great fishes had broken out of his netts torn and worn for age, drew
unto him certain skillful workmen out of our Universities, with deceitful
rewards, who might mend again the netts being so tatterd and torn, and make
them fit to catch not Souls but Crowns; and those whom he first caught with
his golden bait as fishes, he sent back again as fishermen. Whereto agrees
that of Martial.

He sent us great rewards,
but sent them on a hook:
How can the fish on fisherman
in lovely manner look?
With the same cunning deceit he does daily endeavor to entangle young learned
students, and to entise them with deadly gifts unto him, that they may help,
and uphold his forlorn and desperate quarrel. Wherein he seems to be like to
that Pithius the usurer in Cicero, Cic: Offic: 3.
who that he might cosen Cannius a plain country Gentleman, called to him all
the fishermen, and taught them what they should do, that they should fish
altogether, and bring the fish when it was caught, and lay them at his feet,
by which devise he might sell his farm at a dearer rate. So the Bishop has
sent for fishermen out of Germany, Which is the Popes signet.
but chiefly out of England, under the ring of the fisherman, who should
secretly return to the fish ponds whence they came, and being caught
themselves should catch others, and should bring their boats, and fishes of
all sorts, to him, that by that means he might make the merchandise of his
Church the more salable. This is the Bishops cunning. Was this the reason he
allured our youth unto him with rewards, and placed them in his Colleges of
Rome and Rhemes, that he should send them back twice worse than he found
them? This cousenage of our young men, wherewith this grand cousoner of the
world does uphold his seat, is to be prevented with all the advice we can.
Whereby he does plainly show, what great confidence he puts in our men's wits,
wherewith he perceives, that the tower of Babylon is both most egerly defended
and impugned in this age of ours. He has none of his side more learned than
the English-Priests, chiefly the Jesuits, who that they might infect the
English, write in English, in the judgment of wisemen elegantly, in the
judgment of fools probably, that they may supply that by the goodness of their
style, which is wanting to the goodness of their cause. Neither yet do they
bring any new matter, but they pol sh and trim over their old stuff, objected
a hundred times by their side, and refuted a hundred times by ours; and they
cast a new color and flourish over there thredbare and withered arguments,
that the Jesuits school may seem to have refined old popery, as Medea did
Pelia with her enchantments. The description of a Papist.
But it does bewray in the encounter both her fear and diffidence, while she
does enlarge the Canon with the Apocriphals, diminish the Scripture with her
traditions, overthrow the original with her translation, pervert the text with
her gloss. In the mean while she sends out books wherein she stuffes out her
arguments concluded commonly out of mere allegories, enforced proportions,
lame similitudes, fained miracles, foolish revelations, naked names of Fathers,
hired testimonies of Scholemen, which she (I must confess) has furnished with
fine words and well polished, and with a curious composition of sentences,
attiring the Roman harlot with all her trimmings, with the entisements
whereof the unstable and unwary young age of many may be caught and deceived.
Upon the Favorers of which books, who either bring them over to us, or by
reading defend them, or give them to other to be read with allowance of them; I
wish that punishment might be inflicted, D. Ed. Cok. do: com: place in his
Epistle prefixed before the case of Postnati.
which a most Reverend Judge declares to be prescribed by law. The authors of
these books, as soon as the Italian air has blown upon them, do think the
northern people to be scarce men, who write against them though they write
with a better conscience and greater faithfulness then themselves. For they
hold themselves to the true Canon, they trust wholly to the written word, they go
to the original, The description of a Protestant.
they have the same text and commentary, but that they bring in the Apostles
breaking the way, and the Fathers following after, as witnesses of their own
times, as those that judge the Apostles in a matter of faith are to he
harkened unto without the Fathers, and not the Fathers without the Apostles. So
they do not play with reeds in their hands like the Adversaries, but strike
through with their darts: neither do they allege arguments without
testimonies, or testimonies without arguments: which they do not reckon up
for number, but consider for the weight: neither do they deceitfully urge
parcells taken out of the body of the Scripture, as the Adversaries, who read
them reported out of some magistrall book or other; but allege them being
furnished with all circumstances, that from thence they may infer and urge
the truth: neither do they follow after types and allegories, but search out
the inward substances and natures of things, neither do the use any whorish
trimmings, but such sound and sober ornaments, which become the cause of God.
Fearful opponents, great Orators, such as many more are to be esteemed who
do not write, whose stinges if any shall think are lost because they lie
close, he is much deceived. By hearing of whose learned Lectures and Sermons,
and reading their books I ingenuously confess, I come better instructed and
prepared to defend the cause. That as we read the family of the Scipios were
borne to the ruin and overthrow of Carthage, so me think I may hope, that our
Clergy is borne again of God and sent into the world to the utter ruin: and
destruction of Rome. Whom therefore may I better desire to be the Patron of my
labors, then that Clergy that is the fatal vanquisher of Rome? I may add
thereto, that seeing my self in the former course of my life have been joined
with many notable men in the University, either in the fellowshippe of
studies, or in the Court in the duty of preaching, or in conversation in the
bond of friendship: I thought by this my dutiful Dedication I should renew the
memory of our acquaintance in Christ. Last of all, who is ignorant that our
writers, when once they have stirred up more earnestly the God of this world,
and have touched Antichrist to the quick, with what virulent calumniations the
professed enemies will traduce them? And it is not to be wondered at, if they
spare not their books whose throats they would cut: and detract from their
good names, whose lives they seek after? who when they cannot do mischief to
good men by themselves, will attempt to effect it by false brethren. If this
were done in the green tree, how much more in the withered? and if they deal
thus with the tale Cedars, how will they press down the mean trees, and
lower shrubbs? The greater is my hope, that it will come to pass that they who
write, being moved with the sense of their injury: and they that do not write
being moved with the goodness of the cause, will by their authority maintain
another, that offers himself to danger for the glory of Christ. For the
Doctors and writers in the cause of the Gospel as they be most odious to such
as be wicked so should they be most dear to them that be well given. For
these causes (Fathers and Brethren) I have thought good to have these my small
labors to be most humbly and dutifully dedicated unto you, in whose religion I
thought faithfulness; in whose doctrine assistance; in whose love comfort; and
in whose authority help did consist. You have seen as I said at the first the
insolency of the Papists, your Fathers have felt their cruelty, you cannot
neither ought you to forget the powder or rather the Jesuits treason; which
threatened the Kingdom; the massacres of Paris, and the Church; the fires of
Queen Marie: whose imbers the Pope your old friend O ye Clergy of England
does hide and cover, he does well remember your duty, he forgets not your love
toward him. Against your argument drawn from the Scripture he fetches his
drawn from the fagots. You pass over the fire covered over with false ashes.

Therefore that which ministers occasion to many to write, the same must be an
occasion for all to take heed. And that which was cause to me to seek for your
patronage and help, the same should be the cause of stirring up our zeal, and
watchfulness. GOD preserve the KING and Kingdom, GOD defend the Clergy the
most flourishing of the whole world, being the eye of the Kingdom, from the
injuries and treacheries of all their enemies.

Your Lordships and Your worships most devoted in Christ LEONEL SHARP.

THE EPISTLE to the Christian READER; Wherein the glass of Christ, and
Christianity is contained.
YOU are not ignorant, Christian Reader, that the hatred of the Synagogue of
Rome, has been a long time very deadly and open against the reformed Church,
and that it has been secret against the Scripture, and covered over, with a
shadow of outward Religion, and a veil of devotion. For although she be much
moved with the envy at our flourishing Church, and with the injury of her own
beauty so despised; yet because she feels hirselfe so wounded in her head
with a weapon from heaven, cast by the hand of man, she is no less angry with
God, that gave the weapon, than with man that cast it. Which if it were not so,
truly she would never have endured so many Aesops fables, a nose of wax, a
shipmans hose, a Delphian sword, black and inkie Divinity. Scripture men,
inckie Divines.
slanders, so wickedly and profanely vtterd against the holy Scripture to have
been published in print: she would never have furthered such devises in her
inward Laterane Conclaue, which should have framed Matthew: Paris: in Hen: 3.
page: 104.
a new Gospel, Li^^ consor: Fran^isi page: 304.
a new Jesus, The Bull of Pius 4. about the profession of the oath of orthodox
faith annex. to the Con: Trent: sub Innoc: 3.
a new Creed. But she was displeased with the four Evangelists, because they
passed by their Pope as a unknown man. And therefore she created a fifth
Evangelist, who by the help of the Monks might coin a fifth Gospel fitter
for their purpose than the other. They deemed the true Jesus the son of
Marie, crucified by Gods decree upon Mount Caluarie for the salvation of men,
to be but half a Savior. Therefore they devised Francis, Peter Barnardons
son, as if he had been pierced with the same wounds of Christ, and in the
same parts, and consecrated him in the Laterane Council to be the Typical
Jesus. She thought the twelve articles of the faith, gathered together by
Christ's 12. Apostles, not to be sufficient for salvation. And therefore
published twelve new articles of the faith composed in the Council of Trent,
and brought by Pope Pius the fourth, into the form of a Creed, Paul the fifth
being the furtherer of it. O holy mother the Church, but o father far more
holy. In the mean time she preached Christ's great love and bounty toward the
Pope, and the Popes reverence and obsequiousnes toward Christ. But seeing
Babylon that old whore had learned to trim and paint hir-selfe, but to
dissemble her inward affections, and cunningly to cloak her hatred with love,
and her love with hatred, every wiseman is to forecast, being taught by former
hurt and mischief, not any more what she does pretend, but what she does
intend. She knows that the Scripture is a reuealer of her idolatry,
luxury, covetousness, pride and cruelty. She fretts and chafes that no
portion of honor and government, but of labor and pains is allotted unto the
Pope by Christ his Testament. She is grieved at the heart that she is
foretold by the Apostles to be mystical Babylon, and the Pope to be that
Antichrist. She abhorres the Scripture as a thief does the gallows; she
despises the Apostles as her accusers; she hates Christ as her Judge, but
with a secret hatred; as she loves Antichrist with a secret love, whose
enemy she does earnestly counterfeit hir-selfe to be, that she may seem to
be at familiar enmity with him. So she does counterfeit hirselfe to be a most
dutiful worshipper of the Scripture, as of the former Counsels: and does
often allege it as the Devil does, turned to a contrary sense, and does
allege it but as a falsifier fraudulently corrupted: and she is inwardly
vexed, that such a blow is given to her head by the Scriptures, not as they be
expounded by us, but as they be understood by those Synodes. But she takes
nothing more grievously then that in the supremacy of her jurisdiction,.i. in
the chief article of her public religion, that two of their chiefest
founders, as she calls them, be so silent witnesses in this cause S. Peter, 1
Pet: 5.
and S. Paul. S. Peter who did plainly forbid superiority to any one Priest
over the Clergy: and styled himself most truly and most humbly not an
Archpriest, but a fellow-priest: S. Paul who when of purpose he sent an
Epistle to the Romans, made no mention at all of the Pope and the prerogative
of the Church of Rome, nor of the after-borne articles of the faith, which she
in great plenty brought in afterward. And when as of set purpose he had
reasoned of the perpetual government of the militant Church, and had gathered
together many unities; one God, one faith, one spirit, one body, one Lord, he
ouer-past one visible head, Ephesians: 4.
being forgetful of their Peter. And no marvel, when as Peter himself was
forgetful of himself. He did rather divide the government of the Church among
all the Bishops, and would rather have it an Aristocraticall government with
many under Christ, than Monarchical under one: as the practice of the Church
next following for many ages did approve. For that the five Patriarchs had
equal authority, both Balsamon does witness, and the Council of Niece does
confirm. And Francis Duarene writes, that Boniface the third, Francis: Duar.
de sacris benef: lib. 1. cap: 10.
not before the 607. years, not without much ado could obtain of Phocas to
be created the universal Bishop. The Pope then is indebted to a King-killer
for all the glory of his kingdom, and yet he seems to give thanks to Christ,
as if by his word, Feed my sheep, he had ordained the Bishops of Rome in
Peter, as he writes himself, a fellow-minister, to be Kings so many ages
before they were borne. Cic. ad Petu^ ep: 9. ^: 8.
As Cicero when as a false decree of the Senate, was brought into Armenia and
Siria as made against his mind, writes that thanks were given him from
foraigne Kings, because he had named them to be Kings by his consent, whom he
knew not that they were not only named, but not so much as to be borne. But
the Nicene Council does greatly discontent the Roman Bishop, whom he makes
but equal to the Bishop of Alexandria. For therefore the Bishop had corrupted
that Canon, which had restreyned the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, nor
being therewith content, did add many years after fifty false Canons to
twenty true of the Nicene Council, that he might make the whole world
believe, that his supremacy which was apparently shortened by the Nycene
Fathers being alive, were enlarged by them being dead. As the same Cicero does
pleasantly sport himself with Antonie, Philip: 1.
when as he had published certain false decrees of Caesar, that the Citizens
that were sent into banishment of him alive, should be recalled being dead: and
that the City that was denied them of him alive, should be granted being dead:
and that many immunities and privileges that were taken of him being alive,
should be sold of him being dead: by which means Antonie did affect both an
infinite and hurtful power. So the Pope does publish many acts as proceeding
from Christ, as from the Apostles, as from the Nicene Fathers, whereby he does
usurp most proud and cruel government in the Church. And he fetches them
from the dead, for they were never made by them when they were alive. In like
manner he brings in the Chalcedon Fathers being dead, Co^up: of a Can: of
Chalcedon.
denying that which they affirmed when they were alive. Judging, say the
Fathers of Chalcedon, that the Sea of Constantinople in matters Ecclesiastical
be as well advanced in matters ecclesiastical as the Roman, being the next
unto it. Which words are falsely recited, Distinct: 22. Renovantes.
or rather filthily corrupted in the Canon Law; while he adds a negative to
the last words, which alters the sense of the whole Canon into a clean
contrary: yet notwithstanding let it not be advanced in matters ecclesiastical
as she, but let her be the next unto it. What should I make many words? The
first six general Counsels, which may be thought to have best of all known
Christ's mind, and to deliver it most faithfully about the government of the
Church, although they granted a primacie of order, and difference to the Bishop
of Rome; yet they denied him a supremacy of power and jurisdiction: and
according to the sixth Canon of the Nicene Council hembde in the Sea of Rome
into certain limits, wherein being included she should not break forth. Yet
for all that they brake over the bounds set down both by God and Men. God that
he might punish the contempt of the Gospel, brought so grievous a sluggishnes
upon the world, and so general an apostacy upon the Church, that the time it
self laying up and hiding all means of help, did not only bring to light the
bramble formerly hid in the ground, but brought it abroad, and set it aloft,
and placed it above all the Cedars of Libanus: First, above Bishops in Boniface
the third: after above Kings and Emperors in Gregory the 7, whose wings being
so often clipped by four Counsels, Worms, Papta, Brixis and Montze, grew
again in the successors so far that they flew at the last above Counsels.
Till the three general Counsels of Pisa, Constance, and Basil, Constant: Con:
Sess: 1.
did not only displace Popes out of the Popedom, but decreed that Councels
were above the Popes. For the Pisan Council did cast two Popes Gregory and
Benett out of their seats; and choose Alexander the fifth. And the Council of
Constance assembled by the summons of John the 23. for refusing their trial,
and for his abominable symonie, and wicked life and manners, deprived him of
his Popedom, Sess: 10 and 12. Sess: 4. and 5.
and after condemned Gregory the twelfth not appearing, and cut him of as a
withered member, and an incorrigible heretic and schismatike as they plainly
termed him. And that it may seem not to have dealt rashly, This holy general
Synod, say they, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, and representing the
Church militant, has immediate power from Christ (not from the Pope but from
Christ) whose power any whosoever, of what estate and condition soever, even
the Pope himself is bound to obey. And farther declares, if the Pope do
obstinately refuse to obey the statutes, ordinances, and injunctions, which
either this holy Synod, or any other, hereafter general Synod lawfully
assembled, either now have or hereafter shall decree, that he is to be
constreyned to a condign satisfaction, and worthily to be punished: and so
John the 23. being deposed and cast out, it choose Martin the fifth for Pope.
The Pope and the Council did long contend about the maioritie and superiority
as they term it: but the Council had the upper hand. Here comes to my mind a
certain tale, not unpleasant, of the spawne of a frog, which a Calfe had
trodden upon in the absence of the Damme, which Calfe when one escaping from the
rest, had described to the frogge his damme to be a great beast; how big I
pray said she, and (puffing out her self) thus big? greater by the half
said the young one: Horaec. Sermo: 2 Sa^y: 2.
what by so much, said the Frog, when she had blown up hir-selfe more and
more? not if you break your self, said he, can you be equal to it.

The Council of Constance with her foot trod upon two frogs, though they
would have fled from trial, and declared it self to be greater and higher
than the Pope though he sweld never so big. The Council had done well, if it
had not crushed in pieces two Doves; and had not decreed that cup which Christ
for diverse causes had commanded in his supper should be given to the people,
for more and more weighty causes, as they say, was to be taken from them. Which
the Council of Basil did restore afterward, Sess: 13.
being assembled by Martin the fifts Bull, and confirmed by the letters of
Eugenius the 4. whom she deposed, and being ratified by the Bull of Nicholas
the fifth, who succeeded Eugenius, declared the decree of the Council of
Constance about the power of the general Council against the Pope to be a
truth of the catholic faith, Basil: Con: Sess: 16.
and adjudged him an heretic that did obstinately resist the two former truths.

Therefore let the Pope either submit himself under the general Council, or
by the judgment of the general Council he must needs confess himself to be
an heretic. Hence is all their grief, and their secret quarrel against the
Scriptures, and the former Synods, and the latter also, (though they somewhat
favored the Romish superstition) because they did repress her ambition. Till
at the last two other Counsels, the Laterane and the Tridentine, did lift up
the Pope, not only above all Counsels, but above all Scriptures, that he at
his pleasure might put out the Crows eyes, as the Proverb is, and as if he
were the 13 Apostle, set forth a doctrine at his own liking contrary to the
Scripture. After this sort after many ages, and dangers, the Pope got place
above Bishops, Kings, Councels, and Scriptures themselves.

So great a work it was to build the Romish seat.

The very naked name whereof is opposed against all our encounters, as it were
Gorgons head. Do we allege the Fathers? what marvel is it, if when he
perceives they stand against him, he reiects them in several, when he
contemnes them all in general? Do we allege Councels? The former are
corrected by the later, the better by the worse, and the more by the fewer. Do
we allege the Scriptures? what good do we thereby, when we have a Sphinx at
home, who can lay open the Scripture as it were a riddle according to his own
sense and his best avail. Thus they reduce all things at the last to the
mother the Church, or rather to the father of the Church. For they make the
mother to be of the masculine gender, and bring the most general general, to
one that is singular, that is, to the Pope for the time ruling. With whose
spirit that Synagogue being filled, it seems closely to be offended with none
of the Apostles more than with S. Paul: by whose silence, she taks her self
not only not to be assisted, but to be hurt by his testimony, when as the
merit of works being abandoned, he concludes the only mercy of God in
Christ being apprehended by faith, to be man's justice before God. Which
conclusion does overthrow all Popery, as it shall afterward appear. It does
plague the Synagogue: for it touches two things to the quick, the Bishops
miter, and the Monks bellies: for faith being placed in the only merits of
Christ, has diminished the Indulgences, the treasure of the Church, and makes
the offerings to images to be more rare and sparing. So that the Synagogue, does
sometime as well closely accuse S. Paul of heresy, as Luther and Calvin. I
once heard two old popish Doctors, one of them a Friar Ieronimite in Portugal,
another a Iacobine in France say, when they were pressed with Paul's authority,
one of them that S. Peter without doubt was a Catholic, but Paul if he be not
warily expounded seems to smell of heresy. The Other, that places out of Paul,
by the testimony of Peter, were hard to be understood, and had need of a
Romish Commentary; Peter I said made mention of the hardness, but not of the
commentary. In whose Epistle say they, whatsoever sounds against the Roman
faith therein we do not attain to the true sense, that which the Rhemists
have observed. Rhem: testam argument: epist: in gene.
For he in the first chapter (say the Friars) did commend the faith of the
Church of Rome, whereto Cyprian denies that unfaithfulness can have access.
But in the 11. chapter, I say, Epist: 50.
he warned the same Church, that if it departed from the bountifulness of God,
it should take heed lest as the Church of Israel was cut off, so she were not
cut off also. It may therefore be cut off be it spoken by Cyprians leave. For
it is in act cut off, when it is fallen from that foundation, which is placed
in the only mercy of Christ, apprehended by faith. That faith therefore of the
Church which Paul the Apostle so much commended, and taught by his writings is
one: and the faith of this Church which Paul the Pope has left so deformed
with his unwritten traditions is another. And yet she glories much, as I
said, that Paul is her founder; I had rather they would use him as an author.
But she will never do it. She makes more account of Paul's Bulls, than Paul's
Epistles: which the ancient Fathers did rightly term the key of the
Scripture. Which most of the popish sort do so fear, that they cannot
reconcile Paul and S. James together, but oppose them one against the other, The
reconciling of Paul and James.
as if James the Apostle had concluded that a man is justified by his works
before God, not with faith alone, against the Apostle Paul; when as Paul does
not understand the same faith and the same justification which James does. For
he requires faith placed in the heart: this rejects faith bragged on in the
tongue. He requires a lively faith, this rejects a dead faith. He does
enforce a heavenly faith, which lays hold on the promise: this casts of a
devilish faith, which does only acknowledge Christ's history without
application: he does commend and extol fruitful faith working by love: this
does rightly condemn a barraine faith void of the duty of holiness: he does
set forth the justification before God, which Aquinas calls the righteousness
of imputation, James the justification before men, whom the same Aquinas
calls the righteousness of declaration. Moses, from whom either Apostle drew
his testimony, does expound each, and does take up the controversy, begun by
the Adversary. The imputation of righteousness, whereof Moses makes mention
Gen: 15.6. went thirty years before that work, for which they dream that
Abraham was justified before God. Which circumstance of time Paul most
earnestly weighing, concludes that faith was imputed to Abraham to obtain
righteousness before God 15 years, as Moses notes, before he begat Isaac,
and other 15 years at the least before he would have sacrificed him.

They know not well how to loose themselves out of this indissoluble knot,
whosoever think that righteousness was imputed to Abraham before God, because
he killed his son who was not as yet borne, when as the Holy Ghost does
pronounce him to be righteous: which S. James himself v: 23 seems to
understand, as Oecumenius gathers out of the place. that Abraham was the
image of justification, which is wrought by faith alone, when it was imputed to
him for righteousness, ver: 23. ver: 21.
that he believed: and of that justification also which is by works, when he
would have offered his son Isaac upon the Altar. Therefore faith did make
perfect the person of Abraham, and the work did justify the faith, and
declare each to be perfect. Is this a fight? is this an opposition? especially
between two holy Apostles, who writ their Epistles with the instinct of the
same spirit. But no one thing does more nearly gaul the Synagogue, then that
Paul the Apostle by the direction of the spirit, writ the commentary of the
mystery, Apoc: 9. 2 Thessalonians: 2. 1 Timothy: 4.1.
which S. John afterward set forth of that great Antichrist, whom he makes to
be the falling star, i. an apostata from the faith, or rather the prince of
the apostacy, as Paul expounds it. John calls him the Angel of the
bottomless pit, the key-keeper of hell, the beast arising out of the earth,
and counterfeyting the lamb with two horns, and in his voice resembling the
Dragon. Therefore in show the Vicar of Christ, in deed his adversary, in
ambition above Kings, Gods emulus as Paul explaines it. John in order the 7.
King of the Roman state, Apoc: 13.
the reviued image of the former beast, to be after revealed within the Empire
decayed, as Paul does interpret it. John sitting in the common place Lord of
the seven hill'd City, in the special place in the temple of God, A
description of the Pope.
that is, in the Church of God, as Paul does expound it: S. Paul being not
therewith content, defines Antichristianitie, to be not iniquity, but the
mystery of iniquity. And does after divide it into three parts; 1. Curious
speculations. 2. Absurd superstitions. 3. Jewish ceremonies,
whereof it is wholly compounded: which who so holds does not hold the head,
as the Apostle speaks. I beseech thee Christian Reader tell me what is more
like, than old and new Antichristianitie? What is become of them, who deny that
Popery has his beginning from the ancient heresies? which being of the same
age with the Apostolic truth in many things, as Tertullian says, was wounded
with the Apostolic style, as shall be made manifest in the discourse
following. I do therefore more disdain than admire that the Apostle Paul does
so exceedingly displease the Roman synagogue, who did foreshew that Popery
should be patcht together, of Paganism, Idiotisme, and Iudaisme.

A little Glass of Christ and Christianity.
But I purposing to set out all the force and nature of Antichrist and
Antichristianitie in latin, I thought good to set before it a lively and short
form of Christ and Christianity, which the Apostle defines to be the
mystery of godliness: that the truth of the Gospel being brought into light
out of the labyrinth, as it were, of discoursing, might put to flight with her
authority and countenance the Tridentine heresy.

Colos. 1.29.
God the Father did decree by the testimony of Paul, that his only begotten
son from all eternity, Heb. 1.10.
the Creator of heaven and earth, Colos. 1.16.
of Angels and men, Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his glory, and Character of his person, Heb. 2.16.
should take on him not the nature of Angels but of men, Heb. 7.25.
wherein he alone without any fellow helpers might fully finish the whole
salvation of man. God the son, Romans 9.5.
God above all blessed for ever, though Arrius revived burst for grief, 1.
Tim. 3.16.
revealed in the flesh, approved in the spirit.

True God, true man, brought forth without a father
By a maid, whom God begat without a mother.
Heb. 7.3.
As he was shadowed out by Melchisedech, and therefore 1. Tim. 2.5.
the only one Mediator between God and man in the fullness of time, fulfilled
the decree of his Father, reconciling God displeased with man that was lost by
his own accord, The means whereby salvation is procured to man.
by the excellency of his person, the sanctity of his nature, obedience of
his life, and sacrifice of his death, did alone deserve eternal salvation, not
infusing into him so much grace, whereby man himself might merit salvation to
himself, Romans 4.24.25.
but imputing the merit of his death, which he might lay hold on with a
thankful and holy mind. God the holy Ghost proceeding from them both, did
lay open to the mind of man salvation which the Father decreed, the Son
deserved, and sealed it up in his heart, Ephesians. 1.14.
given not as a pledge, but as an earnest (which Austin observes out of the
Apostle Austin in this place.
) because that money which was borrowed when it is paid again the pledge is
restored; but the earnest when the price is paid again is not restored,
because it is part of the price which is not to be taken away, but is to be
supplied, as Aquin. in this place.
Aquine teaches out of Austin. Therefore the spirit of Christ given to man,
the earnest of heavenly inheritance is not paid back again. So the Apostle
has set three foundations of man's salvation more sure then heaven and earth.

1. The eternal decree of the Father. 2. The infinite merit of the Son. 3.
The irreuocable earnest of the spirit.
So the work of our salvation is from God alone, the knowledge of salvation
from the word of God alone, hence he is called the word of salvation. Gal. lib.
2. de sanitate tuenda.
Galen writes that the cause of many diseases in the body as hereditarie
proceeds from corrupt seed, and from putrified nourishment. The disease of
the soul is hereditarie, from corrupt seed as Job says, which is increased
by custom of sinning, as with impure nourishment. Now as the diseases of the
bodies are cured by contraries, so the diseases of souls: which God being Pet.
1.23.2.2.
dead begets again by immortal seed, being again begotten feeds them
with pure nourishment, being sick and diseased heals them with wholesome
medicines, that is with the pure word of God, who is to be accounted the true
Father, Pastor and Physician of the soul. Yet he uses men to that purpose as
instruments, whom he sends and moves, that first they preach forgiveness
and absolution from all their sins promised freely by faith in Christ to the
penitent: and after enjoin two things to him that is forgiven; One, that he
pay back again the duty of holiness to the blessed trinity alone, for so
unspeakable a blessing of salvation; The other, that he afford all the help
of charity to man for Gods sake, being the lively Image of God: setting before
the obedient at the last inward peace upon the earth, and an eternal
inheritance in the heavens. So the men of God do raise up a man that is
sorrowful with the promise, direct a man that goes astray with the
commandment, comfort him that is fainting with the reward: but the men of God
do speak outwardly, the spirit of God does work inwardly. They do beat
these things into their ears, the spirit does engender faith, hope, and love
in the heart; faith which does apprehend the promise; hope which looks for
the reward, love which keeps the commandment. Colos. 1.12.
For God does not find man fit, but makes him fit to participate the
inheritance of the Saints in light, whom he draws being unwilling, and took
him resisting out of the power of darkness, and placed him being thus
delivered in the kingdom of light, the kingdom of the son of his love.
Ephesians. 2.1.
For he found man not yet regenerated, dead in sins, not half dead, but
stark dead: not like to the man with the palsy who lay sick on his couch,
but to Lazarus who lay four days stinking in his grave: So that every sinner,
before he hear the powerful voice of Christ speaking inwardly to him, lies
putrified, and consumed in the grave of his sins. Whence a sinner rises, and
comes forth as Lazarus, for the power of the Lord is in both, not the power
of the dead, Austin: in tracta: of John 49.
as Austin does expound Saint Paul. So that he has need not of helping
grace, whereby he recouereth health, but creating grace, whereby he is again
brought to life. And a sinner is merely passive and can bring no more help to
his conversion, then Lazarus brought to his rising again. In whom Christ does
not help his weak will, but create a new Galat. 6.15. Ephesians. 2.10.
, hence the conversion of a sinner is called new creation; not in respect of
the natural faculties, and of moral virtues which sin only corrupts, but
of spiritual graces which sin has blotted out, as the master of the
sentences observed out of Austin. Therefore the image of God imprinted in the
soul, in respect of the substance is deformed, in respect of the qualities is
clean put out Greg. Nyss. de orat. Dom. Sermon 5.
as Gregory Nyssen teaches. The restoring then of the image blotted out, is
the rising again of man being dead. This is the nature, this is the
disposition of the Apostles doctrine: it does depresse man, that it may extol
God: it does cast off corrupt nature, that it may bring in saving grace. A man
therefore must live in God, yea farther by God, before he can either will, or
think any good; a mere passive subject of grace at the first, while being as
it were made warm by the spirit of Christ, he begins to will his own
conversion, and is made a voluntary instrument of grace, by no imbred or
infused force of the will, but by the power of the seed of grace, and of the
new life which he had from God. Paul does thus distinguish between a man to
be converted, and converted. He makes him to be altogether the servant of
sin, because he is overcome of sin; this free in part, because he is made
free by the Son: not appointing him free in part, lest he make him
sacrilegious, nor this altogether a servant, lest he might make him sluggish.
He does not therefore take from the unregenerate, all power of willing, but all
power of well-willing, that he may not lift up the crest of his natural pride;
and he grants to the regenerate some power of well-willing, that he may not
weaken the strength of spiritual diligence. And that God may give life to the
dead, and renew and repair the lost image of God Ephesians: 3.10.
, he does fasten and imprint the true knowledge of God and our selves into the
mind, and righteousness and holiness into the will of man; he does enlighten
the blind, with the light of his wisdom shining into him, he does cover him
being naked with the robe of his righteousness put upon him, and being
unsavory, he does season him with the salt of his holiness infused into him.
Whereby 1 Cor: 1.30.
Christ is said to be made of God to the faithful man wisdom, righteousness,
and sanctification. Paul makes mention of a twofold righteousness and life of
a Christian: one, whereby he lives before God; the other, whereby he lives
before men. Gal: 2.20.
By faith before God, by apprehending of Christ Gal. 5.6.
, by love before men by the practice of holiness. So that good works are not
the cause of justification, but justification is the cause of good works, as
Aug: de Spi: and li.
Austin affirms: neither do we attain faith by virtues, but virtues by
faith, as Bede gathers out of Gregory. One order is in moral matters,
another in heavenly: one in Aristotle, another in Paul Arist. 3. ethi.
. There a man must do just things justly, before he be just: Here a man must
be first just in another before he can do just things, and justly in himself.
As Christ is made sin for us, so we are made the righteousness of God in
Christ. 2 Cor. 5. vlt.
For Christ himself most holy was made sin by the imputation of our sin,
we sinners therefore are righteous only by the imputation of the righteousness
of Christ. At August: in Euchirid: c. 41.
Austin does expound the Apostle, and Anselme, Austin. He therefore is sin as
we are righteousness: not ours, but we are Gods, not in our selves, but in
him: as he is sin, not his own, but ours; not in himself, but in us. So
Austin. So Ansel: in loc.
Anselme; He is sin, says he, as we righteousness, not ours, but Gods, not in
us, but in him: as he is sin, not his own, but ours, not in himself but in
us. Both of them do acknowledge with us, the imputed righteousness of Christ
with the Apostle, howsoever the Synod of Trent do make inherent
righteousness the form of justification, and the Rhemists too profanely
scoff at the imputation of righteousness, which Pighius that arch-papist does
confess. A sinner therefore dead in himself, lives righteous in Christ, and
lives not to himself, but to God: but yet so lives, that he feels in
himself the fight of the spirit and the flesh, which the Apostle acknowledges
not only in other Christians, but in himself, for the comfort of others: I do
not that good I will, says the Apostle, but the evil I would not that I do:
which a bad man, did not badly express: I hate and what I hate, against my
will must be,
What I would cast away, to bear is grief to me.
But that the Apostle speaks of the motions of concupiscence, whereto the
will does not consent, this of the beastly affections, whereto the will is
wholly addicted. Which notwithstanding by the working of the natural
conscience, he says he hates. But as soon as a man begins to live in God,
sin begins to dye in man. For it has received a deadly wound in the root in
respect of guiltiness: while it be cured by perfect burial it remains dead,
not cut off, that we may be humbled; not imputed, lest we should be cast down.
Sin dwells in us as a Iebusite subdued, not expelled; subdued, it takes
fear from us; not expelled, it shakes off security, that to strive with it,
it is far more safe, than to have no enemy at all. In this fight Gods grace
does help us, strengthening us with a double sacrament: of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper: there the fountain of regeneration is powered out, here the bread
of life is set before us: there is a healthful bathe to wash us when we are
foul, here is a spiritual feast to feed us when we were faint: so that from
each we may take strength to resist. So the power of God is made perfect in our
infirmity, which when out of our own skarres it stirs up in us a courage
to fight, so from help ministered from thence it puts into us sure hope that we
shall overcome. For it brings grief out of the fall for sin, and stirs
up strife out of grief with sin, and out of strife brings the victory of
sin: So out of poison it gets a remedy, and out of the sickness it gets
health. Neither does it in the mean while deprive us of inward comfort, while
we wait for the eternal triumph: But in the fight it shows us the
propitiation; after the fight, which ends in death, it presently opens the
holy place of holiest, so that neither peace of conscience is wanting to them
being alive, and their souls shall have rest when they are dead. Thus it
comes to pass, that these broken relikes of sin in the sons of God, by
Gods grace do much profit, when out of them they make an antidote against
pride, neither are puffed up with the merits of their own works. Whereby the
doctrine of Trent ought to be accounted the more abominable, which does decree
that eternal life is to be restored to the faithful, for the merit of works,
which the Apostle propounds not as the reward of a servant, but the
inheritance of a son; not paid for spiritual obedience, but given to the
spiritual generation, as Austin expounds the Apostle: the crown of
righteousness in respect of Christ, who merited: a crown of mercy, in respect
of us for whom he merited, to be given by the just judge, not for the weight of
man's merit, but for the force of Gods promise: to be rendered according to their
works, not for their works, Gregor: in 7. Psalm: peniten.
as Pope Gregory distinguishes out of the Apostle. The study therefore of
good works is to be urged, because God shall judge according to thy works: but
merit is to be detested, because it shall never save thee for good works. For
whatsoever you do well is of God, not of the merit of man, but of the blessing
of God. You do owe it therefore to God, as the creature to the Creator, as a
captive servant to his redeemer: acknowledge thy self a servant, who of right
do owe duty unto thy Lord: and whereas God does call thee his son,
acknowledge grace, and forget not nature. Neither think thou have deserved any
thing, if thou have done well, because thou oughtst to have done so. Besides
remember, that there is some filthiness from the flesh mingled with thy work
though good, which does purely flow from the spirit, that that very thing, that
we seem to live justly, is a fault, if our work, when Gods severity judges
it, Gods mercy do not excuse it before himself, so that the fault in the
work must first be forgiven to the penitent, by grace, before the work it
self be crowned by promise. Lastly the Apostle says that the afflictions of
this life are not worthy of the glory which shall be revealed, that if a man
should serve God a thousand years, and that most zealously, he should not
deserve for the merit to be half a day in heaven, Anselm. de mensura crucis.
Anselme said, although we die a thousand times, although we perform all the
virtues of the mind, yet we can do nothing worthy of earthly blessings, and
such as are present, which we daily receive from God, much less heavenly and
future which we look for as Jerome, Jerome. in hunc loc.
Chrysostom, and Basil have taught. But take away merit, and the desire of
virtue will wax cold. It may be in bastardes, who serve God with a servile,
and mercenarie mind, but in sons it is not so, who worship God the father
with a free and voluntary spirit, which the spirit of adoption has given them,
who testifies to their spirits that they be the sons of God, the inheritors
of heaven, and coheires with Christ. And if the free love of God, whereby he
being moved did bring thee back from death to life, and forgave thee all thy
transgressions, and healed all thy infirmities, and has crowned thee with his
mercies, (mark what the Prophet says) not with thy merits, but with his
mercies: if this free love I say shall not draw from thee free obedience,
nothing shall ever draw it from thee.

There be many forceable arguments whereby the Apostle persuades us to live
holily, soberly, and justly, that with good works we set forth Gods glory,
which works though they appease not God, yet they please God, and make our
election and vocation thereby sure unto us. But there is nothing more powerful
then the fatherly love of God, to provoke to goodness the ingenuous minds of
sons. This is the will of God even the sanctification and salvation of us
all: to the which ends he chose us from eternity, he called and justified us
in time, and he shall glorify us to eternity. So the mercy of Jehovah toward
his sons is from eternity to eternity, for whom he has preordained
salvation in chosing them, declared it in calling them, begun it in justifying
them, and shall perfect it in glorifying them. They that being persuaded by the
spirit of God do certainly know that they be in the grace of God now
present, and shall be ever hereafter, entering into the state of grace by faith,
and standing therein by faith, and glorying under the hope of the glory of
God, by faith, as the Apostle teaches: which place Chrysostom does thus
expound, that he that has given his faith to God, that there ought not only
a full persuasion to be assured them of those things which are given presently,
but of those that are to come, as if they were now given. That the state of
regeneration should be thought to be more certain, then of creation. The
state of the first Adam was changeable, of the second unchangeable, whose true
and lively members all the sons of God are to be esteemed. Wherefore of the
state of Christ be unchangeable, the state of them that are truly Christians,
who being grafted into Christ by faith do live, and shall live by their faith
(as the Apostle notes out of the Prophet) must needs be unchangeable. For it
was granted to Adam, that he was able not to die, as Austin speaks, but to a
Christian that he cannot possibly die. Three things says Bernard I consider,
wherein all my hope does consist: 1. The love of adoption. 2. The truth of the
promise. 3. And the power of the reward.


Which do so strengthen and confirm my heart, that no want of merits, no
consideration of our profit, no account of the heavenly blessing can drive me
from the depth of that hope wherein I am surely grounded. Therefore let my
foolish thought murmr all it can, saying who art thou? or how great is that
glory, or by what merits do thou hope to obtain it? And I will confidently
answer, I know whom I have trusted, I am in great assurance, because my God in
great love has adopted me, because he is true in his promise, and able to
perform it. Thus Bernard out of the Apostle: Who makes it plain that the
state of regeneration is most assuredly confirmed to every son of God, not
only by Gods promise, but by Gods Oath. Whom he makes partaker of the right
faith, and of working love, and of lively hope, and of earnest repentance, and
of new obedience, and calls him the heir of the promise. To whom God as
being willing to make the immutable certainety of his counsel known
plentifully, as to Abraham the Father, so to Abraham's son, did not only
promise, but swear that he would perform that to him which he had promised.
Heb. 6.
For in God it is all one to swear and to say. Yet that we should have strong
consolation, who follow after to obtain the hope set before us, which he has
appointed as a sure and strong anchor, entered within the veil, i. heaven,
whither Christ the forerunner is entered before us, he has confirmed our
immutable state unto us by two immutable things his promise and his Oath. Let
the prayer of Christ be joined to the oath of God, wherein he prays to God
the father, that he would embrace us with the same love, that he embraced
Christ himself, i. with eternal love: and would crown us with the same
glory, as he crowned himself: and did not only pray for us, but died also,
and rose again and was received into heaven, that he should for ever make
intercession for us. Who has left unto us his holy spirit, whereby he has
sealed unto us the heavenly inheritance. And therefore God has assured
eternal salvation to his sons, not only by promise, but by Oath, but by
prayer, and sacrifice of Christ, and by the seal of the holy Ghost, that we
should not doubt thereof. And yet that wicked Council of Trent decreed, that
none could know by the certainetie of infallible faith that he is in the state
of Grace, much less shall be, but that every one should be in doubt and
fear of his own Grace. That it seems to have utterly overthrown all the
foundations of man's salvation laid by the Apostle, as it shall plainly appear
by the discourse upon the popish Creed. Antonie Marinarius did withstand that
wicked decree even in the Council it self, who taught the perseverance of the
faithful was secure, and their security to be perseuered in. Ambrose
Catharinus did likewise resist, who maintained that a son of God by the
certainty of faith does know that he is in the state of grace, as any man may
be sure that there is Rome, yea and that without doubting or fear, so that he
openly did resist the Council. Albertus Pighius did afterward oppose himself,
who of set purpose does defend that our righteousness is imputed to us by
faith alone unto life. The Council of Colen may thee joined to these, wherein
many learned Divines True it is, say they, and it is required to the
justification of a man, that he certainly believe, not only in general, that
they who do truly repent shall obtain mercy by Christ, but that the man that
believes shall obtain forgiveness of his sins by faith in Christ: which
they learned out of the Apostle by the interpretation of Bernard. Thou have
Gentle Reader the Glass of Christ, the sum of the Apostolic doctrine, to be
set before the doctrine of the Trent Council, who does strike us with a curse
for the same, more fully hereafter to be propounded and maintained. The power
whereof is such, that it does clip the winge of humane pride, that it does
advance the glory of Gods grace, that it does stir up an earnest desire of
godliness, and does fasten a sure anchor of salvation: that the sons of God
may be made lowly in sin, thankful in blessing, holy in life, and
cheerful in death.

This doctrine Trent Council does overthrow, from whence those twelve articles
of faith proceeded, which Pius the 4. brought into the form of a Creed,
enjoined to be publicly professed of his, by his Bull under an oath: which
though they had their birth and beginning from heretics, yet they carry the
name of the true faith, and counterfeit the Apostles to be their parents, that
the greater store of Christians may be induced to receive them. As we
heretofore have heard that Lambert counterfeting the name and kindred of the
Earl of Warwick, had many followers, when in truth he was the bastard of a
villainous Priest: So if any shall compare these twelve bastardly and false
articles of the Popes creed, with the true and right articles of the Apostles
creed, he shall find them to be as like the Apostles, as the bastard of
Simon the Priest, was like the soon of the Duke of Clarence. The schoolmen
and the Canonists have had great ado between them, whether the Pope could make
any new articles of the faith. Bellarmine as a worshipful moderator takes up
the matter in Tortus. He diuides the articles into two sorts. He writes that
some are of immediate revelation, others drawn and fetch from them, which
notwithstanding are to be received with a catholic belief. How foolishly I
shall show hereafter, now only I show what they hold. Articles of the first
sort Bellarmine denies may be made of the Pope. As much as if he should deny
the sun could be made by the Pope, so many ages fastened to his globe by the
hand of God. The articles of the second stamp he does plainly affirm may be
made by the Pope; as if he should say, that he professes himself to be the
author and maker of that book, whereof he is the expounder and interpreter.

Now the Jesuits have divided those that were drawn from the first into two
other kinds, which are so cunningly coucht together that they can hardly be
distinguished. Some of them consist in practice, whereby treason is nourished,
other consist in doctrine, whereby superstition is cherished. Those they scatter
mystically and closely, these plainly and openly. Those I call practical and
mystical, which concern the Popes power in deposing of Kings by the sentence
of excommunication, and absoluing subjects from the oath of fealty: and
conspiracies and rebellions to be concealed under the seal of confession; and
Clerks to be exempted from the judgment of a secular Prince; and the power
of the Pope above the Council, and other wicked conclusions of the same kind,
with the school of Paris has lately condemned. And a certain Priest termed a
more moderate answerer, that he may more covertly and freely teach the
professed articles of superstition, does overthrow those mystical articles of
rebellion: for which cause he complayneth that their salary is denied him, and
the Priests of his order by the Pope. Whom I think good he should answer, as
the Ass answered Balaam, Am not I thine Ass, whereon thou were wont to ride
even till this day? Tell me if ever I did the like before, and now I have once
offended in telling the truth, why will thou beat me, and take my prouender
from me? If such Priests will give ear to me, let them forsake so unthankful,
and unjust a master, and come over to our side. For I fear lest while they
secretly sow their open articles of superstition among our Countrymen, that
they will draw them from the faith of Christ, and beget scholars for Jesuits,
whom they will infect with their hidden articles of rebellion, and bring them
from their allegiance and obedience to the King. These are fetched from the
first, bastards borne of bastards, vipers bred of vipers, the last more wicked
than the former, shortly bringing forth an of spring more vilanous. Those that
are fetched from immediate revelations, as they be supposed, make truth the way
for heresy, as the authors thereof pretend justice for wickedness. But this
is the disposition of all heretics, that out of a general truth propounded,
they always assume and draw out heresy, which as a witch does cast in a sacred
fury into their deceived minds. The Pelagians from the general allegation of
Gods grace and help, do gather a special rule of their heresy, which as
poison they distill more easily into the minds of their simple Auditors. The
Papists holding those articles of Christ generally, do infuse heretical poison
deep into their minds being seasoned with the sweet of those generals. I will
give you one example, which does farther spread it self. They believe in
general that Christ is ascended up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
God, and shall come from thence to judge both the quick and the dead. Yet the
Priest does daily bring Christ from thence, to wit, out of heaven into the
sacrament, so that he is corporally present in the sacrament, when it is
manifest that he is contained in heaven till all things be fulfilled. But here
they distinguish, that Christ shall come once from heaven visibly to judgment,
but comes invisibly every day into the sacrament. O notable deduction, that
ouerturneth the principle from whence it is drawn! O notable distinction,
which does by distinguishing utterly overthrow the principal article But so
does heresy besmere over the lip of the cup as it were with honey, that it
may be taken and go down the more merrily. As Pius the 4, who brought in the
Constantinople creed, which he calls the Rom: creed, as a preface before the
new creed being their own. Which when it seemed to me to be unworthily done,
I thought good to discourse of this new Creed of the faith, composed by the
Pope in a wicked intent, being the sum of Antichristianitie, in a Latin
Dialogue, divided into three books. The first Dialogue brings in Antichrist
as an Actor on the stage: the second and third as a Doctor in the chair. The
first does fully describe the practice of the Beast, and therefore is termed
Pragmaticall Antichrist, or Hildebrand restored to life. Taking that name from
Caesar Baronius, Caes: Baron: in sentent: sua contra Venet.
who to provoke Paul the fifth against the Venetians; Me thinks (says he) I
see sitting in Peter's chair, Gregory the 7. and Alexander the 3. two roots
of the Church liberty now decayed, both issuing out of the City of Senes,
whence your Holiness takes your beginning; whereof the one did bring under
Henry that obstinate Emperor, the other did vanquish Frederick very stoutly
opposing himself against him. You must take in hand the same quarrel.
Therefore Paul the 5. in Baronius judgment is Hildebrand brought to life
again. And if the Pope by Baronius persuasion do Gregorize or Alexandrize
with Princes, I pray to God for Jesus Christ his sake, to preserve our Prince,
that he may Henrize and Frederize, but with better success with the Popes.
The second and third Dialogue discourse of the articles of Antichrist, and
therefore is entitled Dogmaticall Antichrist, or The Popes Creed, because it
conteyneth the articles publicly to be professed: but chiefly that
incomprehensible supremacy, which to the Papists is a transcendent, when it
had not a being with the Apostles, being the head of Goliath, an evil head, or
a head full of all mischiefs, which you shall perceive in the second Dialogue
by all means defended, yet you shall say with a stone cast out of the word of
God to be well broken. But because he has made a scepter of his Crosiers
staff, the second Dialogue is rightly termed The ruling Pastor. I follow after
as I can but not with equal paces, certain notable Fathers of our Church, who
when as they first refute the grave (as they seem) and probable opinions of
Antichrist earnestly and soundly: do afterward pleasantly and wittily laugh at
his foolish and harmefull Institutions. Truth does sometime laugh at heresy,
because she is safe and secure, as Tertullian says. Scu^tile jesting does not
beseem a Divine, but a witty conceit, arising from the matter in question,
which ridiculous Antichrist cannot choose but utter to every one be he never so
sober, in his fained gravity, and pastoral majesty. Wisely said the Poet, An
earnest jest
Does more stoutly and better sometime set out great matters.


But the Papists take it in ill part, that their Pope, compared to the King is
scoft at, as though he extended his Empire in Iaponia beyond the fields of
Cuticalindon: and they be greiued that the Cardinals vanity proudly comparing
himself to the King, is pleasantly flouted at: but that the flourishing meddow
in purgatory devised by the old Doctor is scoft at, they take very hainously.
But who may not think that such odious comparisons, such proud vanities, such
foolish old-wiues-tales should not rather be laughed at with a pleasant jest,
then put off with an earnest argument? as the Prophet laughed at the wicked
fooleries of the Baalites and the Apostle called the circumcision of the false
Apostles pleasantly concision. So ridiculous be these toys, which they term
holy deceites, their vanities be so insolent, which they cast upon the people
as bridles to deceive them, that a wise man even in the dark night of popery
could not choose but deride the Pope.

Henry the second when he had honorably entertained the Popes Legate at
Windsor, and in hunting had caught a stagge, Look my Lord said he, how fat the
stagge is, and yet he never heard Mass. And when Ottobone an other of the
Popes Lagates, was purposed to lay a heavy curse upon certain noble men that
rebelled, and came to that purpose to Killingworth being attired in his purple
robe, and his red Cardinals hat, it is said that they being all in white, and
putting a surplasse upon a Surgeon whom they had got to curse Ottobone with the
like curse, brake out into this jest, that a curse of one in white was as
terrible as the curse of a purple Priest. That which was lawful for Kings and
Peers the popish sons of the Pope, to utter against the pride and superstition
of the Pope: I pray let it be lawful for a King, who does not acknowledge the
Pope for his Father, to reprove sometime with a pleasant jest that
superstition which he has learned out of the word to be not only very
hurtful, but often very foolish. As that learned Marnixius in his Bee-hiue,
when he derideth both the other vanities of popery, and also those fained
cells in hell with a continued irony, and pleasant dissembling: I should
marvel if the Pope and Bellarmine should not like the two South-sayers laugh
between themselves, when they see the world so fit to be cousoned by them. But
I my self truly will follow after not jests but arguments. And I rather
grieve, then laugh when I think of the Pope, that great scourge of God.
Neither do I hate a Papist but popery: I tax heresy not the men: and I wish
an overthrow to heresy, salvation to the men.

Our books are taught this fashion to bring in,
To spare their persons and to tax their sin.
I would not have thought it meet to tax the person of a Jesuit, if he had
not laid open his person who is more dear unto us then our lives, to the
sword of soldiers, being first wounded with the quill of a goose. Whose book
might have profited the very slaunderers themselves even to their salvation, if
they had had in them but one crumme of grace: whereto agrees that speech of
the wise Poet.

He does deserve both prick and praise
Who so with profit pleasure lays.
But whenas the Jesuits do show themselves not only Aristarchi, that is
reprehenders of our writings, Cicero in piso.
as the Orator said, but censors like Phalaris, neither do they set a note
upon our writings, but persecute our writers with fire and faggot: and do not
only sprincle over our books with black salt, but our Court with hell dust:
they may con our men thanks, who for such deeds, give but such words: and
suffer themselves sometime to be galled with the freedom of style, whom they
have hurt with the fury of their wickedness. Wherein our own men should have
been more favorable to our own writers being so excellent for holiness and
learning, whom yet I hear of some (I hope they be but a few false brethren)
like to Ianus, are wont to be though lightly bitten and reprehended. Who if
they be not ours, they might do very well, if, they would more open
themselves: if they be ours, as I rather desire, let them favor our holy
labors: unless they desire to hear of some writer of ours, which Lelius a
certain critical reprehender heard out of Martial.

When Lelius carpeth mine and keeps in his verse,
Or let him hold his prate, or else his own rehearse.
For it is both grievous and unseemly that their writings should be closly bit
with a Theonine tooth, by false brethren, whose throats are first assailed
with a leonine cruelty by open enemies. There is almost none of our writers,
who have not written that the Pope is Antichrist; But there be certain men
among us very moderate, forsooth, and politic, who would not have the
Adversary so angered and stirred up with so sharp a conclusion, and that
thereby all hope of composition and peace between the parties should be cut
off: between whom they think to be a great difference of words, but little
or none at all of things: that God is alike dear to each Church, and that the
liturgy of each is alike accepted of God, that salvation is in both, when each
does rest upon Christ the foundation, that a Papist may, although halting come
to heaven, and that the hatred of Papists is not so great as we make it, and
that it is not conceived by their own accord, but that it is encensed by such
bitter disputations: and that the quarrel had been ended, if certain hot
spirited Theologians had not increased the controversy. These lukewarm
Christians, that seem to be of no side and of both sides, seem to dispute
soberly and politickly. But your religious wisdom, Christian Reader does
better understand, that the Roman Synagogue is full of idolatry, and that it
does therefore hate God, and by Moses judgment, is again hateful to God:
neither was Caine provoked with any injury of Abels, but by his own malice
and hatred of godliness: And though both of them were wont to sacrifice to God
in Adames house, yet Caines sacrifice was rejected, Abels accepted, and the
work pleased God for the person, not the person for the work; that which
Saint Gregory gathers out of Moses, because the person was first made
righteous by faith, as the Apostle taught Heb. 11. and that therefore there is
no less difference of worship and faith between a Protestant and a Papist,
then was between Caine and Abell. And that the Synagogues anger against our
Church is as implacable, as Caines against Abell, and Ismaels against Isaac,
and that before it was stirred up with the blast of contention, it was moved
with hatred of the promise. And as the hatred of Ismael against the promise,
which he derided, being covered with a visard of circumcision, brake out
against the son of the promise; so the hidden and secret hatred of the
Synagogue of Rome against the holy scriptures, the tables of the promise, as I
said, being covered with a certain show of voluntary religion, did greiuously
break and burn out against our Church the heir of the promise, so that Agar
does not leave off to persecute Sara again, the Haidmayde her Mistress in the
house of Abraham. And when it can be proved that Caines sacrifice was as well
accepted of God as Abels, then I will grant that the Papists Mass be as
acceptable to God, as the Liturgy of the Protestants; and when it can be
euicted that Christ alone apprehended by faith without our works, is not the
foundation of the church I will grant that the same is the foundation of both
Churches. Lastly, when it shall appear that Ismael the son of the handmaide
borne by the power of nature, is coheyre of the house of Abraham with Isaac the
son of the free woman borne by the force of the promise, then I will grant
that an obstinate Papist, may come halting to heaven. In the mean time I will
warn these lukewarm and halting Protestant, that they will give sentence in
Gods matters according to the certain truth of God, not out of their
prevaricating charity, and that there be no middle counsel to be taken:
neither let them trust, the Pope being more jointly and easily entreated by
them, will be the more easy and gentle to them. Whom we by short conclusions
out of holy Paul and John, excellently expounded by notable worthies of our
Church, although a little more bitterly and roughly, then seems good to some,
we show to be Antichrist. I confess that this is a weighty and dark
prophecy, whose importance does reject the vanity of tales, whose obscurity
requires more clear light of interpretation. So it falls out sometime that
the exposition is larger, the conclusion shorter. For a short exposition and a
long conclusion are faulty alike when hard and controversies of importance are
handled. For a short exposition wants light, and a long conclusion wants
sharpness of wit. The Adversary does offend in both, while he is busied in
the interpretation of the prophecy, for it does lessen things of weight,
neither does it make plain matters obscure. For he does depresse the
excellency of the prophecy by stuffing it up with the vanity of many fables,
and being satisfied with uncertain conjectures of Fathers, and with their
naked names, has not driven away the obscurity. So it falls out, that from
strange and unkind expositions of the prophecy, they gather weak and idle
conclusions. In the unfolding of this mystery, the holy fathers have stood us
in good steed, and more had, if they had been Prophets. But whenas they (
Daniel being the Author) do teach that the understanding of the prophecy, is
to be taken from the performance of it, and grant that truth is the daughter of
time, we that are fallen upon the ends of times, conferring all the parts of
the prophecy between themselves with great study and reverence, and bringing
light to the text, out of the context, and to the context out of the event,
because Christ has opened the book that was sealed up, nor called it an A
thing sealed and hidden.
apocrypse, but an A thing opened and revealed.
apocalypse, we do from thence more confidently draw a conclusion, not as an
Article of faith, but as asure demonstration of the doctrine of Christ.
Although the popish Synagogue, which without any testimony of Scripture makes
this the thirteenth Article of their faith, I believe that the Pope is the
Vicar of Christ, may justly pardon the reformed Church if being taught by so
many testimonies of Scripture, it make this to be an Article of their faith, I
believe that the Pope is Antichrist. Now I did foresee that when I made a
looking glass for Paul the 5. it would come to pass, that the Jesuits, who
do so often traduce the King of great Britain, with their slanderous and
infamous libels, would be much moved to anger, that I often used the name of
their Pope in this manner. For what will they say? dare thou an obscure
fellow speak so often to the Pope being so great a Prince? or conceiuest thou
any hope that being an heretical minister, thou can convert so great a
Doctor? Whereby thou have got naught else for thy labor, but that thy folly
and pride should be known to all men. These I presage will be the embleames
of the Iesuitish style, whereto (thy self Reader shall be an Arbitrator) I
shortly answer. I see that the Pope of his own is accounted a great Father,
but thrust as a small Prince by his great neighbor Princes into a small corner
of the south: but how big soever he be, I speak to the Pope as not to a
political Prince, but political Antichrist. I favor his civil dignity
whatsoever it be, but I spare not his spiritual impiety. But what? do I take
in hand to convert the Pope? no more then I endeavor to wash an Ethiopian. I am
not yet so mad. I know that the belly has no ears. And it may be Paul the
fifth, as it is said, is dead. What then? but Paul being dead the Pope is alive.
One head grows up under an other. For the popedom is a Hydra. I do not
defend that this or that Pope, but that the Pope is Antichrist. It remains
now Christian Reader, that I exhort and entreat thee by thy salvation, that the
hatred of the Synagogue being contemned, though thou well know Christ, to know
him with me daily better out of the Scriptures, that both of us may more
earnestly love him, and more earnestly follow him being loved, and further that
you know him peradventure suspected by you, to be Antichrist, more certainly
by the event of the prophecy, that being known each may pursue him with an
holy hatred, and right execration; to which purpose I first set before thee the
Glass of Christ and view of Christianity, now I set before thee the Popes
Looking-glass and the picture of ANTICHRIST.

The Translator to the READER.
CHristian Reader, I doubt not, but a translation of such a nature, will incur
much reprehension, even of good men, not only in respect of the matter, which
it somewhat obscure for the vulgar, but also for the manner, which must needs
come short of the original. For the first, if the work be so good, that it
was thought fit to be made known to some, I see no reason, but it may be made
known to more; and so may be, Bonum quo communius, eo melius. And for the
other, I confess, it comes far short of that sufficiency, wherein it was
set out in Latin, and so would have been, though it had fallen on a skillful
workman in respect of our English, which is far more barbarous, and is many
times the worse, when it is set out with bombasted words and incke-horne
terms, such as the world is too well acquainted with at this day. What the
Rom-Catholikes think of the work, I care not, they are like to loose by it,
and loosers will have their words. The Latin has been censured by them
already, as I am informed to be well written for the style, but exceeding bad
for the matter. Whose censure I will regard, contrary to Ciceroes censuring of
a Gentlewomans dancing, whereof he said, the better the worse: but I of their
censures, the worse the better. For if naught that was good was heretofore
looked for from Galilie, what good can be looked for at this day from Rome, the
forge of all slanders and villainies. And if Christian Kings cannot be exempted
from their obloquies and injuries, why should we poor men, both the Author and
Translator hope no escape the opprobries of such blacke-mouth'd Orators.
Howsoever it be, and whatsoever befall, the work was first set out, and now
translated not only to reveal Antichrist, who by his gadding Priests is ready
to seduce thee: but also to set forth Christ unto thee, who by his grace is
most ready to save thee. If ought therein be amiss, impute it to the weakness
of men; if there be any good, for thy good yield glory to God, to whom I
commend thee; and rest

Thy Christian well-willer, EDWARD SHARP.

THE POPES LOOKING GLASS.
CHAP. I. The dedication of the work.
Having a purpose to report a Conference had in Latin among great learned men
on both sides, about the Popes new Creed, lately reprinted by your self Pope
Paul the fifth, I thought it good to prefix a short Treatise, termed the Popes
Looking Glass, which is nothing else but an evident and lively deciphering of
Antichrist prophetically painted out, by S. Paul and Saint John, before the
whole Dialogue, and to set it forth dedicated to your name: partly that I might
show your self to your self, with those your sacrilegious swarms of Locusts
and Frogs about you: partly that I might recall ingenuous Papists from the
frantic love of Popery, when they shall thoroughly begin to know the Pope: and
lastly that I might unite the Christian Kings and Princes that yet favor the
Pope, The Pope an enemy to God and man
in the defense and quarrel of Christ, and Protestant Princes, when they shall
perceive that he is a deadly enemy to Gods Testament, and Princely government.
I hope those excellent workmen that have of late so copiously picturde the
image of the Beast, in every her several member and joint, will give me leave
to do it more compendiously in a lesser Table, and narrower room, for I have
endeavored to the uttermost of my power to contract the large discourses of
other men, and to draw them into short conclusions. For this being concluded
and proved, that the Pope of Rome is that Antichrist which is shadowed out in
the glass, it does necessarily follow, that Popery which is questionable
between us, is that Antichristianisme which is contained in the Creed.

CHAP. II. Wherein, as in diverse following Chapters, is set down what
Antichrist is. In this the mistaking of the Prophet Daniel and the Apostle John.
FIrst therefore I will truly and briefly propound and expound the state and
sum of the principal controversy what Antichrist is, least when I come to
the combat, that is to the conclusion, I may seem rather to fight with my
adversaries shadow then with himself.

Our men for the most part do search out for the type of Antichrist in Daniel,
Antichrists type in Daniel, himself in the Apocalypse.
and for Antichrist himself in John: your men do seek for himself in Daniel
where his Type is, and in John where himself is, they are afraid to seek him
for fear to find him. For there in the place of the literal sense, they urge
the mystical, here in stead of the mystical they press the literal. There
where Daniel the Prophet does hystorically and properly paint out Antiochus
Epiphanes, they dream that Antichrist is properly described, here where John
the Prophetical Apostle does mystically, yet purposelie and lively describe
Antichrist, that shall mystically give life to the Beast, rising out of the
sea, and mystically bring down fire from heaven, there they imagine such a
hagge and as it were a bewitching Canidia, which shall give motion to wooden
pictures, life to the dead, and speech to the dumb, and shall call down for
very true fire from Heaven. What is meant by the ten horns in Daniel.
There the ten horns that are sprung out of the breach and ruins of the
Macedonian Empire, ten Kings, seven from Seleucus, and three from Lagis, who
succeeded orderly one after another in the government of Syria, and oppressed
Jury, and were all dead before the coming of Christ, What is meant by the ten
horns in the Apocalypse.
they take for ten horns, or those ten Kings, who after the death of Christ,
rose out of the division and ruins of the Roman Empire, that was to be
dissolved many ages after: who had the government together with the beast:
neither did in order succeed one another in the same kingdom, but govern in
diverse Provinces at the same time. Neither did destroy Jury, being destroyed
already, but shall subvert and overthrow the Roman Empire, What absurdities
follow by the Popish interpretation of John.
as your men suppose, but as the truth is the Popedom it self. So that, while
your Doctors do in the Apocalypse a bookefull of hidden mysteries, follow
after a literal and a proper sense, mark I pray you what a pleasant and
comicall Antichrist they have imagined. Whom S. John does term a beast with
two horns, they will make a horned beast indeed. The two witnesses whom Saint
John calls two Olive trees, and two Candlestickes, if by the Letter they urge
them to be two men, that is Enoch and Elias, who must be slain by Antichrist
they will imagine a very terrible Antichrist that will kill Olive trees and
Candlestickes: If the two witnesses shall cast out true fire out of their
mouths, these fiery fellows will suddenly consume Antichrist. If Antichrist
contrarily shall fetch down true fire from heaven, and give life to Images as
it were to so many Pigmalions (which if you forget not they will cause to be
worshipped) they will bring a notable magitian upon the stage; so those
profane companions will clean alter the Holy Ghosts most weighty prophecy,
into their own ridiculous comedy. Furthermore while they thus peruersly
compare Daniels prophecy with John's Apocalypse, they do so confound not only
things with things, but ages with ages, that unless they raise dead men out of
their graves, or make Kings reign before they were borne, their
interpretations can in no wise hang together. At a word ( Paul the fifth) they
must not bring back the sun fifteen degrees, as in the dial of Ahaz, but
more then a thousand degrees, that these may agree together. Blessed John of
set purpose has written Antichrist his mystery; Paul has made a Commentary.
How far Daniels prophecy reaches for time.
Our men while they bring light to John's hidden mystery out of Paul's
commentary, your men do bring darkness out of Daniels prophecy: all which
(be it spoken by those Doctors leave who do think otherwise) if you only
except the comfortable prophecy of the resurrection of Christ, Chap. the 12. I
can euict to have been fulfilled within the compass of seauentie years, if
you reckon from that time wherein Jerusalem was taken by the Chaldees, to that
time wherein it was utterly overthrown by the Romans. Wherefore let us take
the type of Antichrist if you please out of Daniel, himself we shall find in
Saint John's prophecy and Saint Paul's, which your men do so much labor to
obscure, that they may utterly pervert the state of the question.

CHAP. III. The state of the question, and diverse significations of Antichrist.
FOr this is the whole question set down by Becanus, B^can. in spec. Antioch
refor. c. 10.
whether Antichrist properly so called, shall come one ^^an in his own person?
Agreeable to that which Bellarmine had said before; for either of them do
imagine that this Adversary shall be one singular person, by reason of the
addition of the article (...), that Antichrist, for that article does point out
always one that is singular, he is much deceived. For it does often point out
one kind, Antichrist not one singular person, but a succession.
as in the same place, (...), as the Fathers do expound it, and the Papists
do acknowledge it, He that withstandeth: He means the Emperor in general,
not this or that Emperor. And Matthew the 16 chapter, verse. 18. not only the
article, but the demonstratiue Pronoune is also added, (...), whereby not only
one Peter (though falsely) is understood of you, but a succession of Popes.
Therefore the article does either settle Antichrist in a succession, or in that
place does not settle a succession in the Pope. Choose of these two whether you
will. I perceive that Becan and Bellarmine do inquire after both: first,
whether he be: then, what he is. Whether Antichrist be foreshewed in the
Scriptures, no man doubts: whether he can be pointed out in the world, I
will so clear it, that none shall doubt, if first by inquiry we find out,
what he is. In the question, what he is, as they make him one singular
adversary by the addition of the article, so likewise by the composition of
the name, (...) and (...). They grant he is Christ's opposite and adversary,
his Vicar they deny him. S. John says, that the Beast that came up out of the
earth (which by Bellarmines confession is that Antichrist) Apoc: 13.
had not two Lambs horns, but two horns like a Lamb, and spoke like a
Dragon. A Vicar or substitute in appearance, an adversary in truth; as it is
manifest by the definition of the thing it self, and of the word. For what can
those two horns of the Lamb signify other, then the two offices of Christ,
his priestly, and his kingly office? which the Beast imagines that she
wears in steed of the lamb, whence I conclude,

The Beast is a counterfeit Vicar of the Lamb by the witness of John.

Antichrist is that Beast by the testimony of Bellarmine.

Therefore Antichrist is that counterfeit Vicar of the Lamb.

No Vicar, says he, but an Opposite, and an Adversary: yea a Vicar to his
person, that he may be an opposite to his glory, The diverse significations of
(...).
and an Adversary to his doctrine. But that the composition of the name will
not bear. for (...) in composition is only a note of Emulation and
Opposition, not so only but of substitution and surrogation also. For (...)
does not only signify a Captain of a contrary part: but also a Propraetor,
who had the same authority in a Province, that a Praetor had in a City:
sometime him that was in the place of a Praetor, or the Praetors Legate.
Adversary like to God. Proconsul.
You have all the significations in one word, how much rather in diverse? as
(...) notes opposition: (...) equality: (...) substitution.

Antichrist does comprehend all these significations, who though he be in truth
his Adversary, yet does challenge Christ his authority, as his equal, and
usurps his place, as his Vicar.

The Pope is Christ his Vicegerent, does emulate his honor, and oppose his
doctrine.

Therefore he is in subtletie his Vicar, in pride his Opposite, in heart his
Adversary, that is in plain terms, he is Antichrist.

Whom S. John affirms to have been in his time, 1 Ioh: 2. v. 18 and 22. Cap.
4.3. Antichrist had his beginning in the days of the Apostles. 2 Thessalonians: 2.
for he speaks of Antichrist properly so called, as Bellarmine confesses, to
whom he joins the article (...): Saint Paul likewise says, that he began
then to work secretly, after that which hindered was taken away, that he should
be revealed in his time, and should sit and dominere so long in the Church of
God, till Christ shall come to judgment: and that he should decay, and by
little and little be consumed with the spirit of the Lords mouth, that is, with
the ministry of the word; but at the glorious appearing of the Lord he should
be utterly overthrown. not therefore one singular enemy shall come in his own
person, as Becan faineth: unless happily he think that one and the same man
in number could possibly live from the age of the Apostles unto the coming of
Christ. Thus I therefore argue breefely out of the premises.

If that Antichrist was in the days of the Apostles after to be revealed to
domineir in the Church, nor to be destroyed till the coming of Christ,
certainly he cannot be one singular person, unless peradventure they dream
that Antichrist shall survive Methusalah many hundred years.

But the Antecedent or former part is true, as S. John and S. Paul do
manifestly prove.

Therefore the Consequent that he cannot be one and a singular person is
likewise true.

CHAP. IV. The diverse kinds of Antichrists, wherein it is farther proved to be
a succession.
FOR whereas Antichrist so called in a common sense by John in his Epistle,
they say did come in the times of the Apostles: but that Antichrist so properly
called in the Apocalypse is not come as yet; first they do not agree among
themselves, who understand that it is Antichrist so properly called of John in
his Epistle, by reason of the addition of the article: secondly, although he
there make mention of Antichrists so commonly called, small and little ones,
whom considered by themselves I confess to have been the forerunners of that
great Antichrist, yet I say and affirm, that they be truly to be termed parts
of that great beast, as Paul in his Commentary of this mystery has so
plainly expounded. For he says, that he who then began to work secretly,
should continue till the coming of Christ. That therefore he could not be a
beast of three years continuance, soon up and soon down. But as small
Rivers while they keep within their own banks have their own names, A
similitude between Antichrist and a great River.
but when they flow into the Thames, or into Seine do loose their own names,
and make the stream the greater: So is it with these small and common
Antichrists: they falling into their own heresies are considered apart; but
when they fall out of their own channels as it were into that great gulf
Antichrist, 1 Ioh: 4.3. and 2.18. and 22.
they lay aside their own names, and make up that grand Antichrist. And
therefore John in his Epistle says, that that Antichrist then was, and after
should be. How may that be will you say? that he was then in secret, that he
should be in open sight: that he was then an infant, but should after be a man.
These were the heresies, this was that Apostacy whereof S. John and S. Paul
spoke, a disposition as Bellarmine confesses, tending to the kingdom of
Antichrist; he said well to the kingdom, not to his beginning. For then he was
borne but to the kingdom of Antichrist, not to the essence of him, that then
was as John said, but to the revealing of him who then lay hid as Paul said.
The apostacy therefore began in those heresies, wherein Antichrist did lurk,
which Paul does teach shall last not only to an appearance, and a kingdom,
but to the diminishing and overthrow of Antichrist. And this apostacy could
not be of three years, and one man only. And therefore it is conuinc't that
Antichrist is not one singular man, but a succession of men. Moreover the two
beasts described by S. John in the Apocalypse, the Sea-beast, and the
Land-beast; by the Sea-beast you mean the state of the Roman Empire; by the
Land-beast the state of Antichrist. Bellar. de Rom: Pont. cap. 10. and cap. 15.
lib. 3
But the Sea-beast does not signify this or that Emperor, but a succession of
Emperors: therefore the Land-beast does not signify this or that Bishop only,
but a succession of Bishops, whereof many were great beasts indeed. As likewise
neither the four beasts in Daniel, whereof the beast in the Apocalypse is
compounded, do not note singular Kings, but Kingdoms. Here Bellarmine
disputes against us topically, or rather typically.

Such as the figure is, such is the thing figured.
Antiochus the figure of Antichrist was one singular man.
Therefore Antichrist the thing figured is one singular man.
If the proposition be general it is very false, for the proportion between
the figure, and the thing figured, does not hold in all, but in those only
wherein they be compared. Many are often the type of one, as many high Priests
of one Christ, and one is the type of one, as Melchisedech of Christ, whom you
notwithstanding do make to be the type of many Priests. It holds not
therefore that because Antiochus the type was one man, that therefore Antichrist
must be but one man. The comparison stands not in the unity of the person, but
in the likeness of nature: And therefore if the proposition be taken
generally, it is very false, and if particularly, then it is a mere fallacy.
But if it please him to argue from a type, I will requite him with an argument
drawn from a type, the author whereof is the Holy Spirit.

The first Beast that is the state of the Roman Empire is a Beast of many heads.

The second Beast that is the state of Antichrist, is the image of the first by
the witness of S. John.

Therefore the state of Antichrist is a beast of many heads.

But so many heads, so many persons. As therefore the state of Antichrist may
resemble the state of the Empire, it does consist not in one person only, but
in a succession of many persons: which when we affirm, it must not be
prejudicial to those holy Bishops, who for Christ's sake spent their blood at
Rome under the Emperors: but to the shame of their Successors, who forsaking
the rule of holy Scripture, have spilt the blood of other men. For it is not
Rome regenerated, and suffering, but degenerated and persecuting must be
counted the seat of the Beast with many heads: which notwithstanding is to be
understood, that to the Beast there is but one only head at one time, more
successively, whom God has permitted The properties and effects of Antichrist.
1 To be like the Lamb in two horns. 2 To speak as a Dragon. 3 To show forth
the power of the first Beast in his own sight. 4 To make the earth and the
inhabitants thereof to worship the first Beast. 5 To cure the deadly wound of
the former Beast. 6 To restore spirit and speech to the image of the first
Beast. 7 To kill such as will not worship the image of the Beast. 8 To work
false wonders, namely to make fire descend from heaven in the sight of men. 9
To have the name of the Beast, and the name of a man, and the number of his
name, which number is six hundred sixty and six. 10 To imprint the mark of
the Beasts name upon all; either on the forhead, or on the right hand. 11 To
forbid that none shall buy or sell without the mark of the Beast.


These be the true notes of the second Beast, that is, of Antichrist, by your
own interpretations, which notwithstanding are miserably detorted, as
afterward shall plainly appear. Now I take this as granted, that these so
weighty and admirable matters cannot be brougnt to pass by one singular Beast
within the compass of three years and a half, whereunto so many Beasts, and
so many ages are required.

Antichrist therefore is that ould-aged Animal, not a simple, but a compound
beast: for as many Marij were in one Caesar, 2 Thessalonians: 2. v. 3.4.
so there be many Antichrists in that Antichrist, whom Paul terms that man of
sin, and that son of perdition. They do therefore but trifle, and say
nothing to purpose, A comparison between the people of Rome and Antichrist.
who think that therefore he is called the man of sin, because he is a
single man. For as Florus did paint out all the people of Rome under the figure
of one man, to wit, an infant 250 years; and 250 years a young man; a strong
man other 250; and an old man the last 250 years, the same people still
governing successively in the same City, with the same policies, always to
the same end, as one man aspiring to greatness, till by the laziness of some
of the Emperors it became decrepite, and exceeding feeble: So it does seem,
that the Apostles by the spirit of prophecy, did describe many Bishops of
Rome, as one wretched man, and one beast successively governing, in that
seuen-hilld City, an infant in the Apostles time, after closely growing up, in
certain of the ambitious Roman Bishops, till it came to strength in Boniface
the third, and to the full age of a man, and greater ripeness in Gregory the
seventh, and others of his successors, ever another man, not another thing, the
same an infant, the same a youth, and a man, differing not in mind, but in
age, by the same means breathing and aspiring to greatness, the same closely
hidden, and openly revealed, the same dominering, and the same to be
overthrown, and now at the last an ouer-worne and a decayed Antic: so that he
seems by his long lasting impiety to be utterly consumed and brought to
nothing. The sum of all is this, that Antichrist properly so termed, is a
succession or a kingdom contrary to the kingdom of Christ, in profession a
Vicar, in presumption an Opposite, in purpose an Adversary.

CHAP. V. Wherein is inquired what manner of one Antichrist is.
WE have found out what Antichrist is, now let us search out, what kind a one
he is, by that means we shall certainly know who it is. Who that he might
not appear unto us in his likeness, Satan has abused the wits of certain
good men, being ignorant of the event of the prophecy, who have out of that
first error devised a notable tale. For first presupposing that Antichrist is
but one single adversary, hence they have imagined, The Popish description of
Antichrist.
that he shall be by Nation and Religion a Jew, of the tribe of Dan, the
Messiah of the Jews, and that he shall sit in the Temple of Jerusalem being
re-edified by himself, that he shall reign three years and a half, that he
shall put to death three Kings, and subdue seven others, and shall obtain the
Monarchy of the whole world: that those two witnesses, whom they think to be
Enoch and Elias, reserved alive in some place all this while, shall return
upon the earth, and fight with Antichrist, and being slain by him, shall rise
again after three years and a half: and it shall come to pass that the
Jews being converted by that miracle, shall kill Antichrist in Mount Oliuet,
and shall join themselves with Christ, who shall come to judgment five and
forty days after. This tale certain ancient writers have devised, which they
so inconstantly report, Bellarmine an A better of the former tale.
that it easily appears by the contradiction that it is but a lie. All this
false tale Bellarmine tells as truth, except that part concerning the Tribe
of Dan. But let us rejecting all fables, Antichrist described out of the
Scriptures and Fathers.
seek after the truth of God, written by the Apostles: being now manifested by
event, the best Interpreter of the prophecy, and by the judgments of the
Fathers agreeing with the Scriptures. Apoc. 9. 2. These. 2. 1. Tim. 4.10.
Saint John does call Antichrist a star fallen from heaven: Paul an Apostata
from the faith, or rather the chief Captain and Ringleader of that general
Apostasy; a Renegate from the Lord God as Augustine does expound it: August.
de ciuit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 10. Greg. lib. 4. epist. 38. That falling star
not Lucifer. Esa. 14.
The King of pride with his prepared army of Priests, and therefore a Bishop
as Gregory the first thinks. But Bellarmine does understand that star to
be Lucifer, according to that, how art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer. And
does urge the pretertense, that Saint John did not see the star to fall
hereafter, but that it is fallen already. Neither does he mark that this his
gloss is far wide from the text. 1. That Lucifers fall from heaven went long
before the sound of the fifth trumpet. 2. He is ignorant of the phrase of the
Prophets, who when they foretell things to come, for the certainty of them,
speak as if they were come already.

3 Neither does he observe the sense of this Prophet who by the name of stars
means the Pastors of the Church. At the last he calls Luther that falling
star, That falling star not Luther.
and the Lutheranes Heretics, and the Protestants Locusts, whose army he
brought out of the bottomless pit when he fell. Of that anon, now I demand,
how an abject silly Friar, as they call him out of his cloister, that examineth
all things by Scriptures can be that star falling from heaven? not that
great Lucifer, much less that little Luther, can be called the falling star,
but some great Bishop, as lofty as the stars, Lucifers mate, who a good
while since, has forsaken heavenly doctrine and holy life, and has betaken
himself to earthly businesses and wicked manners, that is, has fallen from
heaven to earth. For then are Bishops said to stand in heaven, What the fall of
a star means.
when they perform their duties, and then fall to the earth, when forsaking
holy life and doctrine they seek after worldly matters. But this does not agree
with the Pope only, for many other stars having been pulled down by the
Dragons tail are fallen to the earth. The Popes key and the effects of it.
True. But none besides the Pope is of that power, as holy John ascribes unto
him. For the key of the bottomless pit was given to this falling star. This
great Bishop while he shined, as a star in the Church, that is in heaven,
he used the key of heaven committed to him as he ought; but after he fell from
heaven, he took to himself the key of the bottomless pit. Therefore
Antichrist the Angel of the bottomless pit is the key keeper of hell. Apoc.
9.1. 1. Tim. 4.1.3.
Whereof blessed Paul gives a double reason. One that by that his key he
brought into the Church the doctrine of Devils in forbidding meats and
marriages: Another, that lifting up himself above all that is called god, that
is above Kings and Emperors, he does shut them out of their kingdoms, and
thereby has brought the darkness of the bottomless pit into the common
wealth. Is not this the lively image of the Pope? who as soon as he left of to
be a star, by his fall, began afterward to be a foolish fire. Ignis satuus.
Whose key is now no longer the key of heaven, but of hell. For his hatred to
that doctrine and government, that proceed from God is a most certain brand
of Antichrist. Of the key I shall speak more hereafter in the Creed.

CHAP. VI. Wherein Antichrist is proved an Apostata, and universal Bishop.
WHom Saint John terms a falling star, Saint Paul terms an Apostata
from the faith, and makes him a Captain not of a particular, but an universal
Apostasy; whom he so sets down with his proper marks, that he seems to
have pointed his finger at the Church of Rome, to whom every way they do
agree. She forbids marriages and meats, not in open blasphemy, as some old
Heretics did; but in hidden hypocrisy, as the forenamed Apostataes, as the
Apostle notes. Whence I infer thus.

The head of the universal and general Apostasy is Antichrist

The Pope is the head of the universal and general Apostasy

Therefore the Pope is Antichrist.

Therefore Antichrist is not a Jew, or head of the Jews who cannot be said to
have departed from Christ, before they came to him, but an Apostaticall
Christian. Lib. 4. Epist. 32.34.38.
And as it is observed by Gregory the great, A Bishop beleigerd with an
army of Priests, not a Bishop only, but an universal Bishop. Not that he
alone for that cause did depose all other Bishops, but that he advanced
himself before all others. Whence again I argue thus.

An Apostaticall Christian an universal Bishop is Antichrist

The Pope is an Apostaticall Christian, and an universal Bishop.

The Pope therefore is Antichrist.

And that title of universal Bishop Pope Gregory calls wicked, profane,
sacrilegious. Whereunto to consent, is nothing else (says he) but to lose the
Faith. As he writ to Anianus; and thereby to advance himself in honor above
the Empire, as he writ to Mauritius: which whosoever does, as John Bishop of
Constantinople did already, and Ciricius did afterward, he does pronounce him
confidently to be the follower of Lucifer, and the forerunner of Antichrist.
The Pope first universal Bishop.
Pope Gregory was a true Prophet, alas, too too true a Prophet? for within five
years after, that King of pride, whom he foretold to be so near at hand with
his army of priests, did usurp that chair, from whence Gregory did deliver
that Oracle, and has held it now above 1000. years, being first called the
universal Bishop, Then universal Prince.
because he has the jurisdiction over all Bishops. As first, Boniface that
falling star. After that, universal Prince created out of himself, because
he had the sovereignty over all Kings and Emperors, as Gregory the seventh.
So that the Bishop of Rome, is by a Bishop of Rome prophetically concluded to
be for his treason Lucifer, Lastly, Lucifer and Antichrist.
for the loss of his faith Antichrist. But the Bishop, as themselves affirm,
cannot err in his definitive sentence: for he has the Spirit assistant, and
tied to the Chair. The Bishop therefore is Antichrist; for that I may cast up
all into a short sum, Antichrist is a falling star, a degenerating
shepherd, a domineering Bishop.

CHAP. VII. Antichrist within the Church in stead of God, and how he lifts up
himself against God.
Do you not behold your self in this Looking-glass, Paul the fifth? suffer
not your self to be deceived by those men, who imagine Antichrist to be an
outward adversary, whom the Apostle does make an homebred stubborn Traitor:
for as he does abuse the name of a King, against a King, so he does oppugn
Christ, in the name of Christ. Whom therefore Paul does place within the
Church, not without it; and sitting not in a bodily gesture, but in a
spiritual government. Besides that, Theod. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the thrones of Kings are called the seats of Bishops. And he sits not in a
material Temple, for Temple is not any where so taken in the new Testament, as
Bellarmine confesses; therefore in the spiritual Church, for the which the
Temple of God is always taken, as the Fathers expound it. Chrysostomus.
Oecumenius. Hieronimus ad Algasium. quae: 11. who all affirm he shall sit in
the Church, not in the Temple of Jerusalem.
Antichrist he sits in the Temple of God, not in the Temple which he shall
re-edifie in Jerusalem, as is imagined: for that should not be called the
Temple of God, but of the Devil. Again, he is said to sit against the Temple,
as Augustine did well translate it out of Greek, as if he were the Temple of
God, that is, the Church. Wherein the wretched man bearing rule, does not
think himself to be God, much less God alone, as Bellarmine dreameth
(Antichrist is not such a fool) but in stead of God: for he sits as God,
and takes upon him as he were God: not Christ, but for Christ: a Substitute to
his Person, and an Opposite to his Glory: for in many things he makes himself
equal to Christ, The Pope wherein he makes himself equal to Christ.
carrying himself like God, forgiving sins, redeeming souls, making new
articles of the faith, the Judge of all men, himself to be judged by no man.
That although he call not himself God, yet he makes a show as if he were God,
as the Apostle teaches. Is not this the lively picture of the Pope? Does it
not present him unto us, almost palpable? Not so, says Bellarmine, For
Antichrist does think himself to be God alone, wherein he does not agree with
himself.

Bellarmines Antichrist, is the Messiah of the Jews, who does brag that he is
sent from God.

He does not therefore brag that he is God alone: for God that does send is
one, and God that is sent is another. Again, he says, The Pope does not sit
as God, but as a Bishop, but yet as he that has all the power of God, both in
heaven and in earth: as he says in another place. He sits therefore at the
least as a Bishop deified. But he does not call himself Christ. But he takes
to him, if not the name, yet the power of Christ. This therefore I infer.

Who sits as God in the Church, and makes a show as if he were God, the same
is Antichrist.

The Pope has done, and does this:

The Pope therefore is Antichrist.

How the Pope lifts up himself against God.
For do not think Paul the fifth, that Antichrist is so foolish to lift up
himself above God, or does swell with greater pride then does befit a
miserable mortal man. He is said therefore, Not to lift up himself against
every God, true and false, as Bellarmine supposes. Wherein he does contradict
himself.

For a Magician does not lift up himself above all that is God. For he does
not lift up himself above the Devil, who is the God of this world.

Bellar. de Pont. lib. 3. cap. 14.
But Antichrist is a Magician, as Bellarmine says.

Therefore Antichrist does not lift up himself above all that is God: as the
Cardinal says.

But he does lift up himself above all that is called God, as the Apostle
teaches. To whom not the essence of God, The name of God to who^ imputed in
the Scripture.
but the name of God is attributed: for the name of God in the Scripture, is
given to the Angels in heaven, and the Princes on the earth: for the word
(...), does not only signify Maiesticall or Majesty, but it is also any thing
which is worshipped as God, or wherein God is worshipped: And therefore the
images and alters among the Heathens, were called (...). Now when as the Pope
bears rule over the Angels in heaven, and over the Princes in the earth, and
over holy things in the Church, it cannot be but he needs must be Antichrist.

CHAP. VIII. How Antichrist does deny Christ.
NEither suffer your self, Pope Paul the fifth, to be deluded by them who shall
tell you that Christ is not openly, expressly, and directly denied by
Antichrist so properly called. For Antichrist was not so blockish, that he
would openly and directly deny Christ, by whose name and profession he saw so
much profit and honor to come unto him; you may be sure he was not so mad.
It was therefore requisite that he might both satisfy his own hatred, and
serve his own turn, he should deny Christ secretly, by consequent and
indirectly: for could Antichrist possibly have held his government so many
years in the Church, if he had openly denied Christ? certainly he could
never have held it; for all those Christians over whom he governed, would
either have hist him out for a fool, or burnt him up for a blasphemour. It was
not therefore for Antichrists profit to deny Christ after this manner. Add
moreover that he is described by the Apostle to be a cunning and a crafty
companion, and that he shall come with all deceit of injustice. Popery is a
mystery of Iniquity.
Besides all his religion is not called iniquity, but the mystery of iniquity.
And the gloss has noted, that the mystical impiety of Antichrist shall be
cloakt over with the name of piety. It had been therefore very absurd to have
denied Christ plainly, openly and expressly, for that did no whit agree
either with the good of his kingdom, or the humor of Antichrist, or the
mystery of Iniquity. It follows therefore that he denied Christ secretly,
implicitly and indirectly, and retaining the name of Christ, did abolish his
faith and doctrine. But that belongs to petty Antichrists, to deny Christ
secretly and indirectly: but to that great Antichrist directly and openly;
whereupon his coming is called a Revelation, as Bellarmine does sophistically
gather. By which words is expressed not the manner of the denial of Christ,
but the manner of usurping his kingdom. For if you consider the manner of
doctrine, the apostacy of the great Antichrist is called mystical, and so is
his opposition, as of all the rest, but that their apostacy from Christ ought
to be counted particular, his universal. And therefore for all Bellarmines
words, that Antichrist does deny Christ secretly and indirectly, as the Pope,
who though he does in word expressly and directly confess Christ to be God and
man, yet he does closely and indirectly deny hoth Christ's Divinity, and his
Humanity.

CHAP. IX. The Pope takes away the properties of each nature in Christ.
FOR he takes away the properties of each Nature. The Godhead is infinite, the
Humanity finite. The Pope does set out the Deity of the Father in pictures
and images; and does imagine the humanity of Christ to be present in many
places at once: and therefore does forge a finite Divinity, and an infinite
Humanity.

He does confess directly in word, that Christ is just and merciful, but in
deed does indirectly deny both: for perfect justice does not admit imperfect
satisfaction, that is humane: and perfect mercy does not grant imperfect
pardon; it does not remit the fault and retain the punishment.

The Pope does teach that imperfect satisfaction and pardon is performed by
Christ to the faithful: he does therefore deny unto Christ perfect justice
and mercy, and so makes Christ a plain I doll.

CHAP. X. The Pope denies the three offices of Christ.
HE does in word acknowledge the three offices of Christ, but indirectly
denies them, his Prophecy, his Priesthood, and his Kingdom.

His prophecy, First his Prophecy.
while he tells us that the Canonical Scriptures, wherein the voice of our
Prophet in all things necessary to salvation is fully contained, whether they
be principles of faith, or precepts of life, to be very imperfect. And
therefore does account his Decretall Epistles among the Canonical Scriptures.
Distinc. 9. Sic omnes.
Fie upon such blasphemy, and intolerable pride. Herein he is a very Jew, in
that he abrogateth Gods commandments by man's traditions. For as the Jews had
the unwritten Cabala to interpret the old Testament; so the Pope has brought
in his unwritten traditions, as the Jewish Cabala, whereby he does bring a
sense of his own, what pleases him of the written commandments of God. But
with the same argument that Christ did refute the Jewish, we do briefly
refute the Popish traditions.

The observation of humane traditions is the abrogation of Gods heavenly
commundements, Matthew: 15.
witness Christ.

But Popery is the observation of humane traditions, witness the Decretalls.
Here Duarenus said pretily, that it fared ill with men's affairs since the
decrees had gotten wings, that is, since the Decretalls were so saucy as to
fly into the Church over the Scriptures.

Therefore Popery is the abrogation of Gods heavenly commandments.

I will bring one example, wherein it appears that Bellarmine the Popes
sweetheart has by his exposition overthrown one of the greatest
commandments of the Law. Bellarmines lewd dealing with the second commandment.
God said, Thou shall not make to thy self any likeness to worship. Here
Bellarmine distinguishes; Thou shall not worship an Idol: But thou shall
worship an Image. A distinction of the word not of the thing. Far an Image is
an Idol when it is worshipped. But the worshipping of an Idol is Idolatry:
and in the Commandment there is no mention made of an Idol, but of a likeness,
and that of every likeness, which as it were the genus or general does
comprehend equally both Image and Idol. But Idolatry is to worship the
Creature for the Creator, yea by your leave with the Creator too; for the
worship of any likeness is absolutely forbidden in the law, whether it be
worshipped for God, or with God. And the reason of the prohibition is absolute.
Idolatry is compared to fornication, and God to a jealous husband, who by no
means will have the likeness of any thing to be worshipped either before him or
with him. Bellarmine seems to allege the same excuse for his idolatry,
which the harlot does for her adultery: for she tells her jealous husband,
I took not this Letcher for my Husband, but for my Friend, I took him with
you, not for you: So this adulterous mind of Bellarmine answers to God, that
is full of jealousy: I do not worship the image for God, but with God, not for
the Creator, but with the Creator. But God as a most jealous husband does
absolutely forbid any worship of an image, as the lewd embracing of an
adulterer: Ioh: 9. v. 20.
and therefore S. John calls the worshipper of an Idol, the worshipper of
the Devil. Now it is plain that the Pope is a worshipper of an Idol,
therefore the worshipper of the Devil. The Pope owes me a good turn for
saying he is an Idolater, wherein I fear I shall seem to prevaricate and
dissemble, that while I give him the name of an Idolater, I take from him the
name of Antichrist.

For Antichrist is not an Idolater, as Bellarmine would have it.

The Pope is an Idolater, as truth it self would have it.

Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.

I counsel the Pope that if he give credit to Bellarmines proposition, he
grant our assumption, so while he take to himself the name of an Idolater,
he may happily lay aside the name of Antichrist. But he will resume it, so
giddie headed and wavering is Bellarmine.

By whose confession, Antichrist does worship Maozim, that is as he says the
Devil.

But the worshipper of the Devil is an Idolater.

Antichrist therefore is an Idolater.

But the Pope has taken to him the note of an Idolater from holy John: let him
therefore take again to him the note of Antichrist.

From hence arises that which I intended to prove, that the Pope does nothing
else but abrogate and annihilate a principal commandment of God with his
tradition and opposition. What is it to deny the Prophecy of Christ, if this
be not? what? as though he has not only corrupted but also perverted the
Gospel of Christ, The Popes fifth Gospel.
while he has suffered a fifth Gospel to be coined by his Dominicans, as
Matthew: Parisiensis does witness. They called it the Gospel of the Holy Ghost,
Anno 1254. Math. in Hen. 3.
and the eternal Gospel: wherein they taught that Christ is not God, nor his
Gospel the true Gospel, and that compared to their Gospel, his was the
shell, and theirs the kernel. O blasphemy to be punished with hell fire.
Hereof they be the Neptunian or rather Vulcanian Fathers, who in that
Tridentine furnace have by their fiering and hammering shaped out that profane
Gospel anew, but without the name of the fifth Gospel. Although Clement the
eight did of late gladly and willingly take unto him the name of the fifth
Evangelist, put upon him by crouching G^briel that detestable Parasite, as
though Clement had finished the fifth Gospel; which does not only give a blow
to the four Gospells, but a deadly wound. The authors whereof do incur
Paul's curse, which is denounced not only to Popes, but to Apostles, and
Angels, if any shall bring in not a contrary but another Gospel. Not if any
contrary, but if any besides that which the Galathians received of Paul, that
is, besides that which they had received out of the legal and evangelical
Scriptures, as Augustine did expound the place; if they do not only preach or
overthrow the whole Gospel, but if they do never so little preach beside the
Gospel, or do thwart any thing, as Chrysostom has explained the place. For
another Gospel does not only corrupt, but pervert the Gospel of Christ. The
Pope of Rome does not only bring in another, but a contrary, wherein he does
not only add many things, but oppose many things against the Gospel of
Christ. In the one, he does weaken the Gospel; in the other, he destroys
it; for every addition does import an imperfection, every opposition a
falsehood. And therefore Popery is to be deemed not only a corruption, but a
subversion of the Gospel. Out of that fifth Gospel is their new Creed of their
faith taken, which conteyneth twelve articles of the faith to be discussed in
the Dialogue following. For the making whereof diverse Popes heretofore took
great pains, and every one added a piece of his own, till it came to full
perfection by Pius the fourth, and has been lately printed by your authority
Paul the fifth, that the great glory of your omnipotent power in the Papacy
might appear. As likewise the conformities of S. Francis are lately brought to
light, and by your commandment published in print, I think that typical
Jesus being brought again into the world by you might remove the true Jesus
out of his throne. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered. Let true
Jesus utterly confound the typical Jesus. Do not these things Paul the fifth
manifestly prove that thou art that great Antichrist, who although thou do
openly in word confess that Christ is a Prophet, do in very deed indirectly
deny and overthrow the Prophecy of Christ?

More then that, the Pope does indirectly overthrow his Priesthood and his
kingdom.

His priesthood whereon depends the sacrifice and intercession of Christ, 2
His Priesthood.
while he does erect another priesthood which does either offer another
propitiatory sacrifice, or does reiterate the sacrifice of Christ as
imperfect. When as the Apostle does prove throughout the whole Epistle to the
Hebrews that the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ if you seek for the number
is but one, if for the time is but once offered: Heb. 10.14. Well expounded.
if for the Priest: by himself; if for the place, upon the Cross; if for the
manner, bloudily: if for the virtue: exceeding effectual to make holy the
faithful. With what face therefore does the Pope either devise another
propitiatory sacrifice, or cause that to be often repeated of profane Priests
vnbloudily upon the Altar; as though the bloody sacrifice of Christ were not
sufficient to make perfect the believers? wherein he shows himself an utter
Adversary unto Christ. But they do daily sacrifice Christ say they, that they
may apply him to the faithful. But the Apostles did not sacrifice Christ, but
propounded him in the word and sacraments, that they might apply him to the
faithful.

Out of the sacrifice of Christ the redemption of the Church is the first part
of his priesthood, which the Pope of Rome has communicated with the Saints.

Thus they speak of Gregory.

Let him save us from our sins, that in heaven with the Saints we may rest.
You would think that Gregorians not Christians spoke. Of Peter and Paul, Grant
that by both their merits we may obtain the glory of eternity. Out of the
Roman Breuiarie.
It is true that it is said, that the Lord can hardly be discerned from his
Apostles.

O blessed mother
In the Parisian Missal
Satisfying for our sinne^
By the right of a mother
Command the redeemer.
B^rnard. in Mart. lib. 1.
So that the Jesuits do think meet to salvation to mingle the mothers milk
with the sons blood: and they do appeal from the seat of Gods justice, to
the seat of his mothers mercy, whom they call the goddess and Queen of
heaven. So that popery is no more to be called Christianisme, but Marianisme.

Now if the Pope do communicate the office of redemption with the Saints, what
marvel is it if they impart the office of intercession with them? whereas the
Apostle does affirm, 1. Tim, 2.5.
there is but one God, so but one mediator between God and men the man Christ
Jesus, one mediator of intercession, who does offer up our prayers to God, as
he that alone does pay the price of redemption for us all, since the efficacy
of his intercession depends upon the merit of his redemption.

3 His kingdom.
Last of all they profess Christ to be a King in word, in deed they deny him.
And whereas Christ does walk in the midst of the 7. golden candlestickes,
and is not only present in his Church, but President of his Church: this
exorbitant Priest, made a Vicar by himself, and a voluntary Prince, does
reign and supply his turn as if he were absent, and taking unto him the
whole power of Christ in heaven and earth, makes Christ but a titulare King,
and an idle God, so that he seems again with the Jews to mock him in
setting a crown of thorns upon his head, and giving him a ^eed for a Scepter
into his hand. But Christ is a king invisible, the Pope visible. But Christ
although invisible yet he is really in the Eucharist, yea carnally, as the Pope
teaches, falsely, yet he teaches it: but in the real presence of the greater
that is Christ, there is no real presence of the lesser, that is the Pope, so
the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist does take away the visible and
spiritual King out of the Church.

Now seeing in deed he denies the offices of Christ which he professes in
word, The benefits of Christ diminished.
what marvel is it if he diminish the benefits which spring out of the
offices? if making of the cross, he weaken the merit of the cross; if
teaching his death he abolish the power of death: if granting the spirit, he
extenuate the force of the spirit; if preaching the Gospel he put out the
light of the Gospel: while he does confound free will with Gods grace, man's
satisfaction with Christ his blood, inherent justice with imputed obedience in
justification: that part of salvation being attributed to man, part to God may
divide the glory of so excellent a work between God and man. Wherein I cannot
rightly determine whether Antichrist has offered more contumely to God or
wrong to man. Out of the premises I argue briefly thus.

Whosoever does deny Christ closly and indirectly, is Antichrist.

The Pope of Rome does deny Christ closly and indirectly and takes away his
natures, his properties, his offices, his benefits.

The Pope therefore is Antichrist.

Wherein he does always one thing and pretendes another.

He is therefore a cunning crafty Antichrist.

CAHP. XI. Wherein the smoakie Kingdom of Antichrist is plentifully described
out of John.
SAINT John says that the key of the bottomless pit is given to the star
that fell from heaven. Apoc. 9. The Pope the key Keeper of Hell.
Now mark in this hellish business, how diligent this Angel of darkness
shows himself.

2 For as soon as he receives the key, he presently uses it to opening of
the bottomless pit, as it follows in Saint John: from whence ascended the
smoke of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air
were darkened with the smoke of the pit.

3. Therefore Antichrists kingdom is dark and smoakie. The darkness under
Antichrist.
I do not think that any, who knows but his letters, much less any learned
man to be so weak an Interpreter of the Apocalips, as to think the outward
darkness is here meant: and that the darkness of this sun, which we see,
or of this air which we breath, and not rather the darkness of souls, and
minds is here understood, or that smoke out of a furnace, rather then out of
hell is here described. Now the kingdom of Christ is the kingdom of light,
and therefore the kingdom of Antichrist is the kingdom of darkness. Apoc.
8.12.
At the sound of the fourth trumpet, Saint John says, No comparison between
the old Heretics and Antichrist.
that the third part of the sun, the Moon, and the stars were darkened:
When Marcion destroyed Christ's humanity, Arrius denied his divinity, so that
the world was turned Arrian, Eutiches confounded his natures, Nestorius divided
them, when Pelagius obscured the grace of Christ, but all these were nothing to
those universal darknesses brought in by Antichrist. For he took some
contagion from each of these, and added much of his own; When he commanded the
Scriptures to be shut up in an unknown tongue, lest the people might
understand God speaking unto them: when he commanded prayers to be made in an
unknown tongue, Scriptures in an unknown tongue.
that the people might not speak to God with understanding: when he taught
implicit faith, that is brutish ignorance, whereby he blinded their minds
with incredulity: Implicit faith. Images to be adored.
when he set pictures before them not to be gased on only, but to be adored,
that he might feed their eyes with vanities, and choke their souls with
idolatry. Do you not perceive the bottomless pit to be wide open? you do not
see the smoke rising out of the pit for the darkness which has darkened the
sun and the air. For the kingdom of lies is the kingdom of darkness.
While he has taken away the Scriptures as pearls from Swine, Scriptures as
pearls for Swine.

Prayers as cha^tering for Parots.

Faith for asses. Images for Idiots.


and prescribed prayers as pratings for parrets, and delivered faith as an
instruction for asses, and allowed images as books for ideotes. So Antichrist
has obscured the eternal Gospel of Christ more clear and bright then the
Sun it self, with the thickness of hellish darkness, being worthy to be
choked up with the smoke of the pit, that sells nothing else but smoke: as
is evident by the doctrine of Antichrist, A short description of Christian
religion.
clean contrary to the doctrine of Christ. For the doctrine of Christ does
bring forth 4. principal effects: 1. It does cast down the corrupt nature of
man. 2. It does advance the saving grace of God. 3. It does weaken the strength
of concupiscence. 4. It begets peace of conscience.


1. So it settles true humility in a sinner. 2. Right faith toward God in him
being humbled 3. Holiness in him being faithful. 4. And security in him being
holy. Whereby 1. displeasing himself, 2. and trusting in God, 3. And living
holily, 4. he is secure in his way, and triumphs joyfully in his end.

The doctrine of Antichrist does bring forth effects clean contrary.

1. It does extol the corrupt nature of man. A short description of popery.
2. It does diminish the free grace of God. 3. It adds matter to increase
concupiscence. 4. It withdraws peace of conscience.
For 1. it makes a sinner proud with a conceit of his own strength. 2.
Ungrateful by the diminishing Gods grace. 1. Inwardly filthy, outwardly
glorious. 4. Doubtful in the way and fearful in the end. That 1. neither he
knows himself truly, 2. Nor believes in God rightly, 3. Nor lives holily;
4. Nor dies quietly. You have Paul the fifth the very form and face of
Christianity, and Antichristianitie set before you and yours, that they might
love the one and detest the other. No Egyptian darknesses are more gross, no
Cymmerian to be compared with these darkenesses of the Popes kingdom which
Antichrist the Angel of Hell has fetched out of the smoke of the pit.

CHAP. XII. Antichrist his ministers are Locusts, whose properties are
described.
WHose ministers, the Locusts and Scorpions being engendered of smoke and
darkness, it makes well for them, that the world is full of darkness. Blind
superstition will be more bountiful to them, then quick-fighted religion.

Apoc. 9.3. What a Locust is.
4 The Locusts came out of the smoke, as S. John says, the Locust is bred of
corrupt smoke, an Antichristian Monk out of perverse doctrine, who neither
can fly aloft by heavenly contemplation, nor walk beneath according to Gods
ordinance, but being lifted up by certain Luciferian speculations into heaven,
falls down again to the earth: and when he has delivered many things truly
and gravely about the Trinity, does presently fall back to prate of idle
traditions, mingling some truth with much falsehood; like the Devil who makes
true premises to infer false conclusions. The Locusts spring out of the
ignorance of the people, as it were out of smoke.

The division of Locusts.
The Locusts are either elder or younger. The elder out of the family of
Francis, Dominicke, Bennet, etc. The younger out of the house of lymping
Loyola, these be more learned and polished, who after they had translated the
Bible into the English tongue; they of Rhemes the New, and those of Doway the
Old, they add certain smoakie interpretations, whereby they bring obscurity
to a for or translation. So the translation intricate enough in it self, is
made more intricate by their notes. As you may see in this very mystery,
Places of Scripture obscured by popish interpretations. 1 Ioh: 2.18.
whose parts being plain enough, by the text and event, is much obscured by
the darkness rising out of the Gloss, and Commentary of the Jesuits. 1. S.
John says, that that Antichrist was in his time, whom Paul says shall
continue till the coming of Christ; what can be more clear? To this place
they bring obscurity out of the Gloss, when they imagine that Antichrist
shall be one man of three years continuance. 2. S. Paul makes him an Apostata
not from the name of Christ, but from the faith of Christ, and does describe
the Apostacy by two evident notes. This place they darken with their Gloss,
which tells us that he is a Jew, who never came to Christ, and therefore can
never depart from Christ.

3. What is more clear, then that the City with seven Hills, that dominiering
City, is the seat of Antichrist, as S. John sets it; now made the Temple and
Church of God, as S. Paul will have it, Matthew: 24.14.
that is Rome by their own confessions; and yet this light is darkened with
another Gloss, that Jerusalem is his seat, whose final destruction Christ
did foretell should be after the preaching of the Gospel over the whole world;
and the Prophet Daniel, that the desolation of the Temple shall continue to the
consummation and end, that is the end of the world: Luc: 21.22.24.
as not only Jerome but Christ himself has expounded. Yet they give the lie
both to Daniel and Christ, when they outface the matter, saying that Jerusalem
shall be builded again by Antichrist, together with the Temple, wherein he
shall sit and reign. 4. What is more evident then that Enoch was translated
that he should not see death? Heb: 11.5.
yet to this plain Text they put a dark and contrary Gloss, when they say
that he shall return again, and see death, and be killed forsooth by
Antichrist: Do you not perceive that the Locusts do spring out of the smoke
of the pit, which do darken with their Glosses certain places of the
Scripture, that be as clear as the Sun beams. So that all their endeavors
are to darken, nor enlighten this mystery. They fear nothing more then that
Antichrists hood should be plucked over his ears, out of which now like
Democritus he laugheth at all the world, The Pope like Democritus.
which he has deceived with his smoke. As the Poet brought sorrowful
Agamemnon upon the stage, with his head covered for the greatness of his grief:
So these good fellows bring upon the stage, their pleasant Antichrist
hoodwinkt for the greatness of his joy, that the world may not see how he
fleeres at them.

The number of the Locusts
5. The multitude and number of Locusts is answerable to the number and power of
the Monks old and new: chiefly the Jesuits, whose swarms do add greater
force to do mischief.

6. Power is given to these Scorpions over the earth, and charge given them
that they hurt not the grass of the earth, Apoc: 9. v. 4.
nor any green herb, nor any tree, but men only, as it follows in S. John.
These Locusts then are reasonable creatures, yet such as abuse their reason to
the destruction of men: for they do not trample upon herbs and trees, but do
annoy the bodies and souls of men, whom they strike with their stings, infect
with their poison, and kill with a lingering death.

The practice of Jesuits.
These Jesuits whom these Locusts and Scorpions do lively represent, do choke
up with their poison, and extinguish the fidelity of subjects toward their
Prince, and the faith of Christians toward God.

The fidelity of subjects, when they teach they are released from the Oath of
Allegiance given to their Princes, whom the Pope does denounce excommunicated:
The Popes usurped power over Princes.
who can drive out of his Kingdom, and deprive of his government Kings
Catholic in the faith, but wicked as goats, heretical Kings as wolves, as
Bellarmine writes, neither only open but secret Heretics, as Symancha^; nor
those only, but their sons and followers are utterly to be rooted out, as
Creswell agrees with Symancha, by any means whatsoever, as Saunders, either
by open force, 2 King: 33.
as Iesabel by Iehu; or by craft, as Holophernes by Judith, as Rainoldus and
Bourchier write: The cruel practice of Papists against Princes.
or by knife and dagger, whereby Henry the 3. and Henry the 4 were most basely
murdered, either of them being a Catholic, as they term them, only because
they favored hertikes and that before sentence was denounced against them; or
else by a dag and poison, The gunpowder treason from Jesuits.
by which means Queen Elizabeth was often assaulted, as Walpoole and Comensus
persuaded: or else with gunne-powder, wherewith King James with all the Kings
Progeny and Nobility, and the whole Kingdom of Britain should have been
utterly overthrown by certain wicked English conspirators, as Garnet the
Provincial of the Jesuits in England thought meet: whereby it is manifest
that the Cheargy-popery, whereof Iesuitisme is the brain; is nothing else but
a catechism of treason. Must we not here needs acknowledge the poison of
Locusts and Scorpions, whereby the Allegiance of subjects toward their Princes
is shaken off? Let us look after another kind of poison, if you please, The
Papists poison the faith of Christians.
whereby the souls of simple people are infected, to choke up the faith of
Christians, which they teach must be secret and implicit, that the Lay People
must believe as the Church believes, when as they know not neither what
themselves, or the Church believes, as Bellarmine says, that faith is not
placed in the understanding, but in ^he assent. i. The Colliars faith, or that
circular faith which Staphilus so much commends, the master of the sentences
proves out of the first of Job ver. 4. While the oxen were at plow, the asses
fed near them, Many, Mast sent. lib. 3 distinct. 25.
says he, believe such things they know not, and they have their faith covered
as in a mystery. He likes the greater and Doctors to Oxen, Lombards foolish
interpretation.
the less and the simpler to Asses, who in their humility adhering to the
greater, believe in a mystery: an asse-headed interpretation by the masters
leave.

8. Whereby it appears that Laike-popery is nothing else but mere foolery.

Verse. 4. Whom the Lo^usts do hurt.
9. Neither do these Locusts and Scorpions hurt all men, but those only which
have not Gods mark in their forehead, their minds they go about to
intoxicate with their poison. As S. John says, that the great heaps of
unbelievers are only the prey of the Locusts.

Verse. 5. Locusts kill not, but afflict men.
10. It is given to the Locusts and Scorpions, not to kill men, but to afflict
them for five months, but how can that be true, say some, when as the Jesuits
be notable Cut-throates.

I answer, that S. John in this verse speaks of the slaughter of souls,
which these destroying Locusts do chiefly devour. Wherein they do not kill
men at a blow, but by afflicting them by little and little, as they which be
stung of Scorpions, consume away by lingering grief. This is S. John's sense,
when he says, that the Scorpions do not kill men, but torment them.

For when these Antichristian scorpions do infuse and convey the poison into
men, what gnawing and pritching do they leave behind them? how do they vex
men's consciences? how do they inwardly bite and sting? men feel themselves to
be miserable sinners, and after death stand in horror of judgment. They
hear little of the true fire of hell, much of the false fire of Purgatory
from the Monks, they feel the bitterness of sin, they feel not the
sweetness of the remedy. They never hear of Christ; They give ear to the
monks, preaching historically of the cross, of the death and resurrection of
Christ: but of the virtue of the cross, of the benefit of his death, of the
efficacy of his resurrection, (the force and power whereof does consist in
special application) not one word. The Papists enemies to certainty of
salvation.
Yea, rather there Doctors cry out that it is presumption and arrogance, if the
wounded conscience of a penitent sinner be certainly persuaded by faith, that
Christ Jesus is his Savior, or that he may confidently trust he is in the
estate of grace, unless an Angel do specially reveal it unto him, as though
to a faithful man's spirit, the spirit of Christ, the God of the Angels does
not give a more inward, more certain, and a more excellent testimony that he
is the son of God, the heir of heaven, and fellow-heire with Christ, so that
the faithful man feels, that he is governed by the spirit of Christ, from
whom he received that testimony, and does join the grace of that government,
with the grace of that comfort. Neither of this do those locusts feel or
teach, who while they deprive their auditors of the holy confidence in Gods
mercy, The manner how Papists torment men's conscience.
nor suffer them to serve God with a sun-like, but a servile spirit, and
therefore not with the rejoicing of the spirit, nor suffer them to enjoy peace
of conscience in the midst of their afflictions, and send sinners trembling
for fear to the treasure of the Church, as popish indulgences, and humane
satisfactions, and such trifling toys of the same kind. In the mean time the
crafty teachers, and the unhappy hearers, being utterly void of true faith and
repentance, when they have done all they can do, for all that inwardly feel,
inwardly, I say, feel the horror of Gods divine judgment, and the most
grievous torment of the afflicted conscience, and this falls out after those
scorpions have stricken them with their stings: whereupon their grief is like
the grief of a scorpion, when it has stung a man.

For as when a Scorpion stings a man with the sting of his tail, the wound is
not presently felt, but the deadly poison does afterward spread it self abroad:
So those that be hurt by these Loyolane Scorpions, do not presently feel the
hurt, but do by little and little perish without sense, as soon as they suck
in the venom of their poysonfull doctrine. So these Locusts do hurt men with
their number, venom, and sting.

CHAP. XIII. Other properties of Locusts.
11. THese be strange Locusts that are resembled to horses prepared for
battle. What comparison can there be between a base Locust, and a warre-like
Horse? Thus notwithstanding the strength of this vild Locust is expressed.

12. The Locusts do likewise wear crowns upon their heads, here he sets
down the cunning and the craft, It is worth the noting, that the heads of
those Locusts are said to be crowned, when the horns of the Sea-beast
afterward are said to be crowned: why so? Because the Priests have more
prevailed with their subtilty and craft, then the Ethnicke Emperors with their
power and force.

13. But the crowns the Locusts wear, are not of gold, but like to gold.
Here he sets out their pride, true and golden crowns are fit for Kings,
false and couterfet for Priests, and therefore are said not to be golden, but
as it were golden. Whereat, as if they were true, and their own, they wax
very proud: for by the sufferance of Princes they are grown to that power,
that they have often cast off their golden crowns.

14. The faces of the Locusts, are as the faces of men, wherewith they deceive
men.

15. They have women's locks, which signify the diverse enticements and
deceipts of false doctrine: where again their cunning is described.

16. Teeth as it were of Lions, wherewith like their Master that roaring Lion,
they rend asunder, and tear in pieces those with their jaws, whom they caught
with their guile. Here you have their fierceness and their cruelty.

17. They had habergions, like habergions of iron. These noble Locusts, very
warlike, with crowns upon their heads, men's faces, women's hair, Lions teeth,
armed at all points are elegantly and lively described by the holy Ghost.

Some will happily object, that all this place is not to be understood, of
Antichrist, and his Ministers, but of the Turks. I answer that cannot be.
For whereas at the sound of the 4. Trumpet, Cap. 9. v. 1.
the Angel had foreshewed the Arch heretics, the forerunners of Antichrist:
at the sound of the 5. Trumpet, the Angel bringes in the King of the
Arch-heretikes, before which the Angel begins with that dreadful Proem in
the 8. chap: about the end, crying with a loud voice, woe, woe, woe, upon the
inhabitants of the earth.

By the first woe signifying the dark kingdom of Antichrist: by the second woe
the violent tyranny of the Turk: which cannot be one and the same, because he
says in the 12. verse: one woe is past, and behold two woes follow after. This
is not therefore the same, but an other woe.

By the third woe the terrible appearance of the last judgment.

But Bellarmine says, but proves it not, Bellarmines lewd dealing with the
King of England. Bellarmine. Christana vic. Pacenius. Becanus. Personius.
Cidonius. Garnettus. Gerardus. Grenwellus. Creswellus. Reynaldus, and infinite
other.
That Luther is that falling star, and that Lutheranes, and Protestants are
those Locusts. Having forgotten that Paul the fifth, that Prince, is the
Captain General of those warlike Locusts. Who after he had compared the most
renowned King JAMES to Julian the Apostata; does secretly signify that he is
denounced excommunicate, and may be slain by his Subjects in bataile, but not
by cutthroates. Bloody Cardinal, fitly painted out by a Pasquill, a Lion in
the cave: with this Motto well appllied Open the cave, and you shall see his
disposition.

This jest is too bitter, will some say, to bestow upon that great learned
Cardinal. Is it so? he that allows the murder of a King in fighting, does
not he deserve a sharp reproof in writing? He does not deal with our most
worthy JAMES as a King, and we do not mean to deal with him as a Cardinal.
He was learned heretofore, now he is malicious: heretofore he was a chief man
in disputation, now in rebellion. Heretofore a close enemy, now an open.
Heretofore the scorpions venom was not wanting in him, but lurckt in him.
Cardinal Comensis set on Parry that Cutthroate, to murder Queen ELIZABETH
with his dagger. Cardinal Bellarmine nothing the honester, but the cunninger,
denies that the King may be dispatched by a murderer, but by a Soldier he
denies not: As if there were any difference in the case of murder, whether
one kill a King in a Camp, or under a canopie, by open war, or secret
treachery. That may be rightly spoken of Bellarmine, that Cicero spoke of a
great Lawyer, he must kill a King, that will use his help. Therefore that may
be well said to this slippery Sophister, this armed and bloody Locust, which
Martial said to a certain Cobbler.

Good Tortus be not angry with my jest,
I tax thy craft, I mean thy life none ill;
Endure it man: from mirth I will not rest,
When thou do think that others thou may kill.
The cruel dealing of the Papists with Hen: 4. the French King.
How ready a Scholar Mariana this man's Auditor found of Rauiliake the death of
that illustrious French King Henry the 4. never sufficiently to be lamented,
never of kings sufficiently to be revenged, does too too well declare. The
first of his Scholars struck out his tooth, the second took away his life,
themselves buried his heart. A magnanimous and valiant King murdered of a base
rascally parricide, like to Caesar in his life, like in his death, for so he
is bemonde of a Christian Poet.

Caesar and He^: 4. compared
Caesar in valor I was like to thee,
In kind of death we likewise do agree:
The knife before thee took away thy breath,
The knife behind me brought me to my death:
Thou by the hands of Senators did fall,
I by a base and Savage Caniball.
But this Rouge you will say was not Marians scholar; no more then Catsby,
Percy, Write, and Faux were scholars to Garnet, Parsons, Gerard, and Grenwell.

18. But let us return to Saint John, Verse. 16.
who gives the Locusts stings in their tails, and a short time to hurt.

19. Whose King being the Angel of the bottomless pit, he brings in at the
last, The description of Antichrist.
whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, in Greek (...), that is, destroying. The
very Roman Antichrist himself destroying souls, overthrowing commonweals,
casting down crowns, dissipating Churches: being armed with so many bloody
laws, so many conspiring Counsels, so many warlike Legions, fetters, halters,
gallowses, rackes, fires: environed with so many Inquisitors, so many cursatiue
Jesuits, some of them dogmaticall, some pragmaticall King-killers, that he may
be rightly called Abaddon and (...).

You see, Paul the fifth, the disposition of the Roman Antichrist, by the
star that fell from heaven; by the key of the bottomless pit which he
received: by the pit which he opened: by the smoke of the pit which he brought
forth, by the kingdom of smoke which he built up, by the stinch of the
smoke that he thrust out, by the Locusts and Scorpions which do very lively
resemble the Monks new and old: by their infinite swarms whereby they do
hurt: their double venom which they instill: their deadly sting wherewith they
strike: their power, pride, cunning, cruelty which they practice: very worthy
subjects of their King Abaddon whom they obey.

CHAP. XIV. Wherein is set down actions of the Beast.
OF what kind Antichrist is we have expounded, now we must show whereabout
he is occupied. The star which fell from heaven does show his disposition:
The beast that rose out of the earth shall express his action.

Saint John describes two beasts, one ascending out of the sea, another out of
the earth. The first does resemble the Roman Empire: the other Antichrist
properly so called.

Saint John's Sea-beast.
The Roman Monarchy rose out of the sea: that is out of a turbulent state, out
of the factions and disorders of nations, as out of a troublesome sea: who is
called a beast not in respect of his civil authority, which he has from God,
but of his beastly vices, which he took from the Dragon.

Saint John's land-beast.
The Prophet brings in another beast rising out of the earth, not the same, but
diverse from it, like in many things, yet not the same. For I saw says Saint
John another beast rising out of the earth, which is both the seventh head of
the Roman beast, and yet a beast in it self, for her different beginning and
nature.

The actions of Antichrist the land-beast
1 Ascending out of the earth: therefore Antichrist is the son of the earth.
Therefore from the earth, being borne of earthly and sensual concupiscence,
and devilish counsel: as James the Apostle does join these 3. Ia. cap. 3.15.
signifying all one thing, earthly, sensual, devilish.

To speak like the Dragon.
2 She is said to speak as a Dragon, although she dissembles the 2. horns of
a lamb, whereof I spoke before. And herein Bellarmine does almost agree with
us. That by the Dragon the Devil is understood, by the first beast the great
number of sinners but under the Roman Empire, as we have set down by the
consent of all Interpreters, neither does Bellarmine greatly deny it. By the
later Beast Antichrist as elsewhere, as also the Preachers and Apostles of
Antichrist being the head of the first beast, cut off, and living again, he
does acknowledge with us to be the true image of that Beast.

3 She is said to work all her power in his sight. She works in the sight of
the first beast.
First it is certain that one and the same seat the city with seven hills
belongs to them both, which has ruled over Kings and Princes, which can be
no other then that great Lady Rome. In which seat the land-beast did succeed
the sea-beast and derived all the power of the Roman Empire to herself, so
that by her own men it is called the Kingdom of Priests, she does show all
the power of the first beast in his sight, that is at Rome.

4 She does constrain the earth and the inhabitants thereof to worship the
beast how will some say? when the Pope does enforce the inhabitants of the
earth not to worship the Emperor, but himself.

So you are to understand the beasts not to be the person that did reign,
either in the Empire, or in the Popedom; but those tyrannical powers, which
those beastly persons did put in practice. Again you are to consider the
Papal power to be truly imperial, and although it commend it self veiled
with the name of Christ, yet that it was brought in by the Dragon, as well as
the other; that it might worship the Dragon, and be an express image of the
Imperial power, which contained in it the Papal. The actions of Pagan Emperors.
For the Emperor was the chief Bishop. Now the Emperors did belch out
blasphemies against God, condemn the true worship of God, oppress the true
worshippers of God, maintain the worship of Devils: and did openly serve
the Dragon, from whom they received their tyrannical power. And what did the
Popes? The action of the Antichristian Popes.
Did they not with a blasphemous mouth challenge to themselves the divine name,
and godhead with Domitian? did they not scoff at the grace of Christ, with
Julian? did they not persecute the servants of Christ, with Dioclesian? did
they not bring in the worship and doctrine of Devils? and while they did
openly profess the name of Christ, did they not closly and secretly serve the
Dragon? So the difference between the Emperors and the Popes about the manner
of worshipping the Dragon was somewhat but in plain truth nothing at all. But
here is a necessary distinction to be used. There was in the Emperors a
blind ignorance of Christ, in the first Bishops a true confession of Christ,
in their successors a fained, who did in word condemn the old Roman
Idolatry and tyranny, What popery is.
but did call it back again in deed. For what is popery indeed if you do
truly weigh many of the parts of it, but refined paganism. The Authors
whereof were so bewitched of the Devil, that they intended one thing, and did
another: in intention they worshipped God, in very deed the Dragon; as
deceivers, so deceived; the principal Authors of the Devils worship, as
Saint John says; of the doctrine of Deuells, as Saint Paul says. What is
popery else therefore whether you consider the worship, or the doctrine but
secret Draconisme?

1. They think that they do gaily well, when they call upon other Mediators,
either Angels or Saints: when they adore the Pictures of Saints: yielding
worship to the Image (as they say) which is due to the example, whenas the
contrary is fit, to give no worship to the Image when none is due to the
substance. They think they do passing holily, but indeed they worship the
Devil, when they worship the Image as John teaches, whence Lactantius
concludes, there is no religion there where there is an Image. Hence it
follows that the Roman Synagogue is void of religion which is full of
Images. The Popes imagine that they be Masters of abstinence and continency,
when for conscience sake they forbid meats and marriages: when as in truth
they bring in the doctrine of devils, as S. Paul teaches. They do not intend
so, you will say. The murderer does not intend to kill his Father, but his
enemy; but in stead of his enemy he kills his Father in the dark: shall
we say he killed not his father but his enemy, because he intended not his
fathers but his enemies death? which if it be absurd to speak in this outward
darkness, do we not think it as absurd in this inward darkness of the soul,
if any man say that he does worship God when he does worship the Dragon,
because he does intend to worship God not the Dragon? Therefore the Emperors,
and the Popes do agree in a third, that is, in worshipping the Dragon, from
whom they have received their power. Add hereto that the Pope, in whom the
image of the first beast does revive and live again, as shall appear
afterward; while he drives men to worship himself, it may be said, that he
does compel them to worship the image of the first beast: from whence thus I
dispute.

He that compels men to worship the image of the first beast, is Antichrist.

The Pope does compel men to worship the image of the first beast.

The Pope therefore is Antichrist.

CHAP. XV. The decayed Emperor revived by the Pope.
5 FOR she is said to cure and heal the deadly blow of the former beast, and
to restore to him a spirit, and a voice.

That I may not be longer about those things, which are so copiously unfolded
by others, the Empire took a deadly wound in Augustulus, The Empire dead,
which was the last Emperor of the East, from whom the Empire lay as it were
dead for 325 years, till it was restored again by the Pope, and received as
it were new life in Charles the Great, as Bellarmine does vauntingly confess.
For he says, That the Pope did translate the Empire first from the Greeks to
the French, revived.
afterward to the Germans, and appointed that the choice of the Emperor
should be made by seven Electors, on that condition that the confirmation and
inauguration of the Emperor so chosen should belong to the Pope: that by this
means that dead head might seem to live and flourish again by the spirit of
the Pope. But reserving to himself the power of the Empire, he left the title
to the Germans, Cap. 15. de mira: Anti:
as Bellarmine does unadvisedly confess, that Antichrist shall be the last
that shall enjoy the Roman Empire, without the name or title of the Roman
Emperor. The Emperor but titular.
And therefore the Germane Emperor in respect of his power is only Titular,
for the Pope has not only derived to him the spiritual power but the
temporal also: therefore the state of Antichrist is the lively image of the
old Empire. The German Empire, is not now the Empire but the title, and dead
ghost of the Empire, to whom the Pope gives spirit, that is authority, and a
voice, that is his Edicts, when he gives life to the Emperor by his
confirmation. To what end I pray you ^ that it may sustain and uphold the
Popes Seat, wherein the power of the Empire does reside without a name,
according to John's Prophecy. Hence the Germane Emperor is called, the
Procurator and protector of the Apostolical See. I dispute then thus.

Antichrist is the restorer of the old Roman Monarchy, witness S. John.

The Pope of Rome alone is the restorer of the old Roman Monarchy, Bellarmine
not only witnessing it, but glorying in it.

The Pope of Rome therefore alone is Antichrist.

CHAP. XVI. Of bringing down fire from heaven.
But Bellarmine does expound this place according to the letter, as that
likewise of bringing down fire from heaven.

Antichrist says he, and the Antichristian Church does make the image of the
Beast to live and speak.

But the Pope and the Popish Church did never make the image of the Beast to
live and speak.

Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.

Besides, Antichrist says he, does cause fire to come from heaven in the sight
of men.

The Pope did never bring down fire in the sight of men.

The Pope therefore is not Antichrist.

The proposition of the former syllogism taken literally, is not S. John's
proposition: for not the image of every beast is to take life from Antichrist,
but the image of the first Beast, that is of the Roman Empire, which the Pope
in name and title renewed in the Emperor, in strength and power retained in
himself. And therefore he peruersely collecteth out of John, that power is
given to Antichrist to give life, and frame speeches to Images, which may seem
as credible to sober men, Popish false miracles.
as that the picture of Memnon being enlightened by the Sun beams, spoke very
plainly, as Tacitus reports. But grant it be so: the assumption literally
taken agrees with the Pope, and the popish Synagogue, if ye believe the
Legend. How often by them are images counterfeited to move, to sweat, to nodd,
to speak in the sight, and opinion of simple people, that they may be allured
to the worship of those Saints, whose images they be?

There was some wonder toward as often as the image began to speak. Martialis.


The Devil did often speak in the images of the Ethnicks, but a Priest in the
images of the Papist, that he may seem to take the Devils turn in deluding
of men. I retort therefore this argument.

Whatsoever Church does make images to speak, in the opinion of men, is
Antichristian.

But the popish Church does make images to speak in the opinion of men.

Therefore the popish Church is Antichristian.

6. Now I come to Bellarmines latter syllogism, if first I shall explain the
sixth action of the Beast: She works great signs, so that she makes fire to
descend from heaven in the sight of men.

The Beast that is Antichrist does work great miracles, v: 13. which blessed
Paul calls lying signs and wonders. 1. in respect of the end, because they
serve to seduce men, Ioh: 14. 2. in respect of the matter; for they be either
the counterfeytings of lying men, or the wonders of deceitful spirits, as
Augustine speaks. 3. In respect of the form, for whereas true miracles do
exceed nature, and are wrought by the omnipotent power of God; false wonders
are they which are partly effected by natural causes, partly by the power of
Satan. Bellarmine does well agree with us in all.

False miracles.
The miracles of the first and second kind have been infinite in the dark
kingdom of Antichrist: the apparition of Spirits, the visions of Angels, our
Lady how often has she come gliding out of heaven? how often have the
miserable souls crept puling out of Purgatory, besetting highways, and
recounting their torments to procure men to pity them? hence the market of
Purgatory is grown very gainefull, and the bargains about sins very
profitable. Then could the Images walk a foot; then could the Bells strike
alone without help; then could the Angels like Quoristers chant it out in
Canterbury Minster, and play upon Dunstans Harp; then could the Apostles come
down from heaven to help Basil to say Mass. These lying miracles were
feigned by cheating knaves, to confirm strange lies, and to cozen simple
people of their coin. For how often has a spirit being apprehended by the
Magistracy, and an Angel stripped, and our Lady sent to her Cell, been all of
them notably whipped? Souls so whipped with rodds, that they had rather been in
Purgatory. So they couerd all their tricks and conueyances, their kind of
deceit, and their manner of working with the fear of punishment. Of these
miracles Paul spoke, which being merely false had a show of miracles, but not
the power, being the devises of cogging companions. There were other miracles
of deceivable spirits, which were wrought partly by the force of natural
causes, partly by the power of Satan. So that that Synagogue seemed to be
another Canidia. Antichrist does make fire to descend from heaven in the view
of men, says S. John, that is in the opinion of men, as they imagine. Whether
that be taken mystically or literally, let us in a word consider. Fire
according to the Scripture descends mystically, either when God does approve
the religion and sacrifices, of his servants, How fire descends from heaven in
the Scripture.
as of Abel and Elias: or when God does by an extraordinary fashion send down
the graces of the Spirit into their hearts, as in the fiery tongues: or when
God did cast down fire from heaven moved by the prayers of his servants, as of
Elias to destroy his enemies. Three sorts of fire.


1. Is the fire of sacrifice. 2. The fire of grace. 3. The fire of Revenge.
In all these Antichrist is Gods Ape. For he has confirmed and approved the
sacrifice of the Mass and Transsubstantiation with miracles: The Mass
confirmed by a false miracle.
witness that pillar of fire from heaven, falling to the earth, even upon that
place, where by the negligence of the Priest, as the Legend reports, the body
of God fell out of the pixe upon the grass: that pillar of fire shining like
the Sun was about the body of God, so that all the beasts of the field,
except a black Horse, which bended but one of his legs, bended all their
four legs to the body. Which miracle I have brought out of the Legend, that
I might gratify Bellarmine, who knows that beasts then were well nurtured,
like to his lean jade, that forgetting to eat his meat, did adore the
sacrament upon his knees: which the beasts had not done if God forsooth had not
brought down the fiery pillar from heaven, whereby they might have discerned
the body of God lying upon the grass. Add hereto that Antichrist does bestow
the grace of the spirit, and sanctification, upon his Agneit Dei, his hallowed
grains, his holy water, and his bells, as Primasius has it. Further, he
strikes his enemies with vengeance from God, as it were with fire fallen from
heaven, but that in the conceit of men, that they whom Antichrist his fury
does daunt, may seem to be wounded with heavenly revenge, as it were with fire
fallen from above. Which whether it be true of the flash of excommunication,
which the Pope, who is called the God of revenge, casts abroad, let Kings look
to it, whose kingdoms have been often set on fire by such popish lightning.
But to excommunicate a King is, say they, no miracle. But so to excommunicate a
King that you cast him out of his kingdom, and release subjects from the
obedience of their Kings, it is a great miracle, that either Kings are so
patient to endure, or Subjects so mad to believe. Wherefore this is not
material fire, but mystical, brought down from heaven by Antichrist in the
sight of men, not that he does so indeed, but that he seems so to do.
Although if the literal sense do more content you, I have found out Gregory
the seventh, Gregor: the 7. miracle.
that notable enchanter, who could strike fire out of his bosom, as often as he
listed. Thus I infer.

Whosoever in the conceits of simple men does seem to bring down revenging
fire out of heaven, is Antichrist.

This the Pope does and has done.

Therefore the Pope is Antichrist.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Popes Character.
I Proceed. The Beast is said to imprint his character upon all, both great
and small, to be carried either in their forehead, or their right hand.
Wherein he does peruersly follow Christ's character, which GOD does imprint upon
his servants, subjection to Christ, and the acknowledging of him to be their
head and Savior. And it is partly inward, partly outward. Christ's character of
two sorts.
The inward character is true faith imprinted upon the soul by the spirit of
God, whereby we believe that Christ is our only Redeemer. The outward
character, is the confession of the mouth, and the operation of the hands. And
therefore a Christian does bear the mark of God in his heart by faith, in his
forehead by profession, Romans 10.
in his hand by working, as S. Paul has expounded: besides that, the two
sacraments are the seals of faith, the witnesses of profession, and the
practices of holiness. The diverse characters of the Pope.


In like sort Antichrist has a mark proper to himself of his own, which he
does imprint and brand the Antichristians withal. Which character hangs upon
his name, and his name upon his state. Of the first Beast that is of the Roman
or Latin monarchy, The seven forms of government among the Romans.
there were seven heads, that is, seven kingly forms of governing the
commonweal. 1. Kings properly so called. 2. Consuls. 3. Decemviri. 4.
Tribunes of soldiers. 5 Dictators. 6. Emperors properly called. 7 Antichrist.
The state of the Beast is Roman or Latin. Therefore the character of the
Beast is a note of difference whereby all they are discerned from all other,
who are of the Roman or Latin Religion, whom we term Papists.

And the subjection to the Pope of Rome, as to their head, and the
acknowledging of that See, the inward and outward mark of Antichrist.

The double mark or character of Antichrist.
The inward mark is that implicit faith, which I touched before. The outward
mark is that outward profession of the mouth, and the conformity of life to
the Popes laws: as the observation of the heathenish rights was called the
character of the Greeks: which is made perfect by the sacraments of
confirmation and order, invented by the Pope. And Antichrist does so imprint
all his with the mark of the Beast, that he will suffer none to buy or sell,
except they be branded with the Beasts mark. So every Papist is a stigmaticke,
otherwise he cannot hold his house, or keep open doors, or have any contract
or business, or have any comfortable society with Christ's faithful servants,
as Martin the fifth in the bull annexed to the counsel of Constance did word
for word declare.

8. The name of the Beast or of Antichrist does follow in the last place, it is
not a proper but a common name. For if we know what the Beast is, we shall
quickly know what his name is.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the name and number of the second Beast.
THe Beast with seven heads, as I said, is the state of the Roman and Latin
Empire, whose six Heads or Kings, were called Roman or Latin. The seventh is
Antichrist called likewise Roman or Latin. Therefore Antichrist is the seventh
King of the Roman or Latin Empire. But the Pope is the seventh King of the
Roman Empire. The Pope therefore is Antichrist.

9. But he must not only bear the name of the Beast, but the number of his
name, not the number of time, but of his name: for so says Saint John, no man
may buy or sell, but he that has the mark and name of the Beast, or number of
his name. He does not say the number of the time, wherein Antichrist was to be
revealed, but the number of his name, which he was to stamp upon his.

But the number of the name is the number of the years 666. which is
contained, The number of the Beast.
both in the Hebrew name, in which language the Prophecy was delivered to S.
John: or in Greek, in which language it was written by S. John, Romanus in the
Hebrew, Latinos written in Greek, makes up that number.

(...) by Ireneus witness: Romanus by Fox his account. There the common name
of Antichrist is Romanus or Latinus. It is the name of a man also, which is
very fitting: for Latinus was the name of a King in Italy; Romanus of a Pope.
Here is wisdom, says S. John, he that has understanding let him count the
number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.

It is an old tradition not to be rejected of them that be addicted to
traditions, that Irenaeus took the the name (...) from Ignatius, Ignatius from
Polycarpus, Polycarpus from S. John. There be other names that contain the
same number, as Euandas and (...), but none of these be the name of the Beast,
nor the name of a man, none such, which Antichrist does imprint upon his, and
to whom all the notes of Antichrist do agree.

Whosoever does compel those that be under his jurisdiction to take on them
the mark and name of the Beast, the number of his name, and the number of a
man is Antichristrist.

But the Pope of Rome does compel those that be under his jurisdiction to take
upon them the mark and name of the Beast, and the number of his name, and the
number of a man, as I have demonstrated before.

Therefore the Pope is Antichrist.

CHAP. XIX. Wherein is showed the place where Antichrist sits.
The Pope sits in Rome which is Babylon.
We have seen the actions, the mark and the name of the Beast. Let us see his
seat: I have expounded the star which fell from Heaven, I added somewhat of
the Beast which rose out of the earth: now hearken to the whore which sits
on the Beast. Ere while the falling star did represent Antichrist, now the
whore of Babylon does represent the seat of Antichrist. A falling star,
because he left his place: a whore because she broke her troth: ere while the
Land-Beast did point out Antichrist, so called, not only because she took a
surer and a stronger beginning out of rest and idleness, but because she
being a slave to her beastly affections, savors nothing but earth and flesh.
Now the whore of Babylon does shadow out by your own confessions the seat and
Church of Antichrist: Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 16 cap. 17. and cap. 22. lib.
18. Sic Hieron. in Esa. cap 47. v. 1. and else where often. Demonst. 13. and
18.
for they are not afraid to call Rome, Babylon, as the Rhemists, Parsons and
Bellarmine: and mystical Babylon, as Augustine calls Babylon as it were first
Rome, and Rome as it were the second Babylon, and the daughter of the first
Babylon: whereupon your own men grant that Rome is that whore of Babylon
described by S. John: yea, they proceed farther, for your Saunders calls it
the seat and ^ity of Antichrist. We take that you grant: for it follows by
your grant, that not Heathenish Rome, but the Bishops Rome is mystical
Babylon: for the state of Antichrist being the seventh head, does follow the
state of the Empire, being the sixth head of the Beast. And therefore Heathenish
and Imperial Rome could not be the seat and city of Antichrist. Therefore
Christian Rome, and the Popes Rome. Whereby it is brought to pass, that not
Heathenish Rome, but the Popes Rome is mystical Babylon. For this is the sum
of my conclusion.

Mystical Babylon is the seat and city of Antichrist, described in the Apocal.
chap. 17.

But Rome is mystical Babylon there described.

Rome therefore is the seat and city of Antichrist.

But they distinguish of Rome in the assumption, and they enforce it to be
Heathenish and the Imperial Rome, which then governed and persecuted the
Saints. Not this Christian and Popish described by S. John. It is a very
weighty and evident prophecy.

1. It had been a cold and a weak prophecy, Reasons to show it was not
Heathenish Rome: but the Popish.
if he had prophesied of that persecution which he saw in others, and felt in
himself. Prophesies look not to the present, but the future times.

2. If he had meant that Ethnicke Rome had been Babylon, which did afflict the
Saints at that time, he had not spoken as of a mystery: for that could not
seem to him so mystical that Pagans should persecute Christians. That was a
plain mystical evil, that Christians should oppress Christians.

3. Neither would he have called Ethnicke Rome a whore in that sense, which had
not given her faith to Christ, and therefore had not as yet broken it: neither
did she deceive the nations with whorish tricks and daliances: but had
vanquished them with military force and weapons. He does therefore call Rome a
whore, after it left off to be a faithful city, which daunted the nations, not
as Bellona, but enchanted them as Circe.

4. Neither would he have made her merchants the Sales-men of souls, or that
all nations had been deceived by her venomous baits, if he had meant Ethnic
Rome, which subdued nations by force, did not infect them with poison. For that
kept a shambles for bodies not a market for souls. And among all the
negotiations of Popish Rome, none is so gainefull as the traffic of souls,
whereof S. John; which Ethnicke Rome never practiced. Therefore the Christian
Popish Rome is that Babylon, Popish Rome Babylon.
whose wares are men's souls, whose Merchants are the Monks, which make men
value their salvation at a high rate. Not without cause, Martial a pleasant
Poet, thought he might jest with one Calliodore, who had put over his servant
tor 2000. pieces of silver, that out of his man's price he might suppe
daintily, and feed upon Mullet, and other kinds of delicate fish.

I may well cry, o wreth, that fish is not thy meat.
It is a man, a man thou Calliodore do eat.
The same may be truly said of Bellarmine, Becan and such like Jesuits, who
sell men's souls to feed their bellies.

It is not fish ye Jesuits, whereon you do so feed,
O they be men ye Canibals, o they be men indeed.
Whom if I cannot yet satisfy, (for I know their wrangling and obstinate wits)
I will send them to the Angel, the Interpreter of the Mystery, who does
convict that Rome, in name only Christian and Popish, to be that whore of
Babylon.

First, the seven heads of the Beast, whereof he spoke mystically before, are
seven hills, says the Angel, and seven Kings. The hills are the heads of the
city, the seven Kings the heads of the government, by them the situation of
Rome, by these the seven kinds of government are noted, whereof I spoke
before. Five went before John's time, the sixth was then, that is, the Empire,
which the first Beast shadoweth out, the seventh was not yet come, that was the
Popedom, which the latter Beast does represent.

The Rhemists objection.
But the 7. hills and the 7. Kings say the Rhemists are not taken literally and
properly, but mystically, and indefinitly so that they signify all the
Kingdoms of persecutors. Why therefore does the Angel add, of the seven
Kings, 5. are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come? which place the
Rhemists do so expound afterward, but unwittingly, they confess five went
before Christ, one then was, the other was to follow, whereby they overthrow
their former idle interpretation. Whose peevishness I pray behold how great it
is. In all other places almost, Their mistaking.
where the sense is altogether mystical, they imagine a literal sense of
their own. Here where the Angel sets down a plain literal sense they
imagine a mystical. Against sense, which sees the 7. hills of the city,
whereupon Rome is called the seven hild-city: Against the history, which
mentions 7. Kings, that is the 7. kingly forms of government of that City.
Neither does the Angel say, as they dream the seven heads are 7. hills, and
the 7. hills are seven Kings, but the 7. heads are 7. hills, and those seven
heads are seven Kings as Bellarmine acknowledges. The Rhemists exposition is
very foolish. For the Kings being the heads do shadow out the heads of the
politic body very fitly, the hills very unfitly. Besides that, it is very
false for if the hills be Kings, the City which is the woman verse: 18. sits
upon 7. Kings. For she is said to sit on the hills verse: 9. The light of which
place, did so strike and dasell the English- Rhemists, Anglo-Rhemen in Apoc:
cap. 17.5.
as it had done Sanders before, that they confess Rome to be that Whore of
Babylon, and that it may fall out not inconueniently, that great Antichrist may
have his seat at Rome. Out of this exposition of the Angel, and the confession
of the Adversary arises this proposition. That great City placed upon seven
hills, and subject, to the 7. kingly forms of government, is the seat of
Antichrist, hence I dispute both negatiuely, and affirmatively. Negatiuely: But
Jerusalem although a great City, Antichrists seat not at Jerusalem.
yet was not situated on seven hills, nor ever subject to seven such kingly
forms of government; Jerusalem therefore is not the seat of Antichrist.
Affirmatively, but of all cities this situation and government is proper to
Rome. Rome therefore properly is the head-city of Antichrist. Now since
Antichrist sits only at Rome, as the Angel interprets in John, and the
Adversary confesses, and sits in the temple of God, as Paul sets it down,
that is in Gods Church, as the fathers expound it out of the Scriptures, it
follows both ways necessarily that not that Ethnicke but that
Ecclesiastical Rome is the head-city of Antichrist. Sibilla did foretell both
the situation of the place, Sibilla did foretell Antichrist.
and the state of Antichrist. And she foretold there would be great terror
and fury of the Empire near the banks of Tyber, and that the king would be
(...) and gave him the name like to a bridge, and should be a Bishop adorned
with a white, that is a silver Myter, glistering with precious stones; as
Ireneus likewise foretold. Therefore he was a Latin Bishop, that did hold
Peter's chair, as Bernard, who shall be called most holy Lord, and most holy
Bishop as Ioachim the Abbot said. Could Saint John, could Saint Paul, could
Sibilla, Irenaeus, Barnard, Ioachim the Abbot, touch him nearer then they touch
him? Or more plainly show the situation of the seat, the kind of government,
the state of the King, the bank of Tyber, the name of the chair of Antichrist,
so that one of the Papists called him most holy Pope? But let us return to the
Angel, by whom the beast which carried the whore is thus described, (which
was) that is a flourishing Empire (but is not) in truth the Empire of Rome for
his strength and power but his shadow rather verse: 3. (and yet is) the Roman
Empire for name and title: (and is called the eight beast) for 5. are already
fallen, Verse. 10.
as the Angel says. One King was then, that is the Empire in Saint John's
time, and another was not as yet come, Verse. 11.
that is the Papacy which drew to it self the strength and power of the old
Empire without the name: and is called the seventh head of the beast, The eight
beast.
although of it own self it be a beast. But the beast which was and is not
(is the eight) that is a new Empire, for the name and title, and is one of the
seven: that is, of the Emperors. Therefore although the old Empire may seem
to be described by the Angel by the name of the beast, yet a new is chiefly
set out, which the second beast did renew, that the Whore might sit upon it,
and be vpholden by it. What is more perspicuous then this Angelical
interpretation, which event it self has proved true? for the whore sits
upon this heast and is vpheld by it. For therefore the Roman in name, but the
German Emperor in deed is called as I said the Defendor Procurator and
Protector of the Apostolic sea. Out of the premises I shortly dispute.

6 The beast whereon the Whore sits is a new Empire; for it is not the sixth
head but the eight, therefore not Ethnic Rome under the Pagans, but in name
only Christian under the Christian Emperors is that Whore described by Saint
John.

7 Now those ten horns says the Angel, are ten Kings verse: 12. which as
yet have not received the Kingdom.

They be not then those ten horns, whereof Daniel did prophecy whose
kingdoms are at an end. But they shall have kingly power together with the
beast, that is with Antichrist, which cannot be understood but of the
Proconsuls, or Propraetors who were vicegerents to the Emperors in the
Provinces, who together after the dissolution of the Eastern Empire had at
that time absolute kingly authority with the Pope. For while the Empire stood
and flourished, neither the Pope at Rome nor the Kings in the Provinces did
rule absolutely; after it decayed, both he enjoyed Rome and a great part of
Italy, and they enjoyed the Provinces. And these ten horns together with
the beast as Bellarmine confesses it, and event proves it, Lib. 3. de Romans
Pont. cap. 13.
divided the Roman Empire between them. Hence I infer this.

At that time whenas Rome was accounted the Whore of Babylon by the Angel,
then the ten horns took absolute power with Antichrist.

But before Rome was Christian and Popish the ten horns had not absolute power
with Antichrist.

It follows therefore that Rome not before it was Christian and Popish, was
accounted the Whore of Babylon by the Angel.

CAHP. XX. Wherein the qualities of the Whore of Babylon are described.
WHose glorious profession is fitly resembled to the golden cup of
fornication. It is said that Edward the 4. King of England had three Concubines
the first very devout, the second very subtle, the third very pleasant. The
whore of Babylon alone does express these three dispositions. For what is more
devout, what is more ioconde, what is more wily? she has a face none of her
own, as her Husband Antichrist has not. For he does always wear a visard,
and therefore is a counterfeit Antichrist. A whore, not only for her carnal
filthiness, but for her spiritual Idolatry, whereto she has entised the
nations with her allurements, such as had to do with her. She is therefore a
blasphemous and filthy Whore, more then that a proud, covetous, cruel whore.
And therefore she is said to be decked with purple and golden attire, enriched
with the spoils of all sorts, and drunk with the innocent blood of the
Saints. Note
For what extremities soever impiety could effect by blasphemy, or lust by
lasciviousness, or covetousness by rapine, or pride by delicacie, or cruelty
by torture, the same the Angel so long before foretold that the Church should
endure by that whore of Babylon. Neither if we grant that Ethnicke Rome from
her cradell was Babylon, because the beast is said to have 7. heads, any
inconvenience will follow thereby. Neither if we shall say that the purple
whore began then, The Pope compared to Romulus.
when Romulus first founded Rome will it overthrow the exposition of the
Angel. For it remained to be that, which she was in the beginning. Yea a
great deal worse when it was falsely Christian under Antichrist, then
heathenish under Romulus. It is reported that Romulus was a notable theife, a
Deflowrer of Virgins, a truce breaker, a brother-killer, and that he founded
Rome at the first by these sins. But he was not so notorious for his theifts,
as this for his sacrilege. Nor he so filthy for the forcing of Virgins, as
this for the worshipping of Images: Nor he for his breaking his league with
men, as this with God: Nor he such a spiller of his brothers blood, as this of
Christian blood. What an one think we him to be, who does surpass a thief in
robbery, a deflowrer of Virgins in lechery, a truce breaker in treachery, and
a brother-killer in cruelty. Therefore the Angel called the Bishop of Rome
Babylon and the purple whore by a super excellency. The descripti- of the
Whore of Babylon.
For she was proud by the spoils of Provinces, this by the spoils of all
Churches. She was composed or carnal, this of spiritual adulteries and
whoredoms. She brak her faith with men, this with God. She was enraged
against the bodies of the Saints, this against the souls of the Saints. She
dealt with the lambs of Christ by open force as a Lions Whelpe, this as a Fox
with her cunning did sauagely tear them in pieces and devour them. Wherefore
let Rome if you will, be that whore of Babylon from the beginning: certainly
she could not make drunk 10. kings with the golden cup of her fornication,
before there were ten Kings. For while Ethnicke Rome did stand, they were the
Emperors subjects, they were no kings: They were kings under the Pope of Rome,
therefore by popish Rome made drunk, to whom by an excellency the name of
that whore is given by the Angel. Neither yet will I ever accuse that Bishoply
Rome, which suffered for Christ under the ethnicke Emperors. For not Rome
regenerated and suffering, but degenerating and persecuting can properly be
called that whore of Babylon. Neither do I wholly excuse the imperial Rome,
Imperial Rome not to be excused.
which under Constantine, Theodosius and other holy Emperors professed Christ:
because Rome which was Babylon from the beginning, did retain in her bosom
diverse relics of the former paganism, and diverse seeds of the future
Antichristianisme. Because it is not necessary that all that were of the same
succession should be of the same affection. No I would not exclude Paul the 5.
himself from the hope of salvation, if the wretched sinner would repent, and
return unto his God. Hence certain dispute against us.

Antichrist cannot be saved: for he is the son of perdition, as the Apostle
teaches.

The Pope may be saved, by your own confession.

The Pope therefore is not Antichrist. Or thus.

It is not lawful to pray for Antichrist,

It is for the Pope,

The Pope therefore is not Antichrist.

This objection is a fallacy, called the begging of the question. For it does
presuppose Antichrist to be one singular man. We contrary; as by many reasons
we have proved it. If therefore they keep them to the point, and take the
Pope collectiuely, the assumption is false, if they take him for this or that
single man, the assumption is true, if the Pope repent. But then there be four
terms in the syllogism. For the Pope is otherwise taken in the assumption,
then in the conclusion. For there it is taken for singular Popes, here for a
succession of Pope. But of this sophisme I have spoken enough before.

CHAP. XXI. How the Church of Rome may be said to be the Church of GOD.
But here is another doubt to be resolved, how the seat of Antichrist can be
called that purple whore, as Saint John says, and temple and Church of God as
Saint Paul says.

For if Antichrist sit in the Church of God as I taught before, and popish Rome
be the seat of Antichrist, as in many words I have declared, it seems that
popish Rome is the Church of God. I answer and distinguish of the proposition,
and that out of Gods book, which considers the Church after 2. sorts.

1. After the inward truth, and the outward profession. 2. After the outward
profession only.
As blessed John calls the Church of Sardis the Church of Christ although it
had grievously fallen from the doctrine of Christ. Why so? Because as yet it
professed the name of Christ, and retained the sacrament of Baptism, and
because certain lay hid among them, who had not polluted themselves. So the
Church of Rome may be called the Church of God and of Christ, because it
professes the name of Christ, because it retains certain footsteps and
outward marks of a visible Church, as Baptism, the Decalogue, the creed, The
Papists have the truth as the Philistines had the Arc.
the Lords Prayer: but notes miserably corrupted: as the Philistines who
retained among them the Arc of Gods presence, but they felt it to be to them
the Arc of pestilence: as the Cutthites the bastard Israelites, who had Moses
books, and would at once fear God and worship Idols: As the Samaritanes
their successors, who bragged that they had Jacobs well among them, when they
had infected the well of the water of life. Therefore the Delegates did justly
complain of the Church of Rome in the Council of Trent: That that was true
which God complained by Jeremy: This people have committed two evils; one,
they have forsaken me the fountain of living water: The other they have dug
to themselves cesternes, which can hold no water. Although I cannot deny that
certain relikes of the invisible Church do lie hidden in the same, who have
not bended their knee to Baal. But as it is said to the Church of Sardis, You
have a name that you live, but you are dead, that may deservedly be spoken of
the Romish Church, in respect of the inward faith the soul of the Church, you
are stark dead, although in outward profession you are said to live. You are
called the Temple of God, because you reteyne the name of Christ, but you are
the whore of Babylon, because you have forsaken the faith. The temple of God
equiuocally, not univocally, for an equivocal Church is good enough for
aequiuocating Christians. Now the ten horns, that is the ten Kings, have one
purpose, as the Angel speaks, to give over his virtue and his power to the
beast. Her they will serve, they will love and seek after her; her they will
sustain with their forces, at her book they will draw the sword, and being
confederaed in holy leagues both with the beast and within themselves, will
fight with the Lamb: but after that, the Lamb shall by little and little begin
to weaken and consume Antichrist by the preaching of his word, then the ten
horns which before had to do with the whore, shall begin to hate her, and
leave her forsaken and naked.

CHAP. XXII. An advise to Princes to join against the Pope.
8 WHich cannot be said of old, but of new Rome, whereof a great part of the
prophecy is now fulfilled. For the Pope has lost, as Bellarmine bemoaneth, a
great part of Germany, Suetia, Gothia, Noruegia, all Denmark, a good part of
England, France, Heluetia, Polonia, Bohemia, and Pannonia. He might better have
said all England, and joined Scotland and Ireland thereto, but that he would
show he has a little vain hope in certain secret and broken relics of
Antichrist among us. I would to God that as the Kings of Great Britannie, with
many other great Princes have cast of the whore, A desire that France and
Spain would forsake the Pope.
so the Kings of France and Spain would forsake her. Rome is more to be feared
of them, then of our Britain King, whose Crown is more free, whose succession
more certain, whose subjects more loyal, whose kingdom is more remote, and
shut up from popish assaults. I would that so mighty Princes, this Princes
confederates, would follow his valor and holiness in this point, whereby they
might wholly fulfill the prophecy. It is not for men of mean condition to give
counsel, but to make prayers, while they expound this so holy and weighty
prophecy. If not to advise, yet to wish, first that those two potent Kings
would join with the King of Great Britain, and others those worthy Kings and
Princes of the Reformed Church, against Antichrist. Next that if they do make
a secret league with Antichrist and within themselves against the Kings and
Princes of the Reformed Church, that all our side would make a holy League with
all possible haste, and take heed that our neighbors and brethren, the
Protestants of France and Flanders, be not unawares oppressed by them, whiles
ours neglect them. But we may not make wars with our neighbor Kings. But we
ought to take heed, lest they bring in a very dangerous war upon us. But we
must be addicted to peace. True, which has no treachery nor deceit;
otherwise an holy war is to be preferred before a treacherous peace, whereto
the Holy Ghost does exhort Kings, that with united forces they destroy and
overthrow the whore of Babylon, that is Rome, as Bellarmine himself confesses.

CHAP. XXIII. The overthrow of Rome.
AS the Angel does continue his prophecy to the last overthrow of the whore,
which cannot agree with heathenish and imperial Rome; for this overthrow does
follow the dissolution of the old Empire, and the division thereof into ten
kingdoms, which according to the prophecy would that the whore should first
perish, afterward themselves should consume and destroy it. Therefore this
overthrow belongs to Rome that is popish, but christian in name, as the
Angel did notably expound it; for whereas she is said to sit upon many
waters, that is, many people and many nations, as the Angel expounds it, ver:
15. and whereas the woman is called the great City, which bears rule over
the Kings of the earth, ver: 18. nothing does hinder but that it may be popish
Rome. But that popish Rome is not rightly said to have government: first it is
sufficient that Rome then Imperial, is described to be the seat wherein the
whore of Babylon shall bear rule afterward. Again, they which call her the
kingdom of the Romans, Turrianus.
the kingdom of Priests, do confess that she bears rule, who have very
cunningly changed the secular kingdom into a spiritual, that which Aquinas
the Angelical Doctor does observe. Aquinas.
But so excellent a prophecy did not only look into the age then present,
but foresaw the age long after to follow. And therefore the description of the
whore is first set out in all her parts as you see, and after her destruction,
which cannot be understood of the burning of Ethnicke Rome by the Goths and
Vandales, 10
but by a final and sudden destruction, as it were a myllstone cast by great
force into the sea. For it shall not says the Angel, be found again any
more: which cannot agree to Ethnicke Rome, for after it had received that
dangerous wound by the Goths, it was afterward cured and restored to health.
Besides, Bellarmine, Becan, and the rest of those frogs, may merrily scoff and
laugh at our men (but with a Sardonian laughter) because the City and
Antichrist, as they write, to us are both one, as the street and Josephus: for
the woman which is the great City, together with her false Prophet shall be
cast into the lake of fire. Here is no distinction of destruction: for both the
seat, and he that holds the seat shall perish for ever. But Christian Rome
shall not perish, say they. True, if the truth agreed with the name: but the
Antichristian whore shall be utterly overthrown. Therefore the Angel cries
out, Come out of Babylon my people, lest as ye be partakers of her sins, you
be likewise partakers of her plagues. Hierome does allege in his Epistle to
Marcella, whom he persuades to come out of Rome now, not heathenish but
popish, because it is Babylon: which the very Papists themselves do grant to be
the seat of Antichrist. they imagine shall come in the end of the world: if
they say he shall sit after the Emperors be clean gone, Popish Rome the seat
of Antichrist.
it follows that Rome is Babylon, and the seat of Antichrist, not the former
heathenish, but the latter popish. For whereas they go about to prove out of
the Apocalypse, that Jerusalem is the seat of Antichrist, thereof I shall have
occasion to speak more properly in another place. Now out of these premises
does arise that principal syllogism which I took in hand to prove.

Mystical Babylon is the seat and City of Antichrist described in the 17 and
18 of the Apocalypse by the confession of the Adversaries.

But Rome christian in name and popish is that mystical Babylon, as the
exposition of the Angel does manifestly convict.

Rome therefore in name christian and popish, is the seat and city of
Antichrist.

This is the Angels exposition, Paul the fifth, not mine: this exposition if
you have any sense at all pierces to the quick, it galls and wounds
exceedingly. This syllogism does inwardly lanche and wound these your worthy
Advocates, though they seem to have little sense, made like a darte, by the
exposition of the Angel, to be cast and aimed at them. For what are they else
but the shameless bawdes of the whore? what do they else, but with their
cunning netts of words, and with their learned snares deceive and catch simple
people, Papists deceive the people.
that they may bring them to that withered and ouerworne whore, whom they paint
out with all their boxes of their slaberments. But as Chrysostom said of a
woman that colored her face with painting, that God would not acknowledge her
in the resurrection for his creature, that may more truly be said of this same
hagged and painted whore, of whom we speak.

CHAP. XXIV. Wherein is set down the time when Antichrist is revealed.
I Have spoken much of the seat wherein she does govern, now somewhat of the
time when she shall be revealed. For Antichrist lurkt closely a long time, and
closely grew by degrees, as an earthquake, A notable similitude of an
earthquake.
which does not show it self straight way, but begins first by a little
wind, and then being shut up and kept in, in certain hollow caves of the
earth, making no motion or sound, but by little and little gathering great
strength, at last violently breaks out, The degrees of an earthquake.
tears the earth in pieces, shatters rocks, casts down mountains, ouerturnes
Towers, subuerts Cities, swallows up Rivers, inflames the air, brings forth
lightning, fills the heavens with dreadful noise, and the world with
terrible fear. Such is the working of an earthquake, small, little and hidden
at the first, great and terrible after it breaks out. Such for all the world
is the working of Antichrist. In the beginning, like a little wind, it lies
hid in certain hollow cells of the Church, afterward by degrees growing
bigger, and gathering strength, it does agaste the world. Insinuating himself
at the first with a fained cloak of sanctity, creeps secretly into men's
minds: at the last shall appear, and break out openly to their destruction,
after that which hinders is taken away, as the Apostle teaches. It is agreed
on both sides, that which S. Paul says hinders, What hindered the revealing of
Antichrist. De resur: car: 2 Thessalonians: 2.6.
that Antichrist which then was might not be revealed was the Roman Empire, as
all the Fathers thought, Tertullian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Cyrill, Primasius,
Theophylact upon this place, Hierom to Algasia quest. 11. unless better you
know what deteyneth the coming of Christ, that Antichrist should first be
revealed in his time, as that learned Jewel does expound out of the former
words. The day of Christ, says the Apostle, shall not come, unless there come
a falling away first, and unless Antichrist be revealed ver: 7. he teaches
who does keep back the coming of Christ, only he which deteyneth, shall
deteyne till he be clean taken away: which all the Fathers almost, as I said,
understand of the Roman Emperor, about the end of whose fall they say that
Antichrist shall come. The Apostle used first the newter gender, v: 6. then the
masculine, v: 7. By the one some think he meant the Roman Empire, by the
other the Roman Emperor. For so long as the Rom: Empire flourished, or the
Roman Emperor bare rule, Antichrist could not sit and domineere in that seat:
he lay close at that time and durst not show himself. The Emperor who hindered
him was to be taken out of the way, that Antichrist might openly govern at
Rome; that the Popes chair might there be placed in stead of Caesar's throne.
But herein the Adversaries dissent from us; That the Rom: Empire they say,
should be utterly overthrown and ended, so as not so much as the name of the
Rom: Empire should remain, before Antichrist came. Which as soon as
Bellarmine had said, he denied: in which contradiction, as in many others, that
great learned Bishop of Ely takes him tardie. Truly that which he said,
neither the Apostle has said, or any Father has said. The Apostle has
taught, that that which hindered must be taken out of the way, and removed out
of his place, so far forth as it hindered the revelation and domination of
Antichrist, he did not teach it should be abolished and overthrown, as they
say, so that he should lose his name: for the removing of the Empire is one
thing, the abolishing is another. The Roman Empire is not dissolved but divided
into 10 Kings.
The Emperor is gone out of the City of Rome, the Rom: Empire is dissolved
and divided into ten Kings, therefore Antichrist is now come. This is therefore
the conclusion of all those Fathers, whom I mentioned before. He that held is
taken away, says Hierome, Ad Geront. de Monoga.
and do we not understand that Antichrist is near at hand? for so S. John
says, the ten horns shall receive the Kingdom together with the Beast, that
is, with Antichrist, and the ten Kings shall divide the Roman Empire among
themselves (the number of ten is often taken indefinitely.) You have heard the
prophecy, mark the event. The ten horns have received the Kingdom, and
have divided the Roman Empire among themselves, together with the Beast, that
is, with Antichrist: by the confession of Bellarmine. Therefore Antichrist is
now come. But the name of the Roman Empire is not abolished. Neither ought it
to be abolished; for S. John has taught, that the sixth head of the Sea-Beast,
that is, the Empire, The sixth head of the Sea-beast.
after it was deadly wounded should be cured and healed again: not therefore
to be utterly taken away and finished, as they say, so that it retain not the
name of an Empire. Again, he sets out the cause, why the second Beast, that
is, Antichrist should renew the image of the former Beast, that the whore might
sit upon her, as I have taught, and be sustained by her. And therefore the
former Beast was not clean to be taken away, lest the latter being deprived of
her stay, should fall to the ground.

But how does S. John and S. Paul then agree? An objection ansvvered.
S. Paul says, that the Emperor must be taken out of the way, that he might
leave Rome empty for Antichrist, as the Papists expound it: Saint John says,
that the whore sits upon the Beasts back, that is, the Emperor, that she
might be vpheld by him. How do you reconcile these? will you say, if you
understand S. Paul to speak of the old, and S. John of the new Empire. S.
Paul speaks of the Empire which hindered or detained, and of that only, for
so he says, He only that now hinders shall binder, till it be taken away.
The old Empire did hinder Antichrist not the new. S. Paul therefore spoke not
of the new Empire, but of the old. S. John speaks of the Empire that
carries the Beast, that is so far off from hindering it, that it does rather
underprop and uphold it. And to that purpose was the Empire renewed in the
West, The Empire renewed in the West, to uphold the Pope.
that it might hold up the Church of Rome. S. John therefore does not in this
place speak of the old Empire, but of the new. But the Popish sort, who
think that not the Majesty only, but the name of the Empire is to be
extinguished, before Antichrist come, do seem by obscuring the prophecy with
certain contradictions to delude their Auditors. They say that the Roman
Empire which now is, shall continue to the end of the world by the prophecy of
Daniel, and the same men say, that it shall be dissolved and divided into ten
Kings (Very foolishly; they say it notwithstanding) before Antichrist come. As
though ten very potent Kingdoms could consist of the naked name, and vain
title of an Emperor, or that that could be said of them, should be utterly
abolished before Antichrist came, which by them is said, shall continue till
the end of the world. Wherein in the one, they seem to follow the madness of
Epicurus, who seems to make the world of moates, as these men make ten
Kingdoms of words. For what is now the Roman Empire, but a mere word? In the
other they show their brains to be cracked, who say, that the Roman Empire that
now is, shall continue to the worlds end, and yet shall be utterly overthrown
before the coming of Antichrist, whom they say shall reign three years and a
half before the end of the world. In them both they show their notable
impiety, who while they wrape and infold a most weighty prophecy of
Antichrist, within their impossibilities and contradictions they profane Gods
Word, and deceive Gods Church. The sum of all is gathered by the Apostle,
that the old Empire is to be taken away, and to be dissolved and divided into
ten Kingdoms, before that Antichrist should come, that the new was to be
restored and repaired, being the image of the old, upon whose back he should
sit and advance himself when he came.

CHAP. XXV. How the old Empire was taken away.
THe old Empire therefore whereof S. Paul spoke which hindered the revealing of
Antichrist, let us consider how it was taken out of the way: whereof we put two
degrees. First, when Constantine the Great, did translate the seat of the
Empire from Rome to Constantinople: Two degrees of the falling of the Empire.
the second after the division of the Empire, into the Eastern and Western,
which did presently weaken them both, and afterward dissolved the Western,
which was properly the Roman Empire, it was first deprived (the Eastern I
mean) of all the title and interest to Rome and Italy. The empty seat of the
Empire, the Majesty thereof divided and diminished, then first in the West, and
after in the East put out and overthrown, we say to be the two degrees of
the remoouing of that obstacle, which hindered the revealing of Antichrist, and
his dominion in the city of Rome. I trip over the history briefly, they that
will set faster footing, may fetch it out of the fountains themselves, if they
please.

I do likewise set down two degrees of the Revelation of Antichrist. One
wherein he began to reign, Two degrees of revealing Antichrist.
the other wherein he began to be acknowledged.

I note also two degrees of the Kingdom, when it took upon it the chief
government of the universal Church, Anno 607. when he was called universal
Bishop by Phocas that King-killer, at that very time when Mahomet began, so
that Phocas the murderer, When Mahomet began.
the Universal Bishop, and wicked Mahomet may seem to be of one birth. The
wind of false doctrine, and of Church-ambition, did by stealth creep into the
minds of certain Bishops, Socrat. li. 7. c. 11
who, as Socrates is witness, lifting up themselves above the limits of their
Priesthood, into strange government, did strive about the primacie and
superiority over all Churches: and to that purpose Zosimus and Celestinus did
foyst in a new devised Canon of the counsel of Niece, detected and rejected by
the Bishops of Carthage. But that small wind kept in, I know not how in the
heart of the Church, it did not all break out before Boniface the third had
extorted that proud title from Phocas the Emperor, by his importunate entreaty.

But yet Antichrist was but a Pupil as it were in his nonage, not only being
subject to the Emperor for a time, but the Emperors Vice Gerent in the
government of Rauenna: by whom the election of the Pope first made by the
Clergy and people of Rome, was necessarily confirmed, until Benedict the
second obtained this privilege of the Emperor Constantine the fourth,
Pogonotus, that the Pope should be created without the confirmation of the
Emperor. And then Antichrist began to be his own man, living after his
own law, or rather without law, as the Apostle speaks. Not long after, as
Boniface the third did extol himself above all Bishops; so Gregory the
second vaunted, that he was above the Emperor: Gregory the third did spoil
Leo the third, being first excommunicated by Gregory the second, because he
went about to abolish images, did spoil, I say, him of all his revenues in
Italy, and absolved his subjects from their oath of fealty. And so took from
him all the government of the West, as a Popish Author does testify in his
book called, The bundle of times. Faesciculus temp^rum.
At last, that we may not follow after the mean passages in the history
severally, Gregory the seueuth, like an Earthquake, brake out and shattered
both the Church and the Empire. Auentinus does witness; which his successors
continued 450. years in despite of the Emperors, so that they made the
Emperor his vassal. After that Antichrist was come to his height, being
revealed by his two degrees, and domineering in the Church, first be began to
be acknowledged of many holy and learned men in particular: but from the time
of Gregory the seventh, to the happy age of Luther, and then in general Rome
was acknowledged to be Babylon, the Pope Antichrist in all the Reformed
Churches. I am not ignorant that this assertion of the Reformed Church, of our
own men is thought doubtful, of yours mad and doting, but if they do
seriously mark those conclusions following, our men will feel that scruple
taken from them, and your men a sting fastened in them. For thus I will dispute
from all the premises.

To whomsoever all those essential notes of Antichrist set down by blessed
Paul and John, do only agree, he is only that great Antichrist.

But all those essential notes do agree to the Pope of Rome only.

Therefore the Pope of Rome only is that great Antichrist.

CHAP. XXVI. A recapitulation of that which went before.
NOw that the assumption may plainly appear, we will set out, as in one view,
all those propositions shortly, which have been before more largely and
soundly concluded. I told you first what Antichrist was.

1. Chap. 3.
That Antichrist is not one singular and individual person, but a state and a
succession of persons.

2. That he is in a conterfeit show, Chap. 4.
a Vicar or Vicegerent, in presumption a fellow-mate, in purpose an adversary.
Afterward of what kind Antichrist was.

Chap. 5.
3. That Antichrist is the head of a general Apostasy from the faith.

Chap. 6.
4. That Antichrist is an Apostaticall Christian, and an universal Bishop.

5. That Antichrist is not an outward and a professed: but an homebred and
hypocritical adversary.

6. That Antichrist is subtle, denying Christ indirectly.

Chap. 7.
7. He that sits in the Temple of God, as God, and makes a show as if he were
God, the same is Antichrist.

8. He that lifts up himself above all that is called God, or sovereignty
above the Angels in Heaven, above Princes on the earth, above holy things in
the Church, the same is Antichrist.

Chap. 8. 9. 10.
9. He that takes away the natures, properties, offices, benefits of Christ, by
consequent, and indirectly is Antichrist. Chap. 11.
I have showed what kind of kingdom and attendance belongs to Antichrist.

10. Antichrist is the key-keeper of hell.

11. Antichrist is the head of that smoaky and dark kingdom.

Chap. 12. 13.
12. Abaddon or Apollyon is the King of the Locusts. i. Antichrist is the eldest
son of the Devil.

Chap. 14.
I showed what the Beast does that rises out of the earth.

13. That Antichrist is the son of the earth.

14. That Antichrist has two horns of a Lamb, but utters the voice of the
Dragon.

15. He that shows all the power of the first Beast in his sight is
Antichrist.

16. The image of the first Beast is Antichrist.

17. He that compels men to adore the image of the first Beast is Antichrist.

Chap. 15.
18. The restorer of the old Romans Empire is Antichrist.

Chap. 16.
19. He that comes with lying signs and wonders, is Antichrist.

20 The seventh King of the Roman or Latin Empire is Antichrist. Chap. 17.


21 He that compels all under his rule to take on them the Character and
name of the beast,

22 Who so sits in that imperial city situated on 7. hills, and 7. kingly
forms of government, Chap. 19.
near to the banks of Tyber, and is a Latin Bishop, and possesses Peter's
chair, and is called most holy Pope, is Antichrist.

23 Whose seat is mystical Babylon, i: Rome in name Christian and Bishoply,
the same is Antichrist.

24 Who so sits upon the whore that is blasphemous, idolatrous, lustful,
proud, selling souls, bloody, Chap. 20
and is the same in all things for wit and disposition is Antichrist.

I have showed at what time he is revealed.

26 He that after the fall of the Roman Empire, and the departure of the
Roman Emperor out of the city of Rome, sits governing in the city of Rome,
being made the temple and the Church of God, is Antichrist.

None of all these notes belong to Luther, very few of them to the Turk. But
to the Pope of Rome, both every of them severally, and all of them jointly, and
to him alone as it is evidently proved before.

Therefore the Pope of Rome only is that great Antichrist. You have Paul the
fifth, a glass wherein you may behold all your self: but that you have
certain about you more desirous of your momentany reputation then your
eternal salvation, who have cast a certain mist upon the Glass, that you
might not know your self therein. To whom I think good breefly to answer.

CHAP. XXVII. Wherein is showed what kind of one Antichrist is not.
WE have showed what kind of one Antichrist is: now what kind of one he is
not let us likewise set down.

Although that which is straight is the rule both of it self and that which is
crooked, as the Philosopher well said, yet let us yield so much to our
Adversaries either ignorance or obstinacy, that as we have brought out the
true and right notes of Antichrist, out of the text of Scripture, so we may
refute the false and fained proceeding out of the brain of man.

Bellarmine writes honestly, that the opinions of the Fathers about Antichrist,
which cannot be proved out of the Scriptures, are not to be held as certain
truths, or to be believed as matter of faith. I would he would follow his
own rule, we should sooner agree among our selves. And he has rejected some
of their fables in this cause, the Scripture being his guide: but I think he
refused other men's devises herein, that with greater authority he might show
forth his own.

Some of them as false and absurd, others as more probable, but false for all
that, both of them he does reject. Why so I pray? Because they cannot be
proved out of the Scripture. Who would not think that this man deals with
us in good sooth.

Of the generation of Antichrist.

1 Antichrist is not as he says borne of a Virgin. 2 He is not the Devil as
Hypolitus thought. 3 He is not a Devil incarnate. 4 He is not Nero brought to
life again.
These opinions says he are absurd. Others are more probable, neither true.

1 Antichrist is not a bastard, as Damascen said. 2 He is not of the Tribe of
Dan, as 12. Fathers do think and all Papists almost besides Bellarmine.
Do you not see Paul the 5. how your Bellarmine rejects twelve Fathers in
this cause? and gives his own side the slip? He denies the old Tribe of
Antichrist, we look he should deny his Country anon. He denies him to be
of Dan: by and by he will deny him to be a Jew. For as for the Tribe of Dan,
Bellarmine allows Hyeromes opinion. Why? This cannot, says he be proved
out of the Scripture. Although for the Tribe, diverse Papists bring texts as
probable as Bellarmine does for the nation. But those this plain dealing man
forsooth has rejected. Do you not see how your men disagree in this matter,
that you may no more tell our men of their disagreements.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Nation, Religion, Office, and seat of ANTICHRIST.
BUT Antichrist, says he, shall be by Nation a Jew, by Religion circumcised,
and for a time a keeper of the Saboth: by his office Messiah, for he shall
especially come for the Jews sake, and shall be accepted of them for Messiah:
and he shall sit at Jerusalem in the Temple of God, reedified by himself.

A liar must bear a memory.

Messiah of the Jews, says he, shall come not in his own name, but in Gods
name. So Bellarmine. Bellarmines contradiction.


But Antichrist shall come not in Gods name, but in his own, says Bellarmine.

Antichrist therefore is not the Messiah of the Jews. But he proves out of
two places of the Scripture that Antichrist is the Messiah of the Jews, one,
if another shall come in his own name says Christ. Ioh. 5. him you shall
receive. Whereout of a compound supposition of an indefinite person if another,
he does infer a simple proposition definitely, that is that Antichrist
absurdly, nor well applied to the purpose. Which sets down that that
Antichrist shall come a little before the end of the world. Those Jews
therefore, whom Christ spoke to then alive now dead, could not receive
Antichrist for Messiah. Unless peradventure as he tells us Enoch and Elias
shall return before the end who shall resist Antichrist, A great absurdity.
so he imagines the Jews that Christ spoke to shall rise again before the
general resurrection to receive Antichrist. But see how untowardly the parts
of this tale hangs together. For he says, That Enoch and Elias should be
killed of Antichrist, and after three days and a half live again: and that
it shall come to pass afterward, that the Jews being converted by that
miracle shall kill their Messiah in the mount olive, and shall return to
Christ, who shall come 45. days after. Which dream of his he refuteth in
another place which he brings. The Apostle says that to them who receive not
the love of the truth, to their salvation, God will send the working of error,
to believe lies, and so to be judged with the judgment of condemnation 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Woe be to those, says he, who have not received Christ, The Jews.
Although the Apostle says not, who received not the truth 1. Christ, but who
received not the love of the truth: as false Christians. But how shall God
punish those Jews? God shall send upon them the working of error, that they
might believe a lie 1: Antichrist, and should be damned. Therefore the Jews
shall receive Antichrist for Messiah.

But Bellarmine does affirm that the Jews shall be converted by Enoch and
Elias, and therefore shall be saved. The Apostle speaks of men rejecting
Christ, and therefore to be condemned, he speaks not therefore of the Jews.
But the Apostle says that Antichrist is sent to them, who would not receive
Christ, which of the Jews is true, of the Christians false. Yea he says that
he is sent to seduce those who have not received the love of truth, which does
well agree with the Papists those false-christians. Who although they receive
Christ, The Papist receive Christ but not the love of Christ.
receive not the love of Christ. But the Apostle speaks of the time past. Who
have not received the love of truth, not in the future; Therefore he
understands the Jews, who before the Apostle wrote this, refused to believe
the preaching of Christ and his Apostles. But the Apostle speaking of the sin
and punishment of Antichristians, which presupposes a sin going before, did
express their sin in the pretertense, which is not to be referred to the
time of the Epistle which Paul writ, but to the time of the punishment which he
enjoined. But if the Jesuit do urge the pretertense so far, as if the
Apostle should understand, that Antichrist should be received of them only, who
had rejected Christ before that time, he must hold that he must be received of
them in the end of the world who were dead a thousand five hundred years
before. And is not this a worthy demonstration, A popish absurdity.
whereby he proves that Antichrist shall be in Office the Messiah of the
Jews, to be received of them in the end of the world? whence as one error
begets another, he concludes that he is by nation a Jew, by Religion
circumcised etc. I have won it now that Antichrist is an Apostata-christian.
It follows therefore that he can by no means be an Infidel Jew, who as
yet was not come to Christ. I proved that he was an inward and hypocritical
enemy who denied Christ secretly and indirectly. It follows then that the Jew
no ways can be an outward and professed enemy who denies Christ directly and
plainly. I conclude both out of the Scripture and out of the fathers, that
Antichrist was to sit in the Temple of God that was in the Church. And
therefore that Antichrist was not to sit in the temple of Jerusalem. Hierome
with many other Fathers have determined. And yet this Pythagoras who thinks
that his he said so will satisfy fools, does boldly affirm that he shall sit
in the Temple of Jerusalem to be builded again by him. Bellarmine fights
with himself.
Wherein see I pray you how he fights with himself.

The temple reedified of Antichrist is the Temple of the Devil.

But Antichrist shall fit says he in a Temple reedified by himself.

Therefore he shall sit in the Temple of the devil not therefore in the Temple
of God. Unless happily he will change the temple of God into the temple of the
Devil. Besides that, Antichrist shall sit at Rome, as the Rhemists themselves
confess. Not therefore at Jerusalem, unless peradventure Jerusalem moved out
of her place shall pass over to Rome. Which perchance they can bring to pass,
who change the three wisemen of the east into 3. The Papists alter east from
weast.
Kings of Sheba in the west. For Sheba stands west from the city Jerusalem,
and Chaldee whence they came stands east. I cannot see therefore but by the
same power, they may as well carry Jerusalem to Rome as turn the east into the
west. I have euicted before even by the confession of the Adversary: That Rome
is the seat and city of Antichrist, and yet they prove by a strange kind of
Logic, that Jerusalem is the seat of Antichrist. For where Gods two witnesses
(says he) are killed of Antichrist, there is the seat of Antichrist: But those
two witnesses shall be killed by Antichrist at Jerusalem: Apoc. 11.7.
Therefore Antichrist his seat is at Jerusalem. He takes the proposition for
granted, which for all that stands in great need of proffe. For wheresoever
Antichrist shall kill 2. witnesses of God, that there he shall have his seat.
No more then if some great Prince such an one as they would have Antichrist to
be, should there be said to have the seat of his Empire, wheresoever his
authority was of power to kill his enemies.

Do you not know that Kings have stretcht-out hands? Tiberius hand stretched out
it self as far as Jerusalem to crucify Christ, though he sat at Rome.
Antichrist has a long hand; whose hand reaches farther to kill Gods two
witnesses, then where he sits; not ever where Antichrist rages there he
sits. The proposition then generally taken is false, particularly understood
is a paralogisme. The assumption also is very false: for the holy Ghost does
call not Jerusalem but Rome, or rather the Rom: Empire, that great City in
whose streets the bodies of those two witnesses shall lie slain: and that
great City is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was
crucified. Jerusalem above is called the holy City after Christ his passion,
how then here is it spiritually called Sodom and Egypt? Apoc: 11.8. Jerusalem
in the Apocalypse taken for the holy City always.
as Hierom writes to Marcella. Jerusalem is always taken in the Apocalypse for
the holy City, Rome for the great City, which has the government over the
Kings of the earth, which cannot agree with Jerusalem. Besides, the word
spiritually touches Rome very near: for as Rome is mystically Babylon, so it
is spiritually Sodom and Egypt. Sodom for her pride and uncleanness; Rome
compared to Babylon, Sodom and Egypt.
Egypt for her idolatry and cruelty against the Saints; for who is so blind
that can not see that Rome is the chapel of Idols, the stews of lust, the
queen of pride, the shambles of Saints, and the den of King-killers; and
therefore she is truly spiritual Sodom and Egypt.

But where our Lord was crucified, there Gods two witnesses were murdered by
Antichrist. Christ how crucified at Rome.

But not at Rome, but at Jerusalem he was crucified.
Therefore not at Rome but at Jerusalem those two witnesses shall be killed.
We deny the assumption. At Rome in that great City, that is, in the Roman
Empire, our Lord was crucified. First, because by the commandment and
authority of the Rom: Empire Christ himself was crucified, Apoc. 17.18.
as the Rhemists do confess. Secondly, because Christ in his members is often
crucified at Rome. Thirdly, he was not crucified within Jerusalem but without,
as S. Paul witnesses to the Heb: cap: 13. v. 12. Lastly, because Jerusalem
before the Apocalypse, which was extant about the end of Domitian, being utterly
overthrown, together with their Temple, was never to be built again, as we
have formerly euicted out of the prophecy of Daniel, who says, that the
desolation of the Temple and City shall continue until the end of the world,
as Hierom expounds out of the words of Christ. Neither do the frivolous
answers of Bellarmine much trouble me, wherewith he presumes (as he writes)
that Daniel would have said something that he does not say: as if he could not
say what he would, and therefore he faines that the Prophet spoke thus: Either
that the Temple should not be reedified till a little before the end of the
world: or else as it was desolated before it was reedified: so the abomination
of desolation, i. Antichrist, should remain in the same re-edified to the end
of the world; or else that it should never be fully built again, Jerusalem the
figure of the Christian Church.
but that Antichrist should sit in the Temple begun and not finished. Jerusalem
is wholly the figure of the Christian Church, which after it was built up by the
preaching of the Gospel among the Gentiles, there was an end both of the City
and Temple of Jerusalem, Matthew: 24.14.
as Christ prophesied, Daniels best Interpreter: who foretold the abomination
of desolation, that is the abominable and desolate wings, What is meant by the
abomination of desolation.
(understanding the Eagles and the Legions of the Romans, as Luke expounds)
should bring a final destruction to the City and Temple, so that the
desolation of them both should continue to the end of the world, as Christ
explaineth, foreshewing that Jerusalem being overthrown of the Romans, Luc:
21.22, 23, 24.
shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled, i. till he shall come to judgment, which is described in the next
words. So that the bounds of the Christian Church being enlarged, the City and
Temple should have their last end by the testimony of Christ: for the truth
appearing, the type faded away. So that the primitive Church believed that
Jerusalem was turned into eternal ashes; Ad Marcel.
and Hierom calls the opinion of some, who thought the Temple should be
restored, a mere Jewish fable. Therefore Bellarmine, in Hieroms judgment, who
dreams of the restoring of the Temple, is not a Christian Doctor, but a Jewish
Babbler. Unless he be worse to be thought of, Bellarmine and Julian alike.
who with Julian the Apostata will fasten a lie upon Christ, while together
with him he will as it were carry stones to the building of it: he in a mock
to Christ, this in the honor of Antichrist: That Bellarmine may fear fire from
heaven to disturb the work, which as the story reports, Julian suffered.
Theodoret. lib. 3 cap: 20. Sozom: lib. 5. cap. vlt. Cic: de orat. 3.
One thing I greatly fear, that Antichrist will not take it in good part, that
such a mighty Monarch of the world, as he is like to be, must sit in a Temple
b^^^ded in part. Cicero did pretily set out the praise of the Capitol, wherein
Latin Jupiter does reside, that the roof was not only good for use and
necessity, but for ornament and beauty: that although the Capitol were
builded up as high as the heaven where the rain was not engendered, yet it
would have no name, if it had no roof. But Bellarmine, although he carried
mortar and stone to the Temple of Jerusalem by the help of Antichrist, wherein
so great a Prince should sit, so far of he was for tendering his Masters
honor, that he did not supply necessity: for he left the Temple with out
beams or roof, he left it on the earth, where many showers do gather, many
storms do suddenly fall, that he may seem to have exposed the great Prince to
the pleasure of the unmerciful heaven in the midst of his stately Palace.

But let us make up the rest of the tale of this imagined Prince governing in
an imagined place. For he adds many things of his kingdom and his victories,
whereof the Scripture has not one word.

It is a very conceited dream that is fetched out of Daniel misunderstood; who
prophesied of Antiochus Epiphanes the son of great Antiochus, the brother of
Seleucus Philopater, the successor of that namelesse beast, the tenth horn
literally and properly as of nine others which went before, cap. 11. which
Bellarmine himself confesses, and yet concludes

1. That Antichrist rising out of a most base stock, by fraud and guile shall
obtain the kingdom of the Jews.

2. That he shall fight with three Kings, of Aegipt, Lybia and Ethiopia, and
shall possess their kingdoms themselves being vanquished. which was not true
of Antiochus himself being the figure of Antichrist.

3. That he shall make captive seven other Kings, and shall enjoy the Monarchy
of the whole world. O noble conqueror, to be preferred before all the Pompeis,
Caesar's, and Alexanders, who shall do so great acts in the compass of three
years and a half.

4. With his mighty army he shall persecute the Christians, and these be the
wars of Gog and Magog.

Do you think these to be the oracles of the Scriptures, or Bellarmines own
dreams? grant that Antiochus was Antichrists type in many things. what then?
if we should apply all those things, Antiochus and Antichrist unlike: to make
them the same many absurdities do follow.
which were proper to the person of Antiochus to Antichrist, in respect whereof
he was not the type of Antichrist, and shall infer from them not the like but
the same thing. Let Antiochus be fetched out of hell, and let his soul pass
into Antichrist, that he may perform all those things. And although Antichrist
be a most vilde beast, as Antiochus, yet he must come not out of a most vilde,
but a most honorable stock, that he the son of Antiochus the Great, the
brother of Seleucus Philopater, and successor in the kingdom of Syria, as
Antiochus is plainly set down by Daniel cap: 11. v. 21. in whose place one
that is very vilde shall arise. Platoes great year must return again, that
Antiochus again must be an hostage at Rome before he come to his kingdom, and
kill his Nephew Demetrius, as Richard the third King of England did, and make
three voyages into Egypt.

And great Achilles must be sent again to Troy.

Let Antiochus make war again, let him in his return plague the Jews, and
let Antichrist do all the acts of Antiochus, which Daniel the Prophet does so
lively describe, that to Porphery who knew not with what spirit he wrote, he
seems to have compiled an history rather then a prophecy, whereof more
hereafter. Now let us pursue the rest of the pretty passages of this tale.

Enoch and Elias must come again from heaven to earth, to wit, those two
witnesses, who preach the Gospel in their own persons, and fighting with
Antichrist shall be killed by him, and shall rise again after three days and
a half. and the rest which out of the 11 of the Apocalypse, they miserably by
force press out, by wringing the letter, so that they seem to play the Jews
in no place more. Although in that place neither Enosh, nor Elias, The second
beast mistaken for the first.
nor Antichrist, as certain learned men think is understood: for the beast
that makes war against these witnesses of God, is said to ascend out of hell,
which seems to be the first beast, which is said to rise out of the sea, cap:
13. v. 1. when as the second is said to rise out of the earth. Again, the
floor of the Church is said to be given over to be trampled on by the Gentiles
42 months v: 2. which time is assigned to the persecution of the first beast,
cap: 13. v. 5. Again it is to be trodden on by the Gentiles not the Jews,
whose Prince Antichrist is feigned to be. Now they which precisely take the two
witnesses to be two men, The two witnesses Apoc. 11. not agreed on.
could never yet agree among themselves about the persons. Some that they were
Elias and Moses: some Elias and Elizeus: some not Elias but Jeremy: others
together with Elias and Moses think that John the Divine is added as a
witness above number; of Enoch none of the Fathers make any reckoning: of the
two Testaments, as two witnesses, and the diverse sincere Interpreters of the
two Testaments, who expound the place, they do more easily shift themselves,
as it shall be understood afterward; who being clad with sackcloth, in great
sorrow and grief did preach repentance to the Gentiles, at whose hands in
steed of reward, Persecution committed.
they received most cruel death. The cruel persecution of the first beast,
wherein they devoured the most faithful witnesses of God, lasted 294 years,
which made the 42 months, according to Daniels weeks; whereof more anon.
Neither did God suffer his witnesses to die unrevenged, Persecution revenged.
if we compare the story to the Prophecy. For God did punish those bloody
Emperors for his two witnesses sake, so that the Nations were consumed by
sharp and quick diseases growing by long drought, and too great heat of the
Sun, which bred such plagues, that often devoured whole Cities, and consumed
whole armies. So happily the two witnesses may be said to have shut heaven that
it should not rain, and to have opened it that it should rain, whenas by the
prayers of the Christian Legion, the Army of the Pagan Emperor being
environed by the Quadi,
being presently like to perish for want of water, obtained a plentiful shower
from heaven: while the host of their enemies perished, being stricken with
thundering and lightning from heaven: whereupon it was called the thundering
Legion of the Christians. And when as the witnesses of God being so unworthily
and cruelly dealt withal, threaten eternal fire upon the wicked Gentiles, and
did perhaps foretell that fire should come from heaven, whereby Cities and
Camps were devoured, may they not be said after a sort to cast out fire out of
their mouths, to consume their enemies? And when as Gods cruel enemies the
Emperors, did destroy one another by mutual war, and committed such
massacres by sea and land, that they seemed to turn whole fields and rivers
into blood, might not God seem according to the Prophecy, most justly to have
revenged the wrongs of his witnesses? especially when he raised other
witnesses, as Phenixes out of their ashes, who should bear witness to the
truth. and so Gods two witnesses in singular persons, may seem to rise again
in a succession. And because not only the triumphant Church, but the militant
also is often called heaven, both in the Apocalypse, The Church called heaven.
and in the Scripture elsewhere, therefore when the witnesses of God had built
again the Temple of God out of these ruins and relics, so, as the Prophet
speaks: they seemed to ascend up, and to be in beauen. But if any think it
convenient to expound this place of the persecution of Antichrist, which did
lively express the cruelty of the first Beast, and of those Antichristians,
which did most cruelly persecute the Church in these latter ages, for the space
of 494. years, I will not greatly strive against them: when as they did play
the Gentiles under the name of Christ, as Tertullian speaks. Only I show
what other learned men have probably thought, without prejudice to them that
think otherwise. But all that I have said, is refuted of the Adversaries in 3.
words: for thus they cry out, Antichrist is not yet come: and they call all
things to question, whether there be Antichrist, which if you please we still
discuss in the last place.

CHAP. XXIX. Wherein it is disputed, whether Antichrist be, that is, whether
he be come.
THat Antichrist is foreshewed in the Scripture it is evident enough: now
whether he be to be showed in the world, it shall yet further appear, when we
shall have discussed whether he be come or no.

Of this coming Bellarmin gives six tokens. Tow going before. 1. The
Preaching of the Gospel over the whole world. 2. The subversion and desolation
of the Roman Empire, so that the very name remain not.
Two accompanying. 3. The preaching of Enoch and Elias. 4. The most grievous
and public persecution of the Church, which shall clean take away the public
worship of God.
Two following. 5. The continuance of the Kingdom of Antichrist for three
years and an half. 6. The destruction of the world 45. days after.



Out of the first token thus he disputes: If the Gospel be not as yet
preached over the whole world, Antichrist is not yet come.
The first is true. Therefore the second is true.


The first note whether the Gospel have bin preached.
The consequent of the proposition he proves out of the words of Christ,
Matthew. 24. ver. 14. The Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the
world, that it may be a testimony to all nations, says Christ: but he says
not, that then Antichrist shall come: but then shall the end come, that is,
either the end of the world, as Bellarmine thinks, or the rasing of Jerusalem,
as we have euicted. But grant that the end of the world is understood by those
words: yet unless Bellarmine will take that for granted, which is in
controversy, that Antichrist shall not come before the end of the world: which
we most stiffly do deny, this exposition can help Bellarmine nothing at all But
what if the place be to be understood not of the end of the world, The
destruction of Jerusalem taken for the end of the world by Papists.
but of the destruction of Jerusalem, it will avail him much less. Here
therefore first I oppose Chrysostom against Bellarmine, which interprets the
place not of the end of the world, but of the destruction of Jerusalem, which
the context of the place does convince: for first Christ answers to his
Disciples, to whom he had said, The 24. of Matthew expounded. Verse. 2.
it should come to pass that the city and the Temple should be utterly
overthrown, so that a stone should not be left upon a stone, First, I say,
answers them about the overthrow of Jerusalem, which they thought should have
stood for ever. They asking him, Verse. 3.
Tell us when these things shall be? that is, when shall the Temple be
destroyed, and afterward they ask him of the end of the world, and of his
coming to judgment. The parts of the question are therefore double, first of
the destruction of Jerusalem, the second of the end of the world: which they
thought should not continue longer then Jerusalem. To the first Christ answers
first from ver. 4. Verse. 4. to 23.
to the 23. To the second he answers from the 23. Ver. 23. to the 42.
to the 42. And first Christ fore-sheweth the calamities which went before the
destruction, to the fifteenth verse, in that verse he expounds the destruction
fore-tolde by Daniel. But if any body think that the abomination of
desolation, standing in the holy place, be to be taken by an anologie for the
sitting of Antichrist in the Church, I will not gain say it; but if he
expound it properly, and to the lettter, he shall not have only Chrysostom
and Luke, but Christ himself gaine-saying him. Among other calamities which
were before the destruction of Jerusalem, he fore-shewed two spiritual ones
especially: a seducing of false Prophets, a defection of the people. Christ
does therefore forewarne and comfort his Disciples: he forewarneth them that
they beware of false Prophets: he comforts them with a double promise, one of
eternal salvation verse. 13. Verse. 13.
if they shall hold out to the end: another of a prosperous success, which
their ministry by spreading the Gospel over all the world, shall have before
Jerusalem be utterly overthrown. That it might be a witness to every nation,
that the Church shall endure when Jerusalem shall be destroyed, whose bounds
the Apostles and their Disciples by the preaching of the Gospel, before the
destruction of Jerusalem had extended over all nations, both Gentiles and
Jews. Neither is it to be thought, that Christ had confounded all these
prophesies in the handling of them, that he might not nourish an error, which
the Disciples had conceived of the continuance of Jerusalem till the end of the
world. Therefore after he had verse. 15. Verse. 15.
described her overthrow, he adjoined both counsel and comfort: counsel the
ver. 16. Verse. 16.17.18.19.20.
17.18.19.20. that they that were in Jury should shift for themselves by speedy
flight, and that women great with child should pray that their flight be not
in the winter, or on the Sabbath day. Comfort, wherein he promises that for
the Elect Jews sake, the time of the siege shall be shortened, and that
otherwise no Jew should escape as Chrysostom expounds the 22. verse. This
exposition of Chrysostom is notably confirmed by the collation of Luke with
Matthew. For as in Matthew. 24.15. Christ does propound those words out of
Daniel. When you shall see the abomination of desolation (which Daniel calls the
abominable wings desolating) to stand in the holy place, Luc. cap. 21. 20.
expounds it thus. When you shall see Jerusalem environed with armies, What the
abomination of desolation in Daniel means.
which Daniel terms abominable wings, then understand that the desolation and
destruction is at hand, both to the holy city and the holy Temple: and he
warns the Jews that they avoid these calamities hanging over their heads,
with flying away verse. 23. Verse. 23.
24. But whereas Christ, Matthew. verse. 23. begins to prophecy of the end of the
world, Verse. 34.
and of his coming to judgment, verse. 34. where there seems to be the
greatest mixtures of each of the prophesies, he speaks so distinctly when he
foresheweth the signs severally going before the destruction of Jerusalem, and
the end of the world, that he defines a certain time of the one, and leaves
the other uncertain. Of that: verily I say unto you, this generation shall not
pass away, before all those things be fulfilled, (pointing his finger at
Jerusalem, as he sat upon the Mount of Olives. But of this, i. The uncertain
certainty of the end of the world.
of the end of the world, as he notes the certainty of the thing, so the
uncertainty of the hour and the day, which neither any Angel, or the son of
man knew, but the father alone. By which the consequence of Bellarmines
proposition is found out to be very vain and foolish: which sets, 14 15.
The preaching of the word dispersed over the whole world, out of those verses,
to be the sign forerunning the coming of Antichrist: against the literal
sense of the prophecy most clearly set down, not only by Chrysostom, but
by Christ himself, Luke being the interpreter. You see the inconsequence of
the proposition, now mark the falsehood of the assumption (But the Gospel is
not preached over all the world) as Paul Coloss. 1. verse. 6. The Gospel
preached in the world.
says, that the Gospel was preached in all the world in his time, and therefore
before the destruction of Jerusalem, which happened two years after the Apostles
death, as Eusebius writes lib 4. and the Apostle adds, that the Gospel came
so into the wolrd, that it brought forth fruit. True (says Bellarmine) The
Gospel was virtually, then in the whole world, but not actually: No? How then
could it bring forth fruit, if it were not in the whole world actually? but
the Apostle there speaks more significantly verse. 23. That the Gospel was
preached to every creature under heaven. Whom shall we believe Paul or
Bellarmine, the Apostle or the Cardinal? Their sound is gone thorough the
whole world, says the Apostle, that is, shall go out, says Bellarmine. But
Chrysostom by the same testimonies of the Apostle, does prove that the
prophecy of Christ was then fulfilled, the Gospel was preached all over the
world, Chrysostom. homil. in Matthew. 24.
before the destruction of Jerusalem. So by Fame the Gospel could come to all
nations, says Bellarmine, not by several preachings. Paul says not the
report of the Gospel in all lands, but that their fruit by their preaching was
dispersed, which could not be without Preachers. Yet by the whole world, every
little and obscure corner of the world is not meant, but the greatest part of
the known and habitable world, Luc. 2.1. Neither by all nations, are meant all
several nations, but all in general, that is, both Jews an Gentiles. For in
this place as elsewhere, there is an opposition between all Nations and the
Jews. At that time the Gospel was only heard of in Jury, wherein the Church
at that time was enclosed; but the partition wall being broken down, and the
hedge being broken up, it made such a sound every way, with such a number of
Preachers, and with such admirable efficacy of preaching, that it is easy to
be believed that the sound of the Gospel could go into all lands within the
compass of forty years, for so many years at the least, came between the
prophecy expounded and fulfilled. Lastly, although it was preached to all, it
was not received of all, therefore left as a testimony to all nations, that
being offered to all, and rejected of some, it might make them inexcusable. Do
you not see the foolish consequence of Bellarmines proposition, and the
apparent untruth of his assumption? Therefore I do retort the argument upon him
thus, Christ himself prophesying, Paul interpreting, and Chrysostom assisting.

The Gospel was preached in all the world before the sacking of Jerusalem.

Therefore by the consent of Bellarmin Antichrist is already come. And Calvin
seems to me with very deep judgment to set the universal preaching of the
faith, before the universal defection from the faith, the head whereof by the
Apostle is said to be Antichrist, The preaching of the Gospel hindered by
Mahumet in the east and Antichrist in the west.
for there could not be a general falling from the faith, before there were a
general preaching of the faith: which when it was interrupted as in the east
by Mahomet, so in the west by Antichrist, it was true, that the succession
being interrupted, diverse men of God were extraordinarily raised up by God, I
say Angels of God, who by the sincere preaching of the Gospel did restore and
repair the visible Church miserably torn in pieces by him: who did cast down
the wall of the western Babylon, as of Jericho, and did tread down the glory
of Antichrist as of Dagon, so that by the noise of the Evangelical Trumpet
Babylon seemed to fall in the midst of men, and the world began now not to
doubt of the coming of Antichrist, The decay of Antichrist.
but to deliberate of his departure. For with the greatest part of the
Christian world, the swelling title of Antichrist failed, his great power
fainted, his spiritual by the judgment of others,
his temporal by his own: his markets of indulgences deceased, his golden
Euphrates was at an ebb, his great streams of money running into that Church
wholly dried up, being brought back again into their own channels not without
great love showed to that Tyberine Bishop, to whom Luther and Caluixe and
other preachers of the word thought such a boundance of wealth to be very
pernicious. As Tacitus writes that Aleius Capito, and Lu: Aruntius, to keep
in the ouerflowing of Tyber, they would divert the fluds and streams whereby
it did swell to that height, that Tyber being cut off from the neighbor
rivers, might flow as with less glory, so with less danger. Ana: 1.
The Christian world seems to have taken the same counsel, to moderate the
hurtful abundance of the Tiberine Bishop, so that Bellarmine may seem to cast
a needless doubt of the entrance of Antichrist, of whose overthrow we so
carnestly think. We have heard the man's first demonstration, let us consider
of the second which is thus concluded.

CHAP. XXX. Of the second token going before Antichrists coming.
IF the Roman Empire be not yet utterly ouerturned, so that it has not lost
the name of the Roman Empire, Antichrist is not yet come.

But the first is true. Therefore the second is true. Or thus.

If before the coming of Antichrist the Roman Empire was to be divided into
ten Kings, whereof none shall be called the King of the Romans, Antichrist is
not yet come.

But the Antecedent is true. Therefore the consequent is true.

Let us see the strength and sinews of this wonderful demonstration, wherein
they so greatly triumph, although in opening of the prophecy, it is
sufficiently before refuted, the assumption whereof they go about to strengthen
on every side. This is the assumption. But the Roman Empire is not yet
utterly ouerturned, so that it has lost the name of the Roman Empire. Which
they prove because the Roman Empire is to be divided into ten Kings whereof
none is called the King of the Romans. They endeavor to strengthen either
part out of the 2. Daniel 2.32.
and seventh of Daniel, and 17. of the Apoc. in the 2. of Daniel they say is
described a succession of 4. Kingdoms to last unto the worlds end, by the
Image, having the head of gold, the breast of silver, the belly of brass, and
the feet of iron. The head of brass signifies say they the Kingdom of the
Chaldees, the breast of silver the Kingdom of the Persians, the belly of brass
the Kingdom of Alexander and the Grecians, the feet of brass the Kingdom of
the Romans: the 2. feet the eastern and the western Empire of the Romans:
Now as 2. feet have 10. toes, say they, which are not feet: So the Roman
Empire shall be divided into 10. Kings, whereof none is, or is called the King
of the Romans. The very same 4. Kingdoms Dan. 7. are described by 4. beasts,
a Lion, a bear, a Leopard, and a fourth without a name having 10. horns,
whereof none is, or is called a beast. But this beast they say signifies the
Roman Empire, and the 10. horns 10. Kings which shall divide that Empire.
Which they prove out of the 17. of the Apocalips, where John describes the
beast with seven heads and 10. horns upon whom the woman sat. For the
Angel say they does so interpret. The woman is a great city which sits upon
7. hills, that is Rome. The 10. horns are 10. Kings which shall reign at one
time, and shall hate the whore etc. By which words the Angel does signify
that the Roman Empire by them shall be divided and desolated, so that it shall
not retain the name of the Roman Empire. But that Antichrist is not as yet to
come, it is openly euicted out of Daniel cap 7. verse: 14. the ten horns are
the ten Kings of that kingdom, whereof we have spoken hitherto. And another
say they, shall rise after them, Dan. 7.24.
(to wit Antichrist) and he shall be more potent then the former, and shall
subdue three Kings, and he shall utter speech against the most highest, and
shall tread under foot the Saints of the Almighty, and shall imagine that he
can change times and laws, and they shall be delivered into his hands for a
time, times and half a time. And this they prove out of Hirom. who adds,
that a leuenth little King shall arise, who shall overcome three of the ten
Kings. Yea Bellarmine goes farther, and out of the 11. Chapter verse: 21. and
in his place shall stand up the most vile, concludes that Antichrist rising
out of a base place shall by fraud and deceit get the Kingdom of the Jews,
and shall not sight only with three Kings of Egypt, Libia, and Ethiopia, and
shall enjoy their Kingdoms themselves being vanquished, but shall also make
slaves seven other Kings, and shall have the government of the whole world 3.
years and a half: and in the mean time shall oppress the Christians with an
innumerable army, and these are the wars of Gog and Magog. By all which
prophecies of Daniel and John concerning the Roman Empire and Antichrist,
together with the extent of his Kingdom, beginning, end, and continuance
thereof, all (as he thinks) so fitly agreeing between themselves, he
peremptorily concludes that Antichrist is not yet come. Whereby there is a
greater charge necessarily imposed upon us to look diligently to the
expounding of Daniels prophecy, as we were careful formerly of expounding of
John's prophecy: So the argument shall be well satisfied, when I shall confer
the history with the prophecy, and set in order things confused, and make
plain things obscure, and shall compare Testament with Testament, book with
book, chapter with chapter, verse with verse; neither will I add a long
Commentary to a clear text, nor too short a Commentary to an obscure, by
this means I shall neither admit superfluities, or omit necessaries.
Especially when the prophecy is as a riddle which being darkely in many words
set down by the Prophet cannot be made plain in a few words by a Doctor,
which does rather require a Prophet to be the interpreter, till event has made
it plain. Wherein the Papists (but chiefly Bellarmine) must deal more
favorably with us, who has rejected 12. Fathers in this cause, if we likewise
do reject the same, and among them Jerome chiefly, so it be without touch of
his reputation, seeing Austen says that prophecies may sooner be accomplished
then understood, and does sometime require that naked authorities being laid
aside, the matter with the matter, and the cause with the cause, and the reason
may strive with the reason. Ireneus says that prophecies till they be
performed are to be counted doubtful riddles: Irene lib. 4. ad ver. here is. c.
43.
wherein Bellarmine shall not grant less to us, then he takes to himself,
who when he sees his Master the Pope to be pincht and stonge by Ireneus,
Bellar. de Pon: lib. 3. cap. 18.
makes this answer to serve his turn. Ireneus (says he) thinks it a surer
way and less dangerous to expect the fulfilling of the prophecy, then to
suspect it. And the Papists seem to have learned this modesty out of Daniel
who prophecing of other things as we shall prove, of Antichrist as the Papists
think, say that the words are shut and sealed up to the time appointed. Who if
we grant to have foretold of the Roman Empire and of Antichrist, he will
neither much hurt our cause or help theirs. For if Daniels fourth beast be the
state of the Roman Empire, and the 10. horns the ten Kings among whom it
shall be divided, and the eleventh horn springing thence be Antichrist,
assuredly the Pope who is raised out of the fall and ruin of the Empire, is
Antichrist. Here if you please I will consider of all those places alleged by
Bellarmine and search-out how they agree within themselves and how with the
text.

Bellarmine says, that the fourth Empire, Bellarmines contradiction.
which he takes to be the Roman, shall last to the worlds end. And yet he
says that the Roman Empire, shall be utterly destroyed before the coming of
Antichrist, who shall reign three years and a half. How can he then allege
it for a truth that the Roman Empire shall last to the worlds end? I send this
great Chrisippus again to Aristotle's Analytickes, whither some time he sends
others without cause, that when he has reuiewed them he may teach us how two
contradictions can be true at one time.

The Roman Empire shall last to the worlds end.

The Roman Empire shall not last to the worlds end, for it must have the
final destruction at the coming of Antichrist, who shall reign three years
and a half. Now let us consider how Bellarmine and Daniel do agree. Many of
our age and those very learned, who seem very exactly to search into Daniel,
do think that the fourth Empire (which many other without doubt as well
learned as they do take for the Roman Monarchy) was the Kingdom of the
Seleucides and the Lagides in Siria and Egypt, The exposition of the 7. of
Daniel.
as they afflicted Jury hembd in between them: and therefore designed to be
more terrible then the three former, because more dangerous to Jury. And that
the ten horns were ten Kings of Siria and Egypt, who did successively oppress
the Jews, and that Antiochus Epiphanes was the tenth and last, who more then
the rest did plague them most cruelly, and that therefore he was the type of
Antichrist who should no less afflict the Christians, and not Antichrist
himself, as Bellarmine dreameth. Let us if you please allege some of the
reasons drawn out of the Text.

Reasons th t Antichrist is not properly in Daniel.
1 The fourth beast was a kingdom to be abolished before the coming and reign
of the Messiah, as the Prophet teaches cap: 7. v. 11. 26. 27. which is true of
the kingdom of the Seleucides, false of the Roman.

2. The fourth beast did make war with the Jews, and did grievously oppress
them, did hinder the worship of God, not only before the coming of Christ,
but before the purging of the Temple, and the restoring of the Jewish worship
by Judas Machabeus cap: 7. v. 25. 26. 27. which agrees with the kingdom of
the Seleucides, not with the Roman.

3. Ten horns and no more did belong to the fourth beast, that is, ten Kings,
(I will name them anon) who did oppress Jury with their tyranny, which being
understood of seven Seleucides, and three Lagides is very true, of the Romans
very false, who after they got the government of Jury, were more then ten.

4. Besides, those Kings did succeed one another orderly in the same kingdom;
this is true in the seven Seleucides and three Lagides, but not in them who
after descended from the Kings in the Rom^ Empire, who at the same time did
reign in diverse Provinces, as the Adversary himself confesses.

5. Lastly, the Leopard cap. 7. signifying the Grecian Empire, is shadowed by
the Goat cap: 8. which appears by that, that as the Leopard is said there to
have had four heads, so the Goat, when his great horn was broken of,
Alexander, four horns are said to succeed in his place, i. four Princes
among whom the Empire of the Goat was divided; which to the Roman Empire
agrees not, but to the Greek it does. Alexander and his four Princes.
For after Alexanders death, Ptolomey the son of Lagis held Egypt: Philip,
Alexanders brother, Macedon: Seleucus Nicanor, Syria and Babylon: Antigonus,
Asia the less: these were Alexanders four Princes, as Hierom observes. If it
be demanded how the two feet prophesied of by Daniel, What is meant by the 2
feet, and 10. toes.
which in Bellarmines judgment does fitly resemble the Rom: Empire divided into
the East and West, from whence ten Kings, as ten toes did proceed: I answer
from those four Princes of Alexander, two of them, that is, Seleucus Nicanor,
and Ptolomey Lagis were the most potent, who brought the other four Kingdoms
by mutual wars under their subjection: from him the kingdom of the
Seleucides, and the kingdom of Syria in the North: from this the kingdom of
the Lagides, and of the Kings of Egypt in the South did descend, and both these
did with their invasions greatly afflict the Jews, placed in the midst.
These were the two feet, which did so miserably trample upon the Jews, from
whence did spring out ten Kings, as ten toes, which Daniel describes cap: 11.
Daniels little horn, who it is.
for the three Lagides descended from Ptolomie; the seven Seleucides from
Seleucus, and from thence in the end of the kingdom of the Selcucides over the
Jews, a little horn sprouted out, cap: 7. and 9 that is, a King with a bold
face, that is, The ten horns.
Antiochus ^piphanes, the tenth horn cap. 11. properly and lively described. 1
Ptolomie Lagis.
The first horn of the fourth and namelesse beast Ptolomie Lagis King of the
South,.i. of Egypt, is described v: 5. then Seleucus Nicanor the most puissant
of Alexanders Princes, v: 11. 2. Seleucus Nicanor. 3. Antiochus So^er. 4.
An^i^chus Theos.

the King of the North is the second horn: for he prevailed against Ptolomie
and recovered Jury and all Siria from him, and governed there himself. Him
did Antiochus Soter the third horn succeed, whose son Antiochus Theos the
fourth horn, that he might establish a league between himself and Ptolomie
Philadelphus King of Egypt, v: 6.
took Bernice, Philadelphus daughter to wife, that thereby he might fulfill
that part of the Prophecy of the two feet, one of iron, the other of clay, that
they should mingle themselves with man's seed, and yet should not grow
together, Dan: 2. v. 43. the prophecy was proved true by event: for Antiochus
Theos had already Laodice another wife alive, 5. Seleucus Callinicus.
of whom he begat Seleucus Calinicus the fifth horn, who slew Bernice, her
son and servants: Antiochus Theos was poisoned by Laodice his wife, and
Ptolomie, v: 7.
Bernices Father presently after the marriage died for grief. 6. Ptolomie
Euergetes.
But in his place arose Ptolomie Euergetes the sixth horn, who being of the
same race with Bernice,.i. her Brother, made war upon Seleucus Callinicus to
revenge his sisters death, v: 8.
and vanquished him, and being crowned King of Siria returned into Egypt with
his spoils and prisoners, and having greater power then Callinicus, enjoyed
Siria many years, and Jury therein. v: 9.
Wherefore the two sons of Callinicus, Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus the
Great, invaded Siria, and raised a cruel war: Ceraunus against Ptolomie
Euergetes; v: 10.
who being dead, Antiochus the Great gathered great forces against Ptolomie
Philopater the the son of Euergetes. Of this Antiochus the great, the Angel
prophecieth from the 10. v: 11. 12.
verse to the 20. first of his wars with Ptolomie Philopater, and those first
prosperous, wherein he recovered Siria, then unfortunate, 7. Ptolomie
Philopator.
wherein he lost it again. Here Ptolomie Philopator lifted up into pride by
this good success, was the seventh horn, and slew many thousands of the Jews
and therefore shall not always prevail: v: 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
After of the wars and victories of Antiochus the Great, which he got of
Ptolomeus, Epiphanes the son of Philopater: and of the depopulation of the
Jews, whence Antiochus the Great is the eight horn. 8. Antiochus the Great.
He gave his daughter Cleopatra. in marriage to Ptolomie Epiphanes, that he
might again mingle the iron and the clay together, but all in vain, according
to the prophecy, cap: 2. when as he pretended peace and friendship by that
marriage, but intended destruction to Ptolomie, but all in vain: because
Cleopatra took part with her husband against her Father. Lastly, v: 17.
of Antiochus the Great his inuading the Isles of Greece, which he subdued, v:
18.
and of the wars he made with the Romans, wherein he gat great disgrace,
and of his ignominious death inflicted upon him in a mutiny by savage people
for his sacrilege. v: 19.
Into his room succeeded Seleucus Philopator his son the ninth horn, 9.
Seleucus Philopator.
who did impouerish the people with grievous impositions, and emptied the
treasury and the Temple of Jerusalem, and perished not by war but by
treachery: for Heliodore being suborned by Antiochus Epiphanes took him away
by poison. Now into his place shall step up, says the Angel, a most
contemptible fellow,.i. there shall succeed Seleucus Philopator in the kingdom
of Siria one very base in manners, not in his Ancestors, Antiochus Epiphanes,
the third son of Antiochus the Great, the brother of Seleucus Philopator,
Demetrius Uncle, the tenth horn, 10. Antiochus Epiphanes.
that little horn so fully described by Daniel in the rest of the 7. and 11.
chap: for the Angel does prophecy, of his entrance, deeds, and end in the
rest of the chapter: of his entrance, to note that he came not to the kingdom
of Siria by any lawful right of succession, or election: for Demetrius his
Nephew was right heir of the kingdom; but crept in by cunning and flattery,
as a tutor and a guardian of the young Prince, and a protector of the Kingdom
in the nonage and absence of Demetrius, sent to Rome for an hostage in his
steed. You have the history agreeing with the prophecy, described both by
others, and especially by Josephus. Antiq. lib. 12. cap: 1.
Therefore Antiochus Epiphanes the tenth and little horn, out of small and
weak beginnings usurped the kingdom of Siria, a man for his wickedness vile
and contemptible, who did break off and cast away by his craft, three of the
former horns in the Kingdom of Syria, the father, the brother, and the nephew,
that he might attain to the Kingdom. And uttered speeches against the
Almighty, and so often trampled upon the Saints of God, so that the times of
persecuting the people of God, Daniels countrymen, assigned to the little
horn, do precisely agree with the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes: Four
degrees of deliverance.
which are diversely reckoned up in respect of the beginning and ending: for
there are four degrees noted of the deliverance from the tyranny of Antiothus,
procured at four several times.

Judas Machabaeus: for from the profanation of the Temple, which began the
fifteenth of Casleu, anno 145. to this reformation made the 25. of Casleu, anno
148. three years and ten days came between, which space Daniel calls a time,
times, and a piece of time, cap. 7. v. 25.

Antiochus, drove his forces out of Jury, and re-established the new
reformation: P^ Bell. I. de. lib. 1. cap. 1.
which happened 3. years and an half, as Josephus observes, from the time,
when the daily sacrifice did cease: which space Daniel calls a time, times and
half a time, cap. 12. verse. 7.

Antiochus, which is contained by Daniel in 1290. days, cap. 12. verse. 11.

Daniel to be 1335. By all which it appears, that Daniel did shadow out by
the fourth beast not the Roman Empire, but the kingdom of the Seleucides and
the Lagides, The disagreement of Bellarmine and Daniel
and that he described by the tenth and little horn, not Antichrist properly,
but Antiochus Epiphanes. And I pray you mark how ill Bellarmine agrees with
Daniel. Daniel describes a beast with a tenth horn, Bellarmines beast has an
eleventh Daniel speaks of ten Kings, who successively did afflict the Jews,
Daniels countrymen. Bellarmine speaks of ten Kings, who together with an
eleventh, at the same time did altogether bear rule in the world: but in
diverse places. Daniel sets down ten kings, whereof the three latter were
rooted out in the sight, and procurement of the tenth, the other six, either
all of them, or most of them being dead before he was borne. Bellarmine faines
that three of them were slain by him, and seven others subdued at such time,
as they were not in the world. Lastly, Daniel says, that his horn or king was
broken off, being infamous for his cowardly flight, and being infected with a
filthy disease, after he had tormented the Jews the time appointed, did
miserably consume away and perish. Bellarmine imagines his horn the
Egyptians, Lybians and Aethiopians being vanquished, and seven other Kings
subdued should get the monarchy of the whole world for three years and a
half. O admirable Conqueror, more renowned then the Antiochi, Alexanders and
Caesar's.
Therefore we look that Bellarmine shall play the Orator for Antichrist who
may excellently set forth these wars and victories, as Cicero did Caesar's.
No man has so flowinng a wit, so copious and eloquent tongue and style, who I
will not say, can paint and set out, but point at and reckon up thy worthy
Acts, Most Mighty Antichrist. Neither could any man so soon pass through
remote Kingdoms by their speedy iournies, as thou, I will not say, by thy
swift marches, but by thy swifter victories. For thou, o great Antichrist, with
thine innumerable host, shall subdue all the Christians in the world within
three years and an half, and shall obtain the monarchy of the whole earth.
And this is the war of Gog and Magog. Let me then add the rest which
follows in Cicero. All which unless I should confess to be so great, that
no man's wit or understanding can conceive, let me be counted for a mad man. But
an imaginary victory does befit an imaginary Antichrist. Thus out of the
premises I argue against Bellarmine. If Antichrist be found in this prophecy
where Antiochus is literally described He is there either in his person, or in
his likeness, or in his identitie, or like substance, or in his image.

The absurdities that follow if Antiochus be Antichrist. 2. Macc. 9.
If Antichrist be in all things Antiochus, certainly as Antiochus is dead, as
it is in the end of the chapter, so Antichrist is dead. Then Antichrist must
die before his birth: but by what kind of death Antiochus died, is declared.
Lice did crawle out of his swollen body in great abundance, which did inwardly
gnaw upon him, hereby his flesh putrified, Wherein Antiochus and Antichrist
disagree.
and fell from him by peece-meales, so that the army could not endure the
stinch of the beast. Antichrist therefore must be eaten up with lice, and
being so putrified, must cast out a filthy stinck, that Antichrist may be
another Antiochus.

If Antichrist shall get the same kingdom of the Jews, which Antiochus
enjoyed: if he shall cast down and root out three horns, that is, three kings
next going before in the kingdom of Syria, the father, the brother, the
nephew, as Antiochus did to get his fathers kingdom by deceit: therefore these
three must be alive, after they be dead, and Antiochus the father, and
Seleucus the brother, and Demetrius the nephew, must rise again before the
resurrection, that Antichrist may deprive them of their kingdom, and by his
cunning cast them off and destroy them. This is the sum of my conclusion.
Antichrist is Antiochus in his identity, or in his likeness: if in his
identity, it is a great miracle: if in his likeness, it is a lame argument:
for every similitude does halt, as the Logicians teach, and a symbolical
argument is not of force to argue, as Aquinas says. Yet notwithstanding rather
for a flourish, then for a proof of the cause let us shortly see wherein
Antichrist is like or dislike unto Antiochus. Antiochus came not out of a base
stock and kindred, as many Popes did, but out of a kingly race. Antichrist is
the son of the earth, as S. John tells us. Antiochus most abject in his
manners, but of a great parentage, but is farther described by the Prophet to
be by his country a Syrian, by religion uncircumcised, a breaker of the
sabbath, an oppressor of the Jews, a worshipper of Jupiter Olympius. What
Antichrist? how is he painted out by you? Is he not though base in mind, yet
baser by birth, by country a Jew, by religion circumcised, a keeper of the
Sabbath, the Messiah of the Jews, an enemy to Idols, is he not thus
described? that he may well enough deny himself to be Antiochus, though he
be hanged up in his picture. You see how unlike, now mark how like he is to
Antiochus. For I will never deny that Antiochus in many things is the type of
Antichrist. Nay, I will say more, Antiochus the type of Antichrist, wherein they
do agree.
that S. Paul and S. John did bring many things out of Daniels prophesies into
their own, wherewith they did lively set out and express that Antichrist.
Antiochus is an enemy to God, and adversary to the Church, lifting up himself
above all, and against all that is called God, an Outlaw, whose will stands
for a law, whose mouth speaks great things, whose hands do afflict Gods
Saints, such an one is Antichrist described by the Apostles. Antiochus as he
did abrogate his country and false ceremonies, so the Jewish and the true
ceremonies. Antichrist has overthrown the Idols of the Gentiles, and has
altered the true and Christian worship of God. Antiochus is inwardly an
Atheist, and outwardly an Idolater: for he did worship Jupiter Olympius in the
Temple of Jerusalem, and caused others to worship him, whom their forefathers
worshipped not, who had worshipped Apollo and Diana. So Antichrist is an inward
Atheist, and an outward Idolater. Antiochus shall worship in his place the god
Maozim described verse. 38. as it is in the vulgar translation: So Antichrist
also, who shall worship the Devil, as the author of his strength and power,
he shall worship the devil against God, as your interlined gloss has it.
And Bellarmine, He shall worship the Devil after the manner of the Magicians,
but closely. And this is called the god Maozim, by whose help Antichrist shall
work miracles. Antichrist therefore shall be an idolater by his own
confession, which elsewhere he often denies. But Antichrist shall fight
against all Gods, that he alone may be taken for God, as he lately has
written. How then shall he worship the Devil, as he writ before? you see that
Antichrist is like to Antiochus in many things, I grant then that Antichrist is
typically described by Daniel, but not prophetically, Bell. lib. 2. cap. 21. de
Antichr.
whom even Bellarmine grants to have spoken literally of Antiochus, when he
sees that the Pope is so nearly urged and stung by our men with these notes
of likeness. Although he cite Jerome elsewhere, expounding those words 21. v.
cap. 11. not of Antiochus, but properly of Antichrist. Therefore in the same
place he does both follow and forsake Hierome. In Dan. cap. 11.
Neither is it marvel, when Hierome seems to forsake himself. For Hierome in
the former part of the 11. chapter confesses that the Seleucidae are
described, and Seleucus Philopater in the twentieth. And one that is most vild,
shall stand in his place, that is, Seleucus Philopater in the place of
Antiochus the great. What reason had he then, why he should expound the 21.
ver. And the most vild shall stand in his place, Bellarmine contradicts
himself.
not of Antiochus Epiphanes, Seleucus brother and successor, but of
Antichrist, whom Daniel did not prophetically describe? Here Bellarmine
staggers, and speaks as it were out of a tottering boat. He says it, he
denies it, that the Angel spoke literally of Antiochus, and Hierome brings
such a reason against himself, as Hierome himself cannot answer. But
Bellarmine thought it not suffiicient to dissent from himself, The ten horns
in John and Daniel not the same.
but he must set a jar also between Daniel and John. For he says, that
the ten horns in Daniel and John are the very same: yet Daniel speaks of ten
horns broken off and cast aside before Messiah came in the flesh: John speaks
of those ten horns, which in his time had not attained the Kingly
soueraignety. Daniel speaks of the ten kings of the race of Seleucus and
Lagis, who by turns successively succeeded one another in the Kingdom. John
speaks of ten Kings, among whom the Roman Empire was to be divided, who
governed at one time in diverse provinces. Daniel tells us what the little horn,
which was the tenth, did do to the three next foregoing, without mention of
the rest. John tells us what the ten horns shall do to Antichrist, which is
not one of the ten horns, but one of the seven heads of the Beast. Daniels
king is a tenth horn, pointing out one singular man. John's king is not to be
accounted an eleventh horn, but a head, and signifies not one singleman, but a
state, Daniels ten horns rose out of the ruins of the Macedonian Empire,
John's ten horns out of the overthrow of the Roman Empire. So that there is
no likeness between Daniels horns and John's, Dan. 7.8.
but that in either of them they were ten, Daniels ten horns if you consider
the chronology, were broken and fell off many ages before. John's ten horns
did appear, that is, before they received kingly power with the Beast, the
Roman Empire being destroyed. Those ten horns, if you consider cosmographie,
bear rule in Syria and Babylon, out of these ten horns, wherein a certain
number is set for an uncertain, as our men have proved, one had the Kingdom
of France, another of Spain, another of Great Britain, and other in other
nations and kingdoms. Those ten horns after the captivity, and before the
coming of Christ did oppress Jury situated between them, These horns being
converted by Christ triumphing in the heavens, shall at the last wound and
strike through that double horned Beast of Rome. O cunning Chronology, and
skillful Cosmographie, BELLARMINE, that can so well distinguish the places and
times of each prophecy, CICERO did in open place iestingly tax a certain
Poet, Bellarmine well compared.
who was very foolish in the judgment of others, but very learned in his own,
that in one place made Euripides and Menander, and in another Socrates and
Epicurus have conference together, whose lives were severed not by many years,
but many ages, and that he had many Schools in the world, that had as little
learning as himself. He did as wittily sport at other writers, who said that
Numa was Pythagoras scholar, when Pythagoras was borne diverse ages after Numa.
But another most pleasantly said, that by the ignorance of a foolish
Historiographer, he was made a Babilonian of a Grecian, and that his Country
being cut off from Hellespont with the very wales and towers and people were
carried into Mesopotamia. These men's ignorance Bellarmine seems very well to
express, who brings in Kings of Siria long dead, conuersing with many Kings of
Europe borne a thousand years after, transporting Europe into Asia,
Absurdities out of Bellarmines interpretation.
and Paris to London, and the seats of other Kings and Princes who fell from
the Roman Empire together with their subjects into Hierapolis and Babylon.
That I can hardly refrain from crying out, that this learned Historiographer
will one day bring to pass that The Parthian shall drink Araris, and the
German Tygris.

A man may easily slip in the mistaking of a year or years, but it is a
foul fault to confound an age or ages together, which this learned Doctor
has committed. But I know his answer that he had rather err with certain
fathers, then hold a truth with us. Let us now see the return of that
terrible demonstration, fetched out of Daniels corrupt interpretation.

If the Roman Empire be not as yet altogether overthrown, Antichrist is not
yet come. For the destruction of the Roman Empire is a certain token
forerunning the coming of Antichrist (as it appears out of Daniel who speaks
never a word either of the desolation of the Roman Empire or of the coming of
Antichrist) But the Roman Empire is not so utterly overthrown. Therefore
Antichrist is not yet come.

The general overthrow of the Roman Empire he thus proves out of Daniel.

If before the coming of Antichrist the Roman Empire be to be divided into
ten Kings, whereof none is, or is called the King of the Romans, then
Antichrist is not yet come. For the general overthrow of the Empire is not
come, because the name remains.

The first is true. Therefore the last is true.

He proves the assumption out of Daniel, What be the two feet and ten toes.
out of the first vision of the 2. feet, and out of the second of the ten
horns of the beast without a name. For as two feet, have ten toes, which are
not feet, and as the ten horns are not the beast, so the Roman Empire shall
be divided into ten Kings whereof none is the King of the Romans. O full
wittily as he thinks. But Daniels two feet are not the esterne and western
Empires of Rome, but Ptolomeus Lagis, and Seleucus Nicauor, Alexanders Princes
as I said before: And the ten horns of the beast are not ten Kings rising out
of the ruin of the Roman Empire, but ten Seleucides, as toes springing out of
those feet, after the destruction of the Macedonian Empire, whence four
horns arose in Alexanders place, as I showed before, which fell afterward to
be two feet. Has not Bellarmine proved the assumption doubtely well out of
Daniel. But he has showed it I warrant you better afterward out of John. For
those ten horns in John are ten Kings among whom the Roman Empire is divided.
I grant it. Neither so shall I loose the cause But that is not set down by
John which Bellarmine adds, whereof none is, or is called the King of the
Romans. The clean contrary is set down by John as I proved before. As the
Roman Empire was to be taken away as Paul taught, Why the Roman Empire
restored.
so far forth, as it hindered the revealing and government of Antichrist: So
a new Empire as the picture of the old was to be restored of the land-beast
chap. 13. i. of Antichrist that the whore of Babylon might sit upon her back
chap. 17. One of the two heads of the sea-beast, i. the western Empire of
Rome, dead in Augustulus, revived in Charles by the land-beast, that is
Antichrist, got life again and gathered strength, and therefore it was not
finally overthrown. The image of the first beast recovered life, and voice:
and therefore did not altogether loose her power and name. The image of the old
Empire got life again, the name remained: the thing it self perished not, but
past over from the chief secular Prince, to the chief spiritual prince: as
Aquinas teaches. So as Antichrist was the last state, that held the Roman
Empire, without the name of the Roman Emperor as Bellarmine confesses.
Therefore the Pope did transfer the Majesty and the power of the Roman Empire
to himself and has left a bare name and title to the Emperor, that the
Emperor might be like him. The power of the Empire in the Pope, the name in
the Emperor.
A Bishop in name, and an Emperor in name. Indeed the Bishop infringeth the
faith of Christ, professes his name, and seems his Vicegerent. A substitute
in name, but a real Adversary. So the majesty of the Emperor resides in the
Pope, the title in the Emperor. Then the titulare Emperor is the Popes real
vassal. Let him be called, and you will the King of the Romans, to whom the
Pope has not left one foot of land in all Italy. So that the old Roman
Empire in substance and power, is so divided between the Kings and the beast,
that it is extinguished, unless happily you would have the Empire consist, not
in the number of lands, but of sillables. I retort therefore the argument that
I may overthrow the assumption of the first syllogism which he took for
granted, that the Roman Empire was not yet subverted.

The prophecy of Saint John has taught us that the Roman Empire is to be
divided and determined, as Bellarmine says, and then that Antichrist shall
come.

Event proves that the Empire is a good while since overthrown.

Therefore Antichristi come.

CHAP. XXXI. Wherein the third demonstration is refuted.
BEllarmines two former demonstrations as 2. reeds we have broken in pieces,
let us if you please breifely scatter the rest being fully refuted by others.
Any man will see how weak they be being severed, I have united them that they
might be the stronger, two of the signs accompanying: and two other following
being as notably concluded, whereby he proves that Antichrist is not as yet
come.

The first sign that does accompany the coming of Antichrist is not only the
preaching of Enoch and Elias, but their combat with Antichrist.

Wherein Bellarmine does greatly dote, not unlike a frantic woman among us,
who imagined she had such inward acquaintance with the Angel Gabriel, that
she received many letters from him to be delivered to many others about diverse
businesses, I think Elias was the Carrier: And we have such an other mad
fellow sent to give light unto the world. These seem not to be so mad as
Bellarmine, who as if he had conferred with Enoch and Elias three days since
in Paradise, The fable of Enoch and Elias.
or at least had received letters from them, does hold so fast, and tell so
confidently that Jewish fable received from others, that he seems to believe
it, it is this, that both of them being reserved so many ages in a certain
aereall paradise, living in their mortal bodies, shall return into the world
to fight with Antichrist, and shall be slain by him, and both of them shall
rise again the third day before the general resurrection: and by that miracle
convert the Jews, and enforce them to kill Antichrist their Messiah (as they
thought) in the mount of Olives, and to embrace Christ at the last their true
Messiah.

To prove the truth of all these passages Bellarmine has misreported diverse
testimonies out of the Scripture and fathers, all which the most excellent and
learned King of great Britain has so wrested out of the hands of the silly
weak Doctor, that in the judgment of all learned men he seems to have
won the cause. It is not needful then to discuss those testimonies again,
that I may not do that which is done already, all which are restored by the
King to their natural and proper sense, so that from thence I may fetch
arguments, to pursue the beast being wounded with the Kings weapon. All godly
learned men will grant, that these two holy Prophets, for their singular
holiness had an especial privilege from God: when one of them, Heb. 11.
that is Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, the other was
taken up in a fiery chariot into Heaven. Let me therefore ask Bellarmine
certain questions for my learning, that I may search out the truth of this
business, not only for the refuting of the fable, but for comforting of the
Church. The first question.
First therefore I demand where Enoch and Elias be at this present? Bellarmine
answers and that confidently; in Paradise. What? are they in that Paradise, A
discourse of Paradise.
wherein Adam was placed at the first, which Moses describes to be planted by
God in the region of Eden, a place so full of delights, watered with a great
river from whence four other great and noble rivers did flow? Out of which he
makes mention, that Adam was expelled, a dreadful Cherubine being set to
stop the entrance, that none of Adams posterity may ever reenter? where the
Armenians, condemned afterward for Heretic; in the Florentine counsel, did
say that the souls of the Saints did abide after death to the day of
judgment? yea says Bellarmine in the very same Paradise Enoch and Elias are
reserved alive. Enoch and Elias have a loss by being in Paradise and loosing
heaven.
A great privilege forsooth, that when other Saints the citizens of heaven do
live with God, these for so many ages be kept out of heaven by God. That we
may grant that Paradise is as well planted and delightsome a place, as ever it
was, wherein with the smell of flowers and fruit, the sweetness of fountains,
the greenesse of the fields, the chanting of birds, the melody in the woods,
the shadow of trees they might delight themselves so many ages. Yet for all
that, Paradise could not be so pleasing unto them, that it could content them
for the loss of one day, wherein they were deprived of heaven. Ecclesiasticus
corrupted.
For whereas Bellarmine proves out of the Apocryphal scripture of
Ecclesiasticus, that Enoch was translated into Paradise, he had said somewhat
if Paradise had not been foisted into the Apocryphal text: for though it be
in the Latin vulgar translation, yet it is not in the Greek original. But
what will he answer for Elias, whom the canonical Scripture does plainly set
down to be taken up into heaven, not as it were into heaven, but into heaven
it self? He cannot deny that which many sober Papists do grant, that God in
the Scripture did pubblish his decree concerning Elias in uery plain words,
unless happily in Bellarmines opinion when God had determined to take Elias up
into heaven, he suddenly changed his mind, and cast him into Paradise? Elias
therefore does so much the more grievously take the loss of heaven, as he was
near enjoying of it, Paradise taken away.
and mist it. But if Paradise which was sometime a most pleasant and
delightsome place, has been a long time since taken away, what comfort then
is left to Enoch and Elias wherewith they might comfort themselves for the want
of heaven? Now to let pass other Papists, Pererius the Jesuit does in many
words prove, that Paradise was overflowed with the flood, and grew so wild
and unwholesome, that although it was a place, yet it left off to be a
Paradise. Paradise overflowed with the flood.
But this vniesuited Bellarmine that he might preserve that place free from the
inundation of waters, to be more pleasant and wholesome for Enoch and Elias,
has removed it into a place near the circle of the Moon. Paradise not near
the Moon.
But the Jesuit Pererius does prove that it is the more incommodious, and
unwholesome, and altogether inhabitable. First for the neerenesse of the Sun
and other stars, then for the Element of fire placed next the moon, besides
for the perpetual agitation of the place, being carried swiftly about with the
constant motion of the heaven. So that Bellarmine has provided very ill for
those good Fathers, when he placed Paradise so near the Moon, and has done
great wrong to the Inhabitants of the earth, as Pererius notes pretily and
pleasantly, that the height of Paradise, being in a place opposite to the east,
would keep away the light of the Sun. It is good sport to see these two
learned Jesuits wrangling together about the situation of Paradise, Papist
against Papist.
as the Madianites wounding one another with their mutual blows. Yet out of
this their conflict the truth does appear that Enoch and Elias is not in the
earthly Paradise. And yet without all doubt they must be in Paradise, then in
heavenly Paradise Which when all is done he confesses they be not in the
ethereall, but aeriall heaven. Aeriall Doctor, who dreams that God will give,
but an aeriall happiness to these his excellent Prophets. For whereas he
thinks it is a matter of religion for any to confess, that heaven gates were
open for any before Christ, and to the proof thereof has gathered, and bent
all his forces, that most learned Bishop of Elie has so weakened and
dispersed them, that he has clean vanquished the Sophister and driven him out
of the field. Enoch and Elias are members of the son of man: the son did
first ascend into heaven by his own power: Enoch and Elias being members of
Christ have ascended by the power of the son of man, so that Christ may be
rightly said to tread the way before them both. Whence seeing it sufficiently
appears that Enoch and Elias do now live in heaven; I will demand again, The
second Question.
whether they entered heaven in their souls alone, or with their bodies also?
For if only in their souls, as certain learned men do think, they must
twice rise again, if it be true that Bellarmine says, once to fight against
Antichrist; the second time, to convert the Jews to Christ. If with their
bodies also, which the greater sort, and better learned on both sides do
conclude, that they may not deny the privilege given to them for our comfort, I
will not curiousty inquire whether they enjoy the blessed vision of God, when I
hear they be entered into the house of God, that is, the heavens, wherein
Christ says, that he has many mansion places. Three examples of God his
glory. Enoch. Elias. Christ.

It contents me that God for the comforting of his Church upon earth would have
three examples and shows of his glory to appear; Enoch before the Law, Elias
under the Law, Christ under the Gospel; that the two former by another,
Christ by his own power entered heaven in their bodies. Enoch for the comfort
of married folks, Elias for the comfort of Virgins, Christ for the comfort of
either estate, who being borne of a Virgin that was espoused, did adorn both
of them in his life, the Virgin by his example, the married by his miracle: but
especially, that Enoch being famous for his integrity, Elias for his zeal,
Christ for his perfection in all graces, might be openly known to have their
entrance into heaven. Hence every faithful man may behold the foundation of
his happiness in Christ, the first fruits in Enoch and Elias, in him the
working cause, in these a warrantable earnest of their resurrection and
ascension into the highest heaven, with the highest joy; and hence may we
conclude against any Jewish heretic, that as there was an entrance into heaven
to Enoch and Elias, to perfect their happiness, so a return to the earth is
denied unto them, only Christ who ascended up into heaven, not for himself
alone, but for them and us, must come again in the latter day, that he may
bring those that belong unto him into heaven. Nor let any doubt but that
Christ, by which power he shall carry those being changed in the twinkling of
an eye into heaven, whom he shall find alive at his coming on the earth,
has with that power changed Enoch and Elias in the very moment of their
translation, and assumption, that being made like to his glorious body, he
shall as he has made them, so also make us fit for heaven.

The third Question.
Here I thirdly demand how Bellarmine can imagine their bodies to be mortal and
corruptible, who have so many ages enjoyed in the heavens immortality and
incorruption; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven, and
corruption cannot put on incorruption, as the Apostle teaches, Bellarmine
contradicts the Scripture.
whom the Cardinal does contradict. Enoch was translated that he should not
see death, says the Apostle; he shall return that he may see death, says the
Cardinal. so Bellarmine always beats against the rock, so long till it be
to be feared he will be beaten in pieces by the rock. But if so be that Enoch
and Elias do live in their bodies in the heavens which is Gods house, as the
wiser Papists do confess to be agreeable to Scripture, it follows that
their bodies be incorruptible and immortal.

The fourth Question.
I demand therefore in the fourth place, how it can be, that they should be
killed by Antichrist in the latter day? how they can so die that they be raised
up the third day? There is no show of truth in the invention, no probability
in the devise. And yet these two inhabitants of heavenly Paradise, the
possessors of immortality, as Hierom calls them; not that now they desire, but
that they now enjoy immortality, as Tertullian speaks, the marke-men and
first borne of our resurrection, as Epiphanius says; the most ancient
inhabitants of heaven, in whom the worth of grace has changed the law of
nature, as Athanasius says, Immortality not overcome by death.
even these two this old doting Doctor Bellarmine does imagine shall return
again upon the earth, that they may dye by the hand of Antichrist. Mortality
shall be drunk up of life, but immortality shall not be drunk up of death.
For God will not give that glory to Antichrist, that he triumph over the death
of the Saints in heaven; for they be immortal. If they be heavenly and
immortal, what business have they upon the earth to fight with Antichrist,
whom Christ has purposed by three means utterly to destroy and abolish.

1. By the effectual ministry of his word. Three means whereby Antichrist
is vanquished.
2. By the powerful forces of Kings. 3. By the glorious appearance of his last
coming.
But if we should grant them that they should come to fight with Antichrist, it
would not follow for all that, that Antichrist were not yet come, which he so
labors to prove; this only would follow, that Antichrist were not yet gone,
which we will easily grant. And is not this then a doubtie demonstration? The
sum is this.

Enoch and Elias are not yet returned out of Paradise.

Therefore Antichrist is not yet come.

It is reported of Lycurgus, Lycurgus his devise to make his commonweal endure.
that his common weal might continue, that he feigned as though he took a
long journey, and bound his citizens with an oath, that they should not alter
the form of the common weal settled by him till he returned. Lycurgus never
meant to return, therefore he hoped that his common weal should last for
ever. That which Lycurgus did in a good mind, the Popish sort do with an ill
intent, dissembling that many things must be endured for the continuance of
their Hierarchy, that thereby they may blind the eyes of their credulous
scholars, not to expect Antichrist as themselves have fashioned him, till
Enoch and Elias should return out of Paradise. They know for a certain that
they shall never return out of Paradise, and therefore their Antichrist shall
never come.

CHAP. XXXII. The fourth Note concurring.
ANd yet Bellarmine does add another sign that does accompany the coming of
Antichrist, a most grievous and notorious persecution, which shall take away
the public worship of God; which sign though in the true meaning it do most
truly agree with the Pope of Rome, The Pope justly challenged for a persecutor.
who has publicly taken away the true, and pure worship of God, as much as
lies in him, with his most grievous and bitter persecution, yet this Roman
Advocate, with a cunning sleight of putting of, does remove the infamy of this
fiery persecution from the Pope, that inflicts it, and lays it upon our
Church which endures it; as Tacitus writes of Nero, who when he had set fire on
the City, laid the fault upon the Christians. It irkes me to stay any longer
in wiping away this bloody demonstration, wherein he does so maliciously
insult over our miseries, and as another Fimbria scoffs at our Sauolaes,
Fimbrias scoffs like Bellarmines
who^ Antichrist has grievously wounded, because they have not received the
beasts whole weapon into their bodies. What? whether is this a more feeble, or
more cruel demonstration? To the proof whereof I cannot tell whether he show
more malice or ignorance, in violent wrything of Scriptures after his wonted
manner to serve his turn. I will unloose those knots, and think it very
necessary, to defend the Scripture from his miserable corruption. When
Antichrist shall come he shall raise the most grievous and terrible persecution
that ever was, such an one, wherein the public worship of God shall utterly
cease. Therefore Antichrist is not yet come. As if he should say, there was a
grievous persecution, if a persecution under the Pope, but not a most grievous
and notorious: that the persecution of the primitive Church, was far more
grievous, and more notorious, then that of ours, whereof we so justly
complain, which he terms naught else but a chastisement. What is this else
but cruelly to scoff at our miseries, and scornefully to trample upon our
ashes? When the Pope has consumed so many millions of innocent men with fire
and sword, thus to mitigate the Popish persecution with a comparison of the
Emperors persecutions? and to name it not a persecution but a chastisement?
Which, if our Princes would revenge, on Gods behalf, Charles the 5. plagued
Rome
as the army of Charles the fifth, under the conduct of the Duke of Burbone, is
said to have taken Rome, while he washed away blood with blood, and gelded those
Ietcherous Cardinals, as Sadolett does pitifully bemone the matter in his
Epistles: Bellarmine would leave of with his sarcasmes to floute at our just
complaints, which his inhumanitie as well as their immanitie has drawn from
us. But let us return to the argument. He confirms the three parts of his
proposition. First, that the persecution of Antichrist shall be the most
grievous of all others that ever were, he proves it out of the 24. of Matthew,
out of the words of Christ: Matthew: 24. misalleaged.
there shall be then great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning, or
shall be to the end. which place that it is not to be understood of the
persecution of Antichrist, but of the calamities of the Jews, both the context
of the place, and the testimony of Luke, does most plainly convince. And we
read out of the 20 of the Apocalypse, says he that Satan shall be then loosed,
who was bound till that time. Which place is not to be referred to the coming
of Antichrist, as is made plain by that which goes before, and follows
after.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the loosing and binding of Satan.
THe coming of Antichrist does go before the loosing of Satan, who appears
by the premises, to be not only borne and of some years, but being of a ripe
and settled age governed under the figure of the beast cap: 13. so furious that
he slew them that refused to worship the image of the beast, his synagogue was
described under the type of the whore, making the Princes of the earth drunk
with the golden cup of her fornication, and her self made drunk with the
blood of the Saints. I add also out of the consequents: for the Angel, (by
whom Satan is said to be bound for a thousand years, after the end of those
years to be loosed for a small time v: 2. and 3. of which small time there is
mention made cap: 12.) recites that he saw their souls, who were killed for
the testimony of Christ, because they would neither worship the image of the
beast, nor take his mark upon them, v: 4. and 5. But for the clearer
understanding of this obscure place, I must first speak of some few
distinctions taken out of the Text, that thereby the vanity of this
demonstration may be laid open to every man's view. The exposition of the place
of the loosing and binding of Satan.
Twice Satan is said to be bound, twice to be loosed: first bound by Christ,
that he might not destroy the soul of any of the faithful: but loosed to
afflict the flesh. Bound for ever, that by his spiritual tricks he might not
overthrow the salvation of the Church: but loose for a time, that with bodily
plagues he might exercise their patience. Here I distinguish the time, from
which he was bound, from the time wherein he was twice loosed. Once from the
beheading of John Baptist, to the Empire of Constantine: again from the
government of Constantine to the Empire of Ottoman the first, and the Popedom
of Boniface the 8. He was loosed from the death of the Baptist almost 300
years, that he might rage in the Roman Emperors against the primitive Church
to the Empire of Constantine; when he was bound again with the Angels chain
for a 1000. years v: 2. cap: 20. He was again let loose that he might rage
for a little while v: 3. as before almost three hundred years in the Turkish
Emperors, and the Rom: Bishops, from Ottoman the first, and from Boniface the
8; whereof, he without, this within, 1300 years from the death of Christ, 1000
from the death of Constantine, began cruelly to rage against the Church, one in
the East, the other in the West. There are who number the beginning of the 1000
years from the year of Christ 73. wherein Jerusalem being defaced, Satan cap:
12. did endeavor to put out the Church dispersed among the Gentiles: the seed
of the woman, which fled into the wilderness for a short time, that is, a time,
times, and half a time: which space does well answer 42 months, and 1260
days, as the learned teach, which according to the supputation of Daniel, do
make two hundred ninety and four years. In which time the Dragon, as is
said, being angry with the woman, did go about to destroy the rest of the
woman's seed that remained. Now in the 20. chapter, where the same history is
thought to be continued, the Angel is said to have bound Satan with a chain
for a thousand years, which was ended in the year 1703. at what time Satan is
understood to be loosed in Gregory the 7. Gregor: 7.
in whom Antichrist as a strong man began to strive against the Empire.
Difference about the loosing of Satan.
But they seem more rightly to interpret this place, who think that Satan
bound for a thousand years was let loose, at the river Euphrates in the
outward enemy of the Church Ottoman, the first Emperor of the Turks, and his
posterity the most barbarous enemies of the Christian name, in whom the
prophecy of Gog and Magog is thought to be fulfilled. Unless they be rather
to be believed, who understand the place not of the Turk only, nor of the Pope
only, but of them both; counting, as I said, the second loosing of Satan, from
the reign of Constantine, wherein he was bound for a 1000 years, to the
reign of Ottoman, and the Popedom of Boniface, wherein he was loosed after
that bloody decree of the counsel of Laterane, about the burning of Gods
servants, termed by them Heretics, which has most cruelly devoured and
consumed many millions of innocent men tormented with a lingering death, who
refer the place to Antichrist only, do shrewdly gale Bellarmines master, who
refer it to the Turk only, do take away Bellarmines demonstration. They
that refer it to them both, Two sta^es erected for cruelty.
when both perform the same, they erect two stages, one at Constantinople,
the other at Rome, wherein we may see a black Devil furiously raging in the
one, and a white Devil in the other. For whereas it is certain, that the
Saracens without, and Antichrist within, did bring many plagues upon the Church
within the compass of that 1000 years, and did stir up many mischiefs, and
many garboyles within the bowels of the Church, Satan being the leader, and the
Pope the author: First I say that the invasion of the outward enemies neither
was so general, nor so continual; nor the persecution of the inward enemies,
although it was raised up often for the show of religion, not so often for the
cause of religion, as for a greedy humor to govern: that the Church might
feel rather the outward peace to be intermitted, then quite omitted, and that
Satan's chain did seem rather to be somewhat slackned by the Angel, rather
then altogether loosned. For Satan did rather nourish and increase Antichrist
his darling and sweet heart with outward peace then war: flattering the world
rather then threatening it; bound rather then loose: so that in comparison of
those continual invasions of Turks, and the perpetual persecutions of Popes,
wherewith the whole East and West Churches have bin most miserably torn in
pieces these 300 years The outward peace may seem to be given to the Church,
as a breathing time for a thousand years, but yet such as the Church may cry
out with Esaias, behold in peace my bitterness is most bitter: for by those
means whereby Satan did grant an outward peace to the Church, by the same he
assayed to take away the inward: being very careful to yield to the Pope his
gainful merchandise of souls, while he sold sins, Satan did more hurt
bound then loose.
as it were, by the drum in the Temple at the highest rate; and did rack and
gather together great treasures to his companion, compast him with pleasures
and got him all authority, all which he could not have effected without long
peace. Satan therefore was bound,
not that he should not at all stir against the Church, but that he might
do it more mildly, and for his own good: that he might seem rather to play
then rage in his chain, and to play not the cutthroat, but the cozener; and
might rather infect men then kill them, and might not massacre them with
murders, but deceive them with lies, and show himself more a Comedian then a
Tragedian, and deceive the world more with sweet baits, then mingle any
sower, unless it were when he went about to get his eldest son the Empire,
then he is said to play the Tragicomedian. So Satan being bound did do more
good to Antichrist, then if he had been loose: yea, rather he lost that being
loose, that he got being bound. For whom Antichrist long held blinded with
superstition, and deceived with the enticements of peace, those he did after so
stir up, worn out with wars, and discontented with persecutions, that they
at last rebelled against him, and did very valiantly defend the oppressed cause
of the Gospel. Now that I have shortly expounded the place of Satan's loosing,
let us return to Bellarmines argument, who proves out of this place, that the
most grievous persecution that ever was, shall be under Antichrist, which if it
touch the Turk only, it takes away the foundation of Bellarmines
demonstration, if it press the Pope, the argument is brought upon the authors
head. For the most grievous persecution whereof he speaks, is come already.
And therefore Antichrist is come. Add that this comes nearer the Pope then he
is aware. For

The inward most grievous persecuter of the Church is Antichrist.

The Pope is the most grievous inward persecuter of the Church.

The Pope therefore is Antichrist.

But Antichrists persecution must be most notorious (says he) The Popes
persecution is not most notorious: why so? because all the wicked would oppugn
the Church with open war, and not only infidels and known sinners, but
hypocrites, and false brethren would join themselves to the Pope, and laying
themselves open, would openly invade the Church. For such persecution becomes
Antichrist, the Pope it becomes not. And why? because there be so many
hypocrites and false brethren in the Church, he means the Roman. I grant
it, it is a defense full of truth. The Pope that great hypocrite, The Pope that
great hypocrite.
must needs beget sons like himself, arrant hypocrites and dissemblers. But I
fear I may not grant him that, where he says, that hypocrites and sincere
Christians, whom as chafe and wheat, Christ says, are not to be divided
before the day of his coming, Bellarmine affirms that they are to be
separated before the coming of Antichrist.

Hence thus I dispute.

When all hypocrites shall be made known, Antichrist shall come.

When Christ comes all hypocrites shall be made known.

Therefore when Christ comes, Antichrist shall come.

Therefore Antichrist shall be not a beast of three year old, but a beast of
a day old: unless he think that Antichrist shall come after the coming of
Christ, and the end of the world: for that which he adds in the end, that
there shall be such a persecution under Antichrist, that all the public
ceremonies and sacrifices of religion shall cease, is a mere dotage. He wholly
forgets what is set down by the Apostle, that Antichrist shall be a notable
hypocrite, not an outward, but an homebred enemy, who with fained holiness and
sanctity, shall entice and deceive simple people, as Acosta, Viega, Pererius,
Ribera, four principal Jesuits do plainly set down: and by this means do
greatly weaken Bellarmines idle demonstration. Which let us weigh if you please.

The public worship of God, and the daily sacrifice of Christians under the
persecution of Antichrist, shall cease at that time when Antichrist shall come.

The worship of God, and the sacrifice of Christians is not ceast.

Therefore as yet Antichrist is not come.

He proves his poposition out of the 12. Dan. 12.5.11.
of Daniel verse. 11. from that time, when the daily sacrifice shall be taken
away, are 1290. days: where Daniel, Bellarmine against Daniel.
if we credit Bellarmine, speaks of Antichrist, Daniel himself gaine-saying
it, who expounds himself. chap. 8. v. 11. and chap. 11. verse. 13. directly
affirming, that the daily worship of God shall be taken away by Antiochus
Epiphanes and his army, speaking not of the daily sacrifices of Christians, but
of the daily sacrifices of the Jews. The manner of the Jews was to offer
sacrifice to God morning and evening, which they called (...), which sacrifice
was taken away by Antiochus, as Josephus and the author of the first book of
Macchabees, and Chrysostom plainly witness. And to Daniel demanding when the
end of these evils shall be, God answers, from that time, When the daily
sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination of desolation set up,
whereof he spoke chap. 11. verse. 31. that there should be 1290 days to the
restoring thereof, and the deliverance of the Jews from Antiochus tyranny. Of
this restoring and deliverance I showed out of Daniel, Diverse degrees of
deliverance.
that there were diverse degrees noted by Daniel, at diverse times. For from the
hinderance of the worship of God, to the first restoring of the same by Judas
Macchabeus, the Prophet says, there were three yeeeres and ten days: which
space chap. 7. verse. 25. he called a time, times, and a piece of time. To the
victory of Judas Macchabeus, when he drove Antiochus forces out of Jury, and
so did establish the first restitution, Daniel says, there was three years
and an half, which space chap. 12. v. 7. he calls a time, times, and half a
time. To the time, wherein Antiochus stricken by the hand of God, promised he
would restore the Jewish religion, he understands there were 1290. Bellarmine
mistaken in taking away the daily sacrifice.
days to the time of his death 1335. in all which numbers the prophesies of
Daniel, and histories of Josephus, and the Macchabees do very well agree. I
marvel the more that Bellarmine was so blind in the prophecy, and so
ignorant in the history, that he dreameth that the public worship of God, and
sacrifice of the Jews, taken away by the most grievous persecution of
Antiochus within three year and a half, should be the like public worship
of God, and sacrifice of the Christians, taken away by the persecution of
Antichrist, three years and a hafe before the end of the world. He confirms
the assumption by experience, which does testify that the public worship of
God was never taken away by the Pope, and that the sacrifice of the Christians
never ceased. He means the mass, and other public voluntary worships of the
degenerated Church of Rome, which the Creed shall make plain to be neither
worship of God, nor the sacrifice of Christians. So the proposition is fetched
out of the Scripture misunderstood, the assumption is the begging of the thing
in question. And is not this a worthy demonstration?

CHAP. XL. Of the 5. note of the continuance of Antichrists kingdom.
Now to the 2. last signs following.

1. The continuance of the kingdom of Antichrist 3. years and a half. 2. The
dissolution or end of the world five and forty days after.
And do not these make as doughtie a demonstration as the former? An
impossibility.
The kingdom of Antichrist must last just three years and a half. All which
time is not sufficient for the gathering of the Jews together dispersed over
the face of the whole earth: much less for the building again of the temple,
which is so defaced and raced, that not one stone is left upon another. 2. Chr.
2.2. The 2. buildings of the temple described.
The first building whereof, in great peace, in great provision of all
necessaries, by the most exquisite workmen, the number of whom the scripture
sets down to be a hundred and fifty thousand could not be perfected in less
then 7. years by Solomon. But the second reedifying of it being often hindered by
the incursion of a near enemy, and their own frights, that often the work
was interrupted, the high wales and the stately roof uncovered, and was not
finished under 46. years. Ioh. 2.
And yet Bellarmine allots but three years and a half to so great a work. He
does to good purpose imagine Antichrist to be an Enchanter, who can call forth
spirits out of hell, and send them as Messengers, Note
being carried on the wings of the wind to gather the Jews with all speed,
out of all the coasts of the world, and after may hire Marlines workmen to
carry stones, and lay them artificially in the work. But that he should in the
same three years and a half bring into captivity all Christians, subdue 10.
Kings, get the Monarchy of the world, is a tale so incredible that Turks may
laugh at, and Christians abhor. Let him write this to his fools, whom he
teaches that faith is not in the understanding, but in a blind assent, that
they must receive without search and inquiry, whatsoever is offered to them,
be it never so incredible, so it be in the name of the Church. And mark at
last what this Magitian has brought to pass. He has brought in Bellarmine
dancing in a circle. For thus he makes him dispute for him.

Antichrist shall precisely reign three years and a half.

The Pope spiritually has reigned in the Church 1500. years, neither has any
other been taken for Antichrist which did reign just three years and a
half.

The Pope therefore is not Antichrist.

And therefore Antichrist is not yet come.

The syllogism may be thus resolved.

If neither the Pope nor any other reigned precisely so long, then Antichrist
is not yet come.

The antecedent is true. Therefore the consequent.

Here you see Bellarmine to bring the chief question in a round to prove
that which is in controversy. Bellarmine dancing in a round.
Antichrist is not yet come, why so? Because the Pope is not Antichrist. The
Pope is not Antichrist, why so? Because Antichrist is not yet come. Behold the
Cardinal dancing in a round. He goes about to strengthen his proposition out
of Daniel, and John misunderstood, to wit, that Antichrist shall reign just
three years and a half. I have euicted out of Daniel 7. v. 25. that a time
times and a peecs of time, i. three years and ten days was that space wherein
the profanation of the temple and the hinderance of Gods worship was first
committed by Antiochus as Josephus the best interpreter of the prophecy has
numbered. Archimedes himself could not have set it down better. So much time
past from the profanation of the temple to the purging and reforming of the
same made by Judas Machabeus. From that purging to the expulsion of the army
out of Jury there are counted a time times, and half a time Dan. 12. in which
two numbers the 1300. days mentioned chap. 8. verse. 14. are contained, when as
that reformation well began, was better established and settled, from which
time if you accoumpt to the sickness of Antiochus there arise 1290. days chap.
12. 11. if to the death of Antiochus they amount in the Prophets account to
1334. chap. 12. 12. Bellarmines absurdities.
Now I pray let us apply this notable demonstration of Bellarmine about the
continuance of Antichrists reign, and we shall perceive, not only how he
agrees with the Prophet, but also with himself. First those things that are
to be understood literally and properly of the tyranny of Antiochus, who died
so many ages before Antichrist, he takes it literally and properly for the
Kingdom of Antichrist, who shall reign by his own record in the end of the
world. But he alleges always Jerome who refers that place chap: 8. of the
days 2300. to Antichrist, which make six years and more. How therefore do
they say that Antichrist shall rule 1260. days which makes three years and a
half? 1300. days and 1260. days how do they agree? now whereas out of the
12. Chap: they exactly define that Antichrists Kingdom shall endure a time,
times and a half time, let them tell me how they can reconcile therewith 1260.
days: wherein they say the Kingdom of Antichrist in Daniels judgment must
be contained? how can 1260. days agree precisely with a 1290? They must
devise a new Arithmeticke and a new Logic to make these numbers agree. For
whereas Bellarmine does add, That Daniel after he had said chap: 12. that
Antichrists Kingdom should endure 1290. days, he adds presently that he is
happy that does expect and abide to those 1335. days that is to the 45. days
to the death of Antichrist as he expoundes, because Christ as he thinks shall
then come to judgment, Daniel utterly mistaken.
this is the dotage of a cracked brain, as shall afterward be made as clear as
the light. For the judgment which Daniel mentions, is not the last judgment
of the world, but the temporal judgment that shall consume that beastly
Antiochus speaking so proudly, Dan 7.11.
whenas yet there is leave granted to the other beast to continue after for a
time and times. The sixth and last sign.
But Bellarmine does dream that the end of the world shall be 45. days after.
That we may come at last to consider of his sixth and last sign; Bellarmine
will seem to be of Gods secret counsel, Bellarmine wiser then Christ and
against Christ.
who knows more then either the Angels or the son of man: but that he will
not acquaint us with the day and hour, but with the year wherein the world
shall have an end. Yet he lately writes that 45. days after the Scripture
says that the day of judgment shall be put off and longer. Therefore those
days that Christ promises shall be shortened for the elects sake, Bellarmine
that worthy Divine says shall be lengthned. And those days which Christ says
shall be contracted for the comfort of the elect, those he says shall be
protracted for their torment. Fie upon such paltrie Divines, that do shut up
those fountains of comfort that Christ opens for the good of his Children.
What greater comfort can possibly be then the promise of Christ, hat the day
of judgment shall be hastened for the deliverance of Gods elect? And yet this
worldly Cardinal tells us that it shall be put off for their affliction. They
shall be ignorant says he that live after the 45. whether that day shall be
deferred any longer. He knows it is well with him in this world and lives in
all delight and delicacie with that his latiall Jupiter the Pope,
but whether it will be so well with him in another world that he knows not.
And therefore he thinks of the prolonging of this present world. I think
verily that if God would inuit him presently to his heavenly banquet, he would
crave, as old as he is, some more days; it may be some more year, wherein he
may pamper and cherish his old carcass, Mart. lib. 9.
and would secretly answer with that profane Martial, Seek others for to
feast with Jupiter above,
I hear upon the earth my Jupiter will love.


Here they place their heaven: they put far from them that day of judgment,
wherein they are to give account of so many impieties against Christ, and so
many outrages against Christian Kings and people. But let us come to his
argument, wherewith he proves that we are not to expect Antichrist before his
departure, nor before the end of the world to look for his coming. Thus he
argues.

The end of the world is not yet come.
Therefore Antichrist is not yet come.
This shall be their everlasting argument while the world endures, thus will
they argue for Antichrist: this because Bellarmine thought to be very absurd,
he does alter the question and concludes thus. That it shall not be long
before Antichrist come. For If it were long before Antichrist came, the end of
the world would be long hence. But the consequence is false. Therefore the
antecedent

He proves his proposition out of the Apostle. That Antichrist shall come a
little before the end of the world, and immediately before the second coming
of Christ, and then that ioyly fellow shall appear, whom the Lord Jesus shall
consume, with the spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming. But
the Apostle does distinguish between the coming and the destruction of
Antichrist, between the substance of Antichrist and his appearance or
revelation: between which and his destruction there is a great distance. He
lay close hidden in the days of Saint John and Saint Paul, as I have said
before; he was therefore. He did appear after the removing of the Empire, for
that did hinder that he might not appear: which happened not till many ages
after. Again the Apostle distinguishes between the consuming of Antichrist,
and his final overthrow. After he is revealed, he says he shall wast away by
little and little with the spirit of the Lords mouth, but shall be utterly
put out by the brightness of his coming. Bellarmine a profane Iester.
Here let me a little touch Bellarmines profane jesting. Surely says he the
spirit of Christ must be very weak, if it cannot dispatch Antichrist raging
above a 1000. years. And there it pleases him to distinguish between the
word of God, and his power. As though there is not power in the word of God to
weaken, and break Antichrist in pieces, the force whereof the beast shall
feel in his fall and destruction. Now the thing is a working, now Christ does
enfeeble Antichrist with his word, afterward he shall destroy him with his
presence. He shall kill him by weakening him, that I may put off the Cardinals
ridiculous distinction, who does thus distinguish, He does not say he shall
weaken him but he shall kill him. And it pleases him to scoff at us when we
say that now Antichrist shall be overthrown by the word of the Lord,
when as now the word of the Lord shall be ouerthrown by him. May not a
Christian, and an old man, and a Divine blush for shame, (as for a Cardinal
nothing will make him blush) to sport and jest in a matter so weighty and
serious? As God himself so Gods word is eternal, his Ministers Gods witnesses
Antichrist could kill, the word it self he could never kill, which shall abide
when he rots to nothing. Yea truly as the word of God is a living word so the
Ministers of the word Gods faithful witnesses being slain, shall by the power
of the word rise again, if not in their several persons, yet in a succession,
and kill this murdering Antichrist. Christ therefore has not a weak spirit,
but the Cardinal has a weak brain, who does not as yet understand, the
degrees and means which Christ uses in the abolishing of Antichrist. But he
tells us Saint John says that Antichrist shall come in the last hour: What is
meant by the last hour.
But he understands the last hour to be all that time from the ascension of
Christ to his second coming, which God does call an hour, very short in
respect of the Saints glory, but very long in respect of their patience. This
testimony I thus retort.

When that Antichrist comes it shall be the last hour, says John.

But Antichrists are now come (meaning the whole body together with Antichrist
that head, which elsewhere he affirms is come)

Therefore now is the last hour.

And if then was the hour of the coming of Antichrist, he is not to be
destroyed three years and a half before the end of the world.

CHAP. XLI. Of the sixth and last Note.
But he proves it out of Daniel, Cap: 12.12.
that after Antichrist has reigned three years and a half, he shall be
destroyed 45 days before the day of judgment. For when he had continued 1290
days, he adds, happy is he that shall live to see 1335 days. Daniel mistaken.
This place is properly to be understood of Antiochus, of his death, and of the
deliverance of the Jews. But grant that the place be to be understood of the
kingdom of Antichrist, and the end of the world: then it would follow, Three
absurdities.
first, that the kingdom of Antichrist lasted not 1260 days, which make three
years and a half, but 1290. Again, it follows that Antichrist is to be
destroyed 45 days before the end of the world, whom the Apostle says must be
destroyed at the coming of Christ. Thirdly, it would follow, that the time of
Christ's coming should be known to men, which Christ does assure us is
unknown unto Angels. If these consequences be absurd, then the Antecedent is
absurd, from whence they arise.

You have, Paul the fifth, Bellarmines six demonstrations making small proof
that Antichrist is not yet come. Now seeing I have dilated about Antichrist all
the questions, whether he be, what he is, of what kind, what is his kingdom
and retinue, what he does and wherein he is busied, the name wherewith he is
termed, the mark wherewith he is branded, What Antichrist is.
the seat wherein he rules, the time wherein he is revealed, and withal what
he is not: It is not requisite that I tell you in many words who it is, when
you your self seem to have Antichrist wholly in your breast, and to carry him
in your bosom. Antichrists sufferings.
You have heard what he has done, now hear what he shall suffer. For we
are so far from doubting of his coming, that we think of his destroying
foretold of the Angels in John. Apoc. 14.7. The first Angel.
I saw says he an Angel flying in the midst of heaven, having the eternal
Gospel to preach unto them, that are upon the earth, and to every nation,
tribe, tongue, and people, speaking with a loud voice, Fear the Lord, and
give honor to him, because the time of his judgment is at hand, and worship
him, who made heaven and earth, the sea and all that are therein. This Sermon
of the Angel, what is it else, but a brief sum of all those Sermons which
Luther and Calvin, The Angel and the Protestants pr^^ch alike.
and other Preachers of the Gospel preached in all the coasts of the Christian
world, that they might bring the people to the faith of Christ, the fear of
God, and the worship of him alone?

He only that made heaven and earth is to be worshipped, he only is to be
served.

God only made heaven and earth.

Therefore we must worship and serve God only.

This syllogism of the Angel, as a Ram is advanced by our men, to batter,
overthrow, and expel out of the consciences of men all those forces of Idols,
which Antichrist has erected.

And there followed another Angel, saying, The second Angel. Apoc: 14.8.
Babylon is fallen, Babylon that great City is fallen, because she has made
all nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Here the
spiritual fall of Babylon, not the material is to be understood; which being
weakened, and shaken by the preaching of the word, while as yet the walls were
standing, fell in men's minds, and was wholly cast down. For who is there, but
of small understanding, to whom the iniquity of the Church, and Court of Rome
does not appear? to whom their impiety is not evident? to whom she seems
not to be the mother of fornication, the receptacle of spoils, the queen of
pride, the shop of sins, and the sink of all filthiness? In what account
the Pope was heretofore.
A hundred and threescore years since one that was no Heretic, as a Lutherane
is termed, but a Roman-Catholike, writ thus of the Pope, as it is recited in
the catalogue of the witnesses of truth.

Jupiter is below.
In heaven is Plutoes place.
Upon a brutish animal
Bestowed is all grace.
It is as Jewels in the mire
And dirt upon the face.
And if he were so hateful, when the darkness did cover his filthiness, how
much more hateful does he seem to all since the light of the Gospel has
laid him open and naked to the view of all men?

The third Angel followed them, The third Angel. Apo: 14.10.11
crying with a loud voice, If any shall adore the beast, and her image, and
bear her mark in his forehead, or in his hand, he shall drink of the wine of
his wrath, which is mingled with wine in the cup of his wrath: And he shall be
tormented with fire and brimestone in the sight of the Angels, and before the
face of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment does ascend up for ever. This
Angel does threaten eternal destruction not only to Rome and the beast, but
to all that love Rome, or adore the beast, whether they carry the mark of the
beast either openly in their forhead, or closely in their hand. An exhortation
to Ministers.
Here I admonish every man of God, every messenger of God, my self being the
least, and last of all Christ's servants, that they seek not after ease to make
them idle, or after wealth to make them covetous, or after pleasures to make
them luxurious, or after preferment to make them proud: but that they have a
continual care to recover souls fallen to the beast, or preserve them that
stand upright; to whom being stamped with the mark of the beast, the Angel of
God does denounce so grievous and endless torments. There is no doubt but as
soon as any of you do earnestly undertake this business of God and Christ,
but he shall endure many wrongs, not only from outward enemies, but which is
more grievous from false brethren, those following the quarrel of Antichrist,
these covering their own with the name of Christ, so that they can look for
nothing from these but molestation and trouble, from those nothing but death
and destruction. But let him for his comfort hear that voice, which John heard
from heaven: write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, so says the
Spirit, that they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. And if
those dead be blessed that live and die in the Lord.i. in the faith of the
Lord: how much more happy be they that live and die for the Lord.i. for the
faiih of the Lord? We have three witnesses testifying this happiness Three
witnesses of happiness.
1. The voice from heaven. 2. The Scripture in the Church. 3. The spirit in the
consciences.
all testifying that the sense of our misery is short, but the sense of our
happiness everlasting; that the life weakened by sickness, is necessarily to
be laid down, and that it is not greatly material, whether a man die under a
canopie, or in a camp, so he die in Christ, and for Christ; that a momentanie
life is here granted to us, but that the reward of a life well spent is
immortal. And whereas it is appointed that all shall die, Gods servants may
rather wish that their life, which must necessarily be ended, be rather spent
in a holy cause, then reserved for a natural end: especially against seducing,
and bloody Antichrist, and all his adherents, who now if ever are most wrung
and grumble, threatening fire and sword to the Saints of God. The wicked
therefore when they fall, shall be most grievously punished in hell, for all
their impieties, and abominations, but these that are washed and redeemed with
the blood of Christ, shall presently from their death in great triumph enjoy a
place, and rest in heaven. The sixth Angel. Apoc: 16.12.
For after in the sixth Viol, which the sixth Angel powers out into that great
river Euphrates, there is mention of a great battle, to which those 3.
unclean spirits coming in the likeness of frogs out of the mouth of the
Dragon, out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet, do summon the Kings of the earth against the great day of the
Almighty God, who shall gather them together into a place that in Hebrew is
called Armageddon. In which words the malice of Satan, and of Antichrist, and
the Antichristian Synagogue is plainly set down, as likewise of the Jesuits,
those frogs, who croking out of their caves, provoke the Kings of the earth to
war against Christ, and the Church, but with what success the place and day
does declare. That is the day wherein the right hand of Almighty God shall be
great and glorious by the fall of Antichrist. The place where the Popish frogs
shall be destroyed,
The place is called in Hebrew, the hill of thieves and robbers, as Aquinas: or
a cursed army prepared to battle; or an army of destruction, which shall
both bring destruction and endure it. Unless that be better, as diverse read
Charmagaddon, that is, a troop appointed to the slaughter; or Gnarmageddon,
which signifies a crafty kind of killing; so that the sense is, that Princes
are to be brought into that place, by the cunning sleight of Satan, and
Antichrist, where they may utterly perish. Although another far otherwise,
and far better do take it not for a noune appellatiue, but proper, Megiddo
it was a hilly city in the land of Canaan, and because Har in Hebrew is a hill,
and that was situated upon an hill, it was called Harmageddon. That place was
renowned for the slaughter of the Canaanites where, where Iabin and Sisera
fighting against the people of God, were daunted and vanquished under the
government of Deborah, for whom the stars were said to fight in their
courses: as the winds and seas did fight for our Elizabeth of blessed memory,
against the Spanish invincible Armado, to whom that distichon of Claudian does
fitly agree.

O much beloved of God, for whom the seas do fight,
And winds conspire to blow, to put the foe to flight.
The seventh Angel.
Therefore Harmageddon was the place of this battle that the enemies of the
Church with Iabin and Sisera, gathered together by God, might expect the like
destruction. Apoc. 16. 17. etc.
This the seventh Angel which powered out his vial into the air, does notably
set out. There went a great voice from heaven out of the throne saying, It is
finished. And there were made lightnings, and sounds, and thunders, and a
mighty earthquake, such an one as was not since men inhabited the earth: And
the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the Heathen
fell, and great Babylon came into remembrance with God, to give unto it the cup
of the indignation of his wrath. And every Island did fly away, and the hills
were not found, and a great hail like talents fell down from heaven upon men,
and men did blaspheme God for that great plague of hail.

What marvel if when the Creator is offended, all the creatures be likewise
offended? for as then the stars abiding in their order and course, did fight
from heaven against Sisera for Deborrah; so now the lightnings and thunders,
and wonderful earthquakes, and the mighty talentary hail shall, when God is
angry, fight for his Church against great Babylon. And as then the victory at
the waters of Megiddo, so these now shall not be attributed to the force of
men, but the powers of heaven. So likewise in the 20 of John, when Satan shall
be loosed after a thousand years, by whom Gog and Magog shall be mustered to
battle, the tents of the Saints, and the beloved city shall be besieged, but
he adds, that fire shall issue out of heaven from God, which shall consume
the enemies. In which place John does not understand those enemies, whom
Ezechiel describes, the Seleucidae inhabitants of Syria and Asia the less.
For Gog does signify Asia the less, deriuing the name from Giges their king,
Magog is Hierapolis the chief seat of Idolatry in Syria, builded by the
Scythians, and by them so called. So that in Ezechiel, Gog is taken for Asia
the less, and Magog for Syria: now because the Seleucidae were the most
outrageous and cruel enemies of the Jews, by whom after their captivity, and
before the coming of the Messiah, they were to endure most greeuons
afflictions; therefore by a usual proverb among the Jews, the cruel enemies
of the Church are called Gog and Magog, The enemies of God called Gog and
Magog. And why.
which John did apply to the setting out of the enemies of the Christian
Church, whom Satan in the latter days, under the conduct of Antichrist,
should stir up to war against the Saints. Not therefore the same, whom
Ezechiel describes; but the like, called Gog and Magog, consumed and devoured
by fire sent from God out of heaven, that the conquest being got not by
earthly, but by heavenly powers might take away courage from the
Antichristians, and increase it in the Saints. In the mean time one of the
seven Angels chap. 17. had conference with John, saying, Come and I will show
thee the condemnation of the great whore which sits upon many waters, that is,
people, nations and tongues, with whom the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication, and the people have been drunk with the wine of her fornication,
who after they have a long time fought on the beasts side a against the Lamb,
at last being conquered by the Lamb, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
shall join their forces against the Beast, The order in destroying of
Antichrist.
and shall devour and consume by fire the Babylonish whore, left naked and
forsaken of all men. And mark in what order Paul, so John. After the preaching
of the eternal Gospel, by An exhortation to come out of Babylon.
and a cage for every unclean spirit, and every unclean bird. There is joined
by him an heavenly admonition, to them who as yet abide in Babylon. Come out of
her my people, lest as you be partakers of her sins, you likewise be
partakers of her plagues. Here the Angel speaks to all Papists, cheefely to
them that be simple and ingenuous that they be careful of their salvation: if
the words of God cannot move them, let his deeds move them: if they will not
hearken to men, let them hearken to Angels: if they fear not temporal
punishments, let them fear eternal: let them come out of Babylon with all
speed: lest as they be found partners of her sins, they be found partners
likewise of her plagues: which the Angel does describe very lively in the
verses following. While at the last, the last Angel being of great strength
took up a stone, Comforts for Gods children in respect of the Captains.
why the Antichristians should lift up their minds, or Christians deceive
theirs. For if we look upon the captains of either side, on that side the
Lamb, on this Antichrist; on that side the invincible lion, on this a silly
beast shall fight. If we look upon the subsidiary soldiers on that side,
Soldiers.
most valiant Princes converted by Christ shall fight, on this side with old
doting Priests forsaken by Christ. If we look for soldiers from heaven, we
shall have the Angels fellow soldiers in this battle, whom we had
fellow-witnesses of the Gospel. So heavenly bands shall fight with earthly
forces. If we look for the authors of this war, God on this side shall fight
with the Devil, Authors.
power and eternity with weakness and rottenness. If we look to the causes
of this war, the truth and the pure worship of that one everliving God,
Causes.
written religion, sound faith, heavenly magnanimity shall fight with deceit,
with idolatry, with superstition, with perfidiousnesse and fear. And if God
do suffer some of his soldiers to fall in the quarrel, that they may rise
again and come to him, will he suffer his cause to be lost, will he suffer
his truth and power to be overcome by error and wickedness? Assuredly he
will never suffer it. The Christians therefore have no cause to fear, the Pope
has no cause to insult.

For the Pope alone has all the marks of Antichrist.

The Pope alone therefore is Antichrist.

CHAP. XLII. The scope and conclusion of the whole work.
I Have finished the Glass, Paul the fifth, set before you to see your self,
before others to look on themselves, wherein Antichrist is fully set down as
in preface. Here you may see contained his right and true marks, the false
being rejected and cast by. Every of them in several, and all of them jointly
together do prove the Pope to be that great Antichrist. Hence it follows
that Popery is Antichristianity. What he is, and who he is, appears out of
the preface. What he does and what he teaches, out of the Dialogue divided
into three books. First comes upon the stage Antichrist pragmaticall. In the
two other books Antichrist dogmaticall. There he carries himself like a
Rebel, here like a Sophister: there he does impair the glory of the Empire,
here the truth of the Gospel, there he does undermine the faithfulness of
subjects, here the faith of Christians. The first book does propound the
rules and grounds of Christian fealty and obedience toward Kings against
Christian rebellion, shadowed over with a show of Catholic religion. The other
two do erect the foundation and pillars of Christian doctrine and faith,
against the Antichristian heresy, compacted of twelve new articles of the
faith, brought into the form of a creed by Pius the fourth, whereupon I call
it the Popes creed. I do solemnly profess that I am afaithfull servant of
Christ and the King. I do not take upon me, being the meanest and the least of
all other, to give warning unto Kings, once already warned by the great King,
not therefore to be warned of any, but of Christ the King of Kings Let Jesus
Christ therefore be in our thoughts a while, who although he be absent in
body, yet present in spirit, has an interest, and being, yea and a government
also in the spirits of all Christians, and chriefly of all Princes, his bounty
is to be loved, his majesty is to be dreaded even of Kings: for as the
powerful government of Kings is to be dreadful to their own subjects, so the
most powerful government of God is to be dreadful to Kings; of God I say
manifested in the flesh, who being present with them in spirit, seems thus to
speak, and complain.

CHAP. XLIII. THE PROSOPOPEY.
I AM not ignorant, who am ignorant of nothing (o ye Christian Kings and
Princes) that the Bishop of Rome, my Vicare, as he calls himself, my
Adversary, The Pope both an heretic and traitor.
as he carries himself, has been a Teacher of heresy in the Church, and a
Practiser of treason in the commonweal for these many years. For ever since
he was made the universal Bishop, he has done nothing else, but corrupted my
Gospel, and perverted your Empire. And no marvel, for out of the corruption
of the Gospel, does follow the dissolution of the Empire. For whereas I have
erected by the Gospel a twofould pillar of government, Authority in
Magistrates, and Allegiance in Subjects; it is strange to see the Gospel
perverted in the minds of men, how each pillar of government falls to the
grounds. The greatest fault whereof is in the Bishops treachery, and in your
slothfulness, that whereas I had submitted all Bishops under your power and
judgment, you have suffered one to fly out so far above the rest, that he
dare not only rebel against yours, but against my Majesty also. That
therefore the ancient dignity of the Empire, may be recovered being lost, and
for ever maintained being recovered; my counsel to you is, that the truth of
the Gospel, shaken and long weakened, by the Popes tyranny, may at last be
restored by your princely authority. For what is more reasonable, then that I
should have you defenders of my glory, whom I have appointed Ministers of my
power? And if it were in question heretofore, whether that Bishop, were that
Antichrist; He is so prophetically described by my beloved Disciples John and
Paul, that now it is out of question, seeing that event has laid open and made
clear the prophecy. For all the parts of the prophecy are so plainly
interpreted, All notes of Antichrist agree with the Pope.
of the succession of the persons, the nature and disposition of the King, and
kingdom, the acts of the beast, the impression of the Character, the number of
his name, the situation of his seat, the time of his revealing, the cup of
the whore, the kind of his merchandise, the fall of Babylon, lastly the coming
in, and going out, the birth, and death of Antichrist, the last answering the
first, and the middle answering both, with such a consent and barmonie,
inferring things to be fulfilled, by things that are fulfilled, that I could
not have made it clearer, if I had named the Bishop of Rome himself. And
Antichristianity is well defined by my Apostle, to be not iniquity, but the
mystery of iniquity. For if Antichrist had appeared to you in his own
likeness, you needed not to have been so careful about the business. Now
that he does insinuate himself with a counterfeit holiness, and a dissembled
sanctity, how many millions of innocent men has he cosoned and deceived with
his hidden and mystical wickedness? But let the visard be taken off from this
hidden Antichrist, then none can hereafter be deceived, but he that will
wittingly and willingly be deceived. Beware therefore that the old tricks, and
stratagemes being laid open, beguile you no more. He faineth himself to be the
Prince of the covenant, and yet he has altered my covenant: He pretendes
himself to be a Keeper of my will and testament, and yet he has not only
raced and defaced my testament, The Pope has altered Christ his Testament and
brought in a new.
but has foysted in one of his own. He terms himself the foundation of the
Church, and chalengeth to him my peculiar title, and yet he does with cunning
devises subvert and overthrow my Church. He makes a show of great zeal to my
cross, and yet does annihilate the power of the cross. The holy Scripture
makes mention of Gods double government, the Legale, and Evangelical: The
legale which has the condition of working annexed unto it, do this and thou
shall live. Ierem. 31.31. Heb. 8.5. ad finem.
The Evangelical requires the condition of believing, Believe and thou shall
be saved. But it requires faith not as a work, but as an instrument, whereby
you may receive the promises of the spirit, therefore that is called a
conditional, this a free conuenant. Where there is no covenant, there is no
faith, and where there is no faith, there is no salvation. Humane faith does
rest upon an humane covenant, heavenly faith upon a heavenly covenant. Heavenly
faith is of two sorts, answering the double covenant: One legale, which
believes the promises and threatenings of the law to be true: the other
Evangelical, which is rightly called justifying faith, which does believe the
promises of the Gospel grounded upon my self not only to be true in
general, but does apply them to every believer in particular to eternal life.
Now salvation is to be expected of you, not out of the form of each of these
covenants, but out of one of them. The form of the Legale covenant is, as I
said, Do this, and thou shall live: the form of the Evangelical covenant is,
believe and thou shall be saved. If therefore you look for salvation out of
the legal covenant, you must wholely and entirely, and at all times do that
which is commanded. You do it not: you shall die therefore. If you look for
salvation by the Gospel, you must certainly believe that which is promised.
These be the distinct forms of each covenant, for the procuring salvation, by
no means to be confounded, yet the Pope has confounded them: Do and
believe; and so has brought in a third covenant which holy writ does not
acknowledge Thus the Prince of the covenant, has broken Gods covenant. It is
not to be denied, that faith, and good works are to be joined together in a
man that is justified, but to mingle and confound these two forms Do this and
believe, that thereby a man is to be justified, is utterly to be denied, as my
Apostle Paul has delivered. For as the Law does not admit the least
transgression, so the Gospel does not admit your least satisfaction. Now what
is more evident then that this hypocritical enemy, who vants himself to be a
faithful keeper of my will, has not only in many places ^ased my will, The
Dominicans brought in a new Gospel.
but which is far more heinous shuffled in a new will? As when the Dominicans
printed their new Gospel by the sufferance and conniuency of the Pope: as when
Paul the fifth caused the conformities of Saint Francis that typical Jesus my
ape, S. Francis typical Jesus.
to be reprinted. A mere forger, who having abrogated my will, has brought in
one of his own. A man^ testament, which is ratified by the death of the
testator admits not, either addition, or detraction, says the Apostle, much
less Gods testament, which is confirmed with my blood and death. But my
testament, say they, is of two sorts, The first nuncupatiue. The second written.
The last does abrogate the former as my Apostle teaches.


The Pope deuiseth Christ's nuncupatiue will.
But I know what vexes them. The Legacies set down in writing, they think not
sufficient to serve their turns, and therefore they have devised a will
nuncupatiue, not out of my Sermons, but out of their decretals. A fit
similitude between the bod^ of man and Scripture of God.
How far better did the old Rabins, who compared the five books of Moses for
the absolute knitting of the parts thereof within themselves, to the body of
man? whereto if you add a part as as finger to a hand, you bring in a
deformity; if you take away a part, as a iaw from the face, you bring in
infirmity; if you shut up a part as the mouth, which nature has opened, or
open a part, as the side, which nature has shut up, you bring danger to the
life. So if the Pope do add unnatural parts to the written will of God, he
does corrupt Gods book, as when he adds Apocryphal and decretall Epistles:
if he take away natural parts he does deceive the soul of man, as when he
takes the second commandment out of the decalogue, and takes the cup from
the supper: if he open those things that should be shut, he offers wrong to
God, if he shut up those that should be opened, he offers wrong to men. The
Rabins shall rise up in judgment, and condemn both the Pope and all
Popelings, who accuse all the written will of God of imperfection, when as they
judge the five books of Moses to be a volume most perfect. They who diminish,
add, change every thing at their pleasure, shave away with their censure what
they mislike, and what they like restore; that curiously open secrets, so that
their own Clergy thinks basely of them: and of envy shut up things to be
revealed, that they be not known of the people of God: They I say are
contumelious to God, whose last will they have either corrupted or abolished.
They are injurious to the sons of men from whom they have either openly
stolen away, or privily filcht away God, heavenly Legacies. Here I appeal to
all learned and ingenuous Papists. It is no small matter that is in hand, but
one of the greatest that ever was: the thing in controversy is Gods Testament.
The legacies of all the sons of God, are in question, which cannot be of
force unless Gods testament be safely kept. Herein the sons of God must
maintain their right against men, and Devils. Your Masters grant that Rome is
Babylon, the context and event convince it to be Byshoply Rome, against whom my
servant John does denounce most certain destruction. Come forth of her
therefore as soon as possibly you can. Yea? out of the Catholic Church does
some of you say? he is ever harping on this string, he should say from the
Catholic or common whore, if he would harken to John. Bid her therefore
farewell, whose welfare she cannot endure. I heartily beseech you, that you
would be pleased to be saved. Saved you cannot be, unless Gods last will and
testament, wherein the salvation of man is contained, be kept safe and sound
from the corruptions of Antichrist.

The parts of the Testament are two. Remission of sins. The sanctifying of a
sinner, which consists in the true enlightening of the mind, and the
reforming of the heart. The parts, form, and Legacies of he new Testament.



The form of the Testament is, I will be your God. You shall be my people.


Upon these, three Legacies do depend. The remission of your sin. The
imputation of my grace. The gift of eternal glory.


The forgiveness of sin is free, is perfect, is eternal. It is free: I blot
out your sins for my own sake, not for your sakes, but for my own names
sake. I am that lamb that was slain, who alone take away your sins. Are you
then so mad that you will go from the Lamb that is stain, to the golden
Calfe that is set up; that you believe the sin of man can be forgiven by the
man of sin? The dispensing of grace is not in his power, much less the
forgiveness of sin, which as it is free, so it is perfect. For I do not
remit some sins, and reteyne others; I do not remit the fault, and reteyne
the punishment: but I wash away all your sins, and forgive all your
punishment, if your confession be earnest, my pardon is perfect. What? Is it
not also everlasting? Righteousness imputed.
I have made an everlasting covenant with you, never to forsake you, ever to
bless you, and to send my fear into your hearts, that you never forsake me.
The imputation of righteousness does necessarily follow the forgiveness of
sin; the grant of life, and that eternal life does likewise follow
imputation of righteousness: for he that believes in the son of God shall
never come into condemnation, but shall go from death to life; and let him
surely persuade himself, that being now justified by me, and now glorified by
me, that being saved by my grace, he shall sit in heavenly places with me, and
enjoy the real possession of the highest heavens. Your sanctification,
Sanctification
is the second part of the new covenant, the beginning of your glorification,
as your coronation hereafter is the full accomplishment. For what is grace but
glory begun?
and what is glory but grace perfected? Eternal life therefore, which is begun
in this world, and made perfect in the world to come, does not differ in kind,
but in degree. Therefore your sanctification is begun in this world, so that
the relikes of sins do abide in the most holy, but covered; the inbred
corruption did abide in Paul regenerated, but weakened; it remained in him to
try him, not to destroy him: that corruption is remitted, not finished; the
guilt is released, but the act remains. Sanctification is not therefore
perfect but true, which inlightneth your minds to true knowledge, and
reformeth your wills to the sincere obedience of the Gospel, and therefore
does change the whole man, both the inward and the outward man, into my
likeness, by the power of my spirit, that beholding the same in the Gospel, as
in a glass, Glorification.
you may proceed from glory to glory, that is, from the glory of your
sanctification here, to the glory of your coronation hereafter. And herein
behold how ill the Pope, and I agree. How Christ and Antichrist disagree.
I set before you free remission, he a mercenarie: I a categoricall and
absolute, he an imperfect and hypotheticall: I an everlasting, he a temporary.
I require a sincere sanctification of a sinner in this life, but imperfect: he
faines a perfect holiness, but a counterfeit. Now your Christ Jesus, as he is
propounded in the free covenant, and the new testament, is appointed the only
foundation of the Church by the Prophets and Apostles, upon whom they are
taught to build their good works, as gold, silver, and precious stones, as the
superficies fit for that golden, and precious foundation: but they deny good
works to be the foundation it self, because your works be they never so
glorious, cannot endure the weight, and burden of the kingdom of heaven. They
make Christ alone, even Christ alone apprehended by faith, as it were that
mighty Atlas, that with his shoulders and his power can bear up heaven, being
made of God for you wisdom, justice, sanctification, and redemption, and
therefore the foundation of the whole building. Not that salvation is begun by
him, and made perfect by you; for there is one great stone of the whole
building, as deepest in the foundation, so chiefest in the corner; as the
ground and beginning, so the roof and accomplishment of salvation. Which your
Pope has not only deformed with wood, hay, and chafe built upon it, that is,
with foolish and absurd doctrines, differing from the foundation, but with
wicked and pestilent doctrines overthrowing the foundation, and by that means
has most wickedly taken away the beginning, matter, form, instrument, and end
of salvation. The causes of salvation.
For whereas the holy Scripture does appoint the free mercy of God, the
efficient cause of righteousness; the meritorious my obedience both active and
passive; the formal, the imputation thereof by the Holy Ghost; the
isntrumental, faith conceived out of Gods word, founded upon a free promise;
the final, the glory of Gods divine mercy and justice: when as the Pope does
overthrow all the foundations of salvation, then does he take and stop from
you all the means and lights of comfort. While I set before you eternal life
(...) that is a reward of grace, he makes it a stipend for work: that I make a
gift, he makes a debt: that I make a patrimony, he makes a stipend; what I
make due to adoption, he makes as paid for obedience. He does not say it to
him that is obedient, which is very true, but for obedience, which is very
false: that he forsooth might set my gifts to sale, and by that means deprive
me of glory, and you of peace. From whence it does arise that the Roman
Antichrist (let him pretend what he will) is a breaker of Gods covenant, a
corrupter of his will, a subuerter of the foundation, being full of Satan,
being busy about this one thing, to bring destruction to my Churches, and
damnation to your souls. Is it any marvel then if he bring destruction to
bodies, and overthrow to Empires? Papists, as Dogs.
when as he secretly sends in his runnagate Priests into your Kingdoms, who as
mad dogs, with their infamous libels may rent in sunder the good name, and fame
of Kings, and bring them into hatred and contempt of others. Who as subtle
Foxes, Foxes.
do with their cunning sleights alienate the Kings subjects from the faith of
their obedience due by my commandment, and to be performed by their oath.
Wolves.
And as cruel Wolves after they have taken away the Kings good name by false
calumniations, and drawn away the Kings subjects from their fealty and
obedience, do spill the Kings blood by what means soever, either by open
rebellions, or secret conspiracies, and defend it to be a deed most lawful and
meritorious. They show their dogs tooth by railing, their fox-like subtletie by
equiuocating, and their woluish cruelty by conspiring. They do nothing else
but deceive the simple, bite them that be sincere, and devour those that be
innocent. They pretend faith, but they teach perjury: They say they reconcile
men to Christ, but in deed reconcile them to Antichrist: in the mean while
whom they get to adhere to the Pope, they draw from the King. For while they
build up spiritual obedience, they cast down the civil: is not this the
quality of a Fox? They set upon those that be weakest, that they may overcome
the strongest, as the Serpent seduced Eve, that Eve might seduce Adam; so these
Serpents set upon wives, that the wives may deceive their husbands; they catch
after women, that they may entangle young men, in whom is greater vigor, and
heat to commit any wicked enterprise. So they have a school full of masculine
women, and feminine men; does not here appear to you the wiliness of the
serpent? Now with what vilanous slanders these curres have abused Princes, both
living and dead, being the excellencies and glories of the earth, witness those
infinite libels cast out against Elizabeth Queen of England, and James King of
Great Britain. What marvel is it if they rail upon holy Doctors, that do
but write against them, when they revile great Princes that can proscribe them?
But that is no marvel, that they spare not the good name of a King, when they
spare not his blood. For they be not only biting dogs, but devouring wolves,
as appears not only by the gunpowder Treason, I should have said the Jesuits
treason, but by the cruel death of Henry the third and fourth Kings of France.
An exhortation to Princes.
I am grieved at your sluggishnes; I am grieved at your slavery, o ye Kings
and Princes, who do endure such sowers of sedition, such teachers of perjury,
such authors of King-killing. Beware of these dogs, catch these foxes, drive
away these wolves, as my spirit has advised you; to whom slandering is a
sport, consening is a game, rebellion and conspiracies is meat and drink.
Foresee that your patience be no longer hurtful, both to you and me. Awake out
of sleep at the last, and defend my glory together with your own safety,
take the cause of the Gospel in hand, and laying aside Antichrist, put on
Christ Jesus, not a false and a feigned Jesus, as he is devised by that
Apostata, but true and right Jesus, as he is preached by the Apostle. Do no
longer hold shadows for bodies, shows for substances, prefer not things
vain before those that be sound, nor things frail before eternal. Vain and
frail is the outward show of Christ, which deceiues the eyes, sound and
eternal is the truth that feeds the souls: it is not the form but the power
of the Cross that brings salvation. Let not the glistering show of Antichrist,
which wrongs you being alive, and cannot help you being dead, deceive your
eyes, that it may keep you from Christ, from whom you may expect comfort in
life, and true rest in death. Whereby their madness seems the more, who
groueling upon the ground, so dote upon Antichrist, that they neglect the faith
of Christ, his name only being retained, who cannot feel the saving force of
the Cross, nor the inward power of the Spirit, nor the heavenly light of the
Gospel, nor the spiritual glory of my kingdom: As if my estate, base and
contemptible, in whom there is no outward form, nor show to be desired, as my
Prophet Esaias said, had caused you to turn both your looking and your liking
from me: or as if I had suffered the most grievous anguishes of the soul, and
the most bitter tortures of the body for mine own sake, and had not been
wounded for your transgressions, and broken for your sins, that the
chastisement of your peace might reside upon me, and salvation out of my wounds
and miseries might come to you. For this is the very truth, the baseness of
the estate, I undertook,
the weakness of the flesh I took on me, the ignominy of the Cross I endured,
for your sake, seems vile and contemptible in the judgment of flesh and
blood. But if that heavenly majesty, if that power, if that glory, which
through the veil of humility, weakness and ignominy is transparent to the
eye of faith, might appear to your minds: even as I am described by John a
lamb slain, and a lion invincible, that so I may appear to you a mighty God
in the form of a weak man. How great love and fear, if you believe either a
heaven or a hell, would the uniting of so infinite mercy with such infinite
power and justice stir up in your souls? Great sinners such as commonly
Kings are, had need of great grace, the preaching whereof shall be as
acceptable to you as necessary, when once you shall feel the stinge of an
accusing conscience pricking you, whereby you might come to heaven by the way
of repentance, that could not come thither by the way of innocence. But they
that understand not the force of their sickness, desire not the force of the
remedy. And while they feel not the wound inflicted by sin, they look not
for the remedy applied by grace. To whom I denounce that I will prove either a
most loving Patron, or a most severe Judge, with my right hand to save them, or
to be revenged on them. All men whatsoever they have or are, owe it all of
right to me: but Kings and Princes chiefly, whom by my special favor and
grace I have advanced a few over so many millions of men, and placed them in
mine own throne. To what end? to what end I pray? that they might give
themselves to lust and idleness, to serve the Dragon, to advance, and adorn
Antichrist? not so, not so verily. But that they may watch over the Church, may
fight for the Lamb may spoil and tear in pieces the Beast: and if that
heavenly quire of Saints in heaven fall down before the lamb sitting on his
throne, and worship him that lives for ever, and cast their Crowns before the
throne, saying: Thou art worthy o Lord to have all glory and honor, because
thou have made all things, and being slain have redeemed us by thy blood unto
God. If that innumerable rank of melodious Angels do with sweet and loud
voices sing of the power, wisdom, and strength of the Lamb, that is slain,
and give him all honor due unto him. What ought you to do, you under whose
purple robes, as yet abides dust and ashes, and who wear but corruptible
Crowns upon your heads, what ought ye to do in the cause of your King and
Redeemer? for since I have brought those holy souls after the end of all their
travels and dangers in my quarrel and battle, into the possession of true
happiness promised and vowed unto them: you that as yet are in the very heat and
danger of the battle, both the necessity of my help, and the expectance of
the reward, ought to stir you up to a more fervent desire to defend mine honor.
Here I have a just and grievous cause to complain, that your mutual suspicions
quarrels have made Antichrist, weak and contemptible in himself, to be so
dreadful and mighty. Hence it is that that Laterane Idol has taken to it
self, the golden head of a swelling title: and spread abroad the silver arms
of his pecuniary inrisdiction: and strouted out the brazen belly of conspiracy
and rebellion: and has moved and stirred from home, those iron feet of
violence and pride, wherewith he has not only trod upon your crowns, but
your necks. I tell you plainly, the discord of Kings has increased
Antichrist, their amity shall weaken him. Is it for your good to admit of
spies, that may search into your counsels? fiery spirits that may cast the
seeds of discord between neighbor-kings, and set them together by the ears?
Harpeyes that may spoil you of your treasures? Horse leeches that may suck
your blood? secret traitors that with fair words may cut your throats? who
when they have laughed at you in their sleeves, that they have left you lead,
and taken your gold, that they may distract your minds, and stir them up to
make war against your brethren, that thereby that Latiall Jupiter waxing
great by your discords, may leap for cruel joy at your miseries and
destructions. I appeal to your own consciences, have you not at all times
found the Popes Nuntij, Dataries and Jesuits to be such? Let there be an end
of quarrelling at the last, all these mischiefs shall be presently taken
away, and now this serpent that has swollen so big with discords to the
public hurt, shall be broken and consumed. Let me therefore be a counselor to
you, The duty of Kings.
that a true and a sound peace being concluded among you, every one of you in
your several kingdoms, wherein I have left you Kings to be my Vicegerents,
that you restore the true worship of God, renew a right faith, establish good
manners, purge the true Sacraments of the Church, call back aagaine the old
discipline brought in by the College of the Apostles, and confirmed by the
counsel of Niece. Further, that what every one have done, all the rest do
allow, that you gather together a general counsel by general consent,
wherein the fear of danger being taken away, and the partaking of sides being
laid aside, An admonition to the Pontifician Princes, to beware of Siren and
Erinnis.
the cause of Christ may be safely and freely handled against Antichrist.

Here I do severally admonish the Roman Catholic Kings and Princes to
beware of two counselors, whereof I call one of them Siren, the other Erinnis.
Siren does persuade them to follow their pleasures, avoid labor, fear danger,
do not stir a settled policy, do not break truce with their old friend
and companion the Pope, that they go not about to mend any mischief, that is
almost past help. For they cannot, she says, cast off the Pope though they
would. Can they not? What cannot the arm of a King bring to pass, being
strengthened with the arm of God? from thence faith does arise, from faith the
magnanimity of kings, whereof that drives away blind superstition, this base
sluggishnesse and cowardice. That makes them to discern, this makes them to
withstand all human hindrances, so that they may cast off the Pope as easily
as an old heavy gown. It is a reproach for the Popish Kings to say, that the
mischief is greater then can be remedied, that as yet they cannot mend it?
That they cannot cast out the Pope if they would. Could the Princes of
Germany, could the Kings of Denmark, Scotland and Sueuland, that I may not
speak of a great part of France, Heluetia, Polonia, Bohemia, and Pannonia. The
Kings of England could, the Father, the young Son and the Daughter, even then
when all their neighbors abroad were alienated from them, when at home they
had a seditious clergy, and a superstitious people, even then did the holy
courage of a Man, a Child and a Woman break through, and pass over all humane
lets and impediments whatsoever. Let it be a shame for Popish Princes, both
young men and ancient men, not to be able to do that which a Child and a
Woman were able to do. But Siren perhaps will whisper, that it is not good
stirring of Paul the fifth, being full of Gregory's, Alexanders, Bonifaces and
Iulij. O what foolish fear is that, so to take heed that they fear a
mischief, which when they are able to put it clean away, they pull it and
draw it upon them? But some will not cast off the Pope if they could. They
think it a necessary evil for Kings to bridle their subjects, and for subjects
to bridle their Kings, To whom Christ does seem more hard and rigorous, as he
that never dispenses with sin, and does remit nothing, but to him that
earnestly repents. They have need therefore of a gentle and a cockering
Antichrist: who may dispense with adultery and incest, and may approve and
allow of marriages forbidden by the Law of God. As the fashion of the world is
now adays, license is to be given to sinning; so sin does make the Pope
necessary. Unhappy necessity, which necessarily brings damnation to a man. He
does worthily love his sin, who while he keeps that, loses his soul. He
rates his short life at too high a price, who that while he may live a while
after his own lust, does lose life eternal. In the mean time, while
Antichrist does constrain them with so extreme necessity, what a heavy
burden does he lay upon them? that he seems to bind them with linckes of
gold in this life, whom he has appointed for the chains of darkness in the
life to come. These you shall easily break asunder, by the help of God and
assistance of Protestant Princes. But the contrariety of their religion is
suspected unto us. But this contrariety is your security: for if the Popes be
so saucy to do such things, when so many Princes have forsaken the seat of
pestilence, what would they attempt if none at all had departed from them? for
if the Frederickes, Henry's and Charles did so easily punish the Gregory's,
Alexanders and Clements, even in the very midnight of popish darkness; if
Philip the Fair, and Lewis the 12. did handle the Bonifaces and Iulij after
their deserts: how far more easily may their posterity with the aid of
Protestant Princes in so clear a light of the Gospel, tame and bring under
Paul the fifth? Especially seeing Philip the 2. the present king of Spain,
cannot forget that his father who always was the Popes champion, was
unworthily and basely abused by the Pope, in keeping Sicilie and Naples from
him. And let the French King remember, that not only Henry the 3. but Henry
the 4. his father, was cruelly murdered by a villain sent in for that
purpose. Therefore the holy courage of Protestant Kings, should not move
suspicion in Popish Kings against the Kings their neighbors, but rather it
should stir up their anger against the Pope, that with joined forces they might
break the Idols head, shorten his arms, pare his nails, open his belly, cut
off those legs and feet, wherewith they may remember their ancestors crowns
were so basely cast to the ground. You have heard how evil Siren has
persuaded them, now hear how far worse Erinnis does advise them: whose
deadly music, if you be wise, you shall keep far off both from your
minds and ears, persuading you, that it is fit to raise war in the defense
of Antichrist, against your brethren and allies: for they purpose nothing else,
but that their treasure being spent on both sides, and their forces being
weakened by mutual wars, as it often happened heretofore, that they may build
up a chair for the Priests, and by casting down the thrones of Kings, to whom
it is great pleasure to lift up their shrubbe, which may set fire on the wood,
and consume the Cedars of Libanon. Now I tell you before hand, that you take
heed of that war, which these holy Erinnis will cry out, and tell you, must be
necessarily made against my Church: for you are like to have Christ himself
against you in the field. I know full well that lately at Rome, as often
before; a co^uenticle of Priests have bin gathered together by the Pope of
Rome, and Satan's command to deface and diminish my glory. That they took
counsel wherein the Popish Kings and Princes were in a league confederated
among themselves, against the Protestant Kings and Princes, chiefly against
JAMES the King of Great Britanny, who concluded the Pope to be Antichrist, and
as he rightly inferred Popish Kings and Princes were the members of
Antichrist: that the common cause were to be maintained by common forces: that
he sent in his Priests who might provoke his sons, as he calls them, to wage
war against my servants. The Kings therefore of the Reformed Religion, have
more need imposed by Antichrist, to fulfill the prophecy, and to fight Gods
war, and unite their forces and powers against that double horned Beast the
Pope. For I think that popish Kings have learnt more wit at the last, then to
put in execution the bloody and cruel counsel of the Beast. They know that
the first Beast bore it not scot free, whose ten horns were said to be
crowned, because it spilt the innocent blood of my servants. For the very same
power of the Empire, which did condemn me being borne into the world, the
Prince of your salvation, and fasten me upon the cross, the same did
endeavor to overthrow the Primitive Church with ten persecutions. How I did
revenge the death of my Saints upon the authors thereof, how I did cut off some
of the Emperors by mutual fights, how did I comsume the people with continual
plagues, how I did devour the cities with floodes and earthquakes, how I
struck and dispersed whole armies with thundrings and lightnings cast from
heaven, their stories do well declare. As many creatures as I had, so many
viols I had of my raging wrath, which I powered out upon mine and my servants
enemies. But some of you will say, Those were Pagans that did kill, and
Christians that were killed: we are Catholics which do punish, they are
heretics which are punished They are as certainly heretics as you are
Catholics. You Catholics? I would you were Christians, they be not words, but
deeds must make this good. You carry the name of Christ, I confess: but you
play the Pagans under the name of Christ. Are they heretics? True as I am an
heretic, that call all things to the rule of the Word. But Antichrist does
allege Scripture also: true, as the Devil did allege them misunderstood.
Who as he enticed the Jews to kill me, shadowed out and promised in the
Prophetical Scriptures, to be the Messiah, so he has moved many Catholics
in name, in truth most heretical heretics, the bond slaves of Antichrist, to
burn both my servants and their books, and they blot out as much as lay in
them, by their cunning, and their power, the faith and the Church, whose
quarrel I often revenged with a high hand stretched from heaven. I will give
you one notable example After that the Counsel of Constance had condemned to
the fire, those two my servants, Hu^ and Hierome, the Pope sent two Erinnes
into Germany, the Cardinal of Winchester, and the Cardinal of Saint Angelo:
who when they had called back Sigismund the Emperor, from making war
against the Turks, they incited him to bear arms against the Bohemians, the
new professors of my Gospel, and brought into the field three other great
Germane Princes, with all their forces: will you hear the issue of their whole
fight and passage? The Bohemians leuy an army, come into the field, strike up
the alarm, they had scarce come to handy gripes, but the King, and the Princes
being stroke with a causlesse sudden fear, in their rage crying out to their
soldiers to stand to it and fight did cowardly and beastly fly away: five
times they made inrodes into Bohemia, and five times they were discomfited. And
so not long after three several Popes the Authors of this tragedy, and those
two diuilish Cardinals not without great shame, and sorrow came to a fearful
end. In all which occurrences he that does not behold the hand of God, is
blind, he that does not fear it is wicked. I pass over that invincible
Spanish Armado, which being gathered together by the instigation of Priests,
was dispersed by the winds, swallowed up by the seas, and brought to confusion
by the hand of God. What? do you think that Gods hand is shortened? or do you
think that God has left off to defend his servants? Infinite be the examples
of Gods power, which God has showed both in former ages, and often in this
present age in the defense of the Church against her mightiest enemies. Let
things to come be taught by things past. And if those former tyrants, or those
that followed had gone unpunished for their wickedness, there had been cause
for Antichrist, with all his faction to have rejoiced in their sin: there had
been some reason, that the Kings of the earth had promised to themselves
impunitie, who had bestowed all their might, in building up and enlarging the
Kingdom of the two horned beast. Now that I have first cracked and broken to
pieces the ten crowned and bloody horns, and after have scattered both by land
and sea the smokie slaves of the second beast, what at last shall become of
Antichrist is declared in the sixth seal. But what in the mean time may
Antichrists soldiers hope for, who being set on fire by these fire brandes did
turn all their forces to do mischief? I do advise you therefore, ye popish
Kings and Princes, that ye depart out of Babylon, as fast as you can, then that
being converted to me, you make war with united forces in the quarrel of the
Church against Antichrist, at least that you give no ear to these Syrenes or
Erinnes which will bring destruction, both to your souls and bodies. On my
word the Bishop of Rome, and the great Antichrist are terms conuertible. The
decree of God stands fast for ever, that the Bishop shall be consumed by
those Kings, by whom he was adored. You cannot serve me and the Pope, with
whom peace being made by you, see if it be not to be called peace rather then a
compact of slavery. From whence if I cannot draw the popish Kings and
Princes, I will for all that warn you ye Kings and Princes Protestants, that
you prefer a holy war before a wicked league with the Pope, and think those
arms to be holy, when there is no hope left but in arms. And take heed that
being deceived with an opinion of a false peace you be not on a sudden
brought to ruin. I wish you may be at peace with neighbor Kings, and
neighbor Kings with you, but at no hand have peace with the Roman Antichrist.
Why so? it is wicked; it is dangerous, it cannot hold. It is wicked; what
peace, what consent, what agreement can be with the holy scriptures and man's
traditions, with free will and Gods grace, with inherent justice, and imputed
righteousness, with man's satisfactions and my blood procuring their salvation?
what holy society and unity can there be with the invocation of dead Saints,
and the prayers to the living God, with the popish Mass and the Lords supper,
with Christian faith and Antichristian distrust? You see it is wicked, now
mark how dangerous. Sweet is the name of peace and the opinion of unity is
delightsome. But what true Christian does doubt, that that bond of peace is
most sure, which is knit together with the truth and unity of the Spirit.
Whence it follows that sweet destruction is included in that peace which is
made with falsehood. I add that there cannot possibly be peace between the
seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent: between the lamb and
Antichrist: between those where God has set everlasting hatreds. Fire and
water will better agree then Christ and Antichrist: wherefore I advise
Protestant Kings and Princes, that they make perfect that reformation of the
Church by my help, which by my help they have begun. First that they
compose all home differences chiefly in the Articles of the doctrine of the
Gospel with quiet and Christian conference: for it is to be feared that
inward dissension will bring back again the outward enemy. Secondly, that
they resist the common Adversary with common help and counsel, for there is
danger that if every one resist not, all will be surprised. Thirdly, that they
may the better defend their Christ, let them at once set upon Antichrist: for
he has more courage that does invade, then he that does defend. Lastly if
they cannot in all points fulfill the prophecy, yet let them banish the beast
out of their Dominions. For it is impossible that Christ and Antichrist should
dwell together. In the end I advise both sides that in the deliberation of this
great business they prefer not worldly wisdom, before heavenly wisdom,
secondly that the evil custom of men, be not prejudicial to the eternal
truth of God. Thirdly, that sluggish doubtfulnesse do not put of, and
procrastinate this so noble and so worthy an enterprise. Lastly that the
deceitful condition of peace with Antichrist, do not cross the desire of
recovering liberty. So that every one of you being content with his own
kingdom and territories, shall not busy himself about inuading others, but
will cast about how he may prevail and overthrow the Devil, and his eldest
son the Roman Antichrist, i. not one wicked man, but all the Kingdom of
unrighteousness. Every one of you have a just cause of his own, and now you
have a fair offer made you. The truce made between Caesar and the Turk,
offers a fit occasion to repress the insolency of this Bishop after you
will more easily repel the Turk. And seeing you have both a just quarrel,
and fit opportunity against the beast, let there not be wanting a will in you.

If Christ the Savior, o ye renowned Kings and Princes do speak thus secretly
unto you, and inwardly warn you, shall he not persuade you, though he were not
of power to punish you? The rather seeing he has showed, that the Pope is a
Capital enemy to Gods testament, and kingly government. The Pope has cast
such proiects, and Rome takes such counsels that kingly Majesty, and popelike
Majesty cannot long stand together. Our sins makes the Bishop great, who
if he rise to that greatness which he aims at in his mind, Kings of
necessity must fall to the ground. My Dialogue shall make it plain, if it
please you to vouchsafe to read it, wherein pragmaticall Antichrist first
enters the stage.

Glory to God.
PRAGMATICALL ANTICHRIST, OR HJLDEBRAND BROVGHT TO LIFE: OR The first Dialogue
of Christian obedience due to Kings against Antichristian rebellion covered
under the show of Catholic RELIGION.
The Speakers be six. 1. MICHAEL CALANDER. 2. William Argentine two noble
Roman Catholics, Laickes as they be termed, one more gentle, the other more
fierce. 3. George Velbacel an old Priest, Calanders Confessor. 4. Robert
Saturnine a Jesuit Argentines Guest: one more mild and moderate, the other
more violent and bitter. 5. Antonius Patriotta a Professor of the reformed
Divinity. 6. Carolus Regius a common Lawyer, either of them a Maintainer of
our Religion, Country, and King.


AFter that Paul the fifth had sent two bulls into England wherein he Easter
Term that two Lay noble Romane-Catholickes Michael Calander, and William
Argentine, went aside out of the city into their country house to advise about
their affairs. It was said that old George Velbacell the Archpriest, whom age
and custom had made more mild and gentle went, with them together with his
keeper, that he might ease the trouble of his long imprisonment with some
country delight. There followed not long after a wandering Jesuit younger in
years, a man of a fiery spirit, his name was Robert Saturnine. He, that he
might conceal his Priesthood, covered his bald pate with a Gregorian, or
periwigge, and seemed by his attire to be a Courtier, There happened at that
time to arrive to Calander a man full of courtesy and hospitality Antonius
Patriotta and Charolus Regius one of them a Doctor in Divinity, the other a
great Counselor at Law, both of them an adversary to Popery, yet so that
they could find in their hearts to love the person of a Papist, if they
thought him an honest man, and a faithful subject to their King and Country.
They came of purpose to persuade Calander their old acquaintance, to take the
Oath of supremacy, if it might be: if not, at least the oath of Allegiance:
lest if he did refuse it, he might give just occasion to our worthy King to be
alienated in mind from him, and so might bring some trouble to that Noble and
ancient Family.

Calander upon a scruple of conscience which the Popes two bulls did seem to
inflict to the superstitious old man, Patriotta said, that he took a pause
for a while, and to have answered at the last with tears in his eyes: Let us
lay aside for a time these sad discourses Antonie and Charles, and let me lead
you being weary of your journey into your chamber where you may repose and
refresh your selves before supper.

And that you may not be ignorant, what guests you are like to find in my
house, I dare be bold to tell you, whom ever I have found my trusty and
faithful friends, to have been earnest Disputants, not dangerous informers,
and to have gauled the Papists not with your accusations, but your arguments:
my old familiar friend Argentine, shall be with you at Supper, and Velbace^ my
Confessor, who has taken the oath of Allegiance himself, and went about to
persuade others to do the same. And he had almost prevailed with me, but that
the most Holy Father did interpose his greater authority. A third guest,
Argentines shadow, I will conceal by your leaves, unless you will assure me
that you will procure him no harm, which cannot well be without my danger. It
is his part to dispute against the obedience of subjects, which in his mind
heretical Kings do unjustly exact of them, and to object the strongest
reasons he can, for the authority of the Pope in deposing such Kings, and
releasing their subjects from the oath of Allegiance. And if you can wipe away,
and weaken his objections, you shall easily persuade me, and my Argentine too,
I think, to perform the oath of fealty and obedience to our King.

Then Patriotta truly, said he, so he attempt nothing Regius, as one that knew
the danger of the law better, pausde a while, yet following his purpose, that I
may gain a lost sheep to the King, I will said he borrow so much of the law,
that I may hear a Jesuit disputing.

And upon this condition, said Calander, smiling I will name you my third
guest, in habit a Courtier, in profession a Jesuit, Father Robert Saturnine.

And thus all the guests meeting together in the Parlor, Patriotta said, that
after they had courteously saluted one another, as the manner is, they sat
down to a costly supper; and that it might not be a dumb feast, the Priests
did wisely dissemble their inward grief of mind, with forced and pleasant
discoursing. When supper was ended they were all brought into a gallerie, and
there sometime walking, and sometime sitting, they continued their conference
about the matters in question, till it was late in the night.

Calander beginning, whereas your coming, said he, was ever welcome to me
Velbacel and Saturnine, then never more welcome, then in this dangerous time,
wherein there is a great, and a grievous controversy, not only between
Catholics and Heretics, but between Catholics and Catholics, about the
oath of Allegiance, and the Popes authority in deposing heretical Kings, and
the absoluing the subjects from their obedience due to them, as it is thought.
As it falls out between you two, one of you disswades me, that I should not
swear, the other persuades me, that I should swear. Thus we Laicke-Catholikes
are torn asunder by you the Priests, and so distracted in this quarrel,
between the Bishop and the King, that we know not in the world what to do.
Wherefore when I was desirous, that you should discuss your contrary reasons
in this matter of difference, and by the discourse, and bending of your wits,
some sparks of truth might appear to the satisfaction of our consciences: see
of a sudden there are met two great learned men, Antonius Patriotta, and
Carolus Regius, two shrewd Adversaries, that I may say the truth, in the whole
business of Religion, but yet without malice: unknown happily to you, but very
friendly to me, so that you need not fear, that your conference come abroad,
so it be done freely, not licentiously.

Saturnine; your promise made to me Cala^der does make me fear no danger from
these Gentlemen your friends. Therefore I lay aside that person and habit,
which the necessity of the time, not mine own will and desire has cast upon
me, and I take to me the person of a Jesuit. Although I have not forgot the
last Term of all, that an holy Priest condemned by the Queens Law, was
cruelly put to death. O Dracos Law, written with bloody letters.

Good words I pray you, says Patriotta, it was not Hipponax a Poet of Ephesus,
who being painted by Bubalus in such manner that he was laughed at, made such
bitter verses against the Painter, that for shame he hung himself. The
Jesuits deceived the Pope with false alarmes. C^^: lib. 1. cap. 11.
as several lambickes brought the Priest to the gallows. But in the forefront
of it he wishes health and apostolical benediction to his sons the Roman
Catholics; but within it there is contained a curse, and destruction to you
all. Belike your Pope did sweeten the edge of the cup, that the poison within
might go down more merrily. This bitter cup the Pope has mingled for you
Calander and Argentine, and the rest of the Lay-Papists. The Jesuit has wished
it to you, who being the Popes intelligencer, signified that the power of the
English Papists was greater then the Protestants, if he would that outward
forces were joined with them: as Cominaeus writes that the Burgundian spies
being deceived with the mist and darkness of the night, deceived the Duke of
Burgundy, telling him that the forces of France, were greater and nearer, when
as they took the longer briars and brambles in the field, for iauelins and
lances. So the false reports of the Jesuits, deceived the Bishop, whereby he
took rash and untimely counsel, to send his Bulls unto you. Hence the Pope,
as Pius the fifth had done before him, compiled an horned argument, wherewith
he struck his sons on both sides, and drove them to that exigent, that
either they must run upon the point of the Queens law, if they obeyed not
the King, or incurred the Popes curse, if they obeyed him. For he drives them
(whose calamities undertaken for the Catholic faith, he does miserably
deplore) either to hell, or the gallows. For of necessity they must either be
damnde, or hanged, if you believe the Pope, damned unless they obey the
inhibition, or hanged if they obey it. Is this the salvation of Paul the fifth
that he sends to his sons? is this his Apostolical blessing? Does the
pitiful Father thus bless his sons that have hitherto endured so great
afflictions for reteyning, as he writes, the Catholic faith? He has well
rewarded your holiness, that has sent his Papists in a bad cause with a false
fear of hell, to certain death upon the gallows.

Saturnine, may not only thank the false messages sent to the Pope, The
Jesuits false doctrine has troubled the Papists.
but the pestilent doctrine broached by you, for all the sorrows they have
endured. For what else could have extorted that Law from so merciful a Queen,
which you ere-while blamde as bloody? For your Jesuits after the sending in of
Pius the fifts Bull, came swarming into England, as Campion, Parsons, and many
others, and did mightily labor to put that Bull in execution, and did propound
it as the thirteenth Article of their faith. That there was no more obedience
to be showed to a Queen excommunicated, The seditious doctrine of Jesuits ga^
that severe law when it came to practice.
and deposed; then presently followed the rebellion in the North. It was
therefore your seditious doctrine that begat so severe a law. Your school has
made the Catholic doctrine of Rome a Catechism of rebellion: Your Logic
first made a Papist, and a Traitor to be all one: your Society was the first
overthrow of the Roman-Catholikes estate. For your Papists behaved themselves
quietly for the first eleven years, while Pius the fifth, that old credulous
dotard, was induced by the false whisperings of the English Catholics, as they
call them, showing that their powers were so strong, that they could resist the
Queens forces, had excommunicated the Queen by his Bull, and deprived Her of
her kingdom, and had released her subjects from the Oath of their Allegiance,
and being so released stirred them up to take arms against Her. But the old
man quickly found his error, and corrected it with his dispensation, that the
Papists to redeem their troubles (so he speaks) should show outward
obedience to Queen Elizabeth, but restreyned with two conditions: one, things
so standing: the other, while the public execution of the Bull might be
performed, that is to say, while they had so much power, as by force they might
overcome the Queen. Rebellion among Jesuits is an article of faith.
Hence among the cases of conscience brought into England by you, sprang out
the 55 Article. Where a Catholic being demanded, Do you believe that the Pope
can put the Queen from her authority? he is taught to answer, notwithstanding
any fear of death, I do believe it. For this question does appertain to
faith, and requires a confession of faith. Behold your Catholic faith, which
this present oath is said, by the Pope, to cross, it is the chief head of
Iesuitisme, which we may call the marrow of Popery. And are you now in a chafe
Saturnine, that a few Jesuits are hangde up for Traitors, who make treason an
article of their faith? And do you not think the King has a just cause to
take away their heads, Ala^us.
who have with such coniuring bewitched the consciences of subjects, that they
think that war, holy, just, and honorable, which is raised against their
Prince?

But what if they were not only messengers and masters, The I^suites and
authors and actors of rebellion.
and have entered into the most cruellest conspiracy, that ever was since the
creation, not only to depose the King, and absolve his subjects, but to raze
out the King and Kingdom, and to blot out the English nation, and to root out
the men out of the earth for ever (and that not the guilty only, but the
innocents also, according to that old tyrannical practice, Cicero pro Diatore.
Let our friends perish so our enemies perish also.) And they would have the
Catholics with heretics, The Martyrdom of the Kingdom of England.
as we seem to you, the noble with the ignoble, and the fathers to be
Martyrs with their sons. For what else was that gunpowder treason devised by
you: but the Martyrdom of the King and Kingdom?

Saturnine you do great wrong to the Jesuits (says he) whom you feign to be
the Authors of Catesbies conspiracy, for that which they heard only under the
seal of confession, thought it was meet to be concealed about the martyrdom
of the kingdom, as you call it (which God wot hurt no body) being only
devised, and not performed. Garnet therefore the chief Jesuit, did wrong to
the Jesuits (says Patriotta) who when himself had nourished that evil humor
in Catesby whom he would have to be the head and heart of the whole
conspiracy, a right Cateline, and an apt scholar (who concluded by a very
wicked consequence, out of the bull of Clement the eight, wherein the Pope had
excluded the King being an heretic, as he writ, from entrance into the
Kingdom, concluded, I say, that being entered, he was by all means possibly to
be expelled) out of that wicked proposition, which now is in question, he
sucked out that most pestilent poison of that unheard of treachery. But when
Garnet would have him the chief worke-man in this conspiracy, he joined unto
him diverse other counselors out of his own tribe, nay out of his own bosom.

And lest that living mess of Jesuits being singularly inspired with the
spirit of the Pope of Rome, Garnet. Greenwell. Gerard. Parsons.
should lay the whole fault upon a Lay-traitor now dead, let it be understood
that it was confessed by Garnet, being now ready to die, under his hand by a
voluntary confession. He writ that Greenwell with Catesby was heard of him,
The Traitor betraies himself.
not confessing, but consulting: That Greenwell with Gerard were not only
authors, but actors, who declared their guiltiness of the fact by their
flight: That Baldwine and Parsons were acquainted with it, whereof he set on
Fauxe that Fire brand in Germany: The other made acquainted by him of the
villainous treachery, came flying against the day, out of Italy into Lions in
France, as it were on pilgrimage to S. Winefreds well, as a crow to carrion,
that like another Nero, he might with a detestable pleasure nearer behold the
fire most furiously consuming each part of his country. But this Martyrdom of
the King and Kingdom, as you call it, was not brought to effect. What then? As
though we are ignorant that Antichrist does deliver many to death, and does
assign many more. That he does thirst after more blood then he does spill. We
were all Martyrs in your intention, but not in execution. That the mischief
was devised, we attribute it to your malice, that it took no effect, to Gods
mercy. Which moved the neuer-suspecting heart of the King, the most mildest of
all that are, have been. or shall be, that out of those letters whereof little
reckoning was made, he smelt out the kind of danger, and, I may almost say, the
very gunpowder it self, and so was made an instrument of the public
safety. Hence rises a double bond, one that binds the King to God, the
other that more nearly for ever binds us to the King. There is no want
either of counsel and care to the King and his prudent and faithful
Counselors: but when neither care nor counsel can prevent such blind and
secret conspiracy, both thanks are to be given to God for our deliverance
past, whereof I doubt we are too forgetful, and continual prayers are to be
powered out for the time to come, that he may alwaie defend both the King and
Kingdom of Britannnie against their secret and devilish devises. For Gods
help begins there where man's help fails, as Philo says. In the mean time
let us take heed, that when Gods providence is not wanting to us, we be not
wanting to Gods providence.

Saturnine go shake his ears, that calls Queen ELIZABETH'S Law cruel, which
condemns such Priests as have been the deuisers, teachers and executioners
of treason. And let the Roman Catholics themselves judge, Calander and
Argentine, whether in this weighty business they ought to follow such guides,
who do not only reach and offer to us and you, but drink to the Laity a
large draft out of that cup, which being gilded over with a vain title of
religion, but indeed being full of most bitter poison, the Pope has mingled
and prepared; Very untowardly I assure you. Wherein they deal as those do,
who meaning to make others drunk, use to make themselves drunk first. For
what drunkenness of the mind is this, or madness rather, to make two things
most nearly knit together by the commandment of God, Eccles. cap. 5. and cap.
8. v. 1.
sever and part asunder by the inhibition of man? And whereas Ecclesiastes does
draw from faith and obedience to God, as a necessary effect out of a proper
cause, faith and obedience toward the King, although he be evil: to put these
two chief duties of a Christian so well agreeing, and so nearly united, into
another rank of such things as be clean contrary and opposite? as if one
being set down, The chief head of the Popes bull.
the other were taken away. As the Popes bull does pretend concluding in bad
Logic, but in worse Divinity, that the Oath of Allegiance toward the king
cannot be performed with faith reserved toward God.

Another horned argument of the Popes.
In the mean time the lay people are at a maze, when they be enforced by you
Saturnine, that if they have not at all taken the Oath of obedience, that they
should stoutly refuse it: if they have taken it, that they speedily retract it.
Hence it is, that they which refuse it be guilty of secret treason, they that
retract it have their conscience troubled with manifest perjury.

I am not ignorant that it seems Distinct. 19. q Si^om.
sacrilege to you to dispute of the Popes action. Extra^. Io 22. cum inter non
nullos.
Heresy to doubt of his power, Causa 25 qu. 1. vi^latores. ibid gloss.
blasphemar^
Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, either to say or do any thing against the
Popes canons and decrees: Distinct. 4. si Papa.
although he draw infinite numbers of people by heaps into hell, as Boniface
speaks. Such an holy frenzy has distracted men's minds, that whatsoever
has proceeded from the Pope, although it be against the commandments of
Christ, against the examples of the Primitive Church, although it be
manifestly convinced, to be against Justice and common sense, yet they think
it must be received as an Oracle from God.

But make not ship-wracke of your estates or lives, Calander and Argentine, I
advise you: that laying aside all servile prejudice, you earnestly consider
what you have to do.

Then Saturnine, the loss of a man's estate or life, is Malac. 2.7.
For the Law of God is forsaken, when as the will of the chief Priest, whose
lips do preserve knowledge, as Malachie witnesses, is neglected.

True, said Patriotta, so long as the lips of the chief Priest do preserve
the Law, so that the voice of the Law and the voice the Priest do agree. But
if the Law do fail from the Priest, as Jeremy foretold might come to pass,
that the Law may bid one thing and the Priest another, then without doubt we
are not now to obey the Apocryphal voice of the chief Priest, Sum Syluest.
verbo obedien. number. 50.
but the canonical authority of the Law, as Syluester that Catholic Doctor
gave warning. If the Pope enjoin any thing under the pain of excommunication,
which sauoureth of sin, in the performance whereof it is presumed there will
succeed a scandal of souls and bodies in the city, then the Pope is not to
be obeyed.

Then Calander being somewhat moved, started up from his seat, and said, that
he greatly wished, that the chief Priest would resolve his own Dilemma, and
withal, did much commend the clemency of the King, who had used the Oath of
Allegiance for distinction sake, that he might truly discern the true
Catholic subjects from the treacherous. And added further, that it was news
to him, which he heard from Patriotta about the Jesuits, whom, if it did
appear by Garnets voluntary confession to have been the principal authors of
the gun-powder-treason, he would never hereafter receive any Jesuit into his
house: The subject of the whole Dialogue.
but because, says he, we are met together to know the reasons of faithful
obedience to the Prince, of what sort soever he be: and of the power of the
Bishop of Rome, in deposing heretical Kings, and absoluing subjects from their
faith and obedience, while these things be argued by you, that be learned on
both sides, we that be unlearned Laickes do promise you our best attention.

Two foundations of Christian obedience due to any King.

1. The perpetual commandment of Christ.

2. The practice of the ancient Christians.


Then Patriotta: First I will lay down, says he, two grounds or foundations of
faithful obedience, to be performed of all subjects to kings, as well evil
as good, Pagans as Christians, Heretics as Catholics.

1. On the perpetual and immutable commandment of Christ. 2. The other, the
example of the first Christians, and chiefly of the Bishops of Rome, for 800
years and more, after Christ.
Let us consider them both against the chief head of the Popes bull, wherein
he affirms, but proves not, The bull.
that the oath of allegiance and obedience to King James, cannot be kept with
reservation of the Catholic faith, and salvation of your souls.

Matthew. 22.21.
Why then did Christ say, Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God
the things that are Gods? by which words what meant he else, then that
Christians should give civil obedience to the Emperor, and spiritual
obedience to God. Why did he make good this commandment with his own
example, when he sealed his obedience with payment of tribute for himself and
for Peter? Christ therefore gave in charge, that Christians should faithfully
obey Tyberius a Pagane, and a most cruel Emperor, and (that which is more)
obeyed him himself, and shall the Pope forbidd the faithful Papists to obey
King James a Christian and a most merciful Prince? and shall he dare to say
that the Oath of obedience cannot be kept, their faith and salvation reserved,
which Christ the Author of faith and salvation did both command and perform?
I am not ignorant that both the Pope and Bellarmine do take it for proved and
granted that the King is an Heretic. But if the King might argue both cases
with them face to face, before learned and equal judges, I durst paune my
life, that the King in their presence would convince more strongly, and more
peremptorily that the Pope were Antichrist, then that the Pope with the help
of his Champion should prove the King to be an Heritike. But grant to them for
a time that which they miserably beg, would Christ think good that faithful
obedience should be given to an Infidel, i. to an Emperor that was altogether
a stranger from the faith, and would he judge the same to be denied to an
Heretic, i. to a King deceived in the faith? he would not, he would not. If
Christ then did right, then does this supposed Vicare of Christ amiss.

And if fealty and obedience cannot be performed to a King as you think with
reservation of the Catholic faith, why did Saint Peter when he had set down
Catholic faith in the 1. Chap: command obedience due to the King in the 2.
Chapter. 1. Pet. 2.13.
Be subject to the King as to the most eminent, even to Nero that monster of
men? wherein he taught that the impiety of the person ordained of God to
govern, ought not to over throw the obedience of subjects, nor the authority
of the Prince. If Peter speaks well, then Peter's successor speaks ill. If
Peter speak by the spirit of Christ, then Peter's successor speaks by the
spirit of Antichrist. But Peter did bind all, by a bond of a religious
commandment, both Clerks and Laickes, when he presently added, 1. Pet. 2.17.
fear God, honor the King, As if he had said, they be clean void of Gods
fear, whosoever deny honor to the King. And therefore Solomon Proverbs 21.
does comprehend both duties under one word: My son fear God and the King.

Saturnine. But ancient Ignatius, says he, in his Epistle to the Church of
Smyrna, speaks after this manner, Forged Ignatius brought in to cross
Solomon.
worship God, next the Bishop, and last of all the King.

This is a hard case, Saturnine, said Patriotta to make Ignatius Salomons
corrector, as if he had forgotten his duty toward the chief Priest. Pro. 21.
Solomon says honor God, and the King: but I say, honor God first, the Bishop
next, and the King last. Certainly true Ignatius would never have spoken so
saucily. Solomon says, but I say, and so prefer a Priest before a Prince.
But it is no hard matter for you to place the Bishop in the middle betwixt God
and the King. For you do nothing more willingly then make your Pope the
controuler of all Kings, and to that purpose bring in a counterfeit and a
bastardly Ignatius to patronize your ambition.

Peter says Saturnine calls the Prince a humane creature. True, answered
Patriotta, in respect of his nature: but in respect of his ordination, he is of
as heavenly a creation as a Priest. For kings rule by God, as priests preach by
God. From man they have their nature, from God their power. For there is no
power but from God as the Apostle teaches. As they are men they are
immediately from their Parents, as they are Princes from God. Therefore a
Magistrate is called a Minister and ordination of God. Yea which is more, Kings
are called Gods. They as Gods vicegerents upon earth are vouchsafed the honor
of Gods name. Priests are called men of God, Angels of God, but kings are
called Gods. Therefore the King is not called a humane creature by Peter,
because he has his beginning from man, A double obedience due to kings active
passive in things lawful unlawful.
but because the government is administered by man and for man. Be subject to
him says Peter for the Lord, the text has it sometime as to the Lord, i. as
to Christ's Vicare in his own kingdom: as Eleutherius Pope of Rome called King
Lucius, sometime in the Lord, i. in all things lawful, although in things
unlawful, there is a certain kind of obedience due: but an active obedience in
things lawful to do that which is commanded, a passive in things unlawful to
suffer that which is inflicted. But for the Lord says Peter, that Kings
although they be tyrants, (as then Nero was,) bearing the rule and image of
God upon earth, though they be Gods scourges, yet they must be honored with
the fealty and obedience of all for Gods sake. As an heathen man could say,
Good Emperors are to be desired of us, but any are to be endured. The Apostle
adds, for the praise of the good, and the punishment of the wicked. Hence a
certain Master of the Presbytery gathered a false and a dangerous consequence
cosen germane to yours: A leude collection of a Schismaticke.
That because the king is a power ordained by God, to the praise of the good,
and the punishment of the wicked, if he govern to punish the good, and praise
the wicked, that he is not a power ordained by God, and if he be not of God
no more to be obeyed, but to be resisted. O wicked consequence unknown to
Peter and Paul, who although they did see, and feel the tyranny, and cruelty
of the Lion, as Paul calls Nero; that they thought not that the abuse of the
power did take away the power it self, but did lay necessity of obedience
upon all Christians, teaching that it would come to pass, that if they did
resist Nero, they did resist God himself the Author and ordainer of so great
power. With what face therefore can the Pope deny that the Oath of Allegiance
and obedience is to be kept with a Christian moderate King, though an
Heretic, as you think, as a matter in it self unlawful, and contrary to
faith and salvation: whereas Peter commanded faithful obedience as holy, and
performed it as duty, to Nero a Pagan and most bloody tyrant?

Paul, whenas formerly he had in plentiful manner delivered the Catholic
religion of Rome, in his 13. Chapter draw from thence this precept, Romans 13.1.
that every soul should submit himself to the higher power? he that speaks
of all excludes none as Chrysostom observes. And Bernard to the Archbishop of
Seen, every soul is subject, therefore yours. Who has exempted you from this
general commandment? The exception is a mere illusion. Subjection requires
these three.

1. Reverence in their souls. 2. Honor in their words. 3. Obedience in their
deeds.
And mark that he requires subjection of the soul in a subject. Romans 12.
In the beginning of the 12. Chapter, speaking of the obedience due to God, he
exacteth subjection of the body, Romans 13.
In the beginning of the 13. Chapter speaking of the obedience due to a Prince,
he requires the subjection of the soul. What obedience is due to Princes.
Has he not likewise submitted the soul to God and the body to the Prince?
yes verily. But to that end he has distinguished these, because men do for
the most part thus excuse themselves, that they vow their soul to God, when
they prostitute their body to the Devil: and yield their body to the
magistrate, when they deny him the reverence of the soul. Therefore let the
soul be subject to the higher power says the Apostle. Hence two other parts
of subjection do necessarily follow; Paul the Apostle does add the reasons
with a commandment, which Paul the Bishop does not add with his
prohibition. For all power says he is of God. He speaks not so much of the
Prince as of the government, nor so much of the person as of the power. To show
that he rather respects the right of governing, then the quality of the
governor. Again if the power of a King be from God, Power from God not the
Pope or people.
then it is not from the Pope, as diverse of the Popes flatterers would have it.
Neither is it from the people as diverse flatterers of the people do at this
day strive for it. I believe they leave the power of destroying a government to
him, whom they dream to have a power given to build it up. They that yield so
much to the Pope, subject a King under a sober tyrant, they that yield so much
to the people, subject him under a furious tyrant, and as the Poet said very
wittily and truly, to a beast of many heads. And therefore the King is not
bound to give account either to Pope or people, but to God, from whom he
received all his power immediately. Hence the Apostle presently infers these
two conclusions: 1. He that resists Gods power, resists the ordinance of
God, and draws to himself damnation. The 2. that the King is Gods Minister,
and bears the sword, wherewith he does defend the good, and punish the
wicked, and that all must be subject, not for wroth, but for conscience. That
no man may think that Peter and Paul, thought that obedience was due for the
times sake, and that they wanted force rather to resist Nero, then a mind. I
will shut up all in a word. The Catholic faith of the ancient Roman Church,
as it was delivered by Paul the Apostle, did infer loyal subjection to a
Pagan cruel King. The Catholic faith of the vpstart Church of Rome, as it is
delivered by Paul the Bishop does take away and overthrow Allegiance and all
obedience as it were unnatural, from a Christian King, and such a King that
even by the confession of his Adversaries is very merciful. Whom then shall we
believe? Paul the Apostle, or Paul the Bishop, an holy decree, or an unholy
prohibition? Neither were these commandments of Christ, Peter and Paul of
civil obedience to be showed to Emperors, Kings, and civil Magistrates,
mutable according to times, but are to be accounted perpetual and eternal.

I have laid the first foundation of our loyalty, the express and everlasting
commandment of Christ, the second follows which is the practice of Christians.

Saturnine, before you go further says he, I yield that subjection, reverence,
honor, fealty, obedience, is to be performed to a King, A King excommunicated
no King in popery.
so long as a King is a king, but if he leave off to be a king, then it ought
no longer to be performed. But he leaves off to be a King as soon as he is
denounced to be rightly excommunicated by the Vicar of Christ, whereby he is
presently accounted by law to be deposed of his Kingdom, and his subjects
absolved from the Oath of obedience. And although you lay very heinous and
greiuous crimes of treason upon our most holy Father, and upon many holy
Priests, and chiefly upon the Jesuits, yet if you would think of the matter a
little better, all this smoke of words would vanish to nothing. For first I
affimre that the Pope of right has had, and now has this power: then I
affirm that as soon as he had it, he did put it in practice. And yet it
follows not, that he that defendes this, as you conclude is a Traitor.

Thomas Aquinas objected.
Unless perhaps you dare account Thomas Aquinas that most glorious Saint, and
Angelical Doctor to be a Traitor, who writes thus. After that the Prince is
denounced an Apostata, all inferiors and subjects are to be absolved from the
Oath they had taken, and from their obedience due unto him. And you may if you
please join with him, Francis Toletanus objected.
as a fellow in the like treason Francis Toletan a worthy Professor in our
time, who does thus comment upon Thomas: Note says he that there is the same
reason of one that is excommunicated: because that as soon as one is denounced
excommunicate all his subjects are freed from the fealty: The Laterane
Council objected.
and that most famous Oecomenicall Lateran Council, held about 300. years
since, of 70. Pattiarches and Archbyshops, and 400. and 12. Bishops, and 800
other choice Prelates, because it decreed, that the Pope had the power we
speak of, do you think it was a conuenticle of Traitors?

Then Patriotta, what Thomas Aquinas says he, what Toletane, what Laterane
Council do you speak of? Thomas Aquinas writ 1200 years after Christ, was
overtaken with the error of his time, and was the Popes vassal: neither did
he allege any Prophet, Apostle, or Doctor, only he rested upon the only
example of Gregory the seventh, who was the first that a 1000 years after
Christ did attempt by excommunication to cast Henry the 4. out of his Kingdom.
Pope Hildebrand no fit example against Kings.
A very weighty authority forsooth against a Kings sword, which Christ
ordained, and to whom the Church of Christ, as it shall appear afterward,
obeyed for a 1000 years, of an vpstart Canonist, dreaming in the dark night
of Popery, that the subjects might be absolved by the Pope, from the oath of
obedience, wherewith God had bound them, and alleging no other Author but Pope
Hildebrand, a turbulent and furious monster, as he was accounted by his own
Cardinals.

And yet Aquinas was somewhat more reasonable then Toletane, Aquinas answered.
he thought that no man's subjects were to be absolved from their oath of
obedience, but his, that was denounced an Apostata, that for ever had fallen
from all christianity. But Toletan forsooth, Toletane answered.
the worthy professor of our age, the Popes hireling, with less learning and
greater boldness, as if he were some worshipful Vmpire gives his sentence
without all reason: Note says he, that the case is all one of a Prince
excommunicated by the Pope upon any cause whatsoever. Do you not think that
these be notable demonstrations in a controversy of this weight? which
Antichrists hired slaves, have uttered as Oracles upon their bare authority,
against the perpetual and manifest commandments of Christ, and practices of
the Apostles? In the mean while the Apostles shall be silent, the Fathers
shall be mute, while Kings shall be censured by two of the Popes young and
sworn Chapleynes professed and sworn enemies of Kings.

Lateran Council both for antiquity and number must fight in the quarrel.
The Laterane Council answered.
We seek not what evil associates, but what good authors you can allege in
this business, neither must you strive with number, but with reason. It was no
hard matter at that time, for Innocent the third to call together 800 Covent
Priors, and their Vicars his creatures, the hungry Friars, and drousie pated
Monks, for whom it was not lawful to sit in Councels, who might prevail
against 400 Bishops, not in weight of reason, but in number of voices, and
coin any decree against Princes, at the beck of the Pope their great God and
maker.

But what if at that time nothing at all was decreed, but only propounded, and
deliberaetd on, as Platina testifies, that many things were offered to
consultation, but that nothing could be determined, because the Pope suddenly
departing, to quiet a sedition lately stirred up, died in his journey? And yet
will you call the meeting of a number of hunger-starued Friars, only
consulting, how the Pope might depose a King out of his kingdom, but
concluding nothing, because the Popes sudden death prevented it, will you call
it the most famous general Laterane Council? And that power which Kings have
received from God, and that obedience which subjects are bound to perform,
both by a charge from Christ, and rules from the Apostles, shall a few of the
later proud Bishops 1000 years after Christ, and mercenarie schoolmen, and
begging Monks, take the same power from Princes by the decrees of men? Shall
God ordeyne Kings, and shall men overthrow them? Has Gods word bound us to
obedience, and shall man's word release us of the same?

But that I may do no wrong to Gods word, I will oppose men to men, Catholics
to Catholics, as they be called, and ancient to younger ones.

Otho Frisingensis writes, after he had read over and Lib: 6. cap. 35.
that he found none before Henry the 4th Emperor excommunicated by the Bishop
of Rome, or set beside his kingdom, which was first assayed by Gregory the
seventh in the year after Christ 1066.

I have found out Vrsbergensis, Vrsbergens. in anno 1085.
who speaking of the Sinode of Mentz (wherein the Popes Legates being present,
the Bishops that had taken arms with Gregory the seventh against the Emperor
were deposed, and cast out of their Bishoprics) said, that there by common
consent and counsel was settled the peace of God; whence he concludes that
Gregory was the author of that devilish garboyle against the Emperor.

Sigebertus the Abbot speaks playner, Sigibertus in anno 1088.
and goes further, if good men will give me leave to say so. This only
novelty, says he, that I may not say heresy, did not as yet appear in the
world, that his Priests, who says to a King, thou Apostata, and that causes
an hypocrite to bear rule for the sins of the people, should teach the
people that they ought to show no obedience to wicked Kings: and though they
have taken an oath of Allegiance, yet owe no fealty, neither are to be called
Periurs, if they have such minds against Kings, yea that he is accounted for
an excommunicant, that does obey the King: that he does against the King is
freed from the fault of injustice and perjury. This was counted novelty, this
was counted heresy of your Sigebert about 500 years since, which doctrine you
thrust upon us, as catholic out of Aquinas, Toletane, and the Laterane
Council.

And because Baronius the Cardinal, Vincent. in Spec. hist: lib. 15. cap: 84.
does deny Sigebert the Abbot, a Schismatike, I add Vincentius the Bishop
above 300 and fifty years ago, by whom this very heresy is condemned in the
same words, wherewith they are taxed by Sigebert.

And if either Sigebert or your Vincentius have lost their authority, because
as Schismatikes, they were said to take part with Kings against the Pope, see
that your credits be not cracked by these late writers, because the favorers of
this novel heresy, as rebels flatter the Pope against Kings. For it is
plain that there were very excellent and sincere Catholics, not a few, as
they were accounted in those times, whom Gregory's fact did mightily displease,
and who did plainly deny, that the Apostolic See had any authority to
depose Henry the 4. Emperor, as he did, and to absolve his subjects from their
oath of fealty: as the Bishop of Mentz, who was in great favor with Gregory
the seventh, Gregor 7. epist. 21. lib. 8. apud S^uer. ad Conc.
writ to him, and entreated him to furnish him with those reasons, whereby he
was moved to depose the Emperor, that he might be the better provided to
answer them, that did gainesay him.

And Gerochus, Gregory's great champion was constreyned to say, Auent. lib. 5.
fol. 563.
as it is in Auentine, that the Romans took divine honor to themselves,
neither would give any account of their doings, neither would endure that any
should say to them, why do you so? who answer as the Poet writes. So I will,
so I command, my will stand for a reason. I did first use heavenly weapons
against you Saturnine, you made resistance with humane. Now I oppose humane
against humane, yours against yours; and I will prove it with a necessary
argument, that it was a new heresy, which Sigebert so called. If that be taken
for a good definition of heresy, which Robert Grosthead that holy and learned
Bishop of Lincoln under King Henry the third, fetched out of S. Austen.

The definition of heresy.
Heresy in Greek, says he, is an election or choice in Latin, wherein an
opinion chosen by a humane sense contrary to the holy Scripture, is openly
taught, and obstinately maintained.

By which argument, as Matthew: Parisiensis reports, he proved Innocent the Pope
to be an Heretic, because he thought it in his power to bestow a benefice upon
a child. with the same argument shall Paul the fifth be convicted, who thinks
it in his power to deprive a King of his Kingdom.

For this opinion was first chosen by humane sense, by Hildebrand to get
vainglory, and enlarge the bounds of the Churches dominion with all humane
policies and powers. And it is against the holy Scriptures, which has
submitted Bishops to Kings, not Kings to Bishops, as before I concluded. And it
is openly taught, being set out in two Bulls by Paul the fifth. and it is
obstinately defended by the Bishop, who forbids under the pain of
excommunication, that the Catholics shall not take the Oath of Allegiance, or
else retract it being taken. And it is to be doubted, that to whom the
definition of heresy does agree, whether heresy the thing defined does agree?
That Grosthead being dead seems with his definition, as with his
Crosier-staffe to strike the Pope upon his breast.

Then Saturnine. What Schismatikes, says he, what Sigebert, what Vincentius,
what Grosthead with his Crosiers staff do you reckon up? As if they were not
all condemned by the Church, because they were at contention with the head of
the Church. But that we may not seem rather to contend with the authorities
of men, then of God, Paul the Apostle forbad to salute an Heretic, yea he
warns, that after the first or second admonition, we should avoid him. If it
be not lawful to salute an Heretic, is it lawful to serve and obey an
Heretic? Paul teaches, that we sacrifice an heretic, as hateful to God, as
a great sacrifice to him, and tha^ we fly from him as from a gangrene. And
shall it not be lawful to cut of the gangrene and cast it away, lest it do
infect us: when as we are bidden to cut off our own flesh, if it be affected
with a gangrene?

Now says Patriotta, you show your self a right Jesuit, Paul did forbid,
that we should salute an Heretic, How heretics are to be dealt withal.
but avoid him after the first or second admonition; in one word, he did
forbid voluntary society, not necessary duty: familiar salutations, which
courtesy affords, not reverent observance which piety imposes; private
acquaintance whereby souls are infected, not public obedience whereby
government is maintained. It is not lawful to salute an Heretic; will you not
therefore pay an Heretic the money that is owing him? yes that I would say
you. I demand again, whether the debt of obedience be not more just, then the
debt of money? which is of greater force, a debt contracted in your own
consent, or that which is imposed upon you by the commandment of God?

Saturnine. We owe nothing, says he, to Heretics. Nothing said Patriotta?
Does not the servant owe faithful service to his Master, being an Heretic? he
owes it you say to an Infidel, not to an Heretic. You trifle. If you owe it
to an Infidel which does oppugn the faith, do you not owe it to an Heretic,
who only does err in the faith? Does not the wife owe faithful obedience to
her husband though he be an heretic? yes, when nothing may be the cause of
divorce, but adultery, as Christ teaches: no not infidelity it self, as
Paul says. Lastly, children are bound to obey their Parents in the Lord,
although they be Heretics: Therefore shall not subjects much more obey the
Prince, Lord of the family, the husband of the common weal, the public
father of the country, although he be an heretic? for heresy does not
dissolve the bond of duty, but breaks of the knot of acquaintance. But
heresy is a gangrene, as the Apostle faith. But although we are commanded to
cut of all heresy, as a gangrene, yet are we not commanded to root out every
heretic. It were wrong with the Papists if this your opinion were settled in
our men's minds. But we leave these parts of cruel Surgeons to your selves,
who presently betake your selves to lanching and fearing, and always use the
cutting knife and fire, and look not for easier and gentler remedies. But
seeing in this quarrel you seem to buckle with us with weapons out of the
Scripture, which you do seldom handle, whereby you prove that Kings in right
may be, and in fact have been deprived, that subjects may by a word be
absolved, as by a word they were bound with an oath of obedience. Go to, let
us see before you come to the second foundation, the practice of Christians,
what you can say against us in the former.

Then Saturnine, I will freely speak (says he) what I Examples out of the old
Testament. 1. Saul.
and might remove them being the hatred of God and men, the shame to religion,
and the burden to the people.

Therefore we read the first King over Gods people, because he seemed to take
upon him the spiritual function, was excommunicated by Samuel at Gods
commandment, and put from the possession of his Kingdom, although after
David's anointing, and his own deposing, he held it by tyrannical force many
years: and did often attempt to murder both David the competitour of the
kingdom, and Samuel the executioner of Gods decree, as he had slain
foure-score and five of the holy Priests the Nobites.

Who knows not that a special Prophet was sent Jeroboam King of Israel, 2.
Jeroboam.
who did denounce the judgment of God, against the King and the Kings race,
because he had separated the people by a wicked schism from the ancient and
true worship of God, begun at Jerusalem, and had erected a new altar in
Bethel (whereby the schism and division from the Apostolic See is properly
prefigured) and ordained a new Clergy, a hunger-starued, and contemptible out
of Aarons order, such an one as yours is. The sin was afterward so severely
punished according to the censure of the Prophet, that there was none left of
the Kings stock to make water against the wall. The King did very fondly lay
hold upon the man of God to kill him, because he thought the denouncing of
Gods judgment was treason against the Kings crown and dignity.

3. Ozia.
We read likewise that Ozia the King of Judah being puffed up with intolerable
pride, not content with the honor of a King, did insolently presume to usurp
the spiritual and Priestly office, being stoutly withstood by Azaria and 80.
other Priests, and violently expelled out of the Temple: and that because he
threatened and resisted the Priests, he was stricken with a filthy leprosy: and
therefore not only cast out of the Temple, but by their authority separated
from the company of men (which was a special figure of the Priestly authority
under the new Law, which may excommunicate Kings as well as others for heresy,
which is a spiritual leprosy) and committed the government of the Kingdom to
Iotham his son. An apparent example that it is lawful for Priests to take
arms, and by force to bring under the wickedness of Kings, when as they deem
it is auailable for the preservation of religion, and the honor of God.

Athalia is worthily commended: 4. Athalia.
whom Iehoida the chief Priest with a power of the Priests and Commons did
command to be put beside her throne, and put to death, and did annoint and
crown the true heir.

Elias answered, being designed to death by Achab and Iezabel, 5. Ahab.
who had cast down the holy altars, and had slain the true worshippers of
God. That it was not he and other men of God, but Achab and his house that had
troubled Israel: and with what zeal he slew Iezabels false Prophets, restored
the holy altars, called for fire from heaven, wherewith he did destroy Ochozias
captains and messengers, and anointed Iehu king over Israel, and cast Achab
with all his posterity out of the Kingdom, of whom it is said, That he put
down, and overthrew Kings, and cast the mighty out of their seats: Eccles. 48.
as God appointed Jeremy over kingdoms, that he should plant, and root them
up, build them up, and pluck them down Which power of Christ's Preisthood
under the new Testament, does appear to be far larger and more ample, and
is given to the chief Priest the Bishop of Rome, that he may in the name of
Christ break in pieces, and beat to powder with his iron rod, as if they were
earthen vessels, such kings as lift up themselves against Christ his Church,
which is his spouse and his kingdom.

For by those examples it is evident, that Kings anointed and justly created,
may of right be deposed: Secondly, for what causes they may in fact be
deprived: Lastly, that in the inauguration and consecration of kings, as also
in their deprivation God did use the ministry of Priests and Prophets, either
ordinary or extraordinary, to that purpose, that they might be, not only
Judges, but correctours of kings. For whereas kings do hold their dignity and
supreme authority from God, and have bound themselves with all their might to
promote the true religion and worship of God, and the honor of their highest
King and Lord, and to govern the people in the faith and fear of God, the
Priests and Prophets (to whom the chief and principal care of religion and
souls is committed, and who have been set above Princes in spiritual
matters) did of right oppose themselves against them in those passages, which
brought dishonor to God, ruin to the religion, and damnation to the souls of
subjects: and did exercise justice and judgment against their Princes, in the
name of God, who abused their government to overthrow the true worship of God,
and brought in and established idolatry, heresy and other abominations.

more bear with Kings in these days, who be heads of Apostasy from God, then
he did with Kings of former times. Both which be it far from Gods Justice
and providence. Truly he had left a miserable and a wretched Church as
desolate and forsaken, if he had exposed it, being bereft of the help of holy
Priests, to the lust of cruel Tyrants, that they might toss and turn it at
their pleasure, and alter the state of religion every year. For whereas
heretofore Christian Bishops did not depose, Nero, Dioclesian, Julian the
Apostata, Valens and the like: it was because Christians wanted temporal
strength: for otherwise they might have done it by right, I say by right, the
Bishops might have deprived the Pagan-Emperours, Apostataes and Heretics, if
the Church had had that force to resist, as before and after getting force it
did resist.

Then Patriotta, while in your malice, Saturnine, you

But you went about to daily with the express commandments of Christ and the
Apostles, with a few examples of the Priests and the Prophets ill understood,
and far worse applied to the Pope. How did that vnbeseeme a Divine? let us
therefore, if you please, weigh them severally.

Samuel, you say, did excommunicate Saul, and being excommunicate cast him out
of his kingdom: Samuel did not excommunicate or depose Saul.
therefore the Pope has power to cast a Prince out of his Kingdom. I deny
first the Antecedent. It was not the Prophet, but God himself that cast off
Saul for his wickedness: for it is Gods only prerogative, to depose the
mighty out of their thrones, and to raise up those that are cast down: to
deiect kings, lift up kings, and to bestow a Kingdom upon whom he please. He
sent Samuel only to denounce it to Saul, and to annoint David in his room.

Samuel did anoint David, when God did expressly command it, therefore the
Pope may depose a Prince, although God did not expressly command it. I pray
tell me, has the Pope any revelation from God to deprive a King? No, you will
say, but he has a commandment, as before him many other had: true, to
denounce the judgments of God, either temporal or eternal, not to execute
them. God is the actour in casting down of Saul, not Samuel. God inflicted the
punishment as a Judge, Samuel only did publish it as a messenger, neither as
he was a Prophet by his general vocation, but as he was a Prophet by special
instinct, appointed to that purpose: not as Superior to Saul, but as Gods
messenger, who did precisely lay this change on him, and named the successor
with his own mouth. What is this to the Pope? unless you think the
prerogative proper to the mighty God, communicable with a sinful man: which
if he take it on him without Gods special and express commandment, he does
not exercise it under God, but equal as God. And whatsoever is done without
God, is done against God. But Saul, as you say, is deposed by Samuel, by Gods
commandment, God set down the censure, Samuel declared it.

I add also out of the text, he did not declare the Saul to be cast out of
the possession of the kingdom, as you say, but the offspring of Saul from the
succession of the kingdom: for Israel and Judah, after Saul was rejected of God,
and David anointed, did for all that with David obey him many years: 1. Sam.
24.11.
whom David after his deposing, called his Lord, and the Lords anointed. God
keep me, says he, from laying my hands upon him: for he is the anointed of
the Lord: he does not say, he was, but he is the anointed of the Lord. And he
restrained himself in ot for fear, but for conscience, not for courtesy, but
for duty, when he found him sleeping in the cave, and one of his captains
would have killed him: Take heed (says he) what you do, 1. Sam. 24.5.
for who shall strike the Lords anointed, and be guil^lesse? he did not
think it compassion, because he spared him, but he would have thought it a
sin, if he had laid his hand on him. Hence arose that scruple in his
conscience, because he had cut off the lappet of the Kings garment: he
trembled when he cut off the skirt of the kings coat, these good fellows
blush not to offer violence to the kings person. He commanded the man to be
thrust thorough, who had killed Saul the Lords anointed, these appoint earthly
and heavenly rewards, for such as murder anointed Kings.

And if all Israel did of right obey Saul, being rejected David himself
anointed the successor of the kingdom, did perform all loyal obedience to
him, if he reverenced him as the Lords anointed, and condemned it as a sin
in himself, if he had laid his hand upon him, when he might, and revenged it
upon another that had committed it: how can the Pope absolve the subjects from
the oath of obedience, made to any king whatsouer, or make his act meritorious
who does kill him, from whom the Pope without any authority has taken the
government? you see therefore that there is neither truth in the Antecedent, of
your enthymem, nor coherence in the consequence.

Jeroboam, The example of Jeroboam answered.
that which your self confess by the way: that the Prophet was sent, who
should denounce the punishment in word only, not violently inflict it himself:
and did not utter one word of the schism, and deposing, but only foretold
what should follow, that Josias should ouerturne that altar, and burn the
Priests bones upon it, as it fell out 300. years after Jeroboam was dead.

But whether it prefigured our falling from the Apostolical sea, Jeroboam and
his Priests types of popery.
as you call it, or your backsliding from the Apostolical truth, and whether
Jeroboam with his altar do represent your Pope, who has corrupted the true
and ancient worship of God with unwritten traditions; or our Princes who have
reformed it, so corrupted by the holy Scriptures, it is not to be argued at
this time: only I see a great likeness between his calves, and your idol
upon the altar. I appeal to your religious wisdom, what difference is there
in the case of Idolatry, whether a caluish or a crustie Godhead be adored? I
know your answer, you do not worship the bread, but Christ in the bread.
And Ieroboams Priests might make the same answer, that they worshipped not the
calfe, but God in the calfe: whose Idolatry for all that you hold to be
condemned. But whether Ieroboams Priests be the types of our Ministers, or of
your shaulings; and whether they be more abject and hungerstaru'd, they who for
conscience sake serve the living God, or your Priests who to fill their
paunches serve the golden calfe; it belongs not to this question in hand. And
all this example, proves nothing else, but that a wicked King may rightly be
reprehended of a Prophet, as a wicked Pope may of any Priest: yet you would not
say that a Pope might justly be deposed of him, as neither the king by the
Prophet, although he were greiuously reprehended by him as he well deserved.

Neither leprous Ozias though he were shut from the company of men according
to the Law, Ozias the Leperous no type of excommunication.
whom you make the figure of a spiritual Leper, and by that reason of one that
is excommunicate, was at any time thrust from his kingdom, because the
government thereof was committed to his son. 4. Reg. 15.
For Ozias continued king to his dying day, as the Scripture calls him in the
25. year of his reign which was the last of his life. Iothan therefore was
not as yet the King, but the Kings Vicegerent, while his father lived.

Neither did any Leper by Gods law loose his private inheritance, Inheritance
not lost for leprosy.
much less a king the public inheritance of the crown. Neither did heresy
which you term a spiritual leprosy, drive any out of his kingdom, no more
then covetousness or ambition, or the contempt of the word cast the Pope out
off his Popedom, which the Fathers called the leprosy of the soul. And if
leprosy shall remove a king out of his throne, how shall the Popes hold their
chaires? that you leprous conclusion does as well touch the Popes myter as the
Kings crown. This figure then is as pernicious to the Pope as to the King.

For whereas you said it was the office of the Priest to separate those that
were Lepers, there you err greatly.

It was their office to discern the leprosy, the Magistrates to separate,
lest they should faint others. That we may therefore urge this figure against
you: It is the duty of Princes to separate the leprous, that is heretical
Popes, rather then of Popes to separate heretical Princes.

But whereas you said the person of the King was stoutly assalted by Azaria and
80. other Priests, and by violence cast out of the Temple, that is an error far
more dangerous. For they did not violently cast him out, but as the text has
it, they caused him to make have to go out of the temple, no force at all being
attempted. For it follows, because the Lord stroke him, he was forced of his
own accord to depart. And so the word signifies, and so your vulgar
translation has it, which you call Ieromes, he made have to go forth.

2. Chron. 26. The Jesuits violence taxed.
But this error has brought forth that dangerous sin, Saturnine, by the help
of your conclusion, as it were by the aid of a Midwife. For you conclude it is
a manifest example, that it is lawful for Priests by force of arms, and by
violent means to repress the wickedness of Kings.

Azarias I confess and the other Priests did resist the King, but with words,
not with weapons. And because he had broken the Law by burning of incense, they
did as it was meet, sharply reprove him: neither did they forceably rush upon
the Magistrate, or lay strong hand upon him, to drive him out of the temple,
much less out of the kingdom. But your men Saturnine go further, and from
admonition fly to rebellion, from reprehension to force, from reprofe to arms,
being cousoned and deceived by the false interpretation of this and the like
places.


How long will ye suffer these martial and swaggering Priests to abuse your
patience? how long shall this superstitious madness deceive you? An Ap stroph^
to popish Kings.
how long shall this wol^ish fearcenesse under sheep clothing assail you?
how long shall they cover their detestable rebellion against kings under the
cloak of religion? And as if they fetched poison from heaven as Hercules Aeteus
in the tragedy, abusing the authority of holy Scriptures, and examples of
holy Priests, gather force against your sacred persons, and opprobry to your
Majesty's?

This is, said Saturnine, to chafe with us not to dispute Ozias the king was
stricken with the leprosy, because he presumed to execute the spiritual and
priestly function, whereof you have ordained your Kings supreme Governors.

I mark it well, said Patriotta, and when we maintain that it is lawful for
our Princes, to preach the Gospel, to baptize, to minister the supper of the
Lord, to forgive sins, then cast us in the teeth with Ozias pride and plague.
In the mean while learn, that it is not for priests, but kings to bear
arms; and the kings of Judah, who used the temporal sword, to restore the
truth, and suppress error, which David, Iehosophat, Ezekias, Josias were said
to have done, got great favor with God, and great honor with men. But we
when we are justly displeased with you, whenas like seditious tribunes you
stir up the commons against Kings, and call them to arms, wherewith they may
vanquish the professors of the Gospel, as occasion is offered, then here I
pity you exceedingly, that from Azarias example, peeuishly understood and
wretchedly drawn to your purpose, you draw from an idle figure so slender an
argument of your outrage, that there appears neither probability in the
Antecedent, or necessity in the consequence.

And whereas you said that Athalia was deprived of Iehoida, the priest, with
the forces of the priests and people, Atha^^^ justly deposed but not by the
Priest.
Ioash the right heir, whom he preserved in the temple, being proclaimed,
anointed, and crowned king, you held that the Pope might likewise, rightly
deprive a lawful king for heresy both of his kingdom and life, it does lay
open apparently the wretchedness of your cause.

For what can you say else then that a wicked woman who flew all Ochasias the
kings offspring, one son only excepted, and did unjustly usurp the kingdom,
was surprised and punished, by the undoubted and lawful heir of the crown
the king being proclaimed, and anointed, and the crown set on his head by the
consent of the whole kingdom as you your self have confessed:

But Iehoida the high priest commanded to put her to death not the king. True:
but he commanded it by the authority of the king not his own. But the king
you say, was but a child of seven years of age; but he was no less a king
at seven years, then if he had been of seventy years. For age cannot take
away the right of a kingdom which blood has given him. Iehoida had Gods law
and man's law to approve his action.


But Iehoida when he commanded Athalia to be slain, in the kings name did it,
both by Gods law, and man's law. First, he preserved the young king in the
Sanctuary, being kept from the rage of Athalia, and nourisht him secretly in
the Lords house. Again, he was the chief of his Tribe, as others were of
theirs, that he might arrogate so much to himself as others might, in the
nonage of the king to pacify the kingdom, and to take vengeance upon the
usurping Queen for the cruel tyranny against the kings progeny Besides
that, his wife was the kings Ant, and he was his nearest kinsman, and therefore
was bound both by the law of nature and nations to defend the kings right, his
age and innocence. Last of all whatsoever he attempted was with the Kings
authority, and with the common counsel, and consent of all the nobility. For
he conuented all the captains and chief Fathers of Israel unto him into the
house of God, and made a covenant with them, and exacted an Oath of them in the
house of God, and showed the kings son unto them. And so being not only the
high priest, but chief also of his Tribe, and nearest allie to the king, nor
with his own, but with the common counsel and consent of the Peers, nor
commanded with his own, but with the kings authority that wicked Athalia
iniustly usurping the kingdom, the kings offspring being first murdered, and
extinguished, to be cast from her kingdom, and of her life. What is this to
the Pope to depose a lawful king to be murdered by a rebellious people, being
first by excammunication deposed from his kingdom?

And whereas you brag of Elias zeal, who did not Ahab very stoutly, but slew
400. Elias killed not Baals Priests.
of Iesabels false Prophets; you tell us of the act, but you cunningly conceal
the cause and manner of it. The famine of the kingdom and Elias miracle were
the causes, that king Ahab yielded up by a compact, and public decree of the
kingdom these false Prophets into Elias hands to be put to death according to
Gods Law.

But Elias you say killed them. What? with his own hand? do you think the
Prophet was a slaughter-man? you will say, no, though they were not slain by
Elias hand, yet by Elias authority. You should say by his advise, rather then
authority. For Elias was a private man, not a Magistrate. But Ahab if Elias
had not vrgd him, had not slain them. I think so, Elias moved the king to do
it, but compeld him not. Ahab gave his consent with all Israel that the
Baalitish priests, who had seduced the king and kingdom should be slain
being convicted by Gods law.

For whenas a grievous famine grew upon them, and that no rain could fall, but
at the word of Elias, as he had foretold Ahab before the drought; being
accused to Ahab to be the procurer of the famine, and troubler of Israel,
defends himself, and testifies before the king, that God had sent that
plague upon all Israel, because he and his Fathers house had forsaken the
commandments of God, and worshipped strange Gods. And to make his word good,
he offered before all Israel, upon pain to loose his head, that the king and
his people were seduced by Baals priests, and that he would make it plain by a
miracle, that is with fire sent down from heaven, which should make it appear
whose sacrifice God did approve: promising that they should have plenty of
rain, after the conversion of Israel to the true God, and that he was sent to
that end at that time. The King accepts the condition, all the rest give their
consents, and when they plainly perceived by the miracle of Elias, that the
Baalites were convicted to be the deceivers, and should have cast down
themselves upon their faces, and given glory to God, as the people did, and
should most humbly have submitted themselves to the truth of God: Elias did
advise them, to lay hands on the Baalites, and to punish them with death by
Gods law, due to such seducers and deceivers. So Elias persuaded Ahab and all
Israel, to consent to the slaughter of the Baalites with a public decree.
Therefore by the consent of the King, the decree of the kingdom, in so
extreme necessity, by so notable a miracle wrought by the Prophet, not by
Elias hand, but by his persuasion, the people did in public place put to death
those Baalitish impostors, according to the law of God publicly convicted. How
can you draw this example to your purpose? Will you reason after this manner?
False Prophets may rightly be put to death by Magistrates, therefore Princes
may rightly be deposed by Priests? I will not send you to the schools to
learn better Logic, but to An I Will in Thessaly where Eleborus grows that
purges Melancholy.
Anticyra to purge your foolish brain if you dispute after this manner.

Ochasias captains and soldiers with fire called down from heaven. How
Ochosias soldiers were destroyed, and by whom.
Elias spoke the word, God performed the deed. That fire from heaven was not in
Elias power, but in Gods will: And if Elias had not received a special
instinct of Gods spirit to that end, he durst never have called for fire from
heaven, for that had been plainly to have tempted God; which Christ reproved in
his Apostles, desirous to imitate Elias. As these were extraordinary, so by no
means you can thence draw a conclusion for disputation, or an ensample for
imitation, no more then you can allow of thest, because Israel by Gods command
spoiled the Egyptian; or persuade that one kill himself, because Sampson killd
himself; or teach that one may curse and kill unhappy boys, because Elizeus
handled forty two in that manner, that called him bald pate in Bethell. But
here I do acknowledge you to be very perverse followers of Elias, How the
Papists differ from Elias in their fire-workes.
in that you go about to use consuming fire: for Elias called down for fire
from the height of heaven, but you have fetched it up from the depth of hell;
Elias by the instinct of God, you by the instigation of the Devil. And yet
Elias did not once touch the King, much less depose him; but you went about
not only to depose the King, but utterly to consume the King, with all his
excellent progeny and kingdom.

But Elias you say did by Gods appointment anoint Iehu King over Israel, and
cast off Ahabs son, and all his house for ever bearing rule in the kingdom.

Elias did not anoint Iehu, but one of the sons of the Prophets, whom
Elizeus sent, and chargde him in the name of God, not in Elizeus name (mark)
but in the name of God, that Iehu should take sword in hand, and root out
Ahabs house. The King therefore was not cast off by the prophet, but slain by
Iehu, to whom God had given Ahabs kingdom, that he might destroy Ahab and all
his house and posterity. Now if you please let us weigh your argument. God may
rightly give a Kingdom to whom he will, and by name stir up a subject, to
punish his masters sin: therefore the Pope may rightly do the same. What
Catholic King can be safe from the conspiracies of his subjects, if once he
begin to displease the Pope? With such arguments our English Jesuits have gone
about to bewitch ou men, that they may take away the lives of our most worthy
Princes. Be they not the very slaves of Antichrist, and members of the Devil,
who do flatter the Pope with such arguments, to the destruction of Kings?

Elias did cast down and destroy Kings, that is to say, did foretell they
should be cast down, if you believe Hugo the Cardinal. Hugo the Cardinal
expounding Jeremy.
And Jeremy was set over Kingdoms, to plant and root out, to build up and
pluck down Kingdoms; that is, as that learned Cardinal expounds it, I have
appointed you, says God, to pull up: that is, to threaten the Jews that they
shall be cast out of their own country: and that you destroy: that is, that
you prophecy that the City of Jerusalem shall be destroyed: and that you
disperse, that is, that you foretell, that they shall be dispersed by the
Chaldean Princes: and that ye scatter abroad, that is, foreshew, that the
kingdom of the Jews shall be scattered abroad after the captivity. And that
the Jews should not be cast into despair, he did not only foreshew their
captivity, but their deliverance also, adding that he should build up, that
is, show that the City should be re-edified; and that you should plant, that
is, tell the Jews that they shall be planted in Jury. This literal sense
Hugo the Cardinal did give, that I may omit the mystical sense, whereby the
Prophets doctrine does understand, that the kingdom of sin should be rooted
out and destroyed, and the kingdom of virtue should be planted and advanced
in the conscience.

Ahab, not by Elias, not by Elizeus, but by Iehu, whom God by his own mouth
raised up by name. The deposing therefore of the King, was not effected by the
Prophet, but by a Prince by name appointed to that purpose. What does this
help your cause? Saul was not deposed, it is manifest that his posterity was
cut of from the succession of the kingdom, and not his person from the present
possession.

Ierob^am was by the Prophet sharply reproved, not violently expelled. Ozias,
as a Leper was removed from the government, not the right of his kingdom.
Athalia was never rightly created, and for the cruel murdering of the Kings
offspring was put to death, not by the Priests, but the Kings authority.

The second conclusion is very idle, for what causes the Kings in fact are to
be secluded. What shall you need to enquire, for what causes they be deposed,
when you do not prove they should be deposed? Athalia was taken away neither
for apostacy, nor heresy, but because she usurped the Crown against the
lawful heir apparent. God commended the acts of Ozias, but detested his
pride. Jeroboam both an Apostata, and an Idolater, and yet never set beside the
cushion. Achab the Idolater was cast of with all his race, but by the
Magistrate, not by the Priest. The causes therefore which you allege help
your cause no whit at all.

The last conclusion which concerns the persons of ferula, o ye Kings, will
you kiss the rodd, that has so often paid you, and by this your patience make
your Tutor more cursed and whip you the more? But I come now to you Saturaine.

Kings deposed Priests.
but I have a King that deposed a Priest. Whom you will say? Abimilech.
I speak not of Saul, who slew Abimelech for taking part with David. I pass
over Ioash the King who commanded Zachariah, Zacharia.
Iehoidas son to be stoned to death, forgetting his fathers virtue and duty.
What say you to Solomon who displaced Abiathar the high Priest from his
primacie and dignity, Abiathar.
because he followed Adoniahs faction being the elder brother. When it would
have followed by your conclusion, that Solomon was rather to be deposed,
because the High Priest thought Adoniahs right to the kingdom to be better
then Salomons.



But whereas you make the end of supreme princely majesty received of God, to
be the promoting of the true worship, and honor of God, and the reteyning of
the people in the faith and fear of the Lord: I marvel what it meant, that
when always you deny that a King should meddle with spiritual affairs and
business: now as if you were forgetful of your own mind, Alanus.
you direct the chief end and scope of the Kings dignity, to set forward the
worship of God, to stir up others to honor his high Lord, and to preserve the
people in the faith and fear of God. We accept of your grant, but that which
you add, that Priests and Prophets have opposed themselves against Kings in
all those matters, How Priests ought to oppose Princes.
which may bring either dishonor to God, or overthrow to religion, or damnation
to souls; I am afraid unless you expound your self more plainly, we may
not grant it unto you. For if you say they opposed themselves as men of God,
and did earnestly admonish them by word and counsel, or else did sharply
reprove such Princes, we do willingly acknowledge the freedom of their holy
vocation; but to take upon them to be Judges over Kings by their rule and
authority, and do either iudicially deprive them, or violently invade them, we
detest the pride of such a turbulent spirit.

But between God and the King there is a certain The covenant between God and
the King.
And what if the King do break some article of the league, who shall accuse
him? before what judgment seat, before what Judge shall he be endighted?
shall it be in the Court of the common people, who for fashion sake have made
choice, and accepted of the King? or in the consistory of a Bishop, who has
anointed and consecrated him? I see what you mean to answer, a Bishop, who
has conditionally anointed him, if he break the condition and covenant made
with God, has again deprived him, and has showed justice against him in the
name of God, who has abused his supreme authority.

The Scripture recites nineteen Kings of Israel and Judah, No bad King of 33
deposed by a Priest.
who brake the covenant made with the Lord, and worshipped strange gods, and
drove the people to apostasy, show me any one of them to be deprived by a
Priest or a Prophet, because they had broken their first covenant, and take the
cause: if you cannot, leave of to tell an untruth, and to cross your own
speech, whom we even now heard confessing, that Kings do hold their supreme
authority received from God, not then from a Priest, not from the people, and
that therefore they are not bound if they break their covenant, to give
account either to a Priest, or to the people, but to God. For he holds his
Crown by the right of blood, and inheritance, not by the virtue of invnction
or consecration, or of election and acceptance, as you were wont to say, that
you may give some authority of deposing and depriving to a Priest, whom you
make to be the first mouer, and some to the people whom you make the remouer.
So you make Kings hypotheticall, and the people conditional, but Priest
absolute and categoricall, being herein very simple, because that power which
you say they have received of God to depose Kings, that was never brought into
practice under the whole old Testament.

Your argument therefore from the stronger, falls to ground and comes to
nothing, that if the priestly excommunication under the old Testament was of
such force, of how greater and larger force is it under the new? But we have
euicted it, that there was none at all under the old.

Popish blasphemy.
At last you return back again and repeat that former blasphemous argument of
yours, that God was not provident enough, but left the Church in a miserable
case, like a widow clean forsaken, if he had not given the chief Priest to
her, either as a Tutor forsooth, or a Husband. That is like as if the father
and husband of the Church were not alive, or took care of another daughter and
wife, or else would appoint in his place such a one to be a Tutor for his
daughter, whom he foretold to be an adversary, or provide such an husband for
his daughter, who would prove an adulterer.

Lastly, as if Peter and Paul had dissembled, and had commanded obedience to
be showed to Nero, so long till Christians could make head: and other
Christian Bishops had so many ages consented to the like dissimulation, you do
not blush to affirm, that Bishops could of right excommunicate their Princes,
and depose them being excommunicate, if the Church had then power to resist.

True, said Saturnine: for Christ his Preistly prerogative,

For that commandment of Christ alleged by you, Give to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, does he not submit
Caesar to be kept under by the Vicar of God, when he denies to God, those
those things which belong to God? And whereas Christ did th^^ce speak to
Peter, Feed my Lambs feed my sheep, feed my sheep: did he not commit all
Christians, little and great, lambs and sheep, subjects and princes, to be
fed and ruled without exception to Peter and Peter's successor? And when as he
had committed the keys of heaven to Peter and Peter's successor to let in and
shut out, does he not show that divine and admirable power of excommunication,
which you forfooth would have so weak and feeble? for whereas you said, that
Prelates and Bishops ought to be subject and obedient to Kings, Heb. 13.17.
I did much marvel that you were so forgetful of another commandment no
less Apostolical, whereby he bound Kings as well as subjects to obey their
Prelates and their Pastors, and to submit themselves, as to them by whom
account is to be given to God for their souls: wherein what Christian Prince
can exempt himself, if he do think that he have a soul?

Patriotta, I past by that your reason, Saturuine, of the prerogative of Christ
communicated with the Bishop, Christ ouerruling Kings not as a priest but as a
king.
not as unknown, but as very idle. For that prerogative whereby Christ does
bruise and break in pieces kings and kingdoms, the Prophet shows not to be
his Preistly, but his Princely power. I have set my king, says God, not
therefore as a Priest, but as a King, he has broken and beat in pieces wicked
Kings with his iron Scepter. As a Priest he bears the Cross, as a King he
bears the Scepter: as a Priest he offered up himself upon the cross and
suffered his blood to be shed for the remission of sins: as a King he
vanquished his enemies, shed their blood, weakened and overcame their power with
the sight of this so great glory that resides in him, so you went about to
blind our eyes, while you did closely subject the scepter of a King to be
trampled on by the Popes feet.

that this prerogative of Christ is communicated with the Pope. What else? And
that with large and precise charter: where be those words? point at the place,
show the charter, where Christ imparted this his prerogative with the Bishop of
Rome. Heb. 7. v. 23.24.25.26.
For there be many others appointed Priests (says S. Paul) who by reason of
death cannot continue, but this because he abides for ever, has an immutable
Preisthood, whence he can perfectly save those, who come unto God by him,
always living to make intercession for us. For such a Priest was fit for us,
holy, innocent, immaculate, separated from sinners, made higher then the
heavens, who has no need every day, as the Priests of Leui, to offer
sacrifices, first for their own sins, then for the sins of the people; for
that he did once, when he offered up himself, the only sacrifice for sin,
that he might obtain for us eternal redemption. The Bishop of Rome let him
pack and be gone, and let him brag of Christ's Preistly prerogatives,
granted to him by a large charter, that all men may spit in the blasphemous
face of this impure wretch.

But if he have not all, yet he has imparted with

Therefore when Christ spoke to Peter, feed my sheep, he meant this, depose
Princes; I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, that is, I will
give you the thrones of earthly kings, that you may let into the kingdom whom
you will, and whom you will exclude: that you may loose subjects whom you
please, and whom you please bind: that you may punish whom you will, and may
forgive whom you will. We must, I think, learn not only a new Divinity, but
a new Grammar and a Logic also.

To feed Christ's sheep, The popish strange divinity.
and to abandon Christian Princes, are Synonamaes or all one with the Papists.

To bind Kings and to bind Scepters is all one. To exclude a King out of the
Temple, and take from him his kingdom and life, be Synonomaes with you.

O divine and admirable power of excommunication, which brought in not only a
new Grammar, but a new Logic also into Divinity?

All Princes ought to be taught of the high Priest, therefore deposed. They
may be shut out of the kingdom of heaven, therefore out of their earthly
domimions. Princes ought to obey the wholesome doctrine ^aught by their
Pastors: therefore if they refuse it, they may rightly be cast off by them.
The condition of Princes is very hard. But what shall they do? excommunication
can do thus much if we believe Saturnine. But you have other Catholic Doctors,
as I hear honester men a great deal, who weaken and take away the edge of
excommunication, for bringing forth such monstrous effects.

Austin, who thought that excommunication was very sparingly to be used
against Princes, August. cont. Epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2.
and when it were, it was not to root them up, but to correct them: that we
may omit Bernard, De consid. ad Eugen. lib. 2.
who was not afraid to tell Pope Eugenius, Therefore your power is over sins,
not over possessions, because for them, not for these, you have received the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Thomas Aquinas your Angelical Doctor said,
that excommunication is one thing, and rotting out is another: which we find
written in an Epistle of Pope Vrbane, recorded in the canon Law, whereof he
alleges a reason out of the Apostle, who says, that one excommunicate is to
that end so dealt withal, Decret. 2. part. cause. 4 qu. 3. cap. 37.
that his soul may be saved in the day of the Lord. It is used then for
correction, not for destruction: for excommunication is discipline, says Pope
Vrbane, not a rooting up. Either of them both a Canonist and a Priest, seemed
to borrow the distinction out of Austin. So he writes, that excommunication
is not the taking away any man's private goods, which the transgressour of the
Law did formerly possess: but it was the taking away of the public goods,
which he was to receive from the Church, and the receiving of the Sacraments.
The force of excommunication.
Therefore excommunication is of force, if you may believe your own men, to
shut a King out of the Church, not out of his Kingdom: to deprive him of the
Sacrament, not his Scepter; to sever him from the Communion of the faithful,
not from the obedience of his subjects: to save his soul, not to destroy his
body: to remove him from the confines of the Kingdom of Heaven, till he
repent, not to drive him out of his territories, or to loose the raines of
obedience from subjects, or free them from their sworn fealty. As Ludonicus
Richeomus has it in his Apologeticke. These agree with the canon: Render,
says Christ, to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are Gods. Which be Caesar's? his scepter, crown and sword: which be Gods?
our faith, worship, invocation, and all our spiritual obedience? Matthew. 22.


Christ therefore says, render to Caesar his scepter, his crown, his sword:
what say you Saturnine? let him take away from Caesar, being excommunicate, his
scepter, his crown, his sword, be these your Synonimaes to render and to take
away?

Christ if he had pleased, could thus have excommucate Tiberius, and obtained
of his father an army of Angels to have cast him out of his throne. He would
not: for he came to give an heavenly crown, not to take away an earthly
crown. When a certain man said to him, Luc. 12.
Master command my brother to divide the inheritance with me, the Lord
answered, who has made me a Judge between you? Christ thought that the power
of dividing a private inheritance, belonged not to his vocation, who therefore
could appoint the Pope to be a Judge and Distributer of kings crowns? Christ
being demanded of Pilate, what kingdom he laid claim to, answered, my
kingdom is not of this world: but you, Saturnine, with the turn of a key,
which others received as well as Peter, have delivered all that belongs to
Caesar, to the Vicar of Christ's disposition, forsooth. Therefore what Christ
could not do, can the Vicar of Christ do? That which the Lord himself would
not undertake, shall a servant take upon him?

Peter was a simple scholar to Christ belike, whom What Peter did to Princes.
for he did not cast Nero out of his throne with a thunder bolt of
excommunication: he did not forbid Christians from taking the Oath of
Allegiance, or free them when they had taken it: he did not dispose of his
kingdoms and dominions: he did not arm the servants against their master, or
stir up other Princes against the Emperor. He taught that the glory of
Martyrdom was to be sought after by suffering, not the infamy of rebellion
by resisting: cheefely by Bishops, to whom he has committed the power of
persuading, not enforcing; the duties of teaching, not of fighting: the use of
prayers, not of weapons. Shall it be lawful for the Popes successor, which
was not lawful for his founder? did not Peter understand what it was to feed
sheep? did he not learn what it was to bind and to loose? did he not know
the power of the keys? Belike he had not met with your dictionary. He could
with his word as well have stricken Nero, as he struck Ananias, but he
following his masters steps, yielded simple obedience to Nero, as he had
yielded to Tiberius.

How Peter's successorus used Princes.
the servants their masters, that for 300. years, even to Syluester they did
patiently submit themselves to Pagans, as Martyrs, and for 300. years, to
Boniface, they did humbly obey both Christian, Catholic and Heretic Princes,
as beads-men? and for 400. years, to Gregory the 7. they did obey them even
in their absence somewhat tolerably, as freemen. For the times of the Empire
were diverse, as the times of the Church were, and as the qualities of Emperors
were diverse, so of Bishops: while the Emperor was but one and present, the
Bishop was of small reputation, but when he was absent and divided, he grew
great: the Imperial spoils being left in Italy, whereby the master being
somewhat weakened and cast off, the servant began to grow lusty and stout, and
I wish he would leave off to continue so still.

Lest happily the King of birds do come
And take his feathers from this ietting Iay,
Whereat the rest may do naught else but laugh
To see stolen feathers taken thus away.
For surely it was not thus from the beginning that the staff should resist
the sword, the crosier the scepter, the myter the crown. No marvel you say:
for then the Christian Bishops wanted temporal forces. They might well have
excommunicated and deposed Princes, Ala: cont^exec Angli inst. pa 167.
if the Church had had power enough to resist. As two great Masters, of not
building up, but of destroying divinity have taught, Alan and Bellarmine.
Bellar: de Romans Pont. lib. 5. cap. 7.


So I believe, the Apostle Paul when he saw the ancient Christians to be few in
number, and weak in power, How Paul used Princes.
belike he served the time not the truth, when he taught that subjects should
be subject to Nero for conscience sake. For when they were increased in number
and power, if we believe these Cardinals, they should no more suffer as
patient Martyrs, but take upon them like boasting soldiers For so they have
corrected the Apostles discipline with their worthy interpretation, and put out
the crows eyes as the proverb is, and have wisely altered the rules of the
holy Ghost which ought to be perpetual and immutable, to the practice of the
Church as the case required. But one thing I doubt much they cannot wipe away.
It is damnation to resist the power says the Apostle: Moses.
what is it then to lay violent hands upon him? Moses forbad, that the people
should not speak evil of their Governor: would he have suffered, Solomon.
if they could to resist him? Solomon forbad, that none should curse the king
secretly in his conscience; did he grant by force to cast him off if they had
might to do it? Judas.
Judas the Apostle did style them fitly Dreamers, that spoke ill of government,
and despise such as be in authority: would he take these Cardinals for holy
Doctors, who persuade the people, to drive the king out of his kingdom if
they can.

Let us believe it if it be possible, that Moses, Solomon, Judas the Apostle,
when they would have the subjects tongues to be tied up, they would leave
their hands to be loose. Jeremy the Prophet exhorted the exiled Jews that they
should offer up their prayers for the life of the King of Babylon. Paul the
Apostle did advise the persecuted Christians to pray to God for the safety of
Nero. Is it eredible that the Prophet and the Apostle, for whom they would have
subjects prayers poured out, that they would have their blood to be poured
out? unless you think the Apostle was like to Charles the fifth, who commanded
that public prayers should be made for the deliverance of Clement the 7.
whenas his own legions kept him captive.

I expect that the Cardinals do thus expound the place of the Apostle, to have
commanded them to have prayed for Nero, because they wanted force to resist:
which if they had got, they might justly have gone from praying to violence,
and from orizons to weapons. O warlike priests! In the mean while what wrong
do they offer to Peter and Peter's successors, who suffered death for Christ,
whom they insinuate not to have wanted courage but power to resist? And they
make goodly Martyrs, if when they died for the truth, delivered rebellious
souls out of their afflicted bodies.

Tertul. in Apo. leget
And I wonder that two so learned Cardinals were so ignorant of the history, to
say, that Christians might lawfully have resisted, if they had had strength,
when Tertullian does allege, that they had power, but might not lawfully
resist. Which if it may be truly said of the second age after Christ, how
much more in the fourth, fifth, and sixth age, whenas Christians being graced by
Princes, and defended by laws, might profess the Austen, August in Ps: 124.
that the Christian soldiers did obey Julian the Apostata their temporal
Lord, not because as these men dream they wanted power to resist, Christian
soldiers obeyed Julian.
but for the Lord eternal. For the soldiers in their war against the
Persians might easily have surprised Julian being far from home, S^cra. lib.
3. cap. 22.
and succor. But they were, you will say, Pagane soldiers. Yea forsooth, as
Socrates tells us: the next day after Iulians death, when Iouinian was chosen
Emperor by them, he refused that honor, because he suspected the greater part
of the army to be heathenish, all of them cried out with one voice that they
were Christians. The Fathers writ against Julian, they fight not, they used
their pens, not their arms; they struck the Apostata with their arguments,
not with their weapons, as they dealt afterward with Constantius and Valens
heretical Emperors.

But your Cardinals, and Fathers do undertake the

Although I have lighted upon some who before the sentence denounced by the
Church, hold that an heretical Prince by right for the very act, Caietane.
is to be removed forcibly by the subjects. But Caietane denies that the
subjects may be absolved before the sentence be publickely denounced. Very
franckly: that he will allow somewhat to an heretical Prince.

But Alanus will have all Heretics not only after they be by name
particularly denounced, Alanus.
but by law and ipso facto as they say as soon as they begin to appear
heretical, or be by law excommunicated, should be put from their kingdoms.
For as Fame so Heresy.

Gathers strength by going forward. Alanus is somewhat more earnest in the
matter then Caietane, who pronounces that war to be holy, just and
honorable, which subjects undertake against their heretical Prince, and does
advise the valiant Englishmen to take part with the enemy against the Queen.

But after our Cardinal had delivered his opinion as Apollo from his three
footed stool, Philop. 194.
Philopater does boldly affirm, that it is an opinion certain, and of faith,
and undoubtedly held of all the learned, and agreeable to Apostolical
doctrine: that every Christian Prince, if he flatly fall from the Catholic
religion, and call others from the same, to fall presently from all his power
and dignity, by the force of Gods law and man's law: and that before the
sentence of the supreme Pastor and Judge be denounced against him, and that
all manner of subjects are free from every bond of Oath, which they should by
obedience have performed to a lawful Prince; and that they may and ought, if
they have power, cast out from the government of Christians such a man as an
Apostata or Heretic, and a Renegate from Christ the Lord, and an utter enemy
to the common weal.

De iustae abdica Hen. 3. Gal. Re. William Reynolds.
and another Saturnine or Gracchus, William Reynolds, who said, that Henry the
third French King was ipso fact^ excommunicated, because he favored
Heretics. Who after a long disputation concludes that he was lawfully put to
death before the excommunication published. For says he, public grief does
not attend for legale forms. And though in a hidden crime no man ought to be
condemned, his cause not being heard, or the party not being cited: yet in
public and notorious crimes, the evident knowledge of the fact, is in stead of
the sentence. What would this man do to an Heretic Prince, who thought a
Catholic not to be spared.

Symancha proceeds farther, and he affirms that by the law a secret Heretic
is to be e^communicate, Symancha.
and not he alone, but his son also: because Heresy is a leprosy, and that
leprous sons are begotten by leprous Parents, and therefore to be put from the
succession of the kingdom. O dambd Rascal, that cuts up the root with the
branches.

Aquinas, Toletane, and Caietane were more temperate, these go to the quick,
neither speak they so mildely and schollerlike, but they speak to the purpose.

I could name you some Priests that bear arms, and that you held, Saturnine,
to be lawful.

Very odious, said Saturnine, are these your calumniations,

But your spiritual sword must command the temporal if the Pope command,
said Patriotta. And you persuade that other should take arms, as Alanus did.
The practice of Papists.
But what difference is there between the Author of a mischief and the Actor?
Whether you counsel others to bear arms against the Prince, or bear them
your self? you do not arm the hand of a Subject, but you inflame his mind.
You do not draw forth the sword, but you whet on the spirit with absolutions,
promises, praises, rewards not only in this life, but in the life to come. Is
this your Catholic faith? Does this make for the salvation of souls? Christ
and his Apostles did instruct both by their doctrine and example their
disciples to humility, patience, faith, and obedience. You stir up your
disciples, to insolency, fury, treachery, and sedition. Good God, how far
does your new Divinity differ from the ancient? You have seen already what
Christ and his Apostles taught, now mark what they did. Christ for the
redemption of the Church, suffered his blood to be shed. Christ's Vicare as he
is cold, for the enlarging of his Empire is ever shedding other men's blood.
Peter and Paul for the confirmation of their faith, did with quiet minds
endure martyrdom inflicted by the Prince: And many Roman Bishops did
afterward tread in the same steps. But you their degenerated and bastardly
offspring, for the sealing up of your treachery did go about with most bloody
minds, to bring the most barbarous martyrdom upon our whole Nation, that ever
was devised since man was created. O unworthy attempt. Therefore the spiritual
Father of Kings, as he is styled, shall he tread under foot the majesty of a
King? And the universal Pastor of the flock feed himself fat not with the
milk, but with the blood of the flock? And shall he break in pieces
Scepters with his crosiars staff? And stall he stir up the people being
quiet, whom he should have quieted being stird up? And shall he set together
by the ears Princes being at peace, whom being at a jar he should have
appeased? And shall he set forth with the holiest title of religion, those two
wicked policies the discord of Kings, and the rebellion of Subjects? As if when
he filled all places with garboiles and murders, he shall think he has
deserved Gods favor, by the bloody sacrificing of innocents.

Sinons lurk closely among us, professing love to your Catholics worse then
any hatred, persuading them to violate their faith sworn to the King, and
hayle in that Troiane horse, full of deceit, pernicious as well to them as to
us? That have your Cursitors as Pegasus, who run about hither and thither,
quickly taking up all reports, that may inueigle men's minds, and watch for all
occasions? That have your boy-priests gadding up and down, who may increase
your number and forces, and, as Gracchus striplings, may stir up such as be
offended already, and provoke them to an uproar? That set the old and greater
Foxes over these cubbes, who first open the school of deceites to them, and a
shop of crafty devises, teaching that the Pope has plenarie power to depose
a King, and absolve their subjects from the Oath of fealty: and that the King
though he be not by name excommunicated, does yet stand excommunicated by
diverse bulls, because he has infringed the authority of the Popes supremacy
etc. and therefore that the subjects may, if fit opportunity be offered, attempt
any mischief against his sacred person: persuading them in the mean while to
dissemble their faith, and show an outward obedience to the King, while they
reserve their heart to the Pope? You cherish closely your Catelines, who when
the conspiracy waxes ripe, may be your Captains and standerd-bearers to
execute your wicked devises with actions and arms. Lay aside therefore that
visard of religion, which you have worn so long, cast away that habit of
gravity, pluck of that cloak of sanctity: appear such as you are, confess
your selves to be the trumpets of war, not of the word: that you feed not
souls, but seek for blood: that the Magistrate may distinguish between a
devout and a quiet, and between a Machiuilian and a turbulent Papist.

But you Calander, and you the rest of English Papists, Jesus Christ, I do
exhort you by your own salvation, that you repel these Sirens music, not
only unprofitable but hurtful to the hearers, from your ears and your
minds, lest you bring a most just reproach upon the true Catholic Religion, an
incurable wound to the conscience, a lamentable ruin to your family, and an
extreme plague to your country. This I had to say of the fealty and obedience
of subjects to be performed to Kings and Magistrates, ordained by the
perpetual commandment of Christ and the Apostles against the inhibition of
the Pope, and the sophismes of the Jesuits; it follows that I pursue the
second foundation of our obedience, the examples of ancient Christians, and
chiefly of the Roman Bishops, unless happily any other course seem better to
you.

Then Calander I promise you, said he, that nothing Argentine my friend. I
never doubted of civil obedience to be rightly performed to good Kings by
Catholics: I thought to confess the truth, I was absolved from the oath of
obedience to Heretics and Tyrants, after once they were denounced
excommunicated by the Pope, and now lawfully deposed from their kingdom. Now
seeing I perceive that Christ, Peter, and Paul, not only taught, but showed
civil obedience to Tiberij and Neroes, and to be so far from taking from
them with their divine power, as they might, their scepter, sword and Crown,
that under them they laid down their life to confirm their faith and
obedience. You have said that which makes me begin to doubt, of such force of
excommunication, and such power of the Pope.

For when I did diligently observe every passage of your disputation Patriotta,
out of that perspicuous and short exposition, and as it were consisting of
those three texts, I must needs confess, that the sparks of this unknown,
and unhard of truth, did first cast them selves into mine eyes, wherewith the
authority of Aquinas, Toletane, and Laterane Council for their power of
excommunication, and the authority of the Pope alleged by Saturnine,
presently brought a mvst over them. But light was brought out of the mist by
Fristugensis, Vrshergensis, Sigebert, and Vincentius, and all the ancient and
sincere Catholics, and grave witnesses of those times, as I hear my
Velbacellus affirm, at what time Gregory the 7. did first attempt to drive
Henry the 4. Emperor by his excommunication out of his kingdom. Here Saturnine
being driven from humane authorities, betook himself to divine. But
whatsoever he took, Patriotta straightway caught it out of his hands; where
he said that the Apostle forbad we should not salute an heretic, and
commanded to avoid him after one or two admonitions; Patriotta made answer,
that he forbad voluntary society, not necessary subjection, private
familiarity, not public obedience. And when he pressed that a gangrene was to
be cut of, he instantly replied, that it was not an heretic, but heresy was
compared to a gangrene, and with a religious kind of charity, (as it seemde)
sparing the heretic, thought good the heresy should be rooted out. And from
thence in my judgment concluded not amiss, when no heretic was to loose his
inheritance or his life, that a King much less was to be deprived either of
his life or inheritance by reason of heresy. Here Saturnine bent all the force
of his wit, and betaking himself into the fortifications of the old Testament,
from every place gathering the forces of examples, with arguments drawn from
thence fought very valiantly, so that when I heard him alone, he made me
consent almost unto him. But this heretic Patriott, shrunk not a foot, but
presently buckled hand to hand. He had said that Saul was deposed, Patriot as
the truth was distinguished, that the person of Saul was not removed from the
possession of the kingdom, but his offspring from the succession. But by whom?
even from GOD, not from Samuel, whom he proved to be not a Judge, but a
messenger, nor to have inflicted the punishment of deposing, but to have
published the decree, and that not by the right of his general vocation, but
by special instinct and revelation from God, not as Prophet, but as a Prophet
appointed to that end, to anoint David for the succession of the kingdom,
whom God had named with his own mouth. So that nothing can accrue to the Pope
from hence, unless he can prove he have received a revelation to depose a
Prince.

When he contended that Jeroboam was cast aside Prophet, he again denied it,
confessing he was grievously reproved by the Prophet, not violently removed.

Saturnine assaults again, that Ozias a Leper was by force driven out of the
Temple, by Azaria and 80. Priests, and that he was separated from the society
of men, and the government committed to Iothan his Son.

Here Patriott, a better Text-man as it seems, denied that the King was put
out of the Church forceably, but being struck with a leprosy, was enforced by
his own accord to depart out of the Sanctuary, not out of the kingdom; the
right whereof he reserved to himself to his dying day, and put over the
government to his son as to his Vicegerent. And that a Leper never lost his
private inheritance, much less his public. And when as heresy is a leprosy,
nor ever any was deprived of his kingdom for leprosy, and therefore for
heresy none was to be deprived. Which reason must needs satisfy me in this
business, unless it can be proved that the leprous Jews lost their
inheritance.

And when Saturnine affirmed that the lepers were separated from the company of
men by the Priests, Patriotta excepted against it, that it was their duty to
discern the leprosy, but the Magistrates were to put them apart. So that the
judgment of the business belonged to the Priests, the parting of the person
to the Magistrate. Whence he concluded and retorted it upon Saturnine, who said
that heresy was a spiritual leprosy, that it followed from this figure, that
the King ought rather to separate an heretical Pope, then the Pope an
heretical king. So that this figure was more hurtful to the Pope then to the
King.

Patriott did shrewdly re-enforce against you Saturnine, and did likewise
mightily offend us all, when you concluded out of Azarias example, that it was
lawful for Priests to take arms to repress the wickedness of Kings, for the
Priest resisted the King not with arms, but with words: unless perhaps you
will take a grievous admonition, reproof and reprehension for arms. Azarias
did not cast the king out of the temple, much less out of the kingdom. And
do you think of corslets, swords, and lawnces, wherewith a warlike Priest may
remove a King from his throne? fie upon this proud vanity. A Bishop ought not
to be a striker, much less a warrior. It was not lawful for David to build
up Gods material Temple, because he was a man of blood, and will you build up
Gods spiritual Temple with bloody hands? But I refer you to the canons, and
go forward.

For where you said that Athalia was lawfully deposed Iehoida the Priest, it
was first answered, that she was never rightly created and crowned. Again,
that she was deposed by Iehoida, not as he was high Priest, but chief Prince
of his tribe, and next allie to the king, nor by himself alone, but joined
with all the Nobles of the kingdom: not with the authority of the Priest, but
by the authority of Ioash, being first anointed and crowned by him: that
whatsoever he did, he seemed to do by the power of the king, with the common
consent of the Peers and Nobles against the wicked usurper of the Kingdom,
which had murdered all the Kings Progeny. What is this to the Pope, that he
may depose a lawful Prince with his Bishoply authority?

And whereas you propounded Elias zeal to be imitated by you, Patriott
answered truly, that your zeal was too fiery, and would prove too
preposterous, unless you could prove you had Elias special instinct.

And when you said that Achab was removed from his Kingdom by Elias or
Elizeus: it is partly true, partly false. It is true that you say, he was
removed, but by Iehu whom one of the sons of the Prophets did annoint by
Gods special commandment, which God gave to Elizeus, that Iehu should root
out all the posterity of Achab. He was not therefore deposed by Elias or
Elizeus, but by Iehu, whom God had raised up by name extraordinarily for that
purpose. Neither did the son of the Prophet, when he anointed Iehu, begin
thus, thus says Elizeus, but thus says the Lord.

This does no whit help the popes cause, that Patriott did sometime scatter
abroad your arguments, as brooms that are not bound together: and enforced him
as a cripple with a broken leg to halt now upon one leg, now upon both, both
in his antecedent and consequent: as if the antecedent retained neither truth
in the matter, or Law in the form, and the consequent had lost all the
necessity of proof. So that you neither did help the popes power, or satisfy
our consciences.

For it was to no purpose, as he rightly said, to seek for causes at the last,
why princes should in fact be deposed by priests and prophets, when you cannot
prove that any was deposed.

Patriott did allege that a priest was deposed by a king, one especially,
Abiathar by Solomon. This did not only not help but hurt the popes cause.

Here when you did enforce the covenant between God and the King, your ready
adversary did demand, if the King break any of the articles of agreement, who
would enter suite against him? or in what court or consistory were he to be
accused? And out of your own grant he concluded, when you said that the king
held his supreme authority taken from God, and therefore the king was to yield
account to God alone in the heavenly court for his government.

Two pillars of government overthrown.
And where there are two pillars of government, Authority in the King, and
obedience in subjects, which for all our good we are to keep safe and sound,
you seemed, Saturnin, to overthrow them both, when you made the king, as it
were, an hypotheticall proposition, and the subjects conditionales: but when
you made the Popes categoricall and absolute, although I reverence them as most
holy fathers, yet I will speak truly, you have dealt herein as an unskillful
Physician, who gets a more grievous disease to the body by curing one that is
easier.

Being repelled from the old Testament you fled into feed my sheep, and I
will give you the keys, had well strengthened the Popes authority, and
sharpened the edge of ecclesiastical excommunication. But it fell out
otherwise. For the adversary proved that by the first words diligence was
enjoined the Bishop to feed the flock, and by the second were committed the
keys of the heavenly, not the earthly kingdom. And he brought for proof not
only Augustine and Bernard, as common witnesses: but Aquinas, Pope Vrbane,
Dominicus a Soto, and Ludouicus Rycheomus, all of them being on our side, who
thought the force of the keys to be not in possessions, but in crimes, not in
binding Scepters, but sins, and judge it not to be a rooting up, but a mere
discipline. What you! do you think these to be Heretics, as lately you
termed Sigebert and Vincentius? what marvel is it if strangers accuse the
Pope, when his own condemn him? if his enemies set upon him, when his friends
forsake him? if the late Catholics leave him, when the ancient forsake him?
The first foundation therefore of our obedience laid by Patriotta upon the
perpetual and unchangeable commandment of Christ and his Apostles stands
firm and sure; unless you think that it be lawful for the Vicar of Christ,
an holy man though a sinner to pluck down the sacred tables of the Testament,
to violate the heavenly laws of Christ, and to abrogate the eternal decrees
of God.

Forwhereas in the end you say that the Apostles and their Successors might
lawfully have deposed Nero, Dioclesian, Julian, Constantius, Valens and the
rest, if the Church had had power to resist: you would never have said it, as
your adversary rightly objected, unless you think the holy Apostles and
fathers were dissemblers, who obeyed those evil Emperors for fear, not for
duty, for times sake, not for conscience sake: wherein we heard that not the
holy Scripture only, but the ancient history was directly against you.

Bellarmine and Alan so great wits brought forth so wicked an untruth. And
that we may omit Symancha, Creswell, Reynoldes, Parsons and others of our side,
who brought all their wit and eloquence to patronize so wicked a cause with
Alan, trumpets, not of the word, but of war: and we must needs confess that
they have brought an overthrow to many Catholic families, and a plague to
their Country; but also a torture to our consciences, and an everlasting
infamy to the Catholic religion.

Wherefore leave off I pray you any more to solicit us in this cause,
Saturnine, upon whose head we see your first argument to be retorted by
Patriotta, who confessed that subjection, reverence, honor, fealty, and
obedience is due to a King, while the King is a King.

But the King is king, and we be subjects notwithstanding any excommunication,
or authority of the Pope whatsoever, as Patriotta has proved against you (as
it seems to us) not only with common, but with proper arguments of our own
Catholics.

It follows therefore, by your own confession that all subjection,
reverence, honor, fealty, and obedience is to be performed of us to our King.

Saturnine, I am right heartily sorry, most honorable Calander, and am much
vexed with all, that you whom we ever held a devout son of the Roman
Church, now to find a Renegate in the Heretics tents, and not only doubting
of the supreme authority of the Bishop, but that which is far worse, and
more dangerous to your soul, oppugning it.

For not only the excommunication of Princes, which to diverse seems to be the
sovereign censure of the ecclesiastical and spiritual power of the Pope,
belongs unto him, but their overthrow also and rooting out, which proceeds
not from the power of excommunication, but from the power of a certain supreme
authority in the Pope; either as he is directly the Lord of the temporalties,
or indirectly in the order to the spiritualties, as very learned and holy
Catholic fathers have delivered.

I am not ignorant what was attempted lately by George Blackwell the Archpriest
with certain answers of his to weaken and cut in sunder all the sinews of
ecclesiastical excommunication. Neither that only, Blackwell accounted an
Apostata.
but has broken and cut off as it were the joints of the Popes two arms, not
that of his supreme authority spiritual and ecclesiastical, but of his
civil and imperial power, which the Roman Bishop has received from Christ,
and has exercised upon the earth under Christ. But the timorous old man, and
wretched Apostata, did not so much hurt by his fact as by his example, which
gave occasion of a very foul schism to you the Catholic laickes, whose
constancy the Christian world did much commend.

Here Calander you are too testie, said he, Saturnine, George Blackwell, as a
wretched Apostata, and a Captain of schism, I will entreat Velbacellus, that
he answer somewhat, not for me only but much more for our Archpriest his
ancient friend.

Then Velbacellus: Truly said he, when I am unwilling more unwilling then at
this time, when ill hap has made our adversaries beholders of our disorders.
But because I think it not fit, Calander, to neglect your authority, and
withal have purposed to satisfy both your conscience, and mine, in this
worthy business of religion: I will do as you advise me.

Two popish means to overthrow Princes.
These are as you say, Saturnine, the two ingines the Roman Bishops have used
to overthrow Princes, the one ecclesiastical excommunication, the other civil
and imperial authority. What was the force and nature of excommunication,
they were not Ignorant, they knew it was given to bind sins not scepters, as
Patriotta did truly dispute out of our own men. Which first when Gregory the
7. was Pope, as he did rightly observe out of Frisingensis, Sigebert, and
Vincentius all ours, brought forth those monstrous effects, the deposing of
Kings, the absoluing of subjects, and the styrring of them up to take arms
against their Prince, with which this present Oath of allegiance does meet.

Whose successors fearing that ecclesiastical excommunication in process of
time, would loose not that native and inherent power, but that unnatural and
borrowed in the opinion of men, they assumed that civil as you call it, and
imperial power given by the Canonists for the increase of their own
authority, as if it had been bestowed by Christ himself.

Lords of all the temporalties, and said, that the supreme jurisdiction, not
in spiritual things only, but in temporal things also, did belong to Peter's
successors, whose worm eaten assertions, and such as long ago were hist out
by the more sober Papists, certain men, not unlearned, have lately renewed, and
have set them out publicly in printed books, for found and Catholic
doctrine, and have very stoutly defended them. Whereof some Franci: Bozius de
temp. eccles: monarch: lib. 1. cap. 3. fol. 98.
as you say, defend the Bishop of Rome to be directly Lord of things
temporal, one and the same to be the Ruler and Monarch of the world. That
Baron. annal. tom. 1. ann. 57. page 423. and 433.
Christ as he received all Judicial power from the Father, and united it with
his Preist-hood, when he meant to settle a Kingly Preist-hood in the Church,
put it over to Peter and his successors: and that as Christ was King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, so the Church ought to be Queen and Lady of all, and if the
husband must be Lord of all the temporalties, the spouse must be Lady of all
likewise: that all temporal Princely power did first reside in the soul of
Christ: then in the Church the Queen of the world, and from thence it did flow
to others, that were faithful or unfaithful, as from a fountain. Thom. Bozi.
de iure statu. praefat. ad Aldobran.
That this spouse of Christ, Queen of the world, as often as the order of the
universal does require it, can transfer the proper right of one to another,
as a secular Prince, for the adorning of a city, may pluck down private men's
houses, and may do it by Law, although he have not erred, by whom such rights
were translated to others. So the Pope gave the Indies to the Spaniards.
Isodor. Mosco. de may. mili. Eccles: page 670
All dominion do hold of the Church and of the Pope the head of the Church. And
that authority is to be considered in the Pope, power in Emperors and Kings:
for power does depend of authority: that true, Care de potest. Romans Pont. page
9. Difference between power and authority. Idem page 111.
just and ordinate from God, and mere dominion as well in spiritual things as
in temporal, is fetched by Christ, and the same is committed to S. Peter and
his successors: that Christ was Lord of all these inferior things, not only
as he was God, but also as he was man, having at that time dominion in the
earth: and therefore as the dominion of the world, both divine and humane, was
then in Christ as man, so now it is in the Pope the Vicar of Christ. As God may
be called by a secondary means, the temporal Governor and Monarch of the
world, though in himself principally he be neither temporal nor of the
world: Idem page 112.
so the Pope may be said to be the temporal Lord and Monarch, although his
power be a certain spiritual thing. That Christ when he had performed the
mystery of our redemption, as a King, gave Peter the government of his
kingdom, and that holy Peter did use that power against Ananias and Sapphira.
That Christ, directly the Lord of the world in temporal things, and therefore
that the Pope Christ's Vicar is the like: that he set out an immutable truth,
by the sole coming of Peter to Christ upon the water, Page 151.
and that the universal government, which is signified by the sea, was
committed to Peter and his successors: that diverse powers and authorities were
given of God, but that all did depend upon the supreme authority of the Pope,
and that they take their light from thence, as the stars do from the Sun.

And as God is the supreme Monarch of the world productiuely and gubernatiuely,
Page 145.
although of himself he be neither of the world nor temporal; so the Pope,
although originally and from himself he have dominion over all things
temporal, yet he has it not by an immediate execution, and commits that to
the Emperor by an universal jurisdiction. That the Roman Bishop is the
chief father and man in the world: and that all hang on him, as on the chief
workman (he should have said foundation) otherwise if any should appoint an
Emperor by himself (I think he should say a substantive) in respect of his
temporalties should make two principles, which heresy that he might avoid, he
makes the Emperor an adjective; Isodor. Mos. pa. 22. de may. mil. Eccles.
As another says, that the holy writer in the old Law made the Priesthood
an adjective to the kingdom, but that S. Peter made the kingdom an adjective
to the Priesthood. Tho Boz. de iure sta. lib. 1. cap. 6. fol. 137.
That kings are not immediately from God, but by the interposing of the Church,
and the chief Priest thereof. That there is a warlike and compulsiue power
given to the Church above Kings and Princes: that Constantine gave nothing that
was his own, but restored what was unjustly and tyrannously taken from the
Bishops.

That Christ committed to Peter the key-keeper of eternal life, Isido. Mos de
may. page 27.
the right of earthly and heavenly government: and that in his place the Pope
is the universal Judge, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: and therefore
that he is consecrated as a chief Bishop, and crowned as a King. Because he
has each power: that he uses that power either absolutely or ordinarily:
absolutely, when he does abrogate such laws, as he please: ordinarily when he
uses laws. When he will live under laws to use the counsel of Cardinals;
when he will not, to rule without counsel, because his power is from God, not
from the College of Cardinals. I think not only Asses but Lions also.
That all the faithful and the unfaithful, and every natural creature, for
so he speaks, is subject to the Popes government, and that therefore the Pope
does all men to worship him, prostrate themselves before him, and kiss his
feet: that the adoration of Dulia service is given to him, as to Images and
Saints, in respect of his kingdom he has a crown, of his Preisthood a
myter: That Emperors and Kings may be compelled to observe their oaths taken
at their coronations and confirmations, because by the virtue of their oath
they be made the Popes vassals. That by the Law of God and nature, the
Pre^sthood is more eminent then the Empire. That secular powers are not
necessary, but that Princes should perform that by the terror of discipline,
August. triump apud Carer. p. 130. and 132.
which a Priest cannot do by virtue of his doctrine. And if the Church could
punish offenders, the Imperial and Kingly government should not be necessary,
because potentially it is included in the Apostolical government. Celsus
Mancinus ib 3. cap. 1. Et Care. p. 133.
That it may be auowed of Christ's Vicar by a certain similitude, which Plato
in Time us spoke of God: for being demanded what God was, answered, he is not
man, he is not heaven, nor good, but somewhat that is better: if a man shall
demand, whether the chief Bishop be a Duke, a King, or an Emperor, Isodor.
Mosc. page 80.
he shall answer warily, if he shall affirm by denying, that the Pope is
something more excellent, something more eminent. That all temporal
Jurisdiction is to be exercised, F^e upon flattery.
not at the Popes commandment, but at his beck. Princes will and command, God
the Lord does all things with his beck agreeable to that.

He spoke and with his beck made all Olympus quake. And that Christ had all
plenarie jurisdiction above all the make Christ, Leli: Ze^h: tract: Theol. page
81. Franc. Bozius lib. 2 cap. 14.
so they make the Pope the absolute Lord of the world, out of those words,
Behold two swords, which signify the power spiritual and temporal, and from
them I will give you the keys. The keys of heaven are given, therefore of the
whole earth. And from those words, all power is given to me in heaven and in
earth, therefore the right, both of the heavenly, and earthly Empire is
committed to the Pope, who is Christ's Vice gerent upon earth. To what end say
I? But that Christian Kings, and Emperors should acknowledge, that they hold
their kingdoms and Empires of him, forsooth, and that as often as they do any
great hurt to the Church, they may be deprived by the Pope, and the right of
their kingdom may rightly be conveyed over to others: or if they do not
acknowledge it, they may be constrained by arms either of their own subjects,
or of outward Catholic Princes, if the Pope will have it so, to part with
their kingdom and life.

Patriotta, I believe truly said he, that your Doctors did strive among
themselves, by advancing the dignity of the Popes, and suppressing Emperors
and Kings whether of them with a more gross, or with a more spruisse kind of
flattery, might set forth the pride of the Popes court. But the very naked
recital of these toys, seems to be a sound refutation of them.

Then Velbacellus, I do said he, and have much greiued, that the withered,
and decayed opinion of the Canonists, disproued long since, and rejected of
good Catholics, should be now taken up again, and brought in as a thing
forlorn, by so many excellent wits, the chief whereof both for place, and
learning was Cardinal Baronius, who did very stubbornly and obstinately defend
the direct, ordinary, and inherent authority of the Pope, whereby as a Lord
of the world in temporal matters he may at his pleasure depose Emperors and
Princes. Is it not necessary to add his many other reasons. They are extant
in his books that are in many men's hands, there they may fetch them, that will
have them.

There is sprung up on the other side Cardinal Bellarmine, Bellarmine.
and as well deserving of the Church, who did overthrow that ordinary, direct,
and inherent government of the Pope in temporalties, as left by Christ, with so
sound arguments of scripture, that in my mind neither the adversaries, nor
himself afterward could with his most exquisite skill of distinctions dissolve
them. But that he may seem somewhat to gratify the Pope, although says he,
he be not the Lord of all temporalties directly, neither has inherent and
ordinary authority as he is Pope to disthronize temporal Princes, yet be
is Lord of the temporalties indirectly, in order to the spiritualles, as he
usually speaks, and has an extraordinary and a borrowed authority, as he
is chief spiritual Prince, to alter kingdoms, to take them from one and give
them to another, if it be necessary to the salvation of souls, i. in order to
the spirituals.

Carerius a Doctor of Padua, Carerius against Bellarmine.
a sharp witted and earnest fellow, he is of a contrary opinion, and does
not only strive with argument, but lays a curse upon the adversaries, sparing
none, no not Bellarmine himself, whom he taking in hand of purpose to refell
in a whole book, written as the Preface importes, against the wicked
Politicians, and Heretics of our time, did a little too plainly touch the
Cardinal: So far are they from agreeing in the manner of diriuing so great
authority to the Pope from Christ.

Here Patriotta, your Doctors says he, thing it self: that the confusion of
tongues may again seem to happen in building their tower of Babel.

Velbacellus, somewhat more gently I pray Patriotta. Although that I
ingenuously confess, while they thus egerly strive among themselves about the
manner, and overthrow their own opinions with mutual contradictions, they
seem to leave the Pope very small or no authority at all in temporalties. For
Carerius says, the Pope has either ordinary and direct authority to depose
Kings as he is Pope, or he has no authority at all. But he has none direct
and ordinary, as he is Pope by Bellarmines assumption. Therefore he has none
at all by Carerius conclusion. It were long, to set down all the reasons
drawn from Scripture, whereby Bellarmine has utterly overthrown the direct
and ordinary authority of the Bishop, neither were it necessary, because
they may be had in his fifth book he set out, so that men may think he spoke
one thing and thought another. Which when he might not touch openly for
offending the Pope, he did with sleights and devises impugn, that he might by
any means deliver the truth.

For he seems indirectly, that I may use his own aduerbe, to take away all
power of the Pope of depriving Princes. For if the Pope, as he is Pope cannot
directly, and ordinarily depose Princes, though the cause be just as
Bellarmine says, and yet as he is the chief spiritual Prince, may dispose
of kingdoms, taking them from one, and giving them to another, if it be
necessary, for the saving of souls, that is, indirectly in order to
spiritualls as he affirms; what other thing did he closly insinuate, but
that the Pope had no power at all to displace Princes? For Saint Peter, neither
did, or could transfer any power but ordinary. Besides it is plain, that the
Pope is no otherwise the chief spiritual Prince, but as he is Pope, so that
what he cannot do as Pope, he cannot do as he is the chief spiritual Prince.

Which Carerius concludes against Bellarmine, and does urge it with this
grant, that the Pope is properly called Gods Vicar.

Either he is not says he, the Vicar of Christ, or else he deposes inferior
powers as Pope.

But he deposes them not as Pope: by the witness of Bellarmine.

He is not therefore the Vicar of Christ by the conclusion of Carerius.

So Bellarmine gave Christ's Vicar so greiuous a wound, if we believe Carerius,
that he could never cure with all the remedies of his distinctions. And
Carerius while he deckes him with strange feathers, spoiled him of those were
his own. Whom while he ordained Lord of the temporalties, hardly left him
Lord of the spiritualties. In the mean time, when neither the direct, nor
indirect power be a matter of faith formally determined by the public
sentence of the Church, as Alanus and Couarruvias confess, there was no reason
why Saturnine should call my friend Blackwell wretched Apostata, who never
swarued from the Catholic faith; unless by inueighing so bitterly against
Blackewell, he vaunt himself to be of the contrary faction.

Then Patriotta, I willingly behold Bellarmine and Carerius, as Cadmeyes
brethren, or the Madianites cutting one another throat. But I could more
willingly behold the Pope, as a iacke-daw dispoiled of his Egles and Doves
feathers which he has stolen, which is of all his regal and Byshoply
ornaments, wherewith he has so long ietted so proudly and terribly up and
down: but I leave this cause to God, to be mended by him at his due time.

But truly Baronius and Carerius with all their faction do flatter the Pope
more grossly, but Bellarmine with his cunning opposition flatters him more
smoothly, being the more dangerous enemy to Kings, because the more cloase.
But that I often observed the witty old fellow crossing of himself with his
own tricks, and coining those distinctions, whereby he vnweaued those things
which he had weaued before. O Penelopean skill of disputing. But while he does
touch kings crowns indirectly, and tells us that it is all in the Pope, so that
he thinks it meet to belong to a spiritual end, he bewraieth less malice,
but greater craft.

Here Argentine who had kept silence from the beginning, looking earnestly
first on Saturnine, then on Velbacellus, Saturnine, says he, seems to me, to
be more strickt in this matter, then is requisite, and Velbacel more loose and
remiss: because he gave too much authority, this none at all, to our most holy
father, to suppress Kings when need requires. This great Doctor of the
Church therefore Bellarmine took a middle course, who first overthrew that
infinite power of ordinary and inherent government: then retained that
extraordinary and borrowed authority in the Pope, least Kings like untamed
coultes, as it were, not having bitte and bridle should wax too lusty, whom
the most holy Pope might bring again into the circle of religion and justice,
if once they began to start out, first with his counsel, and after, if that
were relected, with some other moderate chastisement. Which would be the most
safe course for Kings, and very available for subjects.

Carolus Regius, this moderate chastisement of Kings, Argentine, as you call
it, is their utter ruin and rooting out if you understand Bellarmine aright.
For there lurkes under those Aduerbes certain deceites, which subjects have
found to be as damnable to them as Kings have. For he brings in your Pope,
whom one does well term Satan's Ass, with this his extraordinary and
borrowed power which he bestowed upon him, curbing of Kings with a bridle, when
the raynes lay on his own neck, turning and ouerturning kingdoms at his
pleasure, taking them from one and giving them to another, Means of the Popes
greatness.
when he thinks good that it is for the order tending to spiritual good. And
by what counsels he always used, to take from Kings both their kingdoms and
their lives, all histories do show them to have been, by the emulation of
neighbor Princes, the faction of subjects, the treason of the nobles, and the
superstition of the people. And do you call this a moderate chastisement? And
safe for kings, and good for subjects? Wherein as there are many things very
unjust and unworthy, so those are most of all, that he terms these wicked
treacheries holy counsels, and pretendes that they tend in order to a
spiritual end. And do in that manner sow the scruples of conscience, mingled
with the seeds of treachery in the hearts of men, as if the grains of
religion and rebellion had sprung out of one and the same blade. So it comes to
pass, that the Roman faith at this day does beget and nourish most dangerous
faction both to Kings and subjects, which so long is very demure and humble,
till as a wise man observes, it has found the keye of power and authority.
For as all faction which springs out of the heat of desire, is dangerous, so
that is most dangerous which rises out of the scruple of conscience. For when
it rises from desire, it is like fire, that takes hold of stubble, which
though presently it rise up into a great flame yet soon being consumed is
extinguished. But when it arises from the conscience, it is like fire, that
heates iron, which getting his strength but slowly, keeps it surely; as a very
worthy and a wise Senator left it in writing.

Wherefore that which Bellarmine said of the Oath of Bellarmine: know
therefore Argentine, that such qualifications are nothing else, but Satan's
sleights and deceits, wherewith the majesty of Kings is either openly or
closely assailed, which Christ has fortified plainly with his commandments.
That these vain pretenses of Aduerbes are Satan's ginnes and stratagems,
whereby under the color of religion, he brings utter destruction both to
your souls and bodies. But because you will not give as good credit to us, as
to your own men, and I think it not meet to take upon me Velbacellus part, I
pray you Calander entreat your Confessor, that he would lay open and unfold
the subtle and hurtful fleights and devises of this working brain.

Yield so much, says Calander, to the Catholics your friends, Velbacellus,
yield it to the Catholic religion, which is necessary to be discerned from
these false Catholic opinions, as you call them, lest the consciences of
Catholics be corrupted.

Velbacell, I will do, says he, as you require me, in respect of my duty to
the King not unwillingly, but against the Popes inhibition not so willingly,
howsoever it be, I answer for the satisfying of the conscience sincerely, and
for the Catholic religion not unfitly.

The Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy confounded by Bellarmine.
And I marvel much that Bellarmine, being a learned man, and of great wit, did
confound the Oath of Allegiance with the Oath of Supremacy: but I am grieved at
the heart, that the supremacy of the Pope, which he does of right enjoy in
spiritual and ecclesiastical causes, is so enfolded with the worldly
government, which is in temporal and civil causes, that he brings his
lawful authority in hazard to be lost. Add thereto, that when he had
overthrown the direct dominion of the Pope in all temporal matters with sound
reasons, he did maintain the indirect government in order to the spiritual,
as he speaks, with such slight and flaggy arguments, that with this his
playing fast and loose, he seems to have left him no authority at all.
Although other think otherwise: and think that he does as well submit Kings
crowns to the Popes feet, as Baronius does. But let it be as every man takes
it. He cannot directly take away the crowns from Kings. What then? but he can
indirectly: he cannot as Pope ordinarily depose Kings, but extraordinarily he
can, as he is the chief spiritual Prince: He has not inherent authority:
but that is fetched else where: much forsooth: what matter is it with what
authority Kings be cast off, if they may be cast off by the Pope? But they be
worse then mad, who subject the crowns of Kings to schoole-distinctions.

Here Saturnine: But although, said he, it please

But that England and Ireland are portions of Peter's patrimony, and the Bishop
of Romes temporalties, it is plain by the articles of agreement between
Alexander the third, Pope of Rome, and Henry the second, King of England,
agreed on in the year of the Lord 1171. who when he was absolved by the Pope,
for the death of Thomas of Becket, did covenant that none should afterward
accept that Crown of right, or should be acknowledged for King, till he had
his confirmation from the chief pastor of our souls. Which covenant was
renewed in the year 1210. by John, King of England, who had confirmed the same
by oath to Pandulphus, the Popes Legate, at the request of the Barons and
Commons, as a matter of great importance, to preserve the commonweal, to
keep it from the unjust usurpation of Tyrants, and to avoid other mischeefes,
whereby before they had smarted, and to prevent that they fall not into the
like again, by the default of any wicked King thereafter. Wherefore if it be
honorable and pious for the Bishop to dispose of the kingdom, being made
tributary, why may he not likewise depose a refractory and a disobedient
Prince?

Velbacellus, you allege, says he, a worm eaten and ridiculous charter,
whereby you make the King of England Tributarie to the Pope, England not
tributarie to the Pope, neither can be.
which was never done: and if it were, it neither could, or ought bind the
successors Kings of England. For Rome neither can, nor ever could at any time
show such a grant, as Thomas Moore that great Catholic does argue: and if it
could, it was to no great purpose, for no King of England might at any time
give away England to the Pope, or make his kingdom tributary, though he were
so disposed. Therefore let us pass by that counterfeit compact, and that
frivolous devise, and let us return to the matter in hand, The question is not
Saturnine, of the true temporalties of the patrimony of Peter, but of the true
temporalties of the patrimony of Kings, the sovereignty whereof either directly
or indirectly is given to the Pope, and it is given either by Law divine or
positive: and therefore the temporalties of Kings do no more belong to the
Pope, then the temporalties of Peter belong to Kings. And every King may as
well deprive a Pope, as any Pope may deprive a King. And an Emperor may as well
he called Lord of all the spiritualties, as a Pope Lord of all the
temporalties. But God has distinguished these, giving the spiritual swords to
Popes, and the temporal to Kings, as Bellarmine himself seems formerly to
confess: who if he had been still the same man, he would never have placed
Popes to be Lords of temporalties indirectly, for order to the spirituals, and
have rooted and cast them out as Kings, and have attempted any evil against
them by their agents, either subjects or strangers, when place and occasion was
offered, if they thought it auailable to spiritual good: So it is a spiritual
action, but a diabolical.
as if he thought the murder of Kings to be a spiritual action, which after
some sort may be said with a distinction, that the spirit of God does not
direct and govern such bloody counsels, but the spirit of Satan. Who if he
go forward as he begins, and use the pen of such a man as Bellarmine is, it
is to be feared (I will speak plainly, what I think truly) it is, I say,
to be feared that blood will overtake blood: and that Kings will imitate
Charles the fifth, who when Clement the seventh began to grow proud, belegred
Rome with his army, Bellar. de Romans Pont. tit. lib. 5. cap. 6.
and battered the castle of Saint Angelo, not with arguments, but with
cannon-shot.

But why, added the Cardinal to his aduerbe indirectly, Bellarmines dangerous
ad uerbes.
incidently and casually seen? as if he should say, although the Pope as he
is Pope, cannot ordinarily, no not upon just cause depose a Prince, yet as he
is Lord of the temporalties, incidently and casually he may change kingdoms,
and take them from one, and give them to another, if not as the politic
Prince of the Church, yet as the chief spiritual Prince, whether I say he
do not lay trappes for Kings, whereby they may more certainly of a sudden be
surprised. Thieves have not an ordinary power to break up houses well fenced,
or to rob travelers by the high-way-side being well accompanied, but they
have power casually to do both: when they light upon houses that be but sorrily
defended, or travelers that be ill appointed. So he denies that the Pope
has ordinary power to depose Kings, and to cast them off, but grants that he
has a power accidentary and casual, whereby he may either with his own, or
others forces, or with the secret devices of his part, by any means overthrow
king, when they least suspect it, and find them most weak and feeble, looking
for no such matter. What is this else but to make the Pope Machiauils scholar,
sometime playing the Lion, sometime the Fox, attempting the destruction of
Kings with whom he is displeased, either by force or fraud, as he can casually
bring his purposes to pass, and swallow up Kings, as it were, their prey?
which without doubt is far from the holy fathers mind: but so it sometimes
falls out, that wicked men being deceived by such distinctions do abuse the
opinions of learned men against the Popes will to the ruin of Princes.

Calander and Argentine if you will be advised by me, put out of your minds
and consciences, this bewitching and overthrowing divinity; you may do better
to go the plain, and the Kings highway, directed by Christ and his Apostles,
and showed unto you erewhile by Patriott: and avoid these by-pathes and
dangerous downfals, that you may live and die with the honor of your families,
and safties of your consciences.

Then Patriott, I wish it, I wish it, said he, with all my heart Velbacell,
The second foundation of obedience the practice of Christians, and chiefly of
the To. Bishops.
that you understood all the mystery of iniquity as well as you understand this
part in controversy, I will clear your eyesight with an ointment, as old
Tobies was. And being warned by you, I will show you the right way of
obedience, prescribed by Christ, and trod forth by the footsteps of the
ancient Christians, and cheifely of the Bishops of Rome, that I may finish that
I promised, that it may appear what predecessors the Bishop of Rome had in
the better ages, and what in the worse: who were so far off from having power
in the te^poralties, that they had it not in the spirituals, and they who vaunt
themselves, now to be Lords over kings, acknowledged the^selus to be their
servants, as I will make it plain out of your own histories.

How the Pope grew great.
or by their impiety and rebellion: or whether he attained greater power and
wealth by the munificence of former Caesar's, or by the overmuch patience of
such as succeeded: for when as the ancient nobleness of that Imperial city,
and the great estimation of the Apostolic See, and the invincible holiness of
thirty Martyrs had first made him famous: then the great favor of Christian
Emperors, Popes for their excellency first had primacy of order.
and the sincere faithfulness of the Bishops, and their dutiful obedience did
so highly promote and advance him, that he did easily obtain the primacy of
order among all the other Bishops. And you might perceive for the first six
hundred years, at the least, virtues in the Bishops contending with virtues,
patience with obedience, and constancy with learning: and you could hardly know
whether they were more famous for the glory of their zeal and martyrdom, or
for the commendation of their knowledge and obedience. So great was the favor
of Emperors, so deadly the hatred of Pagans, so exceeding the love of
Christians was toward the Bishops, that you may well doubt whether their
cruelty did more purge and refine the Bishops holiness, or this over lavish
bounty did infect and corrupt it. Whence came that notable speech of
Tertullian, The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church, as well as that
of Augustines: Religion brought forth riches, and the daughter eat up the
mother. Which I think was not spoken to that end, as though the subsequent
peace had clean extinguished that primative zeal, which persecution had
raised up, but rather cooled and abated it: for as the Bishops for 300. years,
to Syluester, performed passive obedience to the Heathenish Emperors: so
before and after Boniface, for 500. years they performed active obedience to
Christian Emperors. And when as either an Heretic, or an Apostata, or a
Tyrant possessed the seat of the Empire: yet by the doctrine of Christ, when
they might not do that the Emperor commanded, they would suffer that the
Emperor inflicted.

The histories are extant which show that the Emperors Popes subject to
Emperors.
even in things spiritual, by the Romans Bishops, and that they were reverenced
and obeyed, not with a constrained, but voluntary obseruancie, not with a
counterfeit, but sincere humbleness of mind. Did not Meltiades the Bishop of
Rome acknowledge Constantine the great to be supreme head in things spiritual,
Meltiades. Eusebius. l. 1. cap. 5 August. lib. 1. con. Parmen. Epist. 162. and
alibi Reticio. materno. Marino.
and did he not humbly obey him, when as he, as the Emperor commanded,
together with others, did hear the cause of Cecilianus and Donatus, about the
choice of a Bishop, committed by the Emperor, not to himself alone, but to
other Colleagues? who when as Donatus first appealed from the sentence of
Meltiades, he committed the whole matter again to be discussed by the
Council Aralatense, called together by him, excluding Meltiades out of it:
from which Council when Donatus did the second time appeal, because
Caecilianus had received his ordination from Foelix, he referred Foelix
business to Aelianus a civil Magistrate: to whose sentence when Donatus would
not stand, the Emperor called the whole cause before himself and determined
it. Meltiades was far from the sovereignty of all temporalties, when the
Emperor committed an Ecclesiastical cause, first to him and other Delegates,
and after appointed second Judges, and lastly called the whole cause before his
Royal Majesty, and by himself determined it Meltiades being excluded.

Damasus, Siritius, Anastasius, did they not acknowledge Theodosius the elder
their supeme Lord, Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 23. Damasus, Siritius, Anastasius.
and most humbly submitted themselves unto him, when as Flanianus was
grievously accused before the Emperors Majesty, that he had intended upon
the Sea of Antioch against the canons of the Church, was freed by the Emperor
against their wills, and commanded to return to his country, and feed his
flock committed to his charge?

Innocentius.
I think Innocent did acknowledge Arcadius son to Theodosius his supreme
Lord, when we was an humble suter to the Emperor, that he would command a
Council to be assembled for the examination of Chrysostomes cause: whom for
all that the Arrian Emperor did reject in a good cause, Nicephor. lib. 13.
cap. 3.
and sent away his messengers with reproach, as perturbers of the Western
Empire, drove Chrysostom farther off into banishment, published a decree
wherein he inflicted a penalty of deprivation upon all Bishops, who favored
either Innocent or Chrysostom, and would not communicate with Atticus,
Chrysostomes successor. Innocents cause was the better at that time, but
Arcadius authority was the greater. It was then no new matter, that the Bishops
of Rome were humble supplicants to Emperors: so far was it that they had
rule in civil causes.

Leo the Bishop did humbly entreat Theodosius the Eutiches heresy, Leo Epist.
9.
which place the Emperor would not hear off, but assembled the Council at
Ephesus: where when Dioscorus the Bishop of Alexandria had oppressed the truth,
and confirmed Eutiches heresy, and had cast out Orthodoxall Flauianus from his
Bishopric of Constantinople, Leo did the second time earnestly entreat the
Emperor that he would command a general Council to be gathered in Italy,
Epist. 24.
which for all that Theodosius would not grant to the good old man. If at that
time the Bishop could have commanded the Emperor, what need had he to
entreat him? if the power of assembling Councels had been in Leo, why did he
give such deep sighs? why did he shed so many tears, wherewith he might move
the Emperors gentleness in that business? which when he saw was denied him
in so great an hatred of the Christian faith, why did not the Lion begin to
roar, and affright the Emperor with excommunication? why did he not cast him
out of his throne? why, if he might have done it lawfully, did he not deal
with him by threatenings, or by force of arms? but then the Bishops of Rome did
attempt all things with prayers and tears, not with threats and weapons.

Epist. 43.
When Theodosius was dead, he did as humbly and as earnestly entreat Martian,
who had gathered together the Chalcedone Council, that with his Imperial
decree he would disanull the Council of Ephesus, and command the Chalcedone
Council that they should not swerve from the Nycene faith. Leo's piety,
certainly, was great, far greater then his authority: but his piety, at the
last, obtained that it required. Wherein Leo was not superior, but happier, in
that the Imperial authority was answerable to the Bishops holiness.

Gregory the great did humbly tell Mauritius the Emperor, Gregor. Q. 2.
Epist. 61.
that the charge he enjoined him, as he thought, was unjust, and yet being
commanded, did publish the Emperors decree. I did (said he) perform my duty
each way, who both gave obedience to the Emperor, and for God delivered my
mind what I thought.

Lib. 5. Epist. ad ora. de bal. fili tradendis.
I think he did imitate Ambrose, whose answer to Valentinian the younger, being
an Arrian Emperor, is very memorable, being commanded to allot one church in
Millain to the Arrians, which though he condemned the thing, granted. I will
(said he) never willingly part with my right, and being compelled, I have
learnt not to resist. So keeping a sincere conscience to God, denied not
obedience to the Emperor.

Let the Bishop of Rome now go and learn modesty of those ancient Bishops,
at lest of his own precessours, but especially of their great Gregory: who
acknowledged Mauritius the Emperor, from whom John of Constantinople had
received the title of universal Bishop, to be his most reverend Lord, and
himself his servant, as many had done before him. But Gregory the great did
more lessen and abase himself, who am I that speak to my Lord, that am but
dust and a worm? (how far off was this worm from deposing of Lions) which he
professed not with a fained, but sincere humbleness of mind, and submitted
himself to his Lord, not with a show of humility, but with a necessity of
duty: unless peradventure you will imagine Gregory to be a dissembler,
reuerencing the Emperor with fained, not true obedience, and submitting
himself in jest rather then earnest.

But after that Boniface, Gregory's successor, had Phocas obtained the title
of universal Bishop, the Bishops perchance did deny their obedience to
Emperors.

No indeed: for Agatho when Constantine did call diverse learned and holy men
out of the West, who should communicate with the Greeks in the sixth general
Council, about the truth of religion, he writ back, that he had sent his
fellow-seruants to his most excellent Lord, according to the most holy decree
of his Princely Maiestly, and the duty be ought unto him.

Our submission has obediently performed, which is by you enjoined, and in
another Epistle, all the Bishops (says he) both of the North and of the West,
the Christian servants of your Empire, do give thanks to God for your
religious mind.

Yea truly, two hundred years after the universal Charles the great, who had
left the Pope great possessions in Italy, Cause: 2. quest. 7 cap. Sic nos.
how dutiful and humble did the Pope show himself to Ludouike his son, and
Lotharius his nephew?

The submission of Leo the fourth, Bishop, that we may make short, is famous
and notorious, which he showed to Ludouike and Lotharie: We, if we have done
any thing (Leo the Bishop writing to Lodouike) and have not dealt justly with
them, over whom we be placed, whatsoever is done amiss we will amend at the
discretion of your Excellency: beseeching your Majesty, that you would be
pleased to send those, who in the fear of God may strictly examine, not only
those things whereof we are accused, but all other our dealings both great and
small.

Here we have the Emperor the Popes correctour in great matters and small.

But this was, you will say, no part of the Popes duty, Ibi ca. Petr^.
but a dispensation of the Popes humility. Indeed Gratian does speak so
ridiculously, as if the Bishop had submitted himself in jest, for a mock to
the Emperor, and not in earnest and of bounden duty.

Distinct. 10. de capi. Caro. Ludo and La. ha.
Did he afterward in jest, or with voluntary humility submit himself to
Lotharius, and not rather in all duty and obseruancie, when he promised that he
would inuiolably observe all the Ecclesiastical laws of Charles, Ludouike and
Lotharius, and did swear not only present obedience, but for ever after?

The Bishop of Rome was then, as you see, the Emperors subject and servant. He
did humbly supplicate the Emperor, as his Lord, he did not proudly command
him as his servant. He did obey, he did not resist: and that not a Catholic
only, but an heretic also, and that an Arrian. He gave honor to his
person, he offered no wrong to his crown. He kept his laws, he did not
gainsay them. And he received Ecclesiastical canons from him, himself set
down none. He did perform the Oath of obedience, he did not then free others
from keeping it. The Emperors themselves were not only, but their Lieutenants
also, were the Bishops of Rome Judges and Correctours, in all matters, both
small and great. The Popes therefore were not then their Judges and
Controllers. They were not as yet Lords of the spiritualties, much less of the
temporalties, as they are now termed by their Claw-backes.

Popes grew greater by abundance, and division of the Empire.
At the last, being enriched and furnished with the temporalties of Bishops and
Kings, by little and little they began to wax proud against their Lords and
Patrones: and grew very great by the division of the Empire, the departure of
the Emperor out of Italy, the dissension of Kings, and the rebellions of the
people.

Gregory the 7. was the first as Frisingensis testifies, Gregory the 7. the
first that excommunicated and cursed Emperors.
1600. years after Christ, that cursed Henry the 4. Emperor with
excommunication, and assayed to set him beside his kingdom: and to that end
loosed his subjects from their oath of obedience. Whose next successors
followed his frantic humor: Who as Hilde brand had stirred up first
Rodolphus, then Hermanuus, after that Ecbertus all servants against their
Sovereign, and lastly Courad and Henry sons against their father, all of
them being bound with an Oath of fealty, and these besides with the bond of
nature.

But the Author of this tragedy Gregory, Sigeb. in ann. 1^84. Vesserg. in an.
1089. Gregory's fall.
four years after being forsaken by his own people, with a joint consent of
all was cast out of his Popedom. And being at the point of death, as Sigebert
found it written of him, one of his twelve Cardinals whom he chiefly favored
being called unto him, he confessed to God, to S. Peter, and the whole Church,
that he had greiuouslie sinned in the administration of the pastoral charge
committed unto him, In the life of Greg. 7.
and that by the instinct of the Devil he had raised discordes and wars
among men, as Benno the Cardinal writes.

I am not ignorant that the Italian writers of malice against the Emperor, did
go about to hide and dissemble the faults of their Pope with the greatest skill
of lying that might be. Who can give credit to Blondus, Fulgofius, Trithemius,
and other writers of small account, either of a later time, who were borne some
hundred years after these things were done, that either for favor, or hatred
as Bloudus, or for ignorance as Fulgosius, and Trithemius the Abbot they might
easily ouer-reach? who I say can credit these men as ribing false praise to
Hildebrand, when as his own Abbote and Cardinals, who were not only
earewitnesses, but eyewitnesses of the whole tragedy, who had a purpo^e not to
honor the faults of men, but defend the ordinance of God, branded him with
deserved infamy? and writ that the chief. Author of rebellion and perjury
was put besides his Popedom? and that he troubled the world being moved by
the instinct of the Devil, as he confessed upon his death bed? And may we not
now marvel, that this Bishop who follows his outrage, may not fear his
ruin? Who has stirde up Tirone against King James a most merciful Prince, as
he stirred up Rodolphe against Henry the Emperor.

Rodolphe the chief Actour, when he beheld his right hand cut off in the
skirmish, Rodulphus ruin and repentance. Vrsbergene in ann. 1080.
and ready to give up the Ghost, fetching deep sighs, is said to speak thus
to the Bishops that stood about him, as Vrspergensis records: Behold this is
that right hand, wherewith I swear fealty to Henry my sovereign Lord, and now
as you see showing the truncke of his arm I leave both his Kingdom and this
present life. Whose end I wish to Tirone that most treacherous Traitor, but I
wish him his repentance also.

In ann. 1080. Hildebrands revelation.
Sigebert writes that Hildebrand by a revelation from heaven, as he said,
foretold the death of a false King that year wherein Rodolphe was slain. He
understood him to be Henry. But Henry fighting with his Saxons returned
Conqueror, and Rodolphe the false King died. If this were a true Revelation,
as Gregory said; God as he foretold did thus punish Rodolphe the false King
whom Gregory had raised up against his Lord: if it were not a divine
Revelation, but some devilish familiarity with the spirits, what a holy Saint
was this man whom you so commend, who had such acquaintance with the Devil,
who deceived and betrayed the frantic humor of this his hellish Scholar.

Hermannus being broken by a stone cast from a tower by a woman's hand,
Hermannus ruin.
his brain being dashed in pieces and running about his ears, frighted and
scattered the army following the ensigns of his treachery.

Ecbertus ruin.
Eebertus flying out of his throne into a sincke-hole to save his life, lost it.

Conradus the elder son being rightly disinherited of his fathers kingdom
which he had betrayed died miserably. Conradus ruin


Henry the younger son being instructed by the Popes lesson, to break his
oath wherewith he bound himself to his Father, Henry's treachery against his
father.
first levied an army against his Father; And when by the intercession of
diverse of the nobility, who regarded the sun rising more then the sun
setting, the quarrel seemed to be ended between the Father and the Son: the
son allured the Father with promises, tears and Oaths, to enter into a
castle, whom he received as an Emperor, but detained as a prisoner, and made
him this offer, that either he should resign his crown, or his head. O most
periurde and vilanous parricide: O most wicked scholar of a wicked master.

That stone which Gregory the 7. first moved against Henry the 4. Emperor,
with his overthrow as it appears: the same other Popes afterward have not
left off to cast down upon other Emperors, and Kings, sometime with no
better success, always with no less disgrace to the Church. As Adrian the 4.
and Alexander the third, against Frederick the first, Honorius, and Gregory
the 9. and Innocent the 4. against Frederick the 2. two very wise, devout,
and valiant Emperors that we name no others.

For Adrian the 4. Adrian against Frederick.
an agreement being made with the Cardinals and William King of Sicely, and
other peers and cities of Italy that they should expel Frederick the first
out of Italy, first cast out his bolt of excommunication. And when a fly
shortly after had choakt Adrian as he was a drinking, Choakt with a fly.
Alexander the third persecuted the Emperor in the same footsteppes, he sent
out his Cursitors out of his own bosom, who should solicit Crema,
Placentia, V^rona, Mylaine, Brixia to rebellion; he did more incense William
the King of Sicely his adversary to assault Frederick. He did corrupt Henry
Duke of Saxony and made him forsake his sovereign in the field; he raised up
the French, the English, the Spanish and the Venetian to molest and vex him:
with these devises, and engines he endeauored to strippe the Emperor of his
kingdom and his life. But God did so bless and assist his servant Frederick,
that he took the cities of Italy, and overthrew them, drove the treacherous
Duke out of his dukedom, and the Pope from his Popedom, and made him fly to
Saint Mark at Venice under the habit of a Cook. Although he afterward being
moved by natural affection, to release his son out of captivity, suffered
himself to be there trod upon by Alexanders feet. Alexander trod upon the
Emperors neck.
Which base indignity was not so reproachful for the Emperor to suffer as for
the Pope to commit.

Henry the 4. As Cardinal Wolsie de^lt with King Henry the 8.
Emperor and Frederick the first should be deposed; whenas there was no
lawful power or just reason for any Popes at any time to depose Emperors.
Adrian the Pope that followed, was displeased with Frederick the first,
because the Emperor had set his name in his letters before the Popes name:
because he forbad the Cardinals under the color of visiting the Churches to
rob and to spoil them: i. because he withstood the Bishops ambition and
avarice. As Gregory the seventh set upon Henry the fourth, that he might
transfer the donation of byshoprickes taken from the Emperor to himself, so
Adrian to exempt the persons of Bishops, whereby neither in respect of their
benefice, or duty they might adheare to Princes.

Frederick the second had good success against the Pope. Pla. in Greg. 9
The like causes did incense Honorius and Gregory the 9. and Innocent the 4.
against Frederick the second his Nephew, whom God did assist being so
unworthily abused, that he handled the treacherous Cardinals according to
their deserts, plagued the Popes and his Priests, shut up Gregory the ninth,
and brought him to that misery that he died in great anguish of mind.

Let the Pope take heed lest if he Gregorize with Princes, Princes Henrize,
and Frederize with Popes.

Neither is Innocent the 4. Conuina. Theobaldus. Franciscus. Gulielm. de San.
Seuerino. Pandulphus.
therefore the more happy Frederick the second out of his Empire and provided
two other to be chosen in his room. For if they had not prevailed more with
conspiracies and poysonnings, then elections: Caspini. in Freder. 2. Frederick
murdered.
they could never have surprised Frederick that noble Prince. But at last he
was taken away by poison as he returned into Apulia. Whereof when he seemed to
have recovered, he was choked with a pillow, by Manfred his bastard son, as
he lay in his bed.

These be the acts of Popes whereby they ruinate Princes, and so highly
advance their Popedom: The popish engines against Princes
Excommunications, wherewith as with hooks they catch after kingdoms, and as
with whippes to scourge kings; open rebellion whereby they toss Princes up and
down as balls with their feet; and secret conspiracies, whereby as with ginnes
they lay for and entangle Princes, and take them unawares, that they may more
covertly take them out of the way by poison.

That there is a great doubt as I said, left whether the Bishop of Rome grew
more by the virtue and obedience of his predecessors, or by their treachery
and wickedness: whether by the beneficence of former Emperors, or patience of
the later, he is come to that height and top of greatness that the world
wonders at.

I have now laid the two foundations of obedience toward a King whatsoever he
be, and of the fealty of their subjects One in the perpetual and
unchangeable decree of Christ, the other in the perpetual practice of the
ancient Christians, and chiefly of the Bishops of Rome, for eight hundred
years at the least till worldly ambition had clean put out all piety and
religion.

Saturnine, that I may omit says he, other things (least our disputation be
ouerlonge) which you have collected out of histories concerning the Bishops
of Rome, that one I cannot pass over, that you said that Gregory the 7. whom
you defaced as much as you could, was the first Author that excommunicated and
deposed Kings.

For both Leo the 3. Emperor was excommunicated by Gregory the 2. and
plainly deprived of all his temporalties he held in Italy, and the Greek
Emperors were removed from the Empire by Leo the third Bishop of Rome, for
defect in religion, and forsaking the defense of the Church, and the Empire
translated to the Germans. The defense of Popes. Causa: 15 qu. 6. alius Plat.
in Zach. 1. F^^sing. lib. 5. cap. 22.
For who knows not that Childricke the French King was deposed by Pope
Zecharie the first, as foolish and unprofitable, and Pipine appointed in his
place? as it is clear in our law, and Platina writes that by his authority
the kingdom of France was adjudged to Pipine. And Frisingensis, which Author
your self do follow, writes that Pipine was absolved by Pope Steven from the
Oath of fealty, which he had given to Childricke, and the other peers of
France likewise, and that the King being shaven and thrust into a Monastery,
Pipine was anointed King. More then that, Gregory the great, whom erewhile
you called a worm in respect of the Emperor, did bring the same into practice
whereof we now speak, four ages before Gregory the 7. for in the charter of
a privilege granted to the monastery of Saint Medard, he so decrees; If any
king, Prelate, Judge or other secular person whatsoever do violate the decree
of the Apostolic authority and grant, of what degree or state soever he
be, let him be deprived of his honor.

Wherefore in that you deprave Gregory the seventh that most holy man being
dead, because he was the first that offered to depose Henry the 4. Emperor, a
man full of dishonest lust, The Empe^^^ Henry the 4. slandered. Auenti. lib. 4.
Anna. Bot^.
infamous for his adulteries and whoredoms, which his very friends could not
deny, as Auentine writes: truly it bewraies both great ignorance, and
singular malice in heretics. And, that I may not heap many things together,
wherewith the histories of those times have set forth the fame and glory of
Gregory; the form of his election, as it is set down by Platina, Sabellicus
and other writers, Author. 3. conuer. Angli. par. 2 cap. 7.
does easily show what kind of man he was. We have chosen this day, being
the 21. day of May, in the year of our Lord 1072. for the true Vicar of
Christ, Gregory's false praise.
Hildebrand the Archdeacon, a man of great learning, great holiness, wisdom,
justice, constancy, religion. The commendation of Lambert Schafnabergensis is
extant, wherein he writes, that those things which were usually brought to
pass by the prayers of Gregory with signs and wonders, and most fervent
zeal for God and the laws of the Church, do sufficiently defend him against
the venomous tongues of all slanderers.

And what other authors write, even the Germans themselves, of Gregory's
enemy, infamous for adultery, Marian. Sco. i^ chro. an. 1075
simonie and other trespasses, what shall need to speak? Marianus Scotus is
witness, that Gregory the 7. moved with the just outcries of Catholic men, who
mightily spoke against the sauagenes of Henry's impiety, did for the same
excommunicate the Emperor, but principally for his simonie, in buying and
selling of Bishoprics. And this act of the Pope, did greatly content
Catholics, but displease them who were ready to buy and sell benefices, and
favored the Emperor.

I might allege the same for Adrian the fourth, and Alexander the third,
against Frederick the first, and for Honorius, and Gregory the ninth, and
Innocent the third against Frederick the second, but that I remember, you gave
us a caveat, that the question between us was not about the quality of the
person, but about the right of power. I might show also if it were not over
long, that those very Roman Bishops themselves, whose humility and obedience
you commended, did perform the same, not with any prejudice of their right,
but for want of power to resist the heretical and tyrannous Emperors. I might
allege likewise national Counsels and Parliaments also, which did always
approve the necessary and just correcting and deposing of such Emperors and
Kings, as you name, by the Popes censures.

Carolus Regius, it is pretty, said he (which the Orator observes) to put
over the business till another time, when you have no more or better matter to
allege though you would. But that I may briefly answer the objections, that
Leo the 3. Emperor, was deprived of all his temporalties by Gregory the
second, Leo the Emperor, how deposed by the Pope.
which he held in Italy; certainly if we diligently search the history,
although the revolt of the Italians from Leo the Emperor of Constantinople,
may seem to be the act of Gregory the second, Zoner. an. Tom. 3. in impera.
Leo. Isaar.
as historians testify, because it made much for the Bishop, to have the
Emperors wings clipped in Italy: yet it nothing belongs to the controversy in
question: for the Pope did it not as the minister of excommunication, but as
the head of rebellion; neither as a Bishop without the rest, but as a Rebel
with the rest, not with that universal authority, which

Visp^rg^in an. 718. Sige^ert. in an. 731. Blond. dec. 2. l. 1 Sab^ll. Enne. 8.
lib. 8. Au^ntin. Anna lib 4. fol. 344. and Sigebert. in an. 801. How the Empi^e
was translated to the Germans.
But the Empire was translated from the Greeks, by Pope Leo the third, to the
Germans. Not so. For the Empire was translated, not by the Popes keys, but by
the decree of the people of Rome, as your own historiographers testify,
neither for religions sake, but for respect of civil justice: for the Romans
who had in purpose revolted long since from the Emperor of Constantinople, who
perceived themselves to be forsaken of the Grecians, and exposed to the
inrodes of the Lombards, taking that occasion, because a frantic woman, that
is, Irene the mother to Constantine the sixth, had put out her sons eyes, and
taken away his crown, all of them with one applause chose Charles for their
King, crown him by the hands of Leo the Pope, and salute him Caesar and
Augustus.

Neither did the Pope depose Childericke, Sabell. ^nne 8. lib. 8.
the French Pepines prowess, Childericke not deposed by the Pope.
and being weary of the Kings silly weakness, Zachary the Pope being first
consulted withal, and the title of a King taken from Childericke, that all
hope of ruling might be taken from him, shave him for a Priest, and chose
Pepine for their King. He was therefore set besides his Kingdom, not only by
the Popes consistory, but the council and consent of the Peers and people,
for that he was unprofitable for the kingdom, as you observed: how justly I
do not dispute, only I show, that not by the excommunication of the Pope,
who could never have brought so great a matter to pass, but by the
ioynt-consent of the Nobles and people, he was put from his Kingdom, and
Pepine and his posterity substituted in his place.

For whereas you said that Gregory the great, brought Medard, let him be
deprived of his honor. Whether is this rather a deprivation of a King, or an
imprecation? Add which you omitted, and let him be damned in the lowest pit of
hell with Judas the traitor. If the Pope have power out of this place to
depose a King, he has likewise power to damn him. But he has not power to
damn him, therefore he has not power to depose him. Are you well in your wits,
who take a vow for a censure; and the form of imprecation, for a sentence of
deprivation, a former curse, for a revenge following?

Gregory the seventh, your sweet delight, and that worthily, for that he
showed himself not only a traitor, as you are your selves, and desire to
make others like your selves; but also a captain and ringleader of all
treason, to promote the glory of Priests, with diminishing the credit of the
people.

For those praises which you lay upon Gregory, and those reproaches you cast
upon Henry, do nothing either help your cause, or hurt ours: but I wonder
that this good Archdeacon, as you call him, proved so bad a Bishop, Gregory
condemned, and for what.
that all the German Bishops almost did condemn him in the Council of
Worms, of monstrous periuries, strange mis-behauiours, and diverse outrages in
his life. But the Italians did acquit him. Not so neither. For thirty of them
being assembled at Brixia, after they had received Ambassadors and letter,
from nineteen Bishops, who had consulted at Mentz, with the Nobles of Italy
and Germany, did publicly testify, that Gregory did most impudentlie
in^rude himself into the Sea Apostolic by deceit and briberie, did pervert
all Church government, did trouble all government in the Christian Empire, did
attempt the destruction both of body and soul of a Catholic and peaceable
King, and maintained a perjured rebel against him. Nor being therewith
content, at last adjudged Hildebrand a most shameless person, committing
sacrilege and robbery, defending periuries and murders, calling into
questiun the Catholic and Apostolic faith, about the body and blood of
Christ, being an ancient scholar of Berengarius the heretic, an evident
obseruer of dreams and diuinations. And therefore to be canonically deposed
for his backsliding from the true faith, Lambert in an. 1077.
and to be thrust out of his Popedom. But these factious fellows favored
the Emperor against the Pope. What? they that favored the Pope against the
Bishop? But Lambert Schafnaburgensis does praise the man. But the same very
Lambert, whenas he was the Popes Legate, and had showed that the Emperor had
reconciled and submitted himself at Canufium, yea by his own report, all of
them (the Italians) began to chafe, to hiss and clappe their hands, and to
scoff at his apostolical Legacy with flowting outcries, and to cast out
bitter and railing curses in their mad mood, that they nothing regarded his
excommunication; whom all the Italian Bishops had excommunicated a goodwhile
since upon just causes; him, who had climbd up into the Apostolic seat with
simonicall heresy, imbrued it with murders, defiled it with adulteries and
capital enormities: that the King had done otherwise then became him, and had
much staind his honor, for submitting the majesty of a King to an Heretical
Pope, most infamous for all villainies. For all this we excuse not the faults
of the Prince, but defend his right, neither do we accuse the life of the Pope,
condemned by his own side, but we weigh his fact: we observe this one thing,
that a Simoniacall and an adulterous Emperor, as Marianus Scotus writes, was
ill removed by a Simoniacall and adulterous Pope as the Germans and Italians
call him.

I am not ignorant that Frederick the first and second, Henry the fourth was:
Princes traduced by popist writers.
as Lud^uicke the fourth Emperor by John the 22. and Philippe the fourth
surnamed the fair, the French King by Boniface the 8. and Henry the 2. King of
England by Alexander the 3. and John King of England by Innocent, all of them
being once excommunicated, were by the flattering style of the Roman writers
abused and slandered. That it is no great matter to wonder at, that the Princes
of our time being taken for Heretics by you though falsely, Henry the 8.
Edward the 6. Elizabeth, and James the first be so unworthily dealt withal,
who did even then in the midst of popish darkness so cruelly vex their own
Princes.

But that not only the English whose faithfulness toward their Princes,
certain hired vassales of the Pope have endeauored to corrupt in their books
set out in English; but that the Germans, the French, the Spaniard, the
Italian may see out of their own monuments the fidelity of their ancesters
toward their own Emperors and Princes, even then when the Popes did most
terribly thunder against them: that they may acknowledge it with me, and the
rather imitate and express it, in so clear a light of the Gospel: hearken I
pray you hearken, not what a few Lutheranes and Caluenistes, but what the
Catholics of these nations almost without number, have often decreed in their
Sinodes and Parliaments for their Kings against the Popes tyranny: which
writers shall with authority easily overcome the rest either old or new, being
few in number and corrupted by bribes.

Germans and Italians both Bishops and Nobles did decree publickely, for
their Emperor Henry the 4. against Gregory the 7. Now hear what the Germans
did publicly first for Frederick the second against Innocent the 4. then for
Jews against John the 22. and after of the rest.

The Pope resisted by the popish clergy.
The Germane Bishops first whenas they had received a charge from Albert Pope
Innocents Legate, to publish the bull of excommunication against Frederick, all
of them refused it. The Abbotes being commanded, to curse the Bishops that
refused, neglected it. The Clergy receiving a new charge that they should
choose new Bishops, and the Monks other Abbotes, being greatly aghast at the
nouelty of the example began to disdain, and chafe: and detest the rashness
of the Popes Legate, and grievously to accuse even the Pope himself, for
undertaking so strange and shameful an action against all equity and right,
and filling all Germany with troubles.

How did they entertain Raberius a French man being another Legate sent from
Innocent in the same business, having his associate the Bishop of Rentzburge
when he delivered the bull against the prince? All of them scoft at the man's
impudency, and disdainefully asked what that light headed and superstitious
French man, what the Rome-pope himself did in Germany, without the consent of
the Germaine-byshops his colleagues. They disdain that discordes should be
sown, that the liberty of Christians should be oppressed, that the flock of
Christ redeemed by his blood should be brought into slavery by false
Teachers. And when the Legate would not give over, the Germane Bishops did
not only despise his commandments but denounced a curse against him in all
their Churches, as an enemy to Christian peace, and an Arch heretic, and
pronounced him to be worse then any Turk, Saracene, Tartar, or Jew. They did
publicly likewise accuse the Bishop of Rome, for attempting such matters
among Christians, which were against reason and the law of nations, against the
doctrine of Christ, and which were not at any time done among the most savage
Tartars.

And as the Bishops, so the nobles of Germany did take in foul scorn so
great a wrong offered by the Pope to the Emperor their Master: and to repel
it conuented all the States, wherein Eberhardus the Archbyshoppe of Salisburge
a godly old man, when he had known ten Romane-byshoppes, and had diligently
marked their practizes and dispositions, under Frederick the first, Henry the
sixth his son, and Frederick the second his Nephew for fifty years together,
that the chief bishop was wholly compounded of avarice, luxury, contention,
wars, discordes, and desire of rule and so did decipher him for a ravenous
wolf in each part under a Shepherds weed, and so lively paint him out, that
although in other matters he were not a Lutherane, in this one, you would have
said he had been almost Luther himself The old Catholic fathers Oration is
extant in Auentine a Catholic Writer, Auenti. annal. lib. 7. fol. 683.
there you may have it if you will read it.

Germany with the whole commons did with common consent against Innocent the
fourth in the quarrel of Frederick the Emperor, the very same they did in
the like quarrel of Jews the fourth Emperor against John the 22. that
although they were released from the Oath of Obedience they did notwithstanding
take the Oath of obedience to be faithful to Jews though he were removed,
and that they did by the judgment of all the Doctors in both laws.

Philip the fair the French King in a council with full consent of the Nobles
and Bishops, did not only set at naught, and despise the iniust sentence of
the Popes deprivation sent out against him, but brought all the kingdom from
the Popes obedience: and that he might the better tame his pride, he laid hold
of the Pope, kept him in durance, so that within six weeks after in great
anguish of soul he gave up the Ghost. Popes crossed by the French.
The pragmaticall sanction is well known, which did of old infringe the Popes
authority: and all the canons of the Church of France (that part which
maintains the popish religion) and all the decrees of the Kings parliament do
so disanull the Popes power in excommunicating Kings and releasing their
Subjects from the Oath of obedience; Tract. inscript. le Franc. Discourse an.
1600.
that the very body of Sorbone, and the whole University of Paris do condemn
the doctrine of the Jesuits as schismatic and pernicious.

Neither Henry the 8. only, Edward the 6. and Elizabeth, English practice
against Popes.
whom you term Caluinists and Heretics, did by their laws expel this
usurped authority of the Pope, and punished by death the Abetters thereof: but
other Kings of England, who reigned in the midst of popery, thought good to
contemn the Popes censures, and to suppress the Actors therein by your Laws.

The law of Edward the 3. 25 Edwar: 3.
does it not seem to be made by a Caluinist, which makes it treason, to
attempt and go about the death of the King, to move war in his Kingdom
against the King, or to join with the Kings enemies in his kingdom, or to
give them aid, and comfort, either within the Kingdom or without?

Do you not see how that two hundred years before Queen Elizabeth was borne,
the Priests treason, covered with the habit of religion by the Statute of
Edward the third in every branch of it, as it were with lime twigges, is met
with and suppressed?

If to attempt the death of the King be treason, therefore Greenway and other
Jesuits, who took counsel to destroy the King and kingdom had been
Traitors by Edward the thirds Law although Queen Elizabeth had made no such
law.

If to raise war against the King in his kingdom were then treason, the
priests were Traitors, who stirred up papists to take arms and to join
themselves with Catsby and Persie in the rebellion.

If to join with the Kings enemy in his kingdom were then treason, how can
you then, ye Jesuits, avoid the sharpness of King Edwards law, who being the
instruments of sedition, do adheare to the Pope the Kings deadly enemy, under
the color of religion?

If to aid and anima^e the Kings enemies either within his kingdom or without
was treason at that time; truly whosoever at this day under pretense of
religion whatsoever do either solicit foraine Kings, to invade this Kingdom,
as Garnet, Creswell, Baldwine, and others have done; or persuade the people to
take arms to depose their King, as Greenwell, Hall and others have undertaken,
were Traitors although Elizabeth with her Caluinists, had never made any law
against them.

Edwardes law you will say does not touch the people by name. True. But when
the noble King remembered that the French King was stirred up against John King
of England, who had contemned the Popes censures, that the Subjects were
incensed against their King, the Barons and Bishops fell from him, and were the
Ministers of the Popes wrong; that thereby he might the better confirm his
subjects in their obedience, against the French, the Spanish and the Roman,
and all others whatsoever, from whom he foresaw danger might come to himself
and his kingdom and that he might decline the envy of naming the Pope
particularly, made a general Statute with the consent of the Bishops, Baron,
and Commons without any exception of person or cause whatsoever, wherein he
made him a Traitor, whosoever did adhere to the Kings enemy in his kingdom, or
did aid or animate any either within his dominions or without, who should move
war against the King; including by his general word as well the Pope, as the
Popes factours, as if he had expressly named them.

and that they would unite the^se^ues to the King against the Pope, in all
causes undertaken by the Pope against the King, his crown and dignity, and
wou^d live and die with the King. This was the love and the ancient
faithfulness of the whole English people toward their King, namely, against
the Pope: they were so far from suffering the King to be deposed by the Pope.

Now the Spaniards, with what earnestnes they have Council. Teleta. 4 Cano. 75.
their many Councels of Toled do declare in that book which is entitled the
Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, The practice of Spaniards against Popes.
wherein they seem to check your equivocation, which they observed in many
things, when as they made profession of their oath with their tongue, and
retained in their mind perfidious treachery.

Do you not see how in the thick darkness of Popery, these noble Nations,
the I^^lians, Germans, French, English and Spanish did retain this light and
heat of obedience toward their Kings against the Popes? and that in this
business, neither the Bishops dissented from the Nobles, nor the Nobles from
the Bishops: but the Laickes with the Clearkes, and the Clearkes with the
Laickes, Councels with Parliaments did fully agree to maintain the dignity of
the King, and the obedience and concord of subjects against the popish
censures? what is become of this ancient nobility, and this virtue of the
people? where is that magnanimity of the Italians, French, Germans and
Spanish? when shall we ever see a second Frederick, or another Philip the
fair, who will suppress the Popes insolency in Germany and France? when will
these noble Kingdoms bring forth such Catholic Bishops, which will keep the
Kings crowns and the peoples consciences free from the Popes tyranny? They
have England, Scotland and other famous countries going before them in this
business. But you call these schismatic, the Italian, Germane, French,
English and Spanish, who with common consent resisted the Pope. But mark, if
you believe Sigebert your Abbot, if it be not a harder matter for you to wipe
away the note of heresy from the Pope, who carries himself so proudly against
Kings, then to take away the aspersion of schism from those Catholic people,
who did maintain their Kings against the popes.

Saturnine, how that is very false which you alleged erewhile, that the
Councels and national Parliaments did ever approve the deposing of Kings by
Popish censures, when as they did publicly condemn their insolency, cruelty,
treachery toward their Kings, as you see. For so the matter stands, grace did
never destroy nature, or divinity ciuility, faith did never overthrow civil
justice, but made it better, nor ever took away the affection of man, but made
it more humane: And when men ought to behave themselves reverently toward the
parents of their bodies, much more reverently ought they to carry themselves
toward their country, and the father thereof? for this love of our country,
and reverend respect of our Kings, is not taught us by a master, but in bred
and grafted by nature, which whosoever does under pretense of religion, either
weaken or blot out, he opposing himself to God the author of nature, is to be
accounted not a Pastor, but an impostor, not a holy father, but a cruel
tormentour of souls and bodies: But you, as if the Popish religion put all
civil honesty out of the mind of men: and as if Popish zeal did blot out
all natural affection, you think that the glory of your Pope must be builded
up with the blood of our Princes, and the greatness of your Kingdom, with the
ruins and desolations of our Country. And if Catholic Kings did retain
those Princely spirits of their ancestors, proud Popes would not more boldly
desire to rule without the commandment of God, then they to forbid them, being
armed with the sword of God. And by the example of most excellent Protestant
Kings, they would not only prune and cut off these hurtful sprigges of this
unjust and poisonfull power, but they would utterly cut up, and pluck up that
poisoned tree from the very roots out of their Kingdoms. But the beginning of
all this mischeife is the Popes spiritual supremacy, whereby he claims to
be the head of the visible Church, the Vicar of Christ, the Judge and Father of
Kings, the universal Bishop of Bishops: to whom the original of all
spiritual jurisdiction does forsooth immediately descend from Christ, to be
derived mediately to others from him: which whether it be done with greater
wrong to Kings or to Bishops, I cannot justly set down. But all this
spiritual supremacy, from whence all the force and nature of that
excommunication does depend, whereof so many things have been spoken, and of
the deposing of Kings, and of releasing of subjects from the oath of obedience:
Patriott shall pluck it in pieces in the Creed, wherein first he shall fly
at the head of Popery, after he shall wound the body. Thus we have seen
Pragmaticall Antichrist upon the stage, now we shall hear him disputing out
of his chair.

DOGMATICAL ANTICHRIST, OR The Popes Creed, OR The Pastor reigning. The second
book of the Dialogue.
AFter that the most renowned James Bellarmines Epistle for the Oath of
Allegiance: One Matthew Tortus, under whose visard Bellarmine lay hid, vttred
both elsewhere diverse articles blasphemous against God, and those two
reproachful against Princes, full of insolency and cruelty, one of the
supreme dignity, the other of the depriving power of the Pope, and set them
out, being taken forth of the Popes new creed, with all the skill he could.
This creed was composed of twelve new articles of the Romish-Catholike faith,
The division of the Popes creed.
taken in Council of Trent, as it it propounded in the bull of Pius the
fourth, about the oath of the profession of the Christian faith. It may be
divided into two parts; one wherein the faith of Christians, the other wherein
their faithfulness toward Princes is corrupted. From that spring out the
articles of superstition and idolatry, from this, of treason and sedition. By
them they are made evil Christians, by these evil subjects, that it is hard
to say, whether they have more troubled the Church, or this the commonwealth.
Hence Lionell Sharp an English Divine took upon him to lay open the popes
whole creed, and to illustrate it in a Dialogue. For when as the most learned
Bishop of Chichester, had plainly showed against Tortus, or rather counterfeit
Bellarmine, that the Apostles Creed was set forth, whereto James the Apostle
before his martyrdom had added the Article of Christ, before the departure of
the Apostles from Jerusalem: and therefore before S. Peter came to Rome, by the
testimony of Baronius himself, Anno 44.
and had concluded necessarily from thence, that the Catholic faith was fully
finished before the Apostolic See was begun: hence it is said, there arose a
doubt in that right honorable Calanders conscience, a Papist, but very
moderate and honest, not only of the supremacy of Peter, and of that
depriving power annexed to the supremacy, but of all the whole Romish Catholic
faith, which he saw was contained in the popish, not Apostolical, Nycene, or
Constantinopolitane Creed.

William Argentine, came again to visit him: It is very well said Calander,
that you are met again to discuss before us a very difficult controversy,
of the popes new creed, which Pius the fouth had formerly compiled, and Paul
the 5. commanded it lately to be printed: my good friend Argentine has lately
recited it, and I hope by and by he will recite the same to you. This being
prescribed by the Church; utterly to reject it, I do as yet (to speak truly)
make a conscience: and to admit it wholly, unless it be ratified by the
testimonies of the holy Scripture, I cannot admit without scruple of
conscience. For I have lately learned to give attendance to the holy Scripture,
which holy S. Peter does directly affirm to be as a candle lightened in this
life, to us wandering in darkness, 2. Pet. 1.
Which holy Paul does likewise make the foundation of the Church, Ephesians. 2.20.
1. Tim. 3.15.
and yet I cannot depart rashly from the Catholic Church, whereto I have been
accustomed, which the same S. Paul calls the pillar and ground of truth, by
which there is a creed of faith set out for me. So I hang doubtful between
the Scripture and the Church, which God has given unto us, as the Sun and
Moon, the two great lights to give us light to life.

Then Patriott: you say right Calander, said he, in the The Scripture and
Church compared to the Sun and Moon.
but that you err in the special, as after it shall better appear.

But the holy Scripture has light in it self as the Sun, the Church is a
light, but borrowed from the Scripture, as the Moon from the Sun; and these
two, I confess, are given us of God to direct us unto eternal life. But the
Scripture directs us with masterly authority, the Church with her ministry:
for the holy Scripture is the wisdom of God in Christ, inspired from above
into holy men, for the eternal salvation and perfection of the Church, as the
Apostle has defined it. God has commended the Scripture to the Church, The
office of the Church.
as an heavenly charge, that it may discern, expound, keep and publish it to
men: the Scripture is therefore men's master, but the Church is Gods minister.
Therefore the Apostle calls the truth the foundation of the Church, and the
Church the pillar of truth, as Solomon made his chariot to have a golden
axtree, and pillars of silver, understanding by the axetree, the sound doctrine
of the Messiah, by the pillars, the faithful teachers of the same.

The office of the Scripture.
and the Church is the house of God: the truth is the golden foundation of this
house: and this house is the silver pillar of this truth, that is, cut out of
the truth, as out of the rock, as Chrysostom observes. So if the Scripture
be the base of the Church, then the Church is the pillar of the word, as he
spoke very wittily. Now reason teaches, that the foundation is not sustained
by the house, but the house by the foundation. And religion concludes from
thence, that truth makes the Church, not the Church the truth. For the
approbation of the truth is the working cause of the Church. For before it do
approve the written word of God, it is but a company of Infidels and Idolaters:
after it has approved it, it begins to be the family of the faithful
worshippers of God, that is, a Church. Further, although the Church by the
Spirit do discern the true Scripture from the false: yet the Scripture being
once known and acknowledged, as before it made, so after it shows the
Church. For what more certain note can there be of showing a thing, then the
working cause of the thing? Again, what privilege soever the Church does
rightly challenge to it self, it received from the Scripture, as that which
calls the Church the pillar of truth. Therefore the truth of the Scripture is
more ancient in time, more perspicuous for the light, and greater for authority
then the Church; which when it once receives her essence, light and power from
the Scripture, then at last, as a pillar, it vpholdeth with her ministry the
truth in respect of men, and reueales it to the inhabitants of the earth: and
it is that ground whereon men both may and ought to lean and rest. Laws upon
pillars, so the Scriptures on the Church.
Whereupon the Prophetical and Apostolical doctrine is said to be the
foundation of the Church, the Church is the strength of doctrine, not the
foundation. It is evident therefore, that the Church is founded and sustained by
the truth, and that the truth is sustained and revealed by the Church once
founded, as it were, a watchtower for travelers, to direct them into heaven.
The Heathens were wont to write their laws in tables, and hang them up upon
pillars to be read of the people. The Apostle describing the Church, compares
it to such a pillar, the use whereof was to show the Law, when it self was not
the Law. So the true, Orthodoxe and Catholic faith being written in the tables
of the Scripture, is fastened to the Church, as it wereto a most beautiful
pillar, as a most strong prop, which rests upon it, not with its own, but a
borrowed strength. Wherefore the Apostle in the second to the Ephesians defines
the Church, when in the second to Timothy, he describes it. For there he
argues from the causes, here from the effects, in each place he understands
the Church of Ephesus, that is, a particular Church. In the first place he
teaches what made that, in the second what that did: nor so much, what it
always does (for of necessity the foundation being taken away, the Church must
fall, as it happened first to the Church of Ephesus, and afterward to the
Church of Rome) as what it ought to do. For this is rather an admonition then
a commendation, and with a praise gives warning of duty. Wherefore you shall
do well, Calander, as S. Peter warnes you, if you always give attention to
the holy Scripture, as to the candle: to the Church, as to the candle-sticke,
so long as it contains and vpholdeth that candle, giving light to all the
house. For if it be bereft of the light of her sun, and being blind
endeauours to make others blind also, while it makes new Articles of the
faith, and conceales the old: it does retain the name of a Church, but it has
altogether lost the nature, that which may very truly be spoken of the Church
of Rome.

Saturnine, by whom you think that new Articles of the faith were made; for
the Articles of the faith, which it propoundes are divided into two sorts.

One are of immediate Revelation. Others are drawn and fetched from thence.
What articles of faith the Church makes.
The Church does not make new Articles of the faith of the first sort. But the
Church makes Articles of the second sort, which ought to be believed with the
Catholic faith as the case requires, if it think them necessary. Therefore
Vincentius Lyrinensis thinks that the life of prophetical and evangelical
doctrine, must be directed by the rule of Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense,
so that he does in vain brag of the text of scripture, who rejects the sense
of the Church.

Patriott, how absurdly is it said says he, that the Church does not make
immediate revelations of God? Unless that be more absurd to think that to
fetch and draw from, is the same which to make: for an Article must first be
made, before a doctrine can be drawn or fetched from the same. Therefore that
is said to be an Article of the faith, which is drawn from an Article
Foolishly; Articles are principles, deductions are conclusions. An article is
one thing, a conclusion drawn from the article is another: which often is so
contrary that it utterly overthrows the article. As it shall be made clear
in the explication of your creed. For I confess with Vincentius Lyrinensis,
that the line of prophetical and Apostolical doctrine is to be directed by
the rule of the ecclesiastical and catholic sense. For the ecclesiastical
and catholic sense must always agree with the Prophetical and apostolical
text. For where the text does fail us, the gloss cannot help us. Whence I
conclude that nothing can be Catholic and Ecclesiastical, which is not
Prophetical or Apostolical. Now because Vincentius does restrain the
prophetical and apostolical line, to the cannon of the Scripture, which he
confesses to be more then sufficient for faith; it follows that nothing
contrary to the canonical Scripture, can be Ca holicke though it be so
determined by the Church. Wherefore, Calander, if the Church of Rome have cast
any article of faith into the Creed of the second sort, which is contrary to
an Article of the first sort; and have added an ecclesiastical gloss,
disagreeing from the definition of canonical Scripture, that Church shall
sooner leave off to be the Catholic Church, then that Article shall begin
to be Catholic: Let us come therefore to the Creed, and let us entreat
Argentine if he please, to open it unto us.

Then Argentine, I will do it and very willingly; and Pius the 4. to be a
form of an Oath, of the profession of the orthodoxall faith.

1 I William Argentine do firmly admit and hold the Apostolical and
Ecclesiastical traditions and other ordinances and constitutions of the Church
of Rome. The Popes creed Traditions. Scriptures according to the Roman sense


2 I do firmly hold and admit the holy Scriptures according to that sense
which the mother Church has and does hold, whose right it is to judge of the
true sense and interpretation of the Scripture, neither will I ever admit it or
expound it, but according to the joint consent of the fathers.

3 I profess that there be seven Sacraments truly and properly of the new
Law, 7 Sacraments.
ordained by our Lord Jesus, necessary for the salvation of mankind. Baptism,
Confirmation the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme unction, Orders, Matrimony. I
admit the received and approved rites of the Catholic Church.

Original sin and justification.
4 I admit and hold all and every those points concerning original sin and
justification which were determined in the holy Council of Trent.

The Mass.
5 I profess that there is offered up in the Mass unto God, a true proper
propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead.

Transsubstantiation.
6 I believe that in the holy Eucharist the body and blood of Christ is truly
and really, and substantially: and that there is made a change of the whole
substance of bread into his body, and of the whole substance of wine into his
blood: which change or conversion the Catholic Church calls
transsubstantiation. I confess also that under one kind only whole Christ is
received, and a true sacrament.

Purgatory.
7 I constantly hold that there is a purgatory, and that the souls there
detained are help with the prayers of the faithful.

Adoration of Saints.
8 I hold that the Saints reigning with Christ, are to be worshipped and to be
called upon: and that they offer up their prayers to God for us, and that their
relics are to be worshipped.

The worshipping of Images.
9 I firmly hold, that the Images of Christ, and the ever blessed Virgin, and
of other Saints are to be had, and to be adored with due worship.

Indulgences.
10 That the power of indulgences was left by Christ, and that the use of them
is very available for salvation.

The supremacy of the Pope.
11 I acknowledge the Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church to be the mother
and mistress of all Churches, and I vow and swear true obedience to the
Bishop of Rome, the successor of blessed Peter the Prince of the Apostles,
and the Vicar of Jesus Christ.

The authority of the Council of Trent.
12 I undoubtedly likewise receive all other things defined and determined by
the holy Canons, and Occumenicall Counsels, chiefly of the holy Council of
Trent, and I reject and accurse all things contrary, and all heresies rejected
by the Church.

This true Catholic faith without which none can William promise, vow and
swear, so help me God, and these his holy Evangelist.

And I stand in fear of that which the most holy Father added. It shall not
be lawful for any man to infringe this authority of our ordination,
inhibition, derogation, will, statute, decree and commandment, or by any rash
attempt to withstand it.

If any shall presume to attempt any thing against these, let him know that he
shall incur the displeasure of almighty God, and of blessed Peter and Paul
his Apostles. Given at Rome at Saint Peter's in the year of the incarnation of
our Lord 1564. in the Ides of November, and of our Byshopricke the first.

You have heard of me Calander the 12. open and Secret Articles drawn from
the former.
Now if it please you take them which are drawn from them more hidden and
unknown. I hope my old friend Saturnine will give me leave to open unto you
seeing your time is not long, and are not far from heaven, and do daily
expect the hour of your departure, to open I say to you the inward sense of
the creed, and to furnish you as it werewith provision in this your journey,
that when you depart hence Saint Peter the Porter of heaven may the sooner let
you in being thus provided. The Masters speak wisdom among those that be
perfect, they have certain hid mysteries, all which they do not lay open to
all, but some certain to some, as these are thought best to agree with their
capacities and desires. Neither will I pour out all, I will reserve the
mystical sense of every Article to be found out by the practice. In the mean
time by your favor, Saturnine, the order being somewhat inuerted, I will
propound the primacy, the eleventh Article in order, the first in authority
(whereon all the rest depend) which I desire you with some of your best reasons
to defend, now rather then at any other time, wherein it is fiercely impugned
by the assaltes of the Heretics of our time.

Peter was very certainly appointed in the Scripture to be the primate, The
primacy is the chief head of faith and the chief foundation of the Catholic
faith, as Bellar: in Torto. most plainly grounded upon the Scriptures.
and Prince of the Apostles, and of the universal Church; and that the Pope of
Rome Peter's successor is the heir of this primacy, and universal principality
in the whole: who being the key-keeper of eternal life, the Pastor of the
universal flock, the head and foundation of the universal Church, the
infallible rule of faith, the chief judge of all causes and persons, having
the same tribunal with Christ, and the same consistory: in stead of Christ,
nay in stead of God, nay as God himself upon earth, and therefore I hold him
to be reverenced and worshipped.

I believe the chief inward power annexed to the primacy is of 2 sorts Sacred.
Temporal.


The sacred whereby the Bishop of Rome, as the spiritual Lord can by
excommunication drive away Kings and Princes, from the flock of Christ not
only Heretics in the faith as ravening wolves, but Catholics also, if they
prove wicked as outrageous rams. and to deprive them of all government and
free their subjects from the Oath of fealty and Obedience. The temporal
whereby the Pope as Lord of the temporalties in earth can dispose of all
crowns, and them directly, Princes saucily resembled to Wolves and Rams by
Bellarmine.
or indirectly in order to the spiritualls, as it set down by you Saturnine in
the former Dialogue, can take from one, and bestow upon another, as he shall
think it to be available to the spiritual end. And I vow and swear
spiritual obedience to the chief Prince my spiritual Bishop of Rome,
according to those mystical rules, which our Masters have prescribed to the
cureent right of the present Church, and the preservation of the same.

Here Saturnine you seem not half wary enough Argentine said he, who not
contenting your self with a public profession of the faith, Popish mysteries
not to be revealed.
which Pius the 4. did prescribe, especially to the more learned sort, but have
published the hidden and secret Articles drawn from thence, i. Mysteries as
we call them and that in the presence of Heretics: which before the creed
was set out, ought to have been believed of you, but ought not to be revealed.

It seems then, said Patriott, as Aristotle had some strange books which he
writ to all; and other subtle books, which he writ for them of the wiser
sort, which were said to be set out, and not set out; So the Pope has some
doctrine that is populare, and other that is mystical, that many of the
doctrines of your Church seem to be Proserpinaes mysteries. Yet you see
sometime how they fall from men that be not so evil disposed, and come abroad
into the world.

Then Argentine as much as ever I hated heresy so Calander required it at my
hands and you were present, who can stoutly maintain the same against any
cauelling Heretic whatsoever. That was very necessary said Calander, seeing
other were here who could as stoutly make answer. Therefore let us ignorant
Laymen learn, let the learned teach. It is your part to answer, mine to
demand. It is an old song of the Papists, a learner must believe; but a
truer, a learner must ask. You believe too many things Argentine, as there be
many men who be too incredulous in many thtngs, so I fear that in many things
many be too credulous. When we begin to believe that we ought not we will
not believe that we ought. How often and that without cause may you hear it
among us, It is a matter of faith: which ranging out of the circuit of holy
Scripture, I suppose reaches farther then it ought. These doctrines therefore
of the Catholic faith, as they are called, which are brought by our men into
the form of a creed, the state and drift of every cotrouersie being briefly
and truly propounded, I could wish they were soundly disputed and discust by
you. But chiefly that primarie Article of the supremacy whereof I desire not to
know all, but the most chief points, as also of the rest, that the errors of
the Church of Rome now doting for age, as they be well observed by certain
honest Pontificians, may appear unto us.

Saturnine said, must be very honest I warrant you that reprove our Father the
Pope: and accuse our mother the Church of dotage. For whereas you desire to
have the Articles of the Catholic faith discust, Calander; you are in a great
error. For they are in all humility to be received, not curiously to be
discussed. For as Austen says well, the simplicity of believing, not the
quickness of understanding is required in a Christian man. That he may with
reverence believe what the Church teaches, not wittily discuss it, and may
humbly submit himself to the judgment of the Church without any discourse.

Calander if you confess that our mother the Church has no errors: The Pope
of Rome does err by the Papists judgment. Peter de Aliaco a Cardinal.
Adrianus Pope. The three Legates of the Trent council.
I wonder that Peter de Aliaco a very learned Cardinal granted that there were
many things not only in manners but in faith had need of reformation. Why did
Adrian the sixth, ill touching the fountain it self, say that all mischief
came from the chief Bishop into the whole Church, and promised reformation
of all things by his Legate Cheregatus to the Germans. I wonder also why the
three Legates in the Council of Trent, did apply that Prophecy of Jeremy to
themselves, and to the popish people: This people have committed two great
evils: They have forsaken me says the Lord the fountain of living water,
and have dug to themselves cisternes that can hold no water. And in the
Council it self Cornelius the Bishop of Bitont, did openly acknowledge the
Apostasy of the Church of Rome in the chief heads both of doctrine, and
life. I would to God, says he, that they had not fallen wholly from religion to
superstition, from faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, from God to
Epicurisme; saying out of a wicked heart, and with an impure mouth, There is no
God. Neither did any Shepherd or Pope care for these things. For all of them
sought their own, and not one of them all sought for those things that belong
to Jesus Christ. Sixtus Senensis, Canus, The council of Trent rejected by
their own side.
Lindanus the Bishop, Catharinus, Pighius, Ouander, Ferus and many more: but
Pope Pius himself confessed, that the worship of the Church of Rome had much
swarued by continuance of time from the ancient institution. Therefore these
reverend Doctors, Cardinals, and holy Bishops, do give me both cause and
leave greatly to doubt. Neither do I desire only that the chief Articles of
immediate Revelation be discust, which I embrace with all faith and reverence,
but these articles of the second sort, which are supposed to be fetched from the
first, and in truth do altogether overthrow them. For whereas by the advice of
Austen, the simplicity of believing no^ the quickenesse of understanding is
required; not an humble desire of learning things necessary, but a curious
desire to seek after high mysteries is forbidden by him. For the simplicity
of belief, Implicit faith, blind Idol.
does as well shut out brutish ignorance, as presumptuous knowledge. I can
therefore no longer adore that blind Idol, implicit faith, whereby we are
taught to receive with all reverence, what the Church teaches, and to believe
as the Church believes though we do not well know what the Church believes.
Bellarm: de iustific: lib. 1. cap. 7.
Neither can I give credit to Bellarmine saying that faith does consist in the
assent, not in knowledge, and may better be defined by ignorance, then
understanding. Whence our learned adversaries do too truly conclude, that as
Clergy popery was before nothing else but a catechism of treason, so
Laicke-popery was nothing else but mere idiotisme: and as they worthily laugh
at the fox-like craft of our Doctors, so likewise the asse-headed ignorance of
our scholars. Such faith which the colliar had, so commended by Staphilus. A
certain colliar being at the point of death, Apol^g. Staphi. pars 1. page 53.
was tempted by the Devil, and demanded, what faith he held, the colliar
answered, I believe and die in the faith of the Church of Christ. The Colliars
faith.
And being again demanded, what was the faith of the Church, answered, as it
it is that faith that I hold: and so the Devil being vanquished by this
answer, fled away, if we may believe Staphilus. Therefore the faith of a Romish
Catholic is the Colliars faith, that is, a circular faith I pray you,
Saturnine, teach me first before I give my assent, and write to that reverend
Bellarmine, that he will provide that implicit faith, which is nothing else
but blind and affected ignorance, be put out of the creed, wherewith the
gravity and wisdom of the Catholic religion is greatly defaced. I have learnt
at last to distinguish between the fictions of man's brain, and the doctrines
of Christian faith, the foundations whereof are not the opinions of men, but the
oracles of God: and those which are committed to writing by the Prophets and
Apostles by inspiration of God, wherein all necessary principles of faith, and
precepts of life are plentifully contained: as I hear it affirmed by the
fathers. Let us now come to the creed.

Peter with such things, as depend thereon, have her foundation directly in the
Scripture, as the Cardinal writes in Tortus. For I hold no doctrine necessary
to be believed, unless it be founded on the Scripture, as Pope Gregory the
first reaches, I am a bad Text-man, and I read the books of the Prophets and
Apostles but seldom, the reading whereof the Church has forbidden to us
laymen, fearing lest by reading we should fall into heresies. But I am both
ashamed, and repent of that my ignorance and negligence. Yet I leave not off to
reverence the fathers both old and new, whose son I profess my felfe to
be, and not their servant. I account them for scholars in the Scripture, not
masters: witnesses and interpreters thereof, not arbitrators and judges.
Neither am I so much moved with their names, as with their reasons.

I seek not then what they bring out of themselves, but what they prove out
of the Scripture; in the cause of faith, I will henceforth admit of no
definition of the Church, unless it rely upon a manifest testimony of holy
Scripture, or at the least a necessary conclusion drawn from thence; I will
not have the matter ordered by bare authority, but let thing with thing, cause
with cause, and reason strive with reason; neither am I led with the number of
arguments but with the weight. Number does oppress the memory, weight does
beget knowledge.
Neither am I delighted with circumstances, I desire breuity. And I will
prefer one sound argument shortly and directly concluded out of the
Scripture, before all the quirkes of men brought for pomp and show. Neither
will I suffer any of you to leap from this one point to another, before I see
this be fully sifted and discussed among you. Buckle up your self therefore,
Saturnine, to set the onset, and confirm the supremacy of Peter, and the
succession of the Pope, and that power which you say is annexed to the
supremacy out of the holy Scripture: but that you may not swerve from the
state of the question, remember that you are to prove the primacy, not of
order and distinction, which is granted to Peter, but the primacy of power and
jurisdiction, which is denied. For this is, as Bellarmine says, the chief
point of the Catholic faith, and the chief foundation of all religion.

Then Saturnine, you do too much restrain, says he, Scripture alone hurtful
to the Romish Church.
Calander, the Catholic faith, if you keep it within the compass of the
Scripture. For if you admit of Scripture only, it does go ill with the
Catholic Church, as Paul the fifth did wisely answer the Venetian Ambassador.
Yet I will do as you will have me, and I will comprehend these three
together, the primacy of Peter, the succession and power of the Pope For the
Church could not long stand without a Primate and Prince, nor a Prince without
a successor, nor a successor without a supreme power.

I will give you the keys. Matthew. 16. Whatsoever you bind, or whatsoever you
loose. Feed my sheep, feed my Lambs. Ioh. 21. What they meant by Popish
keys. What by feeding.
When Christ therefore promised the keys of the Kingdom of heaven to Peter
alone, that is, to the Church, he promises the principallity. When he
committed the power of binding and loosing to Peter alone, he committed the
power of the keys. When he gave the charge to Peter alone to feed the whole
flock, he gave him the principallity. Therefore the primacy was there
promised, here it was given. For as he that receives the keys of a city,
receives the government of the city, so he that has received the keys of the
Church, has received the government of the Church. And because to feed is the
same, which to govern, and only Peter is commanded to feed, not some, but
all, therefore only Peter received the promise first in those words, to
govern the whole Church. Wherein there is joined to the threefold confession
of his love, What to loose and bind.
a twofold confirmation of honor: but those words of Christ joined to the
primacie, do prove the power of excommunicating, which was directed to Peter
alone, whatsoever you shall bind, and whatsoever you shall loose. And that
twofold, one of binding Kings, the other of loosing subjects, not only from
sins, but from vows, laws and oaths. For in those words (whose sins ye
remit) or the power of order is given to all, Io. 20.
limited over sin. But in those words, whatsoever you shall bind, and
whatsoever you shall loose, there is a power not limited, and universal given
to Peter alone, not restreyned to sins, not to persons; because he does not
say, whomsoever, but whatsoever. Whence it follows that James the King of
Great Britanie, does either not belong at all to the sheepfold of Christ, or
that he is subject to Peter, and to his successor the Bishop of Rome, the
chief Pastor, as well as the King of France and Spain: and that as Kings
catholic, Kings very sawcily resembled to Rams and Wolves.
but evil as unruly Rams, so heretical Princes as ravening wolves, are
justly to be driven by him out of the fould, and deprived of all government,
and the Lords being bound, that they rule no longer, the subjects are loose
that they obey no longer.

Here Patriot; An egg, says he, is not so like an Saturnine to Bellarmine:
who as if he had distrusted that the primacie and principality of Peter could
be proved out of one place, huddled three together, whereby he boasted in
Tortus that it was most plainly founded.

Here before I weigh Saturnines argument, I purpose to mark the popish Doctors
wrangling among themselves, by what Text of Scripture the supremacy of Peter
is said to be given unto him.

Cardinal Contarenus says it was given, Contar: de Sacra: Christ. leg. l. 3.
p. 203. Bellar: de Romans Pont. lib. 1. cap. 12. C^nterane and Bellarmine 2.
Cardinals at a far.
when Christ said to Peter, I will give thee the keys. Cardinal Bellarmine
contradicts Contarene, and denies that the keys were then given, but
promised, and that the gift of supremacy was granted with the keys, Ioh: 21.
when Christ said to him, Feed my sheep, as Saturnine observed, more subtly,
than truly, says Contarene.

But there is no more promised to Peter, Matt: 16 than was given to all the
Apostles, Ioh: 10, as Christ the best interpreter, expounded that his
(whatsoever you shall loose) spoken to Peter, in those words, (whose sins
soever you remit) speaking to all his Apostle. And taught that all this power
of the keys, was both common to all the Apostles, and directly restrained to
sins, as Ambrose, Austin, Theophylact, and Bernard thought. Therefore the
supremacy of Peter was not founded upon the keys.

Bellarmine in this place, which Saturnine also used. In the first words is
understood the unlimited power of jurisdiction given to Peter alone, not
restreyned to sins, or to persons, because he says not, whomsoever; but
whatsoever: in the second words, the power of order limited over sin
communicated to all. O admirable witty interpretation! The Bishop therefore may
set open any prison, resolve any hard doubt, for that general word, Whatsoever
you shall loose, does plainly conteyne all these things under it. The right
interpretation of the keys.
Those things are known and common, which the Fathers both old and new, both
the popish and our own, have left written in their Commentaries of the proper
and true sense of the keys: all of them did comprehend the right of the keys,
and the power of binding and loosing, within the remitting and reteyning of
sins: the key wherewith heaven is opened or shut, they make to be the
interpretation of the Law, as Tertullian; the knowledge of the Scriptures, as
Chrysostom; appointed for sins, not Seignories, as Bernard; given to all
Ministers, that they may bind and loose, that they may reteyne or remit
sins, as out of Christ Ambrose, Austin, Theophylact: that they might rightly
out and divide the word of wrath, and the word of grace, as St Paul, that to
the obstinate, this to the penitent. The key of knowledge does direct the key
of power,.i. the force of doctrine, the execution of discipline, whereby the
obstinate are shut out, and the penitent are reconciled. Two keys of order and
jurisdiction.
This is the force, this is the use of the keys, whereof the Fathers made two,
the one of Order, the other of Jurisdiction.



The key of Jurisdiction, the power of restreyning Council: Colo: sub Herman:
Sacra confess. Council. Colon. sub Adulpho.
as Gropper in his book of the Council of Coleyne under Hermannus and
Adulphus, who said, that each key did not belong to Peter alone, but was
transferd to all the Apostles and their successors. And Cusanus long before
that, Nothing said he, is spoken to Peter, that is not spoken to others: for as
it is said to Peter, Cusan a Cardinal against Bellarmine.
whatsoever thou shall bind, so it is said to others, whatsoever ye shall
bind. Here you have Cusan opposite to Bellarmine, a Cardinal to a Cardinal.
One Peter you will say received the keys, but he received them not as one man,
but as the unity of the Church, as Pius the second said. Pius 2. a Pope
against Bellarmine.
Here you have a Pope opposite to a Cardinal. Peter received them not as in
his own person, but as in the person of the Church. For if this be said to
Peter only, I will give thee the keys, the Church has them not. If the Church
have them, Peter when he took the keys signified the whole Church, as Austin
taught. Tract. 14. in Joh.
Then Caietane the Cardinal when he could not rid himself out of these
straites, If we speak, says he, formally and properly, the keys promised to
Peter are above the keys of order and jurisdiction. But this says Cardinal
Bellarmine is not true; for it was never heard of in the Church that there were
more keys in the Church then two, which he does as well grant to all the
Apostles as to Peter.

Whence I thus argue against Bellarmine.

Peter received no other power than that which was promised in the keys, as
Bellarmine says.

But the rest of the Apostles had all that power, as the Fathers, and the
learneder Papists teach, and Bellarmine whether he will or no does confess.

Therefore Peter had no other power than the rest of the Apostles.

Yet Bellarmine has a trick how to escape, he says, that the keys were
given to Peter immediately, to the rest mediately by Peter.

With hundred chains bind fast the man,
And yet this fly ladd Proteus
Will still escape do what you can.
And yet he shall not escape: for if the keys were given mediately to the rest
by Peter, they should open and shut, bind and loose, not in Christ's name, but
in Peter's name. Then how can that be true which Paul writes of himself, Paul
the Apostle, neither from men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ. For if we
credit Bellarmine, he came mediately either from the man Peter, or by the man
Peter. How does Paul affirm that he was not inferior to the chief Apostles,
as who had received both his doctrine and his vocation immediately with them
from Christ? Will the Cardinal then father a lie upon the Apostle, and labor
to prove that Paul did mediately receive the keys from Peter? All the Apostles
received the keys from Christ, the spirit descended upon all the Apostles in
fiery tongues. All the Apostles received the keys and fiery tongues from
Christ. All the Apostles are pillars.
All the Apostles are said to be the pillars of the Church, as the Fathers
observed out of the Scripture. What? Did Bellarmine read that to Peter was
given a greater and a better key, than to the rest of the Apostles? Has he
heard that a larger and a more shining fiery tongue than the rest, sat upon
Paters head, as the prince, then upon the other Apostles heads? Has he
learned, that of twelve pillars one was set more firm and surer than all the
rest, that the house might be more supported by that, than by the rest? which
if Bellarmine knew not, let him leave of to play the fool, and to tell us that
the power was given to Peter immediately from Christ, and to the rest mediately
by Peter, as it were by assignment. Mark I beseech you, Calander, I cannot say
whether more wicked, or more ridiculous consequences follow necessarily out of
this place of the keys.

The keys are promised to Peter:
Therefore to none but to Peter. Wicked and ridiculous co^clusions.

Two keys were given as badges of the ministry,
Therefore three Crowns as badges of the Empire.
For when Christ gave the keys, he gave principality,
as Bellarmine says.

Peter received the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
Therefore of earthly kingdoms.
Peter can exclude Kings heretical out of heaven,
Therefore out of their thrones.
He can bind sins,
Therefore Scepters.
He can show his power in offenses,
Therefore in possessions.
He can release penitent men from their sins,
Therefore traiterous subjects from their oaths.
He has a key wherewith he does loose the sins of Kings,
Therefore he has a club wherewith he may break their heads.
So Bellarmine has changed Peter's key into Hercules club.
He can loose and bind any thing,
He can therefore as Oedipus, loose any riddle, he can bind
Turks and bears.
These consequences prove that a King is not to be deprived of his kingdom for
heresy, but that the Cardinal is deprived of his wit for frenzy. Peter's key
is altogether the key of heaven, whereby by the preaching of the eternal
Gospel he has opened heaven to the faithful and penitent, and shut it to
the unfaithful and impenitent, which the Pope the counterfeit successor of
Peter does use otherwise, as sometime an elegant Poet played upon this princely
porter.

I should not marvel much Doctor Giles Fletcher.

If that the Popes good grace,
Did happily bear the key
Of that dark stigian place.
For he enriched has
that place with many an elfe,
And opened wide hell gate,
And entered in himself.
But since that heaven and hell
Are set so far asunder,
That he should bear the key
Of heaven it is a wonder.
But now it is none at all,
From heaven he all shuts out,
And ^pes the gate of hell,
And lets in that rout.
As the falling star in the prophecy of John he has changed the key of
heaven into the key of the bottomless pit.

Bellarmine being driven from the keys, must needs betake himself to that his
hold, Feed my sheep.

Why then good Sir, why do you urge this place of the keys any more for the
supremacy, whereby nothing was promised more to Peter than was granted to all
the Apostles, as the Fathers both old and new, both strangers and your own do
apprarantly prove?

But in this place, because to feed is the same with to rule, and Peter alone
is commanded to feed the sheep, not some, but all; therefore to Peter alone is
given the principality over the whole Church, being armed with a double sword,
with a double power, spiritual and temporal, which the old man saw, I
believe, as lunatike Pentheus by fitts saw, Two several Suns, two several
Moons appear. which the Fathers both old and new, being of a more settled wit,
Bellarmines pride in making a Cardinal equal to a King.
and sharper insight could never see. But Bellarmine thinks so gaily of the
pastoral vocation, that in respect thereof he prefers a Bishop before a
King, as a shepherd before a sheep: which perhaps he had well concluded, if
Christ had said to Peter, Feed thy sheep; he said it not, but feed my sheep.
But he does not only prefer a Bishop before a King, but makes a Cardinal
equal with him very fondly. The Bishop of Ely, was sometime Cardinal of S.
Paul's Church, as now Bellarmine is Cardinal of the Church of Rome. Yet
notwithstanding being as well learned, he would not compare himself for
modesty sake with the Cardinal, when well he might. For though as he is
Bishop of Ely, he is inferior to Bellarmine, yet as he was Cardinal of S.
Paul's Church he was nothing inferior. And yet the Cardinal is so mad, as to
compare himself to the King the Bishop of Elies Lord. But let us return to
the argument.

It is famous that which the Fathers all with one consent To feed the same
which to teach.
that to feed is the same which to teach. which is not proper to Peter alone,
but common to all Apostles and Ministers: that all the Apostles were equally
shepherds of the whole flock, that James and John were no more Peter's sheep,
than Peter was James and John's sheep; who are equally called pillars, to feed
and to rule are not synonimaes, but by Peter^ interpretation they be contrary.
That Peter was thrice confirmed by name, because Peter denied Christ thrice by
name. Not therefore for honors sake, as you say, but for comfort: or if for
honor, not that it was enlarged upon Peter above the rest, but that it was
restored to Peter: of whom Christ required a threefold confession of love, that
with his threefold confession he might blot out his threefold denial.

Excellently said Chrysostom; When Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep, it
was Christ his purpose, Chrysostom: l. 2. de sacerd.
to teach Peter, and all the rest, how much he loved the Church, to that end
that we with all our minds should take care for the same. and elsewhere in his
87 homily, mark well the words said he, feed my lambs,.i. feed my faithful
people not yours: I have demanded if you loved me, that love which you
professed toward me, show toward them: feed them, not your self. Woe to the
shepherds of Israel that feed themselves, Ezec: 34. cap.
Ezec: 34. not my flock: woe to the shepheardes that scatter the sheep of my
flock. Hearken Paul the fifth: that feed themselves, who seek their own
profit and glory, not the glory of God, not the salvation of the faithful,
over whom they have charge.

Austen speak less elegantly, when it was spoken to Peter says he, Aust. de
agon. cap. 3.
it was spoken to all; Do you love me? feed my sheep. And elsewhere, as my
sheep, not as thy sheep, Tract. in Ioh. 131.
seek my glory in them, not thine own, my gain, not thine. Hear Paul the
fifth, you think that Kings are not Christ his sheep, but your own. You seek
not the glory of Christ in teaching them, but your own in subduing them. How
the Pope feeds.
You do not endeavor to gain sheep to Christ, but to seek wool for your
self. Yea you do not only clippe the flock, but devour the flock, while you
deliver doctrine pernicious to the faith of subjects, to the safty of Kings,
to inward and outward peace. And do you love Christ? you love your own self,
Christ you do not love, no more truly then your Lord Apollyon whose vicegerent
you are upon the earth I might if I would join other fathers to Chrysostom
and Austen; I might allege out of your own men, Marsilius Patauine, and
Cusan, who appoint the feeding to be by word, and by example, by sound
preaching, and good example; and make it common not only to all Apostles, but
to all Ministers.

Bellarmine far otherwise.

Bellar: lib. 1. de pant. cap. 16.
He said to Peter. Feed. Therefore Peter alone must feed.

He said once feed my sheep; sheep, i. Priests, Bishops, and Apostles, who
have bred Lambs, twice Lambs, first understanding Jews, and then Gentiles.

Therefore he committed the universal flock to Peter, and because to feed is
the same which to rule: therefore he gave to Peter the universal principality
over the flock.

Stapleton, that by sheep Pastors, Staepl: doctr: punc: con. 2.
Bishops, and Apostles are signified: by lambs the rest of the faithful. So
happy is Bellarmine, that he never coined so ridiculous or idle a conceit, but
some or other would take it up, Mald: in Ioh: 21.
and commend it over to fools. Mark says Maldonatus, if this subtilty
cast-not learned men into a laughter. Lambs and sheep confounded, Ioh. 17. the
name of the Lamb is a little more kind, and carries a greater show of love,
Feed is not to rule.
but there is no difference in the thing but in the word.

For whereas you say that to feed is all one with to rule, whence you seem
with Bellarmine to fetch the universal Monarchy of Peter, it is not only a
hungry, but a swelling and proud interpretation.

(...), is not to rule, but to feed, (...), are not Rectors but Pastors. And
(...) and (...) are sinononyma, the former word Christ used in the 3. place.
(...). Now assume out of John being rightly translated, and what will you then
conclude? that it was given in charge to Peter, that he should feed the
flock, therefore to rule the flock.

But be it so, let feed, and rule be all one; to rule when it is enjoined to
Bishops, is that which to direct: that is to rule with wisdom and counsel,
not with power and government. But Bellarmine does thus interpret Christ, feed
Peter. i. rule and govern.

Baronius goes farther, Baronius makes feed to kill.
in the excommunication of the Venetians, to Paul the 5. there is a double
ministry of Peter, to feed and to kill, for the Lord said to him feed my
sheep, and he heard a voice from heaven kill and eat.

This killing is not cruelty says he, but piety and sincerity, Paul the 5.
The Pope, does kill in piety.
out of his love and piety forsooth does kill men, which Seneca does call
cruel piety. But he kills them that he may hide them in his entrails,
says he: I think so, he will have the Pope not only to fleece the flock,
but swallow it up at a bit. Baronius does use the words of charity, but the
examples of cruelty. For he propounds Gregory these uenth, and Alexander
the third, his Countrymen of Seen to be imitated by Paul the 5. Christian Kings
must be very secure I warrant you, whenas the Pope does once begin to play
Gregory's and Alexanders prankes. As Bellarmine does stretch out his (to rule)
to the head and throat, he does it somewhat more w^^^ly, but with as little
honesty. For when he had written in his letters to his friend Blackwell, that
no Pope had ever commanded that the Prince should be killed: and the Author of
the Apology had excepted, that he commanded war to be raised, wherein he
might be slain: he answers in Tortus, How the Papists may kill a King, how
not.
that Bellarmine spoke not of murder, which may happen in battle, but of
that murder which may be committed by a royster. A very honest distinction. As
though he be not as well a murderer, who at the command of the Pope does
kill the King by open force, Cardinal Comensis incited Parry to kill Q.
Elizabeth.
as he that shall do it by secret treachery. That this Cardinal threatening
wars and arms is no honester then Cardinal Comensis, whose letters are
extant, wherein he encouraged Parry, with promise of reward and pardon from the
Pope, that he should bring to good effect the purpose of his good spirit,
those were his words, that is, that he should murder Queen Elizabeth with
his dagger. Bellarmine proved no better to our excellent King James, but
somewhat the closer. Did Peter feed the Church after this manner? This is not
food but poison. Did he so guide the flock of his Master, as if the chief
belweather of the flock went astray, he would take care, that he should either
closly or openly be slain? Give a Shipheards crook to a Shepherd. What has
a Shipheard to do with a sword? Yes forsooth says he, when Christ made Peter
a Pastor, he made him a Prince. For when he commanded him to feed he
commanded him to rule. And he gave him not only a ministry but a magistracy.
But, good Sir, the inward and spiritual government is one thing which Peter
exercised over souls, by the word, the Sacraments, and the keys: the earthly
and outward government is another thing, which Paul the 5 does practice by
fraud and force against crowns. I pray you tell me Calander, what difference
you make between these two, and the Commentaries, of the Fathers, and their
own popish writers? Mark the consequencies depending on this interpretation
partly foolish, partly wicked.

Peter is commanded to feed the flock of Christ.

Therefore none but Peter.

Upon Peter is laid the charge of feeding and teaching.

Therefore the honor of ruling and reigning is bestowed on him.

Peter's duty is to teach Kings.

Therefore to depose Kings.

To instruct Kings, therefore to destroy Kings.

To Peter is granted a spiritual regiment, therefore an earthly government.

Whether does he that knits together such consequences (and these are
necessarily gathered out of Bellarmines interpretation) seem to be sent to the
schools or to the Anticira for a purge. Charge is laid, Calander, upon all
true Pastors in Peter, to feed and rule the flock of Christ committed to
their charge, but so that they feed them with the spiritual food of
wholesome doctrine, and rule them with the staff of wholesome discipline. But
if Paul the 5. do not feed the flock but feed upon it, and do not order
the steps of his sheep, but break their legs and their heads, truly he
does give food, and use his shepheardes staff otherwise then Christ appointed.
Wherefore I think King James would rather fast then be fed by such a
Shepherd, who feeds to that end that he may kill and eat. What other Kings
do let themselves look to it; let them laugh in their sleeves as they please,
when they read these foolish quiddities of Scholars, but let them take heed
of such wicked baits of rebellion, which lurk in Bellarmines new Dictionarie.
Wherein To feed and to rule are (...).
To teach a King and to depose a King all one.
The excommunication of a King, and deprivation.
The absoluing of sinners from s^^e, is the absoluing subjects from their duty.


James does willingly forsake the popish flock, that he may betake himself
to Gods flock, which is known of Christ, and follows him and flies from a
stranger. For he does not regard these carnal Cardinals so leaden-pated in
their arguing.

Peter is the Porter of heaven: Therefore the Lord of the world.
Peter is a Pastor, therefore a Prince.
Peter is a Fisher of men, therefore of kingdoms.
A net was given him wherewith he may take fishes as well great as little.
Therefore he has government as well over Kings as subjects.
Peter is charged to feed the sheep, therefore he is charged to feed the
rest of the Apostles.
He is twice charged to feed Lambs: therefore the Jews and Gentiles, and by
consequent all Christians.
Do not these hang together as a sickmans dreams? Does not Bellarmine seem
to expose the Scripture to mockery, when he reasons after this fashion,
against Aquinas rule, who does plainly deny that symbolicall divinity,
Bellarmine builds his Church government upon tropes.
has any force to argue? whereon for all that he has built the whole
supremacy, and does pronounce it to be a doctrine of the Catholic faith, most
plainly founded upon the Scriptures. The Philosophers do laugh at Epicure for
making the world of moates. And will not Divines hiss out Bellarmine that
frames the ecclesiastical government of tropes? For truly you shall as soon
find Moors Vtopia in the world, as Peter's Monarchy in the text. Which Article
notwithstanding, is fained to be the chief article of the Popes Creed,
wherein are contained many articles, as well of superstition and Idolatry, as
of conspiracy and rebellion. So that Popery is nothing else but a plain
catechism of false faith toward God and the King.

For that double power ecclesiastical and temporal, Peter, to the Pope and
the Popes successor, which you assume and prove not. Ecclesiastical, whereby
by excommunication he may bind Kings, and absolve subjects, not only from
sins, but from vows, laws and oaths. So by excommunication the Pope
steals away crowns from Kings, and souls from subjects, while he takes
away authority from the one, and obedience from the other. In both he breaks
Gods will, whereby the civil power of the Prince, though he be evil, and the
obedience of the subject is soundly established, as I have fully and at large
satisfied you in the former Dialogue: and I have no less infringed the Popes
temporal jurisdiction, where you alleged it. In the mean while there was no
reason this insolent Cardinal should term Kings Catholic in the faith, if
once they began to be wicked, unruly r^mmes: Bellarmines sauciness justly
reproved.
and Protestant Kings and Princes ravenous wolves, himself being a goat and a
fox: he durst not, I say, call them so, but that he thinks Kings to be very
patient. Who if they remembered themselves to be Kings, would teach this saucy
and busy Cardinal to follow his holy study, and not to trouble himself with
Kings affairs. Neither would they at all suffer either the truth of Gods
Testament to be so corrupted by such wicked Impostors, or the majesty of
kingly government to be so defaced. For the dissolution of government
springs out of the corruption of Gods Testament. Wherefore if they would
admit of wholesome counsel, they would judge these deceitful Iuglers, who
make controversies last for ever by the pernicious quirkes and tricks, were to
be suppressed by arms, not to be refuted by art: for certainly these will
never leave off to offer dishonor to God, and wrong to Kings.

Saturnine, you are too hot and earnest, said he, Patriott, against that most
learned Cardinal, and light of our age.

And you must leave off (said he) to praise your Cardinal, and prove the
supremacy. For your Popish writers could never yet agree upon a text, whereon
the supremacy was plainly grounded.

Then Saturnine, what is more plain and evident, says he, then that Peter is
called the head of the Apostles, Ephesians. 1. The Popish division of the head.
and the rock whereon Christ promised he would build his Church? Matthew. 16.
for although S. Paul do call Christ the principal and invisible head of the
Church, which gives life to the whole body of the Church, yet it is evident
that there is a ministerial and a visible head appointed by Christ, that may
outwardly govern the whole Church, Cor. 12.
whereof he makes mention, Corinth. 12. The head cannot say to the feet, I
have no need of you, which cannot be understood of Christ the principal head.
For Christ the eternal word of God can say to us, It follows not but might
have been as well spoken to John or James.
I have no need of you, it follows then, that it is to be understood of a
ministerial head, that is, Peter, and Peter's successor, the Bishop of Rome.
And although Paul do affirm Christ to be that one only chief foundation of
the Church, 1 Cor. 3.1^. yet when he says in another place, that the Church is
builded upon the foundation of the Apostles, and therefore upon the person of
Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, as Christ did first call him the Rock, and
Esaias when in the spirit of prophecy he spoke in the person of God, Behold I
will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation, A text peculiarly proper to Christ blasphemously applied to Peter.
as he understands Christ the chief foundation, whereof the Apostle
speaks, Another foundation, 1. Cor. 3. so he did foreshew Peter, whom Christ
called the rock, and the Pope that precious and corner stone, that
surefoundation, but a second foundation. Bellarm in praefat. de Romans Pont. cap.
1.
As was likewise prophesied of one head, which the sons of Judah, and the
sons of Israel being assembled, should appoint to themselves. Whereby it
appears that there ought to be one universal Bishop of the whole Church,
Saunders of the visib. Monar. l. 4. c. 5
and that Christ and his Vicar make one head, one visible and ministerial
head, whereon all the Church should depend, for the remedy of schism: one
rock, one secondarie foundation, even the person and chair of Peter, whereon
the Church might rest, for fear of slipping and falling.

Let us ask after the fathers, the sincere interpreters of Optatus, who
thinks that the word Cephas, as it signifies a head, taken from the Greek
word (...), and therefore calls Peter the head of the Apostles. For the word
stone in the Syriake signifies head, in the Greek, Ad Marcel. tom. Epist. 2.
each prerogative of Peter is described by that word. Now that the person of
Peter was both called, and laid the rock of the Church by Christ, Jerome is a
witness, who does plainly affirm, that Peter was he upon whom the the Lord
founded the Church. And to Damasus tom. Epist. 2. August. in Psalm. contra. part
Donat.
I am joined in communion with your blessedness, that is, to the chair of
Peter, I know that the Church is builded upon that rock. And Austin when he
makes mention of the seat of Peter, says, that that is the rock. Cypria. de
vnica Ecces. Cathol.
And Cyprian Whosoever does forsake the chair of Peter, whereon the Church is
builded, does he trust to be in the Church? It would be too long to reckon
up all the fathers, who have written that the person of Peter was called, and
placed the rock by Christ, whereon he promised not only to build the Church
at that time, but would build it after. And therefore I alleged three, who
called it not the person of Peter only, but called the chair the rock, that I
might note down in the Bishop of Rome the perpetual building of the Church,
according to the words of Christ. Now be packing Patriott, and deny if you can
this chief article of the Catholic faith, that the supremacy and
principallity of Peter, is plainly grounded upon the Scriptures. Whence a
diverse beginning and excellency may be gathered both of the Ecclesiastical
and secular government: that the Pope, as spiritual Prince, as Peter has
derived his power immediately from Christ, to govern his subjects: But secular
Princes have received their power mediately to govern their subjects, either
by the means of election. as the Emperor, and King of Polonia, or of
hereditary succession, as the Kings of Spain, France and England, or of grant
and donation, as the free Princes, or of just war and conquest, as Godfrey
heretofore and other Lords held the holy land. Therefore to the Pope, as to
Peter, ordained the chief spiritual Prince immediately from Christ in the
Church, as to the head and rock of the Church, spiritual obedience for
conscience sake is to be given of all Christians: But to secular Kings ordained
mediately by humane titles, only secular obedience for policies sake, to
preserve good order and manners, is to be performed, obedience to the higher
power always being preserved: which I would have you know, I speak to that end,
that I might call to your remembrance, Calander, that whereof you cannot be
ignorant that you do so swear fealty to the King, that you abjure not your
fealty to the Vicar of Christ. The use of which article I thought good shortly
to set before all Catholics in respect of their Princes.

Patriots, you have spoken much in few words, said he, Saturnine, and almost
all, I am sure the chiefest points, which your men do allege out of the
Scripture for the supremacy, so that you seem to have placed them in the
rereward, as your best soulders at the push of the pike, whom if I shall by
Gods grace overthrow, I trust I shall more easily defeat the rest of your
broken and scattered forces.

And first we must shortly see, in what sense Christ the eternal son of God,
is said to be the head, the rock and foundation of the Church, and so it shall
easily appear to Calander, what wrong is offered to Christ, Christ is the head,
and how. Ephe. 1.22.23.
when these are given to Peter. God has put all things under the feet of
Christ, says the Apostle, and gave him to be the head over all things of the
Church, which is his body the fullness of him that falls all in all.
Therefore Christ is the head of the universal Church, not only because he
gives life to all the members thereof, and does pour into them all the senses
and motions of spiritual graces: but also because he does rule and govern all
things subject unto him with his spirit: and thus the Church is the body of
Christ. There is therefore that reference between Christ and the Church, as
that he cannot be said to be the head, but in respect of this body, nor the
Church be a body, but in respect of this head. That it is no less absurd to
imagine a Church with two heads, then to imagine Christ to have two bodies.
Therefore Paul when he called Christ alone the head, he brought all the rest,
Christ is head alone, all others be but members.
both men and Angels into the rank of members. Of the Angels it appears
verse. 21. Of men chap. 4. and even of those men, whom he purposed afterward to
set over the Church militant, whereof he has appointed none to be the head,
but has left them all parts in the body. For when as he writ of the
perpetual government of the Church, by way of comparison, and of set purpose,
Ephesians. 4.
and had gathered many unities to preserve the unity of the spirit, in the bond
of peace: One body, one spirit, one hope, one Lord, Among many unities one
visible head omitted.
one faith, one baptism, one God, and one Father of us all; he omitted one
visible head, when as he should have made mention in this place if any where
at all. What? shall we think that Paul was altogether forgetful of Peter,
when as to every of the Apostles was given grace according to the measure of
the gift of Christ, by whom he ascended into heaven, there was not one Apostle
given, who should bear rule over all the rest: but many Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, whom before he called Bishops, to the
gathering of the Saints, The government left by Christ not Monarchical but
Aristocraticall.
the work of the ministry, and the building up of the body of Christ. So that
Paul thought that the government left by Christ upon the earth, was not
Monarchical, by one which Bellarmine does so greatly extol, but
Aristocraticall by many. And that he thought was sufficient to preserve the
unity of the spirit and of faith, to meet with them, who cry out that the
Church is (...), if it be without a visi^le head appointed forsooth for the
remedy of schism. And if Bellarmine had lived in those days, he would, I
think, have put Paul in mind not to have slipped over Peter the head of the
universal Church. But now Bellarmine it is not safe for the Apostle to use
your council: And has left in writing that we ought all of us to worship and
adore Christ himself, ever living and present with his spirit and majesty,
declared to be the only head of the Church, and in this place called the only
Lord.

Peter, is the ministerial head, that he may govern. But to appoint a double
head of the Church, by reason of the difference of a double duty of the head,
one principal that gives life, another ministerial that rules, this is not
to divide, but to pluck in sunder the functions of the head. For to direct
both the inward and the outward functions of this whole body, it is the chief
and proper duty of that head, as Paul teaches, which gives life to the body.

But you imagine that Paul has spoken of the ministerial head in another
place. When as he said, the head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of
you. Which cannot be understood of Christ as you say: for he is such a head,
who may say to us, I have no need of you: which that I may grant to be true as
Christ is the eternal word and perfection it self (for so he has no need of
men, for he fills all places, and himself cannot be filled) but as he is the
head of the Church, he has need both of the head and members, that he may be
a head by the nature of relation or reference. For these are so knit together
by that nature, that it can no more be a head without a body, than it can be a
body without a head: whereby the Church is called the body of Christ, and the
fulfilling of him that fills all in all: which is not wrought by the
worthiness of his humane nature, but by the excellency of his divine nature.
Of the corruption of that place to the Corinths, and of the frivolous and
absurd consequencies of your argument, you shall hear by and by.

In the mean time listen I pray in what sense Christ,

Which is to be taken in this sense, How Christ a Rock.
that he is borne for us, that he died and rose again for us, that he was
taken up into heaven, made of God for us, wisdom, justice, sanctification,
redemption, satisfaction, purging, and to conclude salvation and glory: as Paul
described him in the first chap: not that half and part of these good things,
but that the full accomplishment and perfection is to be sought in Christ.
Neither does he say that Christ was given to us for the increase and help to
wisdom, holiness, and redemption, but does attribute the sound effect of all
to Christ alone, Coloss: 2.
in whom he says that we are perfected: in which place first he taught in
what sense Christ is called the only foundation, then he placed the only
foundation of the Church, that we may put our whole trust and confidence in
Christ and him alone, being founded on him the eternal and immovable
foundation. The Apostles builders not foundations.
And it is worth the marking, that Paul, Cephas, and other the Apostles are
called builders, not foundations: who should build the whole Church upon Christ
alone, not the foundation whereon it should be builded. But the Apostle says
that the Church was builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.
But the personal foundation is one, whereof is mention in this place; and the
doctrinall is another, whereof is mention to the Ephesians: where he
understands not Peter only, but all the Apostles, as they be Doctors of the
Church, are the doctrinall or instructing foundations, as it is in the
Apocalypse. where the Apostles are accounted the 12 foundations of the house of
God.

Saturnine now come, and himself be judge, whether he can call the person of
Peter, the rock and the foundation of the Church. If he affirm it still, (for
I know his wrangling, and never yielding wit) let him say likewise, that Peter
was borne for us, dyed for us, rose again for us, and ascended into heaven for
us: that Peter was made of God for us, wisdom, justice, sanctification,
redemption, satisfaction, purging, life and glory, that our faith and
confidence is as well upon Peter, as upon a foundation, as upon Christ. For
Christ in this sense is both the rock and foundation of the Church.

Do you not see Calander these men's open blasphemy, Popish blasphemy.
who have called Peter, and in him the Pope the second foundation of the
Church? to me truly there can be no more deadly plague, than they who make a
mere man the rock of the Church. But they make a holy man, but a man; as
Marie a blessed woman, but a woman: when as she is said to break the Serpents
head. as Peter a holy man, but a mortal man and a sinner. And then hardly a
man, when fearing death, he denied life, as Gregory says: yet they call him
the rock, whom Christ afterward called Satan. Who put such a weak and
slender foundation of Christ his Church? what other thing do they offer to the
world, than that which the Atheist may scoff at, and the Jews detest? Let
them leave of therefore any more to be madd with the disgrace and hurt of the
Church: and let them confess the only son of God to be the eternal
foundation of the eternal Church.

But the names of King, Lord, Bishop, Pastor, and Certain names given to
Christ, not to be given to men.
by the power whereof life and salvation is derived unto us, as the names of
Head, Rock, Foundation, that those should be given to any mortal man
whatsoever, in respect of the whole Church, that we deny again and again.

But the Fathers call Peter the rock whereupon Christ has founded his Church:
as Jerome and diverse other Fathers affirm. Cusan. lib: 2. de cencord: eccles:
cap. 13.
But your Cardinal Cusan has answered before out of Jerome, although Peter by
the rock is to be understood the stone of the foundation, yet agreeable to him
the other Apostles were likewise the stones of the Church, as Apoc: 21. twelve
stones: The rest rocks as well as Peter.
therefore so many Apostles, so many foundations; which is spoken in respect of
the Apostolical doctrine, as Paul before expounded it.

Other, and that more justly, upon this rock I will build my Church, expound
it of Christ, as Austin. August ^e verb: D m: secund: Mat S^m: 13.
Thou therefore says he, art Peter, and upon this rock, which thou have
confessed, upon this rock which thou have acknowledged, saying, Christ the
only rock.
Thou art the son of the living God, I will build my Church, that is, I will
build my Church upon my self the son of the living God, upon my self I will
build thee, not my self upon thee.

And Gregory; Christ says he, does call himself the rock. Other call the
faith and confession of Peter the rock, Chrysostom: sermon: de Pent: and Homil.
55. in Matthew: Hilar. de Trin: lib: 2.
as Chrysostom; Upon this rock, says he, not upon this Peter, for he
builds not his house upon a man, but upon faith.

And Hilarie; There is one immovable foundation, there is one blessed rock of
faith, confessed by the mouth of Peter, Thou art the son of the living God,
upon this rock of confession, is the Church builded; this faith is the
foundation of the Church.

Ambros: in Ephesians: cap. 2.
And Ambrose; The Lord said to Peter, upon this rock I will build my Church,.i.
upon this catholic confession of faith. Faith therefore is the foundation of
the Church: for there is nothing said of the flesh of Peter, but of the faith
of Peter: because the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.



That (according to Scripture and Fathers) which Peter confessed, that wherein
he believed, was, and is the rock.

But Peter confessed Christ, not himself, Peter believed in Christ, not in
himself.

Therefore according to Scripture and Fathers, not Peter but Christ was and is
the rock.

which argument may be gathered out of venerable Bede, Beda in cap: 21. Johan:
who writes that Christ was the rock, upon which foundation even Peter
himself was to be built.

The ground whereof agreeable to the Scripture, may be fetched out of Peter de
Alliaco, Pet: de Alliac^ recommen. scrip. page 269.
a reverend Cardinal of Rome, a very eager maintayner of the Popes supremacy,
who notwithstanding being overcome with the light of that truth; By the rock,
says he, Peter does not seem to be understood but Christ. For who can ground
the strength of the Church upon Peter's weakness? whereof ask but the damsel
that kept the door, and she will answer you, that Peter being frighted at her
word, as Gregory says, while he feared death denied life. Wherefore seeing
Peter did stagger, and his Vicar has no fast footing, and seeing Bishops
themselves do so greatly differ about the chief Priesthood of Peter, and
Priests wrangle about their chief Priest, who dare presume to say, any man of
what sanctity or dignity soever, whether he be Priest, or chief Bishop,
whether it be Peter, or Peter's Vicar, or any other whosoever but Christ
himself, to be the foundation of the Christian Church? Christ therefore has
founded his Church upon himself, as a most sure foundation, against the
synagogue of Satan: and upon this rock has surely grounded Peter himself, of
whom he spoke that former sentence, upon this Rock. These are the words of
Peter de Alliaco. You would think that Luther or Calvin were speaking.

And yet Cardinal Bellarmine was so saucie, as to Esaias of the chosen stone,
Blasphemy subscribed to by the popish.
precious corner stone, a sure foundation placed in Sion, to the Pope, sur
reverence: This has that base slave of Antichrist delivered against the most
manifest exposition of Peter, 1 Pet: 2. to whom Tho: Aquin. Cardinal Caictan,
and Maldonat, and Fererius, Jesuits, and many other popish writers subscribe.
That with a few others did Bellarmine attempt against the Scripture, which the
boldness of many popish writers more learned were afraid to attempt. And will
you hearken to this fellow Calander, in a chief article of faith, as he calls
it, so far dissenting from his own side? or dare you securely admit of those,
whom you see as the Madianites, mutually wounding themselves in a cause of
such importance?

Saturnine, who seems to be no other thing but very Bellarmine himself
proceeds from Christ to Peter, from Peter to the Pope; from the Pope he
falls to the Popes chair, and he proves that the Church is to be founded
upon that rock out of testimonies, borrowed and framed out of Jerome, Austin,
and Cyprian.

Cic: de erat:
Cicero makes mention of a certain mad fellow, who finding a small boat on
the seashore, purposed to build a great ship of it. Papists like madmen.
These men's madness is like, who finding Peter's chair in the Fathers, do dream
that the Church must be built upon the chair.

Jerome to Damasus, I am united in communion, says he, to your blessedness,
that is to Peter's chair, I know that upon that rock the Church is builded,
that is upon the chair, as you relate it. Jerome misalleaged.
But Ierom thus; I following after none chiefest but Christ, (...) united to
your Blessedness etc. You pass by Christ in this sentence, as if he were a man
unknown, and you curtall Ieromes words, wherein he confesses that he does
follow none chiefly but Christ. You make mention of Peter's chair; Upon that
rocks, I know that the Church is ^aide. Why should you not rather refer,
That rock to Christ that goes before, then to Peter that follows after in
the sentence? chiefly, when Jerome does add the word, I know, that the Church
is builded upon that rock. Now that Christ is that rock whereon the Church is
builded, ^one at all doubts: but that Peter is that rock, many deny. And yet
you are so mad that you will build the ship of the Church, upon the chair as
it were upon a small boat?

You have well Saturnine by rasing out the name of Christ, shaven away the
sentence, as a beard, with Ieromes sharp rasor.

I shall marvel much if Austin when he cannot endure that Peter should be
the foundation of the Church, would suffer the Pope to be: and if when he did
remove the person of Peter from this honor, he would admit Peter's chair.

But when he makes mention of Peter's seat, that, said he, is the rock. Is it
so indeed? let us add the words following reckon up said he all the Priests
from the very seat of Peter, and in that order of Fathers mark who succeeded
one another, that is the rock against which the proud gates of hell shall not
prevail.

Then Saturnine, while you are handling another Patriot you do confirm by
Austens authority another article of the Catholic faith of the Pope Peter's
successor.

But, said he again, to the confirmation of an article of the Catholic
faith, Austens authority without the testimony of the Scripture cannot be
sufficient, in the judgment of Austen himself: who speaks of the matter as
he had heard, that the Bishop of Romes seat was the seat of Peter, and that in
that seat some succeeded others: but he makes it no article of the faith.
Wherefore when he speaks that is the rock it cannot be referred, either to
the seat or to the succession of Bishops in the seat. For therein he should
contradict himself, who makes Christ the rock of the Church, Apostles rocks
in respect of doctrine.
unless rather he refer it to Peter, so understood as I said with the rest
of the Apostles, who in respect of doctrine, may in some sort be called rocks.
But it is not said you will say, he is the rock, but she is the rock,
therefore the reference is not to the person in this place, but to the seat, i.
to the chair.

As though by the deceit and carelessenesse of writers greater faults then
these had not crept into Austens works, then she for he. Although what hinders
why, she is the rock, may not as well be referred, to the person of Peter, as
those words in the Gospel (upon this rock etc.) are referred to the person
of Peter by the Rhemistes.

But let that be granted you for a time which you shall never euict, that
Peter's chair is meant in that place, Austen says not that is the rock whereon
the Church is builded, but that is the rock which the gate of hell shall not
vanquish. So he does not promise that Rome shall always withstand, but does
testify that Rome did then resist the gates of hell, while it kept that faith
vncorrupt that Peter left unto them. For if he should now live, and make
diligent search, he should not find Rome in the midst of Rome. This Rome
not old Rome.
Our Romans at this day are no Romans, they are but the carcasses of those
Romans, who received their first faith from Paul and Peter, which these men
have breathed out as their souls.

Cyprian make answer for himself, who affirms that the like power was given
to all the Apostles by Christ: Lib. de vnitat. Eccles.
and that the rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was, being endowed
with the same fellowshippe of honor and power. Let him make answer for
himself, how he could lift up Peter's chair above the chaires of the rest, and
would not have it forsaken for just cause, which he did oppose in an unjust.

But Cyprian as both Jerome and Austen and other fathers have just cause to
complain, Contra Stepha. Corruption of Fathers after their death
that so many bastardly books are brought in the place of those that were
right and true. And false sentences deceitfully foysted in, and true violently
cast out, that now being dead they are constrained to speak and hold their
peace according to other men's pleasures not their own.

Now Jerome at your command conceales that, which he uttered before. Cypr. de
unit. Eccles.
Now Cyprian speaks that which he never meant. He that forsakes Peter's
chair whereon the Church is built, does he trust that he is in the Church?

Cyprian writ thus a little before; Christ does build his Church upon Peter
alone, How Peter the first stone in order not in power.
meaning that Peter was the first stone that was placed upon Christ the
foundation, upon whom the rest in their order were to be builded. First
therefore in order not in power: therefore he said that equal authority was
given by Christ to all the Apostles, but that it took the beginning from
unity, that the Church may be showed to be one. The foundation therefore of
the building in Cyprian is nothing else, but a beginning. The rest of the
Apostles were this which Peter was, being endowed with the fellowshippe of
honor and power, but the beginning from one. This therefore is proper to the
person of Peter, that he be the first stone set upon the foundation, upon which
etc. How is it then derived to Peter's chair, whereon the Church was to be
builded? Let Peter be changed into chair, and the masculine gender into the
feminine. Do you think that that Father had so weak and childish a memory,
that within the compass of nine lines he would so apparently contradict
himself? that he would remove the person of Peter out of his place, and place
Peter's chair in the room? to displace the Predecessor out of the rank to
place the successors? To cast out the first stone in the building, out of his
order, to place those that followed? he would never have done it, he was never
so mad. It was not therefore Cyprians ill memory, but the falsehood of
certain scribes, who brought that new clause, of a quite other nature into
Cyprians text.

Many popish correctors in this age, and those very One copy of Cyprian
alleged against many.
and many famous Printers have taken great pains in setting forth and printing
of Cyprian, they sought for all the antientest and sincerest manuscripts out of
the best libraries of all Christendom, they could possibly get, they did very
diligently compare them between themselves, and all of them agreed in this,
that that clause could not be found in any of their written copies. Pamelius a
Canon of Bryges only excepted, who being an obscure man, and of small
reckoning said he found that clause lately written in an old copy belonging
to the Abbey of Cambray, and brought it into the Anwerp editions printed by
Stelsius: when that notwithstanding he confesses he had eight other written
coppies in his hands fetched out of diverse libraries, in all which he says
this clause could not be found, but only in the copy of Cambray. Now let us
give credit if we can, that one written copy of the Abbey of Cambray was
vncorrupt, and that all the rest were corrupted. Let us prefer one blind
copy, before so many excellent copies both printed and written. And let us
prefer one Pamelius Cannon of Briges, before so many notable Roman writers,
Remboltus, Cauchius, Coster, Erasmus, Grauius, Manutius, Morelius. Shall we
think one to be of more credit then all the rest? Which we must needs do,
before we must admit of such a bastardly and new devised clause. Let Saturnine
pack up and be gone, let him brag, that Peter's chair is the rock of the
Catholic Church. And let me as my manner is a little consider the
consequencies of this peeterly argument.

Peter confessed Christ the son of the living God to be the rock and
foundation of the Church, against whom the gates of hell shall not prevail.

Therefore Peter is the rock and foundation of the Church against whom they
have prevailed.

Or thus, Peter in respect of doctrine is the foundation, as the rest of the
Apostles.

Therefore in respect of his person.



Or thus, Peter the first stone in order set in the foundation is the rock.

Therefore the Pope Peter's successor, as it is presumed, is the rock.

The person of Peter.

Therefore the chair of Peter.

He is more dull then a stone that gathers so.

In one word Peter in this place holds the primacie of degree only and order.

Therefore it gives the Pope of Rome the supremacy of jurisdiction and power.



Is not this making of the supremacy out of the rock, like the making of a
roape of sand? how foolishly are these argued? but that one thing how
blasphemously of Bellarmine? who applies the prophecy of Esaias of Christ the
chosen stone, precious, chief corner stone a sure foundation, to his Master
the Pope. Christ is the chief foundation, the Pope forsooth is a second. This
argument is not fetched from disparates, as Tortus plays upon us, but from
immediate contraries; for heaven is no farther distant from hell, then Christ
from the Pope, that is from Antichrist.

But my good Lords the Popes do always lurk under Peter's cloak, as the
Dominicans are said to lurk under our Ladies frocke.

Wittily said Erasmus as many things, What is charity, it is a Monks cloak
said he, for it couers the multitude of sins.

In like manner I may call Peter's virtue the Bishops cloak; for it covers
many a wicked man. They do willingly snatch at that speech of Optatus, Bellarm
lib. 1. de Romans Pont. cap. 17. Vall. decla. de dona. Constant.
who thinking the name Cephas in Siriacke a stone, to signify in greek a
head, is set upon Peter by the Greek word (...) as Bellarmine observes, and
therefore calls Peter the head of the Apostles. Which learned Valla does
wonder could ever come into any man's mind: Comment. in Ioh. cap. 1.
and Cardinal Catetane a notable writer among the Papists, refutes it out of
the Gospel. For he alleges out of the Evangelist to meet with this error,
that the word Cephas is interpreted to be Peter, not a head. Ferus in hunc l c.
Papists against Papists.
And Ferus does flatly say that that interpretation of this word is very
foolish and ridiculous. The diriuation of this name is not so ridiculous as the
proof of that, which out of that Paul (the head cannot say to the feet I have
no need of you) Bellarmine being falsely collected, Bellarmine mistaketh S.
Paul.
does violently urge against the scope and mind of the Apostle. who takes the
head by a metaphor for any excellent part which is endewed with great graces:
the eyes, the ears, Chrysostom. hom. viges. nou^: in 1. Cor. Corinth 12.
expounded.
the hands, the feet for inferior parts, which are furnished with meaner
gifts, as Chrysostom expoundes, saying they did excel in gifts some greater
some less, chiefly in the knowledge of tongues. They which received the
greater gifts, did contemn them who had received lesser gifts, and these
again greiued at it, and envied their betters. This difference in the
mystical body, he went about to compound, by the example of agreement of the
parts in the natural body, where the head does not say to the feet I have no
need of you etc. But all the members have mutual need one of another. Out of
this metaphore Bellarmine dreams that the visible and ministerial head of the
whole Church is appointed.

Now mark the foolish consequences necessarily depending upon this
interpretation.

If one ministerial head of the whole Church, be taken out of this place,
therefore because Paul makes mention of eyes, ears, hands, feet, whereof
there are two members, it is requisite that there be two in the Church, that
must have two eyes, 2. that must have two ears, 2. that may be resembled to
two feet, then it will be a very beautiful Church that does consist of nine
members only.

Inquitie after the inferior members.
as Cardinal Poole, some for learned men as Turriane, most of all the Jesuits
of his own order: Kings who with their government may sustain this putrified
head, Jesuits who may do the like with their wits, and may carry it over
among the Indies, to domineer in the new found world. To the which feet the
Pope cannot truly say, I have no need of you: and therefore he gives greater
credit to the Jesuits, then to those idle paunches the Monks, who in their
howerly prayers spend their whole time in mumbling on their beads. That that
also may agree with the argument of your head, which Paul has in the same
place, that the greatest honor is put upon the dishonestest members, hence it
may be other orders will conclude, that the Jesuits are more dishonest then
all the rest of the Monks.

But I demand why there should not be many ministerial heads when there be
many ministerial feet? where be the two eyes, whereby this metaphorical head
without brains may prye into the secrets of Kings? where be the two ears,
whereby they may listen after all reports? where be the two hands whereby they
may rake and gather in all men's moneys? if you answer that two are not
necessary for the head, when the head has many more, we confess that it is
better for your head to increase his treasure, then to make good the argument.
For a duality of these members are more necessary to make the unity of the
head, that a fit proportion may be reserved.

But this so honorable a title, the head of the Church, To make the Pope head
is blasphemy.
so that he be present in earth with his Church, with his majesty and
spirit, yea that he is within his Church to give life and govern the same
with his word, to have this communicable with a mortal man and a sinner cannot
be done without blasphemous contumely. Some things in Bellarmine are
blasphemous, some are frivolous, these are both blasphemous and frivolous, as
this argument drawn from a metaphorical head, whereon the supremacy the
chiefest foundation of their catholic religion does depend. And here see I
pray you what discreet men may suspect, who think the Cardinal to be learned,
they yield so much to his wit, that rather then they will think him to be a
foolish disputer, they take him as it seems to be a secret betrayer of the
cause. He defends his head with so withered forces and ridiculous arguments,
that without any resistance of the Adversary, he will fall to the ground by
his own weakness. That which the Orator said to Mar. Callidius, Cicer. in
Bruto.
negligently and coldly defending the cause of his own head and life, Thou
Mar. Callidius, unless thou dissemblest, thou would not thus plead? This may
more rightly be spoken to this worthy patron of his head, Thou Bellarmine, if
thou thoughtst as thou speak, would thou handle a case of such importance
so lazily, so loosely?

For whereas out of the premises, Saturnine, you gather a different beginning
with Bellarmine of Ecclesiastical and secular government, and from the diverse
beginning of each power, do draw a diverse nature of obedience due to each
power; and do propound the twofold use of this article to be considered of
all Catholics: because all this discourse does so nearly touch the Kings
crown and dignity, I leave it to be discussed by Regius our Counselor;
wherefore Calander, you are to entreat him, that he would tell us what he
thinks in this matter, and ease me of the labor of farther disputing.

Calander, truly, said he, when I diligently mark all the parts of your
answer, I perceive little or nothing making for this our universal
Ecclesiastical Prince to be in the text. For if Christ gave the key not a
scepter, as well to all the Apostles and Ministers, as to Peter, and gave a
Bishops staff, not a sword; and ordained Peter not to be the head, but a
member: and not the foundation of the building, but a work man; as not only
many ancient, but Popish interpreters of the Scripture do teach with one
consent; where I pray you shall I find grounded plainly upon the text, that
universal Church government, as they call it? unless peradventure we may call
Peter the Prince of the Apostles, as we call Homer the Prince of Poets,
Demosthenes the Prince of Orators, and Plato the Prince of Philosophers.
Wherefore my good friend Charles, I entreat thee, that as Patriott has laid
open the truth of God obscured by diverse sophismes: so you would free the
dignity of Princes, being defaced by Popish usurpation, as it becomes one
that is of counsel with the King, which I ever held more dear to me then my
life, even then when I was most nousled up in popery.

Then Regius, All power, said he, is from God, and it is Either Ordained, And
that two fold: Ecclesiastical. Secular. The division of power.

Tolerated,


The Ecclesiastical, 1. If you respect Christ, it is Monarchical or governed
by one: for all power is given to him alone by the father, both in heaven and
earth. 2. If you respect men, is is Aristocraticall or governed by many, and
those the chiefest, as Patriott confirmed out of Paul.


Therefore this your spiritual Prince, Saturnine, chosen a Monarch by
himself, a King at his own pleasure, a supposed Vicar of Christ, an
universal Bishop, ordained not by Christ the maintainer of Kings, but by
Phocas the murderer of kings, at that very time when as Mahomet that false
Prophet his brother came into the world; successor not of Peter, but of
Romulus, what power he has immediately to rule over Kings, when Peter
himself had none at all, I understand that it is but tolerated. As the Dragon
has, from whom the two horned beast took all his power, as John testifies in
the Apocalypse. Therefore this power is not ordained but tolerated, not for the
comfort of the world, but for the plague, not an holy ordinance, but to be a
scourge for the Saints. But there is a certain spiritual power immediately
from God. True: but that which promotes the Kingdom of light: not that which
promotes the Kingdom of darkness, which is immediately from the Devil, such
as the woeful experience of many ages has proved you Popish power to be.
Therefore to your spiritual Prince, holding the seat of the Dragon, spiritual
obedience is no more due to him then to the Dragon.

Nero, yet it is immediately ordained of God, as Paul has taught, and to that
purpose is called by him the ordinance of God. But that, Secular power from God.
will some say, may be said of the secular tyrannical power, as of Tyberius
and Nero, which may be said of the Popish tyrannical power, as of Gregory the
7. or Paul the 5. true in respect of the abuse. But the ordination of the
secular power is of God, the abuse of the Devil. Therefore Pilates power which
condemned Christ, is not said to be tolerated from above, but given from
above. It was therefore a wicked power, not a usurped power, as Austin thought:
wicked in respect of tyranny, not usurped in respect of the ordination: but the
power of this Prelate, I may say this Pilate, as Bernard spoke, it is not only
wicked but usurped. I conclude therefore out of the Apostles principle, for the
secular power against Bellarmine.

All power ordained, is immediately from God: by the witness of Paul.

All secular power, whether it be by the people, by the Princes, or by the
King, is a power ordained. For reason, which is a glimmering of the divine
light does suggest, that all societies must be subject to one of these, whether
it be simple or mixed, for the good of common safety.

Therefore all secular power is immediately from God.

government, to rule over these or those subjects, Bellarmine in his answer to
a book entitled, an answer of a Doctor of Diuity, to an Epistle written to
him by a reverend friend of the monition of the censures from the Pope,
denounced against the Venetians.
either election coming between, as the Emperor: or succession, as the Kings
of France, Spain and England: or grant, as the free Princes, (as the Popes in
their own Dominion, for so he might have said) or by just war, as Godfrey
heretofore etc. Very ignorantly. He does not distinguish between the title of
the power and the power it self. The title is the condition, without the which
the power is not obtained to this or that King, over those or these subjects.
The power is that authority and jurisdiction which God does give immediately to
a Prince, as Paul teaches. The Cardinal therefore vniesuited, as I may so say,
did abuse that most renowned French King, If any man (said he) should demand of
the most Christian King, by what right he holds France, or makes Laws, he
shall not answer by the Law of God, but by the title of hereditarie succession.
Yea truly, the noble King might have answered otherwise, according to that wit
wherewith he was endued: being demanded why he bare rule over his subjects, or
made laws: That he did it not by the right of hereditarie succession, but by
the ordinance of that power which he received immediately from God.
Inheritance does not give that power, but it is a property necessary in that
man, to whom God does immediately give that power. That subjects may give
reverence to their Kings, not for bloods sake, but for Gods sake. Go to, and
what if one should demand of Paul the fifth, by what right he holds his
Popedom, he will answer as he is taught, not by the title of man's election:
but by the Law, forsooth, of God. Therefore the Popes power is by Gods Law, as
it seems, although his election be by the Cardinals. Why then may not the
Kings power be by the Law of God, though his succession be from his ancestors?
for whose condition seems to be like, why should their jurisdiction be
dislike? The Cardinal therefore deals very unjustly, who denies that to the
King, which he grants to the Pope.

The cruel dealing of the Jesuits with the French King.
as another of his order a bloody nouist, struck out his tooth, when he meant
to cut his throat. But now the Jesuits do bless the King, but the King as
often as he cheweth his meat, its marvel he do not curse the Jesuits: who
while the controversy depended about the expulsion of the Jesuits, received a
wound from John Chastile, and the blood issued out of his mouth, spoke
pleasantly, as his use was, Now at the last the Jesuits being convicted by my
mouth must be cast out. That his friends may grieve that they were brought
back again by that mouth, as innocent and cleared, who were the authors of
so cruel a murder: whose scholar did thrust that valiant King to the heart.
After the same manner, Tom. 11.
Baronius, that testie old man, did entertain the Catholic King Philip the
second, the Champion of their Church, for withholding Sicilie and Naples from
the Church. Whom will they spare if they spare not the Spaniard? What may the
Defender of the Faith expect of these fellows, who do thus entertain the
Christian and Catholic Kings?

But although there be no truth, yet there is some equity in Bellarmine.
Bellarmines lewd dealing with all Princes.
He spares no Princes, not those of his own side. He holds that those who
be Catholic in faith, if they begin to be wicked, are to be driven by the
chief Pastor from the flock, and deprived of their kingdom as well as
heretics. Those as giddie headed rams that they hurt not with their horns,
these as ravenous wolves that they devour not the flock. So scornfully does
this Braggadochian Cardinal term the Excellencies and Majesty's of the
Christian world.

The world does not marvel that Priests be so saucy, but it wonders that Kings
be so patient, that they will suffer Princely crowns to be tumbled up and
down by them as foot-bals: and the prerogatives of kingdoms to be so weakened
and diminished by school distinctions.

For this Cardinal, like a bad archer, does strike his confederate, next
neighbour-kings, while he does directly level and aim, but in vain, against
James the King of Great Britain, whom God still defend from his treachery.
But to the argument. He denies all secular Princes to have any power
immediately given from God, to rule over subjects.

But it is well that he does affirm even in the same because the commandment
of obedience is immediately from God, and this is true. For he cannot be
superior and above other if he do not rule, neither can he be a subject that
is not bound to obey. And yet again in the end. If secular Princes (says he)
have no power immediately from God over the Laity, much less over the
Clergy: therefore over none. Which he granted before. Is it so indeed, will
some say? yea truly, look upon the place, He is both unconstant and
unlearned.
you shall see Bellarmine affirming and denying the same predicate of the same
subject, and that in respect of the same, and that in one and the same chapter.
Let this great Logician be packing, who sends his adversaries to turn over
Aristotle's Analytickes: and after he has read them himself, let him teach us
how two contradictions may be true at once.

Secular Princes have no power immediately from Christ to bear rule over
subjects. And

Secular Princes have power immediately from Christ to rule over subjects. A
manifest contradiction
He speaks in both places, not of the title but of the power. A manifest
contradiction.

But how may Proteus fast be held,

Who changes shape at every turn,

But the feeble old man does often fail in memory, and contradict himself, as
Father Paulus, and Fulgentius, and Marsilius, and Chichester, have taken the
man tardy, and held him to it shrewdly.

As the man's great wit appears in Tortus, all whose disputation does hang upon
the begging the thing in question.

Bellarmine continually beggeth the question.
he takes the thing in controversy for granted, to wit, that it is agreed
among all Catholics, that the chief Bishop may rightly depose heretical
Kings, and free their subjects from obedience. And he affirms, that this is
the catholic doctrine, but proves it not, which ought soundly to have been
proved, if he would disprove the oath.

He adds further, that when the Kings of the earth, have admittance into the
Church, with this condition that they submit their scepters to Christ, etc. if
they refuse it, it is lawful for him, who has the rule over all the Church
upon earth in Christ his steed, to remove them from the communion of the
faithful, and to forbid their subjects to obey them.

How falsely the Bishop of Chichester teaches, now we observe the man's wit, we
are very sorry that Bellarmine does openly beg, and that one thing twice,
which is in the very question. For it is in question among us, whether the Pope
have the power to depose the Prince, and to free his subjects from their
obedience.

Here Bellarmine, as if like Apollo Pythius he gave his Oracle from his
three-footed stool, pronounces malapertly enough, that he, who is Christ his
Vicegerent in governing the Church, has that power. For he says, that he has
power to excommunicate, therefore to depose. He proves that excommunication is
an inward thing fastened upon the supremacy, when he should prove, that this
deposing is an inward thing belonging to excommunication: otherwise he
disputes not to the point. So the state of the controversy being either
turned aside, or altogether unknown, he goes from the point, and fights
with us after the manner of the Andabata, who fought blindfold.

And because the power to depose Princes by excommunication Pope, therefore he
says, the power of excommunicating is wholly denied. It follows not, it is a
fallacy from that which is in some sort, to that which is simply and
absolutely. And when he had affirmed, and repeated it again and again, till a
man might loath it, that Christ's Vicar had so great power, he used no arguments
or proofs to that purpose: he desires to be credited upon his bare word
without reason, as if he were a Pope, Bellarmine and the Pope need not allege
reasons of their actions
who is not bound to bring arguments to refute the oath; for then says he, he
might be thought an indiscreet Prince, if he thought he might not forbid a
wicked action, except he added reasons to his inhibition, and write a large
treatise after the fashion of the Philosophers to that end. They do very
cunningly, as they seem, excuse that unreasonable creature: who sets down the
articles of the catholic faith, as the Mathematikes do their principles. You
must not therefore, o ye Kings, in a matter of such importance as concerns
your right, so nearly look for any reasons from Robert Bellarmine, more than
you expect from Paul the 5. He speaks as a Prince, not as a Philosopher. He
sets out not arguments but edicts. He disputes not, but determines in the
Pope^ cause against the King, and that against the opinion of infinite Papists
both better learned and honester men than himself, as appears in the answer
of the Bishop of Chichester. So that Bellarmine seems to many wisemen, to
have attained an opinion of learning, rather than learning it self. For in
that whole d^sputation the begging sophisme of the thing in question, The
ground of Bellarmines argument is the begging of the question
is the foundation of all Bellarmines answer: so heavy headed and dull he
seems in Logic: and so unskillful in Grammar, as appears in that part,
wherein Satur^ine disputes of the spiritual and temporal obedience,
Bellarmine the great learned man speaks false Latin.
and alleges Bellarmines own words out of Tortus, luretur fidelitas, Let
fealty says he, be sworn to the King, but so, ne abiuretur fidelitas, that
faith be not forsworn to Christ his Vicar.

Robert Bellarmines mouth does clearly show, the same does Robert Saturnine:
who when he had abased the power of secular Princes, to advance forsooth the
power of that one spiritual Prince; has also so tied the spiritual obedience
of Christians to the will of one Bishop, that by the pretense thereof, he may
take from Princes at his pleasure, the civil obedience of subjects.

God the object of spiritual obedience.
But as he erred in the original of either power, so he erreth in the object
and end of either obedience.

We make the true object of spiritual obedience to be God himself, the end
Gods word: he makes a contrary object, the Pope himself, and the end the
Popes will.

We make the true object of civil obedience, Gods ordination of the civil
Prince; the end the spiritual obedience toward God: therefore Paul says, we
must obey him for conscience sake, not for the business sake that is enjoined by
the Prince, but for the authorities sake that is ordained by God.

He places the Bishop in Gods place, enioyning spiritual obedience to us,
for very conscience of those things that are enjoined, and he makes civil
obedience terminable at pleasure, by the observation of good order and manners.
So that subjects obey the civil Magistrate, not for conscience sake, as Paul
speaks, but for policies sake, as Bellarmine speaks; and that Clergy men
obey not for necssarie subjection, but at voluntary discretion, and are held
in, Clergy exempted from obedience.
not by force of law, but by force of reason, as he says. So to us the
observing the spiritual duty is the direction, and limitation of the civil,
to him the bond of the spiritual obedience, is the disioynting and loosing of
the civil. Is not Bellarmines deceit evident enough, who under the pretense of
spiritual obedience, has taken the civil clean away? So he plays the
iugler, Civil obedience taken away.
to deceive the Papists sight, and that with a twofold trick: One whereby he
persuades, that for the show of civil obedience they think the spiritual
may be abiured by them; the other, whereby under the show of spiritual
obedience, he clean takes away the civil.

Hence arises those new and strange interpretations Bellarmine in the school
of Divinity; Bellarmines new and strange interpretations.
Let not obedience be showed to man, contrary to the obedience of God, that is,
let not obedience be showed to the King contrary to the obedience of the
Bishop. And we must rather obey God than men: that is, we must rather obey the
Pope, than Kings. I appeal to your own consciences ye Papists, whether you
think this to be the Apostles commentary, that in respect of spiritual
obedience, which consists in faith, devotion, love and fear of God, a
sinful mortal man should be advanced into the seat of God? What if the Pope
command, which God forbids, that we take from Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, by Gods own gift, his sword, scepter, crown, subjects and life, is
not this under the show of spiritual obedience to forbid civil obedience? And
to command, that obedience be given to the Pope commanding unjust things,
against Gods obedience, who has enjoined your subjection to the King. Rom: 13.
This ought not to appear spiritual obedience to you, but spiritual
cousenage, whereby under the cloak of spiritual obedience, which the Pope
has gotten by the gift of men, he loose the bond of civil duty, which is due
to the King by the gift of God.

A cave at for Kings.
that such positions as these be settled into your subjects minds? That such a
catechism as this not only lie close hidden in books, but be openly taught in
your Universities and Churches? There be none so dangerous trecheries to
Princes, as those which are hid under the cloak of duty, and colored with the
name of catholic religion. Under the pretense whereof Bellarmine has
cherished rebellion in the subjects of the Venetian commonweal, which
professes Popery, as he has done at this time in the subjects belonging to
the most excellent King of Great Britain.

A Troiane or a Tirian to him are all alike. Beware o ye Kings, lest the
mischief intended to one fall upon all the rest. Saturnine is an ill egg of
an evil bird, as in the proof of the article of supremacy; he is a corrupter
of Gods will, so in the practice of it, he is an enemy of princely government.
And as you had him ere while a manifest forger, so now you have him an open
traitor.

Calander both your discourses said he, the one against the Pope, the other for
the King, give me just occasion of two doubts: one, how the spiritual and
civil obedience is distinguished in the word of God: the other, whether the
former Counsels did cast of this spiritual power which the Pope does
generally usurp. Which two points being briefly and plainly discust, will
clear the whole controversy, and satisfy any man that is not contentious.

Then Patriott; You do wisely, Calander, says he, to call every thing to her
beginning, for every thing as it is first, so it is true: and that which is
right, sets out both ^^lshood and it self.

First therefore I answer about the distinction of the double power, the
Spiritual and Civil, Chrysostom: de verbis Esa: Vidi D^m: hem:
both which Christ ordained. I call that Spiritual which concerns the souls,
and that Civil which rules the bodies. That, 4. Power distinguished.
Christ committed to his Minister; this, to his Magistrate: sometime to more,
sometime to few, often to one. That is called Episcopal government, this
Princely: or, that is spiritual, this civil. Each as I said is of God. To
whom it is committed and how performed.
The Holy Ghost has appointed Bishops to rule the Church of God, Act: 20. and
Wisdom says, By me Kings do reign, and Lawmakers appoint just things.
Therefore Kings do rule by God, as Bishops do feed. Government belongs to
them, Ministry to these. But these you will say have Government also. I
confess it. Bernard: de consid: ad Eug:
But these have an inward government over men's souls, they have an outward
over men's bodies. Bishops have the key of the word and sacraments to be
exercised not in the name of the King, Matthew: 16.
but in the name of Christ: nor the key only of knowledge, The difference of
government between Princes and Bishops. Rom: 13. Chrysostom. ex Paul. ibid.
but of discipline, and that not after their own pleasure, but after Gods
will. Kings have the sword, to be drawn in defense of godliness and justice,
whereby they command those things that be true and good, forbid such as be
false and evil, and punish the wicked of what calling soever, and defend the
righteous. The weapons of Bishops are spiritual, of Kings corporal. Therefore
Bishops ought to teach, to admonish, to reprove, to deprive of the seals of
grace, and to drive from the communion of the faithful, those that grievously
and publicly offend, till they repent: Chrysostom: ibid.
Kings ought to restreyne them according to the quality of the offense, either
of liberty, or goods, with loss of limbs, or of life it self. Therefore the
government of Bishops is by persuasion, of Kings by compulsion: of a Bishop
directing, of a King constreyning. A King rules men aagainst their will, a
Bishop with their wills. Jerome. al Heli^: in Epitap: N^potiani.
He does govern by fear, this brings to liberty. He reserueth the bodies
for death, this keeps the souls for life. Either of them does punish not
only thieves, murderers, adulterers, perjured men, traitors, but also
blasphemers, Idolators, Heretics, Schismatickes, whether they be of the Laity
or Clergy, but he with the corporal sword, the bishop with the spiritual.
Either of them have equally a care of holiness and honesty, the one that he
may teach by precepts, the other that he may ordain by laws. Either of them
is practiced about holy things but not upon holy things. For they are not
subject either to the will of the Pastor, or government of the King. The King is
conversant about holy and divine things, not in the administration and
execution thereof, as Vzias. but in appointing and ordering them as Ezechias. A
bishop is conversant about holy things in the doing and executing of them to
preach the word, to Minister the sacraments, and use the keys: Good laws are
made to settle truth by the counsel and faithfulness of the Bishop, and by
the power and authority of the King.

Ephesians. 4.
is monarchical, under him alone; if men, it is aristocraticall under many: as
we showed out of Paul. The civil is of three sorts.

Either belonging to the People. Princes, or chief. King.


Which last when we set forth we disgrace not the rest.

The duty of a Bishop.
It cannot be denied but that the bishop in his spiritual perfection and
comfort, does excel the King; for God does not appoint the King but the
bishop to be the seedsman of his word, the Messenger of his grace, the
disposer of the mysteries of his kingdom. But in the outward authority and
power of compelling, the King does excel the bishop, while he commandes
that which God allows. Neither do I so prefer the civil government before
the spiritual, but do affirm that the same God, who teaches those that be
simple, and draw such as be willing by the mouth of the minister, does draw
those that be negligent, and constrain such as be retractory, by the sword of
the magistrate, whom the spirit and God of the spirits has ordained to that
purpose.

Yea truly they who set the civil government behind the spiritual simply as
the body behind the soul, and the flesh behind the spirit, do make a very
fleshly comparison between Kings and Bishops; unless they imagine Bishops
to be without bodies, and Kings without souls. And who so infer thereupon
that a godly king cannot inflict a punishment upon a wicked Priest, do deface
holiness in the King as a matter temporal, and advance wickedness in a
Priest as a matter spiritual. And who thence conclude, that a Christian King
cannot promote holy rites by his laws, as well as a minister can by his
doctrine and censure, give more without cause, to the shauing of a Priest then
to the character of Baptism: and do foolishly prefer priestly anointing
before the Princely. And they seem not well to understand what those excellent
lights of the world, Constantine, Justinian, Theodosius, Valentinian, Gratian,
Zeno, Charles the great, L^wes his son, and Lothary his nephew, and many
other Kings and Emperors did out of Gods word justly command Bishops in
causes ecclesiastical, and wherein they did obey Bishops, as was made
manifest before.

But the Bishop has power from God to govern

One was Inward. Outward


It is one thing to administer the inward another thing to order it. In the
administration of the inward government, a Bishop does excel a King, in the
ordering of it a King does excel a Bishop.

I confess a Pastor is superior in feeding, so Carpenters in building and
Mariners in sailing are above a Prince. A Priest not above a Prince.
What then are they simply better? It is a fallacy from that which is in part
to that which is simply.

But the actions of a Bishop are more excellent then the works of a King, as
the preaching of the word, the administration of the Sacraments, the remitting
and retaining of sins. Therefore a Bishop does excel a King.

But the working and perfection of these things does depend not upon the
arbitrament of the Bishop, but the commandment of God.

August. cont. Cres. lib. 4. c. 6. Ambros.
There is a double spiritual power, 1 Ministerial of men. 2 Imperial of God.


Therefore the credit of these actions must serve the glory of God not the
honor of the Priest. The spiritual work is of God, A Bishop great not in
respect of his person but doctrine.
the bodily service is of the Minister. Men in the remission of sins do not
exercise the right of power, but do exercise their Ministry. They pray, God
does grant. The ministry is from men, the gift from an heavenly power. The
reason therefore drawn from the perfection of heavenly graces in the Church,
to prefer the person of a Priest before the person of a Prince, is very
weak, because the subjection due to the sword is annexed to the person of the
Prince, the worthiness and power due to the key is not annexed to the person
of the Bishop, but to his doctrine.

But we are to hold this that here are not to be understood by Prelates, Popes
and Cardinals, who obtrude their own inventions upon us, but holy and
Christian Bishops and Pastors, who deliver the word of God unto us, as the
Apostle adds, for we are not tied to the decrees of Doctors, but to the
oracles of God. Therefore the obedience required is not the outward subjection
to the person of the Priest, but an inward submission to the doctrine of Christ,
and an allowance and practice of the same. For in respect of the person,
Bishops are called servants, and their function is called a Ministry as I
said.

Therefore the greatest King is bound to believe and obey the least servant of
God delivering his Lords will. And he owes that subjection to the Lord, not to
his Messenger, to his doctrine not to his person. For he comes not in his
own, but in the Lords name, which may be as truly said of the meanest Minister
as of the greatest Bishop. What a Bishop may do.
A Bishop therefore may teach a King that is ignorant, may reprove him being
an Heretic as the Prophet did Jeroboam king of Judah: may admonish him being
of a bad life as John did Herod: may correct him being a Tyrant as Elias did
Ahab: may reprehend him being otherwise good if he do openly and grievously
trangresse, as Nathan did David: and deprive him of the sacrament of grace,
while he repent, as Ambrose did Theodosius. But whether he can remove him from
the company of his faithful subjects, by excommunication, it is a great
question and diversely discussed by the Fathers. They who hold it may be done by
the Bishop, do deny for all that, that the King by him may be put from the
obedience of his subjects, much less being excommunicated be abandoned by
his subjects, and killed either by open force, or secret treachery as certain
of the popish sort do hold. I say, certain, for the honester sort decree
otherwise, and commit the King to the Bishops cure, submit him not to his
Court. For the King is the Lords servant, and the Bishops Lord: as I said
before: subject to the Bishops pulpit, not his consistory; that he may be
directed by him, not judged by him. A Bishop is appointed to persuade, not
compel; not to gape after crowns, but to watch over their souls; and when
he obeys the King, then he prescribes the doctrine of obedience to others,
as Christ, Paul and Peter went before them both in precept and practice.

Calander, you have satisfied me abundantly, Patriot, Primacie of order only
due to Peter.
in the distinction of these powers: now if you please, I desire the other
about the largnes of that spiritual power which the Pope now usurps whether
the former Counsels did grant the same.

Then Patriot, the Fathers says he do grant to Peter the primacie of order,
and to the Bishop of Rome as to his successor, whom certain do call the
Bishop of the first sea: but they deny unto him the primacie of power, as I
said either over Kings, or over their fellow Bishops.

Jerusalem. An^ioch. Alexandria. Constantinople. Rome.
There were either four or five Patriarchs, among whom the government of the
whole Church was divided. That all the rest were equal to the Patriarch of
Rome in all points of jurisdiction, whose power was bounded within certain
limits, out of which he might not pass, does appear by that notable Cannon
the sixth, The Nicene Council of 318. Bishops.
of the Nycene Council. Which was gathered together by the authority of
Constantine the great in the year of Christ 325. wherein 318. Bishops met
together, and set out 20. true Cannons only, as Ruffinus numbers them, the true
copies whereof remained in all the patriarchall Churches, and are extant in
many others at this day.

The sixth Cannon of the Council, does make the government of the Bishop of
Rome the form of government of the Bishop of Alexandria, as it is said
before. Where it does appear, that the government of the bishop of Rome was
shut within the compass of his own Province. For if it had reached into other
Provinces, it had not been the form of the government of Alexandria, Rome no
larger in jurisdiction then Alexandria.
which was contained in one Province. Again it appears by the Cannon that
the bishop of Rome had the same fashion. Therefore the government of
Alexandria was like unto Rome. How could there otherwise be a likeness. For
there could be no likeness between an universal bishop and a provincial.

The second general Council was the first Council Constantinople assembled
by Theodosius the elder in the year of Christ 381. wherein 150. Constantinople
Council the first of 150. Bishops.
bishops met together, who confirmed the decree of the Nicene Council.

Then came the third general Council the first of Ephesus, The Council of
^phesus of 200. Bishops.
gathered together by Theodosius the younger in the year of Christ 4^1. it
consisted of 200. bishops, in which two Counsels the Provinces of the
Christian world were divided, and every Province assigned to his own
Patriarch, and the bishop of Constantinople by name made equal to the
bishop of Rome without any difference of honor, but that the bishop of
Constantinople was next after the bishop of Rome in place, and had the second
voice in all answers and subscriptions.

The 4. The Council of Chalced^ne of 630. Bishops.
general Council of Chalcedon gathered by Valentinian and Marcian in the
year of Christ 451. which consisted of 630. bishops who decreed thus in the
28. Cannon, we every way following the decrees of the holy Fathers, and
acknowledging the Cannon of the 150. bishops, we also decree the very same,
and ordain the same about the privileges of the most holy Church of
Constantinople, which is new Rome. For to the throne of old Rome, because that
City bare rule over all; the Fathers by right give the privileges,
Constantinople equal with Rome.
and the 150. Fathers being moved with the same consideration do give equal
privileges to the most holy throne of new Rome, rightly judging that city,
which is honored both with the Presence and Senate of the Empire, and does
enjoy equal privileges with Rome that ancient Lady; should be advanced in
causes Ecclesiastical as well as she, and be as much esteemed, being the next
unto her.

Acto 3. write thus to Leo the most holy and blessed universal Archbishop and
Patriarch of great Rome. Note, says Binius, that in these books Leo is called
the universal Archbishop. Suri. tom. 2. Council. page 111. and Bini t^m 2.
Council. fol. 215.
But note also that which Binius concealed, that it is added to Leo the
Archbishop of the Romans. Note here the authority of the Bishop of Rome,
says Surius: but it may be that these words slipped out of the margent into the
text, though they be most true, says Binius. But we appeal from these two
pararasites of the Roman Bishop to the very acts of the Council themselves,
which we before alleged.

But this canon is rejected, say they, by Leo the Bishop of Rome, about the
privileges and eminency of the Bishop of Constantinople, because he
presupposes that the Roman seat was made the head of the Church not by Gods
Law, but by man's Law, as Binius says, fol. 180. whom shall we believe? Leo,
who out of his ambition rejected the canon; or Gregory, who with all reverence
received the whole Council, as it is in Gratian distinct. 15. cap. sicui.

But the Council, say they, in their Epistle writ Leo the head of the
universal Church. Because Leo so writes, Piniu^i^ anno in hanc. Synod. 188.
lib. 3. epist. 3. to Eulogius the Bishop of Alexandria, your holiness
knows, that by the holy Synod of Chalcedon, the name of universality was
given to the seat of the Bishop of Rome only, wherein now by Gods providence
my self do serve.

Why then is not the name of universal prefixed before the Epistle of the
fathers? It was prefixed, say they, but by the craft of some Scribe it was
taken out, what a jest is this? as if it were not more likely, that the Popes
Epistle admitted a fraudulent addition, Whether one Leo or 600. Bishops are
rather to be believed.
then the Epistle of the general Council, a subtraction? But he it so, let
Leo have written so. Whether is it more meet to give credit to the Pope
privately in his own cause, or to 600 Bishops in the cause of the Church,
decreeing against it in a public Council? especially when as Gregory the
great does plainly write, that none of his predecessors did ever use the
title of universal Bishop.

Farther, the fifth general Council, was the second of Justinian, 2.
Constantinople Council of 280. Bishops.
in the year of Christ 586. wherein were present 280. Bishops, who repeating
word for word the former decree of Chalcedon, renewed in the 36. canon.

Whereby it is evident that Constantinople had no less authority in
Ecclesiastical causes, then Rome had: and that Rome had obtained the primacy
of order, because it was the chief seat of the Empire: which so many fathers
in five Synodes gathered together would never have said, if they had judged the
primacie of Peter, had been founded upon the institution of Christ.

What? can we imagine that so chief an article of the Catholic faith was
unknown to fathers, so many for number, so famous for holiness, so excellent
for learning, and that in five several the most renowned general Councels?

If the supremacy was plainly grounded upon the Scripture, Note.
then did the Councels very ill to take away the supremacy. If the Councels
did well in taking it a way, certainly the supremacy is not so plainly
founded upon the Scripture. If you shall lay envy to their charge, whereby men
of such justice and integrity, would not behold a matter so manifest, we will
wonder at it. If you object ignorance to them, that having eyes in their heads
they could not see, we will laugh at it. Neither can we conceive any other
cause alleged by you, but either blind envy, or envious blindness.

An irony. Concordan li. 2 cap. 13.
O blind or envious Cusan, who rested content in the decrees of these Councels,
and whatsoever right belongs to the Pope, does think the same was given him
by the Church. D^fens. part. 2. de cap. 18.
O malicious and dull pated Marsilius Patauine, who thought he had no power,
either above Bishops or other Churches, by any Law, either divine or humane,
but that only which was given the Pope, either absolutely or for a time in the
Nicene Council.

If all this power was given, first by the Scripture, not therefore by the
Church: if by the Church, as Cusan and Marsilius say, not therefore by the
Scripture.

The Council of Carthage of 217. Bishops.
wherein 217. Bishops were assembled, among whom Austin was present. In which
Council, as in the rest, the power of all the Patriarchs was made equal, the
right of appealing to the Bishop of Rome, to such as were condemned by the
Archbishop of their own Diocese, was denied.

Which Cardinal Bellarmine, notwithstanding does auow to belong to all Bishops
by the Law of God, Cap. 25. de primi Romans sedis.
yea, if any were condemned by a Synod of their own province among the
Antipodes, they might provoke to the consistory of the Bishop of Rome. Which
Cardinal, I think, lives not in our Horizon, but with the Antipodes, who is
wont to tread contrary steps, against so many men alive, not only of ours, but
against his own Doctors also. Unless peradventure he descended lower then the
Antipodes, who dare be so bold to go against so many holy fathers being dead.

He does admit with his followers, many fraudulent devices, whereby he goes
about to weaken the authority of this Council. Boniface the second with one
blot of a grievous accusation, does wipe out all the decrees of that Council,
and damnes them all. For he says, that Aurelius, sometime Bishop of the
Church of Carthage, with the rest of his Colleagues (among whom was S. Austin)
began to wax proud, at the instigation of Satan, in the times of Boniface and
Celestine his predecessors, against the Roman Church. It is a hard case to
say, that Austin with his Colleagues, at the instigation of Satan began to
wax proud against the Church, because they had resisted both by their decrees
and letters, three proud Roman Bishops, Zozimus, Boniface and Celestine, in a
just cause common to all Churches.

Apiarius a wicked Priest, whom for his lewdness in Apiarius.
Vrbane the Bishop had justly deprived, appealed to Zozimus Bishop of Rome: who
sent three Legates, Faustine, Philip, and Asellus, to the Council at Carthage,
in favor and aid of Apiarius: them he enjoined among other things, that they
should lay claim, in his name, to the right of appeals to him and his seat:
if any Bishop accused or condemdemned, did appeal to Rome, that the Bishop of
Rome might commit that cause, by his letters, to be determined by the next
provinces, or send Legates from his side, who might sit about the business in
his turn, and with other Bishops might determine of the whole matter. To that
purpose he delivered to his Legates, the title and instrument of his right
written with his own hand, the Canon of the Nycene Council, Council. Carthag.
6. cap. 3.
whereby he affirmed that the right of appeals was bestowed upon him: The
fathers of the Carthaginian Council as soon as they had heard the Legates,
answered, that they never had read any such thing in the canons of the
Council of Niece, and withal, willed the Legates, that if they had that
canon, they should give it to Daniel the public Notary, A false canon offered
for a true.
to read it openly. They in stead of the canon of the Nicene Council, offer
the third chapter of the Council of Sardis, but mangled and gelded. For in the
authenticke it is thus written.

Osius said, If any Bishop be condemned, for any cause, and thinks that he
have no evil, but a good cause, that the judgment may be again renewed, does
it please you that for charity we honor the memory of Peter the Apostle, that
it may be written of them, who have examined the cause to Julius the Bishop of
Rome, and if he shall think that the judgment is to be renewed, it be
renewed, and appoint Judges to that end? But if he prove the cause to be such,
that those things be not repealed, which were already spread, those which he
decrees shall stand firm, if this please all? the Sinode answered, It
pleases. Council: Sard: cap: 3. apud Surium Tom: 1.

The Pope corrupts the words of Osius.
But the Bishop of Rome curtoling those words of Osius; Does it please you, that
for charity we honor the memory of Peter the Apostle, and by writ to Julius
the Rom: Bishop, goes on thus: Osius the Bishop said, It pleases that if a
Bishop be accused, and the Bishops of the same Country being assembled, shall
judge and depose him from his degree, if be that is cast of do appeal, and
fly to the Bishop of the Roman Church, and would have himself heard, if he
shall think it in ^^t the judgment be reuerst, or do vouchsafe to write the
examination of the cause to those Bishops that be of the next Province, that
they make diligent inquiry, and determine it according to the credit of the
truth. And if any man will have his business again to be heard, and shall
move the Bishop of Rome with his petition to send his Legate, let it be in his
power to do what he will in the business, and what he shall think best.

The Popes devise to cosen the African Fathers.
Here mark the notable trick wherewith the Bishop of Rome went about to cosen
the African Fathers.

First he pretends a Canon of the Nicene Council for the right of appealing.
The Legates foyst in a Canon

Bellarm: lib. 2. de Rom Pont: cap: 25.
But Sozi^^us and Boniface, though these Canons were not expressly in the Nicene
Council, yet they called them the Nicene Canons, as Bellarmine says, because
the Council of Niece, and the Council of Sardis were taken for all one.

Is it even so, for one? when as they diffred in time, place, and variety of
Canons? For as Baronius is a witness, the Nicene Council was assembled in the
year 325. the Council of Sardis 347. so that eighteen years came between
those councels; the Nicene Council was in Asia, in a City of Bythinia, the
Sardine Council was in Thracia, the confines of Illiria, as the same Baronius
says. Council: T^m. 1 Bellarmine and Baronius at a ^arre.
How diverse the Canons of each Council were, Surius teaches.

Baronius does excuse it otherwise, that Sozimus and Boniface did not allege
the Canon of the Council of Sardis, but the Canon only of the Council of
Niece: yet there can be no suspicion of deceit in this, but that either some of
the Canons of the Nicene Council repeated in the Council of Sardis were lost
out of the Council of Niece, and reserved whole and sound in the Roman
register; or that by some gatherer of the Canons, because the name of Sardis
was infamous through the Arrians, they were recited in the name of the Nicene
Council.

Two thieves by the contrariety of their answers will easily be descried. And
do we not see these two old forgers by the difference of their answers to be
taken tripping?

It is a sport to see the Popes deceived by his Scribe, as they call him, who
for Sardis put in Niece, and when that by the words of the Legates was
manifestly refuted, who alleged in the Council of Carthage the Council of
Sardis, I suspect, says Bellarmine, that the words of the Legates, by the
fault of the writer, crept out of the margent into the text. It is well, when
thieves fall out, as the proverb is, true men come by their goods. Now the
Legates when they allege the Canons of the Council of Sardis, for the Nicene,
they cut of certain words that were in the middle which they thought were not
for their turn, which Osius delivered, It pleases you that for charity we
honor the memory of Peter the Apostle, and it be writ to Julius the Bishop of
Rome? Wisemen saw, if the privilege of appealing should belong altogether to
the Bishop of Rome, that some parasiticall Osius was not to be set down, who
might win it by flattering entreaty, but might have it by authority.
Decret: 5. q. 4. Osius dixit.
And therefore Gratian in his Decretals does let pass the same words with the
like craft; does any man when he deals with other in his own right say by
entreaty, if it please you all?

Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, who was present himself in the Council of
Niece, brought from Niece to Carthage, they decreed by common consent that the
true copies of the Nicene council should be required of the Bishops of
Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, and the Bishop of Rome himself, if
happily that Canon might be found among them. Neither for the space of five
whole years, the matter being much sought after and debated, any thing at all
could be found. In the mean time, the true copies came from Cyrill of
Alexandria, and from Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, wherein twenty Canons
only, as Ruffinus counts them, were contained, agreeable to the copy of
Carthage, whereof, of so many diverse copies, so excellent, gathered from all
the quarters of the world, Austin with his colleagues writes to Boniface the
Bishop of Rome after this manner: Epist: Carth: Conc: ad Bonif: cap: 101.
Who doubts that the copies of the Nycene Council are most true, which being
brought out of so many places, and so worthy Churches of Greece, and compared,
do so well agree together?

Afric. Conc: cap: 92.
Whereby the Carthaginian Fathers set out a decree presently, that Priests if
they complained of the censures of their Diocesans, should be heard of the
Bishops next adjoining, and if they thought good to appeal from them, they
should appeal only to the Counsels of Africa, or to the primates of their
own Provinces. And they that would needs appeal to places beyond the sea,
should be received by none to the communion within Africa.

Here they who before contrary to the decree of the Chalcedon Council did by
stealth bring in the affirmation for the negation, added an exception clean
contrary to the scope of the decree of the Carthage Council. Unless perhaps
they appeal to the sea of Rome. The Council of purpose did except against the
Roman sea, when it expressly concluded, that it was lawful for none to
appeal to the bishop of Rome. So that Bellarmine himself otherwise a
notable forger, could not allow that exception of Gratian the forger, Bellar.
de Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap. 24.
unless perhaps they appeal to the sea of Rome. For this exception says he
does not seem to agree. For the Aphricans most of all for the Roman Church
did decree, that it should not be lawful to appeal beyond the sea.

They joined letters to the decree, which they sent to Celestine the bishop of
Rome, We entreat say they, that henceforth you would not easily admit to
audience any that come from hence, nor would receive any into your communion
that stand excommunicated by us. For this also your blessedness shall easily
find determined in the Nicene Council. And if this seem to be observed in
the inferior Clarks, and Lay people, the Council will have much more observed
in the bishops. Let not them therefore who are suspended from the Communion
in their own Province, be restored by your holiness of set purpose against
right and reason. Let your holiness rather punish as it is meet, the impudent
gaddings of Priests and other like Layikes. For no decree of the Fathers is
forbidden by this of the church of Africa. And the decrees of the Nycene
Council, committed both the Clerks of inferior degrees, and byshopps
themselves most plainly to their own Metropolitans. For they did wisely and
justly foresee, that what business soever were begun, should be likewise
ended in their own proper places. Neither did they think that the grace of
the holy Ghost was wanting to any Province, whereby justice might wisely be
discerned, and firmly retained by the Priests, chiefly because it is granted
to every one, if he think good, to appeal from the sentence of the Judges to
the Synodes of their own Province, or after that to the general Synod:
unless there be any who think, that God can infuse the righteousness of
judging into one man, whatsoever he be, and deny it to an infinite number of
Priests assembled in a Council. How then shall this ouer-sea judgment be
certain, Reasons not to appeal beyond sea.
whereto the persons of witnesses be necessary, who either for weakness of
nature, or for age, or for some other lets and impediments cannot be present?
For that which was sent by Faustinus, in the behalf of the Nycene Synod, in
the truer descriptions of the Nycene Council we could find no such matter.
Therefore do ye not suffer this, that we may not seem to bring in the
smoakie pride of the world into the Church. These things did the Carthaginians
publickely write to Celestine bishop of Rome, wherein they did refute out of
the true and authenticke copies the appeals to the Roman by shop which
Sozumus laid claim to out of the false Cannons of the Nycene Council. For the
decrees of the Nycene Synod, do commit either the Clerks, or the bishops
themselves directly to their own Metropolitanes. They forbid therefore, that
they which were excommunicated by us should be received into the communion by
the Romans. As it is say they determined in the Council of Niece. The
Africans rejected the Popes Legates as new creatures and unknown to the
ancient Church: they called their gaddings to Rome impudent, and deemed the
sending of his Legates the smoakie pride of the world. And they did propound
not the bare decree of the Synod, but enforced it with very weighty reasons.

One is, that if so great authority were given to the

The second, that when it is sufficient to appeal

The third, that seeing in the repealing of sentences

The fourth, because by this custom of appealing the

The Carthaginian Fathers upon these reasons rejected that unjust request of
the Roman bishop: and discovered the false and forged Cannons by the true
and right copies sent from Cyrill and Atticus. So wisdom overcame deceit, and
modesty pride. For the Fathers did the second time condemn Apiarius, and in
Apiarius Sozimus, Boniface, Celestine, that is in one wicked runnagate, three
very cunning forgers.

Here Saturnine in a great chafe, These says he, are A mere Shifter.
yours of malice. The Fathers by a double ignorance, One because they believed
there were but twenty Cannons only of the Nicene Council, whereas there were
seventy, whereof fifty being burnt by the Arrians perished. Wherein, as many
other things so that right of Appeals, which the Roman bishop did challenge
was contained. Soz^m. lib. 3. cap. 10.
The other because they did not distinguish between the two Sinodes of Sardis,
Popish reasons to prove mo^e Canons of Niece then 20. Epist. of Egypt: to
Marcus. For the coppie of the Nicene Council Tom. Conc. 1.
as it appears out of Sozemane, whereof one was Catholic and general of
300. bishops which Austin saw not. The other was heretical of 86 bishops
which Austin saw.

Now beside those twenty Cannons, which Ruffinus reckons up that there were
other 50. more appears out of a certain Epistle of Athanasius and the
Egyptians to Marcus the Roman Bishop, of whom they required the true copy
of the 70. Cannons, after the Arrians had burnt the authenticke copy, which
Athanasius brought from Niece.

There is extant a record of Julius the Roman Bishop against those of the
east in the behalf of Athanasius, wherein beside those twenty Cannons, other
twenty seven are repeated: whereof six do more clearly set forth the
authority of the Roman bishop then that Cannon which Sozimus alleged.

Besides that there be many more Cannons of the Council of Niece besides
those twenty which Ruffinus reckons up.

Eusebius. in the life of Constable. cap. 3. Ambros. Ep 82.
One, wherein it decreed that Easter should be celebrated on the sabbath day, as
appears by Constantines Epistle in Eusebius.

A second, wherein it decreed that a man twice married should not be admitted
into the clergy. As Ambrose tells us.

Ierom. in pref. on Judith. Austen. Epist. 110.
A third, wherein the book of Judith is admitted among the canonical books as
Jerome witnesses.

A fourth, wherein it is forbidden that two bishops should sit together in one
Church as Austin affirms.

A fifth, wherein it decreed that it was not lawful for them that were fasting
to minister the Sacrament of the supper. As the Africane Fathers testify.

Lastly the heretical Doctors Luther, Calvin, and the writers of the
centuries out of the first book of Socrates cap. 8. do allege a Cannon out
of the Council of Niece, wherein their Wives are permitted to Priests. But
none of these Cannons are found among those 20. which they only number.

Therefore if Sozimus be said to be a corruptor and a Forger of the Cannons of
Niece, because he recited one Cannon under the name of the Nycene Council,
which is not found among the 20. Cannons; by the same reason Constantine,
Ambrose, Jerome, Austin, the African Fathers, the Centurie writers, Luther and
Calvin are to be termed corruptors and forgers: for all of them do recite
Cannons out of the Council of Niece, which are not reckoned among those twenty
Cannons.

Last of all in the Council of Florence Sess. twenty, one John a great
learned man affirmed, that he could show by many testimonies of the ancient,
that the Fathers of the 6. Council of Carthage, did at the last acknowledge
that very corrupt and false Cannon of the Nycene Council were sent over to
them out of Constantinople and Alexandria.

Then Patriot, he that holds you not worthy, Saturnine,

You do very shamelesly object ignorance to the Carthaginian Fathers among
whom Austin was present, A popish slander.
out of Bellarmine; and malice to our men.

When the Papists perceived that their Sozimus wa^ taken tardie in a manifest
lie, they devised this tale of the 70. Cannons of the Nycene Council. And to
the purpose coined an Epistle, as it had been sent from Athanasius and other
Egyptian Bishops, to bishop Marcus, wherein they do complain forsooth,
that the true copies were burnt by the Arrians at Alexandria and therefore
required the true coppie of the seventy Cannons. Athanasius Epistle forged.
And as one lie commonly begets another, they counterfeit Marcus answer to
Athanasius and the Egyptians, given the tenth before the Calendes November,
when Nepotian and Secundus were Consuls, which day was near the end of the 13.
year of the reign of Constantine, as we may see in Sozomen the first book
cap. 25. and 28. in which year he writes that Athanasius was absent, out of
Egypt in the Council of Tire, and returned not home, but fled to
Constantinople, and remained there till he was banished into France.

How then could Athanasius send this Epistle to Marcus out of Egypt, where he
was not when the Epistle was sent?

Again in Marcus Epistle is mention of the persecution of Egypt, which was not
at all in Constantines time, but long after under Constantius when Marcus was
dead.

Tusc: 1.
Cicero laughes heartily at a Fellow, who said he remembered what was done
before he was borne, Who can choose but laugh at your Marcus remembering the
persecution in Egypt, raised after his death.

Sozom. lib. 1. ap. 17. Beda distinct. 16. Nicene canons burnt before they were
made.
Now Marcus went next before Julius, Julius was bishop of Rome when the Nycene
Council was gathered, as Sozomen and Bid write. Therefore your Athanasius,
who is said to write to Marcus, writes that the Nycene Cannons were burnt
before they were made.

Besides whereas there were twenty Cannons afterward made, they were preserved
vncorrupt in the public Nycene faith was contained, and the Arrian heresy
was confuted, the other 50. were said suddenly to have perished through the
malice of the Arrians.

O foolish Arrians who blotted out 50. Cannons which touched no part of the
Arrian heresy, and spared the Nycene creed, and the Epistle sent to them of
Alexandria which condemned that whole heresy.

The Orator does make himself merry with certain witnesses of Doris, Orat.
pro Flac.
who being produced against Flaccus, when they had lost nothing said they had
lost the public tables; O Shepheardes said he desirous of letters, for they
took nothing from them but letters; if they had brought forth those that had
been true, there had been no fault, if false there had been a punishment for
corrupting the letters. They thought it best to say they were lost.

These popish witnesses are not much unlike, The Papists like foolish
Shepherds.
who feign that the Arrians stole 50. Cannons out of the Nycene Council, which
hurt them nothing at all, and left twenty sound and untouched, whereby they
were to be condemned. If the Papists bring forth the true Cannons, they hurt
their cause, if false they hurt their credit. They think it the safest course
to say that 50. were burnt, and that by them, who could receive no profit by
this their dealing.

But if the Arrians were so foolish, the Romanistes were wiser then to suffer
20. Canons to remain among them which did restrain their supremacy, and
suffer 50. to perish which did enlarge it.

But we see so little likelihood in the tale, The former forgerie rejected by
Bellarmine.
that Bellarmine himself hist it out. For he writes that the burnings of the
books happened in the time of Constantius the Emperor, whenas Athanasius being
banished, one George an Arrian was ordained in his place, as Athanasius
witnesses in his Epistle to all the Orthodoxe. Marcus received an Epistle
after he was dead.
But it appears, says he, by Ieromes Chronology that Marcus the Pope was
dead at that time. Therefore Marcus after he was dead received an Epistle from
Athanasius. And therefore being dead made answer to Athanasius, if we give
credit to Bellarmine. It is good sport to see how these lying Papists do cover
this tale with their mutual contradictions.

But Julius answer does confirm Marcus Epistle, wherein there is mention of
seven and twenty Nycene canons, A counterfeit Julius.
besides those twenty which are reckoned up by Ruffinus.

Here we have a counterfeit Julius, not only lying for the supremacies sake,
but also forswearing himself: though he that is a common lier, as it is said,
is a common for-swearer. He does not only counterfeit false canons, but
ratifies them with an oath. That I said true, the Godhead is my witness, as
he says in that counterfeit answer. But if the answer of the true Julius, sent
to the Council of Antioch, in Athanasius quarrel, mentioned by Athanasius in
his second Apology, if it be compared with this, it will lay open all the
circumstances of this untruth and perjury. I will not go far for proof,
this blind and bastardly decretall does plainly reprove it self.

It was given the first of November, as it is written, when Felician and his
Colleague were Consuls, Socrat. l. 1. c. 40
that very year wherein Constantine died.

Now the Council of Antioch that deposed Athanasius, Sozom. l. 3. c. 5.
and to which Julius writ, was gathered together by Constantius five years
after Constantines death. So this answer was sent to the Synod of Antioch,
five years before that Synod was assembled. Do you not see with your eyes,
and feel with your fingers how gross this lie is?

Beside, Julius in his answer writes, that Athanasius remained with him at
Rome a year and a half, waiting for the presence of the Antiochians, after
he had cited them with his first process, whereto is ascribed the calends of
October, as to the latter the calends of November of the same year.

So between the two days of appearance were one and thirty days, in which
short time, to go from Rome to Antioch, Pegasi, be horses with wings.
and return again, the Popes Paritours had need to be Pegasi, who were not
to gallop, but fly.

But if Julius six canons did more clearly set out the Popes prerogative,
then that one canon of Sozimus, truly you make Sozimus to be a very wise man,
who chose one canon and the worst, when he could have alleged six, and
those far better.

For whereas you bring many other canons of the Nycene Council, as you call
them, beside those twenty recited by great authors, let your Jesuits make you
an answer, who distinguish the decrees of the Council of Niece into two kinds.

The first kind they call (...), that is, constitutions, as they interpret
them.

The other they call (...), that is properly, canons, as they with us confess.

They are ignorant, as they confess, of the number Ruffinus. To the first
kind, they refer those your canons improperly so called, whereof some they
affirm are among the acts of the Nycene Council, and deny them to be among
the Canons: as Turrian plainly in his proeme upon the canons of Niece, in
Binius, part. 1. page 169. But of these constitutions which you urge, there
will be another time when you shall have a particular answer.

Here I rest, here I dwell, here I stick fast against all the corruptions
and falsifications, where Austin has taught me to set fast footing, who
doubts, says he, that all the copies of the Nycene Council are true, which
are brought out of so many sundry places, and from so noble Grecian Churches,
being compared together, and do so well agree. I give credit to Cyrill of
Alexandria, so writing back to the Carthaginian fathers.

I thought it necessary to send over to your Charity, Sur tom. 1. rescript.
Cyril. Alexan p. 586
the faithfullest copies out of the authenticke in the Synod, held in Nice a a
city of Bithinia.

Epist. Atti. episc. con. ibidem. fol. 190.
Me thinks I hear Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, thus writing back: I have
sent unto you the canons, all of them, as you commanded, as they were decreed
in the city Niece by the fathers.

I ought not, I cannot, but must needs consent to 217. fathers, assembled in
the African Council, whereto Austin did subscribe.

Is any man so mad to prefer the forged writings of a counterfeit Mark, and a
counterfeit Julius, fetched I know not whence, written in the dark and in a
corner, disagreeing between themselves, before the true and undoubted canons
reserved in the Registry, not only of Carthage and Alexandria, but of
Constantinople and Rome, exemplified in the light, openly and agreeing in all
points among themselves? And will any man hearken to 3. suspected and convicted
witnesses in their own cause, rather then to more then 200. witnesses
assembled in a Council in the common cause? and those bringing in the pride
hurtful to the Church with out all reason; these suppressing that pride with
all forcible and holy reasons they could?

Bellarmine, the ridiculous person of one John, Ridiculous John brought upon
the stage.
whom he calls a very learned man, who affirms in the Council of
Florence, forsooth, that he could show many testimonies of the Ancient. What
does this jolly John affirm, that the fathers of Carthage did at the last
acknowledge, that false and corrupt canons of the Nycene Council, were sent
them from Alexandria and Constantinople. Who affirms it? One John. Who told
him so? No body. Only he says on his bare word, that he can show many
testimonies of the Ancient. Why then does he not show them? Therefore what a
certain ignorant animal says he can show, and does not, shall we accept it
for a lawful testimony of a recantation, made by so excellent and wise a
Council? And because a certain Robert has brought in an obscure John in the
fagge end of all, and calls him a very learned man, therefore we must admit of
him as a fit and sufficient witness against so many most reverend fathers of
Carthage? And when he dare object ignorance to all these, does he not see that
in himself he does betray his own arrogance? he does attribute learning to
one John, and ignorance to Austin, forsooth he thinks he can fetch smoke out
of lightning, and light out of smoke: Minerua's heir, who dreams that all
knowledge is borne with him, and shall die with him. For otherwise he would
never have objected ignorance to Austin, and the rest of the Carthaginian
fathers, as if they knew not to distinguish between the two Councels of
Sardis, when himself betrayed more ignorance in confounding the Councels of
Niece and Sardis.

But that we may return thither, where we went aside, Primacy of order
granted to Rome, but of power denied.
and shortly to set down to you the judgment of the Primative Church,
Calander, concerning the primacie, you see that the primacie of order and
degree was granted to the Bishop of Rome, but the primacie of power and
jurisdiction was denied by six Councels. I am not ignorant, Victor did affect
before the Nycene Council, what Leo did arrogantly seek afterward: like the
two sons of Zebede, one of them desirous to sit on the right hand of Christ,
the other on the left. But the desire of glory does not infer an article of
the faith. Therefore the fathers of the Primative Church, did provide as far
as they might, that one should not advance himself above the rest. The fathers
of Niece did assign a province, as well to the Roman Bishop, as to the Bishop
of Alexandria, out of which he might not depart. The Bishops of
Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, did make the Sea of Constantinople
equal to the Sea of Rome: The Carthaginians did deny the right of appealing
from the African Synodes to Rome. It is not credible that so many learned and
holy fathers assembled in six Councels, would have denied that jurisdiction to
the Roman Bishop which the Scripture had yielded him. But there are other
started up, who saw more, and understood the Scripture better then 2000.
fathers assembled in those six Councels. Now they can show us an heavenly
charter in many places, wherein God gave to Peter, and to Peter's successor, as
they presume, the Bishop of Rome, that universal principality; I will give
thee the keys, and whatsoever thou shall bind etc. and feed my sheep, and
thou art Peter, and upon that rock, and diverse others of that kind.

Peter's key was no better, his tongue no more free then the rest.
yet they could not perceive a greater key, or a better given to Peter then to
the rest of the Apostles, nor a larger or a more shining fiery tongue sitting
on Peter's head, as the chief Prince, then on the rest: neither that one pillar
was set more sure and strong, then the other 12. pillars, but that they were al
alike equal among themselves: Acts 15. Acts 8. Peter not equal but inferior
to the rest.
nor that Peter alone was appointed the Pastor of all the Apostles, much less
the Prince, lifting up himself above the rest of the Apostles, above the
Emperor above the Council. Therefore in the first Council of Jerusalem, Peter
was not President, but James. And Peter being sent by the rest of the Apostles
with John into Samaria obeyed. Now the superior is not sent by the inferior,
but contrary: It follows that Peter was not above the rest, but equal with the
rest: yea, truly below the whole Council: to the which for going to Cornelius
the Centurian, being accused, he gave account of his fact, wherein he
confessed himself to be inferior to the Council: which was kept, not by
Peter's command, but by the consent of all the Apostles. Therein there was a
great discourse of the sum of Christianity, of justification, and of the
salvation of the Elect by the grace of Christ: before Peter gave his sentence,
and that not sitting, but arising, and that very modestly and gently.
Afterward, James did only yield his opinion, but pronounced and set down in
writing the decree it self, which all the assembly of Apostles and Priests did
follow. It seemed good also, not to Peter alone, but to the Apostles and
Priests, with the whole Church, to send certain choice men to Antioch, with
the Apostle Paul and Barnabas: and the Synodall Epistle did not bear the name
of Peter, but of all the Apostles, Priests and Brethren. And if Peter had
received the primacy of jurisdiction from Christ, the other Apostle had done
him great wrong, that suffered not Peter to be President of the Council, that
they sent Peter as inferior into Samaria, that they took account of his doing,
that they met not together by his appointment, that they suffered him not to
sit above others, to propound the decree, to send Legates, and to seal up the
Synodall Epistle in his own name. But the Apostles did no wrong to Peter. It
follows then that Peter received no primacy of jurisdiction from Christ, but
was equal to the rest of the Apostles, and inferior to the whole Council.

The Papists do grant a double government to Peter. Peter's double pretended
government. Galat. 2. Paul, nothing inferior to Peter.
They make him Lord of the spirituals and temporals. Therefore the Apostle Paul
did ill, be it spoken with reverence, who made himself equal to Peter, and
gave out, that he was inferior in nothing unto Peter, and which was more,
reprehended him sharply to his face, as his equal and fellow-seruant, and
that publicly, when he took him in a fault. For the Gospel (says he) was
committed to me over the Gentiles, as it was to Peter over the Jews. For he
that was powerful through Peter in the Apostleship of the Jews, the same was
powerful in me over the Gentiles. And when as James, Cephas and John, who
seemed to be pillars, knew that grace was given me, then they gave the right
hands of fellowship to me and Barnabas, See Cephas does acknowledge Paul his
fellow, he had him not for a subject: neither did he challenge to himself
the highest top of government, but gave the right hand of fellowship: which was
done by Peter not only in respect of humility of mind, but for equality of
office. Far be it from us to think it was written by Paul for pride of
mind, but for the truth of the matter. And if Christ had appointed Peter the
universal Bishop and Prince of his Church, how durst Peter and Paul, covenant
between themselves in the 18. year after Christ his passion, that Peter
should exercise the Apostleship over the Jews, and Paul over the Gentiles, not
only, but chiefly? whereby Paul by the Ancients, is called the Prince of the
Apostles, as well as Peter. But the equal has no government over his equal.

Peter would be are no rule over the clergy. 1 Pet: 5.
Neither could Peter himself bear rule over the Clergy, that he might not
seem to permit that to other, which he would not take to himself, when he
called himself not a chief Priest, but a fellow Priest. Much less did he use
the sword, and civil government, and judge Caesar to be subject unto him; but
admonished himself with all other Christians, to submit themselves to Caesar,
as to the most excellent, and to other Magistrates as sent from him, neither
did at any time exercise civil government. He had it not therefore; for that
is not a power which is never brought into act. Therefore Peter was no more
over Kings, than he was over Apostles.

Christ himself as man not above Emperors.
As he is God, he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; as he was man he did not
only submit himself to Tiberius, but to Pilate, Tiberius Deputy in Jury. You
had no power, said he, over me, if it were not given you from above. Again he
says, that his kingdom was not of this world, when he was demanded of Pilate,
what kingdom he laid claim unto. Whereby it appears that Christ was to have
not a temporal, August: in Psalm: 47.
but a spiritual kingdom, as Austin gathers out of those words. Harken to
this o ye Kings, and envy not, Christ is a King after another fashion than you
are, who said my kingdom is not of this world. Fear not therefore, if the
kingdom of this world be taken from you, you shall have another given unto
you, and that a heavenly one, whereof he is King. If Christ had not a temporal
kingdom, was it for Peter to have it? what is this else but to make the
servant above his master, and the ambassador above him that sent him? and if it
did not belong neither to Christ, nor to Peter, do you think that not only the
temporal kingdom, but the chief government over all temporal kingdoms, was
given to the Pope, Christ's supposed Vicar, and Peter's counterfeit successor?
fie upon such foolish pride, fie upon such lofty vanity, which Christ did
reprehend in many places in ye the Apostles, when he said, the Kings of the
earth bear rule over them, but you not so. And as my father sent me, so I send
you. And my kingdom is not of this world. And yet Bellarmine dares to write,
Bellarmine contrary to Christ.
that the supreme temporal power was given to the chief Bishop, which Christ
himself by his own confession did not exercise. Christ says, the Kings of the
earth bears rule over them, but you not so: Bellarmine contrary, but you so.
Christ, as my Father sends me so I send you: Bellarmine contrary, not as my
Father sends me do I send you. The Father sent me in humility, and
ignominy; I send you in pomp and majesty; Christ, my kingdom is not of this
world; Bellarmine contrary, yea it is of this world. and of all this world. So
manifestly does the Cardinal contradict Christ.

But although Christ as man did not exercise temporal Peter to be grounded
upon that which Christ could have done, but upon that which Christ did indeed.
Christ could if he had pleased, have made ye world in an instant, but he would
not: the Scripture witnesses he would not, because it is said that he took
to him six days to bring forth that work. He could if he would have redeemed
the world with one drop of blood without death, but he would not: that he
would not the Scripture bears witness, wherein it is said, that he must die
for us. So he could if he would as man, exercise the dominion of temporal
things, but he would not; that he would not, truth it self does witness,
which said, my kingdom is not of this world. From a possibility to a deed, the
argument is not of force in Christ, much less in Peter. O pleasant madness of
Bellarmine, whereby he dreameth that the temporal power in possibility, as
hanging in the air, is bestowed upon his Bishop.

How the temporal rule forsooth descends upon the Pope.
Therefore if he would, he could have cast Tiberius out of his throne, and
Pilate out of his judgment seat: for he was the heir of all things. Peter
could if he would have wrested Nero's scepter out of his hands, for he was
heir to Christ. And the Pope can if he will cast of the Crown from the head
of any King heretic or catholic, if he begin to go astray, for he is Peter's
heir. For all comes to this at last, that the temporal dominion of the whole
world, descends from Christ to Peter, from Peter to the Pope. That the Pope
forsooth might have and exercise power over Kings, which Christ had but used
not, but might have used, if he had been so pleased. A vant with all these
foolish quiddities which infer such dangerous consequences. Austin and
Maldonate against Bellarmine.
But if he had consulted not only with Austin, but also with Maldonat on of
his own side, he should have understood, that that place was to be
interpreted of the spiritual, not temporal inheritance of the world, granted
to Christ by the Father. For what? he that refused the judgment of dividing a
private inheritance, would he take to him the public inheritance of the whole
world? And he that willingly submitted himself to the authority of Pilate
given from above, even to the death of the Cross, did he show himself a
temporal Lord both over Tiberius and the whole world?

The power of Pilate, says Bellarmine, was not ordained 22. but because S.
Thomas (says he) upon the 13 to the Romans, understands the place of the
ordinary power, we do not disagree: But that this power did extend it self to
Christ, we think that to be done out of Pilates ignorance, who not knowing the
worthiness of Christ, judged him as some private Citizen of the country. As if
in our days a Clergy man were brought to the bar of a Secular Judge under the
name and habit of a Layman, he may be condemned by that power wherewith a
Laicke may, out of the ignorance of the Judge; yet it does not follow thereby
that Clerks by law are subject to the judgment of Laymen, or that Christ was
subject to the judgment of Pilate. Thus far Bellarmine.

But Christ said that Pilates power was not permitted Pilates the Judge, which
Austin called not an usurped but an unjust power. Which place (says he) when I
heard it to be expounded by S. Thomas of a lawful power I do not withstand it.
Bellarmine contradicts himself.
It is well that which before you did wickedly affirm, being instructed by
Thomas you honestly deny. The man speaks out of a boat, now enclining to this
side, now to that, neither does he sometime contradict others so much as
himself. But mark how by turning himself into all parts, he has found a
starting hole to escape by. Whereas Pilate did stretch out this power against
Christ, it was out of Pilates ignorance, that knew not the worth of Christ. As
if a Clerk under the habit of a Lay man should be brought before a
lay-Iudge, he might by the ignorance of the Judge be condemned as a Layman,
which notwithstanding the Law does not allow, etc.

That which he imputes to the ignorance of Pilate, Austin imputes it to his
fear, lest he should offend Caesar in loosing of Christ. But this may be
ascribed to his ignorance that he beggeth the question: Bellarmine begs the
question.
For he takes it as granted, which is in question, that a Clerk may not by law
be condemned by a secular Judge, though out of the Judges ignorance he may,
being attired like a Layman As if he should say that Alexander the 3. being in
his pontificalibus might not rightly be judged by Frederick the Emperor,
Alexander 3.
but being in his cooks apparel he might by ignorance: or that Bishop who
bare arms against Richard the first King of England, An English Bishop in K:
Richard the first days. Odo brother to W. Conqueror.
could not be hanged in his Bishops attire, but being found in a coat armor,
he might by ignorance: Or that Odo the brother of William the first, a very
wicked traitor, could not be committed to ward, as Bishop of Bayon, but as
Earl of Kent: Or that some traiterous Jesuit, imagine some Gar^et or
Oldcorne, could not be hanged in his massing robes, but might by ignorance,
being clad in a Courtiers attire. I could wish rather that such Clerks were
unknown than known. But he does very untowardly make Christ his innocence, a
cloak for a harmefull Clerk: that because Christ could not be rightly
condemned by Pilate, therefore every Clerk is exempted from the judgment of a
secular Judge. It is as I said, a manifest begging of the thing in question.
For I can better dispute after a contrary manner;

There was no exempting of the person of Christ from the judgment of Pilate,

Therefore there is no exempting of Paul the fifth from the judgment of the
Emperor.

For if Christ the chief Bishop was not exempted from the judgment of the
Emperor, whose power was from above, then certainly the Bishop of Rome, ought
not to be exempted from the judgment of the Emperors power. The actions of
Christ are rules for the Pope, the actions of Popes are not rules for Christ.

But whereas the Cardinal brings in his Clearke in Clerk: but when Christ
said not this, but the clean contrary, (you have power against me from above)
he allowed not the exe^pting of a Clerk: unless the prerogative of a Clerk be
greater than the prerogative of Christ. But you have brought in a very
dull-pated Clerk, who being endowed with a privilege as you call it, cannot
utter it that he may be safe from danger: being like to the Ass and her colt,
whence they are wont to draw another argument for the temporal government of
Christ. An argument drawn from the Ass for the Popes power.
He sent his disciples that they should bring him the Ass and her colt,
whereon according to the prophecy, the humble King might sit, when he entered
into Jerusalem; and commanded them to tell the owners of the Asses, the Lord
had need of them: whence they conclude, that Christ was the temporal Lord of
the whole world. very foolishly, for whereas he borrowed the Ass, it shows
Christ's poverty, and whereas he rode on it, when he went into Jerusalem, it
shows his humility and meeknes: as the Fathers expound it. Therefore they
that gather from thence, the dignity and excellency of a temporal Prince,
the Lord has need of them, that I may not seem to speak more sharply
against them.

And if the authority of a Prince might have been gathered out of this place,
he would not have said the Lord had need of them, but the Lord commandes that
you send them. Whose humilite when Celestine the Bishop of Rome peruersly
desiring to follow was carried through the City upon an Ass, The Ass sat
upon the Pope not the Pope upon the Ass.
and enjoined his Cardinals to do the like, was laughed at by them, who
believed that the Ass rather sat upon the Pope, then the Pope upon the Ass:
because when he would resemble Christ his humility, he should have cast off
the Popes stateliness. And yet they are so blockish, that they think that
Christ when he rid into Jerusalem after his manner in triumph, that he
exercised temporal power. Did they then think this manner to be scarce
papal in Celestine; do they think it Regal in Christ? And that which they
thought vilde in Christ, do they think triumphant in him? And that which they
thought a sign of weakness in him, do they count it a show of power in
Christ? Christ assuredly is the King of heaven and earth, and he has a
kingdom both spiritual and eternal. But his kingdom is not of this world,
though it be in this world, as he professed before Pilate. How Christ stood
before Pilate.
He stood therefore before Pilate both the Emperors Lord and Subject: afterward
to judge him, now to be judged of him: God to be feared by his inuicible
majesty, man to be pitied by his visible humility: in whose person the
power of the spirit lay hid under the frailety of the flesh, that he might
teach Peter, and in him the Pope, to rejoice at heavenly graces, not to wax
proud at earthly titles, and ever to bear in mind the glory of a Kingdom
not outward, and decaying; but inward and eternal.



Christ had no kingdom of the world.

Therefore Peter had none: unless he could give that to Peter he had not
himself. The Pope decreaseth by the same degrees he increased.


Christ is the Emperors subject as he is man, how therefore can Peter be his
Lord? unless the Disciple may be above his Master. And if Peter be a subject,
how can the Pope be a Lord?

Peter was not above the rest of the Apostles.

Therefore the Pope is not above other Bishops.

Peter was inferior to the Council.

Therefore the Pope is inferior to the Council.

By the same degrees that the Pope did increase, by the same if you please let
him decrease.

First he was advanced above Bishops, as Boniface the third; afterward above
Kings and Emperors, as Gregory the seventh: then he took upon him the
imperial and pontifical dignity, and that by the right of his Popedom: as
Boniface the 8. Last of all he was lifted above all Counsels, that all the
remedies for mischief might be taken away, and that the Christian people might
happily lament their miseries, but not cure them.

But Peter was not above the rest of the Apostles. Cyprian, That were says he,
the rest of the Apostles, that Peter was; endued with the same fellowship of
honor and power.

There was a paritie of power among all the Apostles, where was then the
superiority of Peter?

The Carthaginian Fathers therefore decreed in the Council that the Bishop
of the first sea should not be called Prince of Priests, or chief Priest,
Chap. 42.
or have any such title, but only the Bishop of the first sea: where is then
the spiritual principality of the Pope, whereof Bellarmine dreameth?

Afterward Gregory the first did not only detest the title of universal
Bishop in John of Constantinople, Lib. 4. Epist. cap. 32. Gregory the first
did detest the title of the universal Bishop.
but in himself and all others as new, wicked, a name of singularity, to be a
general plague of the Church, the corruption of faith, against the Cannons,
against Peter the Apostle, against the sense of the Gospel, against all
Churches, against God himself. That never any holy man used any such title,
Lib. 4. Epist. 34 and Epist. 38 39.
that none of his Predecessors did give their consents it should be used, and
that whosoever did use it, he was the Messenger and forerunner of Antichrist.
This is a notable title, the universal Bishop of the Church, proper to the
Bishop of Rome as Bellarmine says. Therefore new, profane wicked etc. as
Gregory says.

Lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 31. Bellarmines objection against Pope Gregory.
But here Bellarmine does distinguish, there is one sense of this title, that he
who is called the universal Bishop of all Christian cities, so that other be
not Bishops, but only his Vicars, and in this sense it is a profane word as
Gregory speaks. So that according to blessed Gregory's mind, the universal
Bishop seems to take authority from all other, that an universal Bishop
be one and an only Bishop, as Bellarmine does expound in Tortus, as if
Gregory had judged that all other Bishops had been put out of office by
John of Constantinople, who would needs be styled the universal Bishop.

Bellarmine does cross the history.
Wherein Bellarmine does cross the history which shows that all the Greek
Bishops did consent to John of Constantinople, that he should take to him
the title of universal Bishop: which they would never have done, if by the
grant of that title, they had thought all Bishop like authority should have
been taken from them. And Platina shows that Boniface the 3. took to him
that place of preheminency, which John challenged.

Bellarmine contradicts himself.
Besides that in the very said place he does contradict himself, where he
writes that the Greek Bishops would not only prefer the
Constantinopolitane sea before the sea of Alexandria and Antioch, but make it
also equal to Rome, and universal. Which how can it agree with that which he
said before? for he did not prefer himself before the sea of Alexandria and
Antioch, but the sea of Constantinople took them both away: and did not equal
himself to the Roman, but abolished the Roman: for he was the universal and
only Bishop, and made the other not his fellow but his Vicar. For other were
not Bishops, but his Vicars only as he imagines Gregory to have thought.
Lib. 4. epist. 36. Lib. 4. ep. 34.


For Gregory thought by that title not to take away all Bishops but to
diminish them, or that other Patriarchs had their honor abrogated, but
derogated: nor that all other were put down, but that he was set up above all
other: neither did he go about that one thing, that he alone should be, but
be alone in authority; or that other should be no Bishops at all, but that
he should seem a Bishop of better worth then the rest: and that he should
join them as parts to himself, not cut them off: and should be among
Bishops, as Lucifer among the Angels, who preferred himself before others,
took not others away. So this universal Bishop suffered other Bishops to
be, but to be in subjection, if we believe Gregory a better interpreter of
his own mind, then Bellarmine. And this did Boniface the third effect, when
Boniface took nothing to him by the grant of Phocas, which John did not claim
by the grant of Mauritius.

That which Boniface took to himself, Paul the 5. retains, and that much
more.

He does retain therefore a new, profane, wicked, as Gregory thought: while
he is called universal Bishop.

It is well said and truly, an evil head, is a head of evils. And every
evil as it is more general is the worse. And therefore an universal evil is
the greatest evil, from whence all other evils are powered into the Church and
Commonweal: into the Church, heresies; into the Commonweal, treasons: while
it utterly lost the faith of Christ, and trod underfoot the majesty of the
Emperor. Lib. 4. Ep. 39.
Gregory foretold each of them. For thus he said to Anianus: to consent to
this wicked name, what is it else but to loose the faith? And how much damage
the faith has sustained it shall appear by those Articles of the faith which
follow. And to Mauritius he writ, Epist. 32.
that who so delights in that name, does thereby set himself above the
honor of the Emperor. And how much damage the Empire has sustained, the
lamentable ends of many emperors does declare. Regius our Councellor shall
tell you who they were. Gregory as I said was a true, alas too true a
Prophet. And our learned interpreter of Gregory the Bishop of Chicester said
well that the universal Bishop is for the Empire Lucifer; for the Church
Antichrist.

Gregory himself (they say) though he liked not the universal title, he
exercised the universal jurisdiction. Wherein they imagine Gregory to be not
truly holy, but profanely politic, like to Caesar, who refused the name of a
King as odious, that he might more cunningly exercise the authority of a King.

Therefore they counterfeit a certain Epistle of Gregory, thus indorst to John
Bishop of Siracuse, To John Bishop of Siracuse concerning the Bishop of
Constantinople accused of a foul fault. In the Epistle it self the Bizancen
primate, is said to have been accused of a certain fault, Gregor. lib. 7.
Epist. 64.
whom the most holy Emperor, would have judged by us according to the
cononical decrees. But the error of name Bizancene, or Biazene, derived not
from Bizantium the city of Constantinople, Gloss in Grati. edita a Greg 13
but from Bizatium a Province of Africa, is amended in the gloss of the Cannon
law, which says that Anselme and Gratian were deceived in the inscription of
the Epistle of Saint Gregory: An epistle suspected to be forged.
because Bizancene did not signify the Patriarch of Constantinople, but the
Primate of Africa. Which things gives us just cause to suspect that the Epistle
is forged: as another wherein they bring in Gregory affirming that the
Constantinopolitane Church is subject to the Apostolick-sea, Lib. 7. epi. 63.
Lib. 2. de Romans Pontific. c. 14.
as Eusebius the Bishop of the same sea does confess. Which place Bellarmine
cites. But in Gregory's time none did sit in the sea of Constantinople but
John and Siricius, who did usurp the title of universal Bishop, Nicephorus
a witness in his tripartite history. Whereby it appears that a counterfeit
Eusebius is brought in as a witness of the Roman prerogative, A counterfeit
Eusebius.
and a bastardly Epistle devised by some scribe, who testified that Gregory
wrote that being dead, which while he lived, he reprehended so earnestly not
only in another but in himself.

When this devise took no success, they tried another Baronius. Bellarmine.
That there were very many of Gregory's Predecessors, who did write themselves
Bishops of the Catholic Church, that is of the universal. The universal
Bishop and Bishop of the universal Church not all one.
And that it is all one to be called the universal Bishop of the Church, and
Bishop of the universal Church. Wherein they have not only Costerus
gaine-saying them in his Euchiridion: and Lindane in his Panoplie, in whose
judgment these differ, the universal Bishop, and the Bishop of the
universal Church: or that all ambiguitie may be taken away, they deny it to
be one to be called the Bishop of the Catholic Church, that is,
universal, and Catholic, that is universal Bishop of the Church. And they
will deny it. Is it all one to say Tortus is a learned divine of the school of
Papia, and a Divine of the learned school of Papia? Nothing less. For in that
proposition false praise is given to Tortus, in this true to Papia. So the Pope
is the Catholic Bishop of the Church is one thing, and the Pope is the
Bishop of the Catholic Church is another. For in that proposition a
counterfeit title of the Pope, in this the true name of the Church is expressed.
But Catholic and Universal are all one. What then? But these propositions be
not all one. The Pope of Rome is the Bishop of the catholic Church, i. of
the universal, therefore the Bishop is universal: no more then these two
propositions be all one: The King of Spain is the Catholic King, therefore
the universal King. Or thus. The King of Spain is the King of the Catholic
Church; therefore he is King of the whole Christian world. For the power over
all Churches does no no more belong to the Pope, who is called Catholic, then
the power over all kingdoms belongs to the King that is called Catholic.

Gregrrie the seventh did. And if he will to unite each power, both the
Bishoply and Imperial in himself by the force and right of his Popedom, as
Boniface the eighth did. Whereof the divine Apostle S. Peter did neither, but
being poor and lowly, who thought that the care of feeding, not the power of
ruling, was granted unto him: and that not the government, but the ministry
was committed to him. As Bernard said to Pope Eugenius. Bern. de consid. ad
Euge. lib. 2.
Government is forbidden the Apostles. Therefore dare thou usurp, either
governing the Apostle-ship, or being an Apostle, the government? The Apostolic
form is this, government is forbidden, the ministry is enjoined. What then
will you say? did he deny, that Eugenius the Pope was the temporal Lord of
his provinces? Not so. But he answers, be it that thou challenge them, it
must be by some other claim not by the right of an Apostle, Lib. 5. de Romans
Pont. cap. 20.
For Peter could not give that he had not. Which answer the Cardinal does well
allow. Whereby it appears that these two powers by the force and right of the
Popedom, either can or ought to be confounded in one person: Nich. pa. in
epist ad Micha. Imp.
As Nicholas the first himself taught: when we come to the truth, speaking of
Christ the Savior, neither did he of his own accord, as Emperor take to him
the right of the Bishopric, Lib. 5. de Romans Pont. cap. 5.
or being Bishop, usurped the name of the Emperor, which place Bellarmine
taking upon him to expound, Nicholas the first, says he, does directly teach
that Christ did distinguish the acts, offices and dignities of the Bishop and
the Emperor, lest the Emperor should presume to enter upon the right of the
Bishop, or the Bishop upon the rights of the Emperor. And yet Bellarmine does
maintain that these two powers are confounded in the Bishop of Rome, Bellarmin
contradicts Christ, the Pope and himself.
by the power and right of his Bishopric, which he confessed to be
distinguished plainly by Christ and the Pope. What will you do with this
good fellow, who contradicts both Christ, the Pope and himself at his
pleasure? But I leave Bellarmine in this point to be fully confuted and
confounded by our Counselor Regius. Here only I make it plain, that the Pope
does usurp temporal dominion over the Emperor, which neither Peter nor
Christ had, The Pope accounted inferior to the Council.
and either of them condemned in a Bishop.

Peter also was inferior to the Council of Jerusalem, De elect. and electi
potesta. cap. significasti.
even of his own side, inferior to the general Council. As Panormitane: In
matters of faith, the Council is above the Pope, so that he cannot decree any
thing against the determination of the Council. Councels deposed Popes.
Hence it is that the Council may condemn the Pope for heresy, as the
general Councels of Pisa, Constance and Basil, did displace many Popes out of
their Popedomes for heresy, wherein it was decreed, that the Council was above
the Pope. Concord. lib. 2. cap. 34.
Hence Cusan showing the custom of the Church, writ, that the general
Council was of the chiefest power in all things, even above the Pope himself.
I might allege many other notable Papists to be of this mind, but I hold it
not cessarie in this place: But now the Pope is lifted up above the Councels,
and imagines that the supremacy is cheifely placed in himself, that Bishops
being cast off, and Emperors cut down, Is he Peter's successor that is nothing
like Peter?
and Councels suppressed, he may do what he please without controulment. And
may we think him to be Peter's successor, that has nothing in him like Peter?
which notwithstanding Bellarmine takes for granted, when no thing is so much in
controversy. As he does likewise every where affirm that he is Christ his
Vicar, without proof, when as nothing is so necessary for the Romish
Catholic faith, then that he should confirm both these out of the
Scriptures. The successor of Peter is read in the fathers, the Vicar of Christ
is not read. It is not therefore to be believed by Catholic faith, but by
historical faith.

Of the Vicar of Christ, I shall consider afterward, now in few words of the
successor of Peter.

Peter were at Rome: whether he were ever Bishop, or whether Bishop of Rome:
neither if he were, will I dispute the case whether the personal dignity of
Peter could pass into a successor, which is denied, when it was granted by
Christ in respect of his confession which he delivered, not of the seat which
he possessed. Neither if it were in respect of the seat, when it is reported
that Peter had two seats, one at Antioch, the other at Rome, I will not now
enquire, why Peter's privilege should be tied to Rome, rather then to Antioch:
Again, I will not discuss that in this place, which shall be enquired after
in more words, in the whole explication of the Popes Creed, whether the Pope
have succeeded Peter in the faith, only here I will briefly enquire, whether
he succeeded in the seat, and whether the succession of the Pope, whereon all
Popery depends, be a divine or humane constitution. For if it be a humane
constitution, and confirmed only by humane testimonies, sure it cannot be an
article of the Catholic faith, as Argentine auerred out of his Doctors. If it
be divine, let them tell us in what place of Scripture they find it written,
that the Bishop of Rome should succeed Peter; or where Peter ordained the Pope
or any other to be his successor. They answer for the most part, as much as
they can, that Christ when he said, Feed my sheep, did understand Peter's
successor in that place, to whom together with Peter he gave the chief and
perpetual jurisdiction over the whole flock.

But neither the successor there, nor the Bishop of Peter the Apostle was
superior to the rest of the Apostles in this place, do they think that the
Bishop of Rome, successor to Peter, being dead, was made superior to all the
Apostles being alive? let them answer, and let the Papists unloose this knot if
they can for their lives.

Baronius writes that Peter died the year 69. and John the year 101. so 32.
years came between the death of Peter and John.

Now I demand whether Linus or Clemens succeeded Peter being dead, If any
should have the supremacy, it was John that suruiued Peter
for thereof there is a great controversy among them, whether Linus was above
John, or John above Linus? if they say that Linus was above John, that is, a
Bishop above an Apostle, we will laugh at it: if they deny it, it follows
that either the supremacy died with Peter, or that it came not to Linus the
Bishop, but to John the Apostle, as suruiuor. Where is then the succession of
the Pope? to resolve this doubt, Caietaen de di. in. instit. Pont. cap. 13.
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 12
certain great Papists do answer that the succession of the Pope, in so much
as Peter was Bishop of Rome, took the beginning from the fact of Peter, not
from the institution of Christ. Therefore this is matter of fact not of faith.

Go to! and what was Peter's fact, they answer, that he appointed his seat
Rome, and there ended his life. Caietane does add, that the death of Peter did
not simply give the succession of Rome, but that he there died by the
especial appointment of Christ: which Caietan proved by a certain history,
Peter's supremacy depends on a revelation.
which shows that Peter, thinking for fear of persecution to leave Rome, and
being now gone forth part of the way, Christ met him, to whom Peter said,
whither go thou Lord? Christ made him answer, I go to Rome, that I may be
there crucified: whereby Peter being admonished, returned, that he might die
at Rome.

Therefore the Popes succession depends upon Peter's fact, and has the
beginning from thence, and out of this fact they take all this as granted, that
Peter was at Rome, that Peter was Bishop of Rome, that Peter was put to death
at Rome, and that by Christ his appointment. What certainty was in all these,
unless we give credit to a few humane histories, which are subject to many
humane errors? such as that error is chiefly, whence notwithstanding Caietane
says, the succession was granted to the Pope, Acta Petr. and Pan. Baron 69.
about the return of Peter by the occasion of the vision.

Linus, a foolish counnterfet writer, Loco. Theo. lib. 6. cap. 8. Linus a
counterfeit writer.
as it is observed by Baronius himself. But be it a history; it comes not
from the revelation of the holy Ghost; but from tradition, as Canus tells us.
Again, how does it appear, that it was the purpose of Christ and Peter, so to
confirm the succession by this fact, so that the Church should be always
bound under pain of damnation to be believe it? for when they say it is of the
necessity of salvation to be subject to the Roman Bishop, as to Peter's
successor, and that by the power of that succession, they contend that in all
points of faith and salvation he is set over by God himself; it had been
meet that the succession of the Pope had been more clearly and evidently
confirmed unto us, then by a blind and uncertain vision, the author whereof
themselves condemn for a bastard and a fool.

Francis, Vict. relect. 2. de potesta. Eccles.
Besides that, the election of the Pope is an humane ordination: which were
absurd, if Christ had appointed the succession proper to Rome, by Peter's fact,
to alter the form of the election. Therefore none is bound to believe, that
this or that pope (imagine Clement the eighth, De here. lib. 2. cap. 9.
or Paul the fifth) to be Peter's true successor, as Alphonsus writes. So that
it is lawful for any, and at his pleasure, to cast off the pope, of whose
canonical election he doubts. Wherefore seeing the succession of the pope is
so uncertain, he should do better, if as the Emperor does not write himself
Caesar's successor, but Caesar; so the pope would not name himself Peter's
successor, but Peter himself, as pope Stephen sometime called himself. For
we will as easily believe that Paul the fifth is Peter himself, as Peter's true
successor.

Now that I may gather all into a short sum, you see most noble Calander, in
Saturnine, Bellarmine himself, polishing and refining certain old arguments
of his own side, whereby he does underpropped the supremacy staggering, and
falling almost to the ground: but in vain does the Cardinal hope that such
silly sleights can deceive a learned age, which cozened a rude and ignorant age.

For first, he alleged so many corrupt interpretations of certain places,
that they may be refuted, not of the ancient and our own, but of the new, and
such as be their own Doctors. Out of whom, notwithstanding, he brings forth
certain figurative arguments, which necessarily infer such foolish and
damnable consequences, that the wise seem to laugh at, and the religious
detest.

Such an one was that interpretation and argumentation Boniface the eighth, out
of the first of Genesis.

In the beginning, not in the beginnings, Bonif. 8. extrauag. Council. tit. de
mayor. de chedi.
God created heaven and earth, when Boniface understood that the pope was
understood by the Beginning.

Hence he does thus argue; Foolish interpretation and worse consequence. The
Sun the Pope, the Moon the Emperor.
He therefore that does not submit himself to the Pope, does devise two
principles with the Manichees as Boniface devised. Such another was that out of
the same chapter; God made two great lights in the firmament, when therefore
the Pope brought this sense into the text, that by the Sun the Pope, by the
Moon the Emperor was understood; thence he concludes, that the Pope was so
far greater than the Emperor, as the Sun was greater than the Moon. What
Mathematical Archimedes could better describe the quantity of the Sun and
the Moon?

Such be the interpretations, and the arguments drawn from thence by
Bellarmine. He beats the keys of the earth out of the keys of heaven. He
gathers the honor of ruling out of the labor of feeding: he understands
Peter for the rock, a metaphorical head, for the visible head of the
universal church. And out of these allegorical expositions, Arist: 1.
Metaphys.
he thinks he can make orderly syllogismes for Peter's supremacy. Pythagoras
was said so to instruct his scholars in the speculatiue science of numbers,
and to have imprinted such deep notions into their minds, that after when
they came to the consideration of natural things, they thought that the works
of nature consisted of the principles of number: So this Pythagoras has so
deeply wouen his symbolicall divinity in the minds of his auditors, that out
of the metaphors of holy scripture, they believe that the height of
ecclesiastical Monarchy is erected. Whether is he more crafty that so
persuades, or he more simple that so believes? nay more then that, this Rom:
Advocate does endite him as guilty of heresy, that does not believe so. It is
well, the plaintiff not proving, as the Lawyers say, he that is accused is set
free.

Calander of the judgment of the primitive Church, whereof the most learned
Fathers assembled in the first six general Counsels, did not only not
acknowledge this supremacy, but stroke it dead with their decrees. The popish
lewd dealing.
Here the Popes side have brought in so many voluntary corruptions, forgeries,
impostures, wherewith they might foyste in false Canons and blot out true, that
they who have dealt so deceitfully, are rightly deemed to have a bad cause.

Lastly, we brought into open view, not only the doctrine and practice of
Christ and Peter, that the literal sense has reproved this supremacy, which
the allegorical sense of the Scripture did not prove, and that literal sense
is confirmed not only by the testimony of the ancient Fathers and Doctors of
our own side, but by the testimony of the very Papists themselves. So that
this tower of Babylon being not only bereft of her rotten weak vpholders, but
being also thrust at by our strongest engines, that is, by the decrees of the
Church, and oracles of scripture, must needs be shaken in pieces and fall to
the ground.

Therefore the supremacy of Peter that in Bellarmines judgment is a
transcendent thing above all, by the censure of the Scripture is nothing at
all: and the succession of the Pope, is not from the institution of Christ, as
they say, but from the fact of Peter: and this fact is proved not by any
certain revelation, but by an uncertain vision. Behold why the primacie of
Bellarmine in Tortus did vaunt that this article of the catholic faith had a
sure ground in the Scriptures.

And now mark, Calander, to what pass all Bellarmines devises are brought.
The deposing of a King hangs on the excommunication of the Pope; the power of
excommunication is united to the supremacy, the supremacy has the beginning
from a Primate, but the Primate though he be narrowly fought for, yet cannot
possibly be found in the text. Where is then the supremacy? where is the power
of excommunicating Kings? where is the right of deposing them? Truly your
Primate has either a bad title or a bad Patron. But the Patron is said to be
very good: therefore the title is very bad. But the Papists will accept any
thing at his hands as he hops, with whom if he prevail in this cause, it is
more for the credulity of the Readers, than the wisdom of the Writer.

Then Regius; The supremacy being ouer-turned, that double power which is so
annexed to the supremacy must needs be ouer-turned, the spiritual and the
temporal. The spiritual, whereby as a Bishop by excommunication he thinks
he may drive from their kingdoms, Kings that are in opposition, whether
Heretics or Roman-Catholikes: The temporal whether it be direct or indirect,
whereby he may as the chief spiritual Prince take the Crown from one, and
bestow it at his pleasure upon another. But of the temporal we shall see
afterward. Excommunication the mother of rebellion.
Now let us consider of the spiritual. This great Sophister, when the Pope of
Rome purposed to shoot his venomous arrow at the head of the Prince, he bent
the Popes bow with this double power, as it were with a double stringe, that
if the temporal did fail, the spiritual should hit him home. Which if I
should not account holy as the desire of gold is holy, I should lie. For this
trick of popish excommunication, wherewith he binds Kings that they cannot
reign, or absolve subjects that they do not obey, the world has felt long
since that it is but a devilish art, as Vrshergensis says, which has brought
in treachery and rebellion under the cloak of faith and religion, dreadful
to Kings, damnable to subjects, to whose bodies it has brought destruction,
and damnation to their souls, as appears manifestly by the former Dialogue.

Saturnine; We, says he, for our parts do not greatly care what Heretics say:
what the Church ordeynes, that we regard; neither are we bound to their
conceits, but to her decrees. And we retain the supremacy by a double right,
by claim, and by possession. About the claim the Heretics have often moved
many brawles: from the possession they shall never remove us.

Then Regius you say that you regard the constitutions of the Church, as you
call them, I wish rather you should regard the oracles of Scripture. You say
that you hold the supremacy by a double right by clayming and by possessing.
The Pope is fallen from the right of a great claymer, as Patriott has plainly
won. Now at the last you urge another right, of a great possessor: which what
is it else than the right of a strong thief? For what other law belongs to
thieves, than to brag that that which they possess is their own, howsoever
they have got it? Now seeing the supremacy is not grounded upon Gods
institution, but man's ambition, which you see to be clearly overthrown by the
oracles of the scripture, and decrees of the Counsels: it follows now that
the serpents head being broken, we break in pieces likewise the rest of his
members.

Then Calander, Saturnine seems to be driven to straites, when as being
beaten from the right of clayming, he flies to possession. That therefore you
may have a breathing time, let us put of the conference about the other
Articles till another day: for now it is more than time that you refresh your
minds being tired with the labor of this discourse.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this Treatise.
A.
ABomination of desolation, what is meant thereby 82. 90 Absurdities. 78. 108.
133 An admonition to popish Princes, 156. Adrian against Frederick choakt with
a fly. 253. Agathus obedience to Constantine. 249 The oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy confounded. 240 Ambrose did obey Valentinian an Arrian. 248
Alexander the 3. in a Cooks attire. 374 Alexander and his four Princes. 99
Alexander trod upon the Emperors neck. 254 (...), whereof it is a note. 6.
Antichrists type in Daniel, himself in John. 2. The reasons. 98. He began to
work in Paul's time. 2. He must decay by the preaching of the word, and perish
at Christ's last coming 793. Epiphanes described in Daniel not Antichrist. 3.
He shall work wonders. 3. He is held for one single man. 5. The reasons. ib:
but is a succession. 9. Antichrist has two horns like a lamb speaks like a
dragon. 5. 40. Antichrist is Christ's Vicar in appearance in truth his
adversary. 6. Antichrist not a beast of three years and a halfes continuance.
8. Heresies makes the great Antich: 8. 28. Antichrist is the Land beast. 9. As
many Marij in one Caesar, so many Antichrists in one Antichrist. 11. He is that
man of sin and son of perdition. 11. Antichrist in many ages yet but one.
11 The popish description of Antich: 12 a bearer, 39 Antichrist a falling
star, an Apostata, a Renegate from the Lord. 13 He is not a Jew, but an
Apostaticall Christian 15. He sits in the temple of God; or against the
temple. 17 He does not openly deny Christ. 19 Antichrist denies Christ's two
natures, three offices, and the benefits thereof. 20. 21. 26. 27 His kingdom
dark and smoakie. 28 He teaches implicit faith. 28 He takes away the
scriptures, gives images for books. 29. He is the son of the earth. 40. He
works in the sight of the Sea-beast. 41 The actions of Antichristian Popes.
41 Like to Domitian, Julian, Dioclesian. 42. His double character. 50 What
hindered the revealing of Antichrist. 67. The degrees thereof. 71 All the notes
of Antichrist agree to the Pope only, and to no other. 75. 13^ Antichrist not
borne of a Virgin, not a Devil, not Nero, not a bastard, not of Dan. 76. ^ He
shall sit at Rome. 80 Antichrists temple without a roof. 8^ Antichrist shall
fight with three Kings, and vanquish. 95. He shall worship the Devil. 105.
Three means whereby he shall be vanquished. 117 Antichrist increased Satan as
well loose as bound. 122. He shall come a little before the end of the world.
131 His sufferings. 134 How Christ and Antichrist agree. 149 He can neither
help aliu^ or dead. 153 He is the eldest son of the Devil. 163 An argument
drawn from an Ass to prove the Popes power. 375 Antiochus and Antichrist
disagree. 104 yet he is his figure. 105. if Antiochus and Antichrist be the
same there follow many absurdities. 84. 104. The Angels power out their
plagues, 134 135. 137. 138. The Angel and the Protestants preach alike. 135
Aquinas, Toletan, and the Laterane Council answered. 183. 184 Apiatius a
wicked Priest. 353 Apostles builders not foundations. 310 rocks in respect of
doctrine. 315 An Apostrophe to Kings. 198 Apocalypse a book full of hidden
mysteries. 3. The rest of the Apostles the same with Peter. 317 Arrius denied
Christ's divinity. 28 The Spanish Armado overthrown 161 What Articles of the
faith the Church of Rome makes. 280 Athanasius Epistle forged. 362 The
Assurance of salvation to the faithful, and whence. 35 Athalia how deposed.
199. 225 Austin and Maldonate against Bellarlarmine. 372
B
BAbylon, which by their own confession is Rome. 52 Reasons to show popish
Rome Babylon 53. 60. taken for Babylon in Luthers time. 73. her behavior and
description. 58. 59. her whorish qualities. 58 An English Bishop in his coat
armor. 374. Baronius and Bellarmine at a iar. 355 Baronius says Christ gave
all his power to Peter and his successors. 231. Baronius makes to feed, to
kill. 299 Blackwell accounted an Apostata. 229 237. Bellarmines pride in making
a Cardinal equal to a King. 296. 168. 337. 373. 378. Bellarmines
contradictions. 77. 80. 97. 106. 383. says the Jews shall be converted by
Enoch and Elias. 78 his absurdities. 129 Bellarmines sawcines reproved. 303.
336 Bellarmine and Julian alike. 83. wiser then Christ. 130 Bellarmine and the
Pope need not allege reasons. 339. Bellarmines six tokens of Antichrist
coming; the first, 88. the second, 94. the third, 111. the fourth, 118. the
fifth, 127. the sixth, 133. he begs the question, 374. Bellarmine a profane
iester. 132. 118. Bellarmine contrary to Christ. 371. compared to a foolish
Poet 108. his dangerous aduerbs. 242. Bellarmine Antichrists orator. 103.
speaks false Latin. 340. Bellarmine mistaken in the daily sacrifice, 126. he
contradicts scripture, 116. wounds the Popes power, 237. the Popes
flatterer. 237 Bellarmine a lion in a cave. 37. Bellarmine against Cusan. 293
Bellarmines moderate chastisement of Kings, 238 Bellarmines strange
interpretation. 341 Bellarmines foolish distinction. 229. Bellarmine is well I
thank you in this world ib: places faith in the assent, 33 Bellarmine reiects
twelve Fathers. 96 The number of the beast, 51 The second Beast mistaken for
the first; 85. The Bohemians victories over the Papists five times. 161
Boniface got to be universal Bishop. 249 above all bishops 72 The Duke of
Burgundy deceived with briars and brambles in steed of lances. 169 The duties
of a Bishop. 344. not above a Prince, 346. great not in respect of his person
but doctrine, 346. what he may do. 347
C.
CAnons of Niece burnt before they were made. 362 Popish reasons to prove more
Canons of Niece than twenty. 360 A Caveat for Kings. 342 A false Canon offered
for a true, 353 The Canonists make Popes Lords of the temporalties, 230.
Carerius against Bellarmine. 235. Charles 5. surprised Rome, 243. 119
Childerike not deposed by the Pope 259 Christ's characters of two sorts. 49 G^ue
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, 176. 213. Constantinople equ^ll with
Rome. 349 The Nicene Council of 319 Bishops, and when, 346 Constantinople
Council of 150 Bishops, and when. 349 Ephesus Council of 200 Bishops, and
when, ibid: The Ch^lcedon Council of 630 Bishops, and when. ibid:
Constantinople Council the second, of 280 Bishops, and when. 351 The Council
of Carthage of 217 Bishops: when. 352. The Creator being offended, the
creatures are offended. 138. four effects of Christ his doctrine, 23. many
types of Christ, 9. some of Christ's names not communicable, 314. Christ made of
God for man, wisdom, justice, etc. 150. Christ over Kings not as Priest but as
King. 210. 19^. the difference between Christ's preistly and Christ's ignominious
and glorious estate, 153. princely government, 210. Christ would not distribute
lands, and does the Pope think he may distribute Crowns? 173 What places of
Christendom the Pope has lost. 63 False Christians receive not the truth, 78.
Christ the head, and how. 307 Christians did not resist, 216 but obeyed. A text
of Christ blasphemously applied to the Pope. 305 The Clergy exempted from
obedience 341. Two Covenants Legal and Evangelical. 145 The Pope has brought
in a third covenant, ibid. The Covenant between God and the King. 207. 192.
Corinths the 14 expounded. 330 As Christ is the Lord of the Church, so the
Church is the Lady of all. 231 Canterene and Bellarmine at a ^art. 291 The
office of the Church. 277. Wicked and ridiculous conclusions. 295. 301. 318.
302. The Church compared to heaven. 14. 87. Paul to the Ephesians defines the
Church, to Timothy describes it, 279. The enemies of Gods Church overthrown.
161. One copy of Cyprian alleged against many. 317 Cyuill obedience taken
away. 341.
D.
DAniels little horn, who it is. 99. What is meant by Daniels 2 feet and 10
toes. 99. 109. Daniels ten horns, and their names. 3. 99. 106. Daniels
prophecy conteyneth 70 years excepting Christ's resurrection. 4. The
exposition of the 7 of Daniel. 97. Daniel mistaken, 133. The disagrement of
Bellarmine and Daniel. 102 Decretall Epistles among the Canonical scriptures.
21 The Dominicans brought in a new Gospel. 23. 146.
E.
EBerhardus a popish Bishop against the Pope. 263 Ecbertus ruin after
rebellion. 252 Ecclesiasticus corrupted. 113. 253. Edward the 3. and Richard
the 2. made laws against the Pope. 265. 266. Elias, Enoch, and Christ, three
examples of Gods glory. 115 England not tributarie to the Pope, neither can be.
242 The fable of Enoch and Elias. 111 The Sea-beast resembles the Roman
Empire. 40 The Empire took a deadly wound in Augustulus, 43. and new life in
Charles the great, 44. It is now but titular, the power is in the Pope. 44.
Emperor, protector of the Apostolical See, 57. the Empire renewed in the West
to uphold the Pope. 70. the Rom: Empire not dissolved but divided, 68. Two
degrees of the Empires fall, 71. how and when the Empire was translated from the
Greeks to the Germans. 258. An exhortation to Ministers, 136. to Princes,
152, to come out of Babylon, 141 Excommunication the mother of rebellion. 390
F
COrruption of Fathers after their death. 316 To Feed and teach all one. 297.
Not to rule. 299. The Colliars Faith. 288. Implicit Faith a blind Idol. 287.
What meant by Feeding. 290. Saint F^^^cis ^ypicall Christ. 146, His conformities
brought to light. 24 Fred^ricke the 2. had good success against the Pope. 254.
after murdered. 255. Forgiveness of sins is free, perfect* eternal. 148.
How Fire came down from heaven, the three sorts thereof. 47. Forgery rejected.
363. A desir^ that France and Spain would forsake the Pope. 63
G
GArnet and three other Jesuits Authors of the Gunpowder treason. 172. 33.
The Germans condemn Hildebrand. 257. Gregory the great obeyed Mauritius
248. Alleged to depose Kings before they were borne. 259. Gregory the 3.
vaunted himself above the Emperor, Gregory the 3. spoiled him. 72. Gregory
the 7. overthrew all. 73. stroke fire out of his bosom. 48. Cast out of his
popedom, 251. First excommunicated and cursed Emperors. 251. The name of GOD
in Scripture given to Angels and Kings. 18. God the object of spiritual
obedience 340. The enemy of God called Gog and Magog. 95. 139. Gods help
begins whenas man's help does fail. 137. Gros^heads definition of heresy.
186. The Gosp^ll has been preached in all Lands. 88. 91. Hindered by Mahomet
in the East, Antichrist in the west. 93. The Gunpowder treason found out by a
letter. 173.
H
TO make the Pope Head is blasphemy. 321. Three witnesses of happiness. Henry
the 4. French King compared to Caesar. 38. Henry the 3. and 4. French Kings
murdered. 33. Henry the 2. and King John gave not their kingdoms to the Pope.
241. Henry's treachery against his father. 233 Henry the 4. Emperor slandered
by popish writers. 234. Hermannus ruin. 252. Paul's not salute an Heretic
how applied. 187. How Heretics are to be dealt withal. 188. Servants and
children ought to obey Heretics. 188. Heretics not to be saluted. 222.
Hildebrands false praises. 257. Hildebrand no fit example against kings his
revelation. 232. Three condemned and for what. 260. What is meant by the lambs
2. horns. 6. What is meant by the last hour. 133.
I
Idolatry to worship the image for the Creator with the Creator 22. compared
to fornication. 22. The Jesuits violence taxed. 198. The practice of Jesuits.
32. 220. 336. The Jesuits doctrine has troubled the Papists. 170. Rebellion
among Jesuits is an article of faith. 171. The false report of Jesuits made
Pius the 5. excommunicate Q. Elizab. 169. Jesuits Authors and Actors of
rebellion. 171. Iehcida had Gods law and man's law to approve his action. 200.
Iehu not the Prophet deposed Ahab. 225. 4. degrees of the Jews deliverance.
102. Jerusalem in the Apoc: always taken for the holy ci^y. 81 Jerusalem the
figure of the Christian Church. 82. The destruction of Jerusalem taken for the
end of the world. 88. Jeremy and Paul exhorted to pray for bad Princes. 216.
Forged Ignatius brought to cross Solomon. 178. If any one had the supremacy
it was John that suruiued. 385. Jeroboam not deposed by the Priest. 196. His
Priests types of popery. 196. An image is an Idol when it is worshipped. 22.
Immortality not overcome by death. 117. A great impossibility foolish
interpretations and worse consequences. 387. Inheritance not loft for leprosy.
197. Jerome misalleaged. 314. A counterfeit Julius. 364.
K
KIngs by Papists judgments may be killed by force or craft. 32. Saucily
compared to rams and wolves 32. 291. Discord of Kings have increased the
Popes power. 155. Kings duty. 156. Kingly majesty and Popelike majesty
cannot agree. 164. The King an humane creature. 178 A King excommunicated no
King with Papists. 182. Kings wherein heads of the Church. 199. Kings not
immediately from God but from the Church say they. 233 A King not to be
resisted with swords but words. 224. A King may as well deprive a Pope as a
Pope a King. 242. No bad King of 33. deposed by a priest 207. Whence Kings have
their government as Papists say Jbid. Kings deposed Priests. 306. What is meant
by the keys by binding and loosing, 290. The right interpretation of the
keys. 292. Peter's key no greater then the rest. 368. Two keys of order and
jurisdiction. 292. All the Apostles received keys. All fiery tongues. 294. How
the Papists may kill a King how not. 300.
L
(...) the name of the beast. 51. Lambart and Rabirius 2. Popes Legates scoft
at. 261. Leo the Pope obeyed the Emperors Theodosius and Martian. 247. Leo the
4. obedient to Kings. 249. Leo the Emperor how deposed by the Pope. 258. The
legacies of the sons of God are in question. 147. A learner must believe and
ask. 285. The parts form and legacies of the new testament. 148. A Leper
never lost his inheritance. 224. The thundering Legion of the Christians. 86.
Licurgus devise to make his commonweal last. 117. The number, division, and
power of Locusts. 34. The Locusts hurt and afflict men but kill not. 34.
Resembled to Horses and why. 36. Their Craft, pride and cruelty. 36. Lombardes
foolish interpretation of a place in Job. 33. Luthar not that falling star,
nor Protestants those Locusts. 37. A counterfeit Lynus. 386
M
The Martyrdom of the King and kingdom. 172. Marcion destroyed Christ's
humanity 28. Marcus received an Epistle after he was dead. 362. Martials Ca
liodore and t^^ Jesuits ^^e Caniba^s. 54. Martials Cobbler. 38. The Mass
confirmed by a black horse. 48. Government left by Christ not Monarchical but
Aristocraticall. 308. Matthew the 24. expounded. The Monks cloak resembled to
charity. 319. How Moses, Solomon and Jude used Princes. 215. Number does
oppress the memory wait does beget knowledge. 289.
N
Nostorius divided Christ his natures. 28.
O
THe Priest to be Obeyed so long as he preserues knowledge. 175. Two
foundations of Christian obedience. 176. A double obedience due to Kings active
and passive. 179. Odo brother to W. the Conqueror 174. Primacie of order
granted to Rome, of power denied. 367. What 3 things obedience requires. 180
What obedience is due to Princes. 180. Austius words corrupted. 354. Ozias
leprosy no type of excommunication. 167.
P
PEter would bear no rule over the Clergy. 370. What Peter did to Princes.
213. How Peter's next successors used Princes. 214. How Paul used Princes. 215.
Priests have bin deposed by Kings 226. How Priests ought to oppose princes 207.
Peter inf^riour to the rest. 368. Peter commanded obedience to Kings, Peter of
Rome now otherwise. 177. Paul nothing inferior to Peter. 369. Counsels
deposed Popes. 383. Subject to the Emperor and his Vicegerent 72. 242. 2^^.
The Pope a persecutor 118. An hypocrite 114. Bisely accounted of. 135.
Injurious to God and man. 147. dangerous to hold peace with. 162. His bull
hanged the Jesuits. 169. He forbids that which God commands 174. Power
from God not from the Pope or people. 181. His power pretended greater then the
former Priests to depose Princes. 192. Inferior to the Council. 383. His
practice toward Princes. 244. He had primacie of order. 245. The Popes power
pretended from Christ's priesthood. 209. His charge to feed sheep, 209. How he
feeds. 298. His supremacy cause of much mischief. 269. He can no way depose
Princes. 236. The Popes Creed. 281. Spain and France have taken great wrong
from Popes. 158. Two means how he overthrows Princes. 230. 253. Popish
Writers traduce Princes. 261. Popery begets dangerous effects to Kings and
Subjects. 239. God used Prophets tongues to reprove Princes not their hands to
depose them. 205. Ph^cas a murderer, the universal Bishop, and Mahomet of
one birth. 71. The difference of government between Bishops and Princes. 343.
How Christ stood before Pylate. 376.
R.
REasons not to appeal to Rome, 358. A Recapitulation of the former discourse,
74. 75. Rome spiritually Sodom and Egypt. 81. Two stages erected for cruelty,
one at Constantinop: another at Rome 122. Old Rome doteth for age, 286. This
Rome not ancient Rome. 316. The Popes of Rome do err by the Papists judgment.
286. How Christ a rock, 339. How the te^porall rule descends upon the Pope.
372.
S.
SAmuel did not excommunicate Saul. 194. Places of Scripture obscured by Popish
interpretations. 31. No doctrine necessary, but grounded on Scripture. 28^ The
office of the Scripture. 278 Scripture alone hurtful to the Roman Church. 290
An admonition to popish Kings to beware of Sirene and Erinnis. 156.
T.
Four Popes acknowledged Theodosius supreme Lord. 246 Tiberius at Rome killed
Christ in Jerusalem. 80. Christ obeyed Tiberius a Pagan, the Papists will not
obey King James a Christian. 177. The council of Trent rejected by their own
side. 287. Bellarmine builds his church government upon Tropes. 302
W.
The two witnesses Apoc: 11. not agreed on. 85. The uncertain certainty of
the end of the world. 91.
Z.
Zachary supposed to depose Childericke but did not. 256.
FJNIS.

