MORE FOOLS yet. Written by R. S.

AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Castleton, and are to be sold at his shop
without Cripple-gate. An. 1610.

To the Reader.
TImes Ministers have often drawn the features,
Of many vild, obsceane, illitterate creatures;
Even till the pensils they portraid withal,
Had spent all colors, now they write with gall.
(Seeing those fairer shapes were not respected)
Thereby to make vice lothed and rejected:
Yet notwithstanding mark man's impudence,
See yonder villain, who for his offense
Did merit death; yet pardoned swiftly flies,
To act more damd and horrid villainies.
Note that Adulterer which seems sorry now,
And with afained sanctimonious vow
Abiures his sin, yet more his soul to blame,
With His neighbors wife next day commits the same.
The Usurer by scripture reprehended,
Weeps and is sorry that he has offended:
Yet as the diucll will have it he is drawn,
Immediately from's book to take a pawn.
Behold that impious Thief that lately swore,
To make his godless stock but twenty more;
And then to leave his rude and ruthlesse dealing,
But heel behang'd before heel leave his stealing.
And multitudes of such like impious slaves,
Which labor for to purchase their souls graves:
Are often determind to for sake their sin,
And when the devil please, they will begin.
But not till then, let Justice do her worst,
Such is the will of villains (most accursed:)
Therefore since mild per swasion cannot move them;
(Nor reprehension, whosoere reprove them,
Nor Laws severity, nor Justice sword)
I will not (to reclaim them) wast a word.
Nor will I tax their vice, because I see
They will persist in spite of you or me:
And so I leave them to their damned rules,
I will not deal with villains, but with fools.
Roger Sharp.

More Fools yet.
Loves Metamorphosis.
OHcryes kind Dolus
if she hate my feature,
Sweet Cupid turn me
to some other creature.
Make me a Bull like Jove, if that may pass;
Or let me be an Horse as Neptune was:
Or like to Mercury a Goat i will be,
If such a shape will please so fair as she.
Love was attentive to his imprecation,
And quickly thought upon some transformation.
And in a moment rising from his stool,
Transformd him to a creature called a Fool.
A thriftie Gallant.
FOgh cries spruce Curio what a smell is here,
As if some house of Office troubled were?
Is there some foysting Spaniell in the room,
Or is it pesterd by some stable Groom.
There Is some thing putrified, search round about.
O tarry, tarry, I have smelt it out:
It is my suit, the Satin is impure,
Or else my Tailors hands were nastie sure.
I must expel this sent with some perfume,
Counsel me sirs, your judgments may presume:
Why then says one, I think a Siuit best,
No says another 'twill atract the pest:
Why then that powder which your Sempsters sells,
Come you are fools I will have something else.
There is a kind of sweet your brokers use,
It Is that alone i will take, the rest refuse:
For that effectual is, and of such power,
Twill purge a stinking garment in an hour.
Moreover it is a scent of honest thrift,
And many Gallants use it for a shift:
Therefore to frugall be and win repute,
To Lauender he does commit his suit.
A confident Cuckold.
YOu wrong Zelopio to repute him so,
Tell me that he is jealous, faith sir no:
He will permit his wise to see a play,
And let her drink with Captains by the way.
Will give her leave to walk to Westminster,
To see the Tombs and monuments are there:
Will suffer her to drink and stay out late,
To be led home by each associate.
This proves him confident, and which is more,
When his wife knocks, himself will look to the door:
But wot you why Zelopio seems content,
She keeps the house, keeps him, and paies the rent.
A variable humorist.
THe humor of Muander is most strange.
He Is still extreme, and nothing makes him change:
To day he is accoutred like your knight,
To morrow like a stalking broome-man right.
He wears a suit to day that is cut and slasht,
To morrow one slit on a shirt nere washed.
Now he is extremely merry, and anon
He proves a Tymon, all his mirth is gone:
Will you of his extremes the reason know,
His Love, as well as Fortune, is his foe.
A wondrous trauailer.
WOnders most admirable you shall hear,
If you with patience will permit your ear:
That trauailer (believe him if you please)
Swears he has been beyond Th'antipodes.
And that he trauaild has the Orbs throughout,
And with his hand has turned the Moon about:
And to approve his courage could not fail,
He took the horride Dragon by the tail.
And which is more, he swears by all the gods,
He challengd Mars to fight, and give him ods.
All this he has performed he verifies it,
And he will kill the pezant that denies it.
Moreover now he means with expedition,
To travail down into the lower Region.
Do sir I pray you, and to Pluto tell
These novelties, and bring us news from hell.
A familiar Tobacconist.
SIgnior Snuff that rare Tobacconist,
Who many a whiffe has to the air dismissed,
Does often frequent Apoticaries shoppes,
To minister Tobacco to his sloppes.
And to the smoake-monger this speech he bends,
Sir gives the best, as far as this extends.
Showing a groat which he on's gloves did borrow,
With damme him if he paid it not to morrow.
Tush i will have none of your low vallued trash,
Reserve it for your gulls, or those want cash.
Give me of your rich leaf, or by this light
You shall expulse me and my custom quite:
So you respect me now, a pipe I pray,
I Will none of that, reach one of Snells I say.
You Are paid, farewell. Adue penurious ass,
That does thy substance into vapor pass:
Such is thy fate, if could thou't pawn thy cloak,
To warm thee by Tobaccoes fire and smoke.
Anger soon appeased.
WHen John Cornutus does his wife reprove,
For being false and faithles in her love:
His wise to smooth those wrinckles on his brow,
Does stop his mouth, with John come kiss me now.
A woman hater.
MI soginos that lately loved a wench,
Wishes them now the torture of the French:
Let me not live (says he) men are befoolde,
In being by such creatures ouer-rulde.
What can a man discern in such a creature,
A little paultry beauty, form, and feature:
Which is but trash of no pre-eminence,
Then why is it powerful to distract your sense?
Tell me what women are, that you adore them,
Surely naught, being so you should abhor them:
What virtues have they which do merit praise,
As many as this week has Christmas days.
What qualities, inconstancy, and pride,
Still in lascivious actions occupied.
O peace Misoginos, why do thou wrong them?
Thou will commend them when thou at among the^
But will you know how this his hate was bred,
A wench in Turnbull-street did break his head.
In Criticum.
NOw Criticus does summon all his wit,
And with the title says there is more fools yet:
(Quoth he) these asses are not left alone,
The Author makes the number more by one.
Thus Criticus will censure and correct,
Calumniate, detract without respect:
Afford the fool to all, O that may be,
For none can show a fool so well as he.
A bare conceit^.
SVch ill success last night had Ned at play,
That no man can discover him to day:
No marvel sir he keeps him from the light,
He was discouerd to the skin last night.
An arrogant fool.
Gross and il-tutor'd fellow, why were thou
elected here? each rascal now
Will with a Gentleman familiar be:
Forgetting difference twixt each degree.
I Will pay you sirrah, what is upon my score?
I will abjure this house for evermore.
Good Master Insolence, sir hold your tongue,
The slave does practice still to do me wrong.
Master; you ill-taught rascal do me right,
Know that this month and more I have bin knight:
Yet you as ignorant of what I am,
Entitle me like each mechanicke flam.
In troth sir, my rude ignorance does greiue me,
I took you for a Gentleman believe me:
Pardon my error, may I so implore,
I Will take you for a Gentleman no more.
A kind young man.
YOung Jasper once led an impure life,
But now he is converted by a wife:
An antique of some threescore years and ten,
Has Jasper snatched from many richer men:
Not that he loves her, but he deemes her trash,
Only he marryes her to gain her cash.
Which cash of hers (being possessed with store)
Shall keep his wench, which wench kept him before.
Captain Nynnie.
Brave Magnaninny swayes in Turnbull-street,
Commands the whores be prostrate at his feet:
Fetch me some wine you baud and shut the door,
Come hither varlot, wheer's the other hoar?
She Is gone to the Tavern, is she, fetch her home,
Tell her from me, i will bast her and her groom:
Here Is a damd crew indeed, god's blood who am I,
I must be feign to thrash you by and by.
Thus Magnaninny bravely dominiers,
Breaks Looking-glasses, and Rabatoes tears,
Slits Couerlets and Curtains, burns their hair:
For which the punckes conspire to shave him bare:
And in a moment so to quit this cullian,
They fire him from the confines of Turnbullian.
In Libidinosum.
A penitent venerist.
LAst night Libidinosus rashly went
Unto a wench lose, and incontinent:
To whom he did participate that evil,
Which did possess him like an eager devil.
But now Libidinosus is contrite,
And sorry for his rashness over night:
And does protest (will God remit his crime,)
Heel deem a whore as men do dross and slime.
You may believe him, he determins so,
For dross is good enough for swine you know.
A quarrel well answered.
PRay you diswade me not, you do me wrong
Thus to detain me from revenge so long:
Throw water in my shoes and run away,
Gross injury, firrha come forth I say.
Will thou come forth, do and here I swear,
For this abuse i will give thee a box athe ear:
Thanks quoth the fellow, but be it known to you,
I Will not come forth if you would give me two.
A rare man in action.
But why does Friuolus that active squire,
(Having abiur'd the Tenniscourt) retire
Again unto that sport, is it for his pleasure,
Or to recover there some spending treasure
Or is it that his humor verifies
It is a Gentleman-like exercise:
Or may it be as some perhaps may brute,
There to discover his new Satin suit.
No sir you misconiecture his intent,
For none of these, the sport he does frequent:
But if you will know the truth, sir understand
He comes to show the wonders of his hand.
How that by force of arm and Tennis-ball,
To admiration he vntopt the wall:
He is no vulgar fellow in his tricks,
Where others bandie Balls, he bandies Bricks.
And he is thither drawn by one thing more,
For to augment his credit on the score.
A great obseruer.
WIll you of Vinolentus gladly know
Why he is drunck, this reason he will show:
Because those fashions heel observe and see,
In his associates as druncke as he.
Will you like wise inquire (when he is druncke)
Why he does range the purleys for a puncke:
He will resolve you thus, for to descrie
A whore in fashion and in quality.
But Vinolentus tell the truth for shame,
And do not more pollute thy hateful name:
Thou art not druncke each humor to behold,
But thou art druncke to make thy vice more bold.
Thou do not visit whores to note their fashions,
But to be deeply known in their transgressions:
Well, drinck, be drunck, proceed and catch the Fox,
Hunt all the purleyes over for the P.
An accomplished Gallant.
Poor Tom goes barely, his best suit is pressed
To be forth coming in a Brokers chest:
And ask you Thomas why he goes so bare,
He answers you, for pride he does not care:
Moreover Satin suits he does compare,
Unto the service of a Barbors chair:
As fit for every lack and Iourneyman,
As for a knight, or worthy Gentleman.
And therefore swears poor Tom, I scorn it I,
To imitate such vulgar rascaldry:
But by and by when fortune gins to fawn,
The Gentleman redeems his suit from pawn.
And now abiures those rags for evermore,
Which but as yesterday his worship wore:
And ask him now the reason of this change,
And why he is transformed thus so strange:
He answers you'tis base, and much rejected,
To be a gentleman and not respected.
Rich habits cause each vassal be esteemd,
When rags make Gentlemen be vassals deemd:
Now sir because he is generous, therefore
He scorns to be attyred like a Bore.
Thus Tom penurious does excuse his rags,
And if reformed, scorns beggary with braggs.
A provident whooremaster.
Lvpurioso to compass his desire,
Makes his wench druncke, if you the cause inquire,
He has a filthy face, his nose is shruncke,
And's wench would loathe him if she were not druncke.
A conuertite.
STrangely addicted now is Brut us found,
He does suppose the world is at an end:
He will not drink not ramble foot of ground,
Nor take a pipe neither with foe nor friend.
He me ditates on heaven, no'tis not so,
Another place he thinks on which is low:
O'tis his purse which nere does measure keep,
He cannot reach a penny it is so deep.
In Rusticum.
A charitable Glowne.
RVsticus an honest country Swayne,
Whose education simple was, and plain:
Having surveyd the City round about,
Emptyed his purse, and so went trudging out.
But by the way he saw, and much respected,
A door belonging to a house infected:
Whereon was placed (as' it is the custom still)
Lord have mercy upon us, this sad Bill
The sot perusde, and having read, he swore
All London was ungodly, but that door.
Here dwells some virtue, yet says he, for this
A most devout religious saying is:
And thus he wished (with putting off his Hatte)
That every door had such a Bill as that.
A well affected lover.
MY Rose says Amorosus, is the flower
Of all her sex, her beauty has the power:
To stir affection in a dying creature,
No female Europe yields equals her feature.
True Amorosus she is a flower indeed,
But scents more rank than does the stinckingst weed,
She grows in the Garden Allies all the year,
But differs from most flowers that appear:
For in the spring when many flowers flourish,
She hides her head, the spring her pride does perish.
An absolute Gallant.
IF you will see true valor here displayed,
Hear Poliphemus, and be not afraid:
Dee see me wronged and will you thus restrain me,
Sir let me go, or by these hilts i will brain ye.
Shall a base patch with such appearance wrong me?
I Will kill the villain, pray do not prolong me:
Call my Tobacco putryfied stuff,
Tell me it stincks, say it is dross, I snuff.
Sirrah, what are you? why sir what would you,
I am a prentice, and will knock you to:
O are you so, I cry you mercy then,
I am to fight with none but Gentlemen.
Mounsier the Englishman.
NOte the industry of our gallant here,
Which imitates all fashions that appear:
The Italian, Spanish, Dutch, o but the French
Especially, he follows to an inch.
His Garters, Roses, all befrindg'd with gould,
Were made in France, and by a Frenchman sold:
His suit (so quaintly wrought) is truly said,
To be by the Frenchman at the Friars made.
His ruff is likewise french, and's Beuer too,
Sir, all is French he wears, be it known to you:
Yet notwithstanding this our gallant swears,
The world's deceiud, there is nothing French he wears.
Yet it appears most plainly to his face,
His Note is frenchified, a small disgrace:
But how ridiculous is he and vain,
To be so proud and have aface so plain.
Self do, self have.
CRedus affirms, his wife and he are one,
They are both formed of equal flesh and bone:
And being one, their natures cannot varry,
Credo is circumspect, his wife as wary.
But he cornuted is, pray who did that,
If's wife, then Credo did consent that is flat.
A penitent drunckard.
WHen Will is druncke, he is obsequiously
Devoted to his prayers, does weep and cry:
Sighs and is sorry for his acted sin,
And will a new and virtuous life begin.
But when religious Will has left the pot,
His zeal grows cold, his prayers are quite forgot:
Then why is drunkenness entitled sin,
When Will does always pray when he is in.
A fellow all wit, or wit all.
I Pray you give attention and be mute,
Here comes old Sponge the Barbor with his Lute:
Give him his lap, and let him (gratis) feed,
And he is your Fiddler till his fingers bleed.
But hark you sir, he has a wife I think,
True sir she takes Tobacco, and will drink
Carowses with a Dutchman while heel stand,
Will swear with any ruffian in the land.
Will give the lie to any Captain too,
Then she will be stabbed, sir what is that to you:
Yet she is virtuous Spundge, her husband swears,
And lives as chaste as Dyan for her ears.
For should she (as heel tell you) tread awry,
He Would slit her nose for her impuritie:
But's tongue goes false, as any tongue may trip.
Thrice in afternoon he knew her slip.
Fortune favors Fools.
A Skippe-iacke.
HEre comes a fellow of a light vocation,
(Perhaps an usher of a dancing school:)
Who was maintained by some of occupation,
Does now maintain a lackie, and a fool.
Fortune affects his art, and loves him too,
For what I pray? that which a Horse can do.
A Fiddler.
ANother there in form as light as he,
Who lived by aires (though not Camelion like:)
Does now contemn his primitive degree,
And scorns his finger should a vyoll strike.
Fortune be thanked (and his chaunting tongue)
That gave him living only for a song.
In Flaccium.
A tried Friend.
FLaccus is dry, and does request his friend
To satisfy his thirsty appetite:
His Friend has now great business to attend,
And swears he cannot tarry by that light.
Flaccus is druncke, and meets his friend again,
And now forsooth his friend bestows the wine:
Flaccus receaues it and his senses bane,
Shows apish tricks, then imitates the swine:
O you forget your self, true sir I do,
I knew my self until disguisde by you:
I loved you once, here after i will despise ye,
Because you will glut me, rather than suffice me.
Better late then never.
BRiscus will turn good husband, marry fie,
What wench is it tush loose bodied Margerie:
Good husband now, that nere was good in's life,
The better husband sir, the worser wife.
In Spumosum.
A fine tongued Suter.
SPumosus courts his wench, and thus does prate,
Adorned, pollisht, and immaculate:
Repugne me not, but let thy lenity,
Extend to me as to propinquity.
Sweet, be propitious, not inexorable,
Thy Amorosus is inviolable:
And will persevere with iucunditie,
Till I descend my hopes profunditie.
Sir, quoth his wench, believe me if you can,
I Will marry none except an Englishman:
If you are, as you seem not by your speeches,
Reserve your Fustian for to patch your breeches.
Tom tell troth.
MY love says Tristram is as constant sure,
As is the Moon, Diana, chaste and pure:
Credit his words, assured true they be,
The Moon does change each month, and so does she.
In Fatuum.
A fool for company.
FAtuus will drink with no such ass,
That lets his jests (vnapprehended) pass:
Or if he jest with such of shallow brain,
He laughs himself to make his jest more plain.
Thus Fatuus does jest and play the sany
To laugh at's self, he is fool if there be any.
DOleus shows his purse and tells you this,
It is more horride than a pesthouse is:
For in a pesthouse many mortals enter,
But in his purse an angel dares not venture.
So to declare the infection for his sin,
A cross is set without, there is none within.
In Fabulosum.
MY word (swears Fabulus) can now be taken
For all the suits that are in Birchin lane^
Yet notwithstanding he does scorn to wear,
The quaintest suit of Satin that is there.
Lilkewise he can without or bond or bill,
Take up of any Scriuener what he will:
Yet does he scorn to be obliged to such,
Whose imperfections any pen can tutch.
As for his diet, Vintners do request
He would vouchsafe to be their daily guest:
And swears he may command more wine a'the score,
Then will make drunk 3 thousand men and more.
Yet does he scorn now by fair Phoebus shine,
To be indebted for a cup of wine:
But Fabulus you lie, else why go bare,
Why pennilesse, why do thou hardly fare
If such would trust thee? trust thee, no not these,
For clout, for cross, for pennyworth of cheese.
In Furiosum.
PRay you give place to Furiosus there,
Whose irefull looks presage that he will swear,
What Is he that dares deny to pledge his health,
Or he that will not lend him half his wealth:
Let him but see that man will say his spright
Shall equal his, heel kill him by that light:
But where are these huge words and blows so darted?
Faith in a Tavern where he may be parted.
A second Diogenes.
BEcause Diogenes on roots did feed,
Philosophaster turns Diogenes:
Observes his diet, and does still proceed
To imitate that Cynicks bitterness.
Calls each man knave he meets, but be it known,
That title he does give them, is his own.
Why does he feed on roots continually?
Faith will you know, it is the cheapest diet:
Why does he tax man's vice so bitterly?
Because the world should judge he does defye it.
Well this Philosopher deserves reward,
Let him be judged by John in Paul's churchyard.
A warm argument.
Love is a fire, so some Poets rumor,
And women are the chimneys where it flameth:
If so it be, I care not for loves humor,
Nor will I harbor there where Venus gameth.
And women (meaning none but you so hot)
Your chimney corners shall be quight forgot.
In Credulum.
I Will not believe that fellow that will swear
He led an eager Lion by the ear.
Nor he that will affirm and rashly prate,
He bodly pist at Pontius Pylates gate:
But him I credit that will justly say,
He did (at midnight) by the sunshine play.
In Virosum.
HOw Falstafe like, does sweld Virosus look,
As though his paunch did foster every sin:
And swears he is injured by this book,
His worth is taxt he has abused been:
Swell still Virosus, burst with emulation,
I neither tax thy vice nor reputation.
The Conclusion.
Pack hence ye idle zanies of this age,
Illitterate fools, fit subjects for each stage:
And do not murmur though your coats are course,
They are too good for fools if they were worse.
FINIS.

