AN EXCELLENT conceited Tragedy OF Romeo and Juliet* As it has been often
(with great applause) played publicly, by the right Honorable the L. of
Hunsdon his Servants.

LONDON, Printed by John Danter. 1597.

The Prologue.
Two household Friends alike in dignity,
(In fair Verona, where we lay our Scene)
From civil broils broke into enmity,
Whose civil war makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes,
A pair of starre-crost Lovers took their life:
Whose misaduentures, piteous overthrows,
(Through the continuing of their Fathers strife,
And death-markt passage of their Parents rage)
Is now the two hours traffic of our Stage.
The which if you with patient ears attend*
What here we want we will study to amend.
The most excellent Tragedy of Romeo and Juliet.
Enter 2. Seruing-men of the Capolets. Gregory, of my word Il^ carry no
coals.

2 No, for if you do, you should be a Collier.


1 If I be in choler, I Will draw.


2 Ever while you live, draw your neck out of the the collar.


1 I strike quickly being moved.


2 I, but you are not quickly moved to strike.


1 A Dog of the house of the Mountagues moves me.


2 To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand to it: therefore (of
my word) if thou be mooud thou't run away.


1 There Is not a man of them I meet, but I Will take the wall of.


2 That shows thee a weakling, for the weakest goes to the wall.


1 That's true, therefore Il^ ^hrust the men from the wall, and thrust the maids
to the walls: nay, thou shall see I am a tall piece of flesh.


2 It Is well thou art not fish, for if thou were thou would be but poor John.


1 I Will play the tyrant, I Will first begin with the maids, and off with their
heads.


2 The heads of the maids?


1 I the heads of their Maids, or the Maiden heads, take it in what sense
thou will*


2 Nay let them take it in sense that feel it, but here comes two of the
Mountagues.


Enter two Seruingmen of the Mountagues* 1 Nay ^eare not me I warrant thee.


2 I ^eare them no more than thee, but draw.


1 Nay let us have the law on our side* let them begin first. I Will tell thee
what I Will do, as I go by i will bite my thumb, which is disgrace enough if they
suffer it.


2 Content, go thou by and bite thy thumb, and i will come after and frown.


1 Moun: Do you bite your thumb at us?


1 I bite my thumb.


2 Moun: I but is it at us?


1 I bite my thumb, is the law on our side?


2 No.


1 I bite my thumb.


1 Moun: I but is it at us?


Enter ^eneuoli^* 2 Say I, here comes my Masters kinsman.


They draw, to them enters Tybalt, they fight, to them the Prince, old
Mountague, and his wife, old Capulet and his wife, and other Citizens and part
them. Prince* Rebellious ^^biects enemies to peace,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mis^empered weapons to the ground.
Three Ciuell brawles bred of an airie word,
By the old Capulet and Mountague,
Have thrice disturbd the quiet of our streets.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the ransom of your fault:
For this time every man depart in peace.
Come Capulet come you along with me,
And Mountague, come you this after noone,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old free Town our common judgment place,
Once more on pain of death each man depart.

Exeunt. M: wife. Who set this ancient quarrel first abroach?
Speak Nephew, were you by when it began?

Benuo: Here were the servants of your adversaries,
And yours close fighting ere I did approach.

Wife: Ah where is Romeo, saw you him to day?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

Ben: Madame, an hour before the worshipped sun
Peept through the golden window of the East,
A troubled thought drew me from company:
Where underneath the grove Sicamoure,
That Westward rooteth from the Cities side,
So early walking might I see your son.
I drew toward him, but he was ware of me,
And drew into the thicket of the wood:
I noting his affections by mine own,
That most are busied when they are most alone,
Pursued my honor, not pursuing his.

Moun: Black and portentious must this honor prove,
Unless good counsel do the cause remove.

Ben: Why tell me Uncle do you know the cause?

Enter Romeo. Moun: I neither know it nor can learn of him.

Ben: See where he is, but stand you both aside,
I Will know his grieuance, or be much denied.

Mount: I would thou were so happi^ by thy stay
To hear true shri^t. Come Madame lets away.

Benuo: Good morrow Cosen.

Romeo: Is the day so young?

Ben: But new stroke nine.

Romeo: Ay me, sad hopes seem long.
Was that my Father that went hence so fast?

Ben: It was, what sorrow lengthens Romeos hours?

Rom: Not having that, which having makes them short.

Ben: In love.

To: Out.

Ben: Of love.

To: Out of her favor where I am in love.

Ben: Alas that love so gentle in her view,
Should be so tyrranous and rough in proo^e.

To: Alas that love whose view is muffled still,
Should without laws give path-waies to our will:
Where shall we dine? Gods me, what fray was here?
Yet tell me not for I have heard it all,
Here Is much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
O any thing, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness serious vanity!
Mi^hapen Caos of best seeming things,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still waki^g ^^eepe, that is not what it is:
This love ^eele I, which feel no love in this.
Do thou not laugh?

Ben: No Cose I rather weep.

Rom: Good heart at what?

Ben: At thy good hearts oppression.

To: Why such is loves transgression,
Griefs of mine own lie heavy at my heart,
Which thou would propagate to have them pressed
With more of thine, this grief that thou have shown,
Does ad more grief to too much of mine own:
Love is a smoke raisde with the fume of sighs
Being purgde, a fire sparkling in lovers eyes:
Being vexed, a sea raging with a lovers tears.
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet. Farewell Cose.

Ben: Nay I Will go along.
And if you hinder me you do me wrong.

To: Tut I have lost my self I am not here,
This is not Romeo, he is some other where.

Ben: Tell me in sadness whom she is you love?

To: What shall I groan and tell thee?

Ben: Why no, but sadly tell me who.

To: Bid a sickman in sadness make his will.
Ah word ill vrgde to one that is so ill.
In sadness Cosen I do ^oue a woman.

Ben: I aimde so right, when as you said you loved.

To: A right good mark^man, and she is fair I love.

Ben: A right ^aire mark fair Cose is soonest hit.

To: But in that hit you miss, she will not be hit
With Cupids arrow, she has Dian^es wit,
And in strong proof of chastity well armed:
Against Cupids childish bow she lives vnharm'd,
She Will not abide the siedge of loving terms,
Nor open her lap to Saint seducing gold,
Ah she is rich in beauty, only poor,
That when she dies with beauty dies her store.
Exeu. Enter County Paris, old Capulet. Of honorable reckoning are they both,
And pity it is they live at ods so long:
But leaving that, what say you to my suit?

Capu: What should I say more than I said before,
My daughter is a stranger in the world,
She has not yet attainde to fourteen years:
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Before she can be thought fit for a Bride.

Paris: Younger than she are happy mothers made.

Cap: But too soon marde are these so early married:
But woo her gentle Paris, get her heart,
My word to her consent is but a part.
This night I hold an old accustomed Feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love: yet you among the store,
One more most welcome makes the number more.
At my poor house you shall behold this night,
Earth treadding stars, that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty youngmen ^eele,
When well apparaild April on the heel
Of lumping winter treads, even such delights
Amongst fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house, hear all, all see,
And like her most, whose merit most shall be.
Such amongst view of many mine being one,
May stand in number though in reckoning none.
Enter Seruingman. Where are you sir, go trudge about
Through fair Ver^na streets, and seek them out:
Whose names are written here and to them say,
My house and welcome at their pleasure stay.

Exeunt. Ser: Seek them out whose names are written here* and yet I know not
who are written here: I must to the learned to learn of them, that is as much
to say, as the Tailor must meddle with his Last, the Shoemaker with his
needle, the Painter with his nets, and the Fisher with his Pensill, I much to
the learned.


Enter Benuolio and Romeo. Ben: Tut man one fire burns out another burning,
One pain is lessned with another anguish:
Turn backward, and be holp with backward turning,
One desperate grief cures with another languish.
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

Romeo: Your Planton lea^e is excellent for that.

Ben: For what?

Romeo: For your broken shin.

Ben: Why Romeo art thou mad?

Rom* Not mad, but bound more than a mad man is.
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipped and tormented, and Godden good fellow.

Ser: Godgigoden, I pray sir can you read,

Rom: I mine own fortune in my misery.

Ser: Perhaps you have learned it without book: but I pray can you read any
thing you s^e?


Rom: I if I know the letters and the language.

Seru: Ye say honestly, rest you merry.

Rom: Stay fellow I can read.


He reads the Letter. SEigneur Martino and his wife and daughters, County
Anselme and his beauteous sisters, the Lady widow of Vtruuio, Seigneur
Placentio, and his lovely Neeces, Mercutio and his brother Valentine, mine
uncle Capulet his wife and daughters, my fair Niece Rosaline and Liuia,
Seigneur Valentio and his Cosen Tibalt, Luci^ and the lively Hellena.

A fair assembly, whether should they come?


Ser: Up.


To: Whether to supper?


Ser: To our house.


To: Whose house?


Ser: My Masters.


To: Indeed I should have asked thee that before.


Ser: Now i will tell you without asking. My Master is the great rich Capulet, and
if you be not of the house of Mountagues, I pray come and crush a cup of wine.
Rest you merry.


Ben: At this same ancient feast of Capulets,
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves:
With all the admired beauties of Verona,
Go thither and with unattained eye,
Compare her face with some that I s^all show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

To: When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire,
And these who often drownde could never die,
Transparent Heretics be burnt for liers.
One ^airer than my love, the all seeing son
Nere saw her match, since first the world begun.

Ben: Tut you saw her fair none else being by,
Her self poysd with her self in either eye:
But in that Cristall scales let there by waide,
Your Ladies love, against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

Rom: I Will go along no such fight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of mine own.

Enter Capulets wife and Nurce. Wife: Nurce where is my daughter call her forth
to me.


Nurce: Now by my maiden head at twelve year old I bad her come, what Lamb,
what Lady bird, God forbid. VVher's this girl? what Juliet.


Enter Juliet. Juliet: How now who calls?


Nurce: Your Mother.


Iul: Madame I am here, what is your will?


VV: This is the matter. Nurse give leave a while, we must talk in secret.
Nurce come back again I have remembered me, thou'se hear our counsel. Thou
know est my daughters of a pretty age.


Nurce: Faith I can tell her age unto a hour.


Wife: She Is not fourteen.


N^rce: ^^le lay fourteen of my tenth, and yet to my te^ne be it spoken, I
have but four, she is not fourteen. How long is it now to Lammas-^ide?


Wife: A fortnight and odd days.


Nurce: Even or odd, of all days in the year come Lammas Eve at night shall
she be fourteen. Susan and she God rest all Christian so^les were of an age.
Well Susan is with God, she was too good for me: But as I said on Lammas Eve
at night* shall she be fourteen, that shall she marie I remember it well* It Is
since the Earthquake now eleauen years, and she was we and I never shall
forget it, of all the days of the year upon that day: for I had then laid
wormwood to my dug, sitting in the sun under the Doue-house wall. My Lord and
you were then at Mantua, nay I do bear a brain: But as I said, when it did
taste the wormwood on the nipple of my dug, and felt it bitter, pretty fool to
see it teachie and fall out with Dugge. Shake quoth the Doue-house it was no need
I trow to bid me trudge, and since that time it is a leaven year: for then
could Juliet stand high lone, nay by the Roode, she could have wadled up and
down, for even the day before she brake her brow, and then my husband God be
with his soul, he was a merry man: Do thou fall forward Juliet? thou will
fall backward when thou have more wit: will thou not Juliet? and by my
hollidam, the pretty fool left crying and said I. To see how a jest shall
come about, I warrant you if I should live a hundred year, I never should
forget it, will thou not Juliet? and by my troth she stinted and cried I.


Juliet: And stint thou too, I pre thee Nurce say I.


Nurce: Well go thy wai^s, God mark thee for his grace, thou were the
prettiest Babe that ever I nursed, might I but live to see thee married once, I
have my wish.


Wife: And that same marriage Nurce, is the Theme I meant to talk of: Tell
me Juliet, how stand you affected to be married?


Iul: It is an honor that I dream not off.


Nurce: An honor! were not I thy only Nurce, I would say thou had sucked
wisdom from thy Teat.


Wife: Well girl, the Noble County Paris is seeks thee for his Wife.


Nurce: A man young Lady, Lady such a man as all the world, why he is a man
of wax.


Wife: Veronaes Summer has not such a flower.

Nurce: Nay he is a flower, in faith a very flower.

Wife: Well Juliet, how like you of Paris* ^oue.

Juliet: I Will look to like, if looking liking move,
^ut no more deep will I engage mine eye,
Then your consent gives strength to make it fly.

(...) Clown: Maddam you are called for, supper is readie^ the Nurce cursed in
the ^antrie, all things in extreamitie, make have for I must be gone to wait.


Enter Maskers with Romeo and a Page. ^o: What shall this speech be spoke for
our excuse?
Or shall we on without Apology.

Benuoleo: The date is out of such prolixitie,
We Will have no Cupid ^ud winckt with a Scar^e,
Bearing a Tartars painted bow of lath,
Scaring the Ladies like ^^row-keeper:
Nor no without ^ooke Prologue ^aintly spoke
After the Promp^er, for our entrance.
But let them measure us by what they will;
We Will measure them a measure and be gone.

Rom: A torch for me I am not for this aumbling,
Being but heavy I will bear the light.

Mer: Bleeue me Rome^ I must have you dance.

Rom: Not I believe me you have dancing shoes
With nimble soles, I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot stir.

Mer: Give me a case to put my visage in,
A visor for a visor, what ca^e I
What curious eye does coat deformity.

Rom: Give me a Torch, let wanto^s light of har^
Tickle the senceles rushes with their he^^les:
For I am prouer^d with a Grandsire phrase,
^^e be a candleholder and look on,
The game (...) so fair and I am done.

Mer: (...) the mouse* the Cunstables old word,
If thou (...) draw thee from the mire
(...) wherein thou stick^t.
Leave this talk, we burn (...) light here.

Rom: Nay that's not so. Mer: I mean sir in d^^ay,
We burn our lights by night, like Lamps by day,
Take o^r good meaning for our i^dgement si^s
Three times a day, ere once in her right wits.

R^m: So we mean well by going to this ma^k^:
^ut (...) no wit to go.

Mer: Why Romeo may one ask?

Rom: I dreamt a dream to night.

Mer: And so did ^. (...): Why what was yours*

Mer: That dreamers (...) lie.

Rom: In bed a sleep while they do dream things true*

Mer: Ah the^ ^ee Queen^ Mab^ath bin with you*

Ben: Queen Mab what is she?
She is the Fairies Midwife and does come
In shape no bigger than an Aggat stone
On the forefinger of a Burgomaster*
Drawn with a teeme of little A^omi,
A thwart men's noses when they ^^e a sleep.
Her wagon spokes are made of spinners webs*
The cover, of the wings of Grasshoppers,
The traces are the Moone-shine wa^rie beams,
The collers crickets bones, the lash of filmes,
Her waggo^er is a small gray coated fly,
Not half so big as is a little worm,
Picked from the las^e finger of a maid,
And i^ this ^ort she gallops up and down
Through Lovers brains, and then they dream of love*
Over Courtiers knees: who strait on c^rsies dream
Over Ladies lips, who dream on ki^^^^ strait:
Which often the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breathes with sweet meats ^ainted are:
Sometimes she gallops ore a Lawers lap,
And then dreams he of smelli^g out a sure,
And sometime comes s^e with a tithe pigs ^aile,
Tickling a Parsons nose that lies a s^eepe,
And then dreams he of another benefice:
Sometime s^e gallops ^re a soldiers no^e,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches amb^scad^s, countermines,
Of healthes five ^adome deep, and then anon
Drums in his ear: at which he star^es and wakes,
And swears a Prayer or two and sleeps agai^e.
This is that Mab that makes maids lie on their bac^es,
And pro^es them women of good carriage.
This is the very Mab that plats the manes of Horses in the night,
And plats the E^se^ocks in ^oule ^luttish ^aire,
Which once vantang^ed much misfortune breeds.

Rom: Peace, peace, thou talkst of nothing.

Mer: True I talk of dreams,
Which are the Chi^dren of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin a substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind,
Which wooes even now the (...) bowels of the north,
And being angered puffes away in haste,
T^rning his ^ace to the dew-dropping south*

Ben: Come, come, this wind does blow us from our selves.
S^pper is done and we shall come too late.

To: I fear too early, for my mind (...)
Some consequence is hanging in the stars,
Which bitterly begins his ^earefull da^e
With this nigh^^ (...) expiers the ^erme
O^ a despised (...) in this breast,
By ^ome (...) vile death:
But he that has the steerage of my course
Directs my sail, on lusty Gentlemen.

Enter old Capul^t with the Ladies. Capu: Welcome Gentlemen, welcome Gentlemen,
Ladies that have their toes vnplagud with Corns
Will have about with you, ah ha my Mistresses,
Which of you all will now refuse to dance?
She that makes dainty, she I Will swear has Corns.
Am I come near you now, welcome Gentlemen, welcome,
More lights you knaves, and turn these tables up,
And quench the fire the room is grown too hot.
Ah sir, this unlooked for ^port comes well,
Nay sit, nay sit, good Cosen Capulet:
For you and I are past our standing days,
How long is it since you and I were in a Mask?

Cos: By Lady sir it is thirty years at least.

Cap: It Is not so much, it is not so much.
It Is since the marriage of Lucenti^,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we maskt.

Cos: It Is more, it is more, his son is elder far.

Cap: Will you tell me that it cannot be so,
His son was but a Ward three years ago,
Good youths I faith. Oh youth's a jolly thing.

Rom: What Lady is that that does inri^^ the hand
Of yonder Knight? O she does teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the che^ke of night,
Like a rich jewel in an Aethi^ps ^are,
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear:
So shines a snow-white Swan trouping with Crows,
As this ^aire Lady over her fellows shows.
The measure done, ile^^atch her place of stand,
And touching hers, make happy my rude hand
Did my heart love till now? ^orsweare it sight,
I never saw true beauty till this night.

Tib: This by his voice should be a Mountague,
Fetch me my rapier boy. What dares the slave
Come hither covered with an Anticke face,
To scorn and ieere at our solemnity?
Now by the stock and honor of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it for no sin.

Ca: Why how now Cosen, wherefore storm you so.

Ti: Uncle this is a Mountague our so,
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To mock at our solemnity this night.

Ca: Young Romeo, is it not?

Ti: It is that villain Romeo.

Ca: Let him alone, he bears him like a portly gentleman*
And to speak truth, V^rona brags of him,
As of a virtuous and well governed youth:
I would not for the wealth of all this town,
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Therefore be quiet take no note of him,
Bear a fair presence, and put off these frowns,
An ill beseeming semblance for a feast.

Ti: (...) when such a villain is a guest,
(...) endure him.

Ca: He (...) endured, go to I say, he shall,
Am I the Master of the house or you?
(...) ind^r^ him? God shall mend my soul
(...) amongst my guests,
You Will set Cock a ^oope, you will be the man.

Ti: Uncle it is a shame.

Ca: Go too, you are a ^aucie (...).
This trick will scath you one day I know what.
We^^ said my hearts. Be quiet:
M^re light Ye kna^e, or I will make you quiet.

Tibalt: Patience perforce with wi^full choler meeting*
Makes my fles^ tremble in their different greetings:
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.

Rom: If ^ profane with my (...) hand,
This holy (...), the gent^e sin is this:
My lips two blus^ing Pilgrims ready stand,
To smooth the rough touch with a gentle kiss.

Iuli: Good Pilgrim you do wrong your hand, too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this:
For Saints have hands which holy Palmers touch,
And Palm to Palm is holy Palmers kiss.

Rom: Have not Saints lips, and holy Palmers too?

Iuli: Yes Pilgrim lips that they must use in prayer.

To: Why then fair saint, ^et lips do what hands do,
They pray, yee^d thou, least faith turn to despair.

Iu: Sai^ts do not move though: grant nor prai^^ forsake.

To: Then move not till my prayers effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by yours my sin is p^rgde.

Iu: Then have my lips the sin that they (...) ^ooke.

To: Sin from my lips, O trespass swee^ly vrgde!
Give me my sin again.

Iu: You kiss by the book.

Nurse: Ma^ame your mother calls.

Rom: What is her mother?

Nurse: Marry Batcheler ^er ^other is the (...) house, and a good Lady, and a
wi^e, and a virtuous. I nursed her daughter that you talked withal, I tell you,
he that (...) ^ay hold of her shall have the ^hinkes.


Rom: Is she a Mountague? Oh dear account,
My life is my ^oes thrail.

Ca: Nay gentlemen prepare not to be gone,
We have a tris^ing foolish banquet toward.
They whisper in his ^are* I pray you let me entreat you Is it so?
Well then I thank you honest Gentlemen,
I promise you but for your company,
I would have bin a bed an hour ago:
Light to my chamber hoe.

Exeunt. Iul: Nurse, what is yonder Gentleman?

Nur: The s^nne and ^eire of old Tiberio.

Iul: What Is he that now is going out of door?

Nur: That as I think is young Petruchio.

Iul: What Is he that follows there that would not dance*

Nur: I know not.

Iul: Go learn his name, if he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

Nur: His name is Romeo and a Mountague, the only son of your great enemy.

Iul: My only Love sprung from my only hate,
Too e^rly seen unknown, and known too late:
Prod^gious birth of love is this to me,
That ^ should love a loathed enemy.

Nurse: What Is this? what is that?

Iul: Nothing Nurse but a rhyme I learnt even now of o^e I da^est with.

Nurse: Come your mother stays for you, I Will go a long with you.

Exeun^. Enter Romeo alone. To: Shall I go forward and my heart is here?
Turn back dull earth and find thy Center out.

Enter Benuolio Mercutio. Ben: Romeo, my cosen Romeo.

Mer: Do ^hou hear he is wise,
Upon my life he has stolen him home to bed.

Ben: He came this way, and leapt this Orchard wall.
Call good Mercutio.

Mer: Call, nay I Will conjure too.
Romeo, madman, humors, passion, liner, appear thou in likeness of a sigh:
speak but one rhyme and I am satisfied, cry but ay me. Pronounce but Love and
Dove, speak to my gossip Venus one fair word, one nickname for her purblinde
son and heir young Abraham: Cupid he that shot so trim when young King
Cophetua loved the beggar wench. He hears me not. I conjure thee by
Rosalindes bright eye, high forehead, and scarlet lip, her pretty foot,
straight leg, and quiuering thigh, and the demaines that there adjacent lie,
that in thy likeness thou appear to us.


Ben: If he do hear thee thou will anger him.


Mer: Tut this cannot anger him, marry if one should raise a spirit in his
Mistress circle of some strange fashion, making it there to stand till she had
laid it, and co^iurde it down, that were some spite. My invocation is fair
and honest, and in his Mistress name I conjure only but to raise up him.


Ben: Well he has hid himself amongst those trees,
To be con^^rted with the humerous night,
Blind in his love, and best befits the dark.

Mer: If love be blind, love will not hit the mark,
Now will he sit under a Medler tree,
And wish his Mistress were that kind of fruit,
As maids call Medlers when they laugh alone.
Ah Romeo that she were, ah that she were.
An open Et caetera, thou a poprin Pear.
Romeo God night, i will to my trundle bed:
This ^ield bed is too cold for me.
Come lets away, for it is but vain,
To seek him here that means not to be found.

To: He jests at scars that never felt a wound:
But so^t, what light forth yonder window breaks?
It is the ^ast, and ^uliet is the Sun,
Arise fair S^nne, and kill the envious Moon
That is already sick, and pale with grie^e:
That thou her maid, art ^ar more fair than she.
P^e not her maid since she is envious,
Her vestall liuerie is but pale and green,
And none but fools do wear it, cast it off.
She speaks, but she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses, I will answer it.
I am too bold, it is not to me she speaks,
Two of the fairest stars in all the skies,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinckle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head,
The brightness of her cheeks would shame those stars:
As daylight does a Lamp, her eyes in heaven,
Would through the airie region stream so bright,
That birds would sing, and think it were not night.
Oh now she leanes her cheeks upon her hand,
I would I were the glove to that same hand,
That I might kiss that cheek.

Iul: Ay me.

Rom: She speaks, Oh speak again bright Angel:
For thou art as glorious to this night being over my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white vpturned woondring eyes,
Of mortals that ^all back to gaze on him,
When he bestrides the lasie pacing clouds,
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

Iul: Ah Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy Father, and refuse thy name,
Or if thou will not be but sworn my love,
And i will no longer be a Capulet.

Rom: Shall I hear more, or shall I speak to this?

Iul: It Is but thy name that is mine enemy.
What Is Mountague? It is nor hand nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part.
What Is in a name? That which we call a Rose,
By any other name would smell as sweet:
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain the divine perfection he owes:
Without that title Romeo part thy name,
And for that name which is no part of thee,
Take all I have.

Rom: I take thee at thy word,
Call me but love, and i will be new Baptisde,
Hence^orth I never will be Romeo.

Iu: What man art thou, that thus beskrind in night,
Do stumble on my counsel?

To: By a name I know not how to tell thee.
My name dear Saint is hateful to my self,
Because it is an enemy to thee*
Had I it written I would tear the word.

Iul: My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
Of that tongues utterance, yet I know the sound:
Art thou not Romeo and a Mountague?

To: Neither fair Saint, if either thee displease.

Iu: How camst thou hither, tell me and wherefore?
The Orchard walls are high and hard to clime,
And the place death considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

To: By loves light wings did I oreperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt,
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.

Iul: If they do find thee they will murder thee.

To: Alas there lies more perrill in thine eyes,
Then twenty of their swords, look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

Iul: I would not for the world they should find thee here.

To: I have nights cloak to hide thee from their sight,
And but thou love me let them find me here:
For life were better ended by their hate,
Than death proroged wanting of thy love.

Iu: By whose directions foundst thou out this place.

To: By love, who first did prompt me to enquire,
I he gave me counsel and ^ lent him eyes.
I am no Pilot: yet were thou as far
As that vast shore, washed with the furthest sea,
I would adventure for such Merchandise.

Iul: Thou know the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a Maiden blush be paint my cheeks:
For that which thou haste heard me speak to night,
Feign would I dwell on form, feign feign deny,
What I have spoke: (...) complements.
Do thou love me? Nay I know thou (...) say I,
And I will take thy word: but if thou swearst,
Thou may prove (...):
At (...) they say Io^e smiles.
Ah gentle Romeo, if thou love pronounce it ^aithfully:
Or it thou think I am too easily won,
I Will ^rowne and say thee nay and be perverse,
So thou will woo: but else not for the world,
In truth ^aire Mountague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou may think my hauiour light:
But trust me gentleman I Will prove more true,
Than they that have more cunni^g to be strange.
I (...) confess,
But that thou ouer^heardst ere I was ware
My true loves Passion: therefore pardon me,
And not (...) this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night^ ^ath ^o discovered.

To: By yonder blessed Moon I swear,
That tips with ^iluer all these fruit trees top^.

Iul: O swear not by the Moon the unconstant Moo^^e,
That (...) changes in her circled orb,
Least that thy love prove likewise variable.

To: Now by

Iul: Nay do not swear at all,
Or if thou swear, swear by thy gl^rious self,
Which art the God of my Idolatry,
And (...) believe th^e.

To: If my true hearts love

Iul: Swear not at al, though I do joy in^
I have small joy in this contract to night,
It is too rash, too sudden, too (...),
Too like the lightning that does cease to be
Ere one can say it lightens. I hear some coming,
Dear (...) adieu, sweet Mountague be true,
Stay but a little and i will come again.

To: Oblessed blessed night, I fear being night,
All this is but a dream I hear and see,
Too flattering true to be substantial.

Iul: Three words good Romeo and good night indeed.
If that (...) bent of love be honorable?
Thy p^rpose marriage, send me word to morrow
By one that i will procure to come to thee:
Where and what time thou wi^t perform that right,
And al my fortunes at thy foo^e i will lay,
And follow thee my Lord through out the world.

To: Love goes toward love like school boys from their books,
But love from love, to school with heavy looks.

Iul* Romeo, Romeo, O for a fa^kners voice,
To ^ure this Tassell gentle back again:
Bondage is hoarse and may not cry aloud,
Else would I tear the Ca^e where ^ccho lies
And make her airie voice as hoarse as mine,
With repetition of my Romeos name.
Romeo?

To: It is my soul that calls upon my name,
How silver sweet sound lovers tongues in night.

Iul: Romeo?

To: Madame.

Iul: At what a clock to morrow shall I send?

To: At the hour of nine.

Iul: I will not fail, it is twenty years till then.
Romeo ^ have ^orgot why I did call thee back.

Rom: Let me stay here till you remember it.

Iul: I shall ^orget to have thee still stay here,
Remembering how I love thy company.

Rom: And i will stay still to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

Iu: It Is almost morning I would have thee gone,
But yet no further then a wantons bird,
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a pore prisoner in his twisted gives,
And with a silk thread pulls it back again,
Too loving jealous of his liberty.

To: Would I were thy bird.

Iul: Sweet so would I,
Yet I should kill thee with much cherrishing thee.
Good night, good night, parting is such sweet sorrow,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

Rom: Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace on thy breast*
I would that I were sleep and peace of sweet to rest.
Now will I to my Ghostly fathers Cell,
His help to crave, and my good hap to tell.

Enter Friar Francis. Friar: The gray eyed morn smiles on the ^rowning night,
Checkring the Eastern clouds with streakes of light,
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reeles,
From forth days path, and Titans fiery wheels:
Now ere the Sun advance his burning eye,
The world to cheer, and nights dark dew to dry
We must up fill this oasier Cage of ours,
With ba^efull weeds, and precious iuyced flowers.
Oh mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
For naught so vile, that vile on earth does live,
But to the earth some special good does gi^e:
Nor naught so good, but straind from that fair use,
Reuolts to vice and stumbles on abuse:
Virtue it self turns vice being misapplied,
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this small flower,
Poison has residence, and medecin power:
For this being smelt too, with that part cheares e^h heart,
Being tasted slaies all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed foes in camp them still,
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will,
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

Rom: Good morrow to my Ghostly Con^essor.

Fri: Benedic^te, what early tongue so soon saluteth me,
Young son it argues a distempered head,
So soon to bid good morrow to my bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where care lodges, sleep can never lie:
But where vnbrused youth with vnstu^t brains
Does couch his limbs, there golden sleep remains:
Therefore thy earlines does me assure,
Thou art vprows'd by some distemperature.
Or if not so, then here I hit it righ
Our Romeo has not bin a bed to night.

To: The last was true, the sweeter rest was mine.

Fr: God pardon sin, were thou with Rosaline?

To: With Rosaline my Ghostly father no,
I have forgot that name, and that names woe.

Fri: That's my good son: but where have thou bin then?

To: I tell thee ere tho^ ask it me again,
I have bin feasting with mine enemy:
Where on the sudden one has wounded me
That's by me wounded, both our remedies
With in thy help and holy physic lies,
I bear no hatred blessed man: ^or lo
My intercession likewise steades my ^oe.

Friar: Be plain my son and homely in thy dri^t,
Ridling confession finds but ridling shrift.

Rom: Then plainly know my hearts dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
As mine on hers, so hers likewise on mine,
And all combind, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage: where, and when, and how,
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vows,
I Will tell thee as I pas^e: But this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us to day.

Fri: Holy S. Francis, what a change is here?
Is Rosaline whom thou did love so dear
So soon forsook, lo young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, b^t in their eyes.
Jesus Maria, what a deal of brine
Has washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline?
How much salt water cast away in was^e,
To season love, that of love does not taste.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven cleares,
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ^ares,
And lo upon thy cheek the stain does sit,
Of an old ^eare that is not washed off yet.
If ever thou were thus, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline,
And art thou changde, pronounce this sentence then
Women may ^al, when there is no strength in men.

Rom: Thou chidst me o^t for loving Rosaline.

Fr: For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

Rom: And badst me bury love.

Fr: Not in a grave,
To lay one in another out to have*

Rom: I pree thee chide not, she whom I love now
Does grace for grace, and love for love allow:
The other did not so.

Fr: Oh she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, and could not spell.
But come young Wauerer, come go with me,
In one respect I Will thy assistant be:
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your Households rancour to pure love.

Exeunt. Enter Mercutio, Benuolio. Mer: Why what is become of Romeo? came he not
home to night?

Ben: Not to his Fathers, I spoke with his man.

Mer: Ah that same pale hard hearted wench, that Rosalin^
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.

Mer: Tybalt the Kinsman of old Capolet
Has sent a Letter to his Fathers House:
Some Challenge on my life.

Ben: Romeo will answer it.

Mer: I, any man that can write may answer a letter.

Ben: Nay, he will answer the letters master if he be challenged.

Mer: Who, Romeo? why he is already dead: stabd with a white wenches black
eye, shot thorough the ear with a love song* the very pin of his heart
cleft with the blind bow-boyes but-shaft. And is he a man to encounter Tybalt?


Ben: Why what is Tybalt?


Mer: More than the prince of cattes I can tell you. Oh he is the courageous
captain of complements, Catso, he fightes as you sing pricke-song, keeps time
dystance and proportion, rests me his minum rest one two and the third in your
bosom, the very butcher of a silken button, a Duellist a Duellist, a gentleman
of the very first house of the first and second cause, ah the immortal
Passado, the Punto reu^rso, the Hay.


Ben: The what?


Me: The Pox of such limping antique affecting fantasticoes these new tuners
of accents. By Jesus a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good whore. Why
graundsir is not this a miserable case that we should be still afflicted with
these strange flies: these fashionmongers, these pardonmees, that stand so much
on the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench. Oh their
bones, theyrbones.


Ben. Heer^ comes Romeo.


Mer: Without his Roe, like a dried Hering. O flesh flesh how art thou
fishified. Sir now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowdin: Laura to his
Lady was but a kitchi^ drudg, yet she had a better love to berime her: ^ido a
dowdy Cleopatra a Gypsy, Hero and Hellen hildings and harletries: Thi^^ie
agray eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo bon iour, there is a
French courtesy to your French s^op: ye gave us the counterfeit fairly
yesternigh^.


Rom: What counterfeit I pray you?


Me: The slip the slip, can you not conceive?


Rom: I cry you mercy my business was great, and in such a case as mine, a man
may strain courtesy.


Mer: Oh that's as much to say as such a case as yours will constrain a man to
bow in the hams.


Rom: A most courteous exposition.


M^: Why I am the very pinke of curte^ie.


Rom: Pinke for flower?


Mer: Right.


Rom: Then is my Pumpe well flour'd:


Mer: Well said, follow m^ now that jest till thou have worn out thy Pumpe,
that when the single sole of it is wor^ the jest may remain after the wearing
^olie singular.


Rom: O single soald jest solie singular for the singlenes.


Me. Come between us good Benuolio, for my wits fail.


Rom: Swits and spurs, swits and spurs, or I Will cry a match.


Mer: Nay if thy wits run the wildgoose chase, I have done: for I am sure
thou have more of the goose in one of thy wits than I have in all my five: Was I
with you there for the goose?


Rom: Thou were never with me for any thing, when thou were not with me for the
goose.


Me: I Will bite thee by the ear for that jest.


Rom: Nay good goose bite not.


Mer: Why thy wit is a bitter sweeting, a most sharp sauce


Rom: And was it not well served in to a sweet goose?


Mer: Oh here is a wit of Cheuerell that stretches from an ynch narrow to
an ell broad.


Rom: I stretched it out for the word broad, which added to the goose, proves
thee fair and wide a broad goose.


Mer: Why is not this better now than groaning for love? why now art thou
sociable, now art thou thy self, now art thou what thou art, as well by art
as nature. This driueling love is like a great natural, that runs up and down
to hide his babble in a hole.


Ben: Stop there.


M^: Why thou would have me stopp my tale against the hair.


Ben: Thou would have made thy tale too long?


M^r: Tut man thou art deceived, I meant to make it short, for I was come to
the whole depth of my tale? and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer.


Rom: Heers goodly gear.


Enter Nurse and her man. Mer: A sail, a sail, a sail.


B^n: Two, two, a shirt and a smock.


Nur: Peter, pree thee give me my fan.


Mer: Pree thee do good Peter, to hide her face: for her fan is the fairer
of the two.


Nur: God ye goodmorrow Gentlemen.


Mer: God ye good den fair Gentlewomen.


Nur: Is it god ye gooden I pray you.


Mer: It Is no less I assure you, for the baudie hand of the dial is even now
upon the prick of noone.


Nur: Fie, what a man is this?


Rom: A Gentleman Nurse, that God has made for himself to ma^re.


Nur: By my troth well said: for himself to mar quoth he? I pray you can
any of you tell where one may find young Romeo?


Rom: I can: but young Romeo will be elder when you have found him, that he was
when you sought him. I am the youngest of that name for fault of a worse.


Nur: Well said.


Mer: Yea, is the worst well? mas well noted, wisely, wisely.


Nu: If you be he sir, I desire some conference with ye.


Ben: O, belike she means to inuit him to supper.


Mer: So ho. A baud, a baud, a baud.


Rom: Why what have found man?


Mer: No hare sir, unless it be a hare in a lenten pie, that is somewhat stale
and hoare ere it be eaten.

He walks by them, and sings. And an old hare hoar, and an old hare hoar is
very good meat in Lent:
But a hare that's hoare is too much for a score, if it hoar ere it be spent.
You! come to your fathers to supper?

Rom: I will.


Mer: Farewell ancient Lady, farewell sweet Lady.


Exeunt Benuolio, Mer^utio. Nur: Marry farewell. Pray what saucie merchant was
this that was so full of his roperipe?


Rom: A g^ntleman Nurse that loves to ^^are himself talk, and will speak
more in an hour than he will stand to in a month.


Nur: If he stand to any thing against me, I^e take him down if he were
lustier than he is: if I cannot take him down, I Will find them that shall: I am
none of his ^lurtgills, I am none of his skaines mates. She turns to Peter her
man. And thou like a knave must stand by, and see every Jack use me at his
pleasure.


Pet: I see no body use you at his pleasure, if I had, I would soon have
drawn: you know my tool is as soon out as another if I see time and place.


Nur: Now before God he has so vexed me, that every member about me quiuers:
scuruie Jack. But as I said, my Lady bad me seek ye out, and what she bad
me tell ye, that I Will keep to my self: but if you should lead her into a
fools paradise as they say, it were a ver^e gross kind of behavior as they
say, for the Gentlewoman is young. Now if you should deal doubly with her, it
were very weak dealing, and not to be offered to any Gentlewoman.


Rom: Nurse, commend me to thy Lady, tell her I protest.


Nur: Good heart: in faith I Will tell her so: oh she will be a joyful woman.


Rom: Why, what will thou tell her?


Nur: That you do protest: which (as I take it) is a Gentleman like proffer.


Rom: Bid her get leave to morrow morning
To come to shrift to Friar Laurence cell:
And stay thou Nurse behind the Abbey wall,
My man shall come to thee, and bring along
The cords, made like a tackled staire,
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Must be my conduct in the secret night.
Hold, take that for thy pains.

Nur: No, not a penie truly.

Rom: I say you shall not choose.

Nur: Well, to morrow morning she shall not fail.

Rom: Farewell, be trusty, and I Will quite thy pain.
Exit
Nur: Peter, take my fan, and go before.

Ex. omnes. Enter Juliet. Iul: The clock stroke nine when I did send my Nursse
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perhaps she cannot find him. That's not so.
Oh she is lazy, Loves heralds should be thoughts,
And run more swift, than hasty powder fierd,
Does hu^^ie from the fearful Cannons mouth.
Enter Nurse. Oh now she comes. Tell me gentle Nurse,
What says my Love?

Nur: Oh I am weary, let me rest a while. Lord how my bones ache. Oh where is my
man? Give me some aqua vitae.


Iul: I would thou had my bones, and I thy news.


Nur: Fie, what a iaunt have I had: and my back a the other side. Lord, Lord,
what a case am I in.


Iul: But tell me sweet Nurse, what says Romeo?


Nur: Romeo, nay, alas you cannot choose a man. He Is no body, he is not the
Flower of cur^esie, he is not a proper man: and for a hand, and a foot, and a
baudie, well go thy way wench, thou have it in faith. Lord, Lord, how my head
beats?


Iul: What of all this? tell me what says ^e to our marriage?


Nur: Marry he says like an honest Gentleman, and a kind, and I warrant a
virtuous: where is your Mother?


Iul: Lord, Lord, how odly thou reply? He says like a kind Gentleman, and
an honest, and a virtuous; where is your mother?


Nur: Marry come up, cannot you stay a while? is this the poult^sse for mine a
king boanes? next arrant you will have done, even doot your self.


Iul: Nay stay sweet Nurse, I do entreat thee now,
What says my Love, my Lord, my Romeo?

Nur: Go, hye you straight to Friar Laurence Cell,
And frame a scuse that you must go to shrift:
There stays a Bridegroom to make you a Bride.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
I must provide a ladder made of cords,
With which your Lord must clime a brides nest soon.
I must take pains to further your delight,
But you must bear the burden soon at night.
Does this news please you now?

Iul: How does her latter words revive my heart.
Thanks gentle Nurse, dispatch thy business,
And I Will not fail to meet my Romeo.

Exeunt. Enter Romeo, Friar. Rom: Now Father Laurence, in thy holy grant
Consists the good of me and Juliet.

Fr: Without more words I will do all I may,
To make you happy if in me it lie.

Rom: This morning here she pointed we should meet,
And consumate those never parting bands,
Witness of our hearts love by joining hands,
And come she will.

Fr: I guess she will indeed,
Youths love is quick, swifter than swiftest speed.
Enter Juliet somewhat ^ast, and embraces Romeo. See where she comes.
So ligh^ of foot nere hurts the trodden flower:
Of love and joy, see see the sovereign power,

Iul: Romeo.

Rom: My Juliet welcome. As do waking eyes
(Cloasd in Nights mysts) attend the frolic Day,
So Romeo has expected Juliet,
And thou ^rt come.

Iul: I am (if I be D^y)
Come to my Sun: shine forth, and make me fair.

Rom: All beauteous fairnes dwells in thine eyes.

I^l: R^^^o from thine all brightness does arise.

Fr: Come wantons, come, the stealing hours do pass
Defer imbracements till some fi^rer time,
Part for a while, you shall not be alone,
Till holy Church have joined ye both in one.

Rom: Lead holy Father, all delay seems long.

Iul: Make have, make have, this lingering does us wrong.

Fr: O, soft and fair makes sweetest work they say.
Have is a common ^indrer in cross way.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Benuolio, Mercutio. Ben: I pree thee good Mercutio lets
retire,
The day is hot, the Capels are abroad.

Mer: Thou art like one of those, that when he comes into the confines of a
tavern, claps me his rapier on the board, and says, God send me no need of
thee: and by the operation of the next cup of wine, he draws it on the drawer,
when indeed there ^s no need.


Ben: Am I like such a one?


Mer: Go too, thou art as hot a Jack being mooude, and as soon mooude to be
moodie, and as soon moodie to be mooud.


Ben: And what too?


Mer: Nay, and there were two such, we should have none shortly. Did not
thou fall out with a man for cracking of nuts, having no other reason, but
because thou had hasill eyes? what eye but such an eye would have picked out
such a quarrel? With another for coughing, because he wakd thy dog that
lay a sleep in the Sun? With a Tailor for wearing his new dublet before
Easter: and with another for tying his new shoes with old ribands. And yet
thou will forbid me of quarrelling.


Ben: By my head here comes a Capolet.


Enter Tybalt. Mer: By my heel I care not.


Tyb: Gentlemen a word with one of you.


Mer: But one word with one of us? You had best couple it with somewhat, and
make it a word and a blow.


Tyb: I am apt enough to that if I have occasion.


Mer: Could you not take occasion?


Tyb: Mercutio thou consorts with Romeo?


Mer: Consort Zwounes consort? the slave will make fiddlers of us. If you do
sir, look for nothing but discord: For heeres my fiddle-sticke.


Enter Romeo. Tyb* Well peace be with you, here comes my man.


Mer: But I Will be hanged if he wear your lyuery: M^ry go before into the field,
and he may be your follower, so in that sense your worship may call him man.


Tyb: Romeo the hate I bear to thee can afford no better words then these,
thou art a villain.


Rom: Tybalt the love I bear to thee, does excuse the appertaining rage to
such a word: villain am I none, therefore I well perceive thou know me not.


Tyb: Bace boy this cannot serve thy turn, and therefore draw.


To: I do protest I never injured thee, but love thee better than thou can
devise, till thou shall know the reason of my love.


Mer: O dishonorable vile submission. Allastockado caries it away. You
Ratcatcher, come back, come back.


Tyb: What would with me?


Mer: Nothing King of Cates, but borrow one of your nine lives, therefore come
draw your rapier out of your sca^ard, least mine be about your ears ere you
be aware.


Rom: Stay Tibalt, hold Mercutio: Be^uoli^ beat down their weapons.


Tibalt under Romeos arm thrusts Mercutio, in and flies. Mer: Is he gone, has
he nothing? A pox on your houses.


Rom: What art thou hurt man, the wound is not deep.


Mer: Noe not so deep as a Well, not so wide as a barn door, but it will
serve I warrant. What meant you to come between us? I was hurt under your arm.


Rom: I did all for the best.


Mer: Apoxe of your houses, I am fairly dressed. Sir go fetch me a Surgeon.


Boy: I go my Lord.


Mer: I am pepperd for this world, I am sped in faith, he has made worms meat
of me, and ye ask for me to morrow you shall find me a graue-man. A pox of
your houses, I shall be fairly mounted upon four men's shoulders: For your
house of the Mountegues and the Capolets: and then some peasantly rogue, some
Sexton, some base slave shall write my Epitapth, that Tybalt came and broke the
Princes Laws, and Mercutio was slain for the first and second cause. Where Is
the Surgeon?


Boy: He Is come sir.


Mer: Now heel keep a mumbling in my guts on the other side, come Benuolio,
lend me thy hand: a pox of your houses.


Exeunt Rom: This Gentleman the Princes near Alie.
My very friend has taken this mortal wound
In my behalf, my reputation staind
With Tibalts slander, Tybalt that an hour
Has been my kinsman, Ah Juliet
Thy beauty makes me thus effeminate,
And in my temper softens valors steel.

Enter Benuolio. Ben: Ah Romeo Romeo brave Mercutio is dead,
That gallant spirit has a spir'd the clouds,
Which too untimely scornd the lowly earth.

Rom: This days black fate, on more days does depend
This but begins what other days must end.

Enter T^balt. Ben: Here comes the furious Tibalt back again,

Rom: A live in triumph and Mercutio s^ine?
A way to heaven respective lenity:
And fire eyed fury be my conduct now.
Now Tibalt take the villain back again,
Which late thou gave me: for M^rcutios soul,
Is but a little way above the clouds,
And stays for thine to bear him company.
Or thou, or I, or both shall follow him.

Fight, Tibalt falls. Ben: Romeo away, thou see that Tibalt's slain,
The Citizens approach, away, begone
Thou will be taken.

Rom: Ah I am fortunes slave.

Exeunt Enter Citizens. Watch. Where Is he that slew Mercutio, Tybalt that
villain?

Ben: There is that Tybalt.
Up sir go with us*

En^er Prince, C^pole^s wife. Pry: Where be the vile beginners of this fray?

Ben: Ah Noble Prince I can discover all
The most unlucky manage of this brawle.
Here lies the man slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman brave M^rcutio,

M^^: Tibal^, Tybal^, O my brothers child,
Unhappy sight? Ah the blo^d is spilt
Of my dear kinsman, Prince as thou a^t true:
For blood of ours, shed blood of Mountagew.

Pry: Speak Benuol^o who began this fray?

Ben: Tibalt here slain whom Romeos hand did slay.
Romeo who spoke him fair bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was.
But Tibalt still persisting in his wrong,
The stout Mercutio drew to calm the storm,
Which Romeo seeing called stay Gentlemen,
And on me cried, who drew to part their strife,
And with his agill arm young Romeo,
As fast as tung cry depeace, sought peace to make.
While they were enterchanging thrusts and blows,
Under young Romeos laboring arm to part,
The furious Tybalt cast an envious thrust,
That rid the life of stout Mer^utio.
With that he fled* but presently returned,
And with his rapier braued Romeo:
That had but newly entertained revenge.
And ere I could draw forth my rapyer
To part their fury, down did Tybalt fall,
And this way Romeo fled.

M^: He is a Mo^^tagew and speaks partial,
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife:
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I do entreat sweet Prince thoult justice give.
Romeo slew Tybal^, Romeo may not live.

Prin: And for that offense
Immediately we do ^xile him hence.
I have an interest in your hates proceeding,
My blood for your rude braules does lie a bleeding.
But I Will amerce you with so large a fine,
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses,
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase for abuses.
Pity shall dwell and govern with us still:
Mercy to all but murdrers, pardoning none that kill.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Juliet. Iul: Gallop apace you fiery footed steedes
To Phoebus mansion, such a Waggoner
As Phaeton, would quickly bring you thither,
And send in cloudie night immediately.
Enter Nurse wringing her hands, with the ladder of cords in her lap. But how
now Nurse: O Lord, why lookst thou sad?
What ha^t thou there, the cords?

Nur: I, I, the cords: alack we are undone,
We are undone, Lady we are undone.

Iul: What devil art thou that torments me thus?

Nurs: Alack the day, he is dead, he is dead, he is dead*

Iul: This torture should be roard in dismal hell.
Can heavens be so envious?

Nur: Romeo can if heavens cannot.
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes.
God save the sample, on his manly breast:
A bloody coarse, a piteous bloody coarse,
All pale as ashes, I swounded at the sight.

Iul: Ah Romeo, Romeo, what disaster hap
Has seuerd thee from thy true Juliet?
Ah why should Heaven so much conspire with Woe,
Or Fate envy our happ^e Marriage,
So soon to sunder us by timelesse Death?

Nur: O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had,
O honest Tybalt, courteous Gentleman.

Iul: What storm is this that blows so contrary,
Is Tybal^ dead, and Romeo murdered:
My dear loud cosen, and my dearest Lord.
Then let the ^rumpet sound a general doom,
These two being dead, then living is there none.

Nur: Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished,
Romeo that murdered him is banished.

Iul: Ah heavens, did Romeos hand shed Tybalts blood?

Nur: It did, it did, alack the day it did.

Iul: O serpents hate, hid with a flowring face:
O painted sep^lcher, including filth.
Was never book containing so foul matter,
So fair^y bound. Ah, what meant Romeo?

Nur: There is no truth, no faith, no honesty in men:
All false, all faithles, periurde, all forsworn.
Shame come to Romeo.

Iul: A blister on that tung, he was not borne to shame:
Upon his face Shame is ashamde to sit.
But wherefore v^llaine did thou kill my Cosen?
That villain Cosen would have killed my husband.
All this is comfort. But there yet remains
Worse than his death, which feign I would forget:
But ^h, it presses to my memory,
Romeo is banished. Ah that word Banished
Is worse than death. Romeo is banished,
Is Father, Mother, Tybalt, Juliet,
All ki^ld, all slain, all dead, all banished.
Where are my Father and my Mother Nurse?

Nur: Weeping and wayling over Tybalts coarse.
Will you go to them?

Iul: I, I, when theirs are spent,
Mine shall ^^e shed for Romeos banishment.

Nur: Lady, your Romeo will be here to night,
I Will to him, he is hid at Laurence Cell.

Iul: Do so, and bear this Ring to my true Knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.

Exeunt. Enter Friar. Fr: Romeo come forth, come forth thou fearful man,
Affliction is enamourd on thy parts,
And thou art wedded to Calamity.

Enter Romeo. Rom: Father what news, what is the Princes doom,
What Sorrow craves acquaintance at our hands,
Which yet we know not.

Fr: Too familiar
Is my young son with such four company:
I bring thee tidings of the Princes doom.

Rom: What les^e than doomes day is the Princes doom?

Fr: A gentler judgment vanished from his lips,
Not bodies death, but bodies banishment.

Rom: Ha, Banished? be merciful, say death:
For Exile has more terror in his looks,
Than death it self, do not say Banishment.

Fr: Hence from Verona art thou banished:
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

Rom: There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell it self.
Hence banished, is banished from the world:
And world exilde is death. Calling death banishment,
Thou cutst my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

Fr: Oh monstrous sin, O rude unthankfulness:
Thy fault our law calls death, but the mild Prince
(Taking thy part) has rushd aside the law,
And ^urnd that black word death to banishment:
This is mere mercy, and thou see it not.

Rom: It Is torture and not mercy, heaven is heero
Where Juliet lives: and eue^ie cat and dog,
And little mouse, every unworthy thing
^iue here in heaven, and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honorable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies, than Romeo: they may seize
On the white wonder of fair Iuliets skin,
And steal immortal kisses from her lip^;
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
^lies may do this, but I from this must fly.
Oh Father had thou no strong poison mixed,
No sharp ground knife, no present mean of death,
Though nere so mean, but banishment
To torture me withal: ah, banished.
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell:
Howl^ng attends it. How had thou the heart,
Being a Divine, a ghostly Confessor,
A sin abso^uer, and my friend professed,
To mangle me with that word, Banishment?

Fr: Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.

Rom: O, thou will talk again of Banishment.

Fr: I Will give thee armor to bear off this word,
Adversities sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee though thou be banished.

Rom: Yet Banished? hang up philosophy,
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a Town, reuerse a Princes doom,
It h^lpes not, it preu^iles not, talk no more.

Fr: O, now I see that madmen have no ears.

Rom: How should they, when that wise men have no eyes.

Fr: Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

Rom: Thou can not speak of what thou do not feel.
Were thou as young as I, Juliet thy Love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered.
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then might thou speak, then might thou tear thy hair.
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

Nurse knockes. Fr: Romeo arise, stand up thou will be taken,
I hear one knock, arise and get thee gone.

Nu: Hoe Friar.

Fr: Gods will what wilfulnes is this?

She knockes again. Nur: Hoe Friar open the door,

Fr: By and by I come. Who is there?

Nur: One from Lady Juliet.

Fr: Then come near.

Nur: Oh holy Friar, tell me oh holy Friar,
Where is my Ladies Lord? Where Is Romeo?

Fr: There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

Nur: Oh he is even in my Mistress case.
Just in her case. Oh woeful simpathy,
Pitteous predicament, even so lies she,
Weeping and blubbring, blubbring and weeping:
Stand up, stand up, stand and you be a man.
For Iuliets sake, for her sake rise and stand,
Why should you fall into so deep an O.

He rises. Romeo: Nurse.

Nur: Ah sir, ah sir. Well death's the end of all.

Rom: Spakest thou of Juliet, how is it with her?
Does she not think me an old murderer,
Now I have stainde the childhood of her joy,
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? and how does she? And what says
My concealed Lady to our canceld love?

Nur: Oh she says nothing, ^ut weeps and pules,
And now falls on her bed, now on the ground,
And Tybal^ cries, and then on Romeo calls.

Rom: As if that name shot from the deadly leuel of a gun
Did murder her, as that names cursed hand
Murderd her kinsman. Ah tell me holy Friar
In what vile part of this Anatomy
Does my name lie? Tell me that I may sack
The hate^ull mansion?

He offers to stab himself, and Nurse snatches the dagger away. Nur: Ah?

Fr: Hold, stay thy hand: art thou a man? thy form
Cries out thou art, but thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable furyes of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
Or ill beseeming beast in seeming both.
Thou have amazed me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temperd,
Have thou slain Tybalt? will thou slay thy self?
And slay thy Lady too, that lives in thee?
Rouse up thy spirits, thy Lady Juliet lives,
For whose sweet sake thou were but lately dead:
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou sluest Tybalt, there art thou happy too.
A pack of blessings lights upon thy back,
Happiness Courts thee in his best array:
But like a misbehaude and sullen wench
Thou fro w^st upon thy Fate that smilles on thee.
Take heed, take heed, for such dye miserable.
Go get thee to thy love as was decreed:
Ascend her Chamber Window, hence and comfort her,
But look thou stay not till the watch be set:
For then thou can not pass to Mantua.
Nurse provide all things in a readiness,
Comfort thy Mistress, haste the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.

Nur: Good Lord what a thing learning is*
I could have stayde here all this night
To hear good counsel. Well Sir,
I Will tell my Lady that you will come.

Rom: Do so and bid my sweet prepare to child,
Farewell good Nurse.

Nurse offers to go in and turns again. Nur: Here is a Ring Sir, that she
bad me give you,

Rom: How well my comfort is reuiud by this.

Exit Nurse. Fr: Soiorne in Mantua, I Will find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time:
Every good hap that does befall thee here.
Farewell.

Rom: But that a joy, past joy cries ou^ on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.

Enter old Cap^let and his Wife, with County Paris. Cap: Things have fallen
out Sir so unluckily,
That we have had no time to move my daughter.
Look ye Sir, she loved her kinsman dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were borne to dye,
Wife where is your daughter, is she in her chamber?
I think she means not to come down to night.

Par: These times of woe afford no time to woo,
Maddam fa^well, commend me to your daughter.

Paris offers to go in, and Capol^t calls him again. Cap: Sir Pa^is? I Will
make a desperate tender of my child.
I think she will be ruled in all respects by me:
But sof^ what day is this?

Par: Monday my Lord.

Cap: Oh then Wensday is too soon,
On Thursday let i^ be: you shall be married.
We Will make no great a do, a friend or two, or so:
For look ye Sir, Tybalt being slain so lately,
It will be thought we held him care leslye:
If we should revel much, therefore we will have
Some half a dozen friends and make no more ado.
But what say you to Thursday.

Par: My Lord I wish that Thursday were to morrow.

Cap: Wife go you to your daughter, ere you go to bed.
Acquaint her with the County Paris love,
Fare well my Lord till Thursday next.
Wife get you to your daughter. Light to my Chamber.
Before me it is so very very late,
That we may call it early by and by.

Exeunt. Enter Romeo and Juliet at the window. Iul: Will thou be gone? It is
not yet nere day*
It was the Nightingale and not the Lark
That pierst the fearful hollow of thine ear:
Nightly she sings on yon Pomegranate tree,
Believe me love, it was the Nightingale.

Rom: It was the Lark, the Herald of the Morn,
And not the Nightingale. See Love what envious strakes
Do lace the seuering clouds in yonder East.
Nights candles are burnt out, and iocond Day
Stands tiptoes on the mystie mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and dye.

Iul: Yon light is not day light, I know it I:
It is some Meteor that the Sun exhales,
To be this night to thee a Torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Then stay a while, thou shall not go soon.

Rom: Let me stay here, let me be taken, and dye:
If thou will have it so, I am content.
I Will say yon gray is not the Mornings Eye,
It is the pale reflex of Cynthias brow.
I Will say it is the Nightingale that beats
The vaultie heaven so high above our heads,
And not the Lark the Messenger of Morn.
Come death and welcome, Juliet wills it so.
What says my Love? lets talk, it is not yet day.

Iul: It is, it is, be gone, fly hence away.
It is the Lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh Discords and unpleasing Sharpes.
Some say, the Lark makes sweet Division:
This does not so: for this divides us.
Some say the Lark and loathed Toad change eyes,
I would that now they had changd voices too:
Since arm from arm her voice does us affray,
Hunting thee hence with Huntsvp to the day.
So now be gone, more light and light it grows.

Rom: More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.
Farewell my Love, one kiss and I Will descend.

He goes down. Iul: Art thou gone so, my Lord, my Love, my Friend?
I must hear from thee every day in the hour:
For in an hour there are many minutes,
Minutes are days, so will I number them:
Oh, by this count I shall be much in years,
Ere I see thee again.

Rom: Farewell, I will omit no opportunity
That may conueigh my greetings love to thee.

Iul: Oh, think thou we shall ever meet again.

Rom: No doubt, no doubt, and all this woe shall serve
For sweet discourses in the time to come.

Iul: Oh God, I have an ill divining soul.
Me thinks I see thee now thou art below
Like one dead in the bottom of a Tomb:
Either mine ey-sight fails, or thou lookst pale.

Rom: And trust me Love, in my eye so do you,
Dry sorrow drinks out blood: adieu, adieu.
Exit.
Enter Nurse haslely. Nur: Madame beware, take heed the day is broke,
Your Mother's coming to your Chamber, make all sure.

She goes down from the window. Enter Iuliets Mother, Nurse. Moth: Where are
you Daughter?

Nur: What Lady, Lamb, what Juliet?

Iul: How now, who calls?

Nur: It is your Mother.

Moth: Why how now Juliet?

Iul: Madam, I am not well.

Moth: What evermore weeping for your Cosens death:
I think thoult wash him from his grave with tears.

Iul: I cannot choose, having so great a loss.

Moth: I cannot blame thee.
But it greeues thee more that Villain lives.

Iul: What Villain Madame?

Moth: That Villain Romeo.

Iul: Villain and he are many miles a sunder.

Moth: Content thee Girl, if I could find a man
I soon would send to Maniua where he is,
That should bestow on him so sure a draught,
As he should soon bear Tybalt company.

Iul: Find you the means, and I Will find such a man:
For whilst he lives, my heart shall nere be light
Till I behold him, dead is my poor heart.
Thus for a Kinsman vexed?

Moth: Well let that pass. I come to bring thee joyful news?

Iul: And joy comes well in such a needful time.

Moth: Well then, thou have a careful Father Cirle,
And one who pitying thy needful state,
Has found thee out a happy day of joy.

Iul: What day is that I pray you?

Moth: Marry my Child,
The gallant, young and youthful Gentleman,
The County Paris at Saint Peter's Church,
Early next Thursday morning must provide,
To make you there a glad and joyful Bride.

Iul: Now by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
He shall not there make me a joyful Bride.
Are these the news you had to tell me of?
Marry here are news indeed. Madame I will not marry yet.
And when I do, it shall be rather Romeo whom I hate,
Than County Paris that I cannot love.

Enter old Capolet. Moth: Here comes your Father, you may tell him so.

Capo: Why how now, evermore showring?
In one little body thou resemblest a sea, a bark, a storm:
For this thy body which I term a bark,
Still floating in thy euerfalling tears,
And tossed with sighs arising from thy heart:
Will without succor shipwreck presently.
But hear you Wife, what have you sounded her, what says she to it?

Moth: I have, but she will none she thanks ye:
Would God that she were married to her grave.

Capo: What will she not, does she not thank us, does she not wexe proud?

Iul: Not proud ye have, but thankful that ye have:
Proud can I never be of that I hate,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

Capo: Proud and I thank you, and I thank you not,
And yet not proud. What Is here, chop logic.
Proud me no prouds, nor thank me no thanks,
But fettle your fine joints on Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag you on a hurdle thither.
Out you green sickness baggage, out you tallow face.

Iu: Good father hear me speak?

She kneeles down. Cap: I tell thee what, either resolve on thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church:
Or henceforth never look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, for my singers ytch.
Why wife, we thought that we were scarcely blessed
That God had sent us but this only child:
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a cross in having her.

Nur: Mary God in heaven bless her my Lord,
You are too blame to rate her so.

Cap. And why my Lady wisdom? hold your tung,
Good prudence smatter with your gossips, go.

Nur: Why my Lord I speak no treason.

Cap: Oh godde godden.
Utter your gravity over a gossips boule,
For here we need it not.

Mo: My Lord ye are too hot.

Cap: Gods blessed mother wife it mads me;
Day, night, early, late, at home, abroad,
Alone, in company, waking or sleeping,
Still my care has been to see her matched.
And having now found out a Gentleman,
Of Princely parentage, youthful, and nobly trainde.
Stuffed as they say with honorable parts.
Proportioned as ones heart could wish a man:
And then to have a wretched whyning fool,
A puling mammet in her fortunes tender,
To say I cannot love, I am too young, I pray you pardon me?
But if you cannot wedde I Will pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to it, think ont, I do not use to jest.
I tell ye what, Thursday is near,
Lay hand on heart, advise, bethink your self,
If you be mine, I Will give you to my friend:
If not, hang, drown, starve, beg,
Dye i^ the streets: for by my Soul
I Will never more acknowledge thee,
Nor what I have shall ever do thee good,
Think ont, look toot, I do not use to jest.
Exit.
Iul: Is there no pity hanging in the clouds,
That looks into the bottom of my woes?
I do beseech you Madame, cast me not away,
Defer this marriage for a day or two,
Or if you cannot, make my marriage bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

Moth: Nay be assured I will not speak a word.
Do what thou will for I have done with thee.
Exit.
Iul: Ah Nurse what comfort? what counsel can thou give me.

Nur: Now trust me Madame, I know not what to say:
Your Romeo he is banished, and all the world to nothing
He never dares return to challendge you.
Now I think good you marry with this County,
Oh he is a gallant Gentleman, Romeo is but a dishclout
In respect of him. I promise you
I think you happy in this second match.
As for your husband he is dead:
Or twere as good he were, for you have no use of him.

Iul: Speakst thou this from thy heart?

Nur: I and from my soul, or else beshrew them Both.

Iul: Amen.

Nur: What say you Madame?

Iul: Well, thou have comforted me wondrous much,
I pray thee go thy ways unto my mother
Tell her I am gone having displeasde my Father.
To Friar Laurance Cell to confess me,
And to be absolu'd*

Nur: I will, and this is wisely done.

She looks after Nurse. Iul: Ancient damnation, O most cursed fiend.
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise him with the self same tongue
That thou have praisde him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go Counselor,
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I Will to the Friar to know his remedy,
If all fail else, I have the power to dye.
Exit.
Enter Friar and Paris. Fr: On Thursday say ye: the time is very short,

Par: My Father Capolet will have it so,
And I am nothing slack to slow his have.

Fr: You say you do not know the Ladies mind?
Uneven is the course, I like it not.

Par: Immoderately she weeps for Tybalts death,
And therefore have I little talked of love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears,
Now Sir, her father thinks it dangerous:
That she does give her sorrow so much sway.
And in his wisdom hasts our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears*
Which too much minded by her self alone
May be put from her by society.
Now do ye know the reason of this have.

Fr: I would I knew not why it should be slowd.
Enter Paris. Here comes the Lady to my cell,

Par: Welcome my love, my Lady and my wife:

In: That may be sir, when I may be a wife,

Par: That may be, must be love, on thursday next.

Iu: What must be shall be.

Fr: That's a certain text.

Par: What come ye to confession to this Friar.

Iu: To tell you that were to confess to you.

Par: Do not deny to him that you love me.

Iul: I will confess to you that I love him,

Par: So I am sure you will that you love me.

Iu: And if I do, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

Par: Poor soul thy face is much abused with tears.

Iu: The tears have got small victory by that,
For it was bad enough before their spite.

Par: Thou wrongst it more than tears by that report.

Iu: That is no wrong sir, that is a truth:
And what I spoke I spoke it to my face.

Par: Thy face is mine and thou have slaundred it.

Iu: It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure holy Father now:
Or shall I come to you at evening Mass?

Fr: My leisure serue^ me pensive daughter now.
My Lord we must entreat the time alone.

Par: God shield I should disturb devotion,
Juliet farewell, and keep this holy kiss.
Exit Paris*
Iu: Go shut the door and when thou have done so,
Come weep with me that am past cure, past help,

Fr: Ah Juliet I already know thy grief,
I hear thou must and nothing may proroge it,
On Thursday next be married to the County.

Iul: Tell me not Friar that thou hearst of it,
Unless thou tell-me how we may prevent it.
Give me some sudden counsel: else behold
Twixt my extremes and me, this bloody Knife
Shall play the Vmpeere, arbitrating that
Which the Commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honor bring.
Speak not, be brief: sor I desire to die,
If what thou speakst, speak not of remedy.

Fr: Stay Juliet, I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution,
As that is desperate we would prevent.
If rather than to marry County Paris
Thou have the strength or will to slay thy self,
It Is not unlike that thou will undertake
A thing like death to chyde away this shame,
That coapst with death it self to fly from blame.
And if thou do, I Will give thee remedy.

Iul: Oh bid me leap (rather than marry Paris)
From off the battlements of yonder tower:
Or chain me to some steepie mountains top,
Where roaring Bears and savage Lions are:
Or shut me nightly in a Charnell-house,
With reekie shankes, and yeolow chaples sculls:
Or lay me in tomb with one new dead:
Things that to hear them namde have made me tremble;
And I will do it without fea^e or doubt,
To keep my self a faithful unstained Wife
To my dear Lord, my dearest Romeo.

Fr: Hold Juliet, hie thee home, get thee to bed,
Let not thy Nurse lie with thee in thy Chamber:
And when thou art alone, take thou this Violl,
And this distilled Liquor drink thou off:
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A dull and heavy slumber, which shall seize
Each vital spirit: for no Pulse shall keep
His natural progress, but surcease to beat:
No sign of breath shall testify thou li^st.
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death,
Thou shall remain full two and forty hours.
And when thou art laid in thy Kindreds Vault,
He send in have to Mantua to thy Lord,
And he shall come and take thee from thy grave.

Iul: Friar I go, be sure thou send for my dear Romeo.

Exeunt. Enter old Capoler, his Wife, Nurse, and Seruingman. Capo: Where are
you sir?

S^r: Here forsooth.

Capo: Go, provide me twenty cunning Cooks.

Ser: I warrant you Sir, let me alone for that, I Will know them by li^king their
fingers.


Capo: How can thou know them so?

Ser: Ah Sir, it is an ill Cook cannot lick his own fingers.

Capo: Well get you gone.
Exit Seruingman, But where is this Headstrong?

Moth: She Is gone (my Lord) to Friar Laurence Cell
To be confessed.

Capo: Ah, he may hap to do some good of her,
A head^^rong selfewild harlotrie it is.

Enter Juliet. Moth: See here she comes from Confession,

Capo: How now my Headstrong, where have you bin gadding?

Iul: Where I have learned to repent the sin
Of froward wilful opposition
Against you and your behests, and am enioynd
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
And crave remission of so ^oule a fact.

She kneeles down. Moth: Why that's well said.

Capo: Now before God this holy reverent Friar
All our whole City is much bound unto.
Go tell the County presently of this,
For I will have this knot knit up to morrow.

Iul: Nurse, will you go with me to my Closet,
To sort such things as shall be requisite
Against to morrow.

Moth: I pree thee do, good Nurse go in with h^^
Help her to fort Tyres, Rebatoes, Chains,
And I will come unto you presently,

Nur: Come sweet heart, shall we go*

Iul: I pree thee let us.

Exeunt Nurse and Juliet, Moth: Me thinks on Thursday would be time enough.

Capo: I say I will have this dispatched to morrow,
Go one and certefie the Count thereof.

Moth: I pray my Lord, let it be Thursday.

Capo: I say to morrow while she is in the mood.

Moth: We shall be short in our provision.

Capo: Let me alone for that, go get you in,
Now before God my heart is passing light,
To see her thus conformed to our will.

Exeunt. Enter Nurse, Juliet. Nur: Come, come, what need you any thing else?

Iul: Nothing good Nurse, but leave me to my self:
^or I do mean to lie alone to night.

Nur: Well there is a clean smock under your pillow, and so good night.

Exit.
Enter Mother. Moth: What are you busy, do you need my help?

Iul: No Madame, I desire to lie alone,
For I have many things to think upon.

Moth: Well then good night, be stirring Juliet,
The County will be early here to morrow.
Exit.
Iul: Farewell, God knows when we shall meet again.
Ah, I do take a fearful thing in hand.
What if this Potion should not work at all,
Must I of force be married to the County?
This shall forbid it. Knife, lie thou there.
What if the Friar should give me this drink
To poison me, for fear I should disclose
Our former marriage? Ah, I wrong him much,
He is a holy and religious Man:
I will not entertain so bad a thought,
What if I should be sti^led in the Toomb?
Awake an hour before the appointed time:
Ah then I fear I shall be lunaticke,
And playing with my dead forefathers bones,
Dash out my frantic brains. Me thinks I see
My Cousin Tybalt weltring in his blood,
Seeking for Romeo: stay Tybalt* stay.
Romeo I come, this do I drink to thee.

She falls upon her bed within the Curtains. Enter Nurse with herbs, Mother.
Moth: That's well said Nurse, set all in redines,
The County will be here immediately.

Enter Oldeman* Cap: Make have, make have, for it is almost day,
The Curfe we bell has rung, it is four a clock,
Look to your bakt me^tes good Angelica.

Nur: Go get you to bed you co^queane. I says you will be sick anon.


Cap: I warrant thee Nurse I have ere now wat^ht all night, and have taken no
harm at all.


Moth: I you have been a mouse hunt in your time.

Enter Seruingman with Logs and Coals. Cap: A Ielous hood, a Ielous hood: How
now sir?
What have you th^re?

Ser: Forsooth Log^.

Cap: Go, go choose dryer* Will will tell thee where thou shall* fetch them.


Ser: Nay I warrant let me alone, I have a head I ^o^ to choose a Log.

Exit.
Cap: Well go thy way, thou shall be logger head.
Come, come, make h^st call up your daughter,
The County will be here with music straight.
Gods me he is come, Nurse call up my daughter.

Nu^: Go, get you gone. What lamb, what Lady bird? fast I warrant. What
Juliet? well* let the County take you in your bed* ye sleep for a week now,
but the next night, the County Paris has set up his rest that you shall rest
but little. What lamb I say, fast still: what Lady, Love, whatbride, what
Juliet? Gods me how sound she sleeps? Nay then I see I must wake you indeed.
What Is here, laid on your bed, dre^t in your clothes and down, ah me, alack
the day, some Aqua vitae hoe.


Enter Mother. Moth: How now what is the matter?

Nur: Alack the day, she is dead, she is dead, she is dead.

Moth: Accursed, unhappy, miserable time.

Enter Oldeman. Cap: Come, come, make have, where is my daughter?

Moth: Ah she is dead, she is dead.

Cap: Stay, let me see, all pale and ^an.
Accursed time, unfortunate old man.

Enter Friar and Paris. Par: What is the bride ready to go to Church?

Cap: Ready to go, but never to return.
O Son the night before thy wedding day,
Has Death lain with thy bride, flower as she is,
Deflowerd by him, see, where she lies,
Death is my Soon in Law, to him I give all that I have,

Par: Have I thought long to see this mornings face,
And does it now present such prodegies?
Accursed, unhappy, miserable man,
Forlorn, forsaken, destitute I am:
Borne to the world to be a slave in it.
Distressed, remediles, and unfortunate.
O heavens, O nature, wherefore did you make me,
To live so vile, so wretched as I shall.

Cap: O here she lies that was our hope, our joy,
And being dead, dead sorrow nips us all.

A^lat o^ce cry out and wring their hand* All cry: And all our joy, and all our
hope is dead,
Dead, lost, undone, absented, wholly sled.

Cap: Cruel, unjust, impartial destinies,
Why to this day have you preserved my life?
To see my hope, my stay, my joy, my life,
Depriude of sense, of life, of all by death,
Cruel, unjust, impartial destinies.

Cap: O sad faced sorrow map of misery,
Why this sad time have I desird to see.
This day, this unjust, this impartial day
Wherein I hoped to see my comfort full,
To be depriude by sudden destiny.

Moth: O woe, alack, distressed, why should I live?
To see this day, this miserable day.
Alack the time that ever I was borne.
To be partaker of this destiny.
Alack the day, alack and welladay.

Fr: O peace for shame, if not for charity.
Your daughter ^^ues in peace and happiness,
And it is vain to wish it otherwise.
Come stick your Rosemary in this dead co^rse,
And as the custom of our Country is,
In all her best and sumptuous ornaments,
Convey her where her Ancestors lie tomb'd,

Cap: Let it be so, come wof^ll forrow mates,
Let us together taste this bitter ^a^e.

They all but the N^rse go^ forth, casting Rosemary on her and shutting the
Curtens. Enter Musitions. Nur: Put up, put up, this is a woeful case.
Exit.
1. I by my troth Mistress is it, it had need be mended.

Enter Serui^gman. Ser: Alack alack what shall I do, come Fiddlers play me some
merry dumpe.


1. A sir, this is no time to play.

Ser: You will not then?

1. No marry will we.

Ser: Then will I give it you, and ^oundly to.

1. What will you give us?

Ser: The fiddler, I Will re you, I Will fa you, I Will sol you.

1. If you re us and fa us, we will note you.

Ser: I will put up my Iron dagger, and beat you with my wodden wit. Come on
Simon found Pot, I Will pose you,


1. Lets hear.

Ser: When griping grief the heart does wound,
And doleful dumps the mind oppress:
Then m^sique with her silver sound,
Why silver sound? Why silver sound?

1. I think because music has a sweet sound.

Ser: Pretty, what say you Matthew minikine?

2. I think because Musitions sound for silver.

Ser: Pretty too: come, what say you?

3. I say nothing.

Ser: I think so, I Will speak for you because you are the Singer. I say Silver
sound, because such Fellows as you have sildome Gold for sounding. Farewell
Fiddlers, f^rewell.

Exit.
1. Farewell and be hanged: come lets go.

Exeunt. Enter Romeo. Rom: If I may trust the flattering Eye of Sleep,
My Dream presagde some good event to come.
My bosom Lord sits cheerful in his throne,
And I am comforted with^pleasing dreams.
Me thought I was this night already dead:
(Strange dreams that give a dead man lean to think)
And that my Lady Juliet came to me,
And breathd such life with kisses in my lips,
That I reuiude and was an Emperor.
Enter Balthazar his man booted. News from Verona. How now Balthazar,
How does my Lady? Is my Father well?
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again:
If she be well, then nothing can be ill.

Balt: Then nothing can be ill, for she is well,
Her body sleeps in Capels Monument,
And her immortal parts with Angels dwell.
Pardon me Sir* that am the Messenger of such bad ^iding^.

Rom: Is it even so? then I de^e my Stars.
Go get me incke and paper, hyre post horse,
I will not st^y in Mantua to night.

Balt: Pardon me Sir* I will not leave you thus,
Your looks are dangerous and full of fear:
I dare not, nor I will not leave you yet.

Rom: Do as I bid thee, get me incke and paper,
And hyre those horse: stay not I say.
Exit Balthazar. Well Juliet, I will lie with thee to night.
Lets see for means. As I do remember
Here dwells a Pothecarie whom often I noted
As I past by, whose needy shop is stufft
With beggarly accounts of empty boxes:
And in the same an Aligarta hangs,
Old ends of packthred, and cakes of Roses,
Are thinly strewed to make up a show.
Him as I noted, thus with my self I thought:
And if a man should need a poison now,
(Whose present sale is death in Mantua)
Here he might buy it. This thought of mine
Did but forerunne my need: and here about he dw^ls.
Being Holiday the Beggars shop is shut.
What ho Apothecarie, come forth I say.

Enter Apothecarie. Apo: Who calls, what would you sir?

Rom: Heeres twenty duckates,
Give me a dram of some such speeding geere,
As will dispatch the weary takers life,
As suddenly as powder being fierd
From forth a Cannons mouth.

A^o: Such drugs I have I must of force confess,
But yet the law is death to those that sell them.

Rom: Art thou so bare and full of poverty*
And do thou fear to violate the Law?
The Law is not thy friend, nor the Laws friend,
And therefore make no conscience of the law:
Upon thy back hangs ragged Mis^rie,
And sta^ued Famine dwells in thy cheeks.

Apo: My poverty but not my will consents,

Rom: I pay thy poverty, but not thy will.

Apo: Hold take you this, and put it in any liquid thing you will, and it will
serve had you the lives of twenty men.


Rom: Hold, take this gold, worse poison to men's souls
Than this which thou have given me. Go hye thee hence,
Go buy the clothes, and get thee* into flesh.
Come cordial and not poison, go with me
To Iuliets Grave: for there must I use thee.

Exeunt. Enter Friar John. John: What Friar Laurence, Brother, ho?

Laur: This same should be the voice of Friar John.
What news from Mantua, what will Romeo come?

John: Going to seek a barefoote Brother out,
One of our order to associate me,
Here in this City visiting the sick,
Whereas the infectious pestilence remaind:
And being by the Searchers of the Town
Found and examinde, we were both shut up.

Laur: Who bare my letters then to Romeo?

John: I have them still, and here they are.

Laur: Now by my holy Order,
The letters were not nice, but of great weight.
Go get thee hence, and get me presently.
A spade and mattocke.

John: Well I will presently go fetch thee them.
Exit.
Laur: Now must I to the Monument alone,
Least that the Lady should before I come
Be wakde from sleep. I will hye
To free her from that Tomb of misery.
Exit.
Enter County Paris and his Page with flowers and sweet water. Par: Put out
the torch, and lie thee all along
Under this Ew-tree, keeping thine ear close to the hollow ground.
And if thou hear one tread within this Churchyard,
Staight give me notice.

Boy: I will my Lord.

Paris strewes the Tomb with flowers. Par: Sweet Flower, with flowers I strew
thy Bridale bed:
Sweet Tomb that in thy circuit do contain,
The perfect model of eternity:
^aire Juliet that with Angels do remain,
Accept this latest favor at my hands,
That living honored thee, and being dead
With funeral praises do adorn thy Tomb.
Boy whistles and ^^lls. My Lord.

Enter Romeo and Bal^hasar, with a torch, a a mattocke, and a crow of iron.
Par: The boy gives warning, something does approach.
What cursed foot wanders this was to night,
To stay my obsequies and true loves rites?
What with a torch, muffle me night a while.

Rom: Give me this mattooke, and this wr^^tching Iron.
And take these letters* early in the morning,
See thou deliver them to my Lord and Father.
So get thee gone and trouble me ^o more.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my ^adies face.
But chiefly to take from her dead finger,
A precious ring which I must use
In dear employment but if thou will stay,
Further to pry in what I undertake,
By heaven I Will tear thee joint by joint,
And strewe this hungry churchyard with thy lims.
The time and my in^ens are savage, ^ilde.

Balt: Well, I Will be gone and not trouble you.

Rom: So shall thou win my savor, take thou this,
Commend me to my Father, farewell good fellow.

Balt: Yet for (...) this will I not part (...) ^hence.

Romeo opens the tomb. Rom: Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorde with the dearest morsel of the earth.
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open.

Par: This is that banished haughty Mount^^^^^,
That murderd my loves cosen, I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallowed toil vile Mountagu^.
Can vengeance be pursued ^urther then death?
I do^ attach thee as a fellon here.
The Law condemns thee, therefore thou (...) dy^,

Rom: I must indeed, and therefore came I ^^ther,
Good youth beg^^^, ^ompt not a desperate man.
Heap not another sin upon my head
By sheding of thy blood, I do protest
I love thee better then I love my self:
For I come hither armde against my self,

Par: I do de^ie thy coniurations:
And do attach thee as a fellon here.

Rom: What do thou tempt me, then have at thee boy.

They fight. Boy: O Lord they fight, I will go call the watch.

Par: Ah I am slain, if thou be merciful
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

Rom: In Faith I will, let me peruse this face,
Mercu^ios kinsman, noble County Paris?
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not regard him as we past a long.
Did he not say Paris should have married
Juliet? either he said so, or I dreamd it so.
But I will satisfy thy last request,
For thou have prizd thy love above thy life.
Death lie thou there, by a dead man interd,
How often have many at the hour of death
B^ene blithe and pleasant? which their keepers call
A lightning before death But how may I
Call this a lightning. Ah dear Juliet,
How well thy beauty does become this grave?
O I believe that vnsubstanciall death,
Is amorous, and does court my love.
Therefore will I, O here, O ever here,
Set up my everlasting rest
With worms, that are thy chamber mayds.
Come desperate Pilot now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-^icke weary barge.
Heers to my love. O true Apothecary:
Thy drugs are swift: thus with a kiss I dye.
(...). Enter Friar with a Lantern. How often to night have these my aged feet
Stumbled at graves as I did pass along.
Whose there?

Man. A friend and one that knows you well.

Fr: Who is it that consorts so late the dead,
What light is yon? if I be not deceived,
Me thinks it burns in Capels monument?

Man It does so holy Sir, and there is one
That loves you dearly.

Fr. Who is it?

Man: Romeo.

Fr: How long has he been there?

Man: Full half an hour and more.

Fr: Go with me thither.

Man: I dare not sir, he knows not I am here:
On pain of death he chargde me to be gone,
And not for to disturb him in his enterprise.

Fr: Then must I go: my mind presageth ill.
Friar stoops and looks on the blood and weapons. What blood is this that
stains the entrance
Of this marble stony monument?
What means these maisterles and goo^y weapons*
Ah me I doubt, whose here? what Romeo dead?
Who and Paris too? what unlucky hour
Is accessory to so foul a sin?
Juliet rises. The Lady sturres.
Ah comfor^able Friar.
(...) I should be*
And what we (...) of: but yet I cannot see
Him for whose sake I undertook this haza^d*

Fr: Lady come forth I hear some noise at hand,
We shall be taken, Paris* ^e is slain,
And Romeo dead: and if we here be taken
We shall be thought to be a^ accessarie.
I will provide for you in some close Nunery.

Iul: Ah leave me, leave me, I will not from hence.

Fr: I hear so^e noise, I d^e no* stay, come, come*

Iu: Go get thee gone.
What Is h^ere a cup clo^de in my lou^rs hands?
Ah chu^^e drink all, and leave no drop for me.

Enter watch. Watch: This way, this way.

Iul: I, noise? then must I be resolute.
O happy dagger thou shall end my f^are,
Rest in my bosom, thus I come to thee.

She stabs herself and falls. Enter watch. Cap: Come loo^e about, what
weapons have we here*
See friends where Juliet two days buried*
New bleeding wounded, search and see who is near.
Attach and bring them ^o us presently.

E^ter one with the Friar. 1. Captain heers a Friar with tools about him,
Fit to open a tomb.

Cap: A great suspicion, keep him safe*

En^^^ one with Rome^s Man. 1. Heeres Romeos Man.

Capt: Keep him to be examinde.

Enter Prince with others. Prin: What early mischief calls v^ up so soon.

Capt: O noble Prince, see here
Where Juliet that has lain intoombd two daye^,
Warm and fresh ble^ding, Romeo and County Paris
Likewise newly slain.

Prin: Search seek about to find^ the murderers.

Ent^r old Capolet and his Wife. Capo: What rumor's this that is so early up?

Moth: The people in the streets cry Romeo,
And some on Iuli^t: as if they alone
Had been the cause of such a mutini^.

Capo: See Wife, this dagger has mistook:
For (lo) the back is empty of young Mountague,
And it is sheathed in our Daughters breast.

Enter old Montague. Prin: Come Mountague, for thou art early up,
To see thy Son and Heir^ more early down.

Mount: Dread Sovereign, my Wife is dead to night,
And young Ben^^lto is deceased too:
What further mischief can there yet be found?

Prin: First come and see, then speak.

Mount: O ^hou untaught, what manners is in this
To press before thy Father to a grave.

Prin: Come seal your mouths of outrage for a while,
And let us seek to find the Authors out
Of such a heinous and seld seen mischaunce.
Bring for^h the parties in suspicion.

Fr: I am the greatest able to do least.
Most worthy Prince, hear me but speak the truth.
And I Will inform you how these things fell out.
Iu^iet here slain was married to that Romeo,
Without her Fathers or her Mothers grant:
The Nurse was privy to the marriage.
The balefull day of this unhappy marriage,
Was Tybalts doomesday: for which Romeo
Was banished from hence to Mantua.
He gone, her Father sought by foul constrain^
To marry her to Paris: But her Soul
(Lo^thing a second Contract) did refuse
To give consent; and therefore did she urge me
(...) to find a means she might avoid
^Vhat so her Father sought to force her too
Or else all desperately she threatened
Even in my presence to dispatch her self.
Then did I give her, (tutord by mine art)
A potion that should make her seem as dead:
And told her that I would with all post speed
Send hence to Mantua for her Romeo,
That he might come and take her from the Toombe,
But he that had my Letters (Friar John)
Se^king a Brother to associate him,
Whereas the sick infection remaind,
Was stayed by the Searchers of the Town*
But Romeo understanding by his man,
That Juliet was deceasde, returnde in post
Unto Verona for to see his love.
What after happened touching Paris death,
Or Romeos is to me unknown at all.
But when I came to take the Lady hence,
I found them dead, and she awakt from sleep:
Whom feign I would have taken from the tomb,
Which she refused seeing Romeo dead.
Anon I heard the watch and then I fled,
What afterhappened I am ignorant of.
And if in this ought have miscarried.
By me, or by my means let my old life
Be sacrified some hour before his time.
To the most strickest rigor of the Law.

Pry: We still have known thee for a holy man,
VVheres Romeos man, what can he say in this?

Bal^h: I brought my master word that she was dead,
And then he poasted straight from mantua,
Unto this Toombe. These Letters he deliue^ed me,
Charging me early give them to his Father.

Prin: Lets see the Letters, I will read them over.
Where is the Counties Boy that called the VVatch?

Boy: I brought my Master unto Iuliets grave,
But one approaching, straight I called my Master.
At last they fought, I ran to call the VVatch.
And this is all that I can say or know.

Prin: These letters do make good the Friars words,
Come Capolet, and come old Mountagewe.
Where are these enemies? see what hate has done*

Cap: Come brother Mountague give me thy hand,
There is my daughters dowry: for now no more
Can I bestow on her, that's all I have.

Moun: But I will give them more, I will erect
Her statue of pure gold:
That while Verona by that name is known.
There shall no statue of such price be set,
As that of Romeos loved Juliet.

Cap: As rich shall Romeo by his Lady lie,
Poor Sacrifices to our Enmity.

Prin: A gloomie peace this day does with it bring.
Come, let us hence,
To have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardoned and some punished:
For nere was heard a Story of more woe,
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

FINIS.

