THE BLESSEDNESS OF MARIE the Mother of JESUS.

LVKE 1.28.45.48. Blessed art thou among women.
Blessed is she that believed.
All generations shall call me blessed.
printer's device of Richard Field ANCHORA SPEI


LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD dwelling in Great Woodstreete. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND WORTHY LADY, Lady DOROTHY ZOVCH, the virtuous
wife of Sir EDWARD ZOVCH Knight, at Oking: JOHN SHAW desires increase of all
true comfort here, and hereafter everlasting blessedness.
THe Scripture of truth, wherein the mysteries of Religion are treasured up,
has three (amongst others) not a little more eminent, most worthy of our
daily and holiest meditations. They are by some called, Bernardus in Vigilia
Natalis.
The wonders of wonders, and are in themselves most admirable, and surpassing
comfortable for use, manifested by the Highest, Ioh. Heid feldius.
for the sure blessedness of all Gods children, without which, all men had
perished eternally. Not to speak of the blessed Trinity, the greatest of all
mysteries; the three here meant, are three Unions, or Couplings in one, of
things in themselves most different.

The first is, the Union of the Godhead to Manhood, in the person of Jesus
Christ, whereby he is God and man, Immanuel, God with us.

The second is, the Coupling of Motherhood and Virginity in one woman, the
blessed Marie, whereby her Son is called The Son of man.

The third is, the begetting of Sauing-faith, in the soul of sinful man,
whereby a son of Adam, becomes a child of God, an heir of salvation.

The first, and third of these mysteries, are jointly declared by Paul, in
these words: Great is the mystery of godliness; 1. Tim. 3.16.
God was manifested in the flesh. -- Believed on in the world.

The second was foretold by the Prophet Isaiah: Isa. 7.14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son.

These are comfortable secrets, which none fruitfully know but the Lords
heritage, that are taught by his Spirit. These manifest how God is near unto
us, and dwells with us, and in us, as in his holy Tabernacle. These are the
appointed means of our salvation and blessedness. These mysteries so high, and
holy, must be sought into by humble and earnest prayer, with much reverence of
heart, by reading, hearing, and intentive meditation; we must believe them, and
rejoice greatly in the sound and lasting consolation they bring unto us.

When man by his sin was woefully fallen from God, and the blessedness
wherein he was set, and by his Apostasy, had cast himself and his posterity
into the state of damnation: then, even then did God manifest his unspeakable
love in restoring him again into the favor of his Creator, and to the hope of
a greater bliss then that which he had lost. It was agreeable to the Lords
holiness, for manifesting his mercy and justice, that as man made the fault,
so man should make the amends. But man alone could not do it, (the Creator
only could repair the creature.) God therefore becomes man, that so he might
thoroughly do it. And he was manifested in the flesh, (not for a small time, as
he appeared to the Patriarchs,) but the second Person in Trinity, John. 1.14.
The WORD, even the only begotten of the Father, was made flesh, and dwelt
among us, full of grace and truth. That man might be made partaker of the
divine nature, and enjoy eternal peace with God: The Captain of our salvation
took not on him the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.
but he to took on him the seed of Abraham; in all things it behooved him to be
made like his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
in things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the sins of the
people. This is the first, high, glorious, and comfortable mystery.

The second craves of us like holy admiration and firm faith. Will God dwell
in a Tabernacle? in a Temple? or as Solomon says: 1. King. 8.27.
Will God indeed dwell on the earth? will he that made the heavens, take flesh
of the womb of a Virgin? have her indeed to be his mother, and yet she
continue a pure and undefiled maid? Yes assuredly, and it is a wonder without
all example, and a miraculous work of him, Psalm. 146.4.
that alone works wonders. Motherhood and virginity meet in Marie, the most
blessed of women, and in her alone. And has correspondencie, to that admirable
Creation in the beginning, where Eve, the mother of all living, was
miraculously made out of the side of man alone: so of the womb of a woman
alone, was borne the holy Messiah, even Jesus Christ our Lord, for the
fulfilling of the Covenant of grace, which God made with man. The woman's seed
shall bruise the serpents head. Genesis 3.15.
This is the second secret, and high mystery of Christian Religion.

The third wonder is, that faith and man's soul so meet, that man who is a
sinful son of Adam; by faith becomes a child of God, according as it is
written: Gal. 3.26.
-- Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

Here we may take up David's words, and say: Psalm. 144.3.
Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him, or the son of man,
that thou make account of him? The difficulty of sound believing in the
Messiah the Savior of his elect, and the wonderful mercy of God in that rare
grace, will better appear, if we call to mind, how that even in Paradise, man
believed not God, (when he said, Genesis 2.17.
Thou shall die the death:) and did believe the devil, Genesis 3.4.
(Ye shall not surely die.) Now that man is fallen from integrity, and captiued
in Original and Actual sin, to believe a promise of eternal life, that God
will make him an heir of heaven, for Jesus sake, is above all humane learning,
sense and reason. And this hope and confidence is only in that little flock,
where Gods Spirit does powerfully work it. How few believe, Isaiah
complains: Isa. 53.1.
-- Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
How great a work of God, faith is, Paul witnesses: -- Who believe according to
the working of his mighty power, Ephesians. 1.19
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. Certainly as
there was a darkness in all Egypt, that might be felt: Exodus 10.22.
but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings: Even so all the
chosen Israel of God now, have Christ the light of the world dwelling in their
hearts by faith. But the whole world of Hypocrites and unbelievers, love
darkness and abide in it for evermore.

Hereupon it follows, that Jews, Turks, Pagans, Unbelievers, and
Hypocrites, who have no communion by faith with the Son of God manifested in
the flesh, abide under the curse and wrath of the Almighty. But the chosen
little flock, to whom the mysteries of Christ's kingdom are known, who soundly,
and with all their heart, believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God, conceived by
the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary; that he the promised Messiah, is
their king, priest, and prophet, and by his obedience unto death, has wrought
their full Redemption, and made their reconciliation with God: these through
faith in his blood, have Christ's righteousness imputed to them for the
attaining of salvation; these have a joy glorious and unspeakable; these cleave
to God in true holiness; and in the end, for this their Mediators sake, receive
a crown of righteousness, and the blessedness promised that lasts evermore.

This little Treatise will so far lay open, and unfold these three profound
mysteries, as may give occasion to the well-minded readers, to make further
search into so high, holy, and necessary doctrines, as are primary pillars of
true Religion.

And now, worthy Madame, in that I commend unto you, my poor endeavors
contained in this little book, it is out of a good desire, to further you in
the best things, to procure you some little help, to get greater increase of
the chief blessings; to cast in my myte by writing also, to add that way
somewhat to your spiritual treasure, of knowledge, holiness, and comfort, as
one desirous to be thankful to God for his manifold mercis to you, in that
since your coming among us, you make it daily evident, that you have a hearty
love to true Religion; and take much comfort in the Ministry, and public
worship of God established: as also that by your good example, and blameless
conversation, you grace your holy profession, going before many, in many
Christian duties. Assure your self, your careful laboring to grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, will give you an heaven upon
earth, and shall be your crown in the day of the Lord: when all those that
suffer their hearts to be stolen away from God and godliness, by excessive
cares or pleasures of this world, shall have their sorrows come upon them like
armed men, and their end shall be fully miserable. Mind you it well, I pray
you; Eccl. 8.12.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet
surely I know, that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear
before him. But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days, which are as a shadow, because he fears not before God. Earnestly,
and constantly seek after those lasting joys, where is mirth without all
mourning, life without vexation; eternal happiness, by a blessed communion
with the eternal God, who will be all in all to them that love him.

Pass over no day, wherein you call not to mind, the many, sweet, free
blessings of the almighty, bestowed upon you; but by them provoke your self to
offer to him, the heartiest sacrifice of thanksgiving that you can attain to,
accompanied with humble, faithful, fervent prayers, for increase of his best
blessings to you and yours; that your happiness begun here, may be continued
everlastingly. Act. 20.32.
And now I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance, among all them which are
sanctified. 1. These. 5.23.
And the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God, your whole
spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life.
Revelation 2.10.
THE BLESSEDNESS OF THE VIRGIN MARIE, the Mother of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
LVKE 1.28.45. Blessed art thou among women.
Blessed is she that believed.
THE holy Evangelist Saint Luke, Luke 1.28
writing the miraculous Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, his
wonderful Conception and Birth: describes the messenger that manifested these
glad tidings, to be the Angel Gabriel; the woman that should be mother to
Jesus, by name Marie, by condition a Virgin, affianced to Joseph, of the house
of David; the place of their dwelling Nazareth, a town of Galile in the land
of Iudaea; the time, in the days of Augustus Caesar: the child to be conceived
and borne of her, by name Jesus; by office and dignity, a King over the house
of Jacob for ever; by nature the Son of the eternal God; by special favor,
and in regard of his humane nature, the son of the Virgin Marie, conceived in
her womb, the holy Ghost coming upon her, and the power of the Highest
ouershadowing her, and she thrice by holy Oracle, assured, that she is
exceedingly blessed.

The Virgin Marie, lineally descending from the royal Kings of Israel, found
grace and favor with God, was freely beloved of him, precious and honorable in
his sight; had great honor put upon her, was exceedingly blessed by Gods
special love to her, even blessed above all women.

Mary's blessedness is twofold.
The first is singular and proper to her self, a prerogative granted to her
alone, and never to any other creature: even to be the Mother of Jesus Christ
the Savior of all the Elect, the mother of Emmanuel, God-with-vs, even God
manifested in the flesh. Thus says Gabriel from heaven, Blessed art thou among
women, Luke 1.28
thus says holy Elizabeth on earth: Blessed art thou among women, 42.
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

The second is, that having obtained like precious faith with the Saints in the
common salvation, she with them, abiding in the truth of Religion, did believe,
and wait for the promised Messiah, and her own salvation by him; as in her
holy prophecy she acknowledges: Luke 1.47.
My soul rejoices in God my Savior. She had also a peculiar proper holy
faith, in a peculiar promise which was made to her alone, Genesis 3.15.12.3.
which was, That the blessed seed, in whom all the families of the earth
should be blessed, should be her seed; that the Son of God would become her
son, and be borne of her womb; and of these, holy Elizabeth, the mother of
John Baptist, Luke 1.45.
says: Blessed is she that believed.

Blessed art thou among all women.
The singular blessedness and rare prerogative, that Marie at once is a maid
and a mother, bears a son, and is still a Virgin; is both a daughter of
God, and a mother of the Son of God; is a wonder of wonders, a strange
miracle, glorious and comfortable: not fruitfully believed of any but of them
that are taught of God, who makes known the mysteries of his kingdom to
babes and little ones, according to the good pleasure of his will: and this part
of the saving truth, he writes in our hearts by his Spirit, and the
manifestation of it is in his word, thus recorded by the Evangelist Saint Luke.

In the sixth month, Luke 1.26.
the Angel Gabriel was sent from God, unto a City of Galile named Nazareth,
to a Virgin espoused to a man, whose name was Joseph, of the house of David,
and the Virgins name was Marie, and the Angel came in unto her and said;
Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou
among women. Thou have found favor with God, and behold, thou shall conceive
in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and call his name Jesus. He shall be
great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall
give unto him the throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever: and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Then said
Marie to the Angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the Angel
answered and said unto her: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the Highest shall ouershadow thee: therefore also that holy thing, which
shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God. And behold thy cousin
Elizabeth, she also has conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth
month with her who was called barren: For with God nothing shall be
impossible. And Mary said, Behold the handmaide of the Lord, be it unto me
according to thy word.

This most joyful wonder, that God will dwell with man, be man, be borne of a
Virgin, is the first sweet Prophecy, and gracious covenant, that God made to
man in Paradise. Genesis 3.15.
The woman's seed shall bruise the serpents head: that is, Jesus Christ, the
seed and son of the Virgin Marie, shall destroy the devil (that spoke by
the serpent) and his kingdom, and work man's full deliverance, and eternal
blessedness. This work of God, so strange and glorious, is the fulfilling of
the prophecy of Isaiah: Isa. 7.14.
A Virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and she shall call his name
Emmanuel; for in the fulness of time appointed by the Lord, The word was made
flesh, Ioh 1.14.
and dwelt among us, full of grace and truth: even he who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, Heb. 7.26.
separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens. The holy God, that of
old declared himself from above the Mercie-seate in the Tabernacle, Exodus
25.22. Heb. 1.2.
has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed
heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.

This rare miracle, so wonderful in the eyes of men and Angels, which had that
due acclamation; Luke 11.27.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck; will
more clearly appear in the excellency of it, if we compare it with the
conceptions and birthes that the worthiest women ever had, or with this of the
blessed Virgin Marie. And to begin with the ancientest:

EVA, the mother of us all, when she had conceived, and borne a son, thankfully
acknowledged Gods love therein, Genesis 4.1.
saying: I have obtained a man by the Lord. Yet had she no comfort of him, 1.
Ioh. 3.12
For he was of that wicked one, and slew his brother: but Mary's joy was sound,
full, and lasting; for she did not only obtain a man of the Lord, Act.
4.27.5.31.
but a man which is the Lord. The holy child Jesus. A Prince and Savior, even
the Lord of glory; 1. Cor. 2.8.
of whom not only Elizabeth a good woman, and Gabriel an holy Angel, gave so
honorable a testimony: but even God the Father from heaven, thus witnessed:
This is my well-beloved Son, Mat. 3.17.17.5.
in whom I am well pleased; hear him. Peter also avouches, 2. Pet. 1.17
that He received from God the Father, honor and glory, when there came such
a voice to him, from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased.

SARA, when she was ninety years old, was made joyful with this comfortable
promise of the Almighty: I will bless her, Genesis 21.6.
and will also give thee a son of her, yea I will bless her, and she shall
be the mother of nations, Kings also of people shall come of her. If Sara
praise the Lord, saying: God has made me to rejoice, all that hear, will
rejoice with me: I have borne to Abraham, a son in his old age: much more may
blessed Marie say, God has made me to rejoice, and from henceforth all
generations shall call me blessed; Luke 1.48.
for he that is mighty has done for me great things, and holy is his Name.
For I have borne a son, Reu. 17.14
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. The Prince of peace, the increase of
whose government and peace shall have none end; Isa. 9.6.
he shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it, and
to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth and for ever.
A King shall reign and prosper, Iere. 23.5.
and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth; in his days Judah shall
be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby they
shall call him: the Lord our righteousness. This King shall reign over the
Gentiles, Romans 15.12. Mat. 1.21. Reu. 1.5.
and in him shall the Gentiles trust. He shall save his people from their
sins, and make all his redeemed, Kings and Priests unto God.

HANNA, the godly wise of Elkana was barren a long time; but when with earnest
prayer and tears she had begged and obtained a son of God, even Samuel, and
given him to the Lord all the days of his life, and had brought him when he
was weaned, to Silo, that he might appear before the Lord, and there abide for
ever: she praised God cheerfully, and rejoiced in his salvation, 1. Sam. 2.5.
and that the barren had borne. Now if this holy Prophetisse gave praises to
God, for such a worthy and gracious son, 1. Sam. 3.20.
even faithful Samuel the Lords Prophet: much more had the blessed Virgin
cause to magnify the Lord, that made her mother of such a son, as is both
the greatest Prophet, and holiest Priest, that ever was.

Of this Prophet thus Moses writes, and Peter reports: Act. 3.23.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren like to
me; him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you: and it
shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall
be destroyed from among the people. He is the wisdom of God, Ioh. 7.46.
that spoke as never man spoke: He that makes known to us, all things that he
heard of his Father: Ioh. 15.15.
He that taught with authority of a Lawgiuer; Mat. 7.29.
that with his gracious words gives his Spirit, Act. 10.44.
opening and powerfully bowing the heart; making all his elect wise to
salvation, 2. Tim. 3.15.
through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

This holiest PRIEST was after the order of Melchisedech, Heb. 5.2.
had compassion on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way. He in the
days of his flesh, offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying
and tears, and was heard; -- and became author of salvation to them that obey
him. This most holy, Heb. 7.25.
high PRIEST, is perfectly able to SAVE them that come to God by him, seeing he
ever lives. He is our REDEEMER, Ephesians. 1.7.
In whom we have redemption through his blood. He is our RIGHTEOUSNESS: Romans
5.19.
By the obedience of one many shall be made righteous. He is our RECONCILER: 10.
When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. He
is the MEDIATOR of the new Covenant: Heb. 12.24 9.24.
entered into heaven, now to appear in the presence of God for us. He is our
ADVOCATE with the Father, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
and the propitiation for our sins; he is at the right hand of God, Romans 8.33
and makes intercession for us.

BATHSHEBA, the mother of King Solomon, had great cause to bless God, that
gave her a son, so great, and so good; who gave such honor unto his mother,
as is remembered in the holy word, 1. Kin. 2.19
that The King rose up to meet her, and sat down on his Throne, and he
caused a seat to be set for the Kings mother, and she sat at his right hand:
But blessed Marie, had a greater and better son, even him, Romans 14.11.
to whom all knees bow; even him, of whom it is said, Let all the Angels of God
worship him. Heb. 1.6.
This son did highly honor his mother. First in his subjection to her, for
it is written, that he was obedient to her. Luke 2.51.
Secondly, in his holy care for her, and that in his extreme anguish on the
cross. Ioh. 19.25.
There stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and when he saw her and the
Disciple standing by, whom he loved: he says unto his mother, Woman behold thy
Son; then says he to the Disciple: Behold thy mother; and from that hour,
that Disciple took her unto his own home.

And whereas conformity to Gods image, and sound holiness, is a great part of
true blessedness; this most godly Virgin showed forth singular and rare
virtues: for being at a Marriage with Christ at Cana in Galile: her Love and
Compassion was made evident, when she spoke to her son, They have no wine;
Ioh. 2.3.
her meekness, that kept silence when Christ rebuked her; also her godliness,
in directing and persuading to that which is the sum of our duty, most
agreeable to that voice of God from heaven, Hear him: Mat. 17.5.
when she exhorted, saying: John 2.5.
Whatsoeuor he says unto you, do it. She suffered much affliction for Christ,
(and so was partaker of that dignity of the Saints, Phil. 1.29.
that both believe in Christ and suffer for his sake:) both when she lived as
an exile with him in Egypt; Mat. 2.14.
as also when Simeons prophecy was fulfilled in his bitter passion: Luke 2.35.
A sword shall pass through thy soul. She persisted constantly in the
profession of Religion, and continued in, and with the holy Church and assembly
of the Saints, in all true holiness: as it is said, -- They all continued with
one accord in prayer and supplication, Act. 1.14.
with the women, and Marie the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren. Thus it
appears evidently, that she was a blessed mother, of a most blessed Son:
even blessed among, and above all women.

The first use and fruit for Confutation.
We knowing and believing the wonderful conception and birth of our Lord Jesus
Christ, do control the madness, and confute the damnable heresies of all that
impugn the two distinct natures of that one person Immanuel, Isa. 7.14.
(who is the Son of God eternally, and the son of Marie, borne of her womb
in the fullness of time, decreed before the world was made;) or that any way
derogate from his Prophetical, Priestly, or kingly offices, by which he
wrought the salvation of his Church.

This doctrine soundly grounded on the word of God, refuteth the Jews of this
age, that yet wait for MESSIAH, who is already come in humility to redeem
his Saints, and will the second time come in glory, Heb. 9.28.
to crown them, and confound his foes; 2. These. 1.8
and will then repay vengeance to all them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Yea moreover, As every spirit that confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is of God: so every spirit, that confesses not, 1. Ioh. 4.2.
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; and this is that spirit
of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard, that it should come, and even now already
is in the world. There is no other true Messiah, but Jesus Christ the Son of
the virgin Marie, whose blessed mouth has said: John 8.24.
Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

The second use and fruit for confirmation.
Our holy faith and soundest comfort, are confirmed strongly in the ancient
gracious Covenant of God made in Paradise, often renewed to the Patriarchs and
Church of the Jews, accomplished when God was manifested in the flesh, and
dwelt among us, when Christ was borne of the Virgin Marie, as it is written:
In the fullness of time, Gal. 4.4.
God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons. Romans
10.10.
With the heart we do believe, and with the mouth we confess, that Jesus
Christ, conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie, is the
Immanuel; (God with-vs,) foretold by the Prophet Isaias; made like unto us in
all things, Heb. 4.15. Ioh 1.29.
yet without sin. Even that Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the
world. Even he by whom all effectually called, Heb. 9.14.
receive the promise of eternal inheritance. For be it, that we all were
conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity, and corrupted in all the parts of
our souls and bodies: yet the Conception, Birth and whole nature of Christ our
Savior, was fully sanctified, by being united to his Godhead, and imputed to
us, so that the holiness of Jesus, is a robe to cover all our sinfulness, and
whereby we shall stand most gloriously in Gods sight, in the great day of the
Lord. For as Ester, Ester 5.3.
advanced from low estate to be a great Queen, had not this dignity put upon
her for her self alone, but also for the comfort of all her kindred, even all
the Jews: so that the glorious Messiah was borne of the blessed Virgin Marie,
was not her blessedness alone, but redounded to the joy, honor and salvation
of all that believe in him, Romans 10.11.
be they Jews or Gentiles.

This high, holy, and comfortable mystery, why God would become man, to work
man's salvation, though it be greater then can be well expressed: yet let us
endeavor stammeringly to utter what we have learned therein. Judge. 9.8.
And as Iotham (in the book of Judges) used a parable to declare his mind more
plainly, saying: The trees went forth on a time, to anoint a king over them,
and so forth: So we desire without offense to use a Dialogue or disputation, to
see if this mystery so profound may be better understood, or leave a deeper
impression of so holy learning. When Adam (and in him all his posterity) by
disobedience had sinned against God, before he should receive the doom of his
just damnation, sundry stood up to plead.

JUSTICE took the first place, and with much vehemency alleged, that the
righteousness of God required, that unless there were a full satisfaction made
by man for man's transgression, man must necessarily die, and that eternally,
for his sin; and that God could not be just, if any of his debts should pass
unsatisfied. Infinite Justice is wronged, therefore must man endure infinite
torments. The most holy and just God has spoken: Genesis 2 17.
In the day thou eatest of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou
shall die the death: Again he has said: Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the Law, to do them. Yea and again: The soul that sins shall
die. Ezekiel. 18.5.


TRVTH likewise stood up and said: My sentence must needs be, to second and
make good all that Justice has spoken: for what God says is true, all his
words are as the faithful witnesses in heaven, and He will be known by
executing of judgment: Psalm. 9.16.
Be ye well assured, Number. 23.19.
God is not as man, that he should lie: has he said and shall he not do it?
and has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it?

MERCY then put forth her voice, Give me place also to stand for, and to
witness, what is noted in the Scripture of truth. For though I may in no part
derogate from Justice or Truth, whose greatness I know and reverence: yet know
ye also, that Mercy will lose neither her right or pre-eminence, but will take
first place of you both: for it is allotted by the word unto me. It is first
said, Gracious and (then) Righteous is the Lord. Psalm. 25.8.
Yea let it be engraven in pillars of marble, and written with letters of gold,
and in the hearts of all the holy ones: Psalm. 145.8.
The Lord is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great mercy. Yea I
will avouch it confidently, that where there is one title of Gods Justice, (He
makes not the wicked innocent;) there are seven titles of his Mercy:
Jehovah, Jehovah, Exodus 34.6
strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in goodness and
truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression,
and sin. If Justice say, man shall die: Mercy says, he shall live. Eze.
16.6.


PEACE then very mildly took part with Mercy, and said: Sister Truth, I blame
thee not for speaking on Justice side, for we have learned that God is true in
his threatenings, none will herein gainsay thee: but speak impartially, (as I
well know thou will when it comes to thy turn to speak again:) is not God
also as true in his holy Covenants, and all his sweet promises? But without
more urging thee, I will speak for us both, and in the words of the holy
Ghost. -- As I have sworn, Isa. 54.9.
that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn,
that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee; for the mountains shall
depart, and the hills shall be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that
has mercy on thee. If rigor of Justice should take such place, that man for
his Sin should eternally perish, then Mercy and Peace should be quite
banished out of the earth. But I know assuredly, That he will speak peace unto
his people, Psalm. 85.8.
and to his Saints. The Lord will bless his people with peace. Yea unto man,
Isa. 9.6.
and for man is given the Prince of peace.

WISDOM then (as best able to decide this controversy) took place and said:
All of you have spoken well, and as beseems you; for God will make his Name
glorious, in manifesting before men and Angels the holiness of his Justice,
Truth, Mercy and Peace. Mercy must be showed, otherwise man cannot be saved;
and yet God will not show Mercy to violate or wrong his Justice. There is a
way found out by him whose name is Wonderful and Counselor, Isa. 9.6.
how to please you all, and to give you full contentment, and to save men from
deserved damnation.

There is a law made by the most High, the Just and Merciful God, wherein it
is thus enacted. -- If thy brother be impouerished, Leuit. 23.47.
and sell himself to a stranger by thee, after he is sold he may be bought
out, ONE OF HIS BRETHREN may buy him out: -- any of the KINDRED of his flesh
among his family may REDEEM him.

According to the equity of this law, some second Adam that is a Brother, must
make the Redemption and Atonement, who can pay all the forfets and debts of
man, who can die, and yet overcome death; die and be no debtor to death, but
merely of love, lay down his life, to save other from dying; who can
perfectly fulfill the whole Law, and purchase the Creators favor, and an
eternal inheritance. For God by his Commandment requiring of man, sound,
full, and perfect obedience; without a perfect and complete obedience, will not
make man righteous: and threatening a curse, and setting down the penalty,
will admit of no satisfaction, but by the suffering of that curse denounced by
God himself. Now such a surety, and man of worth that can thus suffer, and
thus do, where shall he be found?

Here Adam and all his sons were silent, dejected, and heartlesse; for no
such could be found on earth, man could do nothing to work his recovery, no
more then a dead man can raise up himself out of his grave, Ephesians. 2.1.
being dead in trespasses and sins; so that Desperation was ready to arrest
Adam, and to take him from Gods gracious presence for ever: but the SON OF
GOD came in due time to help at need, and to save that which was lost, and he
graciously spoke; I will take flesh of the womb of a Virgin, I will become
man, rather then man shall perish, whom I created after mine own image. He
fell not altogether of himself, but by temtation of another; and another that
is more mighty shall raise him up, and restore him fully into the favor of his
Creator. And this shall be accomplished, as Wisdom has made it plain unto
you, and altogether according as it is written of me in the volume of Gods
book:

Isa. 53.5.
The iniquity of all shall be laid on me, and I will make reconciliation, I
will be wounded for man's transgression, the chastisement of his peace shall
light upon me. Dan 9.24.
To finish transgressions, and to make an end of sins, I will make my soul
an offering, and be cut off from the land of the living; I will make my grave
with the wicked, Isa. 53.10.
and (yet) see my seed, and prolong my days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in my hands. I will make intercession for transgressors, Dan.
9.24.
and bring in everlasting righteousness. This will I do, Psalm. 40.8.
for the Law of God is in my heart.

The eternal Father being ever well pleased in his Son, agreed, (yea before
determined,) that this sovereign Remedy should be propounded, before he
pronounced the sentence of judgment: Yea he plighted the Covenant of grace
between him and man, (in few words, but containing in them the fullness of
true comfort and blessedness,) The woman's seed shall bruise the serpents
head. Genesis 3.15.


Thus was the great controversy decided, and the disceptation ended. Mercy and
truth met together, Psalm. 85.10.
righteousness and peace kissed each other. Justice was satisfied, Peace and
Truth well pleased, Mercy triumphed, Sin was abolished, Death destroyed, Hell
vanquished, Satan trodden under foot, Man eternally saved, Heaven opened,
Angels joyfully sung; Glory be to God in the highest, Luke 2.14.
and on earth peace, goodwill toward men.

O that man's heart were rightly affected (to rejoice unspeakably, and praise
God incessantly,) for this glorious harmony, where the wisdom, power, mercy,
justice and truth of God meet in one, to work man's reconciliation to God, and
his eternal blessedness! Psalm. 107.8.
O that the redeemed of the Lord, would praise the Lord for his goodness, and
for his wonderful works to the children of men! O what an incomprehensible
love is it, that the Son of God, Phil. 2.6.
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
yet made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant;
and was made in the likeness of man, and being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.

Thus the blessed Immanuel (that as Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12
joined heaven and earth together,) must be equal to God, to satisfy Gods
justice, and procure his love to us: he must be in the form of a servant, a
man, a brother, a kinsman; Touched with the feeling of our infirmities, yet
without sin. In which holy mystery, Job was well instructed, when so
confidently he reposed all his comfort in his kinsman, Job 19.25.
in his Redeemer: I know that my Redeemer (the word is Goali, my kinsman)
lives, and he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and though after
my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. Without
this kinsman of our flesh, and mighty holy Redeemer, there is no coming to God,
but as Joseph said: Except your brother be with you, Genesis 43.5.
ye shall not see my face. So high is Gods majesty, and so low is man's
wretched estate, that to make an union and atonement between us, we stood in
need of such a Mediator, as must be both the Son of God, and of the seed of
Abraham.

The Physicians tell us, how the soul of man from heaven, and the body from
earth, Bright in Melanch. 9
are by the spirit of life brought to live together in a marvelous concord and
unity. The soul is merely divine, the body merely a lump of earth: but
that which makes either to affect other, be as handfasted, and comfortably to
dwell together, is the spirit, though not so excellent as the soul; yet comes
it from the divine influence of life; and not of it self earthy. So the golden
clasp whereby God will be joined to man, dwell with him, Ioh. 1.14.
and in him, is the Word incarnate, equal to the Father and the holy Ghost
touching his Godhead, but inferior to them touching his manhood. By him we have
access unto God with boldness, by him we have right to the eternal
inheritance, by him we have comfort in our strangest and strongest temptations.
It is written for our comfort, that He is not ashamed to call us brethren, Heb.
2.11.
saying; I will declare thy Name among my brethren. Joseph highly advanced in
Egypt, Genesis 47.11.
did not only preserve all his brethren from perishing in that great famine;
but procured also for the^, (and that with the Kings good liking) that although
(as shepherds) they were abhorred of the Egyptians, yet they possessed Rameses
in Gosen, even the best of the kingdom: So our tender hearted Joseph Christ
Jesus, our most loving brother, (flesh of our flesh) has reconciled us to God,
and so prevailed for us, Luke 12.32
That it is our Fathers good pleasure to give us the kingdom. Let every true
Christian then be comforted with this free, full, and lasting love of God
toward us in Christ, and return the sacrifice of daily, true, and hearty
thanksgiving, and say: Bless the Lord O my soul, Psalm. 103.2.
and forget not all his benefits, who forgiueth all thine iniquities, and
heals all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowns
thee with loving kindness and tender mercies.

Blessed is she that believed.

THE SECOND DEGREE of the blessedness of the blessed Virgin Marie, is set
down in these words: Blessed is she that believed, Luke 1.45.
for those things shall be performed which were told her of the Lord.

Blessed Marie believed in the Messiah and Savior promised, as all the holy
ones of that age did, and in greater measure, and daily showed forth the fruits
thereof; Christ dwelt in her heart by faith before he was conceived in her
womb. She believed moreover, that He should be the blessed fruit of her womb,
that the holy promised seed should be her seed, that the Savior of all the
elect should be both her Son and her Savior. Her faith was holy, sound, and
strong, when passing over all earthly thoughts that might have moved to
doubtfulnesse, she rested firmly and faithfully on the Lords word and promise,
with sure assent and much certainty, saying: Be it unto me according to thy
word. Luke 1.38.
Whereas Zacharias (a man that walked in the ordinances of God without
reproof, hearing the promise from an Angel, that his aged wife should bear a
son) doubted through some unbelief, Luke 1.20.
and therefore was made dumb for a time, till Gods promise was fulfilled. Is
it not a rare, excellent, and glorious faith, to believe that which never any
before did believe? to have sure confidence, settled persuasion without
wavering, and to seal that God is true, when the promise made seems contrary
to all sense, reason, and experience? Look we on the faith of Abraham, so
often extolled in the Scriptures, and consider if her faith was not as great,
steadfast, holy, and excellent as his, if not more admirable, in that a woman
believes the Angel once assuring the promise, which he a man was often told,
and that by the Lord himself. It is said of Abraham, Rom 4.18
That against hope, he believed in hope, that he might become the father of
many nations, according to that was spoken, So shall thy seed be: and being
not weak in faith, he considered not his body now dead, when he was about an
hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Saraes womb; he staggered not
at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory
to God, being fully persuaded, that what he had promised he was able to
perform, and therefore was it imputed to him for righteousness. So holy
Marie, knowing her self to be a Virgin, and by that ordinary course of
nature she could not bring forth a child: yet minding there was a sure promise,
made by the God of truth, recorded by a holy Prophet, believed by all the
Israel of God: Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Isa. 7.14.
son, and shall call his name Immanuel: And seeing now the God of her
fathers, had spoken to her by his holy Angel Gabriel: Luke 1.30.
-- Thou have found favor with God, and behold thou shall conceive in thy
womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus: She firmly
believing, that with God nothing is impossible, that all the promises of God
are most sure, she strong and steadfast in her most holy faith, gave glory to
God, being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able to perform;
made this sweet answer. Luke 1.38.
Behold the handmaide of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word. It
follows then, that as Abraham the Father of the faithful, was accounted
righteous by believing: so likewise the faith of holy Marie was imputed to her
for righteousness (and so consequently for blessedness) as it is said:
Blessed is she that believed.

If any hard of belief, take exception, and say, Mary's blessedness is
avouched only by a woman: let such remember, that Elizabeth that said it, was
both an holy woman, and a Prophetisse, and the word of God speaks evidently
of her: Luke 1.41.
Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost.

Moreover if any say, we hold it for good, that sound, true, and particular
believing the promises of salvation, gives assurance of full blessedness: but
is Mary's faith such, in believing she should bear a son, yet remain a
Virgin still?

We desire such not to sever things so nearely joined together, her faith of
having a son, and her faith in her son; (who also is the Son of God
blessed for ever.) For it is evident by the word, that she both believed her
own salvation by him the Messiah, as Abraham did; as also with a fuller light
of knowledge, that the hope of Israel should be her son. By the one she has
a prerogative, to be blessed above all women: by the other, a preeminencie
amongst all the Lords holy ones.

By comparing Scriptures together, we shall see very clearly, that we ought not
so to restrain the meaning of those words, Blessed is she that believed. We
read in Genesis; Genesis 15.5.
The word of the Lord came to Abraham again -- One shall come out of thine
own bowels, he shall be thy heir; look now up to heaven, and tell the
stars, if thou be able to number them, and he said: So shall thy seed be,
and Abraham believed the Lord, and he accounted that to him for righteousness.
It is not to be gathered hence, that Abraham was accounted righteous in
believing he should have a wonderful great posterity, like the number of the
stars for multitude; but he formerly believed this promise of the Almighty:
Genesis 12.3.
In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. Now the latter
promise, Genesis 15. contains in it the former, Genes. 12. and has over and
above it, a promise of the boundless enlargement of the Church, which should
be blessed with him, by the promised seed, even by him who is called Shilo,
Genesis 49.10 Isa. 7.14. Dan. 9.26.
Immanuel, and Messiah.

So the holy Virgin Marie, even before the Angel came to her, soundly
believed in the promised Messiah, and that he should be the son of a Virgin,
as the Prophet Isaias had foretold: but after that Gabriel the Lords messenger
had revealed more to her, she believed that she was that Virgin, to whom this
dignity and prerogative was freely given, to be the mother of the most holy
Immanuel. So having the common faith of blessedness with Abraham, and this
peculiar faith above Abraham, (for he saw Christ afar off, but she felt him
in her womb, first saw him manifested in the flesh, heard his gracious words,
enjoyed him as her son and Savior,) we may hold it as a manifest truth, that
she was before all in true and holy faith in the Son of the everliving God,
having testimony of her faith and blessedness from the whole Church of God,
as is prophesied -- All generations shall call her blessed; Luke 1.48.
and from the sound and worthy fruits of saving faith, which are mentioned in
the word. It is among the praises of Abraham's faith, by Christ's own mouth: Ioh
8.56.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. Marie
did not only rejoice in God her Savior, Luke 1.47.
but also magnified the Lord, that is, with heart and voice praised and
extolled the greatness and goodness of God to her and the whole Church. From
her faith flowed the glorifying of God, joy and gladness to her own soul,
and a comfortable reviving of the hearts of all the godly, by witnessing in her
sweet song the fulfilling of Gods promises for helping up his servant Israel.
Luke 1.54.
We conclude then, that the Virgin Marie was a gracious woman, freely and
fully beloved of God, a Maid and a Mother, a faithful Israelite, a primarie
Christian, an holy prophetisse, a daughter of God by adoption, a Mother of the
Son of God by special favor, blessed in bearing Christ, blessed in believing
in Christ, blessed by him on earth, blessed with him in heaven for evermore.

The first use and fruit
Which we must reap by knowing and believing, that Marie was blessed in
believing; is, that we be taught and strengthened by her example, to seek all
our blessedness out of our selves, in Jesus Christ, as he is the Head of his
body the Church, Ephesians. 5.23.
and by him as he is our holy Redeemer and Reconciler. Romans 3.24.
And that this gift is given of God, and received of us by faith only: For
that faith and no other grace gives us right unto, Ephesians. 2.8.
and makes us owners of this blessedness which is in Christ, (the proper act
of this faith being to receive Christ, and apply him to us in particular.) So
that we must be soundly instructed, and immovably settled, in this high and
holy doctrine, of the excellency of faith, and the necessity of it, for
receiving Jesus our Savior to be our own, and in him to have and enjoy free,
full, and eternal salvation.

Look we carefully into the gracious dispensation of our blessedness, and we
shall find it both plainly and plentifully taught in the word of grace. Life is
primarily in the Father, from him in the Son, and that for as many as receive
him, -- The Father has life in himself, Ioh. 5.26.
and he has given to the Son to have life in himself, but not only for
himself, but for all that believe on him. -- This is the record, 1. Ioh 5.11
that God has given TO US eternal life, and this life is in his Son. Now if
it be given to us, we must receive this life and blessedness, and Christ the
giver to dwell in our hearts by faith. Ephesians. 3.17.
By it we have a near union with his person, as members of his body, whereof
he is Head, giving us life, (as feeling and motion are from the head, to all
the natural body.) And communion with all his graces, to our full
blessedness. And that it is the proper act of faith alone, to RECEIVE, is thus
taught. -- The true Light came unto his own, and his own received him not;
Ioh. 1.12.
but as many as RECEIVED him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God, even to them that BELIEVE on his name. Paul thus speaks, Gal. 3.14.
-- That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles, through Christ
Jesus, that we might RECEIVE the promise of the Spirit THROVGH FAITH. In the
same sense the word of laying hold on is used, expressing the nature and act of
true faith, in this exhortation: Fight the good fight of FAITH, 1. Tim. 6.12.
lay hold of eternal life, whereto thou art called. Faith is not a disposition
to holiness, or a beginning of other virtues, which united together, might be
meritorious of life and glory; (as some have greatly mistaken it) but it is a
receiving apprehension, laying hold on, and applying of Christ unto us, for
whom, and by whom, we are acceptable to God, and heirs of blessedness. Our
judgment and faith must be grounded on Gods holy word, which is most plain
and clear in this great mystery. It is no where said, thy faith has begun
virtues in thee, (though indeed there is no true virtue, but which flows from
faith; but it is said by the Lord himself. Luke 7.50.
-- Thy faith has saved thee; as also, 1. Ioh. 5.24
-- He that believes, has passed from death to life. And the holy Apostles,
in like manner set forth the sweet and comfortable fruits of faith. Heb. 10.39
-- We follow faith to the conservation of the soul. In another place, he
says: Romans 3.24
We are justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, whom God has set forth, to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God, to declare at this time his righteousness,
that he might be just, and a iustifier of him which believes in Jesus. To this
agrees that in Peter: 1. Pet. 1.9.
Receive the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

Christ Jesus is the object of our faith, which assures us of our adoption,
justification and full blessedness; and has his seat partly in the
understanding, partly in the heart. In the mind and understanding, faith is a
sure knowledge and apprehension, that Jesus Christ the son of the Virgin
Marie, is the eternal Son of God, the long promised blessed seed, the
Savior of all his chosen; And in the heart, it is a true and sure persuasion,
(wrought also in us by Gods spirit) a confident application, that I have right
to him as given to me: waiting for all my blessedness through him, relying,
and casting my self wholly upon him. So I put to my seal, Ioh. 3.33.
that God is true, just, and gracious, infinitely good, that extends such
mercy to me, freely, for his beloved Sons sake, neither dare I do that wrong
to God and my self, as to mistrust and doubt of his gracious promises, He that
shall believe and be baptized, Mar. 16.16.
shall be saved. Ye are of God in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, 1.
Cor. 1.30
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Having
Christ to be ours, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells, we have by him
free pardon of all our sins and unrighteousness, the imputation of Christ's
righteousness to be ours, by his free gift, redemption through his blood,
freedom from the curse and rigor of the Law, from guiltiness, bondage, and
punishment of sin, from condemnation and hell torments. By him we have
Reconciliation and Atonement, sure, sweet, and lasting peace with God,
boldness with confidence to come to the throne of grace; the spirit of
Adoption, whereby as dear children of God we call him our Father, ioying in
his presence, desiring to do his will; we have prosperity and adversity
sanctified unto us, to further us to grow up to full holiness; we have peace
of conscience, sense of Gods love, joy in the holy Ghost, the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in us, teaching, enlightening, guiding, upholding, and comforting us,
repairing the image of God in us, setting beauty upon our souls, giving grace
to be fruitful in holy desires and meditations, in all good words and works;
strength to persevere in the knowledge and love of the truth, and careful
practice of all piety, to fight the Lords battles valiantly and prosperously,
to get Satan trampled under our feet, to triumph in Christ, and finally with
him to be partakers of glory and eternal blessedness.

An objection and doubt
From these words of the Apostle, -- Now abides faith, 1. Cor. 13.13.
hope, charity, these three, but the greatest of these is charity. If
charity be greatest, (say some) how then does faith justify, and assure every
believer of his blessedness? Let such be put in mind, that although charity
in two respects be greater then faith: yet is it not that grace which receives
justification and life, but the excellency and greatness of it is seen in
other things.

First, charity is greater then faith, in continuance of time, never falling
away, never ceassing, but lasting ever more as may appear in the words going
before, from 8. verse. Faith and hope bring us to Christ, possessing him, and
with him, full blessedness, there will be no more use for them twain. Like as
a man got into his country, arrived where he will ever abide, needs no more
a ship to pass over the seas. Faith and hope end with time: Charity over
lives all time. When faith and hope cease with the world, charity then
comes to a fuller perfection.

Secondly, charity is greater in fruitfulness, to do good to Gods people,
(the proper work of faith being to fetch comfort from Christ, and convey it
into our own soul.) Faith casts her eyes on God, and all his gracious
sweet promises. Charity looks on men compassionatly, to help and comfort
the^; and even this good fruit springs from faith, as an apple from midst
of blossom that grew before it. Faith is the ancient and the true mother both
of hope and charity, and works by love. Gal. 5.6.
All these three graces are excellent, but faith is first, and has
preeminence, first in giving all glory to God, that in his love he made a free
Covenant of salvation, and that in his truth he performed the same. Secondly,
it is greatest by giving to man hold and possession of the promised mercies, so
that by it as with a hand, he takes hold on, receives and locketh fast into
his heart the Covenant of salvation, yea receives Christ to dwell in the
heart, Ier. 23.6.
who is the Lord our righteousness. Faith is like to the root of a tree, that
from the earth sucketh in nourishment, to beget and continually to preserve and
nourish the life and fruitfulness of it: but charity is like the branches of
the tree, which having received vital sap, do put forth their fruits in due
season, and according to their kind. Faith may be compared to the Magnes or
loadstone that draws iron to it, and keeps it fast: Charity to Hematites,
that puts out a virtue to stay bleeding. Faith is a Receiver: Gal. 5.5.
We through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. Charity
is a Giver, for having much given and forgiven by Christ, we love much, Luke
7.47.
and give back a reflexe of our love, eue^ true thankfulness to God, and
sundry fruits of hearty love for his sake, especially to them that excel in
virtue. As in the body the eye and ear, have their several powers and
offices, the one to see, the other to hear: so in the soul have faith and
charity. Faith clingeth fast to Christ, to have in him justification from
sin, and his imputed righteousness to be ours. Charity shows forth the
measure of our sanctification, to hallow Gods name, to make sure our election
and calling, and willing and doing good to the Saints that are on earth.

And this may suffice for answer to the first doubt: but fasten we yet our eyes
more fully on the beauty of faith, whose fairness and worth we cannot
sufficiently admire. That one place which is in the third of John, and may be
called the sum of the Gospel, opens the treasure of grace to our view, and
the excellency of saving faith, in these words: God so loved the world, Ioh.
3.16.
that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him,
shall not perish, but have life ever lasting. Consider we aright the true
causes of our blessedness; and how great a gift it is, and to whom it
befalls. The first moving cause is the free love of God, his rich grace,
mercy and bounty. The second cause, is the Son of God given unto us, who
also gave himself to be our ransom, perfectly able to save them that come to
God by him. The third is the means or isntrumental cause, which is faith or
belief, the very hand and mouth of the soul, to receive Jesus Christ and all
his riches to be ours. The fourth cause is the end, for which the Father gave
his Son; and has two branches, the one, removing of evil deserved, (That we
should not perish:) the other, the bringing in of our blessedness purchased,
expressed in these words, (But have everlasting life.)

When the Law accusing shows us our sins, and Gods angry countenance and
just wrath against us, even eternal damnation; when sin and iniquities
separate between God and us, then must we apply by faith to our fainting
souls, this glad tidings uttered by Christ, and the like, to keep us from
despair. True it is, that the wounds of sin are deadly; but it is true also,
that the salve and remedies to heal and help, are very sovereign, to every
one that is sound in the faith, and lays them to his soul, Romans 13.14.
as a man puts on his garment to keep him from the cold. As our sins are
deformities, that make the soul foul and ugly, we have Christ purging them
by himself. Heb. 1.3.
As they keep us in bondage, we have Christ redeeming us with his precious
blood. 1. Pet 1.19.
As they are evil deeds that cannot be undone, we have Christ covering the^.
Psalm. 32.1.
As they are debts greater then we can pay, we have Christ forgiving them. Romans
4.7.
As they are offenses against God, making us worthy of eternal death, we have
Christ not imputing our sins unto us. Romans 4 8.
As they are disobedience against God and his law revealed to us from heaven,
we have Christ fulfilling the law for us. Romans 10 4.
Yea we have from the same never failing fountain of grace, Romans 4.11.
Christ's righteousness imputed to us, by which we are accounted, and are
righteous, as if we had wrought all righteousness our selves, even as one
friend sets another free, fully paying his debts for him. As Caiphas
(ouerruled by Gods spirit) well prophesied, That Jesus should die for that
nation: Ioh. 11.50.
saying, Ye know nothing at all, nor consider, that it is expedient for us that
one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not. And
Paul very comfortably teaches, describing the faith of Abraham: Romans 4 23.
-- And it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him, but
for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up
Jesus our Lord from the dead. How clear is it in the word, that as Adams
disobedience made us all sinners, so the obedience of Christ makes all true
believers righteous? the words of the holy Ghost are these: As by one man's
disobedience, Romans 5.19.
many were made sinners: So by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous. For like as our sins were imputed to Christ, when he suffered for
us, and bare our sins in his body on the 1. Pet. 2.25.
tree: so his righteousness is imputed, and reckoned to be our righteousness,
through Gods gracious acceptance, most just and wise dispensation. Which also
to the Galathians, Gal. 3.13.
is thus set forth: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us. -- That the blessing of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit
through faith. And yet more plainly to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 5.21
God has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.

Now for the bringing in of blessedness, mentioned in the second branch,
called everlasting life: it is so great, so good, and glorious a treasure, as
no heart yet can sufficiently conceive of the worth and excellency thereof,
where he shall always behold God in his glory, and be satisfied with his
likeness, Psalm. 17.15.
yea conformed unto him, and partakers of a full and endless glory. It is the
bounty and kindness of the Highest to all his chosen little ones, Tit. 3.7.
-- That we should be justified by his grace, and be made heirs according to
the hope of eternal life: Romans 8.15
that we be annexed heirs with Christ, Psalm. 16.11.
and possess the pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore.

Now let it be carefully observed, and well remembered, that while we so highly
commend the sauing-faith, that ascribes glory to God, and brings such
comfort to man's soul, we arrogate nothing to our selves, as if it were in our
own power to believe; but we acknowledge it merely to be the free gift of
God, as we are taught, Heb. 12.2.
That Jesus is the author and finisher of our faith. We may not say that it is
attained by man's skill and industry, but that it is a peculiar gift to Gods
elect, as the holy word teaches us: Phil. 1.29.
-- To you it is given to believe in his Name. It is a work of God, neither
common nor small: -- Ye believe according to his mighty power. Ephesians. 1.19.
And when God by the ministry of his word, and power of his Spirit, has
wrought it in us; yet through our infirmity, it is weak and imperfect, such
as stands in need of daily increasing and confirming; so as that the Apostles
of Christ prayed, Luke 17.5.
Lord increase our faith. Even where faith is in truth, and sound, it is but as
a beggars hand to receive a Kings bounty; or if you would have a gayer
similitude to express it, it is like the fiery chariot that carried Eliah up to
heaven: or like a gold ring that has a pearl or rubie set into it, the worth
of the ring not being from the gold, but from the precious pearl in it.
Excellency of faith is in apprehending and applying to us the most precious
Object of it, that is, Christ Jesus, and in him eternal life; which the word
does plainly say, is the gift of God, Romans 6.23
given only to believers; yet not for the worthiness of their persons, or
faith, but merely of Gods love and free favor, as inheritances befall to men
for whom they are prepared. 2. Sam. 9.7
As lame Mephiboseth was set continually at the kings table, not for any worth
in him (being also a deformed cripple) but only for Ionathans sake: so we find
acceptance with God, but altogether because he has loved us in his beloved. So
that both the blessing, Ephesians. 1.6.
and to be made capable of it, is his most free gift. We see that Kings suffer
their Nobles to enjoy much honor, and great prerogatives, yet they will suffer
no favorite to wear their crown: So the Lord out of his infinite and most
rich grace, bequeatheth to us in his holy Testament, the legacy of eternal
life, and puts faith into our hearts to seal the assurance thereof unto us;
yet the honor (for the exceeding gift) he reserueth to himself, Isa. 45.25.
and will give it none other. We are all equally under the curse; but when God
calls outwardly by his word, and inwardly by his Spirit, giving to us faith
to believe in Christ our righteousness, our hearts are much comforted, and we
greatly rejoice in the Lord. He that spared not his own Son, Romans 8.32
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. If the Son of God obey the Law for us, die for us, make
intercession for us; why should we doubt of blessedness by him, seeing he
casts off none, but such as cast him off through their unbelief? Heb. 3.18.
-- To them that believed not, he swear they should not enter into his rest.
Dare man commit his life that is so precious unto him, to a ship made by the
skill of man, in it to pass over the wide and stormy seas: and shall we not
boldly commend the whole safeguard of our souls and bodies, to the Son of the
everliving God, that laid down his life for the saving of us? Dare Benhadad
put his life into the hands of his enemy, upon this ground, that he had heard
that the Kings of Israel were merciful: 1. Kin. 20.31
and shall not we that are professed Christians, and desire to be accounted for
the children of the Highest, confidently, fully, and joyfully resign our
selves to Jesus Christ, to claim the merciful promises made unto sinners?
especially seeing he is at peace with us, is our peacemaker, and taught us that
he came to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15 Gal. 3.26.
and that he has made us the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: Ioh.
6.47.
with a Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, has
everlasting life.

Among all the seven nations of the Cananites that for their abominations were
destroyed, the Gibeonites only were wise, and escaped deserved destruction;
Ios. 9.13.
for they sought, and obtained peace with the Israelites: and yet had nothing
to plead for themselves why they should be spared, but put themselves upon
their mercy, pretending that they came from a very far country, showing their
old garments, old shoes, old bottels, and mouldie bread. So of all the people
on the face of the earth, they only will be found wise and happy, that
distrusting their own works, (done before grace as altogether sinful:) and
those done after grace received, (as very faulty for not right using of them,)
wholly despair in themselves, rely upon, trust to, and cast themselves fully
on the rich mercy of God, and the holy merits of Jesus Christ; and firmly
believe, that it is a true saying, 1. Tim. 1.13.
and worthy of all men to be believed, that Jesus Christ came to save sinners.
As Jonas was willingly cast into the sea, Jonas 1.12.
to stay the raging of it, that all in the ship with him might not perish, and
they upon his suffering, enjoyed a calm and desired safety: so Christ Jesus
to appease the wrath and curse that would have fallen on us, suffered, and gave
himself for us, Ephesians. 5.2.
an offering to God for a sweet smelling savor; by it Gods justice is
satisfied, his wrath appeased, and all believers reconciled. As he that was
guilty of manslaughter, though he could make no satisfaction for the blood he
had shed, yet if he sought to the appointed city of refuge, by Gods merciful
dispensation and pardon, he was set free; Number. 35.28.
(but it was) at the death of the High Priest: So we that can plead nothing
for our selves, being guilty of many and great sins, (every one whereof
deserves Gods curse and damnation;) yet if we be truly humbled for them, seek
unto Christ and believe, Heb. 10.19
We have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus: and are
commanded that we draw not back unto perdition, Heb. 10.39
but be of them that believe to the saving of the soul. For albeit our sins
are as bonds, death as a tormentor, hell an eternal prison, the devil as a
sergeant to arrest, and as a iaylor there to keep us, because we are indebted
ten thousand talents to the great King, (who will have the debt paid) and we
are utterly unable: yet one comfort, Ioh. 8.36.
(and but one) is left us. If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed.
Now he has freed the believing, as our High Priest, Heb. 7.22.
and as our surety paying our debts to God for us. Christ has once suffered
for sins, 1. Pet. 3.18
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. Colos. 2.14
Yea has blotted out the handwriting that was against us; and is a iustifier
of him which believes in Jesus. Romans 3.26
And like as Abraham with a strong hand rescued Lot his kinsman, Genesis 14.16
when he was under the captivity of his enemies: after the like manner, Jesus
our King and kinsman, Colos. 2.15
conquered Satan, spoiled principalities and powers, and delivered us out of
his claws. For when the Judge and the Law are satisfied, what has the Iaylor
any more to molest the prisoner? Yea such is Christ's loving kindness to all
unfeigned repenting sinners, that believe, and with the whole heart seek to
him, Tit. 2.14.
that He redeemeth them from all iniquity, and withal does purify them to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.

A second objection and doubt.
Iam. 2.21.
Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he had offered Isaac his
son upon the altar? Out of these words of S. James, some gather, that to be
freed from sin, and so to obtain blessedness, (for blessed is the man to whom
God imputes none iniquity;) is for the merit and worthiness of good works.
To which we answer, that not only the words, but the true meaning of them is
diligently to be pondred, lest we should think one Scripture to be contrary to
another, which cannot be. Gather we then the true sense of them from the word
it self; for as no man can see the Sun that shines, but by the light of the
Sun: so neither attain we to the right understanding of the word, but by the
other Scriptures, as this may clearly be unfolded by the words of S. James
going before. For he well knowing, that many who by their profession were
Christians, but in their conversation Libertines and Epicures, such as made
show of Religion, but denied the power of it; speakers of the word of God, but
not doers of his will, even such as turned the grace of God into wantonness:
labors to set before them the danger thereof, and how they deceived
themselves, either not understanding, or not regarding the nature of true
faith; and he makes it plain to them, that they had no true faith, and by
this argument, that they had not such works as necessarily proceed from a
right faith. (Reasoning as our Lord Jesus Christ did: John 8.39.
If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham; but ye go
about to kill me that tell you the truth, this did not Abraham.) Assuring them,
that faith if it have no works, is dead in it self. Iam. 2.20.
Will thou know O vain man, that faith without works is dead? For as where
there is no heat, there is no fire: so where there is no good fruit, there is
no true faith. But where faith is, there works follow, and flow from it; as
Abraham, by a rare and ready obedience, in a service so contrary to nature,
and in appearance also to the great promise made unto him, did make it
manifest, what true trust and steadfastness of faith he had in the Lords holy
promises. By faith, Heb. 11.17
Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac, and he that had received the
promises offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said: In Isaac
shall thy seed be called. God gave testimony of these fruits of faith, when
he said, Genesis 22.12
Lay not thy hand on the child, for now I know thou fear God; seeing thou
have not withheld thy son, thy only son, from me. On the other side, an
hypocritical and dead faith, Mat. 21.19
is like the fig tree with fair leaves, but has no fruit on it; or if it
have a fruit, all we read of, is compared to the faith of devils; and the
fruit, fear and trembling: -- Thou beleeuest there is one God, Iam. 2.19.
thou do well: the devils also believe, and tremble. But true faith has
with it, joy and gladness: 1. Pet. 1.8.
Though ye see him not, yet do you believe, and rejoice with joy unspeakable
and glorious. The manner of speech which the holy Ghost uses, must be
carefully observed, if we will not fall into heresies. What a dangerous
novelty of speaking is it to say, holy works done in faith are satisfactory,
and meritorious of eternal life? whereas the word of God only says, Heb.
11.4.
-- That they obtain witness of righteousness. As we read, By faith Abel
offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice ^hen Cain, by which he obtained
witness, that he was righteous. As faith that is effectual and fruitful,
gives glory to God for his goodness and true performance of all his holy
promises, in their appointed time: so the works that spring out of it, bear
witness to our selves and others, that we are not fruitless trees, which are
near the curse, but planted by the waters side, that bring forth fruit in due
season, whereby God is glorified, our hearts comforted, and the faithful
praise God for us. But on the contrary, such as have a bare knowledge, and
assent unto the truth, or presumptuous persuasion, not rightly grounded; such
as believe there is a God, but believe not in God (having no assurance he is
their God) their gains in the end is to be deceived of their hope, and to be
put in fear, horror, and trembling. Yea the fearful and unbelieving -- shall
have their part in the lake which Reu. 21.8.
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. If any will yet
persist to press the words of James, we urge his words for our assertion, who
says: Iam. 2.23.
-- The Scripture was fulfilled, which says: Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God. But
to reconcile Paul and James, understand, that James speaks how Abraham was
justified declaratiuely, but Paul actiuely or effectually; which distinction
arises both from the words, and handling of the subject in question. If we
would compare Genes. 15.6. with Genes. 22.19. and James 2.18, Abraham was
approved for righteous, when he believed Gods promise, even before Isaac was
borne; so it is as plain as can be spoken, Genesis 15.6.
-- He believed in the Lord, and he accounted it to him for righteousness. But
Saint James shows how he declared it, and made it manifest in work and deed,
by a rare obedience to God, -- When he offered Isaac his son upon the altar.
Iam. 2.21.
His faith so rested on Gods promise, that although Isaac were killed, and
burnt to ashes, -- Yet God was able to raise him up, Heb. 11.19
even from the dead: from whence also he received him in a figure. All that are
taught of God know, that faith works by love, Gal. 5.6.
that it cannot be idle or fruitless, Ephesians. 2.10.
God having created us anew unto good works, which he has ordained that we
should walk in. Though they go not before justification, yet do they follow
it: where the Lord forgiueth sin, he also gives a power to resist sin, to
hate and shun it, with a sound desire to practice such holiness as through
Christ is pleasing to God. Though some ignorant people say, We are justified
for our good works: yet the holy Ghost says otherwise, namely, that We are
justified freely by his grace, Ephesians. 1.7.
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Even that grace, wherein he
has made us accepted in his Beloved, in whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. Even
that grace, which is Gods eternal free bounty, and love to us, in electing,
calling, adopting, and justifying us in Christ, who is the Lord our
righteousness; Ier. 23.6.
not that infused grace, which is but as a drop, and fruit of the other,
consisting in the renouation of the new man, which being but in part, (for they
that have greatest measure, Romans 7.16
do what they would not, and leave undone what they would do,) is not able to
stand before the Tribunal seat of justice, which exacteth entire and absolute
obedience, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
accursing every one that confirms not all the words of the Law to do them:
Which moved David to power out this desire of his soul: Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none that
lives, be justified. And Paul, who as touching the righteousness which is by
the Law was unrebukable, yet counted all things loss, Phil. 3.8.
and did judge them as dung, that he might win Christ, and might be found in
him, that is, not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God
through faith.

A third objection and doubt.
It is said of the godly professors in Sardis, that had not defiled themselves,
Reu. 3.4.
that they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy: there is then
(say some) a worthiness in our faith or works, or both together, by which we
merit our blessedness. That we may not mistake this place, (seeing no
prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation: 2. Pet. 1.20.
) confer it with Luke 20.35. They that shall be accounted worthy to obtain
that world, and the resurrection from the dead: and that in 2. Thessal. 1.5.
That ye may be accounted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye suffer:
And we shall perceive that these are worthy by acceptance in mercy, worthy by
the righteousness of Christ imputed, not by holiness inherent: the reward of
going clothed in white, or to have a kingly dignity, and much beauty set on
them, is not a merit or a reward for the desert of their works, but of the
mere grace and mercy of God for the merits of Christ, for whom, we and our
works wrought by his Spirit, find acceptance and favor, the Law teaching that
the reward is of mercy. Exodus 20.6
And the Gospel telling us -- That the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us. Romans 8.18.
The crown of life is of Gods promise, not of our deserving, Iam. 1.12.
as it is said, Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is
tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord promised to them
that love him. The things which some call merits, (very unfitly and not
according to the phrase of the Scriptures) are the nurses of our hope, the
prouocations of love, the signs of our election, the forerunners of our future
happiness, the way of the kingdom, not the cause why we reign. It is Jesus
Christ, the holy Lamb of whom it is properly spoken: Reu. 4.11.5.12.
Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: and, Worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. He alone purchased his Church
with his own blood. Our robes are made white in the blood of the Lamb. Our
persons, Reu. 7.14.
our service, and our works, have acceptance with God, only for Jesus sake, as
it is said: Ephesians. 1.6.
He made us accepted in his Beloved, and our spiritual sacrifice, is
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 2.5.
As no man's free gift can bind him to give more, but he that receives more, is
the more bound to him that gives it; therefore hence it follows, that by the
good deeds which God has enabled us to do, he is not bound by the debt of his
justice to give us more, that he should be unjust if he gave it not, but we
rather are bound to him. And if he give any reward to our well-doings, this is,
not that he is a debtor to the works, but of his own liberality. How unfitly
are good works said to be meritorious, seeing they are not ours originally, but
Gods? Phil. 2.13.
he working both the will and the deed, and that of his own good pleasure. But
as they are ours, they are debts due to God by his holy Law binding us to do
them; and more, Iam. 3.2.
they are imperfect, For in many things we offend all, they are faulty, not
done always with sincerity, fullness of desire, or not with whole strength,
zeal and continuance, as the Lord requires; yea they are unequal to the
recompense: When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you,
Luke 17.10
say: We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to
do. Let not our hearts be lifted up in conceit of the worthiness of our
doings, Habac. 2.4.
as is usual in all Hypocrites; but desire we that (as they that look through
green glass, think all they see green) the Lord will look upon us in the
face of his Anointed, and accept us as righteous in him, who is our
righteousness. Genesis 27.24.
That as Jacob got a blessing which was not due to him, in the name of his
elder brother, and in his clothing: so we putting on the Lord Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3.9.
may be found in him, not having our own righteousness which is of the Law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ: and may say with the Church (or
seed which the Lord has blessed,) I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, Isa
61.10.
my soul shall be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with the garments
of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness; as a
bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self
with jewels. Now concerning faith, we do not teach, nor believe, that we are
justified or saved for our faith, or the worthiness of it: but we cleave to
the word, and believe as therein we are taught, namely: Gal. 3.11.
The just shall live by his faith. We are justified by faith, and have peace
with God. Romans 5.1. Gal. 3.26.
-- We are all the children of God, by faith in Christ Jesus. -- To him that
works not, Romans 4.5.
but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is COVNTED to him
for righteousness. And that comfortable bill of acquittance: Act. 13.38.
Be it known unto you, men and brethren, that through this man is preached
unto you forgiveness of sins, and from all things, from which ye could not
be justified by the law of Moses, by him every one that believes, is
justified. Understand for a fuller clearenesse in this point, that like as it
is said of Timothy, continuing in holiness and sound doctrine: 1. Tim. 4.6
-- In doing this thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. It is
not meant that Timothy or any Minister does save, otherwise then as
instruments, (Who is Paul, 1. Cor. 3.5.
or who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed?) So though no other
faith justifies, but that which works by love, (the same neither justifying
together with love, nor faith having his efficacy from love:) yet faith which
saves, Ephesians. 2.8.
(Ye are saved by grace through faith, and not of your selves, it is the gift
of God,) saves not as it is a work, or as it works by love; but as it
receives Christ, John 1.11
that in him we may be righteous. Even as fire gives comfort to the frozen,
and be nummed with cold, not by the light thereof, but by the heat of it. As
God gives his Son unto us, and in him eternal life: so gives he also to
every of his, faith to be as a hand to receive the gift, so that they which
receive abundance of grace, Romans 5.17.
and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.
It is true, that true faith, is never alone, that is, it is not fruitless,
barren or idle, as that in Hypocrites; but it is effectual, or there is a
work of faith, 1. These. 1.3
and labor of love. Yet it alone and no other grace justifies, as to them
that will be wise according to the word, it is very manifest: Gal. 2.16.
-- Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the
works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified. This needs no further
declaration, but is as clear as that short speech of Christ to the same
effect, Mar. 5.36.
Only believe. And that also, Luke 8.50.
Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made whole. And this doctrine,
maintains Christ's honor, and extolleth his bounty, who gives to the
thirsty of the fountain of the water of life freely. Reu. 21.6.
And it gives to the broken in heart, and sorrowful soul much and sound
comfort, in greatest conflicts and terrors of conscience, and when for sin
Satan would draw us to despair. Let us then cheer up our hearts, and refresh
our fainting spirits, with the holy harmony of the Apostles, all of the^ so
sweetly sounding out this learning, of our blessedness by faith in Jesus
Christ. Saint Jude thus exhorts: Jude 21.
Build up your selves on your most holy faith -- looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. James requires we ask in faith, Iam.
1.6.
nothing wavering. John assures us, that it is the commandment, 1. Ioh. 3.23
that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Paul sets
down very briefly the sum of the Gospel. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
Act. 16.31.
and thou shall be saved. Peter in a great assembly taught, Act. 15.9.
that God put no difference between them and us, after that by faith he had
purged their hearts. Why tempt ye God to lay a yoke on the disciples necks,
which neither our fathers, nor we are able to bear? but we believe through the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be saved, even as they do. Yea To him give
all the Prophets witness, Act. 10.43.
that through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of
sins.

A fourth objection.
If good works do not answer the righteousness of Gods Law, nor justify, nor
satisfy, nor merit before God: it may seem they are vile in your eyes, or at
least you make small account of them, and you set a door wide open to carnal
liberty, and all licentiousness of living.

O be it far from all that profess Christianity, so to think or speak;
for good works are a maine part of that worship of God which he commands,
and will call us to account for: they are the end of our Election, assurances
of our Calling, companions of our Justification, the practice of
Sanctification, forerunners of Glorification, the effects of grace, the life of
Religion, the beauty of Christianity, witnesses of faith, nurses of hope,
fruits of love, evidences of thankfulness, our sacrifice to God, our
acceptance with men, the difference between Saints and reprobates, the truth
of repentance, a turning from dead works, preservatives from scandals, a
lasting debt and duty; they add honor to our profession, peace to our
consciences, further our reckning; they are seals of salvation, the way to the
kingdom, follow us to Gods tribunal; they are our walking in the ways of
God, and our blameless conversation, without which we are as fruitless trees,
fitted for the fire, and hypocrites that without all help shall be cast into
hell; for as the word of truth teaches; Heb. 12.14
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Take knowledge then and be
minded, that we believe and teach, both a necessity of good works, and sundry
excellent uses of them.

A necessity of good works we do believe. First, because of Gods commandment:
Psalm. 119.4.
Thou have commanded that we should keep thy precepts diligently: Leu. 19.2.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. This is the will of God, 1. These. 4.3
even your sanctification. Secondly, it is Gods ordination: We are his
worma^ship, Ephesians. 2 10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them. Thirdly, there is a necessity of the doing, and
presence of good works, for the manifestation of the righteous judgments of
God, when he will come to be glorified in his Saints, and crown his own works
in them: Mat. 25.35 Reu. 22.12
For he will judge all men according to their deeds. And give to every man, as
his work shall be. Fourthly, a necessity is imposed upon us, because we are
debtors, as it is said: Luke 17.10
-- We have done what was our duty to do. Romans 8.12
And Paul says: Ye are debtors, but not to the flesh, but to God our Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, Ever think we on it, Tit. 2.14.
that Jesus Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify us to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. The obligation and bond of our debt is, our Baptism. -- We are buried
with him by Baptism into death: Romans 6.4.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father,
so we should walk in newness of life. Fifthly, because there is no other way
to eternal blessedness, but by the practice of holiness. For though good
works cannot be the cause of salvation, but only Jesus Christ: (as it is
said, Isa. 49.6.
I will give thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation
unto the end of the world:) yet are they the way and path unto life and
blessedness. Pro. 12.28.
In the way of righteousness is life, and in the path thereof there is no
death. -- Ye have your fruit in holiness, Romans 6.22
and the end, everlasting life.

The uses of good works are many and great, in regard of God, our selves,
others, and our holy profession.

First, God is glorified by our good works, which are (being rightly
performed) a special part of his holy worship and service. Ioh. 15.8.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. His grace is
manifested by enabling us unto a measure of obedience: Eze. 36.27
-- I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall keep my judgments and do them. God is honored and praised for them,
and by them: -- They glorified God for me. Gal. 1.23. 1. Pet. 2.9.
-- Ye are a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him
which has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. 1. Pet. 4.11.
-- Do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all things may be
glorified, through Jesus Christ. As a father delights in a dutiful son: so
God delights in all those that bear his image, imitate his holy nature, that
take pleasure in well doing, Ioh. 4.34.
whose meat and drink it is to do their fathers will.

Secondly, by our blameless and good conversation, we become followers of the
example of Christ, and of his Saints: Ioh. 13.15.
I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. As
Christ forgave you, Colos. 3.13
so also do ye. Take the Prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord, Iam.
5.10.
for an example (of suffering affliction, and of patience.)

Thirdly, by our holy life and obedience to God, we gain assurance that God
has chosen us to be heirs of salvation. 2. Pet. 1.10.
Give diligence that ye make your calling and election sure, for if ye do these
things ye shall never fall. -- If we love in deed and truth -- We know we are
of the truth, 1. Ioh. 3.19.
and shall assure our hearts before him. Thus the truth of faith is known, for
faith that has no works is dead, Gal. 5.6.
being alone. Neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but
faith which works by love. Thus also is the soundness of repentance known:
Act. 26.20.
-- I showed to them, that they should repent, and turn to God, and do works
meet for repentance.

Fourthly, by carfulness of well performing our duty, we are heartned to
look for the performance of Gods free promises made unto us. So Moses had
respect unto the recompense of the reward. Heb. 11.26
(Godliness having the promises of this life, 1. Tim. 4.8.
and that which is to come.) We may look for, (and obtain, if God see it
expedient for us,) long life, a blessed posterity, peace and plenty, joy of
heart, preservation in the evil day, and whatsoever good is. 1. Cor. 15.58.
Be ye steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Gal. 6.9.
Let us not be weary of well-doing, for in due time we shall reap, if we
faint not. Know that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same he shall
receive of the Lord.

Fifthly, they that live righteously, escape curses and calamities, when the
wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience. 2. Pet. 2.5.
For when God spared not the old world: he saved Noah the eight person, a
preacher of righteousness. God said he would spare Sodom and Gomorha, Genesis
18.32. Isa. 65.14.
for ten sake that were righteous. Behold my servants shall sing for joy of
heart: but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall houle for vexation of
spirit.

Sixthly, they that are of upright conversation, and are studious to abound in
good works, shall avoid offenses: Give none offense, 1. Cor. 10.32.
neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Mat. 18.7.
2. Cor. 6.3.
For woe unto the world because of offenses. Giving none offense in any thing,
that the Ministry be not blamed.

Seventhly, by our good deeds we win others to God, or make way and prepare
some to conversion. I am made all things to all men, 1. Cor. 9.22
that I might by all means save some. Have your conversation honest among the
Gentiles, 1. Pet. 2.12.
that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good
works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. Romans
11.14.
I magnify mine office, if by any means I may provoke to emulation them which
are my flesh, and might save some of them. 1. Pet. 3.1.
Ye wives be in subjection to your husbands, that if any obey not the word,
they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives.

Eighthly, righteous behavior stops the mouths of the adversaries, that
they cannot speak ill of us. So the loyal and just carriage of David toward
Saul, joined with love and meekness, prevailed so far that he made this
acknowledgment: -- Thou art more just then I. 1. Sam. 24.17. 1. Pet. 2.15.
So is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men.

Ninthly, by charitable works the poor distressed are much relieved, and such
are commended and commanded in the word of God: Philem. 7.
We have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels of the
Saints are refreshed by thee, brother Job says: Job 29.12.
I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none
to help him; the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the widows heart to sing for joy. To do good, Heb. 13.16
and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Tenthly, when we do such works as beseem them that repent, we countenance the
Gospel of Christ, and our holy profession. Therefore even servants are
commanded so to walk, Tit. 2.10.
That they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. And this
precept is given to all the faithful: Phil. 1.27.
-- Let your conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Furthermore let it be well remembered, that to the well doing of a good work,
all the four causes must meet together: the two external, the Efficient and
the End: the two internal, the Matter and the Form.

By the Efficient is meant, the Author, worker, or doer of a good work, who is
no mere natural man, for he does not perceive the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.14
much less do them. No hypocrite, who does all for himself, even when he
pretends most holiness; as Judas could say, Ioh. 12.5.
Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the
poor? This he said, not that he cared for the poor: but because he was a
thief, and had the bag, and bare that was put therein. No wicked man, Pro.
15.8.
whose very sacrifice is abomination to the Lord. But he must be in Christ, a
new creature, a regenerate man, one that has faith purifying the heart, Act.
15.9.
and which gives him assurance, that for Christ, both his person and his work
is accepted with God. As God had first respect to Abel, and then to his
offering: Genesis 4.4.
So it is Gods chosen that he has ordained to bring forth fruit, Ioh. 15.8.
and be glorified that they bear much fruit. He being the true author of all
good works, working in his both the will and the deed.

Secondly, the End, and principal scope of all our works, is the glorifying of
God: Whether ye eat or drink, 1. Cor. 10.31.
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Pro. 3.9.
Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase. Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. There are also other lawful
subordinate ends of good works, as in those nine several uses before
mentioned, is made plain.

Thirdly, the Matter and substance of good works, is not every devised work
of man upon his good meaning and good intent. Our Savior reproves the
Pharisees, for their traditions and services of God of their own devising,
Mat. 15.9.
saying: In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments
of men. Whatsoever I command you, Deuteronomy. 12.32
take heed ye do it; thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom.
So that nothing can be a good work with God will allow, but only what he has
commanded. The Law of God teaches what good works we must do: as Christ out of
it, answered to the young man, that would know What good thing he should do,
Mat. 19.16. Phil. 4.8.
to have eternal life. Whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely,
of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on
these things; these things which ye have learned, received, and heard in me,
do, and the God of peace shall be with you.

Fourthly, the Form and manner of doing them must be as the Lord commands:
1. In faith, Romans 14.23. 1. Pet. 2.5.
the heart having a well grounded persuasion, that for Christ they are pleasing
to God. 2. In love, as the precept is, Let all your things be done in love. 1.
Cor. 16.14. Tit. 3.8.
Whence springs, 1. A carfulness: -- They which have believed in God, be
careful to maintain good works. Also 2. Readiness, and forwardness, Tit.
3.1. Gal. 2.10.
-- Be ready to every good work. Only they would, that we should remember
the poor, the same which I also was forward to do. 3. Timely for the good of
the receiver. Pro. 3.27.
Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy
hands to do it; say not to thy neighbor, Go and come again, and to morrow I
will give thee, when thou have it by thee. 2. Cor. 9.7.
4. Chearefully, for God loves a cheerful giver.

Thirdly, discreetly, and with judgment, Eccles. 8.5.
For a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment. And as in the
Psalm: Psalm. 112.5.
A good man shows favor, and lends and will guide his affairs with
discretion. Doing first good to them that excel in virtue, and then to others,
after the example of the Samaritan. Yea prouidently to take occasions of doing
good: As we have opportunity, Gal. 6.10.
let us do good unto all men, especially to them who are of the household of
faith.

Fourthly, Plentifully. The praise of Tabitha is, Act. 9.36.
that she was a woman full of good works and alms deeds. Charge them that be
rich, 1 Timothy 6.18
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

Fifthly, zealously and earnestly must good works be done, with fervent desire
of heart, and outward diligence. -- He gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
to purify us to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.

Sixthly, Constantly also, and not for twice or thrice, and then give over. Let
us not be weary of well doing, Gal. 6.9.
for in due time we shall reap if we faint not.

Thus we teach good works, thus we practice, thus we encourage all thereto,
Colos. 1.10
yea -- We cease not to pray that we may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge
of God.

The second use and fruit
Which we are to make by our knowledge of holy Mary's blessedness, is, to be
informed and taught, that it is the nature of true faith, to apply to our own
selves apart, personally and particularly, the promises of salvation, and to
put on Christ, as a man puts on his own garment upon his body: not only to
believe that Christ and all his riches is ours, but also that Christ is mine,
and I am his. So said the Spouse of Christ: My beloved is mine, Cant. 2.16.
and I am his: so said the holy mother of Christ; Luke 1.47.
My soul rejoices in God MY Savior. It was no affectation of singularity in
that gracious woman to say, MY Savior, (as though he had been hers alone.) But
so she well expressed the life of true and lively faith unto us. And after her
example, every Christian for himself is to believe his own salvation,
building his assurance, first on Gods love in Christ, 2. Cor. 5.19
reconciling us to himself. Secondly, and on the truth of Gods free and
unchangeable promises, sealed in our hearts by the spirit of adoption: -- We
received not the spirit of the world, 1. Cor. 2.12
but the spirit which is of God, that we might KNOW the things that are freely
given us of God. It is a conceit without warranty, to think this was a
prerogative granted to her alone, or to Peter, Paul, or some few that have it
by revelation: for every one that is effectually called, does particularly,
with such application to himself, so believe as she did; and has no sound and
certain comfort till he so believe. Mark it heedfully, how Paul so applies
to himself the promise of life, and then to all, and every of the faithful,
that love Christ's coming: -- I have kept the faith, 2. Tim. 4.8.
henceforth is laid up for ME the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give ME, at that day; and not to ME only, but to ALL
them also that love his appearing. He that does not believe particularly, and
faithfully, that Christ Jesus is His Savior, his belief is no better then the
faith of devils; they believe Christ is a Savior to some men, but they believe
not that he is their Savior. As of old every one that sprinkled his door posts
with the blood of the Paschall Lamb, Exodus 12.13.
was assured by the promise of God, that he should escape the destroying hand
of the Angel: so every one is baptized severally, that he may have a personal
belief, that His sins are washed away in Christ's blood, and He shall escape
the wrath to come. Philip will not baptize the Eunuch till he profess such a
faith: Act. 8.37.
Thou may be baptized if thou beleeuest with all thine heart. We have a
cloud of witnesses of the holy ones, that thus apart to themselves applied the
promises of God, whose steps we must follow, if we will have true peace in our
souls. Job expresses his faith apartly, and particularly thus: Job. 19.25.
I KNOW that MY redeemer lives. In Isaias we read: My soul shall be joyful
in MY God. Isa. 61.10.
In Abacuk: I will rejoice in the Lord, Abac. 3.18.
I will joy in the God of MY salvation. In Zachary, I will say it is my
people, Zach. 8.8.
and they shall say, the Lord is MY God. So David, Psalm. 27.1.
The Lord is MY light and MY salvation. Elizabeth the mother of John Baptist,
Luke 1.43.
Whence comes this to me, that the mother of MY Lord should come to me? Thomas
the Apostle after he was healed of his unbelief, could say: MY God, MY Lord.
Ioh. 20.28.
Paul most holily acknowledges: I live by the faith in the Son of God, Gal.
2.20.
who has loved ME, and given himself for ME. It is no presumption to believe
all that God has promised, nor to wait for all he intends to give us. But it
is the great sin (for which the holy Ghost will reprove the world:) Because
they believe not on Christ. Ioh. 16.9.
As a wounded man has not comfort of his incarnatiue plaster, till it be laid
on his sore: so have we no fruit of Gods sweet promises, till we apply the^
close to our souls. Who knows not that the commandments, Thou shall not
kill, nor commit adultery, nor steal, are given to every of us? as if he had
said, Thou John, Thomas, Peter, etc. shall obey me when I say, Thou shall not
kill, etc. So the promises of salvation for comfort, are spoken to us as if he
named every believer severally. It will do thee no good, nor put any comfort
into thy soul, to believe the resurrection of the dead, and life everlasting:
except thou believe, that thou thy self shall at the end of the world rise
again, and enjoy life everlasting. ^^ias prophesying of the coming of the
Messiah into the world, Isa. 9.6.
says not only, A Child is borne, but unto US a child is borne, unto US a
son is given. So the Angels that were messengers of glad tidings, say, Luke
2.11.
Unto YOU is borne this day a Savior which is Christ the Lord. So the Prophets
and Apostles lay down to their hearers their particular sins, particular
punishments, and particular comforts when they repent. Our duty and comfort it
shall be, where God speaks to all his generally, to apply it our selves
particularly. As Seek ye my face: my heart answered unto thee, O Lord, Psalm.
27.8.
I will seek thy face.

The third use and fruit
Is comfort and rejoicing for the certainty of blessedness by faith in Christ
Jesus. So the Virgin Marie having much assurance of her own salvation: Luke
1.47.
Her spirit rejoiced in God her Savior. So the Lord bad his seauentie
disciples, Luke 10.20
Rejoice that their names were writtten in heaven. Now rejoicing which God
commands, is for good things that are certain, and not uncertain. Be it so,
that such as know not that the Lords love is toward them, are ever full of
doubting and uncertainty: and say, the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, by
Christ's revelation might be sure and certain of their own personal and
several salvation, but so cannot others. Let such be put in mind, that where
true faith is, there is also a true assurance of blessedness: the holy Ghost
teaching us, that faith, assurance, and rejoicing in the Lord, go together.
Romans 5.1
Justified by faith we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom also we have access by faith into the grace wherein we stand, and REJOICE
in hope of the glory of God. Phil. 4 4.
Again, Rejoice in the Lord always. Agreeable whereto is that in Peter. 1. Pet.
1.8.
-- In whom, though ye now see him not, yet believing YE REJOICE, with joy
unspeakable and full of glory. And for assurance and certainty, the holy
exhortation is: Heb. 10.22
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith. We could not
attain to this assurance of Gods love, But that we have received the Spirit
which is of God, 1. Cor. 2.12
that we might KNOW the things that are freely given to us of God. He it is
that persuades our hearts infallibly, enabling us to believe the power, truth,
and love of God to us. 1. Pet. 1.5.
We are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto salvation. What more
assurance can we desire? or what surer ground of rejoicing, then to know that
we are kept for salvation, and salvation kept for us? as it is there also said:
1. Pet. 1.4.
-- That the inheritance incorruptible is reserved in heaven for you. Yea and
that we might have strong consolation, we have the Lords oath, Heb. 6.18.
abundantly to show to the heirs of promise, the immutabilitie of Gods
counsel for blessing us. And as the Lord is true in his promises, so is he
constant in his love, the word witnessing that: John 13.1.
-- Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end.
Hence it is that we have boldness, Ephesians. 3.12 Heb. 4.16. Romans 5.2. 1. These.
1.5
and access with confidence by faith of him. Knowing the power of the word:
The Gospel coming unto us in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much
assurance; and the power of faith, that it is a ground or confidence, Heb. 11.1.
A substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. The phrase
or speech of Scripture, is not to doubt of Gods love, to ween, trow, or think
well: but to have confidence, assurance, to believe and to know: John 6.69.
We believe and know that thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. Romans
4.21.
Abraham was strong in faith, fully persuaded, that what God had promised he
was able to perform. Most comfortable are the words in John: Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
sons of God. -- Now are we the sons of God, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
and it does not yet appear, what we shall be; but WE KNOW, that when he shall
appear we shall be like unto him, for we shall see him as he is. Paul uses
much vehemency herein: 2. Cor. 13.5
Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith, examine your selves; KNOW YE not
your own selves, how that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be reprobates? And
in another place: 1. Cor. 3.16
KNOW YE not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? Martha speaking of her brother Lazarus that was dead, says: Ioh. 11.24.
I KNOW that he shall rise again, in the resurrection at the last day. Can we
know a certainty of the resurrection of the dead, and may we not as well know
the other parts of our faith which we confess, a particular, and true
assurance of the forgiveness of our sins, and of our living everlastingly in
the kingdom of Christ? Sure we are, the Lord checketh doubting, and reproves
staggering, mistrust, fearfulness, unbelief, and wavering, where we have any
promise to stay upon. Iam. 1.7.
Let not him that wauereth, think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.
Mat. 21.21 Mat. 14.3.
If ye have faith and doubt not. O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou
doubt? and Why are ye fearful, Mat. 8.26.
O ye of little faith? If it be objected that very faithful and holy men have
doubted, been dejected, and bewrayed their lack of this assurance of faith: as
Jonas, Jonas 2.4.
when he said, I am cast out of thy sight. David when he brake out: Is his
mercy clean gone for ever? Psalm. 77.9.
does his promise fail for evermore? Job, when he ran into extremity of
passion. Job 6.9.
O that God would destroy me, that he would let his hand go, and cut me off!

To these and the like we return this answer: that like as the beautiful
Sun is sometime eclipsed, and the light of it to usward, is diminished for a
time: and as Jacob, when he had prevailed with God, and got a blessing, Genesis
32.31.
yet halted on the one thigh: so the holiest upon the earth fall; and fail in
duty, and yet recover themselves through the seed of grace which God has put
in them, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
and so constantly to the end persist in grace and sanctimonie.

Yet to make it plain by a fuller manifestation, know: First, that at the
first conversion of a sinner, he has not full assurance of Gods love to him,
but believing his sins are pardonable, afterward by spiritual growth he
comes to persuasion, they are pardoned; lastly to an infallible assurance and
certainty thereof, as we read of Abraham, Romans 4.21 8.38.
and Paul. Faith is first like a bud, then a blossom, and after fruit of a
full growth. Eze. 47.3.
As the waters that issued out from under the Temple, first took the Prophet
to the ancles, the^ to the knees, after to the loins, lastly, became a river
that could not be passed over: so are the graces of God in his children, small
at the first, and have their growth both by degrees, and by attending to the
word of his grace. 2. These. 1.3
So Paul thanked God that the faith of the Thessalonians grew daily.

2. Secondly, by some fall into a heinous sin, faith is much weakened, even as
a man's body is by a sharp and sore disease: which moved David to cry, Psalm.
51.11.
Cast me not away from thy presence, take not thy holy spirit from me; restore
to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.

3. Thirdly, in time of grievous tentations, when Satan's suggestions move him
to think hardly of God, and to think of himself that he is but an hypocrite,
deceiving both himself and others; and though God be good to his Saints, yet
has he forsaken him, that he is no true member of Christ's Church, but as a
dead branch. Notwithstanding this fall in the spiritual combat, there is a
recovery, Psalm. 37.24.
God putting his hand under, that though he fall, yet he falls not away. In
such fearful skirmishes it is with Gods elect, as it was with the Patriarch
Jacob in his trials, for he once thought, that he had lost three of his
children: Joseph is not, Genesis 42.36.
and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin: yet through the kindness of his
God he received them all three again, to the great joy and gladness of his
heart. So when faith seems to be quite lost and extinguished, or at the most,
like a sparkle of fire covered with embers, yet where it once was in truth, it
is recovered fully, (as in David and Peter) and manifests it self, Mat. 8.25.
somewhile, in 1. Prayer; for though fainting faith said, We perish: yet
struggling, and recovering faith cried: Jonas 2.7.
Lord save us. Jonas soul fainted in him, Yet remembered the Lord, and his
prayer came to him in his holy Temple. Otherwise, by 2. Hope: -- On thee O Lord
do I wait, Psalm. 38.15.
thou will hear me my Lord my God. Why art thou cast down my soul, why art
thou disquieted within me? Wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks, he is
my present help and my God. In 3. Humiliation also: 2. Sam. 15.26.
If he say I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as
seems good in his eyes. The perplexity of some in sundry temptations is not
unlike David's, and his men at Ziglag, who in their own sense were miserable,
when their wives and children, (and all that they had) were carried a way
captives; and yet behold, after careful using of good and discreet means, 1.
Sam. 30.3.19.
recovered all that the Amalekites had taken away. So though for a moment we
are dejected, and seem to be forlorn: yet God in his time, Psalm. 63.5.
(which is always simply best) gives a recovery, with comfort and rejoicing
in the Lord. Noah's arc may be much tossed, rocked and shaken; but drowned it
cannot be: so the faith of the Saints is assaulted, weakened, and battered, but
never finally and wholly overcome. 2. Cor. 4.8.
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed: perplexed, but not in
despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. The bush
burned and consumed not, Exodus 3.2.
for God was in the midst of it.

To draw to an end, that the called, chosen, and faithful, may have sincere
rest, tranquillity, comfort of mind and conscience, a true and undoubted
assurance of eternal blessedness by Jesus Christ, God that is the giver of
the gift, gives also witness thereof. Romans 8.16.
Gods Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.
1. Ioh. 3.24.
And as John says (who most clearly and often teaches this infallible
certainty,) Hereby we know he abides in us, 4.13.5.13.
even by the Spirit which he has given us. Now the fruits of our spirit
renewed by his Spirit, though they are not all, in all believers, in like
measure, and at all times; yet are they of such power, as give us comfort, and
discern us from the ungodly and wicked, they are to us pledges of Gods love,
and as the gate of heaven: as namely, a searching out of our sins and
defections, a groaning under the burden of them, an hatred and abhorring of
them, a striving against them, a labor and watchfulness to prevent sins,
and timely to cut off the occasions of them; a mourning for the sins of the
land, an hungring after righteousness, true love to God and his children, and
the word of his grace; patient hope, waiting on God, knowing that he will
bless both prosperity and adversity unto us; a desire above all things to
please God, uprightness of heart without hypocrisy, and endeavor to keep a
good conscience, to walk in our calling faithfully and chearefully; boldness
with God, in humble prayer, thankfulness for all his goodness to us, these
and the like do assure us that we are borne of God. As for our certainty to
persevere in grace, the foundation of it is not on the earth, (for so it would
fall,) but on the Lords faithfulness. He now has the keeping of us, and of
our bliss; it is not in our hands, as it was in Adams, who quickly lost it. He
will confirm you to the end, 1. Cor. 1.8.
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is
faithful, by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ
our Lord. Yea he has made a sure Covenant, so to renew us, Iere. 32.40.
that He will put his fear into our hearts, that we may never depart from him.

Marvelous is the light that God has put into man's eye, whereby he sees the
earth about him, and the heavens above him, without pain, in a moment: but
more admirable is the sight of faith, which can see before the world God
electing us to salvation in his Son our head, in the world redeeming us by
his Son our Mediator, after the world glorifying us with his Son our King
in the heavens for evermore. The love of God (which is our life) is ancient,
free, sweet, constant, great, unspeakable, incomprehensible and eternal. God
has given his Son to be our Savior: his Spirit to be our Comforter, Isa.
60.19.
and he will be our glory eternally. Let all the Lords redeemed say, and that
continually, with devout and religious hearts: My soul does magnify the Lord,
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Blessing and glory, Reu. 7.12.
and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our
God for ever and ever, Amen.

The comfort of a Christian, by assurance of Gods love to him.
MY peace of heart, my happiness,
My sweetest joy is this:
Ephe. 1.4.
That God me loved, ere world was made,
And purposed me to bliss.
John 13.1.
This sure decree for lasting life,
This bounty great and free:
Ephe. 1.5. John 6.39. Romans 5.12.17.
He has fulfild in Christ his Son,
Whom he has given for me.
Our fall in Adam fearful was;
We left a cursed race:
Yet Christ our King, the Lord of life,
Act. 15.11. John 5.25.
Has saved us, by his grace.
A powerful voice his Gospel has,
To raise up dead in sin:
2. These. 2.14. Act. 11.17.
Whom he does call effectually,
Are strongly brought to him.
I called, I come: I run with joy,
I haste Lord unto thee:
Mar. 10.49
As Bartimeus boldly went,
When Christ said: Come to me.
Act. 11.18.
Repentance thou do give to life,
The seal of thy sure love:
Mat. 21.32.
By it I stand in state of grace,
As newborn from above.
When Law does give me sight of sin, Romans 7.7. 1. Chro. 34.27.

My soul does melt and rent:
My troubled sp'rite, and broken heart,
Does grieve and much lament. Job 33.27. Ier. 31.19. Psalm. 32.5. 1. Tim. 1.13

I am ashamed of all my faults,
To God I them confess:
I judge my self a wickedwretch,
And of my self helpless.
When sin and Satan bid despair,
Gods voice speaks to mine ear:
Believe in Christ, his grace is great, Act. 16.31.

Shake off mistrustfull fear.
He mercy shows to humbled men,
Heart-wounded he does cure: Luke 4.18. Luke 1.53.

He fills the fainting soul with joy,
Their comfort he makes sure.
He great, he good, he slow to wrath, Exodus 34.6.

He kindness shows to all:
He casts-off none that seek to him, John 6.37.

Yea he does sinners call.
All ye that weary are of sin,
Whom it does lode and quell:
Come ye to me, I will you ease, Mat. 11.28.

My peace with you shall dwell.
These gracious words of Christ my Lord, Cant. 5.2. Ier. 31.3.

These comforts strongly pierce:
This Gospel moves my heart to bleed,
My sobs for sin increase:
Psalm. 51.4.
That I my God, my Father dear,
With sins should so provoke:
Genesis 39.9.
And having found such mercy rare,
Should so cast off his yoke.
Iere. 9.1.
A flood of tears I do desire,
To weep both night and day:
Ephe. 4.30.
Tha^ I have grieved the spirit of grace,
And turned his face away.
In stead thereof, some holy flames,
Are kindled from above:
Luke 7.47.
And many sins to me forgiven,
My God I do much love.
My self, my service joyfully,
Psalm. 119.106.
A fresh to him I vow:
With settled heart, to tread the path,
That he does best allow.
Genesis 5.22.
My care is now to walk with God,
To trust in him for aye:
On him to hope, and him to love,
In all things to obey.
1. Cor. 10.31. Psalm. 145.2. Psalm. 16.3.
His glory I will soundly seek,
His praises forth will tell:
In Saints on earth will I delight,
In virtue that excel.
Psalm. 119.111.
His holy word will I esteem,
As rule of life most pure:
And strive to live as it directs,
To make my calling sure. 2. Pet. 1.10.

The life of grace, as way to bliss,
I wholly will embrace:
And shun allwaies of wickedness,
That may my life disgrace.
Yea I will war against all sin, 1. Tim. 6.12 Ephe. 6.10.

And stoutly still will fight:
Persuaded sure through Christ my King,
To conquer by his might.
And though through frailty of my flesh,
I fail, I fall, or sin:
Mine inward man does it detest, Romans 7.15.

And loath to lie therein.
My heart can witness, that by me
When Gods Law was transgrest:
It was not I, but Adam old, Romans 7.17.

Indwelling-sinne, my guest.
Which like unto Goliath strong,
Does daily vex and rage:
Whereas mine inward man is weak,
Like David young of age.
Yet shall mine inward David once, 1. Sam. 17.51.

Triumphantly prevail:
And great Goliath overthrow,
Who does so sore assail.
Mean while, each conquest over sin,
Makes Gods love to appear:
Psalm. 116.17
And I new thanks, and praise to him,
Will offer in his fear.
Another sign of Gods sure love,
I cannot choose but know:
In that both Devil, and foes did rage,
Psalm. 41.11.
Yet could not me down throw.
For God my strength, did me uphold,
And kept me safe and sure:
1. Sam. 12.22. Psalm. 136.1.
He is no changling now to shrink,
His mercies still endure.
And though my falls bring grief and fear,
I shall not fall away:
John. 8.28.
The sheep of God cannot be lost,
Although they go astray.
Eze. 34.11.
For Christ does go to wilderness,
When one sheep he does lack:
He seeks it there, until he find,
Mat. 18.12.
And brings it on his back.
The Covenant old to do us good,
And put in us his fear:
Ier. 32.40.
That we from him should not depart,
It does my soul much cheer.
Luke 22.32
That Peter's faith might never fail,
Christ here on earth did pray:
He now in heaven my Advocate,
Will me uphold and stay.
A surer seal, a sweeter pledge,
God gives me inwardly:
His holy Spirit, which in my heart, Romans 8.16.

Does Abba Father cry.
My free Adoption he makes known, 1. Ioh. 2.20

My dear Redemption seals:
My full Atonement with my God, Romans 8.16.

He inwardly reueales.
He bends my heart unto his will, Eze. 36.27

He guides me by his Law:
To trust in him, to love him still,
On him to stand in awe.
His power sometimes though I feel not,
Through sin, and fleshly fear:
Yet seed of grace, sown in my heart, 1. Ioh. 3.9.

In time does me vpreare.
His love so old, so sweet, so firm,
My heart with joy does fill:
Whom once he loves, he never leaves, Ioh. 13.1.

But does embrace him still.
The legacy of lasting life, Romans 6.23.

His gift it is, most free:
How then can any thing debar,
Or keep the same from me?
Wherefore were seals to Covenant set? Mat. 26.28 Isa. 34.9.

Why did our Lord often swear?
But to cheer up the fainting soul,
And make his love appear.
Hence I by faith, unto my self
Gods promises apply:
Gal. 2.20.
And say with Paul, Christ so loved me,
That he did for me die.
Ioh 18.17. Ioh. 20.24. Mat. 12.20.
And though with Peter I fall far,
Or do with Thomas doubt:
Thou that breakst not the bruised reed,
Nor smoking flax put out:
As thou did them restore in grace,
And made them to abide:
So will thou me, who only art
Ioh. 20, 28.
My King, my God, my guide.
So whether it be thy holy will,
Romans 14.8
That I shall live or die:
I am thine own, and so shall be,
Now and eternally.
Luke 1.47.
Wherefore in God my Savior,
My soul do thou rejoice:
In praising of his holy Name,
Lift up a cheerful voice.
Psalm. 107.22
In offering up such sacrifice,
Lord make me spend my days:
Make it my study, and my joy,
To give thee thanks and praise.
The Complaints of a Sinner. The Comforts of our Savior.
SINNER. Conceived in sin, in sin brought forth, Psalm. 51.5. Romans 7.14 Romans
5.12. Genesis 8.21.

Sold under sin I was:
Seed of all sin, in me: vile, vain,
I ugly am, alas.

SAVIOVR. A Savior I, am to that flock, 2. Cor. 6.17 Ioh. 1.13. 1. Cor. 6.11

Whom I anew create:
Thou borne of God, by new birth art,
Through me, in happy state.

SINNER. The Law of God, as just, and good, Romans 7.10.7.12.

Does bless who it fulfill:
But me for my foul faults and sins,
It does both curse and kill. Gal. 3.10.


SAVIOVR. The holy Law of God most high,
I have fulfilled for thee: Romans 10.4 Heb. 8.10. Act. 16.31.

Believe the Covenant of my grace,
And blessed thou shall be.

SINNER. The guilt of sin, breeds grief, and dread, Romans 6.21 7.11.

It wounds as a sword:
Psalm. 38.
An hell on earth it seems to me,
What help for this O Lord?

SAVIOVR. 1. Pet. 3.18 1. Pet. 2.24.
When I the just, for unjust died,
And bare your sins on tree:
From guilt of sin, I clearly set
Eze. 18.27.
Repentant sinners free,

SINNER. Romans 6.23. 1. Cor. 10.5.
Sharp punishments, with wrathful rods,
By each sin we procure:
What mortal man can them escape,
Or yet the stripes endure?

SAVIOVR. John 1.29. Ioh. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
The Lamb of God your sins has borne,
Believers are made free:
To work amendment, rods are sent,
To try, and humble thee.

SINNER. Romans 7.23
Sins bondage, blinds, besots my mind,
My heart to evil bends:
Romans 8.7.
To hate the good, to love the bad,
To aim at sinful ends.

SAVIOVR. Romans 6.22.
Thou servant made to righteousness,
By my grace art set free:
2. Cor. 10.4
Though yet a while thou tug and toil,
Till warfare ended be.

SINNER. Through flesh so frail I often am foild, Romans 7.15.

What I would not, I do:
What good I would, I leave undone, Romans 7.19.

This weakness works my woe.

SAVIOVR. Yet spirit often the flesh does courbe, Romans 7.22. 1. Cor. 9.27 Romans
8.13

And shall in time all sway:
This battle will a conquest bring,
To perfect peace make way.

SINNER. The wicked world on evil set, 1. Ioh. 5.14.

Allures me unto sin:
Has sundry snares, and fearful plagues, Iam. 4.4.

And often wraps me therein.

SAVIOVR. Thy home is heaven, seek after it; 2. Cor. 5.2.

Vain worldly pleasures fly:
A friend to world, is foe to God; Iam. 4.4.

Love thou the things on hie.

SINNER. The ugly Devil sweld with spite, Reu. 12.17.

To sin does tempt me still:
And Lion-like seeks here and there, 1. Pet. 5.8.

Whom to devour and kill.

SAVIOVR. Iam. 4.7. Ioh. 12.31.
By faith resist, and he will fly,
From heaven he is out cast:
Romans 16.20.
And under foot he shall be trod,
Through my great power at last.

SINNER. Heb. 2.15.
Unwelcome death, so ghastly grim,
Untimely comes with speed:
Heb. 9.27.
My precious life it will cut off,
And keeps me in much dreed.

SAVIOVR. 1. Cor. 15.55. Philip. 1.21
I conquered Death, Deaths sting is gone,
It ends thy cares and sin:
To lasting life its as a gate,
By it thou entrest in.

SINNER. Luke 16.24.
Hell Torments are a living death,
The pains of easelesse woe:
Reu. 19.^0
For sinners these prepared of old,
These fright my heart also.

SAVIOVR. Job 42.6.
Mourn for thy sins, abhor thy self;
Have steadfast faith in me:
Reu. 20.14.
I vanquished death, and hell also,
For all that faithful be.

SINNER. The dreadful day of doom draws on,
When all men must appear: 2. Cor. 5.10

The Judge is just, our sins are great, Act. 17.31.

What will then ease my fear?

SAVIOVR. The righteous Judge thy Savior is, John 5.27.

Who will thee surely bliss:
But hypocrites will send to hell, Mat. 24.51.

The righteous doom is this.

SINNER. O Savior sweet, my life, my light,
Instruct me to know thee:
What is thy will, what is that good,
Thou have laid up for me.
Unfeigned faith in me increase,
And make me strong therein:
To vanquish Satan, doubts, and fears,
And each presumptuous sin.
Teach me with patient hope, to wait
On thy good pleasure still:
With true submission of my heart,
And conquest of my will.
My frozen heart set thou on fire,
With love of thee my Lord:
With love of grace, of heaven, of Saints,
With love of thy sweet word.
The holy fear of thy great Name,
So put into my heart:
As may cause me from wickedness,
And from all sin depart.
The sacrifice of daily thanks,
From ground of heart I give:
To thee my God, with ioyfulnesse,
By whom my soul does live.
Let all my life set forth thy praise,
And therein never cease:
O grant me growth in godliness,
O let mine end be peace.

FINIS.

