THE PASSIONATE PILGRIM. By W. Shakespeare.

AT LONDON Printed for W. Iaggard, and are to be sold by W. Leake, at the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1599.

WHen my Love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her (though I know she lies)
That she might think me some vntutor'd youth,
Unskillful in the worlds false forgeries.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although I know my years be past the best:
I smiling, credit her false speaking tongue,
Outfacing faults in Love, with loves ill rest.
But wherefore says my Love that she is young?
And wherefore say not I, that I am old?
O, Loves best habit is a soothing tongue,
And Age (in Love) loves not to have years told.
Therefore I Will lie with Love, and Love with me,
Since that our faults in Love thus smothered be.
TWo Loves I have, of Comfort, and Despair,
That like two Spirits, do suggest me still:
My better Angel is a Man (right fair)
My worser spirit a Woman (colored ill.)
To win me soon to hell, my Female evil
Tempts my better Angel from my side,
And would corrupt my Saint to be a Devil,
Wooing his purity with her fair pride.
And whether that my Angel be turnde feend,
Suspect I may (yet not directly tell:
For being both to me: both, to each friend,
I guess one Angel in another hell:
The truth I shall not know, but live in doubt,
Till my bad Angel fire my good one out.
DId not the heavenly Rhetorike of thine eye,
Against whom the world could not hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury:
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore: but I will prove
Thou being a Goddess, I forswore not thee:
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love,
Thy grace being gainde, cures all disgrace in me.
My vow was breath, and breath a vapor is,
Then thou fair Sun, that on this earth does shine,
Exhale this vapor vow, in thee it is:
If broken, then it is no fault of mine.
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
To break an Oath, to win a Paradise?
SWeet Cytherea, sitting by a Brook,
With young Adonis, lovely, fresh and green,
Did court the Lad with many a lovely look,
Such looks as none could look but beauties queen.
She told him stories, to delight his ears:
She showed him favors, to allure his eye:
To win his heart, she touched him here and there,
Touches so soft still conquer chastity.
But whether unripe years did want conceit,
Or he refusde to take her figured proffer,
The tender nibler would not touch the bait,
But smile, and jest, at every gentle offer:
Then fell she on her back, fair queen, and toward
He rose and ran away, ah fool too froward.
IF Love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
O, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed:
Though to my self forsworn, to thee I Will constant prove,
those thoghts to me like Oaks, to thee like Osiers bowed*
Studdy his byas leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,
where all those pleasures live, that Art can comprehend*
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice:
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend,
All ignorant that soul, that sees thee without wonder,
Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admyre:
Thine eye Jove's lightning seems, thy voice his dreadful thunder
which (not to anger bent) is music and sweet fire
Celestial as thou art, O, do not love that wrong:
To sing heavens praise, with such an earthly tongue.
Scarce had the Sun dride up the deawy morn,
And scarce the heard gone to the hedge for shade:
When Cytherea (all in Love forlorn)
A longing tariance for Adonis made
Under an Osyer growing by a brook,
A brook, where Adon used to cool his spleen:
Hot was the day, she hotter that did look
For his approach, that often there had been.
Anon he comes, and throws his Mantle by,
And stood stark naked on the brooks green brim:
The Sun looked on the world with glorious eye,
Yet not so wistly, as this Queen on him:
He spying her, bounst in (whereas he stood)
Oh JOVE (qouth she) why was not I a flood?
Fair is my love, but not so fair as fickle.
Mild as a Dove, but neither true nor trusty,
Brighter then glass, and yet as glass is brittle,
Softer then wax, and yet as Iron rusty:
A lilly pale, with damask die to grace her,
None fairer, nor none falser to deface her.
Her lips to mine how often has she joined,
Between each kiss her oaths of true love swearing*
How many tales to please me has she coined,
Dreading my love, the loss whereof still fearing.
Yet in the mids of all her pure protestings,
Her faith, her oaths, her tears, and all were ieastings.
She burnt with love, as straw with fire flameth,
She burnt out love, as soon as straw out burns:
She framd the love, and yet she foyld the framing,
She bad love last, and yet she fell a turning.
Was this a lover, or a Letcher whether*
Bad in the best, though excellent in neither.
IF Music and sweet Poetry agree,
As they must needs (the Sister and the brother)
Then must the love be great twixt thee and me,
Because thou love the one, and I the other.
Dowland to thee is dear, whose heavenly tuch
Upon the Lute, does ravish humane sense:
Spenser to me, whose deep Conceit is such,
As passing all conceit, needs no defense.
Thou love to hear the sweet melodious sound,
That Phoebus Lute (the Queen of Music) makes:
And I in deep Delight am chiefly drowned,
When as himself to singing he betakes.
One God is God of both (as Poets feign)
One Knight loves Both, and both in thee remain.
Fair was the morn, when the fair Queen of love,
Paler for sorrow then her milk white Dove,
For Adons sake, a youngster proud and wild,
Her stand she takes upon a steep up hill.
Anon Adonis comes with horn and hounds,
She silly Queen, with more then loves good will,
Forbad the boy he should not pass those grounds,
Once (quoth she) did I see a fair sweet youth
Here in these brakes, deep wounded with a Boar,
Deep in the thigh a spectacle of ruth,
See in my thigh (quoth she) here was the sore,
She showed hers, he saw more wounds then one,
And blushing fled, and left her all alone.
SWeet Rose, fair flower, untimely plucked, soon vaded,
Plucked in the bud, and vaded in the spring*
Bright orient pearl, alack too timely shaded,
Fair creature kilde too soon by Deaths sharp sting:
Like a green plumbe that hangs upon a tree:
And falls (through vinde) before the fall should be.
I weep for thee, and yet no cause I have,
For why: thou lefts me nothing in thy will.
And yet thou lefts me more then I did crave,
For why: I craved nothing of thee still:
O yes (dear friend I pardon crave of thee,
Thy discontent thou did bequeath to me.
VEnus with Adonis sitting by her,
Under a Myrtle shade began to woo him,
She told the youngling how god Mars did try her,
And as he fell to her, she fell to him.
Even thus (quoth she) the warlike god embraced me:
And then she clipped Adonis in her arms:
Even thus (quoth she) the warlike god vnlac't me,
As if the boy should use like loving charms:
Even thus (quoth she) he seized on my lips,
And with her lips on his did act the seizure:
And as she fetched breath, away he skips,
And would not take her meaning nor her pleasure.
Ah, that I had my Lady at this bay:
To kiss and clip me till I run away.
Crabbed age and youth cannot live together,
Youth is full of pleasance, Age is full of care,
Youth like summer morn, Age like winter weather,
Youth like summer brave, Age like winter bare.
Youth is full of sport, Ages breath is short,
Youth is nimble, Age is lame
Youth is hot and bold, Age is weak and cold,
Youth is wild, and Age is tame.
Age I do abhor thee, Youth I do adore thee,
O my love my love is young:
Age I do defy thee. Oh sweet Shepherd hie thee:
For me thinks thou stays too long.
BEauty is but a vain and doubtful good,
A shining gloss, that vadeth suddenly,
A flower that dies, when first it gins to bud,
A brittle glass, that's broken presently.
A doubtful good, a gloss, a glass, a flower,
Lost, vaded, broken, dead within an hour.
And as goods lost, are seld or never found,
As vaded gloss no rubbing will refresh:
As flowers dead, he withered on the ground,
As broken glass no symant can redress.
So beauty blemished once, for ever lost,
In spite of physic, painting, pain and cost.
Good night, good rest, ah neither be my share,
She bad good night, that kept my rest away,
And daft me to a cabben hangde with care:
To descant on the doubts of my decay.
Farewell (quoth she) and come again to morrow
Fare well I could not, for I supt with sorrow.
Yet at my parting sweetly did she smile,
In scorn or friendship, nill I conster whether:
'Tmay be she ioyd to jest at my exile,
'Tmay be again, to make me wander thither.
Wander (a word) for shadows like my self,
As take the pain but cannot pluck the pelf.
Lord how mine eyes throw gazes to the East,
My heart does charge the watch, the morning rise
Does site each moving scence from idle rest,
Not daring trust the office of mine eyes.
While Philomela sits and sings, I sit and mark,
And with her lays were tuned like the lark.
For she does welcome daylight with her ditte,
And drives away dark dreaming night:
The night so packt, I post unto my pretty,
Heart has his hope, and eyes their wished sight,
Sorrow changd to solace, and solace mixed with sorrow*
For why, she sight, and bad me come to morrow.
Were I with her, the night would post too soon,
But now are minutes added to the hours:
To spite me now, each minute seems an hour,
Yet not for me, shine sun to succor flowers.
Pack night, peep day, good day of night now borrow
Short night to night, and length thy self to morrow
SONNETS To sundry notes of Music.

AT LONDON Printed for W. Iaggard, and are to be sold by W. Leake, at the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1599.

IT was a Lordings daughter, the fairest one of three
That liked of her master, as well as well might be,
Till looking on an Englishman, the fairest that eye coul
Her fancy fell a turning.
Long was the combat doubtful, that love with love did
To leave the master louelesse, or kill the gallant knight
To put in practice either, alas it was a spite
Unto the silly damsel.
But one must be refused, more mickle was the pain,
That nothing could be used, to turn them both to gain
For of the two the trusty knight was wounded with di(...)
Alas she could not help it.
Thus art with arms contending, was victor of the day
Which by a gift of learning, did bear the maid away,
Then lullaby the learned man has got the Lady gay,
For now my song is ended.
ON a day (alack the day)
Love whose month was ever May
Spied a blossom passing fair,
Playing in the wanton air,
Through the velvet leaves the wind
All unseen began passage find,
That the lover (sick to death)
Wished himself the heavens breath,
Air (quoth he) thy cheeks may blow
Air, would I might triumph so
But (alas) my hand has sworn,
Nere to pluck thee from thy throne,
Vow (alack) for youth unmeet,
Youth, so apt to pluck a sweet,
Thou for whom Jove would swear,
Juno but an Ethiope were
And deny himself for Jove
Turning mortal for thy Love.
MY flocks feed not, my Ewes breed not,
My Rams speed not, all is amiss:
Love is dying, Faithes defying,
Hearts nenying, causer of this.
All my merry Iigges are quite forgot,
All my Ladies love is lost (god wot)
Where her faith was firmly fixed in love,
There a nay is placed without remove.
One silly cross, wrought all my loss,
O frowning fortune cursed fickle dame,
For now I see, inconstancy,
More in wowen then in men remain.
In black morn I, all fears scorn I,
Love has sorlorne me, living in thrall:
Heart is bleeding, all help needing,
O cruel speeding, fraughted with gall.
My shepherds pipe can sound no deal,
My weathers bell rings doleful knell,
My curtaile dog that wont to have played,
Plays not at all but seems afraid.
With sighs so deep, procures to weep,
In howling wise, to see my doleful plight,
How sighs resound through hartles ground
Like a thousand vanquished men in blodie fight.
Clear wels spring not, sweet birds sing not,
Green plants bring not forth their die,
Herds stands weeping, flocks all sleeping,
Nymphs black peeping fearfully:
All our pleasure known to us poor swains:
All our merry meetings on the plains,
All our evening sport from us is fled,
All our love is lost, for love is dead,
Farewell sweet love thy like nere was,
For a sweet content the cause of all my woe,
Poor Coridon must live alone,
Other help for him I see that there is none.
When as thine eye has chose the Dame,
And stalde the dear that thou should strike,
Let reason rule things worthy blame,
As well as fancy (partyall might)
Take counsel of some wiser head,
Neither too young, nor yet vnwed.
And when thon comst thy tale to tell,
Smooth not thy tongue with filed talk,
Least she some subtle practice smell,
A Cripple soon can find a halt,
But plainly say thou loust her well,
And set her person forth to sale.
What though her frowning brows be bent
Her cloudy looks will calm yer night,
And then too late she will repent,
That thus dissembled her delight.
And twice desire yet it be day,
That which with scorn she put away.
What though she strive to try her strength,
And ban and braule, and say the nay:
Her feeble force will yield at length,
When craft has taught her thus to say:
Had women been so strong as men
In faith you had not had it then.
And to her will frame all thy ways,
Spare not to spend, and chiefly there,
Where thy desert may merit praise
By ringiug in thy Ladies ear,
The strongest castle, tower and town,
The golden bullet beats it down.
Serve always with assured trust,
And in thy suit be humble true,
Unless thy Lady prove unjust,
Prease never thou to choose a new:
When time shall serve, be thou not slack,
To proffer thongh she put thee back.
The wiles and guiles that women work,
Dissembled with an outward show:
The tricks and toys that in them lurk,
The Cock that treads the^ shall not know,
Have you not heard it said full often,
A Woman's nay does stand for naught.
Think Women still to strive with men,
To sin and never for to saint,
There is no heaven (by holy then)
When time with age shall them attaint,
Were kisses all the joys in bed,
One Woman would another wed.
But soft enough, too much I fear,
Least that my mistress hear my song*
She will not stick to round me on the are,
To teach my tongue to be so long:
Yet will she blush, here be it said,
To hear her secrets so bewraid.
Live with me and be my Love,
And we will all the pleasures prove
That hills and valleys, dales and fields,
And all the craggy mountains yield.
There will we sit upon the Rocks,
And see the Shepherds feed their flocks,
By shallow Rivers, by whose falls
Melodious birds sing Madrigals.
There will I make thee a bed of Roses,
With a thousand fragrant poses,
A cap of flowers, and a Kirtle
Imbrodered all with leaves of Myrtle.
A belt of straw and Yuye buds,
Wi^h Coral Clasps and Amber studs,
And if these pleasures may thee move,
Then live with me, and be my Love.
Loves answer.
IF that the World and Love were young*
And truth in every shepherds tongue,
These pretty pleasures might me move,
To live with thee and be thy Love.
AS it fell upon a Day,
In the merry Month of May,
Sitting in a pleasant shade,
Which a grove of Myrtles made,
Beasts did leap, and Birds did sing,
Trees did grow, and Plants did spring:
Every thing did banish moan,
Save the Nightingale alone.
She (poor Bird) as all forlorn,
Leand her breast vp-till a thorn,
And there sung the dolefulst Ditty,
That to hear it was great Pity,
Fie, fie, fie, now would she cry
Teru, Teru, by and by:
That to hear her so complain,
Scarce I could from tears refrain:
For her griefs so lively shown,
Made me think upon mine own.
Ah (thought I) thou mournst in vain,
None takes pity on thy pain:
Senseless Trees, they cannot hear thee,
Ruthlesse Bears, they will not cheer thee.
King Pandion, he is dead:
All thy friends are lapt in Lead.
All thy fellow Birds do sing,
Careless of thy sorrowing.
Whilst as fickle Fortune smilde,
Thou and I, were both beguild.
Every one that flatters thee,
Is no friend in misery:
Words are easy, like the wind,
Faithful friends are hard to find:
Every man will be thy friend,
Whilst thou have wherewith to spend:
But if store of Crowns be scant,
No man will supply thy want
If that one be prodigal,
Bountiful they will him call:
And with suchlike flattering,
Pity but he were a King.
If he be addict to vice,
Quickly him, they will entice.
If to Women he be bent,
They have at Commandment.
But if Fortune once do frown,
Then farewell his great renown:
They that fawnd on him before.
Use his company no more.
He that is thy friend indeed,
He will help thee in thy need:
If thou sorrow, he will weep:
If thou wake, he cannot sleep:
Thus of every grief, in heart
He, with thee, does bear a part.
These are certain signs, to know
Faithful friend, from flattering foe.

