CVPIDS Whirligig.

As it has been sundry times Acted by the Children of the Kings Majesty's
Revels.

LONDON. Imprinted by E. Allde, and are to be sold by Arthur Johnson, at the
sign of the white Horse, nere the great North door of Saint Paul's Church.
1607.

The Actors names.
The Old Lord Nonsuch. Alderman Venture. A Merchant Sir Timothy Troublesome. a
iealious Knight The Lady Troublesome. The iealious Knights wife Master
Correction. The Pedant Mistress Correction. The Midwife Peg. The Lady
Troublesomes Kinswoman Nan. Old Venters Daughter. Nucome. The Welsh Courtier
Boy. Nucomes Page The four Scholars. The young Lord Nonsuch a Begging
Soldier. Slack. aswaggering captain.
Master Exhibition, The Ins^a^court man.
To his much honored, beloved, respected, and judicial friend* Master Robert
Hayman.
SIR, I must needs discharge two Epistles upon you the one the Readers, that
should be like hail shot* that scatters and strikes a multitude, the other
dedicatory, like a bullet, that aims only at your self: if either do strike
you, it shall be at your choice, whether I shall hit you in the head, to let
you understand my meaning, or in the heart, to make you conceive my love: yet I
must confess, I had rather express my love out of the flint, then my meaning
in any part of the shot. I aim at you rather then the Reader, because since
our travails I have been pregnant with desire to bring forth something
whereunto you may be witness, and now being brought a bed if you please to be
Godfather, I doubt not b^t this child shall be well maintained, seeing he
cannot live above an hour with you, and therefore shall entreat you, when he
is dead, he may be buried deep enough in your good opinion, and he shall
deserve this Epitaph:

Here lies the Child, who was borne in mirth, against the strict rules of all
Childe-birth: and to be quit, I gave him to my friend, Who laughed him to death,
and that was his end.

Yours while he is his own: E: S

The Prologue
Our Authors Pen, loves not to swim in blood,
He dips no Ink, from out black Acheron:
Nor suckes invention, from the depth of hell,
Nor crosses Seas to get a foreign plot.
He taxes no Goddesses for foulest lust,
Nor does disclose the secret scapes of Jove:
He rips not up the horred maw of hell,
To show foul treasons hideous ouglie face.
Nor does he touch the falls of mighty Kings,
No ancient History, no Shepherds love.
No states-mans life, no power of death he shows.
He only strives with mirth to please each one,
Since laughter is peculiar unto man.
and being sure, freely to speak can be no sin,
If honest words have honest consturing.
Therefore to fly the least cause of offense,
He only finds but words, you find the sense:
Wherefore, if ought unto your ear taste tart,
Thank but your selves, which good to ill convert,
Yet this he ought, has stricktly charged me say:
That he is a slave, and of a base condition,
That does but draw it to suspicion.
That here he privately taxes any man,
Since all the world yeeldes vice to play upon.
What he intends, action shall make you know,
I should fore-stall the play, should I but show.
CVPIDS Whirligig.
The Scene in London.
Enter Cupid. With feathered speed I pierced the Air,
The clouds a sunder I did tear,
And thus with wings and bow come I
Newly from Jove's hye Court in sky.
My mother kis'd me at our parting,
But did charge me leave my darting,
And with a strict command did say,
Boy, on a Whirligig go play.
But such a round i will make him run,
As he shall end, where first begun.
My scourg-stickes shall be made of Darts,
Fethered with sighs of Lovers hearts.
Which made them fly with swiftest flight,
As lightning in tempestious night.
My scourge it self, are golden tresses,
More ritcher far then chains of Esses.
With which i will make some dance a Iigge,
More rounder yet then ere did Gig.
But time does call me to be gone,
Yet first to all you lookers on,
Before I part, I thus much tell,
That Gods can go invisibell.
And though you do not all times eye me,
Yet know at all times, I am by ye.
And be assured, and do not think
But that you stand full nere the brinke
Of my displeasure: which if ye win,
In love i will make ye sink or swim.
Thus farewell all, sit patient yet a while,
Least Cupid make your selves, your selves beguile.
Enter the old Lord Nonsuch Alderman Venture, Sir Timothy Troublesome. Venture.
MY Lord, you know your self and I have long lived friends, and shall we now
with firm affection knit? tie fast our friendship in our Of-springs love,
convey our cares in one, our goods together, and our loves in them, and whiles
the remnant of our aged days do last, lets do'ff all discontents, cast by the
worlds incombers, and leave the careful burden of keeping that, was care
enough to get upon the youthful hope of their more able strength.


Old Lord. O Neighbor Venture, do you not know that to marry a Child, is
but to mar a man? for he that cuts a tender twig in springing, both marres
his length and spoils his growing: my son shall first see twenty years of
age, before my condesent shall once be given to make him father of a son:
Besides, your daughter yet is very young: and though in Women's sex it is always
seen, desire to marriage rides always in post; yet in their Inn repentance is
their host: the fault of this is always known to be, through foolish
husbands: or such as are to young, for Children to their wives are like fruit
half ripe, they yield no taste, nor give no sweet delight.


Enter the young Lord. Ven. Behold, here comes my young Lord, the very
model of your self, the Vigor of your youth, and strength of all your future
hopes.


Old Lord. And he is welcome, what sudden gust (my Son) in have has
blown thee hither, and made thee leave the Court, where so many earth-treading
stars adornes the sky of state? or as the summers speckled flowery garment is
spread about the seat of Majesty? what is the reason thou have left this
earthly Paradise, to visit us before our expectation?


Young Lord. My love dear Father (to your fair wife) has made my hours of
absence from this place, seem teadious years, I could not but return from
whence I came, as like to man, the which of clay was framde, at first did walk
a while upon the earth, but in the end returned to dust; or like a River, which
through the earth does draw his life and spring from out the sea. Thus I that
from you sprung, have run my course awhile, but now as to my sea, return to
you again.


Old Lord. Thy answer with thy wisdom has enriched thy welcome: dear
friends, I pray you set your hands to this my deed.

Exit old Lord.
Ven. I do my Lord, with all devoted love.

Exit. Ven.
Kni. And I which hate my wife his mistress: his welcome home, will breed my
ill at home, I breed my horns as Children teeth, with sickness and with
pain: and yet I will with as smoothe a face as my wife will give me leave,
make show of welcome. Sir, I much rejoice to see you, and doubt not, but ere
long, youl'^ come and see where my poor house does stand.


Young Lo. Or else I were unworthy of your love if I neglect the visitation of
so kind friends as your self and my dear mistress.

Visitation! my wife's not sick, what visitation? It Is I am ill, it is the horn
plague I have, I am sure that is not Gods visitation, yet they are the Lords
tokens, for he has sent them me: but marry when you will, i will try and you
be a Chandler, i will see if you will take your own tokens again: well, but in the
mean time, I am marked for death, yet he will be in the pit before me. O that I
should be a Cuckold! a creature of the last edition, and yet of the old print.


Enter Wages. VVag. O sir, What make you here, when there is a gallant
Gentleman newly come from Court, talking within with my Lady.


Kni. Ye^ more Courtiers, more Gallants, more Gentlemen? now in a hundred
thousand horned diuils names, what makes a there? what is a gone to bed to your
Lady? does a Cuckold me in mine own house, in mine own chamber? nay in mine
own Sheets? what he is come to visit her to, is a not, ha? But let me see, I
have now found out a trick to know if my wife make me a Cuckold, I will geld
my self, and then if my wife be with child, I shall be sure I am a Cuckold,
that will do brave in faith, God a mer^ie brain.


Enter Lady and Newcome. La. Sir, I am sorry that I cannot with that free scope
of friendly entertainment, give welcome to your worth, because a iealious
spirit haunts my husband, which does disturb us all, this diuill has long
vexed him, and he as long vexed me, and were I not composed of more then of an
ordinary female spirit, the burden of his wrongs would tire me quite.


They meet and iustle. Sir, this is my husband.

Nuc. I cry ye mercy sir, I did not see ye.


Kni. A man would think ye saw me, for I am sure ye have hit me right enough.


pointing to his brows. Nuc. I pray sir be not angry, I have not any way
offended you, nor would --


Kni. Nay, nay, though I be, ye may be friends again with me in spite of my
teeth, for look ye sir: my wife and I are but one, and then though I fall out
with you, you may fall in with her.


Nuc. Sir, I come not to offend you, nor --


Kni. Nay, nay, ye may, ye may in faith, ye may, my wife is charitable, and would
be glad by such a means to make us friends.


Nuc. Sir, then know, I scorn my eyes should stand as witnesses unto your
Ladies wrongs, and let you go unpunished: slight see a sweet Lady abusde!


He draws his sword. Lad. Sir you shall not touch him, husband you are to
blame, your madness makes you much forget your manners, and wrongs my hi^
birth, to make me the only cankerd, and worm eaten branch that sprung out of
my fafathers noble stock. No, no, know that the tree from which I grew,
brought forth good fruit to all, not bad to you: but hence forth i will shake
hands with mirth; and entertain a careless humor: for look ye sir, the
Devil gives this iellousie to man, as nature does a tail unto a Lion, which
thinks in heat to beat away the Flies, when he does most inrage himself
with it: but come sir, will ye be my servant, my sipher, my shadow, or
indeed any thing?


Nue. Your shadow if you please, and you my substance.


Lady. With all my heart.


Kni. I, I warrant her with all her heart, and now must be do as all shadows
do, when night comes, creeps into the substance.


Lad. Say a do, do'y here husband, I hear do vow before all the watchful
guard of heaven, that I have lived as true unto thy bed, and chaste unto thy
love, as ere was Turtle to her mate: but hence forrth cerimonious custom shall
not curb me of delight, let her be bridel'd by opinion, whose weak desires
cannot break her rain^s: for my part, i will make you know my will is like a
flint, smoothe and cold, but being hardly strooken, sparkles forth fire even
in the strikers eyes: I am a shamed that I have sa^id thus much, yet I may
lawfully speak, for why? come sir, will ye walk? the proverb says, give
loosers leave to talk.


Exeunt Lady and Newcome. Kni. Owages, wages, O honest wages! what other
Gallants come to your Lady in my absence?


VVag. Truly sir, sometimes there comes a proper young Gentleman one Master
Woodlie.


Kni. Would lie! with whom would he lie good Wages?


VVag. Why with my Lady sir, and he could get her good will: but he is a
Gentleman I can assure ye sir, for he walks always in boots, but in troth
his gentility is something decaying, his boots are on their deathbed, for
their souls are upon parting, and I think he be a Soldier too, for his sword
and his hangers are more worth then all his clothes, and a is a very proper
man, for he is as tall as one of the Guard, and he will come sometimes and take
my Lady by the hand, and pumpe for wit half an hour together.


Kni. How do mean, pumpe, ha!


VVag. Why sir, thus he will take my Lady by the hand, and wring it half an
hour together, and say nothing.


Kni. Is that pumping for wit?


VVag. O sir I, for he that wringes a fair Lady by the hand, and says
nothing, does but pumpe for wit, that is certain.


Kni. A most witty exposition, of what years.


VVag. Faith sir he is indeed a man of no ears, for a has been on the
Pillarie.


Kni. But what makes the cropeard stallion with my wife then?


Wag. Alas nothing but lies with her, and she lies with him, would you have
any more?


Kni. More! no, too much by heaven, nay then twa's past suspisition, past
doubt, past jealousy, is not my hairs turned all to horns? am I not a
monstrous and deformed Beast? my wife's a Goddess (though not Diana) she can
transform: I branch wages, I bra^ch, do I not? am not I a goodly screene for
men to hang their hats upon.


VVag. Why sir? ye are no Cuckold:


Kni. No? no Cuckold? he lies with your Lady, and your Lady lies with him,
yet I am no cuckold.


Wag. Why no, give me but attention, and with a word i will wipe away your horns.


Kni: No, no, words are to weak to wipe them off, when deed have put them on.


Wag, But hear me sir.


Kni* with open ears to swallow comfort.


Wag. I met my Lady and he fast by the Garden wall, and asking for your
iealious worship, they both replide you were not iealious, this spoke they both
together: in this, you know they both did lie together, and yet made you no
cuckold.


Kni. Ha! mean so?


Wag. Even so indeed sir.


Kni. Nay, then I cry ye mercy wife, in faith she yet may chance be honest.


Wag. O sir, very honest as a pretty Semsteris, or a poor waiting
Gentlewoman.


Kni. Well Wages, if I be a Cuckold --


Wag. Why sir, what will ye do if ye be?


Kni. What will I do? i will make it known, for I will be a Citizen, and so be
a Subject for Poets, and a slave to my own wife, therefore follow me Wages,
I will do it.


Exeunt omnes. Enter the Lady alone. Lad. O grief! how thou torment'st me, it
dwells in mine eyes, feasts on my blood: swimmes in my tears, and lodges in my
heart. O heaven! have I deserved this plague? O Husband! why should thou use
me thus? was not my behavior unto thee as soft as Down, as smoothe as
pollish'd crystal, I and my love as clear? was I not like a hand-maide, even
obedient to thy very thoughts? did not my nuptial duty like a shadow
follow the very turning of thine eye? Oh! thou once did love me, but thy
love was too hot, and like to self consuming fire, it burnt out, and how
soon, it is turned to cold ashes, and therefore henceforth i will seem iealious
of him: for since all endeavors fail, i will now try if Jealousy can drive out
jealousy: and here is fit occation for to work upon: Why how now Husband,
wooing of another wife before my death, whence comes this? in my conscience it is
a plague that Cupid has lain upon me for sleeping croslegd in your absence.
What, are ye grown as weary of your wife as of a foul shirt? must ye be
changing?


Peg. Good madam be patient.


La. Patient! no, you are his patient, and he is your Physician, a ministers to
ye (with a Morbus Gallicus take ye both) I pray forsooth let me be your
Butler, and scrape your Trenchers, since I am already feign to live of your
leauinges.


Kni. Woman, art Iellious?


La. I.


Kni. Why?


La. Because you give me cause: but man are you iealious?


Kni. I.


La. why?


Kni. Because thou give me cause.


La. It Is false.


Kni. True, false, thou have been false indeed, abusd my bed, infected even my
verrie blood, and made it grow to hard impostumes on my brows: have thou not
wantonly, changed naked imbracements with strangers? abused thy nuptial vow?
has notthy unsatiate womb, brought forth the bastardie of lust to call me
father? but i will abandon thee, disclaim that, and hate ye both.


Nue. Do'y hear me sir, upon my conscience you do wrong your Lady.


Kn. If I wrong her, you will do her right, I bear a blow of yours, the which I
never felt, you are like a man's Tailor that works with open shop for the
Husband, but if you chance to do any thing for the wife, you must do it
inwards, inwards! you are a good workman, I must needs say it: you have fitted
my wives body, how sa'y wife, has anot?


La. Not, but you can even in my sight cast amorous glances on others: you have
forsook my bed, abhorred my presence* and like a man past grace and shame,
strout like a pimpe before a wanton feather waging minkes at hie noone:
besides, did not I find thee kissing of thy Maid?


Kni. Did not I find thee in private conference with my horsegroome?


Lad. Did thou not offer thy maid a new gown, for a nights lodging?


Kni. Did not thou give a Diamond to the Butler?


Lad. Did not thou send a bowed Angel to thy Landressse Daughter?


Kni. No it is false.


Lad. Yes, it is true, and then when I told thee on it, thou swarest it was out of
charity, because the Wench was poor, her Father a^ honest man, and her Mother
a painful woman: for these and these causes you were kind unto the Daughter,
great whilst I was contented to believe, because I was unwilling, like a faint
hearted Soldier to look of mine own wounds, until I saw thou daily woundst
my love a new, and slew'st thine one reputation.


Kni. Art mad?


Lad. No, but a little Iealious like you, I will no longer mantaine thy,
sanguine sin, sooth lust with patience, nor in broken singing language flatter
thy folly, as sweet heart do not wa^der: for I do love thee dear as does a
Goose her Gander: a Goose indeed for if ought but a Goose, I should a sought
revenge for wrongs.


Kni. What art drunk?


La. No, for I have sufficient reason, too much knowledge, and sense enough to
feel my wrongs: why should we women be slaves to your imperfections? have
we not souls of one metal, are we not as free borne as you? are we not all
Adams Offspring? did not you fall as well with him as we, and shall we be
still kept down and you rise?


Kni. Do hear? ye are a sort of uncertain giddy wavering, tottering
tumbling creatures, your affections are like your selves, and yourselues like
your affections, up and down, like the tuckes on your Petticotes, which you
let fall and take up as occasion serves: I have seen of your sex fall in love
with a man, for wearing a hansome Rose on his shoe: another fall into the
passion of the heart, to see a man untie his point, to make water: a third
fall into the shaking Ague for eating a body cherry with two stones, and yet
youl' be fellows, even with the very image of your maker: but wilt let me
alone, and in faith i will be quiet.


La. A lone! faith no.


Kni. Then i will leave thee, since I know it is folly beyond madness, to make her
pleasure cause of my sadness.

Exit. Knight.
Nue. Believe it Lady, this was well done, and like a Lady of a hie birth: make
your husband know his advancement.


La. O shadow, shadow, I would have you know I would not wrong him for all
the seas drowned riches: for if my heart of blood should do it as he
supposes it does, even that blood would like a traitor write my faults with
blushing read upon my cheeks: but because I (as all women and Courtyers do)
love good clothes which his eyes wear, yet he abraides me, swearing it is to
please the multitude, and that I spread gay rags about me like a net to
catch the hearts of strangers: if I go poor, then he swears I am beastly,
with a loathed sluttishnesse: if I be sad, then I grieve he is so near: if
merry, and with a modest wantonising kiss Embrace his Love, then are my
twistings more dangerous then a Snakes, my lust more vn^atiate then was
Messal^nas: Yet this from Iealiousie does always grow. What most they seek
they loth'st of all would know. But now to you dear Cosen, forgiveness let
me ask, and pardon for my ^ained Jealousy, and take but thus much of my
counsel. Marrye not in have, for she that takes the best of Husbands, puts
but on a goulde^ fetter, for husbands are but like to painted fruit, which
promise much, but still deceaues us when we come to touch: if you match with a
Courtier, heel have a dozen mistresses at least, and repent his marriage
within four and twenty hours at most, swearing a wife is fit for none but
an old Justice or a country Gentleman. If ye marry a Citizen (though ye live
never so honest) yet ye shall be sure to have a Cuckold to your Husband. If a
Lawyer, the neatenesse of his Clarke will draw in question the good carriage
of his wife. If a Merchant, heel be venturing abroad, when a might deal a
great deal more safe at home: therefore come Cosen come, lets home, and this
take of me, That amongst the best there is none good, all ill: she is married
best that is: wedded to her will.


Exeunt Omnes. Enter the Young Lord. Young Lo. They say Cupid is a boy, yet I
have known him confute the oppinon of all your Phylosphers: for they hold
every light thing tendes dyrectlye up: but I think all know he makes every
light wench, fall directly down. Well I am sure a has knocked me with his
bird bolt, for the which Venus give him correction; for I do already love a
Lady of an imcomparable delicacie, but she is another man's, and will shut
her ears as close to keep out charms, as great men do their gates, to keep
in alms. Yet I have no reason to despair, for I have kis'd her, and the
French proverb says, Fame baissee est demie ioyee, a woman kis'd is half
inioyed: but I fear he means but the upper half.

I have here a Letter must work a strange thing, and yet no miracle, it must
make a La^ie love her friend better then her own husband.


Enter Wagas. Wag. Save ye my Lord.


Lor. O Wages! what Tennis-ball has fortune taken thee for, to toss thee thus
into my way?


Wag. I hope ye will not strike me into any hazard of my life though.


Lor. But what is the news my Lad, what is the news? how does Sir Timothy
Troublesome, that iellious knight thy Master.


Wag. Why sir, a does with his wife like a cowardly Captain in a town of
Garrison, fears every assault, trembles at the battery, and doubts most,
least the gates should be opened, and his enemy let in at midnight.


Lor. Now in the name of destiny who fears a?


VVag. O sir* next to you self, none so much as your Courtier, for even with
vennum'd Breath, a speaks of them: for says he, have but a suite to one of
the^, and they are like Iourdaines, which though ye open the Fludgates of your
bounty, and fill them to the very brimme, yet they will always stand gaping for
more.


Lor. But do thou think his Lady honest?


Wag. As woman's flesh may be.


Lor. But she has been a Courtier, and therefore knowing most good, me
thinks she would commit least ill.


Wag. O sir, I will not but with sanctified and hallowed thoughts, touch
Sinthias brightest beams, whom all eyes do adore, and hearts do worship:
where purest chastity does shine in spotless robes of splendant majesty,
where nature emulating heaven to make her even as fair as she is virtuous, but
yet I well could wish, you know y^in the sky of Court are many stars, the
which at midnight shoot and fall.


Lor. True, through most of the twelve signs, for they shoot from their
Husbands at Aries (which gouerns the head) and fall at Scorpio, and so indeed
they shoot from top to tail: but honest Wages, will ye bind me to 'y.


Wag. I think sir twill not be so much for your health, as if I should keep
you sollable.


Lor. I mean in courtesy good Wages.


VVag. O ^ the very name of good Wages, will make a Serningman do any courtesy.


Lor. Then be friend me thus, deliver this Letter to your Ladies own hand,
with as much secrecy as ye may, and take this for your employment.


Wag. As secret as she that sel's complexion: none but the chamber-Maide shall
know it.


Exeunt at two doors. Actus secundus Scena prima.
Enter Lady alone with a Letter. YE have your eyes like Sunne-glasses, caught
the heat of my beauty, and cast it on your own heart, and does your sighs
like bellows, make it more inflambe? then spend your tears to quenchit, for
my chaste bloods honor shall never do it. Lust, it is like an ouer-swollen
river, that breaks beyond all bounds: it is a Devil bred in the blood, nurc'd
in desire, and like a Sallamander lives in a continual fire: it sprouteth
larger then the Iuie, which imbraceth, twisteth and intangleth every one
within his reach, and makes no choice betwixt the goodliest Caeder and the
stinckingst Elder: it is a foul usurper on the name of love, and reigns with
greater domination then an Emperor: it is a very leperous Itche, it stains,
and leaves a fouler spot upon the soul then tears can wash away: but my
chaste thoughts shall watch mine honor: i will muster up my prayers to fight
against temptation: shall I that have bin a commander of my self, now prove a
slave to sin? No, no, my mounting thoughts do soar too high a pitch to
stoop to any strangers lure. Say that a pecuish Fly entangled were within my
neuer-shorne tresses, should I to save his life, cut and deforme me of so rich
an ornament? What though the Lord Nonsuch within my love entangled be, must my
honor now be clipped to set him free? No, no, my saw is this and ever shall: he
that on hope does climb does often fall. But what shall I do? a writes here
a will come: wit of a Woman now assist me, O aperne stringes be now auspitious,
for here is my Husband, something I must do: I have it.

Enter Knight. Kni. Now fair mistress: this is strange to find you here alone:


La. Not alone, but inuiron'd and accompained.


Kni. With what?


La. With many heart-biting thoughts, which like Actteons hounds have almost
slain my self* yet now my constancy shall prove a glass, in which your
self shall see your own errors: the Lord Nonsuch which you have long suspected,
with vnrebated edge of lust, has awaies sought, (I must confess) to cut my
very reputations throat, and this night --


Kni. This night?


La. I this night, but hear me husband:


Kni. No no, cuckold me, kill me with grief, do, do, and when I am dead
marry him: a has made you a ioynter already of Breech down: well wife well, I
married you out of the Country, but you have learned the City fashions
already: I am a Cuckold, I am, but ignorance that I was to marry thee so young,
not being able scarce to put thine own apparel on.


La. I was the fitter for a Husband, ye might then a bin sure to have taken me
a bed at all times,


Kni. True, so might other men too.


La. No, ye are deceived husband, other men never lie with a man's wife but when
she is ready for them, but to the purpose: this night have I promised the Lord
Nonsuch a shall enjoy my love, for which cause he will send a certain Pander
before, for fear you stand a rock in his way, on which all his hopes will
suffer ship-wracke. Now this same Panderlie Pylate shall be by you bribed to
stand sentinel, and give the watchword when a comes, that you may then punnish
him, either with death or fear.


Kni. O snallowe and womannish invention, as if he would betray his master.


La. Tut money often times corrupts a good, disposition and makes a knave ride
poast to hell.


Kni. But is this true? art honest indeed? come hither, do love me, do?
nay but tell me true, do?


La. Or else in hatred let me ever live.


Kni. Do not flatter me, I scarce believe thee, thou never kissest me but with
such an affection, as a young wife does an old husband^ wringing her lips,
and making a mouth as if she were taking a Potion.


La. You distaste me much sir.


Kni. Do not distats me too sometimes, tell me true?


La. Nothing but your Jealousy.


Kni. Well prithee forgive me and lets go, but i will so swindge my Lord a her
son otter, i will teach him fish in other men's ponds.


Exeunt omnes. Enter Young Nonsuch and Wages. Lor. Did you deliver my Letter?


Wag. With secrecy.


Lor. To her self?


Wag. Her own hands.


Lor. Made she any answer?


W^. Not any.


Lor. What other news then rides on the back of report?


Wag. Why they say sit that mistress Correction the Midwife is turned her
Maphrodit.


Lor. Why Hermaphrodit?


Wag. Why sir, she is become a Midwife, for as your hermaphrodit has two
members the one to beget, the other to bring forth, so has your Mid ^ife too
means, the one to bring you to beget, the other to bring it forth when it is
begotten: and look you sir, hear she appears upon her Q.


Enter Mistress Correction. Lor. O prithee do thou board her as she passes by.


Wag. Who I board her? by this light I dare not.


Lor: Then I will: fairly met fair Mistress.


Mist: Cor. Indeed forsooth I have bin, by my truth I see he is a fine spoken
man.


Lor: Where abouts is your house fair Lady?


Mist. Cor. Here fast by sir, not above a couple of stones cast off.


Wag. What Gentlewomen have ye at home?


Mist. C^r. O Master Wages, how do'y? faith sir I have no body at home but
mistress Punckit, you know her well.


Lor. What Is she?


Mr. C. Truly sir a very courteous Gentlewoma^, and she loves to act in as
clean linen as any Gentlewoman of her function about the town, and truly
that is the reason that your sincere puritanes cannot abide to wear a
Surplesse, because they say it is made of the same thing that your villainous sin
is committed in, as your most profane holland.


Wag. Pra'y when was Master Wrastler of the Guard at your house?


Mi. Co. Who he? in troth Mi. Punckit cannot abide him, she swears a looks
for all the world like the Dominicall Letter in his red Coat: no Master Wages
no, I can tell ye I have other manner of Guestes come to my house then ^e: I
have Pentioners, and Gentlemen Vshers, Knights, Captains and Commanders,
Lieftennants, and Ancients, volluntary Gentlemen, I, and men y^ wear their
clokes linde through with velvet; I entertain no Mutto^ eating Innesa court
men, no half linde cloak Citizens: nor flat capt Prentises, no, the best come
to my house, Master Newcome the Courtier was there the other day, and truly
he would have had some dealing with Mi. Punckit, but that he had no siller: and
yet I must needs say it, a would a put her in very good obscurity, for a
brought a Gentleman with him that would a given his word in a consumption of
twenty pound, that a should a paid her at next meeting, and truly but that
her trade stands so much upon present payment, and partly for mortallities
sake, I think else she would a taken it, and yet before a went, I must needs
say it, a shewde himself like an honest Gentleman and a Courtier, for a left
his Perriwigge in pawn: but had you seen how a looked, for all the world like
an Estridges egg, with a face drawn of the one side.


Lor What other guestes have ye?


Mi. Cor. There comes master Exhibition of the Innes a court verrie often, and
Master Angell-taker the counselor comes sometimes, but Mistress Punckit does
so jest with him, she swe^res to him as she hopes to be saved, and I may tell
you sir, there is great hope on it, for truly she uses just and upright
dealing with every man, but as I said, as she hopes to be saved, she would
not marry him of all the men in the world.


Lor. No, why?


Mi. Cor. Because she says that Lawyers are like Trumpeters, they sell their
breath.


Lor. She Is a fool tell her, the Lawyers are the pillars of the Realm.


Mist. Cor. Yes forsooth so I said but she said they were not only the Pillars
but the Polers also, but I pray you sir of what profession are you?


Lor. Faith of none Gentlewoman, only a young gallant as you see.


Mi, Cor. A young Gallant, say you lisaith, i will quickly try that by and by, do'y
hear sir, do'y hear?


Putting her hand to her purrsse. Lord What say you Gentlewoman?


Mi. Cor. I pray can you give me ten shillings for a piece of gold.


Lor. Yes that I can.


Mi. Cor. O sir, O sir, I perceive you are no gallantifaith, it would go deep
my friend, I may tell you for a young gallant to change three groates for a
shilling, and twere great fish, I may tell you too, to Angle for in a gallants
great hose.


Lor. Hold mistress, spend that for my sake, and it shall not be long ere I
will come and visit your house.


Mist: Cor. I thank your worship, sir, i will be so bold as to take my
deliverance out of your company.


Lor. Farewell.


VVag. God be with you mistress Correction.


Mist. Cor. The like to you good Master Wages, but do you hear sir, I hope
if your worship come to my house, if there be no body at home but my self,
though I am an old woman, yet I hope your worship will not despise age.


Lor. No, no, fear not that.


Mist. Cor. I thank ye heartily sir.


Lor. With all my heart, Wages farewell, and bring but an answer of my letter;
and I will be thy pay-maister, not thy debtor.


Exeunt. Enter Nuecome, Wages and Peg. Peg: I understand so much by your name
good Master Nuecome.


Nan: And I am in grace too Lady, what my souls sweet secretary! you are
fairly met indeed, how does old Venture thy father?


Nue: O how perfumed your Courtiers phraisies are: I left him in health sir.


Wag. O I, they speak in print I can tell you, and though it be a sin, to
rob a man of his learning yet Courtiers are very sildome blamde for getting
out of any men's books.


Peg: Yet I have known them steal out of them ere now.


Nan: Nay then you will make a Courtier a Thief:


Peg: I, such a one as the good thief was.


Man: Mass I wonder what Country man that good thief was?


Nue: O, a was my countryman Lady, he was a borderer on North wales, I can
assure you.


Nan: Indeed and so I think, for not to flatter ye, many of your Country men
have proved good thieves ever since: but I pra'y tell me, is it the fashion of
your north wales, to suffer your beards to grow upwards thus, in spite of your
nose?


Nue: Yes Lady, al of us that are Courtiers: marry before when we were poor
country fellows, we suffered our beardes carelessly to grow downward, and
then they grow into our mouths in spite of our teeth, now you know hair is
but excrement, and for mine own part, I had rather have my excrement in my
nose, then in my teeth.


Peg: I have heard most of your Country men are verry active men.


Nue: O Lady, I have seen a youth of eighteen years in our Country, would a
caper'd ye, thus hye!


VVag. 'T as bin in a string then.


Peg: Is it possible?


Nan: Nay, believe it, a would have done it with all his heart, but he could
not.


Peg They say to, most of your Countriemen are very valiant


Wag. O I, they terrify their enemies with patience.


Nue^ O, we make the excellent'st Soldiers in the world.


Peg: I, but they say, they cannot press a man to the wars though, in all
your country.


Nue: yes Knights:


Nan: Why Knights?


Nue. To save our Landed men at home.


Nan: I have heard, most of ye are great Trauailers.


Nue: I, for france Spain and England, and such neighbor countries, why I
have been as far as Winchester my self.


Wag. Indeed it is true, some of ye Travail so far abroad as ye come short home
many times.


Reg: I have heard ye are all Gentlemen.


Nue: Indeed I must confess Lady, we have few beggars, and those we have, we
reward according, for if he be a lusty Knave, we give him a Lawyers alms,
tell him of the stature: if a poor and decrepit fellow, we give him a
Citizens wives charity, cry God help him, God help him.


Peg: By your leave Master Nuecome, me thinks you have a pr^^tie lace on
your band


Nue: A pretty slight court lace, all show, all showe^


Nan. What Is this, a shirt that ye wear? else it is a mock^begger with strips.


N^ue. No, it is a shirt Lady.


Nan. What, did you make this Doublet new, or else ye new made it?


Nue. Yes I made it new Lady?


Nan. Believe me sir but the livings are old.


Peg, Fie, they are greasy.


Nue, I think they are something sweatie indeed with hunting.


Nan. Hunting: why a man need not hunt far for game, what is this?


She finds a ^ouse. Nue: O, a Sallamander Lady, it is a Sallamander bredde with
the continual heat of sweating --


Peg: What Is your breech made all of one stuff Master Nuecome?


Nue: Pray why do you ask?


Peg: Because me thinks the soil change's here behind


Wag. I, and so does the air as well as the soil I warrant ye.


Nan: What are these hose made of the newest fashion ye have at Court?


Nue. Faith Lady for mine own part I am no man's Ape, this is my fashion, and
sometimes I stand in the presence with my cloak linde through, either with
velvet or with Taffata, if with Velvet, I let him hang on my shoulder, making
the greatest show, carry my hat here.


Peg. Now by the soul of chastity I swear, a is a proper man.


Nue: If any man pass by and salute me, I salute him again, but if any Lady
or Gentlewoman glide through the presence, and cast her eye on me, as commonly
they use to do on men, that makes any show or glister as I always do.


Nan. Ye! always making glisters, I hold my life he is a Portecarie, do you
never make no suppositors sir?


Nue. I keep my place of standing, carry my body stiff and upright, blush
not, am impudent enough, when perchance the heat of the Ladies affection makes
her take ^place of standing, either against the hanginges or one of the bay
windows, and therewith a greedy eye feeds on my exteryors, which perceiving,
I draw to her, kiss my hand, and accorst her thus.


Enter Knight. Nan: I pra'y accorst her anon sir, and lets stand close and
trouble not true iellousie in the picture of Hieronimo, in a little volume.


Peg. See, see how a looks, do you not perceive his heart beat hither?


Nan. I, for all the world like the Denmark Drummer.


Wag. Peace, hear what a says.


(...): Forgiveness wife: O how have I wronged thee, O who would abuse your
sex, which truly knows ye?* O women were we not borne of ye? should we not
then honor you? nursed by ye, and not regard ye? begotten on ye, and not love
ye? made for ye, and not seek ye? and since we were made before ye, should
we not love and admire ye as the last? and therefore perfect'st work of nature,
Man was made when nature was but an apprentice, but woman when she was a
skillful Mistress of her Art, therefore curssed is he that does not admire
those Paragons, those Moddels of heaven, Angels on earth Goddesses in shape: by
their loves we live in double breath, even in our Offspring after death. Are not
all Vices masculine, and Virtues feminine? are not the Muses the loves of the
learned? do not all noble spi^rits follow the Graces because they are women,
there is but one Phoenix and she is a female: Is not the Princes and foundres of
good arts Miner^^, borne of the brain of highest Jove, a woman? have not
these women, the face of love the tongue of persuasion, the body of delight? O
divine perfectio^'d, women, whose praises no tongue can full express, for that
the matter does exceed the labor, O if to be a Woman be so excellent, what
is it then to be a woman inritch'd by nature, made excellent by education,
noble by birth, chaste by virtue, adorned by beauty: A fair woman which is
the ornament of heaven, the grace of earth, the joy of life and the delight of
all sense, even the very summum bonum of man's life.


Nue: O monstrous herresie, he will be damb'd for that error.


VVag. Nay, let him alone, for he had like to been burnt for that opinion ere
now, had not a friend of mine plucked the fire from the stake.


Nue: Come, lets break out upon him.


Nan: O no good sir, though it be a thing much given to your name, yet let not
us break out, let us not show such childish parts.


Peg. Save ye Knight.


Kni. And bless ye Lady, O sir, are you there? come ye hither, what is that
strange Lady there?


VVag. I think it be mistress Babee sir, master Nuecome's Mistress, for she
looks like an Northern Less, made of a strange fashion, something like a
Lute, all belly to the neck.


Kni. So, like a Lute, and you like a skillful mu^^tian have bin fingring it.


Nan: How does your good Lady Knight, how does she?


Kni. Well I praise H^me^, and I adore my stars, she has no acquaintance with
such a female fly as you are.


Nan: What means he by that?


Peg, Why I think a means you are but a light huswife, but come let us leave
him.


Nan: Light Huswife, hang him dogged Cinicke.


Nue: Farewell Knight.


Exeunt Nue: Nan, and Peg. Nan, Forgiveness wife.


Kni. Now the plague of Egypt light upon you all, Lice devour yetcomeye hither
sir, what is the cause you keep such villainous company?


Wag. I keep their company most sir for good vittailes, for you keep such a
villainous house, as if tweare always Easter eve, we still hope for better:
and you know your Cook is gone already sir, for fear a should forgette his
occupation with you. Besides sir, if any man come to your house to dinner
though he hop upon one leg, yet every man says a comes to fast, and for
mine own part sir, you have given me nothing since I came unto you.


Kni. O thou pampred lade! what would thou have? what would thou feed on
Quails? art thou not Fat? is not thy neck brawne, thy leg calfe? thy head
beef, and yet thou wants meat.


VVag. No sir, but I would willingly have some wages.


Kni. Well, i will think on it, and so go call your mistress.


VVag. Look you sir, here she comes without calling.


Kni: Save your honesty then, and be gone without bid ding.


Wag: Ivannish sir.

Exit Wages
Kn^: Do so: O my sweet wife, my selected spouse, the very vessel of chastity,
filled to the very btim with Hymen zeal and nuptial duty: how have I abused
thee? but I have washed repentance even in tears, and in thy absence I have
dedicated sacred sighs unto thee to appease thy wrath: therefore tell me sweet
wife, when comes this pa^der, when comes he?


Lad. I muse he stays so long, he should a been by promise here an hour
since, and look here a comes?


Enter Lord disguised. Kni: O you are welcome Sir, welcome in faith, but when
comes your Lord? is he at hand, wi^ a come?


Lor. My Lord sir, what Lord?


Kni: Nay, come, come, make not the matter strange man, my wife has told me
all, you are an honest man, hold, hold, will ye but be friend me now, and
watch another door unto my h^use, and give me notice when a comes, while I
watch this.


Lor. O now I see the trick on it, his wife has guld him with a lie and made
him believe I am but a pore seruingma^ only to enjoy my love: O kind woman! O
sweet Lady! nay now I see she loves me.


Kni. O excellent wife, how true she told me, what a beast have I bin still to
wrong her with suspect.


Lor. Faith sir I see ye are a very worthy Gentleman, and for mine own part I
shall be glad to do you any pleasure, for to tell you true, I think my Lord
means to Cuckolde you indeed.


Kni. Why that's well said, hold hear's one Angel more, and go but with my
wife, she will show you the other door while I watch this: and if a come, knock
him down, kill him, and lay the fault on me, i will please you for your pains,
look, here is a club will hold.


La. Give me, give me, come.


Kni. Go wife, go with him, see a stand stiffly to it, and if occasion serve.


Lad. I warrant ye husband, fear it not, but i will do my part.


Exeu^t Wife and Lord. Kni. Why that's well said, and if a come to this door,
i will teach him come to tie his mare in my ground, but what a slave have I bin
still thus to suspect my wife, I could never feel any horns I had, and yet I
know my scull is so thin that if my wife should a Cuckold me with the least
thing in the world, yet my horns would a grown through now am I for my Lord.


Enter Lord and the Lady at an other dors. Lor: Now fair mistress, this far
through the mouth of danger am I come and made my passage eue^ through her
life. deuoring Jaws to feast mine eyes upon this beauty, which makes me
think all danger's but a sport, so you receive and wrap me in your loves
imbracements, and take hold of this fair occation, for well you know your
Husbands Jealousy will turn this proffered time like fortunes wheel, and
drown our fairest hopes even in despair, if you be tedious in our loves
effects, and therefore since your wi^te has safely plotted my arrival here;
proceed even to the utmost listes of my desire, and make me happy in the
fruition of your long desired love.


(...). O my Lord, shall a smile, a good word, a little kind behavior, or the
title of dear servant, make your hopes to swel into so great a sea of lust,
as presently to euer-flow and drown the honor of your Mis^ris? O my Lord no,
your judgment much deceiues you of my disposition: besides, I sent not for
ye, it was your lewd unbridled will, that made you thus come gallop heither:
yet by my means I must confess as yet you are unknown, and in some sort I
glad your being here, only to make you know, that neither fairest occasions
nor greatest persuasions shall ever make me violate my faith to him I owe my
love; No my Lord I know I durst to trust my self against the most of
opportunity and strength of all tempation, and though my husband watch you at
the door, yet know within, my conscience watches me though he be blinded
with a trick, yet the clear all-light^ giuers eyes do see: therefore good my
Lord be gone, you see my husband is wilful bent, and if he chance to know you,
I much doubt your safety.


Lor. But is this my pains requital and my loves reward?


Kni, Alas my Lord, what would you have? my love is not mine own.


Lor. Well, farwell Lady, you may repent this yet ere long: yet peace fond
breath, least threats my plots beguile: ve^gence intended policy, must smile.


Exeunt Lord and Lady Enter Lord. Kni. Are ye going sir, are ye going, what
will not your Lord come^


Lor. I think not sir, his hour is past long since, some other business
hinders him.


Kin. Gods my passion, what do I see, this is he, I see his chain: nay but
look you sit, when will you come again? by this light I see his signet ring.


Lor. Assure your self sir, i will bring you notice before my Lord come.


Kni. Nay, but will you sure? shall I trust to you? for look ye sir, and if
you should not come, pra'y stay a little, me thinks your band is torn.


Lor: It Is no matter no matter.


Kn. No, it is not now I sent, by this hand it is he, it is he, what should I do,
now if I should strike him, he would be to hard for me, for he is better armed
then I.


Lor. Well (...) i will take my leave of you, till your occasion shall need my
presence.


Kni. Fare ye well sir, I hope that shall be never: but have not I spun a fair
thread think you, to be a verry Baude, an arrant wittall, to give them
opportunity, put them together, Nay hold the door the whilst this is my wives
plot, by which I have saild to Cuckolds haven yet my sail was but asmocke,
which she her self hoist up alas alas, Gentlemen do you not know the
Philosopher says this world is but a stage: hodie mihi, cras tibi my part to
day, it may be some of yours to morrow ^hy it is but matrimonial chance, we
that are Cuckolds should be wissest men, for no men else do know their ends,
but we know ours, for we are forked at both O thou powerful and celestial
Jove! strike down from heaven some congealed boltes of thunder, that it may
pierce the womb of earth, and through it send thy lightning flames to make
hell hotter then it is, or with Egiptian dampes and rotten jaws renouate thy
eating plague of life, dissolve nature, consume earth, destroy hell, and dambe
woman I beseech thee into a deeper dungeon then the Devil. They fill men with
diseases, and give the wane-eyde Sun of Heaven cause to smile to see our
pains: shall the gaping of graves, the scritching of Ghostes, and cries of
damned souls, yet longer be deferred? shall time incorporate with sin, and
beget more mischief? shall hell be better furnished with women then with
Devils? infernal Lucifer will muster up his female souls against thy dietie,
unless thou do abridge the course of sin by cutting off the increase of
women, and then we shall have no more cuckolds. Come ye hither wife, come ye
hither, pra'y tell me one thing true.


Enter Lady. Lady. True: why husband, i will lie for no man's pleasure.


Kni: Yes, for his pleasure that is gone.


La. For his pleasure, why for his pleasure?


Kni. Because you are a Puncke wife, a puncke.


La. Now Jove bless me.


Kni: You are a Cockatrice wife, a cockatrice


La. Now heavens defend me.


Kni: You are a whore wife, a whore.


La. Sir, the man is mad.


Kni: I, horn mad, ah thou vile perfidious, detestable, lascivious,
insatiable, Luxurious and abominable strumpet, was it not enough to be an
Acteon, a cornuto, a cuckolde, but to make me a Baude, a Pimpe, a Pander?


La. What Pimpe? what Pander?


Kni: What Pimpe? what Pander? why was not this the Lord Nonsuch? did I not see
his chain, nay prithee say twa's not he, nay swear it too: over shoes over
boots, since ye have waded to the belly in sin, nay now go deeper even to
the breast and heart.


La. Pra'y hear me husband.


Kni, What vile excuses can make, how can thou hide thy lust? would wrap
thy sin in perjury to muffell up thy villainy?


La. Nay good Husband for pity sake hear me.


Kni. Talk not of pity, pity is deaf and cannot hear the poor man's cry,
much less a strumpets.


La. For charity hear me.


Kni. Charity is frosen and benumbed with cold, it cannot help thee, do
kneel? do kneel? to the heauen's not to me yet they look thy heart should
stoop, and not the knee. Do weep do? Rise, rise thou stumpet, go out of
my sight, in, in.


Lor. I go, Yet this my comfort, in the gall of life, Suspicion never wronged
a truer wife.

Exit. Lord.
Enter Wages. Kni. Hoe, Wages!


Wag. Here sir.


Kni. Come heather Wages, my olderesolution is come on me again, and it shall
make me do much, for I will geld my self.


VVag. Alas sir that's the only way to make you do little.


Kni. Therefore go fetch me the Opperator.


Wag. What Is he sir?


Kn. The stone-Cutter.


Wag O you mean the Sow-gelder.


Kni. O ^he's an excellent fellow, he takes away the cause of a man's beastly
desires.


Wag. I, and of their manly performance too.


Kni. He makes a man not care a rush for a woman.


Wag. No, nor a Woman care a straw for a man.


Kni. Does not such a fellow deserve commendations?


Wa. Yes as a hangman does, for cutting off the traitors that makes the flesh
rebel.


Kni: Wages I do now more doubt my wives honesty then ever, therefore i will
make him the touchstone of her reputation.


Wag. Faith sir ye might get easier touchstones then he a great deal, there is
many a Goldsmithes wife in Cheapeside could help you to a better.


Kni. He deserue's much praise.


Wag. I, as your cockatrice does for the dismembring of men.


Kni. If she be a punckit i will not be diuorc'd.


Wag. Why should ye? why ye cannot keep more Gentleman ^ike company: besides,
your puncke: is like your pollitition, for they both consume themselves, for
the common people. And your punck of the two, is the better member, for she
like a candell to light others's, burns her self.


Kni. Well wages, come follow me, for I am resoul'd to try my wives honesty.


Exeunt Omnes. Finis Act. second.
Actus Ter. scena prima
Enter young Nonsuch like a begging Soldi^r. Young Lord. Venus lay where Mars
had found her,
And in warlike arms he bound her,
Cupid cride, and Vulcane spide:
And thereon threw the Sciclops,
But his horn, begatte his scorn,
With all the little Gods mockes.
Now some honest Gentleman pass by that I might sell him the maidenhead of my
occupation for a half penny mass, here a comes, a shall have it, ye faith.

Enter Nucome. Worshipful Gentleman, look with your eye, and pity with your
heart the distress of a martial man, I have been a man in my days, and
acquainted with better fortunes then I now see^ time has been I have borne
arms, but now one's gone, and I can no longer write Gentleman: wherefore if you
please to bestow but one poor thistle of your bounty to prick the blister
of my poverty, it would set my slender fortunes a flote, where they now lie
beating on the goodwins of famine, I am none of these Lu^gations that beg for
fourscore and ten poor men: my suite is only for my self.


Nuc. Whom have thou served friend?


Lor. First I served in Ireland, then in Holland, Braband, Zealand, Gelderland,
Friesland and most of the seauenteen Provinces, I was at the siedge of Bargon
up sone, carried a pike at the entrance of Sluice, and was hurt in the gro^e
entering the breche.


Nue: Who was thy Captain?


Lor. I served under the command of Captain pipe.


Nue: Who, captain Gregory Pipe?


Lor. No sir, Captain Tobacco Pipe.


Nue. O, I know him well indeed, he is on the English nation, has much
imploiments.


Lor. I can assure your worship sir, I have seen him in very hot service, and
when some of us his followers have smok'd for it too: wherefore I beseech you
sir, bestow^ something on me, for the knowledge you had of my good Captain.


Nue. Go to sir, I fear ye are a counterf^ite Rogue.


Lor. How Rogue sir^ though none of fortunes favorites, nor great men's
minions, yet perchances as good a man as your self: swoundes Roguel


Nue. Nay be not a^grie good friend for yf^ith I love a Soldier with all my
heart, for indeed I have a Co^ssen is one, would give thee something, but
in faith I have no siller, yet I give thee eighteen pence in conceit, and so
farewell.

Exit Nuecome.
Lor: Well sir, in conceit I thank ye then.

Enter Knight and Wages. Ye Wages, come ye after like a Clog to the heels of
the old Ape your Master?


Kni. Wages, how many pounds go to a stone of beef?


Wag. Eight sir.


Kni: Then I am lighter by sixeteene pound now then I was, I may now lie with
any Lady in Europe for any hurt I can do her.


Wag. True sir, or good either.


Kni: I can cuckold no man,


VVag. Yet any man may cuckolde you.


Kni: What Is he Wages?


Wag: Some poor Soldier sir, lately come out of the low countries.


Lor. I must not now beg lame, for fear I loose his service by it: I beseech
ye good black Captain bestow something of a poor Sould^^r, that has served
his Prince both by Sea and land: if you bestow but one poor penny of your
liberality, when the wheel off^te, turn^s, if ^he bit^er frostes of pouer^e
^oe not in the mean time nip my fortunes in the blossoms, I doubt not but to
reciprocrate your curres^.


VVag Hyda, what an excellent fellow this would make to d^ell in the exchange,
^ow the R^gue prates?


Kni. What (...) a Sol^ier?


Lor I have bin one some few ye^es.


Kni: Why then thou art a Gen^leman by profession, and it is a (...) Gentleman to
beg.


Lor: So I think, for I have Ge^tleman like qualiti^s enough: for I had rather
drink drunk to purge, then take Physic: but will you give me any thing sir?


Wag: No sir my (...) does (...) to give Gentlem^n money, for fear of (...)
them.


Lor. O, I cry you mercy good Master Must^rd-Pot.


Wag. Mustard pot! Gods light, mustard Pot! and why Mustard pot?


Lo^. Because thou art a sawce-box.


VVag: Sauce box?


K^. Go to, be quiet Wages.


L^. But will ye give me any thing sir?


Kni. No not ^ penny.


Lor. Come th^n sir, will ye walk a turn or too?


Kni. (...) with th^e, why, art not lousie?


L^^. I need not, I have change enough, for I have two pair of (...)


Kni. We^ never in better fashion?


Lor, Yes, I have borne the badge of honor in my days.


Wag I a ^ath bin some Noblemans Footeman sure.


Kni. Was thy Father an Alcumist that thou art so poor?


Lor. Why do you not know poverty has a Gentleman Vshers place, it goes
bear before death.


Kni. Thy name,


Lor. Slack.


Kni. Of what Religion art?


Slac. Faith I am yet clean paper, ye may write on me what ye will, either
Puritan or Protestant.


Kni, Will thou serve me?


Slac. So you will give me wages.


Kni. Yes that I will, and thou shall wear my livery too, i will give it thee,
thou shall not buy't thy self.


Slac. I thank ye sir.


Enter a Bawd. Wag. O Mistress Correction ^how do you?


Mist: Cor. I thank ye good Master Wages, and how does that goodly Gelding
your Master?


Wag: Why Gelding?


Mist: Cor. Because he has both abused and accus'de one of the most virtuous
Ladies that ever frisseld her hair.


Wag. Peace, speak soft, that is he.


Mi. Co: Is that he?


Wag: The verry same.


Mi. Co. Now by my troth I am glad to see your worship in good health* and
how does your good Worship: Lord you look ill, a body may see what grief
will do: O had you had a good wife, your worship would look twenty years
younger then you do, it is even pity of her life that would wrong such a
sweet man: what an excellent complexion your beard's off, and by my troth a
keeps his color verry well.

Slack pinches behind. What now you sawfie Companion you, what ayle you trow?


Slac: You had an ill Midwife Mistress, she has not closed your mould well
behind.


Mist. Co^. Marry come up Jack an Apes father-in law, what can you tell?


Sl^. I felt it by giving my hand to bid it farewell.


Mist. Cor. O sir, that is sign ye are a clown, if ye had bin a Gentleman ye
would a kissed it, and a taken your leave on it, I pray master Wages what is this
fellow?


Wag. A new man of my masters, and I can assure you a tall Soldier too.


Mist. Cor. A tall Soldier say you? so me thinks, his clothes have been in
shrode services, for they are very dangerously wounded. Sir, and like your
worship, this that you have entertained is no man, it is some Scar-crowe, and you
have done verry ill to take him away: the Crows will eat up the Corn now out
of all measure, pray God we have not a dear year after it.


Sla. I know your husband well Mistress Correction, and Mistress Punckit too, I
hear she keeps her bed much, what is she not in health?


Kni. Have you such a Gentlewoman lies at your house?


Mi. Cor. Yes indeed sir, a younger Brothers Daughter, a kins-woman of my
Husbands.


Kni. It seems he has been acquainted with her.


Mi. Cor. Who he? no sir, she scorns to speak with him, unless tweare by an
Attorney.


VVag. Pra'y how does your Husband good Mistress Correction.


Mist: Cor. The better your asking good Master Wages.


Wag. Indeed her Husband is a verry honest painful man sir.


Mist. Cor. O master Wages, no, no, master Wages, you are deceived in him,
there is never a morning but I am ready and abroad, an hour before he is up:
and when he is up, as I am a living woman* I can make him do nothing for my
life.


Kni. No, does he not studdie?


Mi. Cor. Yes, like the Clarke of a great man's kitchen, what meat he shall
have for dinner.


Wag. Believe it but he is a good Scholar though* O he has a passing head of
his own.


M. C. Has he, I he has indeed, if ^e knew al, and I can tell ye he may thank
me for it too, for he went to school to (...) in my first husbands time


Kn. Pra'y what was your first husband


Mi, Cor. M. Seldom the preacher an't like your worship, he preached in two of
his benefices in one day, and sure it was the death of him, he never ioyed
himself after he so ouerstrained his voice.


Kni. And then you married this man?


Mi. C. Yes forsooth, and truly afterward bought him a benefice, but he has
sold it again, and I may tell you though I am no Lady, yethe's called sir John
every word, and for all this now he makes no more account of me then your man
May. Wages does of an old shoe-clout which a never thinks off, but when a
needs, and if he cannot find it, why any other thing serves his turn, and so
he deals by me, and truly M. Wages I may tell you, I mean to put him away.


Wag. Away I why ye cannot put him away for this.


M, C. Yes I warrant ye, if you can find in your heart to love and marry me,
let me alone for y^? i will keep ye like a man al days of your life^ besides, if
the stones of the street in y^ ciue should be too hot, for ye, and that ye dare
not walk on them for fear the wicked vanities of the world should catch hold of
ye, as they have done to the utter overthrow and undoing of many a good man,
yet I can get my living in the Suburbs, and what trade so ever go down, I doubt
not but mine will hold up as long as the kingdom yeeldes either soldiers or
younger brothers, which wants maintenance to keep wives of their own No M.
Wages, my trade is a sweet trade, little does any body know what co^mings in I
have daily, I keep 3. as good fetherbeds going winter and su^mer, as any sinner
in the suburbs: besides, I warrant ye, I get above 20 pound a year in Rennish
wine, at the second hand.


VVag. Well, ask my Ma^if he be willing, ye^ shall find me forward


M: C. And that's as much as any woman can ask truly: and please your worship I
have a suite to you.


Kni. Whatist Mi. Cor^ for you are very like to speed?


(...) That I may have your good will to marry M. Wages.


Kni. Why you have a husband alive?


Mi. C. I, but I can be deuorc'd from him, and like your worship for three
several causes which I know well ennough, I warrant ye.


Kni. If he be willing, with all my heart.


Mist: Cor. I thank your worship.


Sla. Hise fellow Wages, pray a word we, do mean to have her?


VVag. I.


Slac: Well, goethy ways, I warrant thee a sound piece of her.


VVag: A piece, why a piece? did thou ever shoot in her?


Slac. Who I, no: she recoiles too much in the discharging for me to meddle
with, but do hear, put her away again as soon as thou can: if thou
ke^pe her long, if she prove not like a commodity of wood, and s^ink in thy
hands then hang me.


Kni. Well Mistress Correction, I could wish you go about this your affairs as
soon as you may, and Slack, and Wages do you two follow me.


Exeunt 3 (...) one door, and the Baud at the other. Enter Peg and Nan. Na.
Now by my chaste thoughts which I was mother of at nine years old, I here
swear, never to be in love: yet Master Nuecome the Courtier thinks with the
wearing of a neat boot, and a clean band, to catch my love napping as Morse
catch this Mare, but Venus be my good speed, and Cupid send me good luck, for
my heart is very light, and I fear it is but like a Candle, burnt into the
Socket, which lightens a litt^^ before it goes out.


Peg. I most fear it is like lightning before thunder, I pray have a careyehold
fast.


Nan. Come, thou have such a running wit, it is like an Yrish foot boy^ I fear
twill rob thee of all thy (...) and then run from thee and leave thee.

But I pray thee tell me one thing,


Peg: I will an't be a good thing?


Nan: Have thou thy Maiden head yet?


Peg: My maiden-dead! faith^^.


Nan: Come, prithee do not lie, for they say it is lost lying and by the
strength of my little virtue, I wonder (for mine own part) to see how this
foolish virginity is esteemed when there is such danger in the keeping it, for
who does not know that the barren womb^ is cursed? and al know virgins have no
children: besides, Women shall be saved by ^he bearing of Children, how
think thou, are they?


Peg: Nay, I cannot tell, you were best try.


Nan: Indeed they say it is good to try before one trust.


Peg: But I pray thee tell me one thing now,


Nan: And what is that?


Peg: The reason why thou art come run away from thy Father, considering the
forman of your Shop, me thought was a good hansome fellow.


Nan. It Is true, so he was, but he had no leisure to keep me comp^^y a workie
days for crying what do you lack, and a Holy days he would be at
stoole-ball among'st the boys when I had most need of him: but to tell thee
the true cause of my coming away; I should have married a young unthrifty
Lord, one that will give his verrye soul to a fair woman, and faith sometimes
though she be never so foul, yet he will lend her his body: he had never a
hair on his beard this th^ee or four (...), but might a bin an utter
barrester, for they have moulted all five or six times: he is like death, he
spares none, young nor old, rich nor poor, fair nor foul, he takes all.


Peg: Well Nan w^ll, thou art happy, thou were borne under a good Planet, thou
have store of suits, but prithee look, is there none heare's our counsel?


Nun: No none, speak boldly less.


Peg: I think an ill star reigned when I was borne, I cannot have as much as
suitor, this Master Nuecome that you for sooth so much scorn: I could find
in my heart to pray ^ine times to the Moon, and fost three Saint Annes eues,
so that I might be sure to have him to my husband.


Nan: I, thou would have him dreaming but not waking I am sure.


Peg: Not waking yea and a (...) too, for here I vow even by the chastest
thoughts that ere was nur^'d within Dianaes breast and by those purple drops
chaste Lucres spilt, and by the vnstainde coulloar of a maidens blush, that I
will prove as true unto his bed, as ere did she that did Ulysses wed.


Nan: Nay, since I have refused a Lord, by this light I scorn to marry any
under the degree of a Knight.


Peg. No, I would not have a Knight if I might, for there are so many, as they
are forgotten what they be.


Nan: Nay I then ^ see you are deceu'd, why woman, they have most of them
taken an order that they will never be forgotten, for they have book'd
themselves down a purpose, I know above three and twenty in one Mercers
books in Cheap side: th^n judge thou how many are in all their books, and
there is that will be a witness I warrant you to after ages, what their
fore^athers have been.


Peg, I, but that is but their faults, yet you know their calling is honorable
though.


Nan: Faith thou say true, I must needs say, Knighthoode is like marriage
know a days, which thought be honoarable amongst al men, yet it begg^^lie with
a great many: but come shal's go to dinner and see what stomach I have to my
vittailes, for y faith i have none to a husband: I would not taste a morsel of
a men for any money.


Peg: O that is because thou art not hungry.


Nan. It Is true indeed, a little bit would (...) my belly.


Exeunt amnes. Enter Lady and Slack after her. La. O my unkind husband, why
do reject me? if not on thee, where should I fix my love to have reward*


Enter Wages. Sla: Here where you are, in dear and hie regard.


Lad Alas thou art a man of mean condition.

Slac. Your love to me, will breed the less suspicion.
Fortune denie's me wealth: all ill upon her,
Yet I have courage to defend your honor,
Madam, you reason have to be unjust:
A wicked husband makes an unkind wife.
Men brag, that women weaker creatures be,
Yet you must suffer all gross Injury,
with silence too, and low linesse of spirit,
And then forsooth a good wives name your merit.
A goodly purchase sure to be a slave,
Unto a slave, till you go to the grave.
Eve had a soul as well as Adam,
All souls are masculine, hold freedom Madam.
If strength of body make the noblest creature,
Why should not Lions be the Kings of nature?
The strongest creatures governed are by sense,
And there thy soul has little residence.
Philosophers say, the Element of fire,
Is active, purest, aptest to aspire:
Of which you women have the lesser portion,
Which makes your brains beget cold Notion.
I grant that Adam was created so,
But since his fall, all thinks do backward go.
Now active heart, gets murder, theft and rapin:
It Is thy chariot which all vice does ride in.
Against whose ille's women could temper spurns,
Give me the heart which warmes not that which burns.
O hateful is the state you now do hold,
Worse then the slave, that is for money sold.
For you must money give to buy your evils,
and bind your selves, to some incarnate devils.
Be but chief steward in their drudgerie,
Bring forth their brats with your lives ieopardie.
Scarce dare you give, an old sleeue from your arm,
But they cry out, you are under Couertbaren.

La. Presumptuous slave whose flesh upon thy boa^e,
Thy Master just, may challenge as his own:
Which by the dead scrapes from his trencher got,
Is quickened now, to cut thy geuers throat:
Thou venem'd Snake, frosen with beggerie,
Now being thawed by thy masters boun^ie.
Would sting the bosom that did revive thee,
and like a viper gnawe, who first conceived thee.
Full argument of a servile spirit,
For noble hearts will gratify each merit.
Exit Lady.
Sl^^. Yea, are ye vanished?


Wag. Why how now fellow Slack, what is she gone?


Slac: S'life what should I do now to stop this slaves vennomed breath, for
fear it infect my reputation with my new master? this time was ill taken,
yet something I must do fellow Wages, how long have thou been here?


Wag. Ever since fortune denide thee wealth: all ill upon her: but thou have
courage to defend her honor.


Sla. Slight he has heard all.

Why man twa's my master set me only to try her.


Wag. Nay, like enough, for I see he would willinglye prove an accessarie to
the stealing of his own goods.


Enter Knight. Sla. True, and look here he comes, but I pray thee say
nothing, let me tell him of it.


Wa. Who I? not a word, my mouth is as close as a faulconers pouch, or a
country wenches placket.


Kn. She would never ^nckold me, but that she has some reason for it


Sl. True sir, there is nothing done, but there is reason for it, (if a man
could find it) for what is the reason your Citizens wives continually wear
hats, but to show the desire they have always to be covered. Or why do your
Semsters spend their time in pricking, and your Ladies in poking of ruffes; but
only to show they do as they would be don unto? or why do your Innes of
court men lie with his Laundresse in a long vacation, but because he has no
money to go abroad? Or why do your old judges widows always marry young
Gen^lemen, but to show that they love execution better then judgment.


K^^. O, but I wonder much she would not give me leave to make my first child
my self.


Sa. Foe: she knew you were but a prentice to the occupation, and commonly
Prentices spoil their first work, and being unskillful, she was loath you
should practice in a good Shop, and therefore she befriended you, because she
would have it well done: she ga^a better workema^ to do it for you. For what is
the reason the younger brothers (according to the old wives tails) always
proved the wisest men, but because the Fathers grew more skillful at last
then they were at the first? but I think your wives eldest Son will prove an
excellent fellow, because she had the help of so many in the making of it. For
commonly if one have a thing to be done, as a conueyance to be drawn, or a case
in the law to be argued, a man would have the help of as many good Lawyers as
he could get: now this case of making of children, and a case in the law, is
something like, for as one Lawyer takes his fee, and deals in it, another
Lawyer comes and argues the case more profoundly: but in the end when all is
done, leaves it to be tried by the Jury, in whom the right is, and so must
you: when they and you and al have done your best, yet in the end, must leave
it to be tried by your wife, whose the child is, for a woman's knowledge in
this case, is better then twelve men's.


Kni: O Slack, I hate worse then the worst sin that is.


VVag. And I p^a'y which sin do you most hate?


Kni. That which is most like her, which if thou will repeat --


Sla. I Will tell their conditions.


Kni. And I, which is most like her.


VVag. Then the first is pride.


Sla. I would have that sin burnt for a witch, it changes men into so many
shape.


Wag: The next is murder.


Slac. O! that's a thirsty sin, for naught can quench it but blood.


Wag. What is Theft?


Slac: Faith the greatest fault that I can find in that is, it cousens the
Scriuners, for it borrowes money without giving any obligation.


Wag: Covetousness.


Sla. O! that is an excellent sin, for to deal with, a that has a loose
belly, for twill bind any man for ten grotes.


Wag. What is sloth then?


Sla. Faith Sloth is a good Maidenly Greenesicknesse sin.


VVag. But leachery my Lady?


Sla. O that's the suckingst sin that a man can be acqainted withal, it
cannot endure to be in company, it creepes into corners, and hides it self in
the dark still.


VVag. What say then to drunkenness?


Sla: O that is a most gentleman like sin, it scorns to be beholding for
what it receives in a man's house, it commonly leaves it again at his door.


VVag. Nay, then lea^cherie scorns to be bebolding too, for I have known what
it has received in a man's house, it has sent home again nine months after,
and layen at his door, and therefore the more Gentleman like sin a great
deal, because it takes the longer time of repaiment, but I pray sit now, which
of all this is most like your wife.


Kni. Murder, for naught can quench her thirst of lust, but now I soon shall
find her villainy, praised be my vigilant care: which if I do epsy, i will
turn her off.


Wag. Alas, alas sir, you have no reason to be angry, much less to de
deuorced, although she do transgress, are you not cut? have ye not given her
cause, is it not out of mere necessity she does it? therefore if you follow
my counsel, mak^ her amends with kindness, and put not her away.


Kni: Believe me he speaks wisely, and good counsel, like a Lady, is to be
embraced.


Slac. Not put her away, and if she wrong him. If he do not, I say he is one
of the aranst blocks yt ever man spurned on: why is he not a Gentleman, a
Knight, has a not seen fashion: sir, I would have you bear a noble mind,
put he^ away and you list, it is no matter for cause, if she change but a
treneher with the Groom of your stable, it is dealing e^ough to be divorced,
Therefore put her away, and then you may have another wife.


Kni. Another wife?


Sla. True, a gallant, and yet a modest Lady too, one that shall nourish no
blood but your own, tender your reputation as the apple of her eye, and honor
even your very footsteps.


Kni: She shall go, i will make her trusse up her trinckets, oh faith she shall
away.


Wag. Shall she away? if she do, you do you know not what, you draw a
thousand thousand enemies about your ears, her kindred theill exclaim, no
friends will seek revenge, and your enemies will grow even fat with laughter
at your folly. Besides: what Woman then will have you, are you not gelded?
assure your self that now there is none will love you, most will hate you*
but all will scorn you, therefore by my advice make much of her, and keep her
while you have her.


Kni. Hah! now by the virtue of my hearing, he speaks but reason.


Sla. So, it is good to keep her still: dwell in the Subburbs to break down your
own glass windows, set some pickes upon your hatch, and I pray profess to
keep a Baudy-house.


Kni. A Bawdie-house? no, i will die first, and if I see but any apparent show of
her disloyalty, i will even be divorced immediately.

Exit Knight and Slack.
Wag. Well, I see the substance of this slave is villainy.

But i will prevent him even what I can,

Since none is worse then a Serving honest man,

Exit.
Sound Music. Actus Quarti, Scena prima.
Enter Knight and Slack. Kni: Why had I not a good leg? did I not always
wear clean lining? was not my hand washed, my beard combed, my cloak
brushed, and my shoes blacked, every morning.


Slac. True, why the more viler strumpet she to cuckold you.


Kni, But how doo'st know she is with child.


Sla. Know it, why she is daily troubled with water panges, and quakings over
her stomach.


Kni: Indeed I must needs say that is a great proof, she has filled her
belly with something that stood against her stomach, but do not think it is
my child.


Slac; Yours! why how cannot be yours: are you not circumcised to the quick?


Kni. Yes, and the rememberance of it galls me.


Sla: That's a sign ye are too patient, and like an Ass eindure all without
resistance.


K^i. Ha, ha, ha.


Sla. But why do you laugh sir?


Kn^. To think who the child will be like.


Sla. Why you, who should it be like ^lse?


Kni: Why it is none of mine man.


Sla. Why the more like you for that: why do you not not know the
Philosophers hold the child is always like the party which the mother
thinks off in the conception: now she thought most of you, for fear you
should a come the whiles, and that's the reason so many Gentlemen's sons are
like your Citizens, and calls them fathers too, for otherwise how could it
be that a young Cockney being left forty or fiftiie thousand pounds: spends
all within so many months, but that some young gallant begat him, for you
know the prouer be, Cat will after kind. No, had the old Citizen begotten
him, he would a bit a Fig in two, to have made just weight, and have had a pot
wi^h a false bottom, rather then a sold too much measure, he would have done
al things within meas^re as your old Citizen did, and not a spend al beyond
measure, as your young Gallants do.


Kni. But were not I best go home and use her well, till the child be borne,
to see if it be like me, that I may be sure it is none of mine.


Sla. O no, that were base, and as deceitful as the Colic when it breaks
out in wind, which leuels at a man's heel, and it strikes him in the nose,
therefore never make a show of one thing, and do an other, but put her away,
rid your hands of her, and there is an end.


Kni. I think whoe's the father of the bastard?


Sla. Why who is the Father of a Punckes child? is it not filius populi, it may
have two Fathers for any thing we know.


Kni: Well Slack, I do verrie much mistrust Wages too, for he is grown very
familiar of late.


Sla. True sir, and takes her part too, and ye mark him


Kni. I mark him: no Slack, no pray heaven a mark not me, but i will instantly
sue out a di^orce, hap what hap shall, but ill's his hap whose wife lies down
to all.

Exit Kni.
Enter Wages. Wag. Of all honest aminall's your Cuckold is the best,
For he is sure a Gentleman, and known by his crest.

Sla. Of all occupations, that ever man professed,
In my opinion still does hold, the Cutpursse is the best.

Wag: And why the Cutpursse?


Sla. Because he will trust no man, foe as soon as he has lone his work,
he is sure to have his money in his ^and.


Wag. Nay then a lawyer is a better trade then that, for he is sure of his
money before he does his work.


Sla. But I pray thee what is the news ab^oad now?


VVag. Why they say the world is like a Byas bowl, and it runs all on the
rich men's sides: others say, it is like a Tennis-ball, and fortune keeps such a
Racket with it, as it tosses it in to times hazard, and that deuoures all, and
for my part they say, twill shortly run upon wheels with me, for my Master
swears a will have me car^ed, because a thinks I have layen with my Lady.


Sla: Nay then twill run upon wheels with thee indeed, but peace fool
peace, when thou art once married, that suspect will die.


Wag. Peace fool peace, say thou when I am married? do hear? I tell
thee, there is no piece in marriage, unless it be with a dumb woman, no nor
but little comfort neither.


Sla: No way? why does the Ballad say then, So sweet a thing is Love, that
rules both heart and mind, there is no comfort in the world, to women that are
blind.


Wag: Kind (man) the Ballet says.


Sla. Mass I think a be kind indeed, yet blind's the better of the two I
think, for as thou say, if she be dumb, I am sure she will say nothing that
shall offend her Husband: if blind, she will see nothing that shall offend her,
and where he nor she is offended, there must needs be a peace: but besides
this is there no peace think thou in the marriage of a wife.


Wag. Yes by the man's, side like a Gentleman only by the fathers side, but
twill nere be any perfect peace.


Sla. Why, why will thou marry then?


Wag. Because I hope to have some good behauio^r of my wife, for the peace I
never look for: but soft ye fellow Slack, me thinks your suit is like a
hard hearted Landlord, it begins to receive great rents.


Sla. I, I would, my Master had given me a suite of Buffe when he gave me this.


Wag: Phoe, buffe is naught man, that has bin out of request quest ever since
Soldiers have bin out of date, and they poor men are now used like Almanackes
of the last year, either clap-vp behind the door, or thrust clean out of
door: but if thou will have a suite that shall last indeed (lad) get thee a
suite of law.


Sla. O, I do not like such suites, for commonly they that have many of them
go almost naked for want of clothes, yet I cannot deny but they are verrie
lasting, but they are subject to many discommodities: so if there be any
goodness in one of them, your Lawyers like mothes, eat shroad holes to it, but
your Country Atturneyes like l^ce neue^ leave wrighting and wrangling till
they have crep't into it, but when it has bin well worn and grown third
bare, they even like Lice drop off, and leave it.


VVag: What say thou by a suite at Courtthen?


Slac. I marry sir, I like that well, for commonly he that has but one suite
when he comes there, has two erehe come away, for if he sue by Petition, it
lies so long in your Courtiers pocket, that it is another suite to get his
Petition back again. There is none suddenly dispatched of his suite there
but a Tailor, marry he stays not at all, unless his suite be to have
mo^eye for his suite, and so he makes his suit two suits too ere he go. But
come, shall we go see what follows after our Masters new divorce.


Wag: Why is a diuor'd?


Sla: I, I think by this time, for he swore he would be presently. By my
troth, I am sorry for it, for in my conscience it is without cause, it grieves
me to see him in these humors, for I thank his VVorshippe he has ever used
me well, I am bound to pray for his life.


VVag. And me thinks that's a strange thing, I see no reason for it that any
seruingman should pray for his Masters life, considering all that he have, is
in reuertion of him: but come, lets follow him, for if he miss us, heel
fret like a grogram I, and fume like a stue pot.


Slac: And let him fume, O would his gal would burst with indignation, then
should his tempe pr^create my bliss, and I (...) that Saint incarnat: but what
shall I do, since base nor noble shape can win, a third i will try.

And if that fail knight, go to church and pray,
For vengeance wings brings on thy lethall day.

Exeunt. Wages. Enter the old Lord alone. (...): He that a long way voyage
takes in hand, fears dangerous gustes at sea, and storms:

At land conquering cold that cripels curssed age, and doubts least every
cloud should prove a storm, and beat his weryed carcass to the earth. But O,
I would to God my longest Journey unto death were to be taken, for I d^e cast no
doubts, having lost all comfort, My Son, I fear, is dead, The loss of him
makes life to me but like a blister on my flesh, which grieves me much, and
naught can ease, unless it breaks. O whilst he lived his presence was a
force unto my age, and gave it such a luster as did enrich my ring of Life: for
life is but a ring beginning in our weakness, going round, till unto weakness
we return again, then to the ground. The world it self is but a skillful game
at chesses, which being ended, Kings and Queens, Bishops and Knights into
one bags are thrown at last: So all of us both poor and rich, shall in the
end into the earth, as into a Bag be cast-Mans ^^ife is like unto a ship that
crossed by tempests and by tides, some thoughts of his like billows swell him up
a loft, another strikes him down, Thus man as on a sea is ^oste, infa^est
weather fears a sto^me, and in a storm the event, but in the end he
sinckes, when life is spent: grief has no bounds in tears, it ebbes and
flows.

Till it have drowned life, and ended woes.

Exit.
Enter Lady, Nan, and Wages. Lady. But Wages, is there no means (think
thou) to turn by it, nor to force back his stream of wrath.


Wag. Yes i will warrant ye Madam, if you will be ruld by me, you shall see i will make
him seek to be friends with you, and entreat me to speak for him too, but
then I would have you seem a little strange: but you shall directly rail on
him. Therefore I would have ye hide your selves here behind the hangings, for
twill not be long ere he come this way, and then you shall come forth and
frame your behavior according as our discourse shall require.


Nan: Mass here he come^, lets stand close.


La. We will, and heaven assist thy proiects.


Enter Knight. Kni. Now Wages, what news with you?


VVag: That which I think will help you from being diuorc'd.


Kni. What Is that?


Wag: Why your Lady is not with child.


Kni. Is It possible?


Wag. Why how should she, unless some Hobgoblin, some Incubus or spirit of
the butterie should beget it? why she, since you were gelded, never saw a man
but through a window: she has never trod her foot awry, for fear some ill
construction should attend her steps, which like a boundless Ocean deep
enraged, would drown her reputation.


Kni. Not with child say thou?


Wag. Not of my word sir.


Kni. Wages I would thou would but do some charitable offices^


Wag. What? make ye friends again?


Kni. True.


Wag. But you will prove fal^e, and break that friendship?


Kni. Never, as I hope to be reconciled, therefore tell me, will thou do it?


Wag. Hum: truly I would do my good will, but I fear twill be but labor
lost.


Kni. I pray thee do but try: I faith thou shall not loose thy pains.


VVag. O less sir, you know I must feed on Quails.


Kni. That was in my fury man, but will thou not do it?


Wag. Pray sir, if you can get some other friend to speak in 't, do.


Kni. Well, thou will leave me now then?


Wag. Alas Sir, what would you have me do? by my troth sir, I am ashamed to
speak in it: have ye not gelded and cut off all the content of marriage? why
they that have the full performance of it, it is as much as they can do to
please their Wives, and you that want all ability, must not only please her
now, but make her amends for the wrong you have done her heretofore, and how
have I the face to promise that which I know you have no means to perform it?


Kn: Alas man, i will do my good will.


Wag. Do your good will, and that's much worth sure, yet since you have been my
master, the world shall not say but i will do that I can, i will persuade what I may,
ye shall see there shall be no fault in me. Enter the Lady and Nan. Mass here
she comes: what will you do now?


Kni: O^ i will hide me here, and so I shall hear all what she says.


Wag: O this is excellent, come, come, come, and stand close, ye shall hear
how i will speak for ye: and if ye hear your pardon granted, come forth.


Kni. I warrant ye.


Wag. Morrow Madam.


Lad. Morrow Wages.


Wag: Morrow Mistress Nan.


Nan: Morrow Wages.


Wages. The Fox is caught, his head is in the ^ouse.


Nan: peace, speak soft, persuade, persuade.


Wa: Faith Madam I have a suit unto you, but I am half a shamed to speed in it.


Kni. Slight, the rogue says he is a shamed to speak for me, hist Wages,
hist wages.


Nan. Madam, your man would make an ill suter, that is ashamde to speak in his
suit.


VVag. What the Devil aile you, what are you made you will be spide anon.


Knight. A pox on thee, art not ashamde to tell her that thou art a shamde to
speak for me? hist, hist, Wages.


VVag^s: I think the Fool rides you, what will you have?


Kn. Do hear Wages, speak for me, and by this light i will mend thy Wages.


Wag. By how much?


Kni. Forty shillings.


Wag. Forty shillings?


Kni. Three pound, three pound.


VVag. Give me your hand, i will do it


La. But what is your suit Wages?


Wag. That you would forgive your Husband,


Lady. What and receive his love again, you mean?


Wag. I Madam.


La. Marry there were aiest indeed, being as he is now, a Woman would be loath
to turn him amongst her ducks: truly Wages I am ashamde in your behalf, that
a man of your discretion would urge it, therefore prithee speak no more on it,
i will tell thee what, I could finde^ in my heart to speak for him my self, but
that it is such a iealious fool, that if he catch but a Flea in her bed, he
will be searching to see if it be a male or a female, for fear a comes to
Cuckold him.


Lad: Well Wages well: to tell thee truly, I bear no malice, and if I wist
he would amend, I should forgive and love him with my heart again.


Enter Knight. Kni. Ye faith I will wife.


Lady. Why how now Wages, have you betraide us?


Wag* I, Madam, but it is into the hands of those that love ye.


Nan. Well Wages well, I did not think you would have used us thus.


La. Is there honesty in this, to set a man behind the hangings to euise-drop
our words.


Kni. Be not angry sweet wife, in faith it was my plot, but you have been a
heavy enemy of mine.


Nan. It Was more for my credit then to have been your light friend.


Kni: Be friends with me good wife, for here I do conf^sse.


Na. Your Jealousy sprung from your own unworthiness.


Kni. It Is true.


Lady. Then in hope you will kinder prove, I am content, For this know, a
VVomans heart will soon relent.


Kn. Then, come sweet wife, letsin,
And Wages, thy pains deserves to be requited,
For separated hearts, have thou united.

Exeunt omne^. E^ter Nuecome singing with a Glass in his hand, and making
himself ready. Nan. La, la, la, la, la, they marched out manly by three, and
by three, and the formoste in Battle, was Mary Hanbrie. Will you hear of a
Spanish Lady, how she woed an Englishman: hum, hum, hum.


Boy. Boy: Here sir.


Nue: Is the Tailor gone?


Bo: Gone, sir.


Nue: Go fetch me my doublet their,


Bo: I go sir,

Exit Boy.
Nue. Hum, hum, hum, by the greatest terror to Gentilitie, which indeed is
Creditors and Sergeants, this Roaguie Tailor came upon me with such a bill as
a man were better have ten Constables and their Watches come vp^pon him with
their bills: why good words, or a dozen of ale will please them, but nothing
will stop this roagues mouths but money: and yet in faith I am greatly in his
books, for though I misuse him never so much, yet the Rogue durst not cross
me. Enter Boy. Let me see Boy, mass it is a pretty Doublet.


Boy. The Tailor sir, intreates you to remember your day.


Nue: My day* Gods light, my day? why what does ^ take me for, I think?


Boy. A takes you for a Gentleman sir, I think.


Nue: A Gentleman, and remember my day, no, i will hold my life he takes me for
some Merchant or Citizen, but i will make him know my strength, e^e I leave him,
he shall find a second Sampson of me. I can break my bonds boy, I can, I
can.


Boy: But come sir, will you try your doublet first.


Nue. O I, come, come pluck, but take heed of my ruff I pray thee^ this
doublet is too little, a pox in him.


Boy: Not now, he is on sir.


Nue. No when he is off, I mean boy.


Boy: Believe it sir, but it becomes ye well though.


Nue: Does it indeed? mass I think it do, me thinks I have a reasonable
good leg in it.


Boy: So you have sir, but your heel is a little too short.


Nue: Yea, why too short?


Boy: Because your long heel sir does always best b^come your great Calfe.


Nue: Why? my Calfe is not verrie great.


Boy: O sir yes, why a man shall not see a greater Calfe of your age, for I
think you are not above twenty.


Nue: Not so much, but come help off my doublet now.


Boy: I will sir.


Nue: Come, i will see how twill look here, and go thou and watch the door,
that no body come the whilst, hum, hum, hum, if I had a band for it.


Boy: Why that about your neck sir.


Nue: But what if any body should come the whilst?


Boy: Why do not I keep the door?


Nue: Mass that is true: hum, hum, hum.

O it is Master Nuecome, I know him, a fine Gentleman in faith i will salute him by
and by as I pass. Master Nuecome I take it, I cry ye heartily mercy good
Master Nuecome, I am glad to see you in good health sir, I shall entreat you
to pardon me, I protest I did not know you in that suite, you have a verrie
fair doubl^ton, the Gods give you joy sir: There is never a Lord in the Land
may be ashamed to wear it sir, rap, rap, rap, rap.

Gods light carry away my Doublet quickly, quickly, quickly.


Boy: I warrant ye sir.


Enter a Messenger. Enter a Seruingman. Nue: Gods precious my Band, what shall
I do now?


Ser. By yeur leave sir, my ^istris, mistress Peg sent to see how your worship
does.


Nue. I thank her verry heartily, I pray commend me to her.


Ser. I Will do your commendations sir, but I pray you be covered sir, I pray
yon be covered.


Nue. I thank ye heartily, it is for mine ease, the weather is hot, hot, very
hot.


Ser. So it is indeed sir, well sir, by your leave sir, i will be so bold sir as
to carrye your commendations sir.


Nue. Do so good friend, farewell, farewell.

Exit. Serving. What a beast was I to put off my band, yet the greiefs the
less, because he came from Peg, which is a Wench I must confess dotes on my
exterior virtues, but I can by no means affect her: only, because the poor
Wretch, in heat of her passion shall not melt her self away in tears, she
sometimes inforceth me to swear and protest I affect her, marry always with
mental reseruations for my souls health, for you know that sometimes it is
policy Courtiers and Statesmen should use fallacy.

Exit Nuecome.
Enter the Lady with a servant. La. Give charge unto the cook a make not too
much haste with supper, for I hope your master will be here to night, and
look you keep fast the door, let no man trouble me.


Ser: I will Madam.


L^d. Now thanks gentle heavens, O be you smiling still on my designs, and
let your influence pour down good fortunes, and be not angry, nor no more
maleuolent, but make my husbands reconcilement irreuocable.


Enter Captain Wouldly, and Seruingman. Ser. Sir, I shall be shent for letting
of you in.


Cap. Sblood I tell thee I will speak with her, what woldst thou bar my
chance when my whole fortunes lies on y^ cast.


La. O heavens, stars, fates, Gods smile not like Su^mer on these Wasps no
longer, that daly bussing come to sting my honnour.


Cap: Save thee sweet Lady, I hear thy husband is from home, which makes me
come to tender thee my persons love.


Lad. Your parsons Love (sir) is most commonly a benefice, O that I should be
troubled with this Ass now, do you hear ^ir, if my husband should come and
find you here we were both undone.


Cap. Your husband, your husband is an ass, by this light and he should offer
you but an ill look in my sight, tweare better he had no eyes: but it is your
own fault that would not ere now accept of the love of a Soldier, to have
kept the slave in some awe.


Ser. O! how reprochfully the Captain swaggers, i will away, for fear he grow
furious.

Exit servant.
Cap. But do hear me sweet Lady, I have loved thee long, and must now
enjoy thee. Fear nothing: this warlike sword of mine shall defend thine honor,
this Martial blade shall do'^: life it shall in faith.


Rap, rap, rap. La. Hark, hark, my husband is come.


she looks through the door. Cap: Your Husband, ha! where, where?


La. It Is not he? but i will try my Captains valor now. O sir, my husband,
what shall I do now, he has a Pistol in his hand too, he will kill us both.


Cap. A pistol? cods my life, what shall I do then? I pray hide me some where.


La. O no! as ye love me, must enjoy me, and will defend my honor, draw forth
this warlike sword: this is the martial blade must do it, therefore I beseech
you good Captain now or never.


Cap: Gods precious woman, he has a pistol, a sword no shield against a
bullet. receive, and then to have, hold, manure and occupy in statu quo pri^s,
that is in the state before and I do not doubt but your grant in this case will
be good, for there is a case that proves this in quinto of Rich the th^rd: a
patro^ was seisd of an aduowsio^ in fee, with two nuns appe^da^t, and theru^to
presented a parso^, with a prouiso, y^ if the incu^bent should alien grant,
demise, let, set, or otherwise put away the premises, or any part or parcel
thereof* that then it should be lawful for the patron (or his assigns) in and
upon the whole to reenter. The incumbent aliend, the Patron entered, the Quare
was, whether those two Nuns were any part of the premises, and by virtue of the
prouiso subject to y^ reentrie: and after long dispute it was agreed by all the
Court, that the entry was good, as well in the two Nu^s, as in the rest of the
premises. The^ much more in this case, where we are both lay me^.


La: Sure this fellow thinks he has some right to me, and he hopes to win me
by law, but what think ye: if my husband should come and enter now upon us
two, in what case were you?


Ex. Why well enough, perchance he would complain of me to the bench, and then
I should be put out of commons: that is the worst he could do, and y^'s nothing;
for I was once put out of commons before, for beating of the panyard man: and
in again within three days after.


Enter a Servant: Ser. O Madam, madam, what will you do? my master is come as
I am a living man.


Lad O less sir, what shall I do with you?


Exh. Why hide me some where, cannot ye hide me here?


La. O no, no, no, he does use to search all the house still, to see if he can
find any body here, but i will tell ye what ye shall do, draw out your rapier
and go out against him, and whatsoever question he ask you* make him no
answer, but only say, ye doubt not for all this, but you shall meet him and
be revenged well enough in an other place, and leave the rest to me.


Exh: I warrant ye.


Exeunt Exhebition and Servant Enter Knight. La. Come out, come out man.


Cap. Slight woman your husband will see me.


La: Spretious man, that is all one, come out, come out, draw your sword, hold
it in your hand, make some show of resistance.


Cap* Sblood woman he has a pistol.


La: He has none, he has none, by this hand I did but ^est.


Cap. Nor no other weapon?


La. Nor no other weapon?


Cap: In Faith.


La. Why will ye not believe me* in faith he has not.


Cap Well then, well, nay I care not if he had.


Enter Knight and Wages. Kni Why how now Wife, what is the matter? what stir
have we here?


La. Why husband did you not meet a man with a rapier drawn in his hand?


Kni. Yes, and heeres another.


La. Alas husband, he would a killed this poor Gentleman, but that he came and
ran in here for shelter, and because I would not suffer him spoil him here
in your house, he is gone in such a rage as you never saw.


Kni. My faith, and he swore indeed he would be revenged in an other place:
did he not Wages?


Wag. he did indeed sir.


Kn^. Believe me, and he might easily have slain you sir, for he had a very
long ^apier.


La. True, I know my self he had the better weapon, or else I would ^ere a
stood so against him.


Kni. I, had I such a rapier, I would a made him run like an Irish Lackey.


La: I, to have overtaken ye.


Kn. Well wife, believe me, I thank ye for this: for I w^ld not for the wealth of
all this town he should a hurt him in my house, well sir you shall sup with
me: and after supper i will conduct you to your lodging my self, but fear
nothing.


Cap. I thank you sir.


Exeunt. Kn^^La^Cap Actus Quinti Scaena prima.
Enter Knight and Slack. Sla. Why did you not perceive it?


Kni. Not, I protest.


Sla. O monstrous! why did she not say herself, she knew he had the better
weapon, for which cause she stood against him, meaning Bauderie, flat baudery,
and yet you could not perceive it: now by this light, had you slept but one
foot lighter, ye had taken them in the verrie fact, but you go dreaming
hanging down your head, that it is no ma^uell your wife makes you a Cuckold: for
the husband being the wives head, why when the head goes down thus* the heels
must needs mount up.


Kni. I Will never more hear of rcconcilement, but be di^orced immediately.


Sla. Straight put her away, why you may have (...) enough.


K^. O wi^es too (...)


Sla. There Is your (...) Peg, she is fair, modest, honest, (...) discreet
and honorable.


Kni. And would a be acquainted with me fal'st?


Sla. Who?


Kni. The man thou speak of.


Sla. Why I speak of none, I talk of a woman,


Kni. And have all these good conditions.


Slac: I, why not?


Kni. Do know her.


Sla. I.


Kni. Hark then, rent a chamber, hang out her picture, take twelve pence a
piece at the least,

For enough will come I know:
To see that which none else can show.

Slac. Slight I think the man be mad, but (...) ye not have her sir?


Kni. Yes, if thou tell true, who would not have her: but first make winged
speed to purchase my divorce, hold here is money, make have, use no delay,

For all men must for expedition pay.

Sla. I go, and you shall be diuorc'd or else my braine^ shall swe^: for what
your folly loses, my wit shall get.

Exit Slack at one door, and enter Wages at the other.
Kni. O Wages, i will tell thee news, I have sent for a divorce, and what will thou say when I am married to a new wife?


Wag. Then sir will I say as the proverb says, marriage and hanging comes by
destiny: but if ye be divorced, and will follow my counsel you shall hang
your self, rather then marry again.


Kni. No Wages, I do not hold that so good: for sure, marriage is better then
hanging in some.


Wag. True, in some respect, and that only because you have a longer time of
repentance, but I pray sir, is it a christian that you mean to marry?


Kni. A Christian! I, why do think I would marry a (...)?


Wag: I do not (...) that so well sir, because it is the fashion amongst them
to send Capons to their Godfathers for New years gifts, and upon my life
sir, she will one time or other clap you up in a basket, and send you away for
good handsell: but I pray sir who is it?


Kni. Peg, is she not a fine Gentlewoman?


Wag. Beyond p^aise.


Kni. Has she not a piercing eye?


VVag. And twere a Ferrit.


Kni. A delicate nose.


Wag. And it were a Mulberrie.


Kni. Teeth like two rows of orient pearl.


VVag. But the string is broken and many of them are fallen out.


Kni: Hands as white as Pelops shoulder.


Wag. I, and as thick too.


Kni. Wages.


Wag. Sir.


Kni: Go to her, and measure by thy protestations the depth of my affections:
tell her what I will be to her, not what I have bin to others: if she allege
to thee her cousens presupposed wrongs, tell ^i^, I well could have been
hoodwinck'd to her cousens faults, so I had never seen her face.


VVag. But what shall I tell her if she say you are gelded?


Kni. I there is it indeed, there is no excuse for that: yet thou may tell her,
I did it only to preserve my voice. Deliver this Jewel to her hand, and with
it even my hearts affection.


Wag. I will sir, and if the Wenches close my proiectes carry, spite of
mschan^ce you shall your own wife marry.

Exit Wages.
Kni. Now must I be frolic, learn to speak well, and woo with a good garb:
and now I think on it, I have a pretty conce^e of mine own, I will tell her
that the wooing of a young wench, is the felling of a tree, and the getting of
her friends good will, like the lopping of the tree, therefore first it behoues
me to hew down the tree and then i will climb with ease: but if at first to fell
it I be not able, to assay to climb it shall be in vain. Welcome, have thou
brought the divorce.


Enter Slack Sla: It Is here sir.


Kni. Come then, lets in, it joys me much that thou so scone have sped,

For hours seem years, till it be published.


Exeunt Omnes. Enter Lady, Na^, and Peg. Na^. But tell me good Madam, why are
you so melancholy?


La. To think upon the sawsie importunity of my Ser^ant Slack: he is like a
badge on a coat, he is never off, off my sleeu^, and yet I shun him like the
pest.


Peg: And he follows you like infection.


Nan: Nay I would he did so by me, for I protest I love him beyond my thoughts,
I covet nothing like his company, and yet he hates me, lothes my sight, but
then comes the welchman your love, and he hanges on my lips like a Padlocke on
a Pedlars Budget.


Peg: And hates me as much, for if I come but near him, he swears I am like
a Kybe, always at his heels.


Nan: Come Madam, do not grieve at that which grief can no way mend.


La: I would not, if I could mend that which does cause my grief.


Enter Wages. Wag. News, news.


Nan. What news.


Wa: You are divorced.


La, Why ^^uorced, why? ha, speak.


Wag. Nay, I cannot speak the cause Madam? but questionles it is true, and
mistress Peg, my master now makes love to you.


Peg. To me?


Na: To thee, I to thee, go thy ways, thou shall be a Lady, I ever thought
thou would come to some promotion, as the boy did that had a bag and a staff
and begged for himself, but how do thou know he is in love with her.


Wa. Know It why I have seen him stand an hour together behind an Oaken tree,
calling it sweet mistress, kind Peg and making speeches to it.


N^, As how? as how? prithee how?


Wa: Stand you for the tree, and i will speak for my Master.


N^n. I will, and that most stiffly in faith.


Wa. Then thus he begins: Dear mistress Peg I must conf^sse.


Na. Nay then he is a dead man already.


W^. Why?


N^, Why confess and be hanged ever.


Wa: O ho, but I mean he does confess she is (...)*


Nan. That's all one, he is but one man, and one witness can never prove her
^act, but prithee on with thy speech.


Wag. Why then this fair Mistress I must confess.


Nan: But he will not confess before witness will he?


Wag. Push, did not I tell you he would speak to an Oak.


^an: Nay, then that will be a strong proof indeed.


Wag. Proof, Nay, if that be not proof, how say by this token.


Na, I marry sir, would we had more such tokens of his love.


Wag: This Mistress he has sent to you.


Peg. Look you Madam, your husband now makes love to me.


Na. Sir how peart thou art, why look woman, your love a^ mad woes me, and to
me sent this ring.


La. And my man the man you so esteem, spite of refusal left with me this
cha^e.


Na. This chain: for ever may he lincked be to woe, that hates my love, and
woes another so.


VVag: Well, lets in, and be but patient all a while, for if the worst do
fall, that ever did fall,

A plots in chase that shall out strip them al


Exeunt. Omnes. Enter Knight and Cupid before him. Kni: Now if she should
refuse my Jewel and contemn my love, or contemn my love, and take my Jewel:
what a ^oole was I to send her a token till I had some token of her affection,
as if women might be woed with gifts, for when we give them those things which
most we love, they do esteem we love them better then those things we give,
when they poor fools do but deceive themselves, for we do ^iue as Merchants
venture, for a ^^eble; again we send them ^okens only to get the^ and their
portions. But there comes my persecutor.


Enter Lady. La. Why do thou haun^ me like a Ghost, thou femall inner: thou
have not holy church in thy power with all hit commandments, to keep me
from thy unhallowed presence: how durst thou break the Edict pronounced by the
mouth of holy Church Man? art thou not Divorced? is not our separation blown
into the peoples ears, even by Ieho^ahs chosen Trumpetter? First, thou did
break thy vow to me, and made of every Priapus a Trumpet; on which thou
blowedst thine own infamy: therefore avoid, thou leauend lump of sinfulnes,
avoid.

O my still beloved Husband, like filth or dirt, do not flea me like a
Serpent, which comes to sting thy bosom; I come to kiss; Sweet let not
suspect divorce me from thy presence, though from thy bed: For if you will
trust this masked face, I know:
No fountain purer than my Love would show.



Kni. I fly, and hate thee like a Serpents hissing, which comes to sting me
with pretense of kissing.

Exit Knight. O faintie tears, and feeb^e hands, ^or ever may you close, and
never part till sharpest grief have cut the heartstrings of my life. Or else
let this same brain of mine dissolve to tea^es, and drop it self even drop
by drop, until it make a Sea of woes, that therein I may drown my w^^^ched
life.


Enter Slack. Slack. Alas poor Lady, I pity your calamity, and grieve to
see you bruised by my Masters injury, which makes your eyes like spunges drop
these brinish tears, and spoils a Face, such as was never better one framde
by the skillful hand of Nature.


Lady. Avoid thou slave, how durst thou woe me? I am like a star to thee;
my O^b's above thee.


Slack. O! then my Love is a most clear and brightest star: look not with a
maleuolent Aspect upon me, but let your eyes bright raise up my life, and so
extol my thoughts


Lady. Perish may thy self and love together:
Heavens grant again, I nere may hear of either.
Exit Lady.
Slack. What shall I do?


Enter Nan. Nan. Respect her most, that most of all loves you.
O! do not turn away those Eyes, whose radiant beams first nursd my flame.


Slack. Avoid thou irresistable Torteror, more ^retting to my thoughts then
Cankars are to Mettalls. How often have I told thee of my ha^red? For of this
be thou sure and still remembered: deep hate (like love) can hardly be
dissembled.

Exit Slack.
Nan. I, do thou hate me then? O brightest Venus,
Now or never make thy blind Son see; and (...) his heart, whose hate has
wounded me.

Enter Nucome. Nuc. Oh here she is; pray God my Band sit well. Fair Lady, may
I presume with the Be to suck Honey from thy lips, for I dreamed the last
night.


Nan. Nay, I thought he would woo me dreaming ^ike a Welshman.


Nuc. That I was transfigured, metamorphosd, or transformed into a flea in thy
Bed.


Nan: But did I not kill ye then?


Nuc. Me thought you did did, but first I dreamed I flung you.


Na. Yet again dreaming, i will talk no more, but be gone; for fear I wake him.

Exit Nan.
Nuc. And then me thought, as I was skipping from your knee unto your thigh,
and so forth; you told a Gentleman of it, a friend of yours; who most courtly
and softly putting in his hand to catch me. Spretious she is gone, sure it is
the acutenes of my ingenuitie, which makes my ieasts so stinging, as she cannot
endure them: I must needs eat some of your new court-water-gruell, to qualify
my my invention.


Enter Peg. Peg. Thou need'st not love, speak what thou will, if gently thou
do speak, thy words to me are much more Musical then is a Sirens voice.
Orpheus himself could never strain his high stretched strings to such
Melodious sounds, as when thy voice does pierce the ^are.


Nuc. It Is but for my wit she loves me: I sent her tricks already: for
Courtyers must as well thriuing be, Have Noses to smell out, as Eyes to see.


Enter Nucome. Peg. Despis'de, and left alone, filde brim full of grief, and
no way to unload me of my cares.

But through these running eyes, in streams of tears.


Enter Knight. Kni. Whose tears like to a clear, yet poisoned source, have
with their vapors through these eyes (the windows to my heart) infected all
my thoughts. Thy eyes do shoot forth glances like to stars, though seated in
a moist and rainie Sky, the which has wounded even my heart, and I must die;
Lest Achilles launce-like, healed by your eye.


Peg. I pray you seek some-where else, if you be ill,
For I in Surgerie-haue little skill.
Exit Peg.
Kni. I Will follow my suit, not ceassing till the most of trial,
For he is a fool in Love that makes denial.
Exit Knight.
Cupid. Here has been a Maze, a Round, a Whyrling in Love,

How like the spoakes of a Ladies Coach-wheeles
They run one after another:
And as of them you see neither,
So none of these can overtake either.
And though you see them thus forsaken,
They shall be married, but mistaken:
Which for performance yet a while,
I must be laboring to beguile.
Only the men, and make them venture,
To run a Circle far from Center
Of their hopes; yet for their good,
Where blinded each like Hawke in hood,
Shall Marry better then they Wooed.
Exit Cupid.
Enter Lady and Wages. Wages. Nay Madame, it must needs be so, or else the
Priest will never Marry me.


La. And so you would have us all be Married masked.


Wages. True, to which you all may easily persuade your Lovers, telling them
with my Marriage, will be with much the less suspect effected.


Lady. But say, who shall know us, when our Faces ^^e not seen?


Wages. The better; for then you shall appoint each one of them, to choose you
by their own Tokens, which you within your selves shall change: Mistress Peg
shall wear Mistress Nans Ring, Mistress Nan your Chain, and you Mistress Pegs
jewel.


Lad: But shall they need to come naked too?


Wag. O I, by any means, only for some private reasons unto me, in which
persuasion if you will practice that you know, you will prevail.


Lady. I Will do my best most willingly.


Wages. Then come Madam, let us in: I know it will do.
For this is held a principle in Schools,
Love makes not fools wise men, but wise men fools.

Exeunt omnes. Enter four Boys. 1. Nominatiuo, hic, haec, hoc.


2. A Nowne is the name of a thing.


3. Amo, amas, amaui, amare.


4. In speech be these eight parts.


Enter Master Correction, and Wages. Ma. Cor. I promise you sir, I had Dinde
forth to day, but that you see the weather is Clowdie, and the Heavens lowre on
my delights.


Wages. I pray you sir, whose Son is that bigger Boy?


M. C. It is Master Parmisins son the Cheese-monger, and the next to him is
Master Cauetas son the Ferryman, two very pretty sparks i will assure you.
Tobias Parmasin, come hither Tobias, hold up your head Tobias, and look and
you can see a penny in my browe: So, it is well done; What part of speech is
Mentula?


1. A nowne Adjective.


M. C. And why a nowne adjective?


1. Because it stands not by himself, but it requires an other word to be
joined with it.


M. C. Mark you Sir, I teach both substance and meaning; I do not teach as
your common people, d, o, b, a, b, b, bottles; Go sit you down again Tobyas,
Timothy, come ye hither Timothy: How construe you this verse Timothy? I am,
iam, Tacturus, Sidera summa putes.


2. I am, iam, O John, John, putes, do thou put, Sidera, summa, Syder in
Summer, Tacturus, in Tankerds.


Wages. A very forward child, I promise ye.


Ma^st. C. Go sit you down again: Will you hear them all examined Sir?


Wag. Moss willingly good good Master Correction.


M. C. Ye shall sir; Sir, I have taken as much pains with them, as any Poet
whatsoever could have done, to make them answer upon their Q. with good action,
distinction, and deliberation: ha, ha, ha, how many devils are there?


2. Number infinite.


M. C. Look you Sir, there are an infinite number of Devils: What is the
Devil?


3. A wicked Spirit.


M. C. What is the nature of that wicked spirit?


4. To work mischief.


M. C. On whom does it work mischief?


1. On all mankind.


M. C. When has he most power to work mischief?


2. When Man has taken his liquor.


M. C. With what visitations then deludes he mankind?


3. With strange Earthquakes.


M. C. What is the man's best comfort?


4. To sleep and slumber.


M. Cor. Look ye now sir, are they not pretty children?


Wag. Very pretty, and well taught, i will assu^e you sir.


M. C. Sir, I will tell you, notwithstanding all these pains I take with them,
yet how unkindly their Parents use me: they suffer their younger Children to
beray the Churchporch: And no longer since then Monday last, came the
Official, and there being angry with me about other matters, he threw
that in my dish, as if I could have helped it: but I answered him sufficiently:
For I told him, they that did it, were but the Children and the youth, and
youth would break out in despite of his Nose; or the best man's Nose in the
parish.


Wages. I think ye spend most of your time with your Scholars here: ye
keep little other company.


M. C. Yes sometimes sir, here was yesterday Master Nucome the Courtier, do
you not know him sir?


Wages. O very well sir.


M. C. He is a fine Gentleman, a good Scholar, and an excellent Naturalist:
and truly fell into a great disputation, (peace these Boys there) and our
Argument was, whether a Fool or a wiseman made the best Lawyer. He stood for
the Wise man, and I most Scholastically, stood for the Fool: and thus I began
my Syllogism, (peace these Boys when I bid ye) your wiseman (said I) uses
few words, your Fool, much babbling; your best Lawyers use much babbling. Ergo,
your Fools makes the best Lawyers.


Wag. And believe me sir, it was well proved.


Ma. C. A flash, a flash, a foolish Schoole-point, a foolish Schole-point.


Wag. O I, and confuted me too, only by reason of a scuruie old Proverb
which says, Children and Fools do always tell true: but your best Lawyers
do not always tell true: Ergo, your Fools make not your best Lawyers, a most
strong and strange Argument.


Wag. I pray Master Correction, let me entreat a Playday for your Scholars.


Ma. C. O Master Wages, they do nothing else, they do nothing but play,
nothing but play.


Wag: Nay good sir, do not deny me, for I have some private business with you of
(...) importance.


M. C. Nay then sir you shall prevail indeed: you shall, yet I remember;
Dyonisius ille Tyra^nus, Scyciliae crudelissimus, crudelissimus Scici^iae
Tyrannus ille Dyonisius: says to one of his Pupils: Hue ades, haec animo,
concipe dictatuo. So I say unto you all my Masters, reuerere Maiores: pluck
off your Hats to your betters, and look ye give the Woman the wall, and so
go your ways.


Omnes Gratias: Gratias: Gratias: Gratias: Exeunt omnes Scholars. Enter
Mistress Correction. Wages. Morrow Mistress Correction.


Mistress Cor. Morrow good Wages.


Master Corr. Morrow sweet Wife, sweet Frisset, sweet Nuptial.


Mistress Corr. O Master Wages! how does your good Master, sir Timothy
Troublesome? what, does he think he is a Cuckold still?


May. Corr. An arrant Cuckold (Wife) believe it.


Mistress Corr. Come, come, Husband, you are such another; why do you say so?


Ma. Corr: Because it is true, Wife.


Wages. Sir, Master Correction you are mistaken, I think he be no Cuckold.


Ma. Cor: Good Master Wages talk no more of Cuckolds; I would they were all
in the Sea for my part.


M^. C. Husband, can you swim?


Ma. C. No Wife, nor I desire not to learn.


M^. C. I would have you in any case appoint with my Husband that I may come
masked.


Wages. Peace, that plot is already drawn, Master Correction, I am sent unto
you from my master, who co^mends his Love unto you, entreating you will give
your diligent attendance this Evening at the Church, because himself upon his
Divorce, is privately to be married to a new wife: three other couples he
brings with him, they all come masked, yet I will give you private notice what
each one is: only I must desire you not to sail.


May. Cor. Master Wages, your Master is the helm by which my labors are
governed: and tell him I will steare all the navy of my actions by his
directions: And so pray commend me back to him.

Well sir then, till then Farewell.


May. Cor. The like to you sir. Come Wise, I hope that thou shall thrive, for
as all your Cockatrices maintain surgions by their issues: So does the Priest
and Midwife agree: I set them together, they make work for thee.


M. C. And truly Husband, i will come to their labors, be it at midnight, if
they send for me.


Exeunt omnes. Enter Lady, Nan, and Peg. Lady. Does my Tire sit well Nan?


Nan: Passing well, i will assure you Madame.


Peg. Prithee tell me too, how am I dressed?


Nan. Why thou art very well dressed too, but basted admirably: for the threedes
sit in thy Gown, Marry thou wantst a little Cramming.


Peg. And that is pity; for I can tell you, I am of my self a rare bit.


Nan. Nay then thou art for the Seruingmen, for your Gallants (I can assure
you) ride altogether with a snaffle.


Peg. Come, thou have such a deal of wit.


Nan. Indeed I had, before I spent it amongst such unthankful persons as you
are Peg; but I prithee pin, my Gown close before: for it.


Peg. That I will, but why then do thou obscure thy Bravery? this thy
Petticoate is a great deal richer the^ thy Gown.


Nan. Faith I, I wear my clothes as your Gallants we are their wits, the best
side inwards, I scorn to show it.


Peg. But for all this Idle talk, I would we had appointed our marriage to
morrow morning.


La. Then the people would a stood gazing on us, and besides, we should have
bin like thee in dutch, subject to every Cobblers interpretation, but now being
mar^yed in the evening, presentely bed time follows.


Peg. Phoe, but it is not the fashion.


Nan. Tut, hang fashion, I love it in nothing but my clothes.


La. Why, thou know it is not the fashion in all places to lie with ones own
husband every night. Slight I had rather lie with a man, and never marry him,
then marry a man and never lie with him, come, come, I speak my mind freely,
I am none of these simpering wenches that come at every, word and says I
forsooth, and no forsooth, and blushes at the sight of a child, it puts her in
mind how it was made and cries faugh at a wanton lest in a play, and harkens to
a baudie tale in her ear.


Peg. I, it is but dishonorable to marry thus in hugger mugger, men will say we
are with child, and are ashamed to show our faces.


Nan. Our faces! why our faces I hope do: not show us to be with child, it is
out bellies shows that, and I hope thou art quick flesh and not dead fish,
thou will not turn up the white of thy belly, woo't? but prithee tell me, was
I not married yesterday?


Peg. Yesterday, why do ask?


Nan. Because, like a young married woman that is poisoned before she is baud,
I begin to long already.


Peg. For what I pray thee?


Na. Faith to be a bed with my husband.


Peg. ^alas woman, those that are past child bearing, use to long for that too.


Na. Nay, but my longing yet me thinks st^etches a great deal longer, for I
long to be a Widow, that I might have a new Husband: yet not for any
concupis^ent desires, that I have in the world.


Peg. No, I think so too, but only a desire thou have to try the difference
of men, and therefore I think thou were best next to marry an old man with a
white head, because thou may sleep quiet and not be troubl^d a nights.


La. By this light I had as live mar^^e a Saint Dauis Leeke, no, no, take this
of me, where ever thou see the Snow lie on the Mountains, be assured
there is no great heat in the vallie.


Na. Let me see, I would be a --


Peg: A Priests wife I warant ye, because thou would fare costly, and live
lasily.


Nan. No Nan, then marry a Londoner, for then thou shall live a life and twere
a Lady, wear thy gold necklace, and go in thy Velvet cap every day.


Peg. True, and then when thy husband is a broad in traffic for commodities,
in other countries, why thou may deal at home for ready money


Na. No not a Londoner by no means.


Peg. No, why?


Nan. Why if they have but a plague amongst them one week they all cry out of
a dead time straight, besides, if they receive but a little loss at sea, they
break straight, and where the husband breaks, you know the wife can no
longer hold out, she must down too for want of maintenance.


Peg. Nay then marry a Soldier, for questionless most of them will use their
wives well, for they love their punkes exceedingly.


La: O but they have a vile sault too, for they always beget their children by
day, and then they be squint eyed, for when the Father looks one way, and the
mother another, ^o see if any body come the whilst, how can the child look
right?


La: What say thou by a Ciuilian Nan.


Nan. O no, by no means, for most of their posterity have ill luck, for
what their fathers get by baudie courts, they commonly spend it all again in
baudie houses, No and ever ^ marry again, i will marry an Irish Merchant,
because they all speak latin, and indeed are most of them Philosophers by
fortune: Omnia mea mecum porto, for they carry all their ware in their breech:
but come, let us make have away, I fear out lovers do our coming stay.


Exeunt O ^. Enter the old Lord, and the Merchant. Old Lord: You see master
Venture, the greatest comfort that is left me now, is only in my neighbors
loves, where are these knaves there?


Enter a Seruingman, Ser. My Lord.


Old Lor. What have they supped within.


Ser. Not yet my Lord.


Old Lord. Why so, thou art an honest knave, go see that none want wine.


Ser. I will my Lord.

Exit a Seruingman.
Old Lor. I would not have the worst complain of scarcity or want of any
thing, for Master Venture we shall carry nothing with us, for naked we into
the world came, without that which we now possess and have, and without it we
must unto the grave. Enter Sir John Correction. O Sir John, Sir John, I thank
you for your homelye to day, but it you have a fault sir John, the which in any
of your Scholars would deserve a whipping: you are come to late, I and to a
feast and all, well, well, well, but you shall fare the worse for this sir John.


Ma. Co: I would desire a word in private with your honou.


Old Lor: With all my heart: They Whisper They shall be welcome, even exceeding
welcome, and I thank you too.

Exit Correction. Hark you neighbor, Sir John tells me that to honnour me in
this my predecessors still accustomed feast, four new married couples are
heather come in a ma^ke, newlle from the church, their feet not yet since
their nuptial, have kisd their own thresholds.


Enter Master correciion, Cupid^ and ^he maskers da^^cing Wen. It Is Sign ye
are well beloved my Lord.


Old Lor. I am indeed Master Venture, I am indeed.

Gentlemen and Women, ye are all welcome even with my heart, I with my heart
in faith. O neighbor Venture my Son and your Daughter now be married, what a
joyful mask would this have bin.


Ven. It Is true my Lord, but they are fled beyond all hope of ever seeing them
again.


Old Lo. It Is true, it is true, yet though the fruit gone be, my grief you see,
like leaves stick (...) upon this tree. but come neighbor come, lets sit and
look upon this youthful dancing mirth, for youth and mirth have daunc'd
themselves out at heels with me.

Nay, pray Gentlemen unmask, that we may know to whom we shall be thankful
for this honor, how now my Son?


The first couple unmask and kneel. Ven. My Daughter.


Old Lor. Now may my blessiug raise thee from the ground.


Ven: And mine make thee both fruitful, and a faithful wife.


Slack. Why what are you?


Na. Mistook of you, but such is woman's fantasy,
Constant in nothing but inconstancy:
For I that first you most abhord,
Loved you a slave, and hated you a Lord.

Slac. Well, woodcocke like by thy bill, it is my hap,
Thus fast to be catched in a woman's trap.

Nue. Now by my conscience I am deceived.


N^. No, not a whit, for I will love you ever.


Nue. Well, give me your hand then, since ^^s my fate,
What marriage (...), i will never separate.
(...)


Na. O! I repent it not, this match is double made, and twice has holy Hymen's
(...)


Nue. Well, since it is thus hence forth i will love thee ever, for que sera, sera,
against what plots so ever, but who is this, master Correction?


Ma. Co. A friend of yours. They unmask. Spretious it is my wife.


Na. O then sir it is a friend of yours.


Ma. C. Come ye away huswife, come ye from him, come.


Mi. Co. Faith ^ir no, why is he not my husband? did not you your self marry
me to him? but do you hear, you were best be quiet and let me alone, if not,
in faith i will tell all.


Ma. Cor. Tell what thou can, justice my Lord Justice, I beseech ye for
Justice.


Mi. Cor. Nay, I beseech your Lordship too, though I am but a weak vessel
called a Woman, and therefore by reason of my bashfulnes unable sir to set
forth mine own tale, yet I doubt not, but I shall find good hearing at your
Lord ships hand, if ye will but give me leave to open mine own case.


Old Lor. Speak, what are your greeuances.


Mi. Cor. May it please your honor in few words, my husband has four wives,
and then I hope it is as lawful for me to have two husbands.


Old Lord. How do you answer this Sir John?


Ma. Cor. And like your honor, I think it is as lawful for me to have four
wives, as it is for my parson to have four benefices, con^idering I use them as
he does his benefices, for I protest to your honor, I near came near none
of them.


Mi. Cor. Will not this do it Master Wages?


Wag. No, you see he has answered it.


Mi. Co. Nay then and it like your Lordship, I may be diuorc'd for another
thing, but that I am ashamd to speak on it.


Kni. Nay, you must tell what it is.


M. Cor. Truly I am half ashamde.


Old Lor. Come, come woman, never be a shamde to tell (true.


Mi: Cor. And I may be so bold to tell your honor in private.


Old Lo. With all my heart.


Mi. Co. Truly and like your honor, he has not that a man should have.


Old. Lo. No, why what does he want.


M. C. Nay pray your Lordshippe to spare me now, faith I am ashamed.


Old Lord. Nay good Mistress Correction, I must know what it is.


Mi. Cor. Why then sir I must needs tell: truly a has never a beard.


Old Lord. Indeed a man should have a beard.
Well mistress correction, your husband must have you back again:
And thus in friendship ends long Iealious strife,
With all things well, save Wages wants a wife.

Enter Cupid. But Gentlemen, whose judgments sit
in str^ct commission on the wit:
Which from the Authors pen did flow
He wishes at all but this to know.
that if you well do censure him,
He ready is with brains and pen^
Another time to pleasure you,
If not, he bids you all adue.
For well he knows he has done wels
And so he boldly dares to tell.
Yet for the children ere I go,
Your censure I would willing know.
For if you do the Action blame.
They ready are with pardon drawn
And each of them here hoping stands
That you will sign it with your hands.

FINIS

