SHAKE-SPEARES SONNETS.

Never before Imprinted.

AT LONDON By G. Eld for T. T. and are to be sold by William Aspley. 1609.

TO. THE. ONLY. BEGETTER. OF. THESE. INSVING. SONNETS. Mr. W. H. ALL.
HAPPINESS. AND. THAT. ETERNITY. PROMISED.

BY. OUR. EVER-LIVING. POET. WISHES.

THE. WELL-WISHING. ADVENTVRER. IN. SETTING. FORTH.

T. T.
SHAKE-SPEARES, SONNETS.
FRom fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beauties Rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory:
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feed'st thy lights flame with self substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
Thou that art now the worlds fresh ornament,
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
And tender chorle makst wast in niggarding:
Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
To eat the worlds due, by the grave and thee.
2
When forty Winters shall beseige thy brow,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauties field,
Thy youths proud livery so gazed on now,
Will be a tottered weed of small worth held:
Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
To say within thine own deep sunken eyes,
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftlesse praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beauties use,
If thou could answer this fair child of mine
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse
Proouing his beauty by succession thine.
This were to be new made when thou art old,
And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it could,
3
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou vewest,
Now is the time that face should form an other,
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou ^oo'st beguile the world, vnblesse some mother.
For where is she so fair whose vn-eard womb
Disdaines the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
Of his self love to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mothers glass and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime,
So thou through windows of thine age shall see,
Dispight of wrinkles this thy goulden time.
But if thou live remembered not to be,
Die single and thine Image dies with thee.
4
Unthrifty loveliness why do thou spend,
Upon thy self thy beauties legacy?
Natures bequest gives nothing but does lend,
And being franck she lends to those are free:
Then beauteous nigard why do thou abuse,
The bountious largess given thee to give?
Profitles vserer why do thou use
So great a sum of sums yet can not live?
For having traffike with thy self alone,
Thou of thy self thy sweet self do deceive,
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable Audit can thou leave?
Thy vnus'd beauty must be tomb'd with thee,
Which used lives th'executor to be.
5
THose hours that with gentle work did frame,
The lovely gaze where every eye does dwell
Will play the tirants to the very same,
And that vnfaire which fairly does excel:
For ever resting time leads Summer on,
To hidious winter and confounds him there,
Sap checked with frost and lusty leau's quite go^.
Beauty ore-snow'd and barenes every where,
Then were not summers distillation left
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Beauties effect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it nor noe remembrance what it was.
But flowers distilled though they with winter me^^e,
Leese but their show, their substance still lives sweet.
6
THen let not winters wragged hand deface,
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled:
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place,
With beautits treasure ere it be self killed:
That use is not forbidden vsery,
Which happies those that pay the willing lone;
That Is for thy self to breed an other thee,
Or ten times happier be it ten for one,
Ten times thy self were happier then thou art,
If ten of thine ten times refligur'd thee,
Then what could death do if thou should depart,
Leaving thee living in posterity?
Be not selfe-wild for thou art much too fair,
To be deaths conquest and make worms thine h^ire.
7
Lo in the Orient when the gracious light,
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Does homage to his new appearing fight,
Serving with looks his sacred majesty,
And having climbed the steep up heavenly hill,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty ^till,
Attending on his goulden pilgrimage:
But when from high-most pich with weary car,
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
The eyes (fore dutious) now converted are
From his low tract and look an other way:
So thou, thy self out-going in thy noon:
Vnlok'd on die unless thou get a son.
8
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly,
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
Why love thou that which thou receaust not gladly,
Or else receau'st with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well tuned sounds,
By unions married do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou should bear:
M^rke how one string sweet husband to an other,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
Resembling sier, and child, and happy mother,
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
Sings this to thee thou single wilt prove none.
9.
IS it for fear to wet a widows eye,
That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
Ah; if thou i^sulesse shall hap to die,
The world will wail thee like a makelesse wife,
The world will be thy widow and still weep,
That thou no form of thee have left behind,
When every private widow well may keep,
By childrens eyes, her husbands shape in mind:
Look what an unthrift in the world does spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world inioyes it
But beauties waste has in the world an end,
And kept vnvsde the vser so destroys it:
No love toward others in that bosom sits
That on himself such murdrous shame commits.
10
FOr shame deny that thou bear love to any
Who for thy self art so improvident
Grant if thou will, thou art beloved of many,
But that thou none love is most evident:
For thou art so possessed with murdrous hate,
That against thy self thou stickst not to conspire,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire:
O change thy thought, that I may change my mind,
Shall hate be fairer log'd then gentle love?
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
Or to thy self at least kind hearted prove,
Make thee an other self for love of me,
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
11
AS fast as thou shall wane so fast thou grow'st,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
And that fresh blood which yongly thou bestow'st,
Thou may call thine, when thou from youth conuerte^t,
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase,
Without this folly, age, and could decay,
If all were minded so, the times should cease,
And threescoore year would make the world away:
Let those whom nature has not made for store,
Harsh, featurelesse, and rude, barrenly perrish,
Look whom she best endowed, she gave the more;
Which bountious gift thou should in bounty cherrish,
She carved thee for her scale, and meant thereby,
Thou should print more, not let that copy die.
12
When I do count the clock that tells the time,
And see the brave day sunck in hidious night,
When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls or siluer'd ore with white:
When lofty trees I see b^^^en of leaves,
Which erst from heat did canopie the herd
And Summers green all girded up in sheaues
Borne on the bear with white and bristly beard:
Then of thy beauty do I question make
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake,
And die as fast as they see others grow,
And nothing against Times sieth can make defense
Save breed to brave him, when he takes thee hence.
13
O That you were your self, but love you are
No longer yours, then you your self here live,
Against this cumming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Find no determination, then you were
You self again after your selfes-decease,
When your swee^^^^ue your sweet form should bear.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honor might uphold,
Against the stormy gusts of winters day
And barren rage of deaths eternal cold?
O none but unthrifts, dear my love you know,
You had a Father, let your Son say so.
14
NOt from the stars do I my judgment pluck,
And yet me thinks I have Astronomy,
But not to tell of good, or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons quallity,
Nor can I fortune to brief mynuits tell;
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Or say with Princes if it shall go well
By often predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine ^ies my knowledge I de^iue,
And constant stars in them I read such art
As truth and beauty shall together thrive
If from thy self, to store thou would convert:
Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
Thy end is Truths and Beauties doom and date.
15
WHen I consider every thing that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
That this huge stage presents naught but shows
Whereon the Stars in secret influence comment.
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheared and checked even by the selfsame sky:
Vaunt in their youthful ^ap, at height decrease,
And were their brave state o^t of memory.
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where wastfull time debateth with decay
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
And all in war with Time for love of you
As he takes from you, I ingrast you new.
16
BV^ wherefore do not you a mightier way
Make war upon this bloody tirant time?
And fortifi^ your self in your decay
With means more blessed then my barren ^ime?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden garde^s yet unset,
With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers,
Much liker then your painted counterfeit*
So should the lines of life that life repair
Which this (Times p^nsel or my pupil pen)
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair
Can make you live your self in eyes of men,
To give away your self, keeps your self still,
And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill,
17
Who will believe my verse in time to come
If it were filled with your most high deser^^?
Th^ugh yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
Which h^des your life, and shows not half your parts:
If I could wri^e the beauty of your eyes,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would say this Poet lies,
Such heavenly touches nere touched earthly faces.
So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
Be scorned, like old men of less truth then tongue,
And your true rights be termd a Poets rage,
And stretched miter of an Antique song.
But were some child of yours alive that time,
You should live twice in it, and in my ^ime.
18.
SHall I compare thee to a Summers day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And Summers lease has all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed,
And every fair from fair some-time declines,
By chance, or natures changing course vntrim'd:
But thy eternal Summer shall not fade,
Nor loose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor shall death brag thou wandr'st in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
So long as men can breath or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee,
19
Devouring time blunt thou the Lions paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood,
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce Tigers yawes,
And burn the long lived Phaenix in her blood,
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st,
And do what ere thou will swift-footed time
To the wide world and all her fading sweets:
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime,
O carue not with thy hours my loves fair brow,
Nor draw noe lines there with thine antique pen,
Him in thy course untainted do allow,
For beauties pattern to succeding men.
Yet do thy worst old Time dispight thy wrong,
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
20
A Woman's face with natures own hand painted,
Haste thou the Master Mistress of my passion,
A woman's gentel ^art but not acquainted
With shifting change as is false women's fashion,
An eye more bright then theirs, less false in rolling:
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth,
A man in hew all Hews in his controwling,
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amaseth*
And for a woman were thou first created,
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a dotinge,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,
Mine be thy love and thy loves use their treasure.
21
SO is it not with me as with that Muse,
Stird by a painted beauty to his verse,
Who heaven it self for ornament does use,
And every fair with his fair does rehearse,
Making a coopelment of proud compare
With Sun and Moon, with earth and seas rich gems:
With Aprills first borne flowers and all things rare,
That heavens air in this huge rondure hems,
O let me true in love but truly write,
And then believe me, my love is as fair,
As any mothers child, though not so bright
As those gould can dells fixed in heavens air:
Let them say more that like of hearsay well,
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
22
MY glass shall not persuade me I am old,
So long as youth and thou a^e of one date,
But when in thee times ^or^wes I behold,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
For all that beauty that does cover thee,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Which in thy breast does live, as thine in me,
H^w can I then be elder then thou art?
O therefore love be of thy self so wary.
As I not for my self, but for thee will,
Bearing thy heart which I will keep so chary
As t^nder nurse her babe from faring ill,
Pr^sume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
Thou gave me thine not to give back again.
23
AS an imperfect actor on the stage,
Who with his fear is put besides his part,
Or some fierce thing repleat with too much rage,
W^ose strengths abondance weakens his own heart;
So I for fear of trust, forget to say,
The perfect ceremony of loves right,
And in mine own loves strength seem to decay,
Ore-charg'd with burden of mine own loves might:
O let my books be then the eloquence,
And domb presagers of my speaking breast,
Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
More then that tongue that more has more expressed.
O learn to read what silent love has writ,
To hear wit eyes belongs to loves fine wiht.
24
MIne eye has played the painter and has steeld,
^hy beauties form in table of my heart,
My body is the f^ame wherein it is held,
And perspectiue it is best Painters art.
For through the Painter must you see his skill,
To find where your true Image pictured lies,
Which in my bosoms shop is hanging still,
That has his windows glazed with thine e^es:
Now see what good-turnes eyes for eyes have done,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Are windows to my breast, where-through the Sun
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art
They draw but what they see, know not the heart*
25
LEt those who are in favor with their stars,
Of public honor and proud titles bost,
Whilst I whom fortune of such triumph bars
Unlooked for joy in that I honor most;
Great Princes favorites their fair leaves spread,
But as the Marygold at the sun^ eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrier famosed for worth,
After a thousand victories once foild,
Is from the book of honor rased quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he ^o^ld:
Then happy I that love and am beloved
Where I may not remove, nor be removed.
26
LOrd of my love, to whom in vassalage
Thy merit has my ^utie strongly knit;
To thee I send this written embassage
To witness duty, not to show my wit.
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it;
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy souls thought (all naked) will bestow it:
Til whatsoever star that guides my moving,
Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
And puts apparel on my tottered loving,
To show me worthy of their sweet respect,
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
Til then, not show my head where thou may prove me
27
WEary with toil, I have me to my bed,
The dear repose for lims with trauaill tired,
But then begins a iourny in my head
To work my mind, when boddies work's expired.
For then my thoughts (from far where I abide)
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.
Save that my souls imaginary sight
Presents their shaddoe to my sightles view,
Which like a jewel (hunge in ghastly night)
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
Lo thus by day my li^s, by night my mind,
For thee, and for my self, noe quiet find.
28
HOw can I then return in happy plight
That am debard the benifit of rel^?
When days oppression is not eazd by night,
But day by night and night by day oprest.
And each (though enimes to ethers reign)
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
The one by toil, the other to complain
How ^ar I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the Day to please him thou art bright,
And ^o'st him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
So fl^tter I the swart complexiond night,
When sparkling stars twire not thou guil'st the eauen.
But day does daily draw my sorrows longer,
And night does nightly make greefes length seem strong^r
29
When in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes,
I all alone beweepe my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootlesse cries.
And look upon my self and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
Desiring this man's art, and that man's skope,
With what I most enjoy contented least,
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
Haplye I think on thee, and then my state,
(Like to the Lark at break of day arising)
From sullen earth sings himns at Heavens gate,
For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,
That then I skorn^ to change my state with Kings.
30
When to the S^ssions of sweet silent thought,
I sommon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear times waste:
Then can I drown an eye (vn-vs^d to flow)
For precious friends hid in deaths dateles night,
And weep a fresh loves long since canceld woe,
And moan the expense of many a vannisht sight.
Then can I grieve at greeuances fore-gon,
And heavily from woe to woe tell ore
The sad account of fore-bemoned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
But if the while I think on thee (dear friend)
All losses are restord, and sorrows end.
31
Thy bosom is indeared with all hearts,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
And there reigns Love and all Loves loving parts,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Has dear religious love stolen from mine eye,
As interest of the dead, which now appear,
But things removed that hidden in there ^e.
Thou art the grave where buried love does live,
Hung with the tropheis of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
That due of many, now is thine alone.
Their images I lou^d, I view in thee,
And thou (all they) hast' all the all of me.
32
IF thou survive my well contented day,
When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover
And shall by fortune once more re-suruay:
These poor rude lines of thy decease^ Lover:
Compare them with the bett^ring of the time,
And though they be out-stript by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the hight of happier men.
Oh then voutsafe me but this loving thought,
Had my friends Muse grown with this growing age,
A dearer birth then this his love had brought
To march in ranckes of better equipage:
But since he died and Poets be^ter prove,
Theirs for their style i will read, his for his love.
33
FVll many a glorious morning have I seen,
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meddowes green;
Guilding pale streams with heavenly alcumy:
Anon permit the basest cloud^s to ride,
With ougly rack on his celestial face,
And from the for-^orne world his visage hide
Stealing vn^eene to west with this d^sgrace:
Even so my Sun one early morn did shine,
With all triumphant splendour on my brow,
But out a^ack, he was but one hour mine,
The reg^on cloud has masked him from me now.
Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaineth,
Suns of the world may stain, when heavens sun stainteh.
34
Why did thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travail forth without my cloak,
To let bace clouds ore-take me in my way,
Hiding thy b^au'ry in their rotten smoke.
It Is not enou^h that through the cloud thou break,
To dry the rain on my storme-beaten face,
For no man well of such asa^ue can speak,
That heales the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief,
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss,
Th'offenders sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offenses loss.
Ah but those tears are pearl which thy love shee^s,
And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.
35
NO more be grieved at that which thou have done,
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud,
Clouds and eclipses stain both Moon and Sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
A^l men make faults, and even I in this,
Autho^izing thy trespass with compare,
My self corrupting saluing thy amiss,
Excusing their fins more then their sins are:
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,
T^y adverse party is thy Advocate,
And against my self a lawful plea commence,
Such ci^ill war is in my love and hate,
That I an accessory needs must be,
To that sweet thief which sourely robs from me,
36
LEt me confess that we two must be twain,
Although o^r undivided loves are one:
So shall those blots that do with me remain,
W^th^ut thy help, by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Though in our lives a seperable spite,
Which though it alter not loves sole effect,
Yet does it steal sweet hours from loves delight,
I may not euer-more acknowledge thee,
Least my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Nor thou with public kindness honor me,
Unless thou take that honor from thy name:
But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
37
AS a decrepit father takes delight,
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by Fortunes dearest spite
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more
Entitled in their parts, do crowned sit,
I make my love ingrafted to this store:
So then I am not lame, poor, nor dispis^d,
Whilst that this shadow does such substance give,
That I in thy abundance am sufficed,
And by a part of all thy glory live:
Look what is best, that best I wish in thee,
This wish I have, then ten times happy me.
38
HOw can my Muse want subject to invent
While thou do breath that poor'st into my ver^e,
Thine own sweet argument, to excellent,
For every vulgar paper to rehearse:
Oh give thy self the thanks if ought in me,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
For who is so dumb that cannot write to thee,
When thou thy self do give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Then those old nine which rimers innocate,
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to out-liue long date.
If my slight Muse do please these curious days,
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
39
OH how thy worth with manners may I singe,
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring;
And what is it but mine own when I praise thee,
Even for this, let us divided live,
And our dear love loose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give:
That due to thee which thou deseru'st alone:
Oh absence what a torment would thou prove,
Were it not thy ^oure leisure gave sweet leave,
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly do deceive.
And that thou teach how to make one twain,
By praising him here who does hence remain.
40
TAke all my loves, my love, yea take them all,
What have thou then more then thou had before?
No love, my love, that thou may true love call,
All mine was thine, before thou had this more:
Then if for my love, thou my love receiuest,
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou use,
But yet be blamed, if thou this self deceauest
By wilful taste of what thy self refusest.
I do forgive thy robb'rie gentle thief
Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To bear loves wrong, then hates known injury.
Lascivious grace, in whom all il well shows,
Kill me with spights yet we must not be foes.
41
THose pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am some-time absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed.
And when a woman woes, what woman's son,
Will ^ourely leave her till he have prevailed.
Aye me, but yet thou mighst my feate forbear,
And chide thy beauty, and thy straying youth,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
42
THat thou have her it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly,
That she has thee is of my wayling chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye,
Thou do love her, because thou know I love her,
And for my sake even so does she abuse me,
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her,
If I loose thee, my loss is my loves gain,
And loosing her, my friend has found that loss,
Both find each other, and I loose both twain,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross,
But here is the joy, my friend and I are one,
Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.
43
WHen most I wink then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected,
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And darkely bright, are bright in dark directed.
Then thou whose shadow shadows does make bright,
How would thy shadows form, form happy show,
To the clear day with thy much cleerer light,
When to vn-seeing eyes thy shade shines so?
How would (I say) mine eyes be blessed made,
By looking on thee in the living day?
When in dead night their fair imperfect shade,
Through heavy sleep on s^ghtlesse eyes does stay?
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me*
44
IF the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way,
For then dispigh^ of space I would be brought,
From limits far remote, where thou do stay,
No matter then although my foot did stand
Upon the farthest earth remoou'd from thee,
For nimble thought can iumpe both sea and land,
As soon as think the place where he would be.
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
I must attend, times leisure with my moan.
Receiving naughts by elements so sloe,
But heavy tears, badges of eithers woe.
45
THe other two, slight air, and purging fire,
Are both with thee, where ever I abide,
The first my thought, the other my desire,
These present absent with swift motion slide.
For when these quicker Elements are gone
In tender Embassy of love to thee,
My life being made of four, with two alone,
Sinkes down to death, oppressed with melancholy.
Vntillliues composition be recured,
By those swift messengers returned from thee,
Who even but now come back again assured,
Of their fair health, recounting it to me.
This told, ^oy, but then no longer glad,
I send them back again and straight grow sad.
46
MIne eye and heart are at a mortal war,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
Mine eye, my heart their pictures sight would bar,
My heart, mine eye the freeedome of that right,
My heart does plead that thou in him do lie,
(A closet never pearst with crystal eyes)
Bu^ the defendant does that plea deny,
And says in him their fair appearance lies.
To side this title is impannelled
A quest of thoughts, all tennants to the heart,
And by their verdict is determined
The clear eyes moyitie, and the d^are hearts part.
As thus, mine eyes due is their outward part,
And my hearts right, their inward love of heart.
47
BE^wixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
And each does good turns now unto the other,
When that mine eye is famisht for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself does smother;
With my loue^ picture then my eye does feast,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
An other time mine eye is my hearts guest,
And in his thoughts of love does share a part.
So either by thy picture or my love,
Thy sei^e away, are present still with me,
For thou nor farther then my thoughts can move,
And I am still with them* and they with thee.
Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
Awakes my heart, to hearts and eyes delight.
48
HOw careful was I when I took my way,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might vn-vsed stay
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust?
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou best of de^rest, and mine only care,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not locked up in any chest,
Save where thou art not* though I feel thou art,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou may come and part,
And even thence thou will be stolen I fear,
For truth proves theeuish for a prize so dear.
49
AGainst that time (if ever that time come)
When I shall see the frown on my defects,
When as thy love has cast his utmost sum,
Cauld to that audite by advised respects,
Against that time when thou shall strangely pass,
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
When love converted from the thing it was
Shall reasons find of settled gravity.
Against that time do I insconce me here
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
And this my hand, against my self vpreare,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part,
To leave poor me, thou have the strength of laws,
Since why to love, I can allege no cause.
50
HOw heavy do I journey on the way,
When what I seek (my weary travels end)
Does teach that ease and that repose to say
Thus far the miles are measurde from thy friend.
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
Plods duly on, to bear that weight in me,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider loved not speed being made from thee:
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me then spurring to his side,
For that same groan does put this in my mind,
My grief lies onward and my joy behind.
51
THus can my love excuse the slow offense,
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
From where thou art, why shoulld I have me thence,
Till I return of posting is noe need.
O what excuse will my poor beast then find,
When swift extremity can s^^me but slow,
Then should I spur though mounted on the wind,
In winged speed no motion shall I know,
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
Therefore desire (of perfects love being made)
Shall naigh noe dull flesh in his fiery race,
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
Since from thee going he went wilful slow,
Toward thee i will run, and give him leave to go.
52
SO am I as the rich whose blessed key,
Can bring him to his sweet vp-lockd treasure,
The which he will not every hour suruay,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure,
Therefore are feasts so sollemne and so rare,
Since sildom coming in the long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Or captain Jewels in the carconet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Or as the wardrobe which the robe does hide,
To make some special instant special blessed,
By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.
Blessed are you whose worthiness gives skope,
Being had to triumph, being lackt to hope.
53
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one, has every one, one shade,
And you but one, can every shadow lend:
Describe Adonis and the counterfeit,
Is poorly immitated after you,
On Hellens cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speak of the spring, and foyzon of the year,
The one does shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty does appear,
And you in every blessed shape we know.
In all external grace you have some part,
But you like none, none you for constant heart.
54
OH how much more does beauty beauteous seem,
By that sweet ornament which truth does give,
The Rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odor, which does in it live:
The Canker^bloomes have full as deep a die,
As the perfumed tincture of the Roses,
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly,
When summers breath their masked buds discloses:
But for their virtue only is their show,
They live vnwoo'd, and unrespected fade,
Die to themselves. Sweet Roses do not so,
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odors made:
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
When that shall vade, by verse di^tils your truth.
55
NOt marble, nor the gilded monument,
Of Princes shall out-liue this powrefull rhyme,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Then unswept stone, besmeer^d with sluttish time*
When wastefull war shall Statues ouer-turne,
And broiles r^ote out the work of masonry,
Nor ^ars his sword, nor wars quick fire shall burn:
The living ^ecord of your memory.
Against death, and all obliuious emnity
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room,
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So til the judgment that your self arise,
You live in this, and dwell in lovers eyes.
56
Sweet love renew thy force, be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be then apetite,
Which but too day by feeding is alaied,
To morrow sharpened in his former might.
So love be thou, although too day thou fill
Thy hungry eyes, even till they winck with fullness,
Too morrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of Love, with a perpetual dullness:
Let this sad Intrim like the Ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
Come daily to the banckes, that when they see:
Return of love, more blessed may be the view.
As call it Winter, which being full of care,
Makes So^mers welcome, thrice more wished, more rare:
57
BEing your slave what should I do but tend,
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at al to spend;
Nor services to do til you require.
Nor dare I chide the world without end hour,
Whilst I (my sovereign) watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
When you have bid your servant once adieue.
Nor dare I question with my ieal^ous thought,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But like a sad slave stay and think of naught
Save where you are, how happy you make those.
So true a fool is love, that in your Will,
(Though you do any thing) he thinks no ill.
58
THat God forbid, that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
Being your va^sail bound to stay your leisure.
Oh let me suffer (being at your beck)
The imprisoned absence of your liberty,
And patience tame, to sufferance bide each check,
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong,
That you your self may privilege your time
To what you will, to you it does belong,
Your self to pardon of selfe-doing crime.
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.
59
IF their be nothing new, but that which is,
Has been before, how are our brains beguild,
Which laboring for invention bear amiss
The second burden of a former child?
Oh that record could with a back-ward look,
Even of five hundredth courses of the Sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
Since mind at first in carrecter was done.
That I might see what the old world could say,
To this composed wonder of your frame,
Whether we are mended, or where better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
Oh sure I am the wits of former days,
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
60
LIke as the waves make toward the pibled shore,
So do our minuites haften to their end,
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity once in the maine of light.
Crawles to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
C^ooked eclipfes against his glory ^ight,
And time that gave, does now his gift confound.
Time does tran^fixe the flourish set on youth,
And delues the paralels in beauties brow,
Feeds on the rarities of natures truth,
And nothing stands but for his sieth to mow.
And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand
Praising thy worth, dispight his cruel hand.
61
IS it thy will, thy Image should keep open
My heavy eie^ids to the weary night?
Do thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
So far from home into my deeds to prye,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
The skope and tenure of thy Ielou^ie?
O no, thy love though much, is not ^o great,
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake,
Mine own true love that does my rest defeat,
To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
For thee watch I, whilst thou do wake elsewhere,
From me far of, with others all to near.
62
Sin of self-love possesses al mine eye,
And all my soul, and al my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Me thinks no face so gracious is as mine,
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
And for my self mine own worth do define,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me my self indeed
Beated and chopped with tand antiquity,
Mine own felse love quite contrary I read
Self, so self loving were iniquity,
It Is thee (my self) that for my self I praise,
Painting my age with beauty of thy days,
63
AGainst my love shall be as I am now
With times injurious hand chrusht and ore-worne,
When hours have dreind his blood and filled his brow
With lines and wrincles, when his youthful morn
Has tra^aild on to Ages steepie night,
And all those beauties whereof now he is King
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
Stealing away the treasure of his Spring.
For such a time do I now fortify
Against confounding Ages cruel knife,
That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet loves beauty, though my lovers life.
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
64
When I have seen by times fell hand defaced
The rich proud cost of outworne buried age,
When sometime lofty towers I see down rased,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.
When I have seen the hungry Ocean gain
Advantage on the Kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the watery maine,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.
When I have seen such interchange of state,
Or state it self confounded, to decay,
Ruin has taught me thus to ruminate
That Time will come and take my love away.
This thought is as a death which cannot choose
But weep to have, that which it fears to loose.
65
SInce brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
But ^ad mortallity ore-swaies their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger then a flower?
O how shall summers hunny breath hold out,
Against the wrackfull siedge of battring days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?
O fearful meditation, where alack,
Shall times best Jewel from times che^t lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
Or who his spoil or beauty can forbid?
O none, unless this miracle have might,
That in black inck my love may still shine bright.
66
Tired with all these for restfull death I cry.
As to behold desert a beggar borne,
And needy Nothing trimd in iollitie,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And gilded honor shamefully misplast,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabled,
And art made tung-tide by authority,
And Folly (Doctor-like) controuling skill,
And simple-Truth miscalde Simplicity,
And captiue-good attending Captain ill.
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone;
Save that to dye, I leave my love alone.
67
AH wherefore with infection should he live,
And with his presence grace impiety,
That sin by him advantage should atchiue,
And lace it self with his society?
Why should false painting immitate his cheek,
And steal dead seeing of his living hew?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
Roses of shadow, ^ince his Rose is true?
Why should he live, now nature banckrout is,
Beggerd of blood to blush through lively veins,
For she has no exchecker now bu^ his,
And proud of many, lives upon his gains?
O him she stores, to show what wealth she had,
In days long since, before these last so bad.
68
THus is his cheek the map of days out-worne,
When beauty lived and dy'ed as flowers do now,
Before these bastard signs of fair were borne,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow^
Before the goulden tresses of the dead,
The right of sepulchers, were shorn away,
To live a scond life on second head,
Ere beauties dead fleece made another gay:
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Without all ornament, it self and true,
Making no summer of an others green,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new,
And him as for a map does Nature store,
To show faulse Art what beauty was of yore.
69
THose parts of thee that the worlds eye does view,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
All toungs (the voice of souls) give thee that end,
Vttring bare truth, even so as foes Commend.
Their outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
But those same toungs that give thee so thine own,
In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther then the eye has shown.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that in guess they measure by thy deeds,
Then churls their thoughts (although their eyes were kind)
To thy fair flower ad the rank smell of weeds,
But why thy odor matcheth not thy show,
The solye is this, that thou do common grow.
70
THat thou are blamed shall not be thy defect,
For slanders mark was ever yet the fair,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A Crow that flies in heavens sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander does but approve,
Their worth the greater beei^g woo^d of time,
For Ca^ker vice the sweetest buds does love,
And thou present'^^ a pure vnstayined prime.
Thou have past by the ambush of young days,
Either not assayld, or victor being charged,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
To tie up envy, evermore enlarged,
If some suspect of ill maskt not thy show,
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts should owe.
71
NOe Longer mourn for me when I am dead,
Then you shall hear the furly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vildest worms to dwell:
Nay if you read this line, remember not,
The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me the should make you woe.
O if (I say) you look upon this verse,
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
But let your love even with my life decay.
Least the wise world should look into your moan,
And mock you with me after I am gone.
72
O Least the world should task you to recite,
What merit lived in me that you should love
After my death (dear love) for get me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove.
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me then mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I,
Then nigard truth would willingly impart:
O least your true love may seem falce in this,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me, nor you.
For I am shamd by that which I bring forth,
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
73
THat time of yeeare thou may in me behold,
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the could,
Bare rn'wd quiers, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou see the twilight of such day,
As after Sunset fades in the West,
Which by and by black night does take away,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see the glowing of such fire,
That on the ashes of his youth does lie,
As the death bed, whereon it must expire,
Consumed with that which it was nurrisht by.
This thou perceu'st, which makes thy love more strong,
To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.
74
But be contented when that fell arest.
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life has in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
When thou reuewest this, thou do reuew,
The very part was consecrate to thee,
The earth can have but earth, which is his du^*
My spirit is thine the better part of me,
So then thou have but lost the dregs of life,
The pray of worms, my body being dead,
The coward conquest of a wretches kni^e,
To base of thee to be remembered,
The worth of that, is that which it contains,
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
75
SO are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet seasoned shewers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold such strife,
As twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
Now proud as an inioyct, and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then betterd that the world may see my pleasure.
Some-time all full with feasting on your sight,
And by and by clean starued for a look,
Possessing or pursuing no delight
Save what is had, or must from you be took.
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
Or gluttoning on all, or all away,
76
Why is my verse so barren of new pride*
So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new found ^ethods, and to compounds strange?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word does almost fell my name,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
O know sweet love I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument:
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Spending again what is already spent:
For as the Sun is daily new and old,
So is my love still telling what is told,
77
THE glass will show thee how thy beauties were,
Thy dyall how thy precious mynuits waste,
The vacant leaves thy minds imprint will bear,
And of this book, this learning may thou taste.
The wrinckles which thy glass will truly show,
Of mouthed graves will give the memory,
Thou by thy dyals shady stealth may know,
Times theeuish progress to eternity.
Look what thy memory cannot contain*
Commit to these waste blacks, and thou shall find
Those children nursed, deliuerd from thy brain,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
These offices, so often as thou will look,
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book*
78
SO often have I inuok'd thee for my Muse,
And found such fair assistance in my verse,
As every Alien pen has got my use,
And under thee their poesy dispe^se.
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing,
And heavy ignorance aloft to fl^e,
Have added ^ethers to the learneds wing,
And given grace a double Majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Whose influence is thine, and borne of thee,
In others works thou do but mend the style,
And Arts with thy sweet graces graced be.
But thou art all my art, and do advance
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.
79
WHilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
But now my gracious numbers are decay de,
And my sick Muse does give an other place.
I grant (sweet love) thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy Poet does invent,
He robs thee of, and pays it thee ^gaine,
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word,
From thy behavior, beauty does he give
And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
No praise to thee, but what in thee does live.
Then thank him not for that which he does say,
Since what he owes thee, thou thy self do pay.
80
O How I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit does use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me toung-tide speaking of your fame.
But since your worth (wide as the Ocean is)
The humble as the proudest sail does bear,
My sawsie bark (inferior far to his)
On your broad maine does wilfully appear.
Your shallowest help will hold me up a floate,
Whilst he upon your soundlesse deep does ride,
Or (being wrackt) I am a worthless bote,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride.
Then If he thrive and I be cast away,
The worst was this, my love was my decay.
81
OR I shall live your Epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I (once gone) to all the world must dye,
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you intombed in men's eyes shall lie,
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall ore-read,
And toungs to be, your being shall rehearse,
When all the breathers of this world are dead,
You still shall live (such virtue has my Pen)
Where breath most breaths, even in the mouths of men.
82
I Grant thou were no^ married to my Muse,
And therefore may without attaint ore-looke
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hew,
Finding thy worth a limmit past my praise,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
Some fresher stamp of the time bettering days.
And do so love, yet when thy have deuisde,
What strained touches Rhethorick can lend,
Thou truly fair, were truly simpathizde,
In true plain words, by thy true telling friend.
And their gross painting might be better used,
Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.
83
I Never saw that yo^ did painting need,
And therefore to your fair no painting set,
I found (or thought I found) you did exceed,
The barren tender of a Poets debt:
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you your self being extant well might show,
How far a modern quill does come to short,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you does grow,
This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory being dombe,
For I impair not beauty being mute,
When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes,
Then both your Poets can in praise devise.
84
WHo is it that says most, which can say more,
Then this rich praise, that you alone, are you,
In whose confine immured is the store.
Which should example where your equal grew,
Lean penury within that Pen does dwell,
That to his subject lends not some small glory,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell,
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
And such a counter-part shall fame his wit,
Making his style admired every where.
You to your beauteous blessings add a cu^se,
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
85
MY toung-tide Muse in manners holds her still,
While comments of your praise richly compiled,
Reserve their Character with goulden quill,
And precious phrase by all the Muses filled.
I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words,
And like unlettered clarke still cry Amen,
To every Himne that able spirit affords,
In polisht form of well refined pen.
Hearing you praisd, I say it is so, it is true,
And to the most of praise add something more,
But that is in my thought, whose love to you
(Though words come hind-most) holds his rank before,
Then others, for the breath of words respect,
Me for my dombe thoughts, speaking in effect.
86
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of (all to precious) you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearce,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compiers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
As victors of my silence cannot boast,
I was not sick of any fear from thence.
But when your countinance filled up his line,
Then lackt I matter, that infeebled mine.
87
FArewell thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know thy estimate,
The Cha^ter of thy worth gives thee releasing:
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my pattent back again is sweruing.
Thy self thou gave, thy own worth then not knowing,
O^ me to whom thou gave it, else mistaking,
So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgment making.
Thus have I had thee as a dream does flatter,
In sleep a King, but waking no such matter.
88
When thou shall be dispode to set me light,
And place my merit in the eye of skorne,
Upon thy side, against my self i will fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn:
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults conceald, wherein I am attainted:
That thou in loosing me shall win much glory:
And I by this will be a gainer too,
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
The injuries that to my self I do,
Doing thee vantage, duble vantage me.
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
That for thy right, my self will bear all wrong.
89
SAy that thou did forsake me for some falt,
And I will comment upon that offense,
Speak of my lamenesse, and I straight will halt:
Against thy reasons making no defense.
Thou can not (love) disgrace me half so ill,
To set a form upon desired change,
As i will my self disgrace, knowing thy will,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange:
Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue,
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Least I (too much profane) should do it wrong:
And happily of our old acquaintance tell.
For thee, against my self i will vow debate,
For I must nere love him whom thou do hate.
90
THen hate me when thou will, if ever, now,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And do not drop in for an after loss:
Ah do not, when my heart has scapte this sorrow,
Come in the rereward of a conquered woe,
Give not a windy night a rainie morrow,
To linger out a purposd ouer-throw.
If thou will leave me, do not leave me last,
When other petty griefs have done their spite,
But in the onset come, so stall I taste
At first the very worst of fortunes might.
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.
91
SOme glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies force,
Some in their garments though newfangled ill:
Some in their Hawks and Hounds, some in their Horse.
And every humor has his adiunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest,
But these perticulers are not my measure,
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is bitter then high birth to me,
Richer then wealth, prouder then garments cost,
Of more delight then Hawks or Horses be:
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast.
Wretched in this alone, that thou may take,
All this away, and me most wretched make.
92
But do thy worst to steale-thy self away,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
And life no longer then thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
When in the least of them my life has end,
I see, a better state to me belong^
Then that, which on thy humor does depend.
Thou can not vex me with inconstant mind,
Since that my life on thy revolt does lie,
Oh what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
But what is so blessed fair that fears no blot,
Thou may be falce, and yet I know it not.
93
SO shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband so loves face,
May still seem love to me, though altered new:
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
For their can live no hatred in thine eye,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
In manies looks, the falce hea^ts history
Is writ in moods and frounes and wrinckles strange.
But heaven in thy creation did decree,
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell,
What ere thy thoughts, or thy hearts workings be,
Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
How like Ea^es apple does thy beauty grow,
If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.
94
THey that have power to hurt, and will do none,
That do not do the thing, they most do show,
Who moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, could, and to temptation slow:
They r^ghtly do inherrit heavens graces,
And husband natures riches from expense,
They are the Lords and owners of their faces,
Others, but stewards of their excellence:
The summers flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to it self, it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
The basest weed out-braues his dignity:
For sweetest things turn sowrest by their deeds,
Lillies that fester, smell far worse then weeds.
95
HOw sweet and lovely do thou make the shame,
Which like a canker in the fragrant Rose,
Does spot the beauty of thy budding name?
Oh in what sweets do thou thy sins enclose!
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
(Making lascivious comments on thy sport)
Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise,
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report,
Oh what a mansion have those vices got,
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Where beauties veil does cover every blot,
And all things turns to fair, that eyes can feel
Take heed (dear heart) of this large priu^ledge,
The hardest knife ill us 'd does loose his edge.
96
SOme say thy fault is youth, some wantonness,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport,
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less:
Thou makst faults graces, that to thee resort:
As on the finger of a throned Queen,
The bas^st Jewel will be well esteemed:
So are those errors that in thee are seen,
To truths translated, and for true things deemed.
How many Lambs might the stern Wolf betray*
If like a Lamb he could his looks translate.
How many gazers mighst thou lead away,
If thou would use the strenght of all thy state?
But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
97
HOw like a Winter has my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year?
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen?
What old Decembers bareness every where?
And yet this time removed was summers time,
The teeming Autumn big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widdowed wombes after their Lords decease:
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me,
But hope of Orphans, and vn-fathered fruit,
For Summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mu^e.
Or if they ^ing, it is with so dull a cheer,
That leaves look pale, dreading the Winters near,
98
FRom you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud pide April (dressed in all his trim)
Has put a spirit of youth in every thing:
That heavy Satur^e laughed and leapt with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odor and in hew,
Could make me any summers story ^ell:
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Nor did I wonder at the Lillies white,
Nor praise the deep vermillion in the Rose,
They wear but sweet, but figures of delight:
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Yet seemed it Winter still, and you away,
As with your shadow I with these did play.
99
THe forward violet thus did I chide,
Sweet thief whence did thou steal thy sweet that smel^
If not from my loves breath, the purple pride,
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells?
In my loves veins thou have too grosely died,
The Lilly I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marie^om had stolen thy hair,
The Roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
Our blushing shame, an other white despair:
A third nor red, nor white, had stolen of both,
And to his robb^y had annexed thy breath,
But for his theft in pride of all his growth
A vengfull canker eat him up to death.
More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
But sweet, or culler it had stolen from thee.
100
Where art thou Muse that thou forge^st so long,
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spendst thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Darkning thy power to lend base subjects light*
Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
In gentle numbers time so idely spent,
Sing to the ear that does thy lays esteem,
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Rise resty Muse, my loves sweet face suruay,
If time have any wrincle graven there,
If any, be a Satire to decay,
And make times spoils despised every where.
Give my love fame faster then time wastes life,
So thou preuenst his sieth, and crocked knife.
101
OH truant Muse what shall be thy amends,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty di'd?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends*
So do thou too, and therein dignified:
Make answer Muse, will thou not happily sai^,
Truth needs no color with his color fixed,
Beauty no pensell, beauties truth to lay:
But best is best, if never intermixed.
Because he needs no praise, will thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, for it lies in thee,
To make him much out-liue a gilded tomb:
And to be praisd of ages yet to be.
Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how,
To make him seem long hence, as he shows now.
102
MY love is strengthened though more weak in seeming
I love not less, though less the show appear,
That love is marchandiz'd, whose rich esteeming,
The owners tongue does publish every where.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
As Philom^ll in summers front does singe,
And stops his pipe in growth of riper days:
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Then when her mournful himns did hush the night,
But that wild music burdens every bow,
And swee^s grown common loose their dear delight.
Therefore like her, I some-time hold my tongue:
Because I would not dull you with my song.
103
A Lack what poverty my Muse brings forth,
That having such a skope to show her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Then when it has my added praise beside*
Oh blame me not if I no more can write!
Look in your glass and there appears a face,
That ouer-goes my blunt invention quite,
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
To mar the subject that before was well,
For to no other pass my verses tend,
Then of your graces and your gifts to tell.
And more, much more t^en in my verse can sit,
Your own glass shows you, when you look in it.
104
TO me fair friend you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyde,
Such seems your beauty still: Three Winters cold,
Have from the forests shook th^ee summers pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow Autumn^ turned,
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Iunes burned,
Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.
Ah yet does b^^uty like a Dyall hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived,
So your sweet^ h^w, which me thinks still does stan^
Has motion, and mine eye may be deceived.
For fear of which, hear this thou age vnbred,
Ere you were borne was beauties summer dead,
105
LEt not my love be called Idolatry,
Nor my beloved as an Idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still sitch, and ever so.
Kind is my love to day, to morrow kind,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence,
T^erefore my verse to constan^ie confin'de,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
Fair, kind, and true, is all my argument,
Fair, kind and true, varrying to other words,
And in this chan^ is my inuen^^on spent,
Three theams in one, which wondrous scope affords.
Fair, kind, and true, have often lived alone.
Which three till now, never kept seat in one.
106
WHen in the Chronicle of wasted time,
I see discriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme,
In praise of Ladies dead, and lovely Knights,
Then in the blazon of sweet beauties best,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique Pen would have expressed,
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophe^ies
Of this our time, all you pre^iguring,
And for they looked but with deuining eyes,
They had not still enough your worth to sing:
For we which now behold these present days,
Have eyes to wonder, but lack toungs to praise.
107
NOt mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul,
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposde as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal Moon has her eclipse in dur'de,
And the sad Augurs mock their own pre^age,
Incertenties now crown themselves assur'de,
And peace proclaims Olives of endless age*
Now with the drops of this most balmi^ time,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
Since spite of him I Will live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults ore dull and speachlesse tribes.
And thou in this shall find thy monument,
When tyrants crests and ^^mbs of (...) are spent.
108
What Is in the brain that ^^^k may character,
Which has ^ot figured to thee my true spirit,
What Is new to speak, what now to register,
That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
Nothing sweet boy, but yet like prayers divine,
I must each day say ore the very same,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine*
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name*
So that eternal love in loves fresh case,
Waighes not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinckles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
Where time and outward form would show it dead,
109
O Never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seemed my flame to quallifie,
As easy might I from my self depart,
As from my soul which in thy breast does lie:
That is my home of love, if I have ranged,
Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that my self bring water for my stain,
Never believe though in my nature reigned,
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterouslie be stained,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:
For nothing this wide Universe I call,
Save thou my Rose, in it thou art my all.
110
ALas it is true, I have gone here and there,
And made my self a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most de^^e,
Made old offenses of affections new.
Most true it is, that I have looked on truth
Asconce and strangely: But by all above,
These blenches gave my heart an other youth,
And worse essaies proved thee my best of love,
Now all is done, have what shall have no end,
M^ne appe^ite I never more will grin'de
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A God in love, to whom I am confined.
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast,
111
O For my sake do you wish fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmfull deeds,
That did not better for my life provide,
Then public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the Dyers hand,
Pity me then, and wish I were renu'de,
Whilst like a willing pacient I will drink,
Potions of Eysell against my strong insection,
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance to correct correction.
P^^tie me then dear friend, and I assure ye,
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
112
YOur love and pity does the impression fill,
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow,
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you ore-gree^e my bad, my good allow?
You are my All the world, and I must strive,
To know my shames and praises from your tongue,
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong,
In so profound Abisme I throw all care
Of others voices, that my Adders sense,
To cry^^ick and to flatterer stopped are:
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense.
You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
That all the world besides me thinks you are dead,
113
SInce I left you, mine eye is in my mind,
And that which gouernes me to go about,
Does part his function, and is partly blind,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out:
For it no ^orme delivers to the heart
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it does lack,
Of his quick obi^cts has the mind no part,
Nor his own vision houlds what it does catch:
For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
The most sweet-fauor or deformedst creature,
The mountain, or the sea, the day, or night:
The Croe, or Dove, it shapes them to your feature.
Incapable of more repleat, with you,
My most true mind thus makes mine untrue.
114
OR whether does my mind being crowned with you
D^inke up the mona^ks plague this flattery?
Or whether shall I say mine eye says true,
And that your love taught it this Alcu^i^?
To make of monsters, and things indigest,
Such cherubines as your sweet self resemble,
Creating every bad a perfect best
As fast as objects to his beams assemble:
Oh it is the first, it is flatry in my seeing,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up,
Mine ^ie well knows what with his gust is greeing,
And to his pallat does prepare the cup.
If it be poisoned, it is the lesser sin,
That mine eye loves it and does first begin.
115
THose lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you deerer,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why,
My most full flame should afterward burn cleerer.
But reckening time, whose milliond accidents
Creep in twixt vows, and change decrees of Kings,
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st i^^ent^,
Divert strong minds to the course of ^l^^ing ^^i^gs:
Alas why fearing of times tiranie,
Might I not then say now I love you best,
When I was certain ore in-certainty,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest:
Love is a Babe, then might I not say so
To give full growth to that which still does grow.
119
LEt me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments, love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remouer to remove.
O no, it is an ever fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wandering bark,
Whose worths unknown, although his higth be taken.
Lou's not Times fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickles compass come,
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom:
If this be error and upon me proved,
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.
117
ACcuse me thus, that I have scanted all,
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
Whereto al bonds do tie me day by day,
That I have frequent binne with unknown minds,
And given to time your own dear purchased right,
That I have hoysted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
And on just proof surmise, accumilate,
Bring me within the leuel of your frown,
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate:
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
The constancy and virtue of your love
118
LIke as to make our appetites more keen
With eager compounds we our pallat urge,
As to prevent our malladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge.
Even so being full of your nere cloying sweetness,
To bitter sawces did I frame my feeding;
And sick of welfare found a kind of meetnesse,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
Thus policy in love t'anticipate
The ills that were, not grew to faults assured,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
Which rank of goodness would by ill be cured.
But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
119
WHat potions have I drunk of Siren tears
Distilled from Lymbecks foul as hell within,
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
Still loosing when I saw my self to win?
What wretched errors has my heart committed,
Whilst it has thought it self so blessed never?
How have mine eyes out of their Spheres been fitted
In the distraction of this madding fever?
O benefit of ill, now I find true
That better is, by evil still made better.
And ruined love when it is built anew
Grows fairer then at first, more strong, far greater.
So I return rebukt to my content,
And gain by ills thrice more then I have spent.
120
THat you were once unkind be-friends me now,
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my Nerves were brass or hammered steel.
For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, y'haue past a hell of Time,
And I a tyrant have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O that our night of woe might have remembered
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
And soon to you, as you to me then tendered
The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
But that your trespass now becomes a fee,
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me,
121
IT IS better to be vile then vile esteemed,
When not to be, receives reproach of being,
And the just pleasure lo^t, which is so deemed,
Not by our feeling, but by others seeing.
For why should others false adul^erat eyes
Give salutation to my sportiue blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies;
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
Noe, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses, reckon up their own,
I may be straight though they themselves be beuel
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be show^
Unless this general evil they maintain,
All men are bad and in their badnesse reign.
122.
TThy gift, thy tables, are within my brain^
Full characterd with lafting memory,
Which shall above that i^le rank remain
Beyond all date even to eternity.
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist,
Til each to razed oblivion yield his part
Of thee, thy record never can be mist:
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to skor^,
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To trust those tables that receive thee more,
To keep an adiunckt to remember thee,
Were to import forgetfulness in me.
123
NO! Time, thou shall not bost that I do change,
Thy pyramyds buylt up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange,
They are but dressings of a former sight:
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire,
What thou do foyst upon us that is old,
And rather make them borne to our desire,
Then think that we before have heard them told:
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wondering at the present, nor the past,
For thy records, and what we see does lie,
Made more or les by thy continual haft:
This I do vow and this shall ever be,
I will be true dispight thy syeth and thee.
124
IF my dear love were but the child of state,
It might for fortunes basterd be vnfathered,
As subject to times love, or to times hate,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gatherd.
No it was builded far from accident,
It suffers not in smilinge pomp, nor falls
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Whereto the inuiting time our fashion calls:
It fears not policy that Heriticke,
Which works o^ leases of short numbered hours,
But all alone stands hugely pollitick,
That it nor grows with heat, nor drownes with showers.
To this I witness call the foles of time,
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
125
Were ought to me I bore the canopy,
With my exter^ the outward honoring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short then wast or ruining?
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favor
Lose all, and more by paying too much rent
For compound sweet; Forgoing simple savor,
Pitiful thriuors in their gazing spent.
Noe, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblacion, poor but free,
Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art,
But mutual render only me for thee.
Hence, thou subbornd Informer, a true soul
When most impeacht, stands least in thy control.
126
O Thou my lovely Boy who in thy power,
Do hold times fickle glass* his sickle, hour:
Who have by wayning grown, and therein shou'st,
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.
If Nature (sovereign misteres over wrack)
As thou go onwards still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill.
May time disgrace, and wretched mynuit kill.
Yet fear her O thou minnion of her pleasure,
She may detain, but not still keep her tresurel
Her Audite (though delayed) answered must be,
And her Quietus is to render thee.
127
IN the old age black was not counted fair,
Or if it wear it bore not beauties name:
But now is black beauties success^ue heir,
And Beauty slanderd with a bastard shame,
For since each hand has put on Natures power,
Fairing the foul with Arts faulse borrowed face,
Sweet beauty has no name no holy boure,
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
Therefore my Mistersse eyes are Raven black,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem,
At such who not borne fair no beauty lack,
Slandring Creation with a false esteem,
Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
That every tongue says beauty should look so.
128
HOw often when thou my music music playst,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently swayst,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those Iackes that nimble leap,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
At the woods bouldnes by thee blushing stand.
To be so tikled they would change their state,
And situation with those dancing chips,
Ore whom their fingers walk with gentle gate,
Making dead wood more blessed then living lips,
Since sausie Iackes so happy are in this,
Give them their fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
129
The Expense of Spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action, and till action, lust
Is periurd, murdrous, blouddy full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
Inioyd no sooner but despised straight,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
Past reason hated as a swollowed bayt,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
Made In pursut and in possession so,
Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme,
A bliss in proof and proud and very woe,
Before a joy proposd behind a dream,
All this the world well knows yet none knows well,
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
130
MY Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sun,
Currall is far more red, then her lips red,
If snow be white why then her bre^ts are dun:
If hairs be wiers, black wiers grow on her head:
I have seen Roses damaskt, red and white,
But no such Roses see I in her cheeks,
And in some perfumes is there more delight,
Then in the breath that from my Mistres reekes.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know,
That Music has a far more pleasing sound:
I grant I never saw a goddess go,
My Mistres when she walks treads on the ground.
And yet by heaven I think my love as rare,
As any she beli'd with false compare.
131
THou art as tiranous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
For well thou know to my dear doting heart
Thou art the fairest and most precious Jewel.
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Thy face has not the power to make love groan;
To say they err, I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to my self alone.
And to be sure that is not false I swear
A thousand groans but thinking on thy face,
One on another neck do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgments place.
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
And thence this slander as I think proceeds.
132
THine eyes I love, and they as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdai^e,
Have put on black, and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning Sun of Heaven
Better becomes the gray cheeks of the East,
Nor that full Star that vshers in the Eauen
Does half that glory to the sober West
As those two morning eyes become thy face:
O let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me since mourning does thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
Then will I swear beauty her self is black,
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
133
BEshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me;
Is It not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be.
Me from my self thy cruel eye has taken,
And my next self thou harder have engrossed,
Of him, my self, and thee I am forsaken,
A torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed:
Prison my heart in thy steel bosoms ward,
But then my friends heart let my poor heart bale,
Who ere keeps me, let my heart be his guard,
Thou can not then use rigor in my Iaile.
And yet thou will, for I being pent in thee,
Perforce am thine and all that is in me.
134
SO now I have confessed that he is thine,
And I my self am morgag'd to thy will,
My self I Will forfeit, so that other mine,
Thou will restore to be my comfort still:
But thou will not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind,
He learnd but suretie-like to write for me,
Under that bond that him as fast does bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou will take,
Thou usurer that put'st forth all to use,
And sue a friend, came debtor for my sake,
So him I loose through my unkind abuse.
Him have I lost, thou have both him and me,
He paies the whole, and yet am I not free.
135
WHo ever has her wish, thou have thy Will,
And Will too boot, and Will in ouer-plus,
More then enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Will thou whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine,
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine:
The sea all water, yet receives rain still,
And in abundance adds to his store,
So thou being rich in Will add to thy Will,
One will of mine to make thy large Will more.
Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill,
Think all but one, and me in that one Will.
136
IF thy soul check thee that I come so near,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy Will,
And will thy soul knows is admitted there,
Thus far for love, my loue-sute sweet fulfill.
Will, will fulfill the treasure of thy love,
I fill it full with wills, and my will one,
In things of great receipt with ease we prove.
Among a number one is reckoned none.
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy stores account I one must be,
For nothing hold me* so it please thee hold,
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee.
Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
And then thou love me for my name is Will.
137
THou blind fool love, what do thou to mine eyes,
That they behold and see not what they se^:
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is, take the worst to be*
If eyes corrupt by ouer-partiall looks,
Be anchord in the baye where all men ride,
Why of eyes falsehood have thou forged hooks.
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tide?
Why should my heart think that a several plot,
Which my heart knows the wide worlds common place?
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not
To put fair truth upon so foul a face,
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
And to this false plague are they now transferred.
138
WHen my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her though I know she lies,
That she might think me some vntuterd youth,
Unlearned in the worlds false subtilties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false speaking tongue,
O^ both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O loves best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love, loves not to have years told.
Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
And in our faults by lies we flattered be.
139
O Call not me to justify the wrong,
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart,
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue,
Use power with power, and slay me not by Art,
Tell me thou love elsewhere; but in my sight,
Dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside,
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more then my ore-prest defense can bide?
Let me excuse thee, ah my love well knows,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
Yet do not so, but since I am near slain,
Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.
140
BE wise as thou art cruel, do not press
My toung^ tide patience with too much disdain:
Least sorrow lend me words and words express,
The manner of my pity wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit better it wear,
Though not to love* yet love to tell me so,
As testie sick-men when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their Physicians know.
For if I should despair I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee,
Now this ill wrefting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
That I may not be so, nor thou be lyde,
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
141
IN faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note,
But it is my heart that loves what they despise,
Who in dispight of view is pleased to dote.
Nor are mine ears with thy toungs tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
But my five wits, nor my five senses can
Diswade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves vnswa^'d the likeness of a man,
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be:
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
That she that makes me sin, awards me pain.
142
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving,
O but with mine, compare thou thine owne-state,
And thou shall find it merrits not reproouing,
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments,
And sealed false bonds of love as often as mine,
Robbed others beds revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee as thou love those,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee,
Root pity in thy heart that when it grows,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
If thou do seek to have what thou do hide,
By self example mai'st thou be denide.
143
Lo as a careful huswife runs to catch,
One of her fethered creatures broake away,
Sets down her babe and makes a^l swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent,
To follow that which flies before her face:
Not prizing her poor infants discontent;
So runst thou after that which flies from thee,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee a far behind,
But if thou catch thy hope turn back to me:
And play the mothers part kiss me, be kind.
So will I pray that thou may have thy Will,
If thou turn back and my loud crying still.
144
TWo loves I have of comfort and despair,
Which like two spirits do sugiest me still,
The better angel is a man right fair:
The worser spirit a woman colored il.
To win me soon to hell my femall evil,
Tempts my better ^ngel from my sight,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil:
Wooing his purity with her soul pride*
And whether that my angel be turned find,
Suspect I may* yet not directly tell,
But being both from me both to each friend,
I guess one angel in an others hell.
Yet this shall I nere know but live in doubt,
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
145
THose lips that Loves own hand did make,
Breathed forth the sound that said I hate,
To me that languish: for her sake:
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet,
Was used in giving gentle dome:
And tought it thus a new to greet:
I hate she alterd with an end,
That followed as gentle day,
Does follow night who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flowne away.
I hate, from hate away she threw,
And saved my life saying not you.
146
Poor soul the center of my sinful earth,
My sinful earth these rebbell powers that thee array,
Why do thou pine within and suffer dearth
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost having so short a lease,
Do thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms inheritors of this excess*
Eat up thy charge? is this thy bodies end?
Then soul live thou upon thy servants los^e,
And let that pine to aggraut thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross:
Within be sed, without be rich no more,
So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
And death once dead, there is no more dying then,
147
MY love is as a fever longing still,
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which does preserve the ill,
Th'vncertaine sickly appetite to please:
My reason the Physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept
Has left me, and I desperate now approve,
Desire is death, which Physic did except.
Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
And frantic mad with euer-more unrest,
My thoughts and my discourse as mad men's are,
At randon from the truth vainly expressed.
For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
148
O Me! what eyes has love put in my head,
Which have no correspondence with true sight,
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled,
That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love does well denote,
Loves eye is not so true as all men's: no,
How can it? O how can loves eye be true,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
No marvel then though I mistake my view,
The sun it self sees not, till heaven cleeres.
O cunning love, with tears thou keepst me blind,
Least eyes well seeing thy foul faults should find.
149
Can thou O cruel, say I love thee not,
When I against my self with thee partake;
Do I not think on thee when I forgot
Am of my self, all tirant for thy sake?
Who hates thee that I do call my friend,
On whom froun'st thou that I do faune upon,
Nay if thou lowrst on me do I not spend
Revenge upon my se^fe with present mon^?
What merit do I in my self respect,
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best does worship thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes.
But love hate on for now I know thy mind,
Those that can ^ee thou love, and I am blind.
150
OH from what power haft thou this powrefull might,
With insufficiency my heart to sway,
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness does not grace the day?
Whence have thou this becoming o^ things il,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds,
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
The more I hear and see just cause of hate,
Oh though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou should not abhor my state.
If thy unworthiness raisd love in me,
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.
151
Love is too young to know what conscience is,
Yet who knows not conscience is borne of love;
Then gentle cheater urge not my ami^se,
Least guilty of my faul^s thy sweet self prove.
For thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross bodies treason,
My soul does tell my body that he may,
Triumph in love, flesh stays no farther reason,
But rising at thy name does point out thee,
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
No want of conscience hold it that I call,
Her love, for whose dear love I rise and fall.
152
IN loving thee thou know I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing;
In act thy bed-vow broake and new faith torn,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
But why of two oaths breach do I ac^use thee,
When I break twenty: I am perjured most,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee:
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
For I have sworn deep o^hes of thy deep kindness:
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
And to inlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see.
For I have sworn thee fair: more periurde eye,
To swear against the truth fo foul a lie.
153
Cupid laid by his brand and fell a sleep,
A maid of Dyans this advantage found,
And his loue-kindling fire did quickly steep
In a could vallie-fountaine of that ground:
Which borrowd from this holy fire of love,
A datelesse lively heat still to endure,
And grew a seething bath which yet men prove,
Against strange malladies a sovereign cure:
But at my mistres eye loves brand new fired,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast,
I sick withal the help of bath desired,
And thither h^ed a sad distemperd guest.
But found no cure, ^he bath for my help lies,
Where Cupid got new fire; my mistres eye.
154
THe little Loue-God lying once a sleep,
Laid by his side his heart inflaming brand,
Whilst many Nymphs that vou'd chaste life to keep.
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand,
The fairest votary took up that fire,
Which many Legions of true hearts had warmed,
And so the General of hot desire,
Was sleeping by a Virgin hand disarmed.
This brand she quenched in a cool Well by,
Which from loves fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
For men diseasd, but I my Mistrisse thrall,
Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
Loves fire heates water, water cooles not love.
FINIS.
A Lovers complaint.
By WILLIAM SHAKE-SPEARE.
FRom off a hill whose concaue womb reworded,
A plaintfull story from a sistring vale
My spirrits to attend this doble voice accorded,
And down I laid to list the sa^ tuned tale,
Ere long espied a fickle maid full pale
Tearing of papers breaking rings a twain,
Storming her world with sorrows, wind and rain.
Upon her head a plattid hiue of straw,
Which fortified her visage from the Sun,
Whereon the thought might think sometime it saw
The carkas of a beauty spent and done,
Time had not sithed all that youth begun,
Nor youth all quit, but spite of heavens fell rage,
Some beauty peept, through lettice of seared age.
Often did she heave her Napkin to her eyne,
Which on it had conceited charecters:
Laundring the silken figures in the brine,
That seasoned woe had pelleted in tears,
And often reading what contents it bears:
As often shriking vndistinguisht woe,
In clamours of all size both high and low.
Sometimes her leueld eyes their carriage ride,
As they did battry to the spheres intend:
Sometime diuerted their poor balls are tide,
To th'orbed earth; sometimes they do extend,
Their view right on, anon their gases lend,
To every place at once and no where fixed,
The mind and sight distractedly commxit.
Her haite nor loose nor ti'd in formal plat*
Proclaimd in her a careless hand of pride;
For some vntuck'd descended her sheu'd hat,
Hanging her pale and pined che^ke beside,
Some in her threeden fillet still did bide,
And true to bondage would not break from thence,
Though slackly braided in loose negligence.
A thousand favors from a maund she drew,
Of amber crystal and of bedded Iet,
Which one by one she in a river threw,
Upon whose weeping margent she was set,
Like vsery applying wet to wet,
Or M^n^rches hands that lets not bounty fall,
Where want cries some; but where excess begs all.
Of folded schedulls had she many a one,
Which she perus^d, sighd, tore and gave the flud,
Cracked many a ring of Posied gold and bone,
Bidding them find their Sepulchers in mud,
Found yet mo letters sadly pend in blood,
With sleided silk, feate and affectedly
Enswath'd and sealed to curious secrecy.
These often bathed she in her fluxiue eyes,
And often kissed, and often gave to tear,
Cried O false blood thou register of lies,
What vnapproued witness do thou bear!
Ink would have seemed more black and damned hear!
This said in top of rage the lines she rents,
Big discontent, so breaking their contents.
A reverend man that grazed his cattle ny,
Some ^me a blusterer that the russle knew
Of Court of City, and had let go by
The swiftest hours observed as they flew,
Toward this afflicted fancy fastly drew:
And priuiledg'd by age desires to know
In brief the grounds and motives of her woe.
So slides he down upon his greyned bat;
And comely distant sits he by her fide,
When he again desires her, being satte,
Her greeuance with his hearing to divide*
If that from him there may be ought applied
Which may her suffering ecstasy assuage
It Is promised in the charity of age*
Father she says, though in me you behold
The injury of many a blasting hour;
Let it not tell your Judgment I am old,
Not age, but sorrow, over me has power;
I might as yet have been a spreading flower
Fresh to my self, if I had self applied
Love to my self, and to no Love beside.
But woe is me, too early I atttended
A youthful suit it was to gain my grace;
O one by natures outward so commended,
That maidens eyes stuck over all his face,
Love lackt a dwelling and made him her place.
And when in his fair parts she did abide,
She was new lodged and newly Deified.
H^s browny locks did hang in crooked curles,
And every light occasion of the wind
Upon his lips their silken parcels hurles,
What Is sweet to do, to do will aptly find,
Each eye that saw him did inchaunt the mind:
For on his visage was in little drawn,
What largeness thinks in parradise was sawne.
Small show of man was yet upon his chinne,
His phoenix down began but to appear
Like unshorn velvet, on that termlesse skin
Whos^ bare out-brag'd the web it seemed to were.
Yet showed his visage by that cost more dear,
And nice affections wavering stood in doubt
If best were as it was, or best without.
His qualities were beauteous as his form,
For maiden tongued he was and thereof free;
Yet if men moved him, was he such a storm
As often twixt May and April is to see,
When winds breath sweet, unruly though they be.
His rudeness so with his authorized youth,
Did livery falsenesse in a pride of truth.
Well could he ride, and often men would say
That horse his mettell from his rider takes
Proud of subjection, noble by the swaie,
What rounds, what bounds, what course what stop he makes
And controversy hence a question takes,
Whether the horse by him became his deed,
Or he his mannad'g, by the well doing Steed.
But quickly on this side the verdict went,
His real habi^ude gave life and grace
To appertainings and to ornament,
Accomplished in himself not in his case:
All ayds themselves made fairer by their place,
Can for addicions, yet their purposed trim
Peec'd not his grace but were al graced by him.
So on the tip of his subduing tongue
All kind of arguments and question deep,
Al replication prompt, and reason strong
For his advantage still did wake and sleep,
To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep^*
He had the dialect and different skill,
Catching al passions in his craft of will.
That he did in the general bosom raig^e
Of young, of old, and sexes both enchanted,
To dwell with him in thoughts, or to remain
In personal duty, following where he haunted,
Consent's bewitched, ere he desire have granted,
And dialogu'd for him what he would say,
Asked their own wills and made their wills obey.
Many there were that did his picture get
To serve their eyes, and in it put their mind,
Like fools that in the imagination set
The goodly objects which abroad they find
Of lands and mansions, theirs in thought assigned,
And laboring in more pleasures to bestow them,
Then the true gouty Landlord which does owe them.
So many have that never touched his hand
Sweetly supposed them mistress of his heart:
My woeful self that did in freedom stand,
And was my own fee simple (not in part)
What with his art in youth and youth in art
Threw my affections in his charmed power,
Reserved the stalk and gave him al my flower.
Yet did I not as some my equals did
Demand of him, nor being desired yielded.
Finding my self in honor so forbid,
With safest distance I mine honor sheelded,
Experience for me many bulwarks builded
Of proofs new bleeding which remaind the foil
Of this false Jewel, and his amorous spoil*
But a^^ who ever shunned by precedent,
The destined ill she must her self assay,
Or forced examples against her own content
To put the bypast perrils in her way?
Counsel may stop a while what will not stay:
For when we rage, advise is often seen
By blunting us to make our wits more keen.
Nor gives it satisfaction to our blood,
That we must curb it upon others proof,
To be forbod the sweets that seems so good,
For fear of harms that preach in our behoof;
O appetite from judgment stand aloof!
The one a palate has that needs will taste,
Though reason weep and cry it is thy last.
For further I could say this man's untrue,
And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling,
Heard where his plants in others Orchards grew,
Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling,
Knew vows, were ever brokers to defiling,
Thought Characters and words merely but art,
And ba^^ards of his foul adulterat heart.
And long upon these terms I held my City,
Till thus he began besiege me: Gentle maid
Have of my suffering youth some feeling pity
And be not of my holy vows afraid,
That's to ye sworn to none was ever said,
For feasts of love I have been called unto
Till now did nere inuire not never vovv.
All my offenses that abroad you see
Are errors of the blood none of the mind:
Love made them not, with acture they may be,
Where neither Party is nor true nor kind,
They sought their shame that so their shame did find,
And so much less of shame in me remains,
By how much of me their reproach contains,
Among the many that mine eyes have seen,
Not one whose flame my heart so much as warmed,
Or my affection put to th, smallest teene,
Or any of my leisures ever Charmed,
Harm have I done to them but nere was harmed,
Kept hearts in liueries, but mine own was free,
And raignd commanding in his monarchy.
Look hear what tributes wounded fancies sent me,
Of played pearls and rubies red as blood:
Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me
Of grief and blushes, aptly understood
In bloodlesse white, and the encrimson'd mood,
Effects of terror and dear modesty,
Encampt in hearts but fighting outwardly.
And Lo behold these tallents of their heir,
With twisted mettle amorously empleacht
I have received from many a several fair,
Their kind acceptance, wepingly beseecht,
With th'annexions of fair gems inricht,
And deep b^ain'd sonnets that did amplify
Each stones dear Nature, worth and quallity.
The Diamond? why it was beautiful and hard,
Whereto his inuis'd properties did tend,
The deep green Emrald in whose fresh regard,
Weak sights their sickly radience do amend.
The heaven hewd Saphir and the Opall blend
With objects manyfold; each several stone,
With wit well blazond smiled or made some moan.
Lo all these trophies of affections hot,
Of pensiu'd and subdew'd desires the tender,
Nature has chargd me that I hoord them not,
But yield them up where I my self must render:
That is to you my origin and ender:
For these of force must your oblations be,
Since I their Altar, you en patron me.
Oh then advance (of yours) that phraseles hand,
Whose white weighes down the airy scale of praise*
Take all these similies to your own command,
Hollowed with sighs that burning lunges did raise:
What me your minister for you obaies
Works under you, and to your audit comes
Their distract parcells, in combined sums.
Lo this device was sent me from a Nun,
Or Sister sanctified of holiest note,
Which late her noble suit in court did shun,
Whose rarest hauings made the blossoms dote,
For she was sought by spirits of ritchest cote,
But kept cold distance, and did thence remove,
To spend her living in eternal love.
But oh my sweet what labor is it to leave,
The thing we have not, mastring what not strives,
Playing the Place which did no form receive,
Playing patient sports in vnconstraind gives,
She that her fame so to her self contriues,
The scarres of battle scapeth by the flight,
And makes her absence valiant, not her might.
Oh pardon me in that my boast is true,
The accident which brought me to her eye*
Upon the moment did her force subdewe,
And now she would the caged cloister fly:
Religious love put out religions eye:
Not to be tempted would she be enured,
And now to tempt all liberty procure.
How mighty then you are, Oh hear me tell,
The broken bosoms that to me belong,
Have emptied all their fountains in my well:
And mine I power your Ocean all among:
I strong ore them and you ore me being strong,
Must for your victory us all congest,
As compound love to physic your cold breast.
My parts had power to charm a sacred Sun,
Who disciplined I dieted in grace,
Believed her eyes, when they to assail begun,
All vows and consecrations giving place:
O most potentiall love, vow, bond, nor space
In thee has neither sting, knot, nor confine
For thou art all and all things else are thine.
When thou impressest what are precepts worth
Of stale example? when thou will inflame,
How coldly those impediments stand forth
Of wealth of filliall fear, law, kindred fame,
Loves a^mes are peace, against ^ule, against sense, against shame
And sweetens in the suffering pangues it bears,
The Alloes of all forces, shockes and fears.
Now all these hearts that do on mine depend,
Feeling it break, with bleeding groans they pine,
And supplicant their sighs to you extend
To leave the battrie that you make against mine,
Lending soft audience, to my sweet design,
And credent soul, to that strong bonded oath,
That shall prefer and undertake my troth.
This said, his watrie eyes he did dismount,
Whose sightes till then were leaueld on my face,
Each cheek a river running from a fount,
With brynish current downe-ward flowed a pace:
Oh how the channel to the stream gave grace!
Who glazed with Christail gate the glowing Roses,
That flame through water which their hew incloses,
Oh father, what a hell of witchcraft lies,
In the small orb of one p^rticular tear^?
Put with the inundation of the eyes:
What rocky heart to water will not wear?
What breast so cold that is not warmed hear,
Or cleft effect, cold modesty hot wrath:
Both fire from hence, and chill extincture has.
For lo his passion but an art of craft,
Even there resolved my reason into t^ares,
There my white stole of chastity I daft,
Shook off my sober gardes, and civil fears,
Appear to him as he to me appears:
All melting, though our drops this diffrence bore,
His poisoned me, and mine did him restore.
In him a plenitude of subtle matter,
Applied to Cautills, all straing forms receives,
Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,
O^ sounding palenesse: and he takes and leaves,
In eithers aptness as it best deceiue^:
To blush at speeches rank, to weep at woes
Or to turn white and sound at tragic shows.
That not a heart which in his level came,
Could escape the hail of his all hurting aim,
Showing fair Nature is both kind and tame:
And vaild in them did win whom he would maime,
Against the thing he sought, he would exclaim,
When he most burnt in hart-wisht luxury,
He preached pure maid, and praisd cold chastity.
Thus merely with the garment of a grace,
The naked and concealed feind he couerd,
That th'vnexperient gave the tempter place,
Which like a Cherubin above them houerd,
Who young and simple would not be so louerd.
Aye me I fell, and yet do question make,
What I should do again for such a sake.
O that infected moisture of his eye,
O that false fire which in his cheek so glowd:
O that forced thunder from his heart did fly,
O that sad breath his spungie lungs bestowed,
O all that borrowed motion seeming owed,
Would yet again betray the fore-betrayed,
And new pervert a reconciled Maid.
FINIS.

