MAN'S LAST END, THE GLORIOUS VISION AND FRVITION OF GOD. By Richard Sheldon
Doctor in Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chaplines.

1 Ioh. 3. 2. We know that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is.

LONDON. Printed by WILLIAM JONES dwelling in Red-crosse-streete, 1634.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
DREAD
Sovereign, Sacred and divine is Royal MAJESTY, and it is the glory thereof
to protect sacred things. This my Meditation upon Heavens Loadstone, the
glorious vision and fruition of God, though in respect of the author and the
style, it may seem unworthy of your Majesty's judicious eye; yet in regard it
is in it self asubiect most sacred, and sacredly handled (agreeing to the rule
of holy faith) I humbly presume to crave from your Majesty both pr^^ection, and
gracious acceptance of it; which my mind presumes, I shall most assuredly
have: Protection, because I humbly crave it, from the Defender of that faith,
the happy end and fruit whereof, is the glorious vision and fruition of God:
Gracious acceptance, because it cannot but be a subject most acceptable to your
religious and pious mind, which (like that of Moses) is daily looking on this
most glorious reward. For this (to the joy of your people, and for the example
of all greatness) Comes testified and confirmed, both by your Majesty's
reverent attention to the word Read or Preached; fervent and intentive devotion
to Gods praises (in prayers) celebrated; but especially by your Majesty's daily
often times of prayers. O that the whole Britaine-Orbe, at least the whole
Tribe of Levy therein, were composed and ordered, according to this your
Majesty's example. Go on glorious Prince, and let not your Hand cease to
protect and enlarge the virgine-faith which ye profess, to raise up despised
Discipline, (for the glory of our Church), to mainteyne justice and judgment,
and with Clemency to establish your Throne. And that glorious God whom ye
serve with fear and trembling, shall, and will in the end, bid you enter into
that his own joy, the glorious vision and fruition of himself.

Amen.
Your most Excellent Majesty's loyal subject and servant, Richard Sheldon.

To the Religious Reader.
CHristian Reader whosoever thou art, into whose hands this Treatise may come;
I advise thee that howsoever this diamond of thy felicity come thus rudely (yet
clearly and truly) presented unto thee, thou make such good use of this and
the like, that thou may happily in the end enjoy the glory it self.
Meditating hereon thou will easily see how degenerate thou art from thy own
Original dignity, if by the contagion of unrepented sin, thou deprive thy
self of that gemme which God has prepared for thee, and all those that fear
him, and love his coming. Had the natural Sages of the world known this end
of man, whereas some of them, as the Grecians called him a little world, an
Earthly God: Others, as the Egiptians and their Trismegistus, the miracle of
the world, they would in respect of the glory expected and to be revealed, have
termed him the miracle of heaven, a glorious companion by grace, of majesty it
self, thus entering into, and diving into, the Lords own Joy it self. But
whence has man this, but from the free grace of the Father? By whom has he
this, but by the humble obedience of the Son to the Father? By what, all
this? but by obedient faith in the Savior; The first is the fountain; the
second, is the way and mean of this glory: the third is the condition without
which, this glory is not obtained. O then having found this most precious
diamond, and from whom it is; God the Father: By whom it is; Christ Jesus the
Son: for whom it is: the faithful and loving believers. Press thou on
toward the mark, for the price of this high calling of God in Christ Jesus,
the glorious vision and fruition of God himself.

AMEN.
Thine in CHRIST JESUS, RICHARD SHELDON.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
Section 1. Shows jointly wherein the nature and condition of an end and last
end may consist. Sect. 2. Wherein is jointly showed by sundry arguments and
clear demonstrations, that the object of humane felicity or last end of man,
cannot be riches, pleasures, nor honor; taken severally, or jointly. page 9.
Sect. 3. Showing that God only is the last end of man, and his final
happiness. page 18. Sect. 4. God being the object of man's happiness, and his
last end, it is showed by what union, he is knitte, and united to the Soul,
and thereby the Soul made happy. page 25. Sect. 5. Wherein is more
particularly handled, in what action, or actions, the last happiness of man,
does specially consist. page 50. Sect. 6, Conteines certain observations,
touching the glorified bodies of the beatified and their glorious qualities.
page 63. Sect. 7. Wherein is breefely and in general laid down the means and
way, whereby eternal happiness is to be attained. page 92.
MAN'S LAST END, THE GLORIOUS VISION AND FRVITION OF GOD.
First Section, showing Jointly wherein the nature and condition of an end and
last end may consist.
THE nature and essence of an end in general, is to be that for which another
thing is intended, as a means to attain the same end. Or Wherein the nature
of an end does (...).
thus, An end, is that which moves to motion or action: which respect and
formality of an end, in the last end requires further, that it be that for
which all other things are intended, and it not for any one of them singly
taken, no, nor for all of them taken together and unitedly: Whence from by
inevitable consequence it follows, that the last end of man is, that to which
all the actions of man, yea man himself is to be referred; as being that, by
which and in which, his full rest and last perfection is intended. Herehence it
also follows most clearly; first, that the last end of man, must needs be
far better than man, and all that is in man; as being that which must give
full perfection and rest to man, and all that is in man. The end final is ever
better than that which is for the end; the house is better than the lime,
timber and stone, which are for the house; and man better than the house, for
whose use the house is, so the end of man better then man,

Secondly, the last end of man must be such as does fully satiate and quiet all
the desires of man; for that is the last end of every thing, which when it is
had, gives perfect rest and repose. Austin, Truly we say that to be the last
end of man, not wherewith he is so consumed as that he cease to be, but that
wherewith he is so perfited that he may fully and perfectly be; By which it may
appear, that the inordinate love of man's own self, is farthest off, from
being the last end of a man's own self; for an inordinate mind is ever a
punishment and affliction to it self. In Austins phrase; God has made us for
himself, and unquiet is man's heart until it attain him. This nature of an
end thus briefly laid open, two things will clearly apeare, The first, that
man in all his actions Man has an end in all his actions.
has some special end, again, that of himself and all his actions he has a
last and total end.

Concerning the first, that man has an end in all his actions, what man that
has the least spaeke of humane knowledge in him is not persuaded? yea more;
who has arightly thought of man and all other earthly creatures, can otherwise
think, but that man, only man, does present unto himself some special end
in all his actions; yea a last end, for which and the consecutio^ of which, he
does and intends all he either does or intends. Senseless creatures, work
not otherwise too and for their ends, but for that without all sense or
knowledge, they by a natural poyse bend and are inclined to their ends.
Sensitive creatures work too and for their ends, though not known to them
under the formality of an end, yet apprehended by them as the thing unto which
for their rest and perfection their nature does incline them, so that they are
rather driven and enforced by a natural propension then moved by apprehension
and cogitation. This truth if daily experience did not make manifest, yet
clear reason does evince it; for there is not any creature whether sensitive
or senseless which has not some inclination and proportion whereby it is wayed
to some special good; which good being that for the attaining whereof it is
inclined, we must and do call the same an end, either partial or total.

And although all sensitive and senseless creatures have one and the same last
remote end, not known to themselves, but intended by God, who has made all
things for himself, yet their Fro. 16. ^
special and peculiarends, are several and distinguished; being no other than
a natural conservation or enlarging of themselves: A very perfect pattern of
that inordinate love, (the very stones and mortar wherewith the tower of Babell
to the contempt of God is built) which every inordinate man has of himself:
for as the sensitive creature has no other end than by satisfying his lust to
conserve it self, so the inordinate man has no other end, but the self
content and fruition of himself; he referrs all things, yea God himself and
his religion (as much as may lie in his power) to himself and for his own
content; which is the greatest iniquity, to use the things which ought to be
enjoyed, and to enjoy those things, which ought only to be used. And although
these brutish sensitive and Animal men have no other end of themselves but
themselves, Lovers of themselves more than of God, yet God ordeines 2 Timothy 3.
2. Pro. 16. 4. Ier. 46. 11.
them to another end, the evil day, the day of anger and of slaughter.

It being thus apparent, that sensitive unreasonable senseless and inanimate
creatures, have their several inclinations, either innate or upon
apprehension, by which they are urgently and necessarily carried to their
several ends; more apparent it must be, that man in such his actions as are
humane, is swayed in and unto them all, upon the apprehension of some good by
him intended and prosecuted, wherein the formality and nature of an end does
properly consist.

And we must not only think, that man in his several particular actions,
has some particular good things after which he aimerh as the ends of the same,
but we are further to understand, that every man has some total complete last
end, both of himself, and all his actions, in things which are ordained one
for another, as are the actions of man, every man; there cannot be process
into an infinity; In causes final, or ends, there cannot be progress
infinite, say the Schools, and the reason is manifest; for an end, is not an
end but as it moves: now if there were an infinity in the ends, there could
be no mooving nor motion at all; for that is infinite which never can be passed
over, nor moved unto, either in finite time or by a finite cause: And again,
second causes move not unless they be moved; but over an infinite distance
there is no mooving; so then if there were an infinite progress in causes
final, there could be no mooving at all, and therefore of necessity it must be
granted, that man has How every man intends some end.
some last total complete end, to which he ordeineth himself and all his
actions. Only it is to be observed, that every man does so ordeine himself and
his actions to some last full end, either vainly, interpretatively, and by
vain imagination, or else, truly, and deliberately by set resolution. I said
vainly and interpretatively, vainly, thereby to design the impious and
ungodly, who upon vain imaginations, do presett unto themselves some vain
fading object, as their end and last happiness; I said interpretatively, for
how soever the wicked and ungodly, Psalm. 1.
whose thoughts and affections are scattered, as dust before the wind, do in
words pretend God, to be their last end, yet seeing they vainly solace
themselves in the fruition of the creature, contrary to the will of God; and
thereby commit wilful sin (which is a separation wall betwixt God and Isa.
59*
themselves) they are interpreted to make the creature and not the creator
their last end; and accordingly their God is said to be their belly, their Phi.
3. 19. Col. 3. 4. Luc. 12. 19.
gold their idol, their store houses and barns the centers of their rest and
repose; by which means (what soever else they may presume or pretend) they are
for all eternity, to be separated from God.

Again I said (vainly) for how vain is it for By vain imagination.
any man to make that his last end, which ought not to be any end at all, or
that to be last end of man (to weet, delightful sin) the end whereof is hell
and destruction; for the wages of sin is Romans 6.
death, death eternal. O, how vainly then walk sinners in the vanity of
their sense; having their Eples. 4. 18.
understandings obscured through the blindness of their hearts, which is in
them. Excellently says the Apostle, that the understanding is obscured,
through the blindness of the heart; for so blind are they that though they
love sin immoderatly, yet they presume that they serve God obsequiously, O
the lamentable (yet unlamented) blindness of wilful sinners! O the fearful
severity of God, thus chastening presumption! Austen fitly to this purpose, If
any robbing, should In Psa. 17.
thereby in the very act lose his sight, every man would say that Gods
judgment was present: but having lost the eyes of our minds, we think God to
be both sparing Indg. 16. 27.
and indulgent. Sampson could not be brought to grind in the mill before his
eyes were plucked out; so, so, neither could the Devil draw men to so servile
a bondage of sin, to place happiness in that which inevitably leads to
death and destruction, unless he had first deprived him of the light of his
mind. I said above that the last end in some is truly, directly and
deliberatly intended; to show the very manner, how the true servants of God do
preset and prefixe unto themselves God and his glory for the last total and
complete end of themselves, and all their actions, that whether they eat or
drink, or what else soever 1 Cor. 10. 32.
they do in word or work, they do all to the glory of God, always and in all
things giving thanks to God Col. 3. 17.
and the Father by Jesus Christ. But I must not on to fast, and involue this
truth with obscurity; I repeat again these words Truly, directly and
deliberatly, Sap. 7. 5.
Truly for that into feined souls and deceitful minds, wisdom will not
enter, but only unto such as think of God in goodness, and in the sincerity
of their heart do seek him. Directly, to show that the Archer aims not more
directly at the white in the shooting, than the servant of God does look on
God in working. To him his soul walks, on him his soul wayteth, after him
his soul thirsts, Psalm. ^3. ^. ^*
yea to him both soul and flesh is manifestly fastened and fixed. I say
deliberately, to show, that the soul not only upon a first motion and as it
were by an impetuosity of sanctified nature, is bent and inclined to God, but
that upon clear consideration he does most fervently pursue and intend after
God, only God.

That of the Schools is most true: The causality of the end is the reason of
all, because the first that mooveth and the moover of all other causes; So in
God, so in all intelligent creatures, the end prefixed mooves all: which end in
God (though without himself he ordained one thing for another; Grace for
Glory, damnation for sin, (only sin) is no other than himself, his own
glory; mooving himself to do all things for the same. In like sort, the end
is that, which first mooveth in all intelligent creatures; how then can it be,
but that the end is truly, directly and deliberatly intended? whenas for the
attaining of it all other things are intended, it being the good one that guids
and directs all.

Again, say the Schools and truly, The end is pursued without measure, but
those things which are for the end, according as the further and conduce unto
the end; how then shall not the last end be pursued directly and deliberatly,
yea with a Mat. 22. 33.
sweet kind of impetuossity and violence of Grace, with the whole heart, all
the soul, with the whole mind, and with all the strength of him, who arightly
apprehends the end. This David feelingly professes Psalm. 42. 1.
when as he thus breathes out. Even as the Heart pants after the fountains of
waters, so my soul thirsts and longs after thee O my God. Herehence it is,
that in so much every thing is the more perfect, in how much it is more
efficaciously ordered and directed to the end: and that as in natural motions,
the nearer the end the swifter the motions are, so in motions of grace and
supernall, the nearer to God, the swifter and the more sweetly violent and
efficacious the motions are. So, so the soul which living only desires God,
delighted Psalm. 73. 25.
on God, dying and parting from the body, longs and pants only after God,
nothing but God.

Yet again says the Schools, and truly: That all things which (as means)
are for, and conduce to the end, are not intended nor prosecuted but out of a
deliberate and full intention of the end. So then in man there can be no
deliberate actions but such as are intended either for the true and happy end
of all, God; or else for such imagined and supposed ends which the corruption
of man presets unto himself. Austen excellently; That is the end of all our
good, for which all other things are loved, and it for it self.

Thus have we showed (though breefely, yet sufficiently) that man, every man
has not only in all his several and particular actions some special private
ends, but further also, that man, every man has some complete and final end
both of himself and of all his actions: But what is the last end of man?

THE SECOND SECTION.
Wherein is jointly showed by sundry arguments and clear demonstrations, that
the object of humane felicity or last end of man, cannot be riches, pleasures
nor honors; taken severally, or jointly.

THough common experience excludes from being the object of humane felicity or
last end of man, that three headed monster, concupiscence 1 Ioh. 2. 16.
of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and pride of life, (jointly or severally
taken) wherein the Apostle confines, all that is excellent, delightful, or
profitable in the world; yet by way of prelude to our following discourse, I
have thought good to add a few moral reasons and demonstrations eight in a
perfect number, that these three which are (formally or reductively) all that
is excellent, pleasant or proffitable in the world, whether taken vnitedly
together, or apart, are not the last end of man or the object of his felicity,
for which 1 Reason.
purpose I argue thus first: The object of man's felicity, or last end of man,
must, in respect of that which is chief in man (to weet, the soul of man) be
so perfect that it must give full content The last end of man must give full
content to man.
and rest thereunto; that is, to man as man; But out alas! who ever, (whose
soul has been endowed with least spark of wisdom) has found full content
in riches, honor or pleasures; against which Solomon the wisest amongst all
the wise, exclaimes; O the vanity of vanities and all vanity. Ecl. 1.
Yea so contrary is the operation of these to the wisdom of the soul, that to
surfeit with these, is to pi^e in reason, to languish in piety, and Ephesians. 4. 18.
with deepest ignorance to have the soul obscured and darkened. And surely by
these Occasionaly
the God of this world does blind the hearts of such as do perish. And in this
respect, is Sa^han called God 2 Cor. 4. 4.
of this world; because by these three (as it were the life and marrow of the
world) (pride, riches, pleasures, glory, etc.) He has abusively rule and
reigns over the children of misbeleefe and disohedience.

Secondly: the last end or felicity of man, must Second reason
be so good, that no man may use the same ill; but these both jointly and
severally taken; are such as by the possessiones of them, may be used so ill,
that for the abusing of them, they may with the reprobate glutton perish
eternally; yea they are so Luke 16. 15.
fit and apt to be ill used, that they carry with them a cross bar of
difficulty, if (not of impossibility,) of being well used, or that salvation
may be obtained by the posessioners of them; for so we are to understand that
of the Son of God; It Mat. 19. 14.
is easier for a Camel, to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich
man, to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Some of the wiser Ancients, to
express the difficulty, which pleasures, honor, and riches, do bring against
the exercise of virtue, have feigned a Virgin (by name Aclanta) of such
admirable beauty, that the Worthies of that time, were all enamoured with the
love of her: but as her beauty was surpassing great, so was her swiftness in
running far greater, so that in running she could not be overtaken, by any
of the Valiants of those times; though she had often proffered her self to be
his, who in running could out go her: At last, one Hippomenes, presents
himself unto her, who that the better he might obtain his purpose, in out
running the fair Aclanta, had secretly provided three balls of gold, the
which, one after one, as they were in their course of running, he casts before
her; for the taking up of which the beautiful maid makes such stays and so
many stops, that she was outrunne by Hippomenes, and so was obtained of him.
Now who is this fair Atlanta, but the soul of man, adorned with sundry
heavenly graces? whose power (by grace,) was to have not sinned, but to have
stood and continued in grace; had she not been overtaken and over prised, in
the course of her obedience, by the infernal H^ppomenes; First apple of
Pleasures; the forbidden fruit: the 2 of pride you shall be like God: the 3 of
Covetousness, knowing good and evil. Gen: 3* 4. 5.
who, casting before her, the three b^lls of riches, pleasures, and honors,
let her from the attaining of that glory, and happiness for which she was
made and designed. Thus are riches eagerly desired, and heaped up for the hurt
of the possessioner; So are honors, the bellows of Satan, blowing up the fire
of arrogance; So are pleasures, the snares and gives of Satan, wherewith he
leads sensual minds, captives to that place of torments, where such a measure
of torments shall be given according as the guilty shall be found, to have
exceeded in the riot of their pleasures.

The third reason I frame thus. The happiness Third reason.
of man, must be such that as no man can use it ill, so must it not have any
evil unavoydable accompanying and adjoined with it. But what sweet,
proffitable or glorious thing is there in the world, which has not ever, some
evil either, of bitterness, or disproffit, or dishonor, or infirmity of the
body, or anxiety of the mind, intermixed therewith? that whosoever shall set
his soul, upon any thing, or all the things that are in this world, he cannot
but be thought to have received his soul in vain, and resting upon vanity,
what happiness for such a soul, to have gained the world, if Mat. 16. 26.
it perish with the world? and what a felicity to have gained the world, when
as all that is in the world is but a puff of vanity? Seneca very excellently,
O how ridiculous is the bounds of mortal men? it is but a point, which with
sword and fire, is divided into so many nations; above there are infinite
spaces, into the possession whereof the soul may be admitted.

Fourthly, I argue thus; The last end of man, Fourth reason.
(because the last, and because of man, who in his soul is immortal, and
never dies) must be also immortal, never dye nor fade away; but who sees
not, by daily experience, that of the beloved Apostle to be most true: The
world and the lust 1 Ioh. 2. 17.
thereof passes away? If then that be true (as it is most true) that, that
cannot be true happiness, the eternity whereof is not certain; then assuredly,
that cannot be the matter and object of true happiness, whose instability, and
daily mutability is most certain. Solomon having had a full taste (even to
satiety) of all the glorious delicacyes of the world, cries out with a most
humble note and loud cry, O the vanity of vanities; and all things vanity; O
the vanity of vanities! Vanity then, and most vain, should the last end of man
then be, if placed in such vanities of honors, riches, or pleasures.

Fifthly, the last end natural of man, is that Fifth reason.
whereunto by God (as Author of nature) he is ordained; the last end
supernatural, is that whereunto God (as the Author of Grace) has designed and
ordained him: But clear it is, and it needs no proof, that all the good
terrene things of the world, cannot be the end supernatural, for which man was
made; and as easily it is showed, that they cannot be the end natural of man;
for as it has been already prooved, they let and hinder man, from the
atcheiving of his supernatural ends: But as Grace, hurts not, but perfects
nature; so nature, as nature (though as vitiated it hinders) hinders not Grace,
but being elevated and renewed by Grace, is by Grace made able to be concurrent
with Grace. O with how few things is nature ordinate content! Socrates the wise
and temperate, observing the superfluity of humane cares, cries out, O how many
things are there which I do not want! Again, do we not see, that honors,
riches, especially pleasures, are very frequently attendant upon those, in whom
nature is rather destroyed and corrupted, than in part impaired or diminished?
Of such manner of men the Apostle Jude very fi^ly: That in those things which
they naturally know, Iud. epist v. 10
(not as man but as brute beasts) in them they are corrupted. It is true, that
as God often favors the famous in giving them wealth, so sin for most part
infatuates where God gives wealth, so that the wealthy as they often glory
inordinately in honor; so they surfeit immoderately in Pleasures. And where are
the persons that do not so? Let the Iovinianists of latter times be an example
for all. And who observes not; that this tendes not to the perfection but to
the corruption of nature?

Sixthly, the last end of man must be immediately Sixth reason.
attained, possessed, enjoyed by the best and cheifest actions, which are in
man, to weet, the actions of the cheifest powers, and faculties of the soul;
the will, and understanding. But riches, pleasures, honor, fame glory, are
immediately apprehended, felt, and enjoyed, by the outward senses of man; and
do only appertain to the soul, by the way of approvance or rejectio^; for the
good and useful service of her body, and sensual parts; for the soul, being
spiritual and immateriall, cannot have, or receive any immediate impressions,
from things corporal, and material. Which being so, and most clearly so; how
idle were it, in these corporal and material things, to place the last end of
man, and to make them, the object of his happiness and felicity?

Seventhly, as the cheifest actions of the soul, Seventh reason
must be the immediate apprehension, possession, and fruition, of those things,
which must be the The last end of man must be the cheifest good that man can
attain unto.
last end of man; so the cheifest good and best thing which the soul, can
attain unto by knowledge; can embrace by love; can enjoy by delight; must be
his last end and the object of his happiness and felicity. Now to think of
any other thing for this purpose besides God, were the greatest dotage, that
might be imagined: For, not speaking only of things sublunary, but even the
celestial Genesis 1. 17.
themselves; what are they all, but either images (as men and Angels) or
footings, or shadows of Psa. 19.
the creator himself, as all other creatures are? And what a vanity were it,
to think, that the Image of the Creator, should have for the object of her
happiness and last end, those things, which are only as footings or dark
foot impressions of the Creator? Or how vain to think, that those things
which are made for the use and service of man (as all terrene things were)
should be the end of man? Sweetly was this understood by most Intelligent
David, who ballancing all things that were in the heavens above, or on the
earth below; cries out, What is there for me in heaven? Psalm 73.
And besides thee what would I upon earth, the Genesis 2. 9. Psa. 23. 25. 26
God of my heart, and portion for ever? As if he should have said, O thou my
God, thou, thou that A most divine elevation of David's spirit.
art my ever and last end; the very joy and happiness of my heart; how glorious
thou in the heavens above? and what happiness is there provided for me in
thee? above? how then may I, or can I, take full content or delight in any
thing that is here below? Basil elegantly, compares them, that fix their
hearts upon any earthly good thing whatsoever, (appretiating them before God)
to him, who hearing some exquisite and most divine Doctor, preaching, or
teaching out of a chair* standing in the Sun, should (neglecting both the
Teacher, his words, and gestures) attend and observe only the shadow of the
teacher, and such several motions, or gestures, as are represented thereby; So
he very excellently, accounting all the best, and good creatures of God (being
compared to God,) to be no more, nor better (indeed they are not so much) than
the shadow of the teacher, and his gestures, (represented therein) are, being
compared to the Teacher himself, and unto his actions of life.

Eighthly, and lastly, as the understanding of Eight reason.
man, is by nature apt, and has an apprehensive power to apprehend all that is
cognoscible, or may God only can be the full object of man's knowledge and love.
be known or understood, under the condition of truth; so the will of man,
(whose proper object is good) as by nature it embraces nothing but what is
good, or under the appearance of good; so it has a propension and inclination,
to pursue all good, either to be attained dispersedly in several creatures; or
in some one fountain and root of all goodness: which inclinations, both of
the will and understanding, unless they be fully satisfied and quieted, by
that cheifest good, and purest truth (which is, and are the last end, and
object of their happiness) they shall never be found, truly to have attained
their last end and final happiness. But if we consider, the most glorious, of
Gods creatures; in no one; no, in no one million of them, can be found, all
that may be understood by the understanding; or be desired and embraced by the
will; and consequently, no one of them; nor no infinite multitude of them
together, can be the full object of man's last end, and happiness: no; God, God
alone is this purest truth, and cheifest good, the full and complete object,
both of the wills and understandings, of all his Intelligent creatures; who
being presented to the beautified Souls, enabled with the light of glory, to
see him as he is in himself, even face to face; how unenarrable, unspeakeable
and incomprehensible, is the joy of such Souls, so intuitively beholding? so
joyously possessing of their God, and most sweetly delighting in their God? Of
this Ambrose sweetly; What good better then this good, What felicity greater
then this, to live to God, in God, and to live of God? Bernard like himself
divinely: Barnard se^m, 31 in Canti^a.
To whom God appears, they will see nothing more desiredly; nor can see
nothing more delightfully: when then, will either desire of seeing loathe, or
sweetness withdraw herself, or truth deceive, or aeternity fa^le, to whom,
opportunity of seeing, and a will to see is granted for ever and ever? how
then shall their felicity not be full? for nothing is either wanting to them,
that always see, or is tedious to them, who have a desire always to see: but
this vision is not of this present life, but is reserved for the last end of
man.

THIRD SECTION.
Showing that God only is the last end of man, and his final happiness.

When I think of that precept of God, known by the law of nature, directed
by the law of Moses, renewed in the law of grace; Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, I cannot but
make a speedy resolution, Mat. 22. 37.
who, and what is the last end of man's heart, his soul, his strength, and his
mind; for if God be to be beloved with the whole heart, soul, mind, and
strength of man, it were a vanity and a dotage, to ^^^ke any other last end for
man then God. Nay love, as says Austen (very excellently) Is my weight and
poyse, with it, and by it I am carried whither to soever I am carried. A total
and complete love then of the whole heart, Soul, and mind, of man, and all
that is in man, cannot other whither carry him, or lead him, then to that
which is the very center of his rest, and happiness. Thou fast made us O Lord
for thee, and unquiet is our heart till it come to thee: and Boethius very
fitly: We must of necessity confess, that God is the very blessedness of man.
But when we affirm, that God is the last end of man and his final happiness,
we must for the clearer understanding of the same, distinguish thus: the last
end of man and his happiness, may be A necessary distinction.
considered in two sorts; either the last end (which) or the last end
(wherewith;) or thus in other terms; the objective beatitude of man, or the
formal beatitude of man. I explain my self: The end, ( which) is that, which
is the very thing, where in the soul of man, does finally rest, and eternally
joy it self: the end (wherewith) are the chiefest action or actions; operation
or operations of the soul, wherewith the end attained is enjoyed, and
possessed: In like sort, the objective beatitude, is the very object, whereon
these chief actions are exercised, which the Soul seeing and enjoying, is
thereby made happy; Beatitude formal, is the very seeing, enjoying and
possessing of this object. We may take some familiar examples hereof; To the
avaritious Person (who should indeed have only God for his lot and portion)
his end, which is his Money, and whatsoever else, is for Money estimable; his
end (wherewith) is his base whoording up, increasing, and possession of the
same: The Intemperate man's end (which is every voluptuous thing,) he takes
pleasure in his end (wherewith) is his solace, pleasure, and delight which he
takes therein even so the last end of man (wherewith) is the adeption and
fruition of God; the end (which) is God himself, so enjoyed and possessed.

It is true, that God who is his own end essentially, God happy by himself.
both objective and formal; is not happy by any any thing that is without
himself, or that is dependently of himself, but as he is essentially his own
existence and being, so is he essentially his own happy being: Austen
excellently; what soever is in God, is God, there is no accidental compaction
or composition; So then God being happy in himself, and by himself; himself
is both the object of his happiness, and his own formal happiness. But
creatures intelligent, to weet, men and Angels, having not an infinite and
essential happiness, but a happiness only by participation, can have the
same by no other means, nor ways, then by some limited operations, and
actions of their intellectual parts, understanding and will; which actions and
operations must needs have some happy and singular object, wherein and whereon
they are conversant and exercised; which object also must or can, fully
satiate, content, and glad the soul; which that it is God, the one only,
chief, and infinite good of the soul, is so clear and evident, that it were
dotage to stand long in the proof of the same. And though it be most clear,
that God, only God, is this last object, which only must and can give
happiness Romans 1. 11.
unto the Soul, yet so obscured are the hearts of some foolish men, that
though they cannot say in their hearts there is no God, yet they say that God
is not the last end of their souls, nor the object of their happiness. But O
that they would consider, and seriously ponder in their souls, oh, how easily
should they find in God all reasons, that might moove them to take him, and to
embrace him only for their last end; and the total object of their happiness?
Where there is an infinite pyle of wood kindled, it cannot be but the fire
kindled may burn for an infinite time, and without end; how then shall not the
soul infinitely, and for ever In God is all that is to be beloved.
burn with love; and joy it self with delight; which has God (in whom there
is an infinite abyss of goodness, power, Majesty, beawty) for her present and
happy object? O thou soul. Whosoevers thou art, and wheresoever thou art; O
that thou would seriously consider, this thy last and best good, the very
place and center of thy sefe; consider seriously, whether there can be any
perfect happy place of rest for thy self besides Genesis 1. 27.
God? Art not thou made to the Image and likeness of God? Then thy essential
and total dependency is from God, then thy total inclination and propension
ought only to be to God; Inquire into thy soul and ask whose Image it is,
whose inscription is ingraved therein? And thou shall find that it is only
God, it is only he that has marked thee, and signed thee for himself yea
immediately for himself. O the honors of intelligent creatures, by their
institution to have God only God, for their last, and immediate end, wherewith
they must be eternally conversant; and to have him for the full and complete
object of their happiness, in the contemplation of whose beauty they must be
eternally exercised. O the best of all best parts; for by participation, it is
the Mat. 25. 27. Luke 10. 42. Psa. 73 26
very joy of the Lord himself; O choose this thou my soul, it shall never be
taken from thee; the God of my heart and portion forever. O that my very flesh
and soul would exult and rejoice after this living God for ever; O the
sweetest water springs; my soul, thirst thou after them for ever. It is said
of those, that love God sincerely and make him the object of their hearts in
this life, 1 Ioh. 4. 7.
that they abide in God, and God in them; holily and graciously; O how joyous,
holy, and gracious then in that glorious estate, shall our abiding in God, and
his abiding in us be, to our souls for the days of his own aeternity in
himself and our Coaeternity with himself! But in this last end of man, and
object of his happiness, we are to consider, that which is observable in every
object, to weet, in what formality or formal respect, God is found to be the
object of man's happiness, and felicity; whether in the formality of goodness,
To what formal respect God is the object of man's happiness.
as he is infinitely good; or in the formality of power, as he is omnipotent;
or of knowledge, as he is omniscious; or of wisdom, as he infinitely wise; or
of truth, as he is infinitely cognoscible and intelligible; or justice, as he
is infinitely just, faithful in his promises, and upright in his judgments
merciful in his rewards; or in the formality of any other of his attributes;
unity, simplicity, verity, etc. Wherein (the observation and question being
novell and new) I had far rather hear a master, then be a teacher my self.
Sure I am, that the beautified and happy, see God in his own very 1 Ioh. 3 2.
presence face to face, for so the beloved Disciple (who sucked this truth,
from the breast of truth) has himself pronounced: we shall see him (says
he) as he is; not obscurely as Timeus and Simonides Plato in dialog.
Philosophers: who both, being required to speak what God was, the first
answers only by negation: showing what God was not, but not what he was: the
other the more he considers God seen by the beatified as he is in him self.
God, the longer time he requires to answer the King what God was: but we
shall see him with eyes intuitive as he is in himself. A most pure and perfect
Act: all existence and being: all essence and nature, and essential existence,
and Act most pure, without all manner of potentiallity, and imperfection. And
because whatsoever is in God, is God: it cannot be, but that he who sees God
must needs see all that is in God: his power, justice, wisdom, bonity, purity,
verity, which seeing, he sees them all to be the very deity and Godhead it
self, wherewith he is unspeakeably delighted. But in what respect, is God
formally the object of beautified Souls? That of God to Exodus 33. 19.
Moses, I will show thee all good: may seem to persuade, that God in the
formality of the cheifest good, is the object of man's happiness: That of
Christ, This is aternall life, that they may know thee Ioh. 17 3.
the only true God, in the formality of unity and verity: that of St. John, we
shall see him as he is, under 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
the formality of his infinite essence, and nature; that of the Apostle, face
to face, under the formality 1 Cor. 13. 12.
of Majesty and glory; so diversely, seems this truth to be delivered and
distinguished unto us; yet with reverence my imperfect meditation and
apprehension tells me, If I misconceave not, according to that of God to
Moses, I will show thee all good, that God under the formality of infinitely
Exodus 33. 19.
good: good, as in power he is able to protect, wisdom to direct, justice to
guide and govern, bounty God under the formality of good the object of man's
happiness.
to enrich and satiate, but especially as he is in every respect infinitely
good in himself, is the formal object of man's Felicity, and last Happiness.
And this is all that I can devoutly meditate or dare religiously affirm, of
this unspeakeable mystery: whereinto to dive overcuriously, and to be a rash
searcher of majesty, should deserve rather confusion then illustration.
Cherubins and Seraphins beholding the divine majesty, out of a trembling
reverence, Isa. 6. 2.
do cover their faces: what ought we then do who do dwell in houses of clay?
I shut Job. 4. 19.
up this point with this reverend note; An Alleluja, Rev. 19. 1. 3.
a song of admiration beseemes Gods majesty in Jerusalem above, but silence of
admiration and devotion beseemes Gods Sanctuary here on earth below, and yet
not such silence and admiration, as must be altogether ocious, and idle, as
though man were in this life only to consider God confusedly in his creatures;
for I understand that of Austen of a more clear and perfect knowledge, to be
had even in this life; though not so fully as in the next; Man was created,
that he August. de diligendo Deo cap. 13.
might know his cheifest good God; knowing, might love him; loving him, might
possess him; possessing him, might enjoy him. For the further clearing
whereof, we observe in our fourth Section.

THE FOVRTH SECTION.
God being the object of man's happiness, and his last end, it is showed by
what union, he is knitt, and united to the Soul, and thereby the Soul made
happy.

THe object of man's happiness, and his last end, being found to be God, only
God; it rests further to be considered, by what real either union, or
application, God is united to man, so that he does enjoy God, as the present
object of his happiness and last end. And herein Some glorious union necessary
that the beatified may enjoy God.
first most clear it is, that some glorious union is required for the same:
for God being in all his creatures, high and low; Intelligent and
unintelligent, Sensitive and senseless, in three general sorts and manners;
To weet, by his Three general presen^ion of God in h^^ creatures.
existence, presence, and power; by his existence, intimely and immediately
coexisting with them or ^ather inexisting in them: by his presence, to (...)
^^^^mely intimely beholding them, and every circumstance of them, with his
all-seeing eyes: by his power, working in, with, and by them all; it cannot be
(I say) but that God, being in the souls of the beatified, as the object of
their happiness and last end; must needs be in them, in a more peculiar sort
and manner, then he is generally in all his other creatures. And this glorious
union, and application, must be by the means of some new glorious qualities,
gifts or habits imparted to the beatified souls: for God being immutably,
unchangeably and essentially No change in God.
in himself always one and the same and in the same manner ( for with him
there is no vicissitude Jacob 1. 17.
or course of changing; being always one, he is what he is) all the change
that is, must be in Exodus 3. 14.
the glorified and beatified Souls. Wherein if we will arightly consider,
there is no repugnancy nor difficulty at all to be found. For as God in a more
special sort in the regenerate then he is in the unregenerate Ephesians. 1. 6. Gala.
6 15. 2 Cor. 6 6. Apoc. 3. 20.
God is truly said by the means of the supernatural gifts of faith, charity,
grace and such like, to be in the regenerate in a more peculiar sort then he
was in them, before thy were regenerated (for in the regenerate he walks,
Dwells, and feasts as in his houses, temples, and Paradises of pleasure, but
on the unregenerate he looks as yet distant from him;) So likewise God with,
and in his glorified creatures in heaven; must needs be united, in a more
glorious and special manner then he was united with them on earth, when they
were only regenerate, not as yet glorified. For the clearer understanding of
which truth, we are to make some special observations, and suppositions: *
first I suppose, that this formal happiness, or immediate means The glorious
union can be no extrinsecall thing.
thereof (which by a general name I have called union) cannot be any
extrinsecall thing, without the souls of the happy; For this union being
required as a means for the attaining and consecution of God (which is
extrinsecall, and outexistent in respect of an infinite natural distance to
the soul,) if this union, should be any thing that is extrinsecall to the
soul; then should there be required somewhat else to make it inherent and
intrinsecall in the soul, or else we must proceed into an infinity, until
we shall find somewhat inhaesiue, and intrinsecall in the soul, whereby God
may intimely be united unto the same. Again, this union, and formal
happiness, Formal happiness requires an inhaerent union.
makes the beatified, happy not only by imputation; but intrinsecally and
most inwardly happy, and consequently, the same must needs be inherent and
in-existent in their souls. For clear it is, whatsoever thing is extrinsecall
to another, as it makes no real impression in it; so it cannot give any
formal but only an extrinsecall An extrinsecall cannot make a formal
denomination a^ inherent.
denomination unto it; by the way of improper denomination and imputation
only; which is no more nor no other, then a mere relation extrinsecall, and
it cannot be otherwise. For, for example, how is it possible that for such
beauty which is without the face, and not in the face, the face should be
formally denominated beautiful? The denominations then, which are of this kind
extrinsecall, are like to the d^^^minations which are attributed to a (...),
^^^ b^eing situate upon the right hand or left hand of the passenger, that
goes by it. Accordingly; if this formal happiness, should not be inhaerently
intrinsecally in the beatified souls, then should they, not formally, but
only extrinsecally be denominated happy thereby; how (...), shall they be
found to be happy really, and in verity? Surely they should be only as really
happy, by such a manner of happiness, as a poor man may be really releeved by
such a manner of relief, as St. James describes (...) 2. 25. 16.
in his Epistle. I conclude then this point as most clear, adding this reason
further and above: to weet, this formal happiness being a union, i^ is
merely impossible it should be such, unless it be found to be at last
inhaerent i^ on of the extremes, or parts, which are united* which manner of
inhaerency, cannot be in God, it must therefore of necessity be in the
glorified creature. No (...) substantial real union possible betwixt G^d and
his creatu^^ then persona^^.


Secondly, I suppose, that betwixt God, and any of his creatures, there is no
other substantial, real and intrinsecall union possible, then that which is
personal; which manner of union was truly sound in Christ; whereby the Word
Ioh 1. 14.
was made flesh, that is, subsistentially and personally dwelt amongst us, full
of grace and truth, as the (...) 1. 12.
only begotten Son of the Father. I say no other substantial real union
possible, then that which is personal and substantial: for by the very
principles of Philosophy it is most manifest, that God cannot, neither as a
substantial part, be informed (as matter is) nor substantially inform (as the
form does:) foreither of them to inform or to be informed, includes
imperfection. Of which kind, in God who is a most pure and perfect essential
act, there can be no sort, nor degree at all. I am not ignorant, that some
excellent wits, have affirmed; that Gods act of intellection and
understanding, wherewith Apud Captolum in 3. did. 14. 9. 1. et Greg. Arimin.
in 1 did. 7. 9. art. 2. conclu. 3.
he beholds himself, may be, yea, and is really united, unto the
understandings and intellective parts of the beatified Souls; and that they by
the very same act of intellection, wherewith God beholdes himself, do see and
behold God, as he is in himself; So that God and the Beatified, with one and
the same iutellection, do behold God as he is in himself: God beholding
himself, and comprehending himself with an infinite action; but the beatified
with the same infinite action, beholding and seeing him finitely and by
participation only.

These men, though they seem to have many great reasons, whereby they
endeavor to show such an union to be as possible, as the union personal in
Christ; or the union, that is face to face, in the beatified and blessed is;
yet doubtless they are greatly mistaken, as by sundry reasons may appear. As
first thus; that if the very vision and intellection of God were so united (as
they dream) to the souls of the beatified; yet they should not therewith be
able intuitively to see God, for it implies, that the power intellective The
beatified cannot see god by the same act of intellection and knowledge
wherewith God sees and beholds himself.
of the soul, or the power volitive of the will of the Soul, should know or
understand; will or desire, by any other actions, then such as are efficiently
from themselves; which without impiety cannot be affirmed of the intellection
of God, as though it could be efficiently from them. To confirm this; An
action vital and of life, does essentially depend of a power of life; that
power vital which uses, it: and is and must also be essentially immanent (if
as an action) in the same power, which uses and produces it. Again, it is
not possible to declare, how the action of God, as an action, should be united
to the understanding power of the beatified. Again: how is it possible, for
them to distinguish and show, how the Beatified themselves do see and behold
God, in different degrees of vision, if they all see and behold him, with one
and the same intellection; and yet most certain it is that the Saints differ
each from other in degrees of glory; as the stars in the firmament 1 Cor. 15.
41. 42.
do differ from each other in degrees of clarity. Again, how is it possible
that the Beatified, should not comprehend God, by seeing as much in God as God
himself does, if they see and behold God, with the same vision, and
intellection, wherewith God sees and beholds himself? Again, how should
the happiness of the beatified, be only a partaking and participation of Gods
own happiness, (as all the Ancients have affirmed, and Counsels have
determined,) if one and the same action, should be one and the same formal
happiness of God, and the creatures? May we not here apply to our purpose,
those words which the sixth general Synod, used (in like case) against
Eutyches? Neither will we allow in any thing or respect, one and the same
natural operation of God, and the Cr^ature, that neither we may elevate that
which is Created into the devine essence: neither depresse down, that which is
excellent in God, to the state and condition of the creature. I conclude this
point, affirming this opinion of these Schoolmen An erroneous opinion of
certain Schoolmen.
to be so greatly against the glory and majesty of God, wherein they affirm
that one and the same vision of God, is the formal beatitude and happiness
both of God and of the creatures; that it is rather to be reputed an error, or
heresy, then an opinion to be tolerated.

Thirdly, I suppose that the last felicity and happiness of man, must be so
full and complete, that it must beatifie, and make happy, the very nature of
the soul, which is estentially life; and all the powers of the soul, which as
powers of life are essentially vital, naturally apperteining to life, and
essentially depending of, or emaning from the life of the soul: which being
so, we must of necessity find out, how or by what union The souls beatified
must of necessity be happy by some formal and vital actions and of her self
or gift the very soul in her own nature, how and by what union or gift the
very powers of the soul, are in themselves, immediately and intimely united to
God, and thereby made happy. Touching the second point, no doubt can be made
(for it is confessed by all) that the vital conversant and exercised about
God. Psa. ^6. 10. Co^^^. 1. 12. (...) ^2. 5. 2 C^r. 13.
faculties, and powers of the soul, (to weet the will, understanding, and
memory, are not only united to God by glorious habites; to weet, the
understanding by the light of wisdom; the will with and by the light of
glorified Charity (though it be the same essentially with the charity of this
life) the memory with a glorious h^bitt of fruition for the tention and
possession of God in security; but further also that they are united to God, by
their proper operations and actions; the understanding by a clear vision By
what manner of actions the powers of the soul are conver^ant upon God.
and sight of God; the will by a burning and ardent affection of the love of
God; the memory, by a joyous ruminating and recogitating of the security of her
happiness in God. These things (I say) are clear, but the greatest difficulty
is, whether the soul her self, in her own essence and nature be immediately
united to God, or no: If so, then by what manner of gift or quality she is so
united. I call this the greatest difficulty, not in respect of the thing it
self, but in respect of the judgments of later Schoole-Divines; A general
con^^^^^ of the Schoolmen.
who generally acknowledge, no other union, betwixt God and the souls
beatified, th^n such, as is by means of such glorious habits, and qualities,
which are immediately and subjectively in the powers of the soul; and by the
means of such actions, and operations, which the powers of the soul, enabled
by such glorious habits, do produce: I say, the point in it self is not
difficult; nay rather, it is facill and apparent.

For first, how clear is it, that God by a glorious illapse, and most in time
presence, is to be present to the beatified souls themselves, whereby The
soul herself is immediately united to God, and not only by her power, and
the actions of them.
the souls, (who of themselves are only a natural life) even as in this life
by a gracious renovation they become regenerate; so by a life glorious in the
celestial kingdom, they become glorious, and immortal: The life natural, is
only an immortallity; the life gracious is an assecured sanctity; the life
glorious, though by participation, yet is a glorious coeternity of durance with
immutability. Again, clear it is, that God, must be united, and gloriously
united to the soul, and her powers; before she can by her understanding see;
by her will, love; by her memory embrace God. Now this unio^, what else can it
be, but a very state of happiness? happiness and a very felicity in estate;
even as happiness by vision, actual love, and delight, is happiness in
exercise and operation. Again, if there were no such glorious ins^^ding
illapse, and inpresence of God in the soul; but that all formal and glorious
presence of God, with the beatified souls, should be only by actions and
opera^ions; then this would follow; to weet, that the last happiness and
felicity of the souls beatified, should be immediately from themselves (for
themselves by their powers immediately do produce such actions) and mediately
only from God, by the mean^s of those glorious habits, which he only
infuseth, and imparteth to them; (...) very (...), for thereby (...) God (...)
her (...), by the (...), (...) happy. And (...); (...) we consider* tha^ which
is (...); to (...) God, of the love of (...) o^ (...) i^ God; are effectively
(...) by the glorified powers and faculties of (...) for these being both
actions, (...) and (...)
and (...) or actions of life; and immanent (...) as actions, they must of
necessity, be from the soul, whose actions they are: for it (...) very terms,
that actions as actions (...) from any other powers then from these, whose
actions they are. And as they are vital actions, or actions of life, it also
implies contradiction, that as such, they should be from any other powers or
(...) then from such a^ are (...) vital, and of life. Again as actions
immanent, they have essential, and (...), on the powers from which (...) are
effectively.

By (...) is appa^e^t, that the happiness of (...) not (whatsoever Pope
Benedictu^ may (...) have desired and cert^ine Schoolem^n may have affirmed)
only and intimely, in the actions and operations of the beatified souls: For
an estate perfect and co^summate, and a glorious grace of light, (whereby they
are conjoined to God, and enabled to see God, face to face: thereby to love him
for himself to delight in him as he is in himself;) is so necessarily (...)
the (...)
and absolutely required, that it is the very corner stone, and ^oundation,
whereon all the ^^st is built, and which does thence from by necess^ry
consequ^nce follow. Again, this may be thew^d, by an argument, drawn from the
(...), which may be (...), although the (...) of this (...) ^ ^, which ^(...)
or would be (...). Fu^ther to (...) strongly; The last happiness (...) of that
which is (...) happiness (which is God, only G^d* must of The (...) of (...)
of (...), and (...)
necessity, be immediately (...) to that which is (...) in man; to (...), to
the very nature of the ^oule (...); which is (...) man, yea formally (...) but
(...) wise done, then by a glorious (...) and change, made in the (...) by the
^^parting ^^to h^^ by grace, a (...) consmmate estate of participated (...),
which is the foundation, and root of all that (...) glorious (...), in (...),
(...) and loving, of, and in God; which the (...) in heaven (...).

(...) (...) St. P^^ter terms this an uncorruptible 1 P^^. 5. 4*
(...) of Glory. And perhaps, of this, (...) terms, the (...)* Paul speaks,
where he assumeth, that the 2 C^^. 3. 1^
followers of Christ, are changed into the same Image of Christ, from glory to
glory. This is the morning Star which the Son of God has promised; Reve. 2.
28.
to give unto them that hold fast their faith, that overcome, and keep his
words unto the end. This is the white glorious robe, wherewith those, that
stand before the Lamb and the Reve. 7. 9.
throne, are clothed and adorned. This is, that very glory of God, and light
of the Lamb, wherewith Reve. 21. 23.
the heavenly Citizens are so illustrated, that they need not, either light of
the Sun, or of the Moon. This is that very estate, place, or m^^sion of
participated eternity, which the Son of God promised to his disciples, that
he ^oh. 14. 2. 3.
went to provide for them; to weet, as it is expressed in another place, that
they should walk Reve. 3. 4.
with him in whites, for that they were worthy thereunto. This is that very
Crown of glory, wherewith the Saints of God in their very souls be crowned
and invested, when Christ himself shall ^ Cor 4. 17.
appear in glory to beatifie and make happy all Co^^oss. 3. 4.
those that expect, and love his coming. And thus it is evidently showed, that
there is a glorious estate, and permanent glorious condition of the beatified
in their very souls themselves, whereby they are intimely and immediately
united to God: whereupon I make a fourth supposition.

Fourthly, I suppose, that this glorious condition and state of the beatified,
is not as a bed of down for sleep and rest only without any exercise or
operation at all; no; it has inseparably joined with, and incessantly emaning
from it, a most glorious exercise of the actions and operations The estate of
happiness requires that the souls of the beatified should be in a continual
glorified exercise of glorious actions
of every power and faculty of the soul: nay, it is impossible to conceive,
how there should be a glorious satiety of happiness, if there be not an
incessant and never intermitted exercise of glorious operations, and a very
apprehension of that glorious estate and condition of happiness, wherein the
beatified are.

This truly is most apparent. The Cherubins and Seraphins with incessant
admiration, sing the thrice holy, holy, holy, holy Lord God of Saboth. The
sweet singer of Israel, accounts all those blessed, that dwell in the house of
the Lord; for that they shall for all eternities bless and sing praises unto
the Lord; Now these divine cries Isa. 6. 3.
and elevations of admiration, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, of the
Cherubins and Seraphins; these praises and collaudations of the Saints; those
Alleluias, praise ye the Lord; praise ye the Lord, recounted by the Prophet in
the Revelation; are they ought else? or can they be ought else? then their
several actions and operations of vision, love, joy, delight, reverence,
admiration, which the Angels and Saints seeing God, have with God, in God, and
of God: with God, because they are made partakers of the very joy of the Lord;
in God because they shall see him as he is of God, because he is the eternal
fountain of light, streaming into the souls and spirits of the beatified; a
most glorious light whereby they see God and his glorious Majesty most
clearly: and consequently they cannot but love him, but delight in him;
admire, reverence, and adore him; (...) b^f^^^ him, thereby acknowledging him
for the (...) and (...) of themselves, of their (...) and o^ all creatures
wheth^r (...) the (...) above, or on the earth (...) within the (...) of the
^arth beneath.

Fifthly, I suppose that this glorious exercise, (...) in (...) glorious (...),
(...) and (...) and (...) of the (...) God. Some there are, who do think, that
there is in the (...), an abstractive knowledge of God by his creatures, and
(...)* an answerable love arising from the same, but without all question they
are herein mistaken for seeing the knowledges of God by (...) 13.
(...) and (...) as being obs^u^e, in part, and imperfect, and of God (...) are
to cause, and to be (...) when as the cl^are and i^tuitive vision of him, (...)
given unto the b^^tified; why then shall (...) knowledge of God by and through
his creatures whenas (...) shall be (...) is in (...): whenas, he shall be
(...) whenas we shall k^^w (...) even as w^^ (...), not obseurely in a ^ha^ow*
(...) clearly, (...) face to face. By (...) vision, the spirits and souls of
the (...), shall be (...), (...), and so swallowed up, that the pretended
abstractive knowledge of God, by, and in his creatures, shall be altogether
needless, yea perhaps impossible, if we would stand longer to (...) the same.
And so I come more specially to distinguish the principal actions and
operations, which the beatified have in (...) God.

The first and pain action of the beatified, about and on God the fountain of
all the rest) is a clear and (...) vision o^ him, as he is in 1 Io^. ^. 2.
himself. I^ is (...), with God before God and (...) presence of God: thereby
not only The first (...) a^^ on (...) the beatified.
seeing that which is ^^nifest of God, in regard of his creatures, but also
that which is manifest of God in himself, by his own (...) ^^sential light;
For God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all: And by this
intuitive vision of God, 1 Ioh. ^.
the beatified spirits so see God (their intellective powers being enabled
thereunto by the light of glory) that their powers are thereby fully satiated
and at rest; most sweetly and joyously enjoying that, which God promised to
Moses; I will show thee all good. Out of this presentiall and Exodus 33. 19.
intuitive vision of good, all good clearly beheld, there follows necessarily
a double love of God: I said necessarily; for it is impossible, that good,
Second glorious action.
all good, essentially good, having no evil in it; should clearly be
proposed to the understanding, and that the will (whose proper and formal
object is good) should not love and embrace the same. Now this love, is a
double tendency, or embracing of the soul, into, and of that infinite
goodness which is in God; first of that infinite goodness of God as he is
good in himself, goodness it self; secondly, of the very same goodness of
God as by participation it is imparted, and communicated, (as their last end
and final good) unto the souls and spirits of the Beatified. This with
reverence I presume to declare by that which the Apostle delivers in his
Epistleto the Corinthians: to weet, that love never fades away; whereby it is
most apparent, 1 Cor. 13. 8.
that the love of the regenerate in this life, and the love of the beatified,
in the life of bliss and glory, is one and the same essentially and in nature;
the only diversity is, that by an excess of perfection, that of the beatified
does exceedingly surpass, that which is of the Pilgrims in this valley of
mortality. If then the love of the Elect, whilst they are in the way, absent
from God; and the love of the Elect, when they are in their country, and at
their end present with God, be one and the same; then must it needs follow,
that as the love of the Elect in the way, tends with a double respect to God,
to love A double kind of glorious love.
God as he is good in himself, and to himself, (which is the love of
friendship and amity) and to love him, as he is good to his elect, their total
and final good (which is a love of a holy and sacred concupiscence) so
likewise the love of God in the beatified inclines them to love God as he is
good to himself, and in himself, and as he is most graciously good unto
themselves: And can there be made any doubt of this? what? shall the habit of
love and charity moove and incline us most divinely to love God, in both
respects, as he is obscurely seen by faith, whilst we are Pilgrims and
travelers in this mortal life? and shall not the same habitt of love and
charity; being now perfected and glorious, necessarily and inevi^ably moove us,
to love God in both respects, for his goodness as it is infinitely in
himself, and for his goodness it as it is; and as he is by participation
communicated unto us. Yea, this is so apparent, that the man according to Gods
own heart, professes what his love was in this life of mortality, and what he
longed for, and longed after, in that life of glory and immortality, thus; What
is there, says he, for me in heaven, Psalm. 73. 25. 26.
besides thee; and besides thee, what would I upon earth, the God of my heart
and of my salvation, and my portion for ever?

Upon and out of this double love of the infinite goodness of God, both as it
is in himself essentially himself, and to his elect by participation (not now
absent from them, but most intimely present with them) there arises a double A
double glorious joy.
joy and gladness; joy to see God, whom they so dearly love, infinitely good
and happy in himself; joy to see themselves, in full and secure possession of
that infinite good as their last end, and the complete object of their
happiness. This joy is that whereof Augustine very excellently. There is a joy
which is not granted to the August. lib. 9. Confess.
wicked, but to those who worship thee freely, whose joy thou thy self art,
and that is, the very life of happiness, to joy in thee, and for thee, that is
the blessed life, and there is no other. Of this we are to understand those
joyous words of Christ; Welcome; well done good and faithful servants, you
have been faithful Matt. 25. 21 24.
in a little, I will make you rulers over much: enter into thy Masters joy.
Lo, the Master of this joyous feast, calls his own joy the joy of his
faithful servants; which is so great, and so surpassing, that holy David
dares thus by a familiar metaphore to express the exceeding sweetness of the
same. They shall be satiated (he speaks of the Beatified) with an over
plentifullnesse Psalm. 36. 8.
of thy house, and with a torrent or river of thy pleasures, thou shall
inebriate them and make them drunk. O most dviine satiety, O most sacred
inebriation of the beatified souls ( Seeing, loving, delighting and enjoying
God) of love, of adoration, of admiration, of astonishment, of content, of
satiety, of rest, of delight, of joy, of enjoying. O blessed Spirits, O
Beatified Souls, so satiated, so inebriated, that seeing and admiring they
cannot but admire at, and delight in, so infinitely good, so infinitely sweet,
so infinitely joyous a good. Holy David considering the same, could not but
with an elevated Spirit cry out, O how amiable are thy dwelings Psalm. 84. 1. 2.
thou Lord of hosts! my soul longs and faints after the Courts of the
Lord. Bernard most sweetly; The sweet abundance of that house, and the Torrent
of that pleasure, neither eye has seen, or ear heard, Bernard in dedicat.
sermon: 4.
nor the heart of man has conceived. Do not think therefore O man, to hear
that which the ear of man has not heard; neither seek thou of man, to know
what that is, which the eye of man has not seen, nor the mind of man has
conceived; Let us rather manfully and courageously labor in these our
tabernacles, that in the end, we may be gloriously glorified, in the house of
Gods bliss and glory above, and be made partakers of that joy, which shall
never fade, nor fall away; which shall be such as it shall fully satiate, and
yet never cloy; ever be had, or enjoyed; and yet ever be desired: not with
anxiety after more or other, but with a most assured continuance of the same.
Again thereof Austine very divinely. There shall be whatsoever shall be
worthy of love, neither shall any thing Austine his 12. de ^^^itate.
be desired, which shall not be there; all that shall be there, shall be good,
and the supreme God, shall be the sovereign good, and most happy it shall be
to know, and to be assecured, that that good shall ever be. There shall we be
at rest and see thee; there shall we see and love thee, we shall love and
praise thee, which shall be our end without end. For what other is our end,
than to come to a kingdom, which has no end? thus he. Besides the above
expressed actions, and operations of the beatified souls and spirits, I do
observe another, which I call a retention or holding or possession of God,
which whether it be all these actions together, as they are exercised upon God
so intimely, and gloriously present; or whether there be besides them another
action of conquiescency, and resting in, and upon God, as the last and complete
end of the beatified, it is not easy to distinguish. Sure I am, that such a
rest and conquiescency there is, the which in all humility and modesty I will
endeavor to difference and distinguish; and O most happy my Soul, when I
shall come, clearly to behold, and know the same. O how with the very
heartstrings of my soul, do I not only desire but long after the same! O the
God of my heart, my Soul longs after thee, to see thee, 'O love thee, to
delight in thee, and to live and rest in thee and by thee, for ever and ever. O
fill and replenish my Soul here so to fear thee, that in the end I may
attain thee to enjoy thee; Amen. It cannot have been uathought of by any, who
have arightly thought of their last end, and of that happiness, which is laid
up for all 2 Timothy 4. 8.
these that love God and his coming; but that they have in their souls
conceived a living hope, and fervent desire of attaining unto the same. We
glory, says St. Paul, in the hope of glory of the sons Romans 5. 2.
of God. Job laid up in his breast, as a most precious jewel, the hope that he
had, that he should by himself see God his redeemer and Savior. We are Job.
19. 27. Heb. 10. 23.
all encouraged to hold fast the confession of our hope, a hope firm and
unmooveable. The Apostle he desired Phi 1. 23.
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And what faithful soul is there, who
longs not for, and desires not after the coming of the Lord; that he may
enjoy that crown of glory and happiness, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
which God has laid up for all those that love his coming? Now this hope of
the last happiness and longing after the same, if it be arightly considered,
will be found according to the doctrine of all sound Divines, to be specially
an action or affection of the will of man (enabled and illustrated by grace)
tending to and longing after God absent: which affection of hope and desire,
cease not, until the good that is desired and hoped for, is obtained, and
made present; but the good being had and attained unto, then the affection of
hope cease, for what we have and enjoy, we hope not for, nor long after; That
which a man sees (that is, as I interpret him, sees and by sight injoyeth)
how can he hope for, says the Apostle? Romans 8. 24. 25.
Austen excellently, Hope is a child of faith, by which August de spirit. et
lit.
man hops (from him whom he knows,) for that which he yet has not; which
hope, being in this state the expectation of an immortal life, I do fitly call
it, the very life of this our mortal life; the which (though fortune often
fails) will never fail, nor in the end deceave the upright and Innocent. Who,
because by hope he waits on God, and has his heart reposed upon God, as
Susanna Dan. 13. 35.
had hers, is as confident as a lion.

Now when as these affections of hope and desire, by reason that the good which
was hoped for, is obtained, does end and cease, there must needs Some glorious
action of the will must needs succeed in room of the action of hope.
in lieu and place of these former, succeed and follow, some other action and
affection of the will, which formally and respectively, must answer unto the
former; The former was hope to; this must be a tention and possession: the
former was desire after, this must be use; the former was longing after, this
must be fruition and enjoying; the former was tending to the good, to attain
it; this a tention, rest, and conquiescency in the good attained. The motion of
the stone to the center, and the resting of the stone at, or so near the
center as possibly it may, is like the hope or desire; and tention or
possession of man to and in its last end. Now as the motion of the stone to,
and the rest of the stone in or at the center, arises from, and is agreeing
to, the natural inclination which the stone has to its center; so likewise
the deliberate hope, desire, or inclination whether natural and rational, and
sapientiall, and supernatural, of the soul and blessed spirits to their last
end: whether natural or supernatural, and their rest and conquiescency in the
same, is from one, and the same faculty of the soul, to weet, the will:
whether naturally (if to her natural end) or supernaturally (if to her
supernatural end) she be enabled, strengthened, and illustrated for the same.

And although it falls out often, that the same faculty which inclines to
good things, does not always by it self attain and apprehend the said good
things, but they are attained and apprehended, by some other powers; yet the
same power and faculty, that desires them, and inclines to them, does rest in
them, and delight in them, being had and attained. For example, the heart of
man desires some rich treasure of Jewel (for Matt. 6. 21.
where the treasure is there is the heart also, says our Savior) and yet the
hand, and other powers of man take immediate possession and apprehend the same:
n^verthelesse the same being attained, the heart or appetite of man, takes
content, pleasure, and rest in the Jewel, or treasure obtained. So likewise
the will of man is that, which enclines whole man, either naturally by her
natural force to some natural good; or supernaturally, by abundance of Grace
supernatural and sapientiall, to her last end and happiness; But the
attaining and apprehension thereof, is by the clear vision, and fervent love
of God, as he is in himself. And yet nevertheless, the eternal rest, repose,
and conquiescency (which I call fruition) in the same God, so clearly and
intuitively sceene, so sweetly beloved; is immediately from, in, and of the
glorified will, whose proper action as it is to desire and hope for: so it is
eternally to rest and repose herself and all other faculties of the soul, yea
the soul herself in the last end of her happiness, and her cheifest and
only good: So that it is she that commands this conquiescency and rest unto
hereselfe.

Be turned O my soul into thy rest! For the Psa. 116. 7.
Lord has done well for thee: It is she that exults; This is my rest, here
will I abide for ever This is Psa. 132. 14.
my joy which no power shall take from me: This, this is that eternal rest and
conquiescency which the Apostle advises us so servently to pursue: Heb. 4. 10.
11.
This is that happy and most sweet repose which the restless Ambitious,
Avaricious, Presumptuous, Contentious, Blasphemous, Luxurious, perjurious
spirits shall never enjoy: For as it is in the Revelation, They shall have no
rest neither day nor night, because Revel. 4. 1. and 14. 11.
they serve such Gods in their works (although they may have tongues and
looks as Angels of light) Gods their own lusts, which shall give Ierem. 16.
13.
them no rest neither day nor night. On that such wretched souls (who
imitating Satan, seek rest in such dry places of Pride, Avarice, perjury,
Blasphemy) returning into themselves, and repenting them of their manifold
transgressions ( whether by their walking in the counsel of the ungodly, or
standing in the way of sinners, or sitting on the chayres of Psa. 1.
the pernicious scorners) would endeavor for Psa 95. 11.
that rest which God has sworn he would never give to those who have hardened
their hearts against his calls! And will he then give it to those who shall
willingly and deliberately either for gain or envy forswear themselves, and
abjure themselves out of his protection, So help us God so help us God? O the
most fearful and execrable evil of perjury, of Elder and of Latter times!
That worthy Cardinal of Cambrey Peter de Aliaco, has a fearful saying
touching the coruption of the Popish church of his times (to weet, at and about
the time of the Council of Constance) That the Church was come to that pass,
that she was worthy to be ruled and governed by reprobates: which his saying
may we not interpret in respect of most fearfully Blaspheming the Majesty of
heaven, by most execrable false oaths and perjuryes? And surely who may or can
be reputed to sin more fearfully, than those who by false oaths and
perjuries do willingly and premeditatly put themselves out of Gods protection?
If they who Matt. 10. 33.
shall deny God before men shall be denied of him before his Angels? what
shall or can become of them who shall deliberately abjure him before men? But
to return to our purpose touching the rest and repose of the soul in God and
his Graces; Peeter upon the mount no sooner beheld the glorious Matt. 17. 4.
transfigured body of Christ, but he cries out with a most fervent longing
desire of, and repose in that object; Let us make here (says he to Christ)
three tabernacles; one for thee, a second for Elias, a third for Moses; So
natural it is, for the will, to rest and content herself in Good present,
apprehended by the understanding as Good; that it is impossible, that the will
should not, according to the measure of the Good, take content therein; How
then is it imaginable or possible, but that God infinitely good, being as such
proposed to the will (beloved dearly, and enjoyed happily) but that the will
possessed with such a sweet trinity, of sight, love, and joy; should (solacing
her own soul with infinite content) thus cry out to her self, This is my
rest; here Psalm. 132. 14.
will I dwell, and abide for ever? The heart of man, is restless, till it come
to its last end, which being once attained, her aeternall rest is a very
banquet of unspeakeable joy and peace. S. Austen August. 1. Confess.
very worthily; Thou have made us O Lord for thy self, and restless are our
hearts, till they come unto thee: But when they are come, their rest is a
supper of everlasting sweetness; the which, my meditation could afford to call,
a celestial and divine satiety, of a never satiated soul, and a supernall
inebriation of glory, whereby the souls beatified, and all their powers, and
facultyes of them, are filled with so great a iucundity as it is possible for
them to attain to; and so are therewith most divinely satiated. The Royal
Prophet, of this glorious banquet professes and Psalm. 17. 15.
sings thus, I shall be filled, and satiated, when thy glory shall appear.
S. Austen hereof most August. tract. 3. in Ioh.
sweetly: Such shall be that delight of beauty; that it shall be always
present with thee, and yet thou never satiated; or rather thus; that thou may
be always satiated, and yet never satiated: for if I shall say that thou shall
not be satiated; there shall be a hunger and thirst: if I shall say, thou shall
be satiated, then will thou fear a cloying there; where shall be neither
famine, hunger, nor thirst, nor any tedious cloying, not then shall I say? I
know not; God has that, which he will bestow.

And so concluding this point, not having more what to say, of the sweetness
of this sweetness; of the unsatiadnes of this satiety, of the iucundity of this
eternal rest; I pray, and beseech God of his infinite mercy, that he will be
pleased to conduct my Soul, and the Souls of all the devout and faithful
readers hereof, to the haven of rest, and heaven of Satietie.

Amen.
FIFTH SECTION.
Wherein is more particularly handled, in what action, or actions, the last
happiness of man, does specially consist.

THe principal actions, of the last happiness of man, being thus distinguished:
I observe first, that if a man would imitate the schoolmen, the Thomists and
Scotists; then were he to distinguish, wherein, and in what action formally and
principally, the same happiness does consist: The learned cannot be ignorant,
what fervent disputes there are, betwixt the Scotists and Thomists on this
point; the former giving the same unto the act of the will, the other, unto the
act of the understanding; which their opinion either side endeavors, by sundry
reasons to prove and confirm; but in my opinion, they toss Sisiphus his
stone, they labor in vain; for what need they, with the quintessence of
their wits, to refine and distinguish farther, than the holy scriptures have
done? Who is ignorant, that has read the scriptures, but that the last
happiness of man, as it is sometimes called the joy of the Lord, whereby the
will (the immediate Mat. 25. 21. 25.
subject and Efficient of joy) seems to have the preeminency; so elsewhere,
they pronounce life everlasting, to consist in the knowledge of God: This is
life everlasting, that they may know thee, to be the only true God; and whom
thou have sent Christ Jesus. Like observations I might make of other passages
of scripture; but the point is clear, that in the Phrase of holy Scripture,
the happiness and felicity of man, does consist, in all those integrall
parts, which he attributes thereunto: to weet, clear and intuitive Vision,
Love, Joy, Delight, Peace, Rest, Eternal Praising, and Adoringe of God with
such like, by which it is clear that in the sense and intent of holy
scripture, the last happiness of man (to use Boethius, his Boethius l. 3. de
consolat.
phrase,) is a state perfect with a confluence of all that is good; but wherein
formally it does consist, or what is the principal action thereof, it does not
express; and therefore herein, I require modesty in the schoolmen; and I
would to God that in like controversies, all men (which would bring great peace
to Jerusalem) would imitate and express such modesty as is requisite; but
there is no hope of amendment. I cannot therefore, but here lament that
arrogant and itching restlessenes of some wits, and in none more apparent than
in the Pope and Tridentine sages, with the statizing Ignatians; who in not
unlike controversies, by teaching and preaching; by decreeing and comaunding;
what is formal, what is material; what is principal, what is Secondary, have
formally, if not overturned* at least severed and disioynted, many of the
churches of God. O ye that are Traditionists; And O we, that worthily embrace
nothing for faith, but what the holy scriptures have recommended unto us: O do
not ye; nor let not any of us, disioyne and separate those things which God
has joined together; O let us, with a religious reverence, use the very
phrase of holy scriptures; where they attribute to any action or operation a
principal concurrence; let not us deny it: where they grant a necessary
concurrence, let us grant it; where they require a necessary concurrence,
conjunction, or society of many actions to salvation; let us teach the same. O
let us fear that curse which is threatened against those that shall either
Reve. 22. 19.
add or diminish, to, or from the sacred word of God. But to return to our
purpose which we have now in hand.

If nothing, can truly and solidly be affirmed of the last happiness, and
gloriouse felicity of man, besides that which the word o* God has revealed,
from the bosom of the Father; and all that which indeed is revealed, does
only (not speaking of the formality of any action more then other) declare
unto us, that the same happiness, is a sum of all good things; a Confluence
of all Joy and Peace, and other such exellent things, Isa. 64. 1 Cor. 2 9.
as eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor the heart of man has
conceaved; then undoubtedly (if we would arightly distinguish) we should
rather confess our own ignorance therein; than overboldly and arrogantly to
confine the formality of the same, rather to the actions of the will, then to
those of the understanding, or to these of the understanding rather then to
those of the will. S. Austen excellently, That which God has August: lib. 22.
de Civi.
prepared for those that love him, is not apprehended by faith, is not attained
by hope, and is not comprehended by Charity: It surpasses those desires and
wishes; it may be gotten and acquired, but it cannot be fully esteemed or
prized: And so not daring peremptorily to affirm, wherein only (and in nothing
else) the formality of the same does consist, I conclude this observation with
the sweet saying of venerable Cyprian. The Saints, shall all Cyprian de laud
Marty^ll.
rejoice in glory, they shall see God, and they shall rejoice in him; they
shall be glad, and delighted; they shall flow in glory, and be jocound with an
aeternall felicity; There they shall not only taste how sweet God is, but they
shall be filled and satiated with a wonderful sweetness; nothing shall be
wanting to them; yet nothing that is hurtefull, with them; Christ present shall
fill and satiate everye desire of them; they shall not wax old, they shall
not languish, they shall not rott; A perpetual sanitye, a happy aeternity,
shall confirm the sufficiency of that happiness; there shall be no
concupiscence in the members; there shall arise noe rebellion of the flesh; but
the whole state of man, shall be chaste and peaceable; last of all, God shall
be all in all, his presence shall fill and satiate, all the powers and
facultyes, both of body and mind: all needful service and ministration of
Angels shall cease; the whole City, being filled and arightly ordered; the
state of this consummate happiness, shall neither be innovated, nor changed:
Thus he with many more excellent praises of that glory, and yet he expresses
not, the least part of the excellent joys, which shall be enjoyed there: for
to conclude August.
this point in Austens phrase, We may more easily show, what is not there,
then what is there; we may more easily declare, what ill is not there; then
express, the gloriouse eminency of all good, that is there.

Though I dare not distinguish peremptorily, with either Sect of the
Schoolmen, wherein the formality of man's happiness does consist; yet we may
not deny, but that in that most gloriouse estate; three gloriouse Actions, are
most specially recommended and spoken of by the Scriptures; to wit, Vision,
Dilection, and Joy, or Fruition; which three, certain schoolmen call A
mistake of the schoolmen. What is the dowry of the beatified.
the dowry of the Beatified Spirits; but they are undoubtedly mistaken: for as
in carnal marriage, the dowry which either the Parents of the Bride, do
give; that the husband may better undergo the charges and burden of marriage;
or which the Bridegroom may give out of excess of love to please and honor
the Bride; are not actions, nor operations; but gifts of Jewels, Ornaments,
Moneys or such like: so likewise in that gloriouse Marriage above, when the
Lamb Revel. 19. 7.
and his Spousesse are knitt together, in the link or wedding-ring of a
gloriouse aeternitye, the dowry is not operations and actions (for those are
the very exercise, fruition, and consummation (if I may so write) of the
gloriouse marriage it self. But they are gloriouse Habitts, Ornaments and
Jewels of the Souls of the Bride; called Psalm. 36. 10.
by holy David, the light wherewith God is to be seen; by the Prophet in his
Revelation, The Revel. 21. 11. and 19 8.
brightness of God and his light: again, fine white Revel. 6. 11. 2. Timoth. 4.
8. 1. Pet. 6. 4.
silk, wherewith the spousesse is to adorn herself; again, white stoles,
wherewith the beatified Souls are to be adorned and honnoured: and the
Scriptures elsewhere, call them crowns of glory, names written in the
foreheades, of the beatified, Thrones of glory, with many such like glorious
epethites.

So then, the gloriouse actions of the beatified, are not the dowry it self,
but suppose a dowry, which to express, wants not great difficulty; yet if I
be not mistaken, as for the act of Vision, there is required a gloriouse
habitt of the Light of glory, so likewise for the act of Love, a gloriouse
habitt of glorified Charity; for the act of Joy and fruition, a gloriouse
habitt, answering to the habitt of Hope and Desire: And these, if I be not
mistaken, are that splendent silk, those gloriouse whites, those new-names,
those seats and Reve. 3. 4. 12. 21. et 6. 11. et 7. 9. et 19. 14. et 21. 11.
thrones of glory, those glorified stoles, that clarity and brightness of God,
whereof the holy Prophet makes so clear, and express mention. And in truth,
the dowry of the beatified Spirits and Souls can be no other, then that
glorious treasurye of glorious ornaments, graces, and gifts, whereby they are
prepared and fitted, for the wedding of God, the marriage of the Lamb: and
whereby they are enabled, to all those glorious actions, and operations; in
which, as the glorious issue, and offspring of that Marriage, they are for all
aeternities, incessantly and joyously, to exercise, and there with to solace
themselves, in the present vision and fruition of God.

This state being such and so glorious, it were idle, with the schoolmen to
inquire, whether in An idle question of lome schoolmen.
such a state be required a rectitude, and uprightness of the will, or not;
For how is it possible but that there should be a rectitude of the will, True
happiness cannot be with out a rectitude of the will.
when as there is such a clear intuitive vision of all good, so fully enjoyed
and possessed? Is not the will of herself a blind power, seeing no otherwise,
then by her understanding; how then, can she incline too or prosecute any
evil; when as the understanding proposes no evil, nor can propose evil unto
her? For in God whom the understanding so clearly and intuitively proposes to
the will; what evil or shadow of evil can be found? or what want of good can
be apprehended? And here I cannot but admire, Orig: I. periarch cap. 7. and
hom: 33. et 35. in Lucam.
how Origin (that flower of wits amongst the Ancients) could find (unless his
writings be corrupted) that the beatified Souls, and Spirits might sin and
transgress: which his error we may observe too too clearly in his writings:
against it we may thus argue most unanswerably: If the blessed Souls and
Spirits, may sin, then by sin they may loose their happiness, which is so
contrary to the essential condition thereof, that it were dotage so to
imagine, that to be the true happiness of man, which is defectible, amissible,
and may be lost: most clear it is, that that cannot be true happiness, the
aeternity whereof may be doubted of: Or else we must admit, that the beatified
together with the complacence of sin, may continue happy: the which is
impossible, and implies contradiction. For if perfect happiness, do
necessarily, yea essentially exclude all evil, how then can it admit that
evil, which Pro. 14. 34. Mat. 25. 48.
is the evil of all evils, the evil that made mankind miserable, the evil
that only makes nations miserable: the evil for the punishing of which, the
evil of hell fire was only provided: and for ever against the reprobates
foreknowne and designed. How then, (I say) can the last happiness of man
admit this evil, which is so contrary to that most happy and holy state, that
nothing, which is polluted with him, can ever or shall ever enter Reve. 21. 27.
August. in psalm. 119.
thereinto. But so it is not above at the Lambs table; there the pure, truly
pure, and only pure, have admittance. Austen aptly. Blessed are the pure and
unspotted in the way, as if the Prophet should have said, I know what thou
would, thou desire happiness; if then thou willt be happy, be thou pure,
be thou unspotted: So then clear it is that the beatified cannot sin: for
beatified they cannot be, unless they be first purified from all sin, how
then being beatified may they committ sin? The truth of this point, of the
impeccability of the beatified Souls and Spirits, I declare thus. The
beatified and happy by How the beatified be come impeceable.
the clear vision of God, are so determined and inclined, with a glorious
necessity to love him, that as they cannot but love him as their last end, and
cheifest good: so they cannot but refer all other actions and affections
whatsoever else they may there have, to the glory of him, as to their last end:
how then is it possible, that they should transgress or swarve from God, and
so sin? Surely they cannot; and this impeccability they have, not by any
extraordinary grace granted unto them, For that purpose; for their very
estate, and condition of seeing God, with so clear a vision; of loving him,
with so unmooveable a love, of delighting in him, with so unspeakeable a joy,
requires that they should not have any left a possibility to swarve from him,
And in truth, to stand within the principles of the light of nature, the Rules
of divinity and Philosophy; it is more possible and probable: that a heavy
millstone, should naturally moove and ascend upwards from the Center of the
earth (unto which or near unto which it has a natural inclination by the
whole force of his nature) then that the beatified Souls and Spirits, should
swarve and cease from their love of God and delight in God, whom they so
clearly, and presentially, see and behold as their last end, the mark of
their desires, the total object of their happiness, their only and cheifest
good. And so we may observe, how idle that reason is, wherewith some endeavor
to prove, that the beatified Souls and Spirits are peccable: because forsooth
the nature of their wills (which intrinsecally requires that they should be
free, and at liberty) is not changed nor altered: True: the liberty of their
wills is not perverted nor destroyed: but they The will of men beatified has
no liberty about her last end.
are so perfected in the highest degree of their perfection, unto which they
can possibly attain. And here I cannot pass to note, as a point of ignorance,
for any one to think that the will has, or can have a liberty of freedom to
love, See Aquinas. 1. q. 81. et 1. 2.
or not to love: to embrace or not to embrace, her last end, her cheifest and
only good, the object of her happiness: so clearly and presentially proposed
unto her, and as such embraced by her.

The jester in the play could tell, what end man desired, yea what end man
necessarily desired, yea could not but desire: to weet, to be happy: and yet
these can find, or presume to find, how the beatified Souls and Spirits, can
in their very state of happiness, have a liberty or indisserency to love or
not to love, to embrace, or not to embrace the infinite Godnesse of God, and
their last happiness: which with such unspeakeable joy, peace, and rest, they
hold and possess in their bedds of that celestial paradise: And of August in
psalm. ^6.
the purity and necessity whereof, Austen most divinely thus.

What shall be the delights of Saints? they shall be delighted in a multitude
of peace: Let the wicked here rejoice in multitude of gold, store of silver,
abundance of servants, excess of riotous and luxurious feasts: but thou, O
thou Lover of God, what shall thy delights be? Thou shall be delighted in
multitude of peace, and rest: thy gold peace, thy silver peace, thy possession
peace: Thy life peace, thy God peace, yea whatsoever thou can desire shall be
to thy peace and peace to thee: here that which is gold to thee cannot be
silver: that which is wine, cannot be bread, that which is light, cannot be to
thee as food and drink; but there thy God shall be to thee all in all: thou
shall eat him that thou hunger not, thou shall drink him least thou thirst,
thou shall be lightened of him that thou be not blind: thou shall be held up
by him, that thou fall not from him: he whole and entire shall possess thee,
wholly and entirely; want there with him thou shall not suffer any, with whom
thou shall possess all. Thou shall have all of him, and he all of thee,
because he and thou, shall be but one: which one, and all, he shall have, who
shall possess and hold his Saints in rest and peace. Thus that Father most
aptly and sweetly, showing God to be so possessed of the beatified, and the
beatified so to possess God, that they cannot desire ought else, no not have
so much as a velleity or weak desire to delight, or rest in ought else then in
God; the God of their hearts Psa. 73.
desire, and their portion for ever. Where then is that idle conceit of those,
who affirm, that although the blessed cannot see any thing in God, that may
moove them, or incline them to sin, yet in respect of other I cannot tell
what particular actions (wherein God may employ them) they may have some either
inconsideration or ignorance, and so consequently may in the doing of the same,
sin and transgress: and so to them, even to them being happy, that of the
Poet may be applied, It is the part of a fool to say I had not thought of it;
I did not consider it arightly. O the presumption of wits, to think that
those blessed Spirits can have any such ignorance or inconsideration, as not to
do the will of God clearly proposed unto them: how shall not they know the
will of him, whose face they so clearly see and Mat. 18. 20.
behold? how should not they do his will who delight in nothing more then in
the performance of his will? The Church by Christ's own command prays thus to
God; Thy will be done in earth, as Mat. ^. 10.
it is in heaven. Whereby she professes, that in the heavens above, there is
most perfect obedience yielded by the beatified unto God; because nothing can
be there done or admitted against his will, either out of intended
wilfulness, or pretended negligence. Mat. 18. 10.


Those blessed Spirits that ever behold the face of God, that is in heaven,
cannot have the least veleity Baruch. 3. 39.
orinclination, not to do the will of their God, which is in heaven; Those
glorious stars no sooner hear the call of their God, but they answer, we
are ready: does not David give unto them, as a peculiar of their honnour and
happiness, that they Psa. 103. 21.
ever do the will of the Lord? Praise the Lord, all ye his hosts; ye his
servants, that do his pleasure, praise the Lord. And so I conclude this point;
affirming that the beatified Souls and spirits, are unpeccable, being by
contemplation made immutable, and by an everlasting love made undefectible.

I have sufficiently showed, that there cannot be a deficiency in the last
happiness, by reason of the commitment of any sine by the beatified; but what?
can there be any deficiency, or defectibility thereof, upon any other head or
respect? Surely no, for then unworthily should it be reputed the last end of
those Spirits, which shall have no end, and of those souls, which being
immortal, shall never dye nor cease to be. True happiness that cannot be, of
the aeternity and endless durance whereof, doubt may be made. Austen Austen de
Civitat. lib. ^2.
most excellently: What other is our end, then to come to that kingdom whereof
there is no end? Diverse do here question, whether the last happiness in part,
to weet, of the glorious love of God, and joyous delight in God, may cease and
fade; notwithstanding the clear vision and sight of God, do still continue:
where in to resolve, is small or no difficulty at al: for if the question be,
whether God out of his absolut power can show himself as he is in himself
(infinitely good etc.) to any of the beatified, and yet they not love him, nor
actualy delight in him; I answer, that it is morally impossible, except in
such a case only, that God would not concur with such his beatified, to the
act of love and affection of delight; and then most clear it is that in such a
case, (though they follow naturally one upon another) yet because they are
really distinguished; that one may be effected and not the other, God
concurring, with the power intellective, for the action of vision; but not with
the power of the will, for the act of love, and affection of delight. But what
a vanity of wits, to seek a knot where none is? Clear it is, that the state
of the last happiness of man shall be so perfect and consummate, that well may
there be some new addition of adventicious and accidental glory; but to think
that there should be any fading in that happiness in which as Bernard
divinely, the Beatified are ever green and growing in aeternity; were an
injurious vanity, and blasphemous dotage, against the glory and honor of the
City of God.

SIXTH SECTION:
Conteines certain observations, touching the glorified bodies of the
beatified and their glorious qualities.

WHat has been said touching the glory of the souls of the beatified, comes
very short of that which in truth it is; For if an admiring soul cannot: how
shall a speaking tongue, be able to express the excellent eminencyes of the
same? But it being so, that the beatified Souls want part of their
consummation until their bodies shall be jointly glorified with them: This
place requires that we should add somewhat, touching First observation.
the glorious conditions, and states of their glorified bodies. For which
purpose, I observe first, that though at the dissolution of man by death, the
Soul being separated, from the body; she (if holy and regenerated) be
elevated to bliss and glory, her body on earth rotting and falling away into
dust and corruption; yet there remains in the Soul a natural and most
intime inclination, to have her body (by information and natural conjunction)
reunited to her again; which inclination St. Austen conceived to be August
lib. 12 in Genesis cap. 35.
so great, that he thought by the means thereof, the souls beatified to be so
let and hindered; that they cannot see and behold God before the
resurrection, so perfectly as they shall do after the same; In which his
opinion though (with reverence be it written) he was mistaken, (for the clear
vision and fruition of God depends nothing of the body, or animal affections
thereof) yet hereby it is evident, that the Soul has not her full and
complete happiness until her yoke fellow after whom she so naturally
longs, be to her un^ted again: I say longs, for the desire after the body
is not immoderate, nor anxious: for she knows, that at the time and hour
appointed, her body shall be reformed in the likeness Phil. 3. 20.
of Christ's glorified body, and be renuited to her again, which time, because
God has so appointed it, she dutifully and obediently tarrieth and expects,
knowing assuredly, that though it be long, yet that at length, coming it will
come.

Secondly I observe, that this inclination of the Soul, arises from this, that
the Souls of men are not (as the Spirits of Angels are) complete and perfect
Substances, subsisting by themselves; The Soul and body are as natural parts
for the Constituting of the nature of man.
but they are parts only of humane nature; the Soul one part, the body
another; both concurring to make a perfect subsisting nature of man; the Soul
and body of both of them, parts separable; yet herein differing, that the Soul
whether separated or united, is naturally immortal; the body whether
separated or united, by nature mortal: and yet herein agreeing, that as being
natural parts, (if united) they make one complete whole substance; so if
separated) they have an inclination, most intime and natural (for the making up
of the whole) to be reunited again. But to declare this point more clearly.
The inclination of any thing, that is but a part of a whole, to be united to
that part, wherewith it makes the whole, is so natural, that the same
inclination cannot be removed, unless the thing it self, which is the part,
be first destroyed; for example, the parts of a green tree, being but half
cleft and pulled asunder, do not with a natural force more endeavor to
reunite them selves together; then the natural, and essential parts of any
complete substance, (upon any separation) do incline to be reunited together
again: the reason of which inclination I take to be this, that everye thing
has a natural propension, for the conservation of it self and his own
being. Now clear it is, that the esse and being of a part, as a part, is for
the making of the whole; so then a part, has never a more perfect being, then
when it is in the whole; for whose being, making, and constitution naturally it
is. What marvel then, that every part natural and essential (if separated
from the whole) have an inclination (for the making up of the whole) to be
reunited to her fellow part again? and so no merveyle it is, that the Soul
being an Essential and Natural part, together with the body, for the making
up of the substance of man, if (she being separated from the body) have a
natural inclination, to be reunited to the body again; that by the means of
such a union, man, who by death was dissolved, and become no man, may by the
resuscitation of the body, and the reunition of the body to the Soul, be made
man again. Though this point be most clear, both in Divinity and Philosophy,
yet is it not conceipted by those, who make the Soul only to be the whole
man; and the body to be no other, then the Souls wagon or chariot; so that
the Soul is no otherwise in the body, then as the mariner is in the shipp, or
the inhabitant in his dwelling house: Of this opinion Porphirie seemed to be,
who (as Austen writes Austen 12. de Civit.
of him) affirmed, that the Soul (if she would be happy) was of necessity to
be separated and freed from the body: And likewise of this opinion al those
Heritickes of necessity must be, who make and teach a duality of God; a good
one, and a bad one; the good God, author of Spirits and Souls; the bad God,
author of the bodies and all such habitual corruptions as are in them; needs
I say must these latter so teach, for if Souls be not natural forms of
bodies, to quicken them, and give life unto them; and with them as comparts, to
make complete composed substances, of the Persons of men and women; then
assuredly, no natural inclination or propension, can be in them, being
separated from the bodies, to be reunited to them again; no more inclination
certeynly, then there can be in him, who having once tasted of the tyranny of
the Popish Inquisition, can desire to return into it again.

Thirdly I observe, the just disposition of God, who has ordained a general
resuscitation of bodies at the last day; that man accordingly as he may have
done either good or evil, may receave either a glorious reward, or an
ignominiouse punishment in the body. Clear it is, that not only the Soul, or
only the body, but men and women composed both of body and souls, are those
who work and do; (for actions and deeds are of the Persons themselves) are
those (I say) who do either good or evil, and consequently, whole man and
woman perfect and complete Persons, must appear to receave according as they
have done in their body either good or evil: We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ (says the Apostle) that every one may 2. Cor. 5. 10.
ceceave, according as he may have done in his body, either good or evil.
Not only bodies then, nor Souls alone; but men and women, Persons complete
and consummate, must appear; I say consummate, for such is the Phrase of the
Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, where speaking of Heb. 11. 13.
the Fathers and Ancients of the old testament, who by the testimony of Faith
were approved, says thus, They received not the repromission and promise, God
providing better for us, that without us they should not be consummated; so he
speaks. And this co^summation (which is when the body being raised up and
shall be joined to the Soul again) is that whereof holy Job speaks thus,
Job. 14. 15.
making it the very work of the right hand of God himself, Thou shall reach
out thy right hand, to the work of thy hands; or as the Chaldaicke paraphrase
has it, Thou shall be gracious to the work of thy hands. How this; but by a
powerful and gracious resuscitation, and raising up of her body from her bed
of dust and corruption, and reuniting the same again, unto the Soul, whereby,
(it being reunited) becomes quickened, Job. 9. 25. and 26.
with the Spirit of life? The hope of this, was so dear and preciouse to holy
and most venerable Job; that on the dunghill of his miseries, with a triumphant
kind of joy, he laid up in his bosom the joy full expectation hereof: I
know, says he, that my redeemer lives, and that at the last day, I shall be
compassed about with my skin, and that in my flesh, I shall see God my
Savior; and that mine own eyes shall behold him, and not any other for me.
And in this expectation, he daily dwelt, according as he professes in another
place: All the days of this my warfarre, I expect and look, until my
change, and immutation be come. Which Job. 14. 14.
change and immutation, is that very thing, which now we have in
consideration; to weet, the glorious state, and condition of the bodies of
those, who in this their pilgrimage, may have walked in true faith toward
their God.

It is not doubted of amongst Christians, but that the same individual Person
is to appear, and is or shall be glorified both in body and soul; who in
this mortal life, has kept his faith; faythfullie and obediently serving God;
not taking, or receaving his Soul in vain; and consequently, Psalm. 24. 4.
as the Soul is the same individuallye (for it never perished) so likewise the
very body, must be the same individuallye, yea, and the substantial union
and conjunction whereby the Soul and body are joined together, must be the
same individuallye, and in unity of number; which though reason conceaves not,
yet faith assecures and warrantes; And so consequently clear it is, that the
immutation and change, whereof the Apostle and holy Job speak, is not because
there is another Soul, or another body, or another union of body and Soul
(for all these three are the same individuallye and numerically) but the whole
change and immutation is, in respect of some glorious properties and qualities
which the bodies resuscitated to glory shall have, which they never had whilst
they were yet mortal; fro as the Souls and Spirits have their special
glories, so likewise shall the bodies have theirs. These Four glorious
qualities of the glorified bodies.
qualities and properties, are commonly distinguished to be four; to weet,
Impassibilitie, Subtillity, Agility, Clarity: Impassibilitie whereby the body
is made incapable of any contrary passion, or violent impression: Subtillity,
whereby the body is made not a Spirit, but like unto a Spirit, to be able to
penetrate, or pass where it could not before: Agility, whereby it is indewed
with such a velocity and Swifenes, that the beatified may follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes: Clarity, whereby al deformity, or natural
obscurenesse being taken away, the body becomes bright, shining and
resplendent; but we must explicate these things more particularlye, and yet
with all brevitie possible. I begin with the first.

Impassibilitye.
Impassibilitye must needs be granted, as a partial dowry to glorified
bodies; for if they should be passible as before, then consequently they should
be corruptible, which as it is against the nature of felicity, that
essentially includes a participated aternity, so is it expressly, against the
Apostles doctrine, where he professes, that our bodies which are sown in
corruption, shall rise up in incorruption. But though it be most apparent, that
glorified bodies shall be impassible; yet is it not so easily to explicate and
open, from whence this impassibility does immediately arise; or what is, the
immediate cause thereof: The Apostle tells us, that what is sowed in
weakness, and infirmity, rises up in power and virtue; which vertus or
power, I take to be the immediate cause of impassibility; or else to be
impassibility it self. But what is this virtue and power? Is it 1.
a supernatural virtue, making the elementary parts and qualities, to be of
another nature, then now they are? Not so; for nature must not be changed or
destroyed, but perfected. Secondly, 2.
shall these elementary qualities, by Gods hand be limited and stayed, in their
actions and operations, that they shall not work one against another, for
their mutual destruction? Not so; for then, this impassibility should not be
an internal virtue, as a dowry immanent in the glorified body; (which is
against the Apostles intention) but only an outward assistance of God. Again,
these elementary parts and qualities, Impassibility is internal.
must have their several mixtions; for the making of diverse and distinct
parts corporal, which cannot be, without a refraction and composition of the
elementary qualities themselves one with another. Or Thirdly, may we think,
that 3.
this virtue is a celestial kind of substance, or substanciall quality,
which united with the elementary qualities and substances, does temper and make
thereby the bodies which are to be glorified, fit receptacles for their
glorious souls? This though it seem very probable, yet I will rather resolve
with Aquinas, that this virtue and Supplem: q. ^2. art 1.
power of Impassibility flows immediately from the soul herself, which
informing the body does so perfectly and fully, subdue all the powers and
qualities of the same, unto herself; that no contrary agent, can be able to
make any violent impression, or action, upon, or against the body, for the
corruption and destruction of the same: or may be able to draw it from that
quiet and peaceable state, wherein it rests. Austen excellently: God has made
the Soul of so powerful a nature, August epist. 66. ad Dios^orum.
that from her glorious happiness there redounds to the body the vigor of
incorruption. Clear it is, that no agent can work, with any violent or
contrary impression, upon, or against any other Agent, or subject, to hurt or
alter the same, unless the same Agent, be more powerful then the other is; on
which, or against which, it works: which being clearly true; likewise clear
it is; that no corporal creature, which has in it contrary elementary
quallities, can be of greater power and force, then a glorified body is, to
work against or upon the same. So long therefore, as the glorified Soul shall
be subject to God, and the glorified body, be subject to the Soul; so long it
shall be impossible, for any corporal agent whatsoever, to have a transeunt
action or impression, which may any way alter or hurt the same. And this is
that immutation and change whereof the Apostle not only speaks but glories, 1
Cor. 15. 51.
We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. Where he makes this
immutation, to be a change, from passibility to impassibility; and to be
peculiar only to the elect, whereof the reprobate, shall have no part, nor
portion at all.

And yet, though we grant an impassibility to the bodies glorified, so that
they shall not be subject to any violent, or contrary impressions; The
Beatified shall have all such sensitive actions which include not Corruption.
yet we may not deny, but that there shall be all such sensitive actions, (and
consequently answerable passions which include not corruption) of seeing,
hearing, feeling, smelling, tasting and such like, as may be fitting for that
place. Of sight clear Job. 19. 26.
it is; for Job professes that his eyes shall behold God his Savior; and most
frequent are other testimonies of Scripture for the same. Hearing cannot be
denied, for as the Saints shall incessantly with vocal praise, (the Psalmist
professing that the exultations Psalm. 149. 6.
of God, shall be in their throats) magnify God; so no doubt may be made, but
that their vocal Allelu^as shall be mutually heard and understood; yea who can
doubt, but that the beatified, shall speak to Christ, and Christ to them? Go
too; Good and faithful Servants, says Christ; all hail Glorious God and
Lord, sing they; Benediction, thanksgiving, is their glorious note for ever and
ever. Feeling we may not deny, for that includes not any corruption, and if
agreeing to sense, it is a perfection not a defect of nature. And that
glorified bodies be palpable and may be felt, Luc. 24. 39.
that of Christ makes it most clear, Feel, and see, for a spirit has not
flesh and bones, as you see me to have. Neither of the sense of smelling, may
any question be made; because, for the sensation thereof, there is no
corruptible or corporal immutation necessarily required.

Touching the sense of taste; some difficulty may be made; and yet though there
be no delicious taste by eating or drinking delicious meats or dainties (such
as the voluptuous of these times make their God) notwithstanding it is not
absurd to think, that the glorified bodies by Gods ordinance, shall have, some
delicious and pleasant moisture, resting upon the place of taste, that so by
such a means, that sensible part may have her full rest and content. The best
reasons, for this which I have said, touching the perfection of corporal
senses, I take to be these few, first, that as the body shall have her
perfection and reward, because she was so familiar, and individual a
companion of the Soul, in the suffering for Reasons why there shall be
glorious actions of Sensation in the glorified.
Christ, or her subjection to Christ; So likewise, the sensitive parts, and
faculties, which have been instruments of the Soul, in the exercise of
righteousness, shall also have their appointed reward. Again, there can be no
sufficient reason, brought Romans 6. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Luke 10. 27. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
against what I have said; why it should not be so. Again; he that will
seriously peruse the 5. and 25. chapters of St. Matthewes Gospel, and the 22.
of St. Luke; where Christ promises, and performs Mat. 5. and 25. Luk: 22.
his glorious rewards, to his faithful followers; and where Lazarus is
described, to have tasted his very felicity (a thing which the rich glutton
importunely desired) will not easily be induced to think this which I have
here set down to be untrue or false. And so I conclude this point with this
observation, that if (as I have showed above) there be in the Soul glorified
an impeccability and indefectibility, so that they cannot sin; and in the body,
an impassibility, not to receive any the least impression of co^trariety and
corruption, that may be: how firm then? how stable then? yea how everlasting
then? is that glorious state: which has this participated aeternity aeternally
that it cannot perish nor decay? Who arightly considers this, and longs not, to
have a speedy dissolution of this terrestrial house? of this cotage of dirt
and clay? that so he may be Job. 4. 19.
present with the Lord; and have a house aeternall and 2. Cor. 5. 1.
everlasting? not made with hands, but such a one, as the spirit of the Lord
shall frame and establish? O how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of hosts?
my Soul Psalm. 84. 2.
longs and my heart faints after the Courts of the Lord.

Subtilitie.
THis dowry gift, which is generally called Subtilitie, I would rather
speaking with the Apostle, call Spiritualty; for in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, he affirms thus, It is sowed a natural body, but it rises a
spiritual body; and again, 1 Cor. 15. 44, 47. 48. 49.
The first man is of the earth, earthly; The second man, is the Lord from
heaven; As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and as is the
heavenly, such also are they, that are heavenly: And as we have borne the
Image of the earthy, we shall also bear the Image of the heavenly. Thus the
Apostle; whereout many excellent observations might be made. But I call it
Spiritualty not as though (which some falsely have affirmed) the body were
changed into the Soul and Spirit, for so that which is raised should not be
man, consisting of Soul and Body; but a third distinct thing, different from
Man; and consequently the mystery of the resurrection of the flesh should be
quite taken away; for Resurrection requires that the same thing which fell, be
raised up again. Neither do I call it Spiritualty as though the body after
resurrection were made thin, and rare, like the wynd and air, as the
Eutychians of old did affirm; denying the bodies glorified to be palpable:
but I call it Spiritualty by reason of a more powerful influence, and that
dominion which the Soul shall have into and over the Body after the
resurrection, then it ever had or could have in the time of her mortalitye.
This though it be hard to explicate, yet sure I am that in so affirming and
calling of it Spiritualty I speak in the phrase of the Apostle; but as for
Subtility 1. Cor. 15. 44.
which in true and proper signification signifyes a property whereby such
things as are spiritual have a penetrative and piercing virtue to pass and
Aristo. lib. 2. de Generat. tex. 50
pierce into and through, the corpulent parts of any thing that has a body
and is corpulent, having dmensions and parts; I cannot see how it can be given
to the glorified bodies, which after resurrection have the same extensive and
corpulent parts for quantity and fulness of matter or bodilinesse; as they had
before the resurrection: and can no more penetrate, pierce or enter into or
thorough any true bodily and corporal substance which has the dimensions of
quantity, to weet, thicknes, breadth, length, then they could August. tract 121
in Ioh. Chrysostom. hom. 89. in Ioh. Ambros. in 24. luc. Hi^ar. ub. 3 definit.
Hiero-Epist. ad Pammach. Ioh 20, 26.
before their resurrection, in the time of their mortality and corruption. And
although it may be probably affirmed with diverse Ancient Fathers, that the
body of our savior (who entered into his disciples the doors being shut) did
by powerful penetration pass thorough the door, yet we may not attribute
the same as a thing natural to his glorified body, it having the same
dimensions of quantity for bodilines and fulness of matter which it had before;
but we must with Antiquity attribute the same to the power of his Godhead,
Luc. 137. August. Eps. 3. ad Volusianum Heb. 4. 18. Job. 37. 18
to whom no word is impossible; for he that could enter into the womb the
secret of the most pure vergin not violated, as Augustine and Nazianzene
excellently; He who could penetrate the heavens which are more solid and
strong then brass, and yet receive no bruise in his body, nor make any rent in
them; we may not doubt but that by the omnipotenty of his power he could
enter in into his disciples the doors being shut.

But to conculde this point wherein the holy Scriptures be so sparing; though
with the Apostle we give Spiritualty to the glorified bodies, whereby it may
seem that in truth they are become Spiritual (which is true in the sense I
have expressed) yet are they not so Spiritual but that they are palpaple and
may be touched Luc. 24. 39.
and felt* Feel and see, says Christ, to his Apostles, for a Spirit has not
flesh and bones as you see me to have. Where I note that a body which is truly
spiritual, may withal be really palpaple and be touched and felt also,
though it be against that known Gregor. hom. 26 in Euangel.
saying of Gregory called the great, a Pope of Rome. Of necessity all what so
ever may be felt or handled is subject to Corruption. But perhaps he meant,
that so it was ordinarily according to the course of natural things, as they
are in this state of mortality. The reader may here expect that I should more
amply open and explicate what this Spiritualty may be; I confess my
Ignorance, I had rather hear a master then be my self a Teacher; only I
resolve that it is a spiritual influence into, and a powerful Dominion of a
Soul Glorious over a Glorified Body, whereby the Body may seem as it were to
be freed and cleared from all such corporal imperfections and defections as
are incident to substances that are bodily, and Corporal, I mean such
imperfections and defects as do not essentially follow the nature of quantity
and Bodilines it self; that is, all such defects and imperfectious as precede
and go before, accompany, or follow after Generation, Augmentation or such
like corporal motions, which serve for the increase or conservation of humane
nature. And surely most necessary it is that all such defects and imperfectious
should cease; for without the cessation of them it cannot be well understood,
how the Beatified both in body and Soul should be elevated into that liberty
of Glory which Romans 8. 21. Galat. 4.
is promised to the childeren of God, the Citisens of that Jerusalem above,
which is both Glorious and freed from all servitude of corruption.

Clear experience teaches that to be most true which the book of Wisdom
complayningly Sap. 9. 15:
delivers. That the Corruptible body overloadeth and aggravateth the soul.
And that the earthly habitation presses down the mind meditating upon many
things. Most necessary then it is, that in that state of felicity and full
liberty where the Souls Beatified incessantly see God and meditate upon God,
that they should be freed from all gross and heavy clogs and hindrances,
that so with all their forces and endeavors they may bend themselves to the
contemplation, love and fruition of the infinite Goodness of God so clearly and
presentially proposed unto them. And this is that which we must call
Spiritualty; wherein, if I may seem to the Learned to be mistaken, I desire
from them some better and more full declaration of this dowry of Subtility.

Agility.
THis dowry gift of Agility is a glorious quality or virtue, whereby the bodies
of the glorified are totally subject to the Souls, as to most powerful
Movers: to be moved by them without all resistance or least reluctance that may
be thought on: which Agility or Facility as I conceive they have, because the
soul has a most absolute dominion over them, and does by a redundancy and
emanation impart unto them a glorious quickening and vivacity or livelines,
far beyond that which any mortal creature in their bodily heavy parts can
have. And this either by the means of a greater perfection of glorified
Souls, or by the means of more perfect instruments for motion, then those
which corruptible bodies usually have. This Agility or Facility for motion,
although it make the bodies glorified very tractable to the souls for motion,
so that we may in a sort say with St. Austen. Whereto soever the will shall
intend, August. lib: 22. de Civit. cap. altimo.
there presently the body (as it were in a moment) shall or may be: yet we may
not grant unto the said bodies any instant tanean motion: so that in an
imagined instant of time (I say imagined instant, for time has no true or
real instant either as part or period and end of it self) they may make any
true real corporal motion or mooving. Howsoever diverse Schoolmen may to the
contrary have dreamed. For does it not imply in terms, and involve
contradiction, that that motion which is a successiue passing over, or in space
from place to place (as all corporal motion and moving is) should be, and not
in some durance and continuance of time according to the greater or less
velocity and swiftness thereof.

And yet notwithstanding, the corporal motion of glorified bodies may be very
sudden and in (as it were) imperceptible moments of time; like as the Sun
beams, the which as it were in a moment (because in an unperceivable moment of
time) do fill this whole hemisphere with their glorious Aug. epist. 44. Sap.
3. 7.
Luster. Austen affirms it, and I dare not deny it: And so I interpret those
words of the book of Wisdom (if they are to be understood of the glorified).
The righteous shall shine, and as Ioh. 20. and 21. Luk 24.
sparks among the stubble, they shall run too and fro: Whereby, I take it,
their agility and facility for motion is figured. And if we arightly consider
what is recorded in sacred Scriptures, touching the sundry soudayne corporal
apparitions and disapearings of our Savior after his resurrection, and how
that the bodies of the beatified shall be made conformable to the Clarity (and
so answerably Phil. 3. 20.
to other glorious qualities) of his glorified body, there will no just reason
be showed for denying such a glorious agility, either to the body of Christ, or
to the glorified bodies of his Saints.

And although we give to the glorified bodies of Christ and his Saints such a
glorious nimblenesse and Agility, yet if we observe the phrases of sacred
Scriptures, we shall find that the glorified in that glorious state of
happiness, are seldom recorded to have used such extraordinary agility and
nimblenesse of motion. We read that they shall follow the Lamb whithersoever
he Reve. 14. 4.
goes, which following is interpreted even by the Lamb himself to be a
walking, which must be so decent and grave as becomes that glorious state. For
thus he professes hereof: They shall Reve. 3. 4.
walk with me in whites, for they are worthy. Now this walking must be such as
beseemes the glorious Majesty of Christ and the honor of his Saints Glorious,
Grave, Divine, Magnificent; And surely it were no less then folly once to
dream that the glorified shall have any games or sports in coursing and
running up and down. No, no, such vanities which earthly minds do over highly
prise, do not beseem their states of glory and Majesty; And yet though we deny
them to have any unseemely runnings or dancings, we may not affirm them to be
so penned up as though they had no glorious restings, perambulations and
walkings; They have doubtless their sittings on seats of Judgment; They have
their religious and Reverentiall standings up, bowing down, prostrations and
Ephe. 2. 5. Revelat. 3. 2. Luke 22. 30. Mat. 19 28. Revelat. 4. 4. 10. and 7. 9.
the casting down of their Crowns before the state of Majestye. How then can
we deny unto them seemly divine motions? And notwithstanding whitherto soever
their motions lead them, they have the glorious presence of God with them; for
God by the virtue and immensity of his allpresence being in all his Creatures,
the glorified Mat. 18. 10.
weresover they be, they always see his face, not only above in the heavens,
but even in the lowest bowels of the earth, if any occasion of service, should
require their presence there.

And can we otherwise dream but that those glorious Angels who did minister
to Christ in the Mat. 4. 12.
wilderness, did there (for by definitive presence the substances and natures
were in the wilderness not in heaven) did there I say behold the glorious
Majesty of the Father? And surely that which Gregory affirms of the Angels
truly; That they Greg. hom. 34. in Ezekiel.
run as it were within God and in God, whitherto soever they are sent, may
also be truly affirmed of the glorified Saints, wheretosoever they roll, and
wheresoever they abide; they abide in God and roulle in God. It was truly said
by the Poet, and afterward confirmed by the Apostle, that in God we live, we
moove, and have our being, as certainly Act. 17. 28.
it may be said of the beatified, that they live, moove are, and have their
glorious being in him; live of him, by partaking of his glorious life; move
before him, by most prompt and ready obedience, always doing his will; are in
him by a glorious inpresence of God in them, and they in God, being entered
Mat. 25. 23.
into his own glory. Again in him, with him, and before him; with him never
to be separated from him; in him, diving into and swimming in the infinite
ocean of his joy; before him always beholding and delighting to behold the
glory of his Majesty, and the Majesty of his glory. So likewise God in them
with them and before them In them by the glorious bright and light of his
countenance illustrating them within; with them ever supporting them with the
left hand of his protection, and filling them with the joys and pleasures of
his right hand of consolation; before Psalm. 16.
them for all aternityes by their glorious vision and fruition of him; himself
to satiate them, but never to sade or cloy them; ever desirous to see and
delighting to see. O how amourously in longing desire after these things cried
out that sweet singell of Israel: Glorious things are spoken of thee O Psalm.
87. 2.
City of God! O thou City of God, so glorious are the things which are in thee,
that no tongue can with sufficiency, speak the least part of them: and no
marvel, for what tongue can speak them which Isa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither the heart of man has
conceived, neither can conceive in this state of mortality, what God has
prepared for those that love him.

Clarity.
THat which the Apostle calls glory, speaking 1 Cor. 15. 43.
thus, The body is sown in ignoblenes, it rises again in glory, is generally
by Divines termed and called Clarity, and this nothing at all from the Apostles
sense; for in the place alleged, he teaching that at the General resurrection
the Glories of the bodies glorified shall be different and diverse, one exceeding
the other, he uses this declaration 1 Cor. 15. 45.
for the same, Like as onestarre differs from another in Clarity (the
brightness of the stars being more properly, called Clarity then glory) so
shall the resurrection of the dead be. Now what manner of Clarity this shall
be, it is not difficult to expesse; if we call to mind what manner of Clarity
and Glory that was wherewith the body of Christ was adorned at the time of his
Mat. 17. 2.
Transfiguration, when his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white
as the light. S. Mark, adds that his raiment became shyning, exceeding white
as the snow, so as no fuller on the earth can whyten them. Mark. 9. 3.
But clear it is, that our vile and humble bodies at the day of the
Resurrection shall be transformed, and by a glorious immutation be made like
to the resplendant and bright shinning body of Christ: so says Paul in his
Epistle to the Philippians; Phil. 3. 20.
And Christ promises in the Gospel, That the Righteous shall shine like the
Sun in the kingdom of their Father. Lo Christ's face on earth did shine, Mat.
13. 43.
and now in heaven does shine like the Sun; and to the Righteous it is
promised, that though now they are as the very of scumme of the world, yet
their faces shall shine like the Sun in the kingdom of their Father. But here
note that though it be said that Christ's body and the Saints bodies shall
shine like one and the same thing; never the less this must not be taken in
full equality of Clarity and brightness. Chrysostom: in Mat.
Chrysostom excellently: But if the face of the Lord did shine as the Sun, and
the Saints shall shine as the Sun; shall then the Lords Clarity and his
servants be equal? Not so, but because nothing is found to be more bright
then the Sun, therefore to give an example of the future resurrection, both the
face of our Lord is said to shine, and the righteous also are said to shine as
the Sun; Whereby we cannot but observe how exceeding bright and resplendant
the Clarity of our glorified bodies shall be; for if they shall shine as the
Sun, and the Sun shall Isa. 30. 26. Chrysostom, in Mat.
shine at the day of Judgment seventimes brighter then now it does; then may
we boldly with Chrysostom say, though there shall be no change in nature,
yet there shall be the addition or putting to of an unenarrable Clarity and
brightness.

Which brightness and Clarity we may not only conceave that it shall be a
transeunt Light upon the superficies and out side of the body, like as the Suns
beams, without any immutation internal, do spread themselves upon a wall;
No, no; there shall be a true internal immutation by a glorious Clarity and
brightness, which shall make the glorified bodies not only bright and clear
without, but also fulgent and shyning within, and thoroughout. So that the
glory of the Soul may thorough the body is it were by a glass, in such a
manner be seen and beheld in such sort as a spiritual glory may be beheld
and seen; somewhat in like sort, as the Color of the body may be seen in a
glass, or rather as the life of the soul is seen and observed in and by the
vivacity and Livelines which it imparts by action and motion to the outward
visible parts of the body.

And if I misconceane not, in respect of this glorious translucency and
transparency, the brightness and Clarity of the celestial Jerusalem is in the
Revelation of S. John thus and in like sort described: And he carried me away
in the spirit into an high Reve. 21. 10. 11.
and great mountain, and showed me the great City holy Jerusalem (which I
interpret the Glorious state of the Saints Triumphant) descending out of
heaven, from God having the glory of God. And her light was like unto a stone
most precious, even like a Iasperstone as clear as Crystal. And again in v.
18. 19. 20. etc.
the 18. and other verses following, And the building of the wall of it was of
Jasper, and the City was pure gould like unto clear glass, and the
foundations of the wall of the City were garnished with all manner of precious
stones. The first foundation was Jasper, the second Sapphire, the third a
Chalcedonye, the fourth an Emerauld, the fifth a Sardonix, the sixth a Sardius,
the seventh a Chrysolite, the eighth a Berill, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a
Chrysoprasse, the eleventh a Hyacinth, the twelfth an Amethist. And the twelve
gates, were twelve pearls, every several gate one pearl. And the street of
the City was pure gould as it were transparent glass. Thus far the Prophet,
giving almost in every word a touch and description of some one or other
Clarity and brightness of that Triumphant City. O let us pondering and
ballancing these things in the scales of our Souls, say unto them; Arise ye up
and be illightened, for the Light of the Lord is coming, and the glory of God
shall appear both over us and in us if we find truly to fear him sincerely,
to love him, and faithfully to expect his coming, Amen.

I have here set down more at large the words of the Prophet, that the Godly
reader may well observe these things, first what I have said to be most true,
touching the glorious translucency and splendor of the glorified bodies
described to be like Jasper or Crystal, or Sapphire or Chalcedon, or some other
precious pearls, or Margarites: the excellency and surpassing brightness
whereof, especially of Christ (conformable whereunto the glorified Phil. 3. 20.
bodies of the Saints shall be made) I gather out of the 23. verse of this said
chapter, wherein the Prophet having described that the glorious City needs
neither light of the Sun nor of the Moon, and Reve. 21. 23.
gives a reason thereof, for that the Clarity and brightness of God shall
illighten the same; he adds in the same verse that the Candell thereof was the
Lamb. Glorious brightness of Christ's body distusing it self
Who has ever observed a candel, lighted at noon days, and bright to have
given any light? No, no; the brightness of the Sun obscures the same, be the
candell never so great; And yet the Lambs clarity and brightness, that is, the
brightness of Christ as man, shall through and by his glorified body be so
shining and resplendant, that it shall be as a bright shining Sun in that
Triumphant City, where shall be no night nor darkness, says the Prophet.

Again, I have been more large in this to confirm that truth, which some
most idly (as not loving nor desirous to excel in those virtues which must be
as measures of distinct degrees of Reve. 21. 17.
glory; for one and the same is the measure of men and Angels) I say as some
most idly would call in question; to weet, that there shall be a true variety
and diversity of glories and glorious Mansions 1 Cor. 15.
in that triumphant City; Some clear like Crystal; some bright like Sapphire,
some glittering like Jasper, others fresh and green like Emerald etc. Men's
Souls shall there differ in glory, and their bodies in Clarity, even as the
stars in the firmament do differ in Clarity each from other. This though it
be a most evident truth, yet the wanton wills of many who have placed al
sanctity in conceit, apprehension, persuasion, (I might say presumption) will
not admit of the same, charm the Charmer never so wisely. But let the pious
read seriously the 20. of this prophecy, Reve. 20. 12.
and he shall find that the very Judgments of God touching great and small, (
great and small) shall be according to what is written in the books. And that
the level measure and square is (...) according to their works, that is,
faith, love, patience, zeal, truth, etc. So just is God that he is to all
those that seek after him in a holy fear, a faithful rerewarder, Heb. 11. 6.
giving to every man according as he may have done.

Again thirdly, I have been herein the more large, to show the surpassing
felicity of that place; where the whole bodies of the Saints and every part of
them, yea those parts that are now esteemed basest and vilest, shall shine and
glitter like most precious Margarites and Pearls: they shall not only then
appear without blemish and free from all deformity; clear from corruption,
without all difficulty; but they shall be filled within and compassed about
without with Clarity, they shall be endowed and invested all over with
Spiritualty; they shall be quickened and enlived with Agility; they shall be
replenished and possessed 1 Cor. 15. 43. 44.
with Impassibility; for that which was sown in corruption shall rise in
incorruption; that which was sown in dishonor shall be raised in glory; that
which was sown in weakness, rising again in power; that which was sown a
natural body, rising again a spiritual body. Seneca perhaps had some obscure
knowledge hereof, when as he writes thus of the state of the Godly after this
life ended. These things (says he, speaking of the joys of this life) cease,
but they perish not: yea, Seneca. epist. 36.
death which we fear and shun, changes, but takes not away life, the day
will come which will place us in rest and light: Thus he, like a Christian,
though not so fully nor so clearly, as that renowned Father St. Austen most
sweetly and divinely. There shall be life without death; Youth Angust. in
Soloqui.
without old age, beawty without deformity; strength without debility, joy
without dolor, rest without labor, such an aeternall refection shall be to
the glorified bodies: thus he. Surely the splendor and glory of the body is so
great, that passes all explication, it goes beyond all apprehension; and
accordingly not only in respect of the happiness of the soul, but also in
respect of the glory of the body we may well take up that of the Apostle, 2
Cor. 2 Cor. 4. 17.
4. 17. That the momentany and short tribulations of this life do work (in us
and for us) a weight of aeternall glory.

O that the wantons of these days (so full of vanity and presumption) who
think themselves nobly adorned by their Pearls, Diamonds and other costly
ornaments, would seriously think of the glorious and resplenda^t Clarity of
the bodies of Saints glorified! how would they despise all those vanities in
comparison, where on now they set their fancyes? If we call to mind how St.
Peter's soul was gladded and ravished with the only beholding of Christ's
glorified body upon Mat. 17. 2. Mark. 9. 3.
mount Thabor, though his body at that time received no part thereof; we cannot
otherwise think, but that the joy of the beatified shall be exceedingly and
surpassingly great, when they shall not only behold the glorified body of
Christ and see his glory, but withal shall see their own bodies and souls
participants of the same Phil. 3. 20.
brightness and glory. So, So, shall God heal the infirmities of his Saints,
crowning them in mercyes Psalm. 103. 3. 4.
and miserations. So so, shall the faithful be delivered from the servitude of
Corruption, into the liberty Romans 8. 21.
of such glory as beseemes the Sons of God: So, so, shall all those who
instruct others to Godly Dan. 12. 3.
life, shine as stars in the firmament for all aeternities. O that our souls
might be truly enamoured with the love and desire of this Celestial place and
state! O how would we despise all transitory flashes and sparks of earthly
pleasures; if we could but seriously think of those joys and Psalm. 16. 10.
pleasures, which are laid up in Gods right hand for his Saints for evermore.

Jacob, served seven years twice told, to obtain his beautiful Rachell, and
the days though so many, seemed to him but as few, in respect of the
greatness of his love. O that the love of our souls were in like sort great
after the Celestial Rachell, so comely in state and glory; then should we
think all the labors but light, all the tarriance but short, all the days but
as moments, wherein and wherewith our heavenly Laban shall exercise us in these
days of our Pilgrimage and mortality! O thou gracious God, Father of lights,
Illustrate our understandings: O thou God fountain of life, refresh our
memories: O thou God, burning fire of love, inflame our wills and sanctify our
affections. O thou God our cheifest last and only good, the God of our hearts
and our portio^for ever, be thou to us all in all things. O thou that have made
us for thy self, thou have framed us according to thy own Image, we know
none, we acknowledge Genesis 1. 27.
none, nor desire any other end of our selves to make us happy but thy self. O
do vouchsafe to conduct us safe and to bring us sure to the heaven of thy
happiness, to the haven of our eternal felicity: teach us thy paths wherein
we shall walk, guide us with thy Counsel, and receive us into thy glory. To
thee we confess in all humble longing desires of our souls: Truly O Lord
August ^n So^^q. about the end.
thou art great above all Gods, and great is thy reward, for thou art not
great, and thy reward little, but as thou art great so also is thy reward great;
for thou art not one thing and thy reward another, but thou thy self art the
too to great reward; thou the Crowner and the Crown; thou the promiser and the
promised; thou the giver and the gift; thou the rewarder and the reward itself
of aeternall felicity. O be thou this to us in the truth of that glory when we
shall enter into thy own joy and see thee as thou art in thy self: to this
guide us with thy Counsel and enable us with thy Spirit of grace, that running
the way of thy Commandments we may in the end attain thee the God of our
hearts, our parts, and our Portion, for ever,

Amen.
SEVENTH SECTION.
Wherein is breefely and in general laid down the means and way, whereby
eternal happiness is to be attained.

FOr the more clear handling of this point, we are to suppose, that whatsoever
thing has any perfection due unto it, as the end and consummate perfection
thereof; If that perfection be not natural and essential to the thing it
self; the same cannot be had without some action or motion leading thereunto:
for example, God who Exodus 3. 14.
is most essentially his own ( I am that I am) and whole infinite perfection
is his own being, most necessarily and essentially; needs not nor requires
not, any action or motion to any thing that is without himself for his end and
perfection. But so it is not in Creatures, whose natures being limited and in
themselves imperfect, need and require some action or motion to that which is
without themselves, for the attaining of their ends and final perfection; which
motion is that which now we have in handling, whereby man is to attain his
last end, and consummate happiness.

For this purpose I ponder that Principle of the Apostle, He that comes to God
must believe that Heb. 11 6.
he is, and that he is a rewarder of all those that enquire after him. In which
words I find clearly, that the accession and coming to God in this life,
(which is the way to that vision and fruition of God in the nextlife, the
final end of man) is by Faith, and a religious inquisition of and after him,
which religious inquisition of and after him, if I should think not to be
cheifely by Faith, hope and love, (as the heads of this way out of which many
particular paths do follow) I should wrong the judgment of all Orthodoxe
Divines whatsoever; who do distinguish the virtues that are conversant and
immediately exercised upon and about God into three, to weet, Faith Hope and
Love. The later of which the Apostle himself terms the more excellent way;
writing thus to the Corinthians; Cor. 12. 31.
And yet show I you a more excellent way* which more excellent way alone, is to
be taken as the spirit and path of Faith, and Faith again, is to be reputed as
the head way and soul of it, two individual and inseparable twins, mutually
ever embracing each other and working each by other.

And though there be infinite ianglings and questions, about the virtue,
extent and causalitie of these several virtues in the matter of justification,
and about their manner of merit or concurrence to salvation, yet do I not
remember, that ever I have read of any, except the ungodly Anomists August: ad
quod vult de* here is. 14.
and profane Libertines (a brood of Ennomius) or some indiscret Predicants,
who have denied the necessity of the two later; hope and love; As for the
first, Faith, all require the same absolutely necessary to salvation; Yea the
Papists themselves require the same as the very first means and foundation for
justification and sanctification Coun: Trident Bellar* Omnes Pontificii.
out of an absolute necessity: but not solely and alone without hope and love.
The Reformed Churches generally, hold her, (to weet faith) to be the sole and
only isntrumental cause of Justification, by which as by a hand, the justice
and righteousness of Christ is applied unto the justified soul. So then by
confession of all, an accession and motion to God there must be in this life,
or else there can be no possession of him in fruition in the next life. The
happiness of this life, is the way and motion to the happiness of the next
life. The happiness of the next life (which is the happiness of the end) can
be no other then the vision and fruition of God. The happiness of this life
which is the happiness of the way, is also a vision and fruition of God, but
it is by faith and love; and that which Eusebius calls, the worship of God,
not only external, but especially internal, and yet not so internal, but
that there must also necessarily Eusib. de moust evanglica.
be external, for no man shall be crowned unless he shall manfully and
lawfully have fought: and 2 Timoth. 2. 5.
again, the Spirit of God says thus, Hold that Reve. 3. 11.
which thou have, lest another take thy crown. Which we are not only to
understand of the internal sight of the soul, and inward constancy of our
Faith, but also of the outward profession thereof, Romans 10. 10.
and the external exercise of piety and godliness; If I be demanded what I
would call this, I cannot bethink of a better name then Christian warfare, or
the Imitation of Christ. The holy Apostle chearing Tit. 2. 12.
up the faithful, puts them in mind of a joyous expectation after the coming
of the glory of the great God; but he prefixes before by the way of necessary
preparation; that they must live soberly, piously, and justly in this world: so
that sobriety (which conteines the well ordering of man in himself,) against
excess etc. Piety, which comprehends the whole worship of God, Justice which
comprises all duties that appertain to equity, and right betwixt man and man;
are prerequired as the very motion and way, by which they shall come to the
joyous meeting and glorious enjoying of the glory Via Regni.
of the great God. Thus then holy life and Christian works, are the very way
and motion, to the glorious vision and fraition of God. It is said generally,
yea received by all Orthodoxe Divines, that good and godly works are the way
to the kingdom of glory. Which we are not to understand by the way of
comparison only to the material way, by which men in their corporal
journies, do walk from place to place, from City to city; but even by the
way of comparison, to the very motions, walkings and passings of men upon and
along the same ways; which we may call men's ways to such and such places: so
the pious and godly life of the faithful, is their very moving, passing and
walking to their journies end, the glorious vision and fruition of God. And so
in what manner we may hold the movings and passings of men along their ways,
necessary for their arriving to such and such places: In like sort we must
hold the moving and passing of man by godly life, to be necessary for his
arriving to the kingdom of glory. No man, says that Reverend Pastor Cowper,
comes Cowper apud D. Boys, 8. Sunday after Trinit. epist.
either to prison or palace, but by the entry thereof. So man goes to heaven
or hell, but by the way thereof.

If this which I have set down, touching good works, the very way of man to
his eternal felicity, were not apparent in it self according to the tenure of
sacred scriptures, requiring and commanding the same; yet the very manner of
Christ's investing and inducting his Saints with, and into glory, does most
evidently evince the same. For Mat. 25. 22. 23. 24.
were it not a dishonor against the infinite pure Majesty of God, and
impeachment to his all Luke 19. 17.
knowledge, and wisdom, to think that he should otherwise give glory in time,
then in such a manner as he from all aeternities foreknew he would give, and
had predetermined to give? Or that he should not from al aeternities have
foredetermined, and decreed so to give glory; as in the time of his admission
of his Saints into glory, he does actually give and in truth of thing collate
the same. Now how God does actually give and collate glory at the day of
glorification, the Gospel is so clear, that there is no declaration or
amplificatio^ of the same needful, for he admits into his kingdom of
glory, those that have believed in him, and beloved him; even as from all
eternities he had prepared Isa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
the glory, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived, for
those that love him. Love him, is expressed, but believe on him, is supposed:
For it is not less possible to love God without Faith, then it is possible to
please him without faith, which the Apostle concludes to be altogether
impossible. And thus do the good Heb. 11. 6.
works of the faithful follow them. So, so, the Virgins, Reve. 14. 13.
that have light and Oil in their Lamps, with joy Mat. 25. 10.
find admittance into the joye of the Bridgroome. So, so, all those that have
on their weding garments Mat. 22. 11. 12.
are graciously admitted, all others wanting the same, are justly excluded. So,
so, the just judge that gives to every man according to his works, rewards
his diligent and faithful Servants, who^ he finds watchful; and by their
piety and obedience, Mat. 25. 20. 22.
in the good use of grace, (and this by grace) to have gained either five, two
or more talents, according to the measure of grace received. So so are good
works via regni, the way to the kingdom! as it is the joint voice of all the
people of God. But yet we must know this very well, that we must not attribute
eternal life, nor the means that lead thereunto, to any other, then to the
grace of God. Concerning which truth, venerable Austen after a long discourse
concludes August. de great. et lib. arbit. c. 8. et 1* 15. 16. etc.
thus, Therefore most dear, our good and godly life is nothing else, but the
grace of God, and without doubt life everlasting, which is given to good life,
is the grace of God; for it also is given, because that unto which it is given,
is freely given; but that to which it is given is only grace; but this which
is given to it, because it is a reward thereof, it is a grace for a grace, as
it were a reward for Righteousness, that that may be true, (because it is
true) that God will reward every 2 Cor. 5. 10.
man according to his works, thus he: Which being so, as it is most evide^tly
so, that the life of Glory, is given too and according to the life of grace and
sanctity: O let us all with joye and alacrity, abound more and more therein,
adding virtue etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5. 6.
as St. Peter advises; that this life being ended, and our races courageously
run through, we may gloriously be exalted into the upper house of Gods glory,
and Eternity. O gracious God, how happy is he whom thou shall vouchsafe so
to teach Psalm. 94. 12.
and instruct in thy Law, that dutiefully walking therein, he may in the end,
come to behold thee the God of Gods, in thy Caelestiall Sion. Psalm. 84. 8.


And so here, as I cannot but observe, so I cannot but lament the infinite
janglings of diverse, touching the causality of good works, to salvation,
whether it be of condignity or congruity, whether they be as conditions
(without which, not) as merrits. For clear it is, that they are so necessary
to Salvation, as the way thereunto, so that without them, salvation shall never
be had. In Philosophy it is most true, from one extreme to another, no man can
pass, but by and over the middle. So likewise in Divinity it is most true,
that no man can pass from the extreme of sinful misery, but by the middell
and means of godly life and piety. When the Philosopher shows, what manner of
Causalitie the passing along upon the way, has for the passengers coming to
the ways end, then may the Divine in like sort, declare what manner of
causalitie, the walking and going on along in piety, may have for the attaining
unto the end thereof, life everlasting: what need such disputes? O how better
is it to have an inward, true sense and testimony of justification, then to
have such wrang ling and foolish logomachie about the formalitie of
Justification? We all on all sides, (I except the outwitted Precisians and
Libertines, Brownists and Separatists) require faith as necessary, yea, as
absolutely necessary to salvation. What need then such hateful disputes about
the causality of them, to salvation? Let all rather endeavor to abound in them,
then to dispute of them, for so an abundant means of entrance 2 Pet. 1. 12.
into glory, and of attaining their last ends shall be ministered unto them.

How idle might that Duke or Prince, be thought to be, who being called by any
free and powerful State to be their absolute Lord and Sovereign, should first
before he would go to take the said Crown dispute with his Sages, what manner
of causality, his going in Coatch or riding on horseback, might have for the
attainement of the same? Is it not enough for the Duke to know that he cannot
be Lord and King except he make his profection and his going to the place where
this honor must be bestowed on him? Again, is it not enough for him that is
in danger of shipwreck, to know that he shall perish together with the ship,
unless by some convenient means he escape to the land? How unwise should
those have been reputed who being in St. Paul's company and in Act. 27. 44.
danger of shipwreck, should have refused to have taken either board or planke
whercon to swim to the shore, before the Apostle had declared in express
terms what manner of causaltty the taking of such boardes and the swimming
out upon them should have had for their deliverance? Is it not sufficient for
the gamester and wrastler to know that except he contend manfully and worthily
he shall have no reward? So, so; let it be abundantly sufficient for
Christians to know and understand, that unless they fight a good fight, they 2
Timoth. 2. 5.
shall not be crowned; unless they hold fast that which Reve. 3. 11.
they have, another shall take their crown: unless their righteousness
abound more then the righteousness Mat. 5. 20.
of the Scribes and Pharisees, they shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Unless they be diligent and painful laborers in the vineyard, they shall
receive no Mat. 20. 8.
day penney: unless they have the cable of faith and repentance, they shall
not avoid shipwreck: except they persevere in faith and piety unto the end,
they shall never attain that last happy end, salvation. Finally, that
according to their very works, so they shall receive; either glory honor and
immortalite; 2 Cor. 5 10. Reve. 10. 12. Romans 2. 9 10.
or shame, dishonor, anguish and confusion, as the Apostle St. Paul has
plainly delivered, and St. Peter most resolutely: Of a truth I have found that
there is no acception of persons with God, but in every nation he that fears
him, and works righteousness Act. 10. 34. 35
is accepted with him. Thus the word of God most clearly: accursed then be he
that adds or detracteth any thing, or disputes against this truth; so
clearly delivered, so strongly confirmed.

Venerable Austen reproved some rash and presumptuous August. de vit. Christ.
cap. 14. 10. 6.
wits of his times, daring to blaspheme against this truth. And I have known
others (says he) whom the dark and obscure cloud of folly and imprudence so
deludeth and deceives, that they think and affirm, that the faith which they
pretend themselves to have shall profit them without works of justice before
God; and being deceived with this kind of error, without al fear they commit
grievous crimes, whilst they believe God to be only a revenger and Punisher of
Infidelity, Mat. 15. 14. Luc. 6. 39.
but not of other crimes. And such as these are not content themselves to
perish alone, but they also endeavor to entrappe others, in whom there is no
light of divine knowledge, and the sentence of our Savior is fulfilled in
them. The blind if he lead the blind they shall both fall into the ditch.
Thus he: which censure of his does it not concern those who in these days
dare affirm that Obedience appertains not to the Gospel, and that of the
law, do this and thou shall live, appertains not to the Gospel; and again,
that whatsoever sins the elect may commit, they are not less acceptable in
the sight of God. By which prodigious paradoxes it is evident, that they have
placed all religion in apprehension and opinion, which in the end will but
deceave them.

Thus having in general showed the way to the last end of man (endless
happiness and felicity) to be faith and pious godly life, it shall not be
amiss to add a few words, touching that source and root, whereout and whence
out, a godly and pious life does spring, yea solely and infallibly does spring
and arise.

Clear it is, that the life of every man is called his daily study, and
conversation; and as clear it is, that the daily study and conversation of
every man, are the usual actions and operations of every man; which actions
and operations if pious and godly, leading to glory, they must needs proceed
from a man renewed in spirit, and regenerate in his soul: so that though the
very faculties and powers of the soul, to weet, the understanding, will, and
memory with such like, do really and truly effectuate and produce such
actions and operations, yet they do it by the virtue and efficacy of grace
which is in them; I (says the Apostle) have labored 1 Cor. 15. 10.
more then they all, but not I, but the grace-of God which is with me; or thus,
which is in me, or thus, with me; upholding diverse readings. Again Christ to
his faithful, when you shall stand before your adversaries, Luc. 21. 14.
do ye not premeditate what or how to speak, for I will give unto you a mouth
and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to withstand; for it
is not you that speak, but the Spirit of my Father which is in you. Of the
Apostles it is affirmed, that they were Act. 2. 4.
all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak as the holy Ghost gave
them utter ante. So in these, so in all actions godly, and supernatural, man
works according to that measure of grace which is given unto him: When given
unto him? Surely Ephe, 4 7.
most specially in Regeneration, where as that which Ioh. 3. 6.
is borne of the spirit is become Spirit, not by ceasing to be that
substantial natural spirit which it was Isa. 11. 2. Galat. 5. 22. Ephesians. 4.
23. 24. Romans 8. 20. 21.
before, but because invested in herself, and in every faculty of herself,
with the gifts and graces of the Spirit; she is by them truly renewed and
innovated, yea changed from the servitude of sin full corruption, into the
liberty of the children of God. Yea, so changed, that by the Spirit of God 2
Cor. 5. 17. Galat. 6. 15. Ephesians. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 7.
they are called new Creatures, light in the Lord, Temples of God, seats of
wisdom, with many such like glorious appellations: And no marvel, for the
graces and gifts of the Spirit of God are so dear, and so gracious, that the
Apostle Saint Peter dares to affirm, that by them the faithful are made 2
Pet. 1. 4.
Partakers of the Divine nature it self. And these graces and gifts precious,
so called by Saint Peter, are the very Source, root, or fountain of all those
graces and motions which lead to aternity: and these graces the Apostle
intends, when he thus divinely admonishes, It is good to confirm and
establish the heart with grace, and not with meats, which Heb. 13. 4.
have not profited those which walked in them.

Now the reason why the sweet providence of God does invest the Regenerate
souls with these graces and precious gifts, whereby the holy Ghost is said to
dwell in them; is not only, because they should have internal garments of
sanctity, befitting his service, but also because, he would have those that
do his service and be his servants, to do him acceptable service, yea, such
acceptable service, as may lead and conduct them to glory immortal. He made
man without man, (man in his making doing nothing), but he will not so save man
doing nothing, hand in hand, leaning his souls elbowes, on the cushion of
presumption: no no, he will not save man, without man (as Austen truly) not
because man with and by virtue of his natural power can cooperate with God, to
salvation; but because man being in his soul and powers thereof, changed,
renewed, and enabled, by the precious gifts of grace; shall and may cooperate
to his salvation: yea the Apostle dares to profess himself 2 Cor. 3. 9.
and such like to be Gods-helpers, in the ministry of salvation.

If God did not require man's good and pious conversation, as a means and
necessary way leading to salvation, then should not the faculties and powers of
man's soul need to be sanctified, and elevated with such supernatural gifts
and graces, for the working and effecting of such actions, of piety and
godliness: but seeing he requires them, yea most necessarily requires them, as
welnye every page of sacred Scripture proclaims; it should seem a kind of
iniquity in God (which be far from him) to require such actions of man, yea
and to condemn for the want of them, if he should not by his graces be ready
to enable man for the doing and performing of the same. He does it then, and
this surely, by no other means then by investing the soul and every power of
her, with such divine gifts, graces and virtues, as so divine actions do
require. Bernard truly to Bern. ser. 83. in can*
this purpose, The soul cannot seek after God, unless she be prevented by
grace. Austen more fully, Grace is therefore given, not because we have done
works, but that we may do them; that is, not because Epist. 105. a sixth: to 2
circa^med.
we have kept the law, but that we may keep the law. And again, Even as man
should not have wisdom, understanding, counsel, fortitude, knowledge, piety,
the Isa. 11. 2.
fear of God, except according to the Prophetical saying, he had received the
Spirit of wisdom and understanding, and counsel and fortitude, and knowledge
and piety, and the fear of God: and even as he should not have virtue,
charity, continency, except he should have received the holy Spirit, whereof
the Apostle speaks, you have not received the Spirit of fear, but of virtue,
charity, contineney; so neither should he have faith, unless he had received
the Spirit of faith, according as it is written, I have believed and therefore
Psalm. 115.
I have spoken, and we also do believe, and therefore we speak.

So then, the source, root and fountain, of all these godly actions, and
motions, which lead to salvation, are the graces of God, because proceeding
from his graces enabling us for them; which Sap. 10. 25.
graces he, who hates nothing of all that he has made, he that wills all
should be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth: He, who delights not
in the 1 Timoth. 2. 4.
death of a sinner, but that he turn from his wickedness Ezec* 33. 11.
and live. He who lightneth every man that comes Ioh. 1. 9.
into the world. He who has placed his Tabernacle in the Sun to run his
race with swiftnes, and Psa^. 19. 6.
to spread his beams with graciousnesse, that nothing can escape the warmth of
his illuminations. He who Reve. 3. 20.
stands at the door and knocks, that if any man open to him, he will enter
in, sup with him, and be his guest. He I say, who is out of his goodness thus
Reve. 22. 17.
graciously disposed toward his creatures, freely and frankely offers and
presents the same unto them: in a holy serious manner, that they may have life,
yea, have it more abundantly, according Ioh. 10. 10.
to that of himself, I am come that they may have life, and have it more
abundantly.

And thus it appears how by grace presented and received (received by the
efficacy of it self) the Saints and servants of God do walk in those ways
where by they come to be saved; whereby they are enabled in some good measure
truly to do that which otherwise should be impossible to nature vitiated and
corrupted. Austen for De great. et lib. arbitrio cap. 16 ^07.
this purpose excellently thus. It is certain we may keep the Commandments,
if we will; but because the will must be prepared by the Lord, we must ask of
him that we may have a will to do so much as we ought willingly to do. It is
certain that we do then well when we will, but he makes us able that we may
will good, of whom that is written, which I expressed a little above; The will
is prepared of the Lord: of whom it is said; The ways of men are directed of
the Lord. And he it is that wills their way of whom it is said, It is God
that does work in us both to will and to do. It is certain that we do when
we do; but he makes that we may do, giving most powerful strength and
ability to the will, who has said, I will make you able that you may walk in
my justifications, and keep, and do my judgments. Thus he, most excellently
declaring the working of grace in us, and our working by grace. Grace the
reward whereof is eternal life, and our good keeping of Gods Commandments in
a partial measure according to this state, not in a full and perfect measure
of degrees. Thus concluding these my meditations touching the last end of man,
I earnestly entreat the religious Reader, seriously to think and meditate on
the glory and aeternity of this Land of promise both showed and promised so
faithfully and seriously unto him in sacred Scriptures. The glories and
excellencies thereof do infinitely surpass the fruits, that were brought unto
the children of Israel out of the Land of promise, which Number. 13. 28.
notwithstanding did so prevail on the hearts of the faithful, that the
desire to obtain the said fruits enabled them with a spirit of courage to
undergo all perils and hazards for the attaining of them; many there were
indeed whom the spirit of fear and trembling restreined from going into that
happy land, because they heard that the sons of Enacim, giants, robustious
men were therein; and thereby perished deservedly for their incredulity and
disobedience: Oh let not the like spirit of Incredulity and disobedience have
dominion over the hearts of any Christians, I especially mean those who
profess to know God arightly; for if we know God arightly, let us walk to him
arightly, diligently, fervently. O gracious God, thou the only wise and most
powerful God, do thou vouchsafe for thy dear Sons sake, to enlarge and
widen our streightened hearts by the Spirit of grace: that we may run to
thee, and in the end also attain thee, by the way of thy Commandments preset
to us by thy self. To my soul I say and resolve, that it be praying to God
the Father in his Sonns name, that she may be endewed with such a spirit of
grace, that enamoured with the consideration and love of this happiness, she
may in the imitation of that holy man ever breathe out thus.

O my soul, if we ought continually, to endure torments, that we may see
Christ in his glory with God the Father, and to be associated to the fellowship
of his Saints; were it not meet, patiently, and willingly, to suffer all that
is sorrowful, that we might be made partakers of so great a good; and so
great a glory? Let the Devils therefore lie in wait, and prepare their
temptations, let fastings and hard-clothings break and sub due our bodies, let
labors oppress, watchings afflict, let that man disquyet me, this man cry
out against me, let cold bow and pinch me, heat burn me, let my head ache, my
breast faint, my stomach swell, my face wax wanne, and pale, let me in every
part be weakened, and let my life fail me in grief and sorrow, my soul in
mourning and heaviness; let rottennes enter into my bones and abound under me,
so that I may find rest in the day of Tribulation, and may ascend up to the
people of God. O my God, give me a spirit to awake early in the morning unto
thee, and that my soul may thirst after thee, yea that my very flesh may be
manifestly and manyfoldly even bent unto thee. O be thou the Horizon of my
heart at noone day, the desire of my soul at midnight. O let all that is
within me long after thee, that I may in the end come to see and behold thee;
as thou art in thy self, my blessed end, my happiness, the God of my heart,
my part, and my portion for ever AMEN.

Recensui hunc Tractatum, cui Titulus est [ Man's last end etc.] (una cum
Epistola Dedicatoria ad Serenissimum Regem Carolum, et praefatione ad
Lectorem.) qui quidem liber continet, page 83. in quibus omnibus nihil reperio
sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica
imprimatur, ita tamen ut si non intra septem menses proxime sequentes Typis
mandetur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Ex aedibus Fulhamiensibus pride. Calend. Septem. 1633. Guil. Bray.

The Errata
Page 10. lin 8. for that, read and p. 20. l. 5. read, is his end. pa. 57 l.
29, for him r, sin. p. 82, l. 30. for roll, r. walk. pa. 87, r. If we be
found. p, 99, l. 2, r. or as me^rits page 100. l, 31, r. table of faith. p. 102,
l. 29, according to diverse readings.

In the notes.
Page 25, read presences. pa, 43, for Trinitate, r, Civitate. page 60, r, q. 82.
p. 68, r. 19. p. 103. r. Cor. v, 16.


