THE RAPE OF LVCRECE.

By Mr. William Shakespeare.

Newly Reuised.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
near the Conduit in Fleet Street. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, HENRY WRIOTHESLEY, Earl of South-hampton, and Baron
of Tichfield.
THE Love I dedicate to your Lordship is without end: whereof this Pamphlet
without beginning is but a superfluous Moity. The warrant I have of your
Honorable disposition, not the worth of my vntutord lines makes it assured of
acceptance. What I have done is yours, what I have to do is yours, being part
in all I have, devoted yours. Were my worth greater, my duty should show
greater, mean time, as it is, it is bound to your Lordship; To whom I wish
long life still lengthned with all happiness.

Your Lordships in all duty, William Shakespeare.

The Argument.
LVcius Tarquinius (for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus) after he had
caused his own father in law Seruius Tullius to be cruelly murdered, and
contrary to the Roman laws and customs, not requiring or staying for the
peoples suffrages, had possessed himself of the kingdom: went accompanied
with his sons and other noble men of Rome to besiege Ardea; during which
siege, the principal men of the Army meeting one evening at the Tent of Sextus
Tarquinius, the Kings son, in their discourses after supper, every one
commended the virtues of his own wife: among whom Colatinus extolled the
incomparable chastity of his wife Lucretia. In that pleasant humor they
alposted to Rome, and intending by their secret and sudden arrival, to make
trial of that which every one had before avouched, only Colatinus finds his
wife (though it were late in the night) spinning amongst her maids, the other
Ladies were all found dancing and reuelling, or in several disports. Whereupon
the Noble men yielded Colatinus the victory, and his wife the fame. At that
time Sextus Tarquinius being enflamed with Lucreces beauty, yet smothering his
passions for the present, departed with the rest back to the Camp, from
whence he shortly after privily withdrew himself, and was (according to his
state) royally entertained and lodged by Lucrece at Colatium. The same night,
he trecherously steals into her Chamber, violently ravished her, and early in
the morning speedeth away. Lucrece in this lamentable plight, hastily
dispatcheth messengers, one to Rome for her father, another to the Camp for
Colatine. They came, the one accompanied with Iunius Brutus, the other with
Publius Valerius: and finding Lucrece attired in mourning habit, demanded the
cause of her sorrow. She first taking an oath of them for her revenge, revealed
the actor, and whole manner of his dealing, and withal suddenly stabbed her
self. Which done with one consent, they all vowed to root out the whole hated
family of the Tarquins: and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted
the people with the doer and manner of the vile deed: with a bitter inuectiue
against the tyranny of the King, wherewith the people were so moved with one
consent, and a general acclamation, that the Tarquins were all exiled, and the
state government changed from Kings to Consuls.

The Contents.
1 LVCRECE praises for chaste, virtuous, and beautiful, enamoreth Tarquin. 2
Tarquin welcomed by Lucrece. 3 Tarquin overthrows all disputing with
wilfulness. 4 He puts his resolution in practice. 5 Lucrece awakes and is
amazed to be so surprised. 6 She pleads in defense of Chastity. 7 Tarquin all
impatient interrupteth her, and rauisheth her by force. 8 Lucrece complains on
her abuse. 9 She disputes whether she should kill her self or no. 10 She is
resolved on her selfe-murther, yet sends first for her Husband. 11 Colatinus
with his friends return home. 12 Lucrece relates the mischief: they swear
revenge, and she to exasperate the matter kills her self.
THE RAPE OF LVCRECE.
1 The praising of Lucrecia as chaste, virtuous and beautiful, makes Tarquin
enamored.
FRom the besieged Ardea all in post,
Borne by the trustlesse wings of false desire,
Lust-breathed TARQVIN leaves the Roman host,
And to Colatium bears the lightlesse fire,
Which in pale embers hid, lurkes to aspire
And girdle with embracing flames the wast,
Of Colatines fair lone, Lucrece the chaste.
Happily that name of chaste, vnhaply set
This batelesse edge on his keen appetite:
When Colatine unwisely did not let
To praise the clear unmatched red and white,
Which triumphed in that sky of his delight,
Where mortal star as bright as heavens beauties,
With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.
For he the night before in Tarquins tent,
Unlocked the treasure of his happy state:
What priselesse wealth the heavens had himlent,
In the possession of his beauteous mate.
Reckoning his fortune at so high a rate
That Kings might be espowsed to more fame,
But King nor Prince to such a peerless dame.
O happiness enjoyed but of a few,
And if possessed as soon decade and done:
As if the mornings silver melting dew,
Against the golden splendour of the Sun,
A date expired: and canceld ere begun.
Honor and beauty in the owners arms,
Are weakly fortrest from a world of harms.
Beauty it self, does of it self persuade
The eyes of men without an Orator,
What needs then Apologies be made
To set forth that which is so singular?
Or why is Colatine the publisher
Of that rich Jewel he should keep unknown,
From theeuish ears because it is his own?
Perchance his boast of LVCRECE Sou'raignty,
Suggested this proud issue of a King:
For by our ears our hearts often tainted be,
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing
Brauing compare, disdainfully did sting
His high pitched thoughts that meaner men should vant
That golden hap which their superiors want.
But some untimely thought did instigate,
His all too timelesse speed, if none of those,
His honor, his affairs, his friends, his state,
Neglected all; with swift intent he goes,
To quench the coal which in his liver glowes.
O rash false heat, wrapped in repentant cold,
Thy hasty spring still blasts and never grows old.
2 Tarquin welcomed by Lucrece.
When at Colatia this false Lord arrived,
Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame,
Within whose face beauty and virtue striued,
Which of them both should underprop her fame,
When virtue bragged, beauty would blush for shame,
When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
Virtue would stain that over with silver white.
But beauty in that white entitled,
From Venus doves does challenge that fair field,
Then virtue claims from beauty, beauties red,
Which virtue gave the golden age to guild
Their silver cheeks, and called it then their shield
Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
When shame assailed, the red should fence the white.
This Herauldry in LVCRECE face was seen,
Argued by beauties red and virtues white,
Of eithers color was the other Queen:
Proving from worlds minority their right,
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight:
The sou'raignty of either being so great,
That often they interchange each others seat.
This silent war of Lillies and of Roses,
Which Tarquin viewd in her fair faces field,
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses,
Where least between them both it should be killed,
The coward captive vanquished does yield
To those two armies that would let him go.
Rather then triumph in so false a foe.
Now thinks he that her husbands shallow tongue,
The niggard prodigal that praisde her so,
In that high task has done her beauty wrong.
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show.
Therefore that praise which Colatine does owe,
Enchanted Tarquin answers with furmise,
In silent wonder of still gazing eyes.
This earthly Saint adored by this Devil,
Little suspecteth the false worshipper:
"For thoughts unstained do sildome dream on evil.
"Birds never limbed, no secret bushes fear:
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer,
And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
Whose inward i will no outward harm expressed.
For that he colored with his high estate,
Hiding base sin in pleats of Majesty:
That nothing in him seemd inordinate,
Save sometime too much wonder of his eye,
Which having all, all could not satisfy;
But poorly rich so wants in his store,
That cloyd with much, he pineth still for more.
But she that never copte with stranger eyes,
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
Nor read the subtle shining secrecies
Writ in the glassie margents of such books,
She touched no unknown baits, nor feared no books;
Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
More then his eyes were opend to the light.
He stories to her ears her husbands fame,
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy:
And decks with praises Colatines high name,
Made glorious by his manly chiualry,
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory;
Her joy with heaued-vp hand she does express,
And wordlesse so greets heaven for his success.
Far from the purpose of his coming thither,
He makes excuses for his being there;
No cloudy show of stormy blustering wether
Does yet in his fair welkin once appear,
Till sable night sad source of dread and fear,
Upon the world dim darkness does display,
And in her vaulty prison shuts the day.
For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
Intending weariness with heavy sprite:
For after supper long he questioned
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:
Now leaden slumber with lives strength does fight,
And every one to rest themselves betake,
Save thieves, and ears, and troubled minds that wake.
As one of which does Tarquin lie reuoluing
The sundry dangers of his wills obtaining:
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving.
Though weake-built hopes persuade him to abstaining;
Despair to gain does traffic often for gaining,
And when great treasure is the meed proposed,
Though death be adiunct, there is no death supposed.
Those that much covet are with gain so fond,
That often they have not that which they possess,
They scatter and unloose it from their bond,
And so by hoping more they have but less,
Or gaining more the profit of excess
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain
That they prove banckrout in this poor rich gain.
The aim of all, is but to nourse the life
With honor, wealth, and ease, in wayning age:
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,
That one for all, or all for one we gage:
As life for honor, in fell battails rage,
Honor for wealth, and often that wealth does cost
The death of all, and altogether lost.
So that in ventring ill, we leave to be
The things we are, for that which we expect:
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
In having much torments us with defect
Of that we have: so then we do neglect
The thing we have, and all for want of wit,
Make something nothing, by augmenting it.
Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
Pawning his honor to obtain his lust:
And for himself, himself he must forsake:
Then where is truth if there be no selfe-trust?
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
When he himself, himself confounds, betraies
To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?
Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
When heavy sleep had closd up mortal eye,
No comfortable star did lend his light,
No noise but Owls and Wolves death boding cries:
Now serves the season that they may surprise
3 Tarquin disputing the matter at last resolves to satisfy his lust.
The silly Lambs, pure thoughts are dead and still:
While lust and Murder wakes to stain and kill.
And now this lustful Lord leapt from his bed,
Throwing his mantle rudely ore his arms,
Is madly tossed between desire and dread;
The One sweetly flatters, the other feateth harm,
But honest fear, bewitched with lusts foul charm,
Does too too often betake him to retire,
Beaten away by brainsicke rude desire.
His Fanchion on a flint he softly smites,
That from the cold stone sparks of fire does fly,
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lights,
Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye,
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly;
As from this cold flint I enforct this fire,
So LVCRECE must I force to my desire.
Here pale with fear he does premeditate
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
And in his inward mind he does debate,
What following sorrow may on this arise.
Then looking scornfully, he does despise
His naked armor of still slaughtered lust,
And justly thus controlls his thoughts unjust.
Fair torch burn out thy light, and lend it not
To darken her whose light excels thine:
And die unhallowed thoughts before you blot
With your uncleanness that which is divine:
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine;
Let fair humanity abhor the deed,
That spots and stains loves modest snow-white weed.
O shame to knighthood, and to shining arms,
O foul dishonor to my households grave:
O impious act including all foul harms,
A martial man to be soft fancies slave,
True valor still a true respect should have:
Then my digression is so vile, so base,
That it will live engraven in my face.
Yea though I die the scandal will survive,
And be an eie-sore in my golden coat:
Some loathsome dash the Herald will contriue,
To cipher me how fondly I did dote:
That my posterity shamed with the note
Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin,
To wish that I their father had not been.
What win I if I gain the thing I seek?
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy,
Who buies a minutes mirth to wail a week?
Or sels eternity to get a toy?
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
Or what fond beggar but to touch the crown?
Would with the scepter straight be stricken down?
If Colatinus dream of my intent,
Will he not wake; and in a desperate rage
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
This siege that has ingirt his marriage,
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
This dying virtue, this suruiuing shame,
Whose crime will bear an euer-during blame.
O what excuse can my invention make
When thou shall charge me with so black a deed:
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail ioyuts shake?
Mine eyes for go their light, my false heart bleed?
The guilt being great, the fear does still exceed,
And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
But cowardlike with trembling terror die.
Had Collatinus killed my son or sire,
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
Might have excuse to work upon his wife;
As in revenge or quittall of such strife:
But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
The shame and fault finds no excuse not end.
Shameful it is, if once the fact be known,
Hateful it is: there is no hate in loving,
I Will beg her love: but she is not her own:
The worst is but denial, and reproving.
My will is strong, past reasons weak removing.
Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw,
Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.
Thus (graceless) holds he disputation,
Tweene frozen conscience and hot burning will.
And with good thoughts makes dispensation,
Urging the worser sense for vantage still.
Which in a moment does confound and kill
All pure effects, and does so far proceed,
That what is vile, shows like a virtuous deed.
Quoth he, she took me kindly by the hand,
And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes,
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band
Where her beloved Colatinus lies.
O how her fear did make her color rise?
First red as Roses that on Lawne we lay,
Then white as Lawne the Roses took away.
And now her hand in my hand being locked,
Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear:
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rockt,
Until her husbands welfare she did hear,
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer
That had Narsissus seen her as fly stood,
Self-love had never drowned him in the flood.
Why hunt I then for color or excuses?
All Orators are dumb when beauty pleads,
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses,
Love thriues not in the heart that shadows dreads,
Affection is my Captain and he leads:
And when this gaudy banner is displaide,
The coward fights and will not be dismaide.
Then childish fear auant, debating die,
Respect and Reason wait on wrinkled age:
My heart shall never countermand mine eye,
Sad Pause and deep Regard beseems the sage,
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage.
Desire my pilot is, Beauty my prise,
Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies.
As corn ore-growne by weeds, so heedfull fear
Is almost cloakt by unresisted lust,
Away he steals with open listening ear,
Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust:
Both which as seruitors to the unjust
So cross him with their opposite persuasion,
That now he vows a league, and now invasion.
Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
And in the self same seat sits Colatine,
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits,
That eye which him beholds, as more divine
Unto a view so false will not incline:
But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
Which once corrupted, takes the worser part,
And therein hartens up his servile powers,
Who flattered by their leaders iocond show,
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours.
And as their Captain so their pride does grow,
Paying more slavish tribute then they owe.
By reprobate desire thus madly led
The Roman Lord does march to Lucrece bed.
The locks between her chamber and his will,
Each one by him enforst, recites his ward,
But as they open they all rate his ill,
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard.
The threshold grates the door to have him heard.
Night-wandring Weezles shreeke to see him there,
They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.
As each unwilling portall yields him way,
Through little vents and crannies of the place,
The wind wars with his torch to make him stay,
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
Extinguishing his conduct in this case.
But his hot heart, which fond desire does scorch,
Puffes forth another wind that fires the torch.
And being lighted by the light he spies
Lucreciaes glove, wherein her needle sticks,
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
And griping it, the needle his finger pricks:
As who should say this glove to wanton tricks
Is nor inured, return again in have,
Thou see our Mistress ornaments are chaste.
But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him,
He in the worst sense construes their denial:
The doors, the wind, the glove that did delay him,
He takes for accedentall things of trial,
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
Who with a lingering stay his course does let,
Till every minute pays the hour his debt.
So, so, quoth he, these lets attend the time,
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring,
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing,
Pain paies the income of each precious thing,
Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelues and sands,
The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.
Now is he come unto the chamber door,
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
Which with a yielding latch and with no more,
Has bard him from the blessed thing he sought,
So from himself impiety has wrought
That for his Prey to pray he does begin,
As if the heavens should countenance his sin.
But in the midst of his unfruitful, prayer,
Having solicited the eternal power,
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair, fair,
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
Even there he starts, quoth he, I must defloure:
The powers to whom I pray, abhor this fact
How can they then assist me in the act?
Then love and fortune be my Gods, my guide,
My will is backed with resolution:
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried,
Black sin is cleard with absolution,
Against loves fire, fears frost has dissolution.
The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
Couers the shame that follows sweet delight.
This said his guilty hand plucked up the latch,
And with his knee the door he opens wide,
The Dove sleeps fast that this night Owl will catch.
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied:
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
But she sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.
Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed:
The curtains being close, about he walks,
Rouling his greedy eye-bals in his head,
By their high treason is his heart misled.
Which gives the watchword to his hand too soon,
To draw the cloud that hides the silver Moon.
Look as the fair and fiery pointed Sun,
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaues our sight:
Even so the curtain drawn his eyes begun
To wink, being blinded with a greater light.
Whether it is that she reflects so bright
That dazeleth them, or else some shame supposed,
But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.
O had they in that darksome prison died,
Then had they seen the period of their ill;
Then Colatine again by Lucrece side,
In his clear bed might have reposed still:
But they must open this blessed league to kill:
And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight,
Must sell her joy, her life, her worlds delight.
Her lilly hand her rosy cheeks lies under,
Coosening the pillow of a lawful kiss.
Who therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss,
Between whose hills her head intombed is.
Where like a virtuous monument she lies.
To be admired of lewd unhallowed eyes.
Without the bed her other fair hand was,
On the green couerlet, whose perfect white
Showed like an April dazie on the grass,
With pearly swet, resembling dew of night.
Her eyes like Marigolds had sheathd their light,
And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
Till they might open to adorn the day.
Her hair like golden threeds played with her breath,
O modest wantons, wanton modesty!
Showring life's triumph in the map of death,
And deaths dim look in life's mortality.
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
As if between them twain there were no strife,
But that life lived in death, and death in life.
Her breasts like iuory globes cirdled with blew,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered:
Save of their Lord no bearing yoke they knew,
And him by oath they truly honored.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred.
Who like a foul usurper went about,
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.
What could he see but mightily he noted?
What did he note, but strongly he desired?
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
And in his will his wilful eye he tired.
With more then admiration he admired
Her azure veins her alablaster skin,
Her coral lips her snow white dimpled chin.
As the grim Lion fauneth ore his pray,
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied:
So ore this sleeping soul does TARQVIN stay,
His rage of lust by gazing qualified.
Slackt, not suppressed, for standing by her side,
His eye which late this mutiny restraines,
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins.
And they like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting:
In bloody death and rauishment delighting,
Nor childrens tears nor mothers groans respecting,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting.
Anon his beating heart alarm striking,
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.
His drumming heart cheares up his burning eye,
His eye commends the leading to his hand:
His hand as proud of such a dignity,
Smoking with pride, marched on to make his stand
On her bare breasts, the heart of all her land,
Whose ranckes of blew veins as his hand did scale,
Left their round turrets destitute and pale.
They mustring to the quiet Cabinet,
Where their dear gouernesse and Lady lies,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
And fright her with confusion of their cries.
She much amazed breaks open her locked up eyes.
Who peeping forth this tumult to behold,
Are by his flaming torch dimmed and controld.
Imagine her as one in dead of night,
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
That thinks she has beheld some ghastly sprite,
5 Lucretia wakes amazed and confounded to be so surprised
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a shaking,
What terror it is: but she in worser taking,
From sleep disturbd, heedfully does view,
The sight which makes supposed terror rue.
Wrapped and confounded in a thousand fears,
Like to a new-kild bird she trembling lies:
She dares not look, yet winking there appears
Quick shifting Antiques ugly in her eyes,
Such shadows are the weak brains forgeries,
Who angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.
His hand that yet remains upon her breast,
(Rude Ram to batter such an Iuory wall:)
May feel her heart (poor Citizen) distressed,
Wounding it self to death, rise up and fall:
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
To make the breach, and enter this sweet City.
First like a trumpet does his tongue begin,
To sound a parley to his hartlesse foe,
Who ore the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
Which he by dumb demeanor seeks to show:
But she with vehement prayers urges still,
Under what color he commits this ill?
Thus he replies the color in thy face,
That even for anger makes the Lilly pale,
And the red Rose blush at her own disgrace,
Shall plead for me, and tell my loving tale.
Under that color am I come to scale
Thy never conquered Fort, the fault is thine,
For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.
Thus I forestall thee: if thou mean to chide,
Thy beauty has ensnared thee to this night,
Where thou with patience must my will abide,
My will that marks thee for my earths delight,
Which I to conquer sought with all my might.
But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
By thy bright beauty it was newly bred.
I see what crosses my attempts will bring,
I know what thorns the growing Rose defends,
I think the honey guarded with a sting,
All this before hand counsel comprehends.
But will is deaf, and hears no heedfull friends.
Only he has an eye to gaze on beauty,
And dotes on what he looks, against law or duty.
I have debated even in my soul,
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed.
But nothing can affections course control
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed,
I know repentant tears ensue the deed.
Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity,
Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy.
This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
Which like a Faulcon towering in the skies,
Coucheth the foul below with his wings shade,
Whose crooked beak threats, if he mount he dies.
So under his insulting Fauchion lies
Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells,
With trembling fear, as foul hear Faulcons bells.
Lucrece, quoth he, this night I must enjoy thee;
If thou deny, then force must work my way:
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee.
That done, some worthless slave of thine i will slay,
To kill thine honor with thy lives decay.
And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
Swearing I slew him seeing thee embrace him.
So thy suruiuing husband shall remain,
The scornful mark of every open eye,
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
Thy issue blurd with namelesse bastardy:
And thou the Author of their obloquy.
Shall have thy trespass cited up in rimes,
And sung by children in succeeding times.
But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend,
The fault unknown is as a thought vnacted,
A little harm done to a great good end,
Fot lawful policy remains enacted.
The poisonous simple sometime is compacted
In purest compounds; being so applied,
His venom in effect is purified.
Then for thy husband and thy childrens sake,
Tender my suit, bequeath not to their lot
The shame that from them no device can take,
The blemish that will never be forgot:
Worse then a slavish wipe, or birth-houres blot:
For marks descried in men's nativity,
Are Natures faults, not their own infamy.
Here with a Cocka-trice dead killing eye,
He rowseth up himself, and makes a pause,
While she the picture of pure piety,
Like a white Hind beneath the gripes sharp claws,
Pleads in a wilderness where are no laws.
To the rough beast, that knows no gentle right,
Nor ought obeyes but his foul appetite.
But when a blacke-fac'd cloud the world does threat,
In his dim mist the aspiring mountain hiding,
From earths dark womb some gentle gust does get,
Which blow these pitchy vapors from their biding,
Hindering their present fall by this dividing.
So his unhallowed haste her words delays,
And moody Pluto winkes while Orpheus plays.
Yet foul night waking Cat he does but dally,
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse pants.
Her sad behavior feeds his vulture folly.
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wants.
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart grants
No penetrable entrance to her plaining,
Tears harden lust, though marble wears with rayning.
Her pitty-pleading eyes are sadly fixed
In the remorselesse wrinckles of his face:
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mixed,
Which to her Oratory ads more grace.
She puts the period often from his place,
And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,
That twice she does begin ere once she speaks.
6 Lucrece pleads in defense of chastity and exprobateth his uncivil lust.
She coniures him by high Almighty Jove,
By Knighthood, Gentry, and sweet friendships oath,
By her untimely tears, her husbands love,
By holy humane law, and common troth,
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
That to his borrowed bed, he make retire,
And stoop to Honor, not to foul desire.
Quoth she, reward not Hospitality
With such black payment as thou have pretended,
Mudde not the fountain that gave drink to thee,
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended:
End thy ill aim, before thy shoot be ended.
He is no Wood-man that does bend his bow
To strike a poor unseasonable Do.
My Husband is thy friend, for his sake spare me,
Thy self art mighty, for thine own sake leave me:
My self a weakeling, do not then insnate me.
Thou look not like deceit, do not deceive me.
My sighs like whirlewinds labor hence to heave thee:
If ever man were moved with woman's mones,
Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans.
All which together like a troubled Ocean,
Beat at thy rocky, and wrack-threatning heart,
To soften it with their continual motion:
For stones dissolved, to water do convert.
O if no harder then a stone thou art,
Melt at my tears and be compassionate,
Soft pity enters at an iron gate.
In TARQVINS likeness I did entertain thee,
Have thou put on his shape to do him shame?
To all the host of heaven I complain me.
Thou wrongst his Honor, woundst his princely name,
Thou art not what thou seemst, and if the same,
Thou seem not what thou art, a God, a King,
For Kings like Gods should govern every thing.
How will thy shame be feeded in thine age,
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring?
If in thy hope thou dare do such outrage.
What dare thou not when once thou art a King?
O be remembered, no outrageous thing
From vassal actors can be wipt away
Then Kings misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.
This deed shall make thee only loved for fear,
But happy Monarchs still are feared for love:
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
When they in thee the like offenses prove:
If but for fear of this, thy will remove.
For Princes are the glass, the school, the book,
Where subjects eyes do learn, do read, do look.
And will thou be the school where lust shall learn?
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?
VVilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern
Authority for sin, warrant for blame?
To privilege dishonor in thy name.
Thou back'st reproach against long living laud,
And makst fair Reputation but a baud.
Have thou command? by him that gave it thee
From a pure heart command thy rebel will:
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill,
Thy princely office how caust thou fulfill
When patterned by thy fault, foul sin may say,
He learnd to sin, and thou did teach the way?
Think but how vile a spectacle it were,
To view thy present trespass in another:
Men's faults do sildome to themselves appear,
Their own transgressions partially they smother:
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
O how are they wrapped in with infamies,
That from their own misdeeds askaunce their eyes.
To thee, to thee, my heau'd up hands appeal,
Not to seducing lust thy rash reply:
Isue for exild majesty's repeal,
Let him return and flattering thoughts retire.
His true respect will prison false desire,
7 Tarquin all impatient interrupts her and denied of consent breaks the
enclosure of her chastity by force.
And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyes,
That thou shall see thy state and pity mine.
Have done, quoth he, my uncontrolled tide
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let,
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
And with the wind in greater fury fret:
The pretty streams that pay a daily debt
To their salt sovereign with their fresh falls have,
Add to this flow but alter not his taste.
Thou art (quoth she) a sea, a sovereign King,
And lo, therefals into thy boundless flood,
Black lust, dishonor, shame, misgouerning.
Who seek to stain the Ocean of thy blood.
If all these petty ils shall change thy good,
Thy sea within a puddle womb is bersed,
And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.
So shall these slaves be King, and thou their slave:
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified:
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler graise:
Thou lothed in their shame, they in thy pride,
The lesser thing should not the greater hide.
The Cedar stoops not to the base shrubs foot,
But low shrubs wither at the Cedars root.
So let thy thoughts low vassals to thy state,
No more, quoth he, by heaven I will not hear thee;
Yield to my love, if not, enforced hate,
In stead of loves coy touch shall rudely tear thee:
That done, despightfully I mean to bear thee
Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
To be thy partner in this shameful doom.
This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
For light and lust are deadly enemies:
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
When most unseen, then most does tyrannize.
The Wolf has seizd his Prey, the poor Lamb cries
Till with her own white fleece her voice controld,
Intombs her outcry in her lips sweet fold.
For with the mighty linen that she wears,
He pens her piteous clamors in her head,
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears,
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
O that foul lust should stain so pure a bed:
The spots whereof could weeping purify,
Her tears should drop on them perpetually.
But she has lost a dearer thing then life,
And he has won what he would loose again:
This forced league does force a further strife,
This momentary joy breeds months of pain,
This hot desire conuerts to cold disdain:
Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
And lust, the thief, far poorer then before.
Look as the ful-fed Hound or gorged Hawke,
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
Make slow pursuit, or altogether bauke
The prey wherein by nature they delight:
So surfet-taking TARQVIN fares this night.
His taste delicious, in digestion sowring,
Deuoures his will, that lived by foul devouring.
O deeper sin then bottomless conceit
Can comprehend in still imagination!
Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt,
Ere he can see his own abomination.
While lust is in his pride no exclamation
Can curb his heat, of reine his rash desire,
Till like a Jade, self-will himself does tire.
And then with lanke and lean discolored cheek,
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthlesse pace,
Feeble desire all recreant, poor and meek,
Like to a bankerout beggar wailes his case:
The flesh being proud, Desire does fight with grace:
For there it revels, and when that decaies,
The guilty rebel for remission prays.
So fares it with this fault-full Lord of Rome,
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;
For, now against himself he sounds this doom,
That through the length of times he stands disgraced:
Besides, his souls fair temple is defaced:
To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
To ask the spotted Princess how she fares.
She says her subjects with foul insurrection,
Have battred down her consecrated wall,
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
Her immortality, and made her thrall
To living death and pain perpetual.
Which in her prescience she controled still,
But her foresight could not forestall their will.
Even in this thought through the dark night he steals
A captive victor that has lost in gain:
Bearing away the wound that nothing heals,
The scar that will despite of Cure remain;
Leaving his spoil perplexed in greater pain.
She bears the load of lust he left behind,
And he the burden of a guilty mind.
He like a theeuish dog creeps sadly thence,
She like a wearied Lamb lies panting there:
He scowles and hates himself for his offense,
She desperate, with her nails, her flesh does tear,
He faintly flies, sweating with guilty fear;
She stays exclaiming on the direful night;
He runs and chides his vanished loathed delight.
He thence departs a heavy conuertite,
She there remains a hopeless castaway:
He in his speed looks for the morning light:
She prays she never may behold the day,
For day, quoth she, night scapes does open lay:
And my true eyes have never practizd how,
To cloak offenses with a cunning brow.
They think not but that every eye can see,
The same disgrace which they themselves behold:
And therefore would they still in darkness lie,
To have their unseen sin remain untold:
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
And grave, like water that does eat in steel,
Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.
Here she exclaimes against repose and rest,
8 Lucrece thus abused complains on her misery.
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind:
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
Some purer chest, to close so pure a mind.
Frantic with grief thus breaths she forth her spite,
Against the unseen secrecy of night.
O comfort-killing night, image of Hell,
Dim register, and notary of shame,
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell,
Vast sin concealing Chaos, nurse of blame,
Blind mussled bawd, dark harbor for defame,
Grim cave of death, whispring conspirator
With close tongued treason, and the rauisher.
O hateful, vaporous and foggy night,
Since thou art guilty of my curelesse crime:
Muster thy mysts to meet the Eastern light,
Make war against proportioned course of time:
Or if thou will permit the Sun to clime
His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.
With rotten damps ravish the morning air,
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
Ere he ariue his weary noon tide prick.
And let thy mysty vapors march so thick,
That in their smoaky ranks his smothered light
May set at noone and make perpetual night.
Were Tarquin night as he is but nights child,
The silver shining Queen he would disdain,
Her twinkling handmaids to (by him defild)
Through nights black bosom should not peep again.
So should I have copartners in my pain.
And fellowship in woe does woe assuage,
As Palmers that makers short their Pilgrimage.
Where now I have no one to blush with me,
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
To mask their brows and hide their infamy,
But I alone, alone must sit and pine,
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans
Poor wasting monuments of lasting mones.
O night thou furnace of foul reeking smoke,
Let not the jealous day behold that face
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
Immodestly lies martyred with disgrace.
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
That all the faults which in thy reign are made,
May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade.
Make me not object to the tel-tale day,
The light shall show charactred in my brow,
The story of sweet chastities decay,
The impious breach of holy wedlockes vow.
Yea, the illeterate that know not how
To cipher what is writ in learned books,
Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.
The nurse to still her child will tell my story,
And fright her crying babe with Tarquins name:
The Orator to deck his oratory,
Will couple my reproach to Tarquins shame,
Feast finding minstrels tuning my defame
Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
How Tarquin wronged me, I COLATINE.
Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
For COLATINES dear love be kept unspotted:
If that be made a theme for disputation,
The branches of another root are rotted,
And undeserved reproach to him allotted,
That is as clear from this attaint of mine,
As I ere this, was pure to COLATINE.
O unseen shame, invisible disgrace!
O unfelt sore, crest-wounding private scarre:
Reproach is stamped in COLLATINVS face,
And Tarquins eye may read the mot a far,
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
Alas how many bear such shameful blows,
Which not themselves but he that gives them knows?
If Colatine thine honor lay in me,
From me by strong assault it is bereft:
My honey lost, and I a Drone like be,
Have no perfection of my summer left,
But robbed and ransackt by injurious theft.
In thy weak hiue a wandering waspe has crept,
And sucked the honey which thy chaste Be kept.
Yet am I guilty of thy honors wrack;
Yet for thy honor did I entertain him;
Coming from thee I could not put him back:
For it had been dishonor to disdairie him,
Besides of weariness he did complain him,
And talk of virtue (O unlooked for evil)
When virtue is profaned in such a Devil.
Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Or hateful Cuckowes hatch in Sparrowes nests?
Or Todes infect fair founts with venom mud?
Or tyrant Folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Or Kings be breakers of their own behests?
But no perfection is so absolute,
That some impurity does not pollute.
The aged man that coffers up his gold,
Is plagued with cramps, and gouts, and painful fits,
And scarce has eyes his treasure to behold,
But like still pining Tantalus he sits,
And vselesse bannes the harvest of his wits:
Having no other pleasure of his gain,
But torment that it cannot cure his pain.
So then, he has it when he cannot use it:
And leaves it to be mastred by his young,
Who in their pride do presently abuse it:
Their father was too weak, and they too strong:
To hold their cursed-blessed fortunelong.
The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sowers,
Even in the moment that we call them ours.
Unruly blast wait on the tender spring,
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers:
The Adder hisseth where the sweet birds sing:
What virtue breeds, iniquity deuours:
We have no good that we can say is ours:
But ill-annexed Opportunity,
Or kills his life, or else his quality.
O Opportunity thy guilt is great;
It Is thou that execut'st the traitors treason:
Thou sets the Wolf where he the Lamb may get:
Who ever plots the sin thou points the season.
It Is thou that spurnst at right, at law, at reason.
And in thy shady Cell where none may spy her,
Sits Sin to seize the souls that wander by her.
Thou make the Vestall violate her oath:
Thou blowest the fire when Temperance is thawd;
Thou smotherst honesty, thou murtherst troth:
Thou foul abbettor, thou notorions baud:
Thou plantest scandal, and displacest land.
Thou rauisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief.
Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame;
Thy private feasting to a public fast:
Thy smothering titles to a ragged name:
Thy sugared tongue to bitter wormwood taste:
Thy violent vanities can never last.
How comes it then, vile opportunity
Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?
When will thou be the humble suppliants friend,
And bring him where his suit may be obtained?
When will thou sort an hour great strifes to end?
Or free that soul which wretchedness has chained?
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pained?
The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
But they nere met with opportunity.
The Patient dies while the Physician sleeps;
The Orphan pines while the Oppressor feeds:
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps:
Advise is sporting while infection breeds,
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds,
Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder rages,
Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.
When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid;
They buy thy help, but Sin nere gives a fee,
He gratis comes, and thou art well apaid
As well to hear, as grant what he has said.
My Colatine would else have come to me:
When Tarquin did, but he was staid by thee.
Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,
Guilty of perjury and subornation,
Guilty of treason, forgery and shift,
Guilty of incest that abomination,
An accessory by thine inclination
To all sins past, and all that are to come,
From the creation to the general doom.
Misshapen time, copesmate of ugly night,
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Base watch of woes, sins packe-horse, virtues snare;
Thou nursest all, and murtherest all that are:
O hear me then, injurious shifting time,
Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.
Why has thy servant Opportunity
Betrayed the hours thou gave me to repose?
Canceld my fortunes and inchained me
To endless date of neuer-ending woes?
Times office is to fine the hate of foes,
To eat up error by opinion bred,
Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.
Times glory is to calm contending Kings,
To unmask falsehood, and bring truth to light,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To wake the morn and centinell the night,
To wrong the wronger till he render right,
To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours:
And smeare with dust their glittering golden towers.
To fill with worme-holes stately monuments,
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
To blot old books, and alter their contents,
To pluck the quils from ancient Ravens wings.
To dry the old oaks sap, and cherish springs.
To spoil antiquities of hammered steel,
And turn the giddy round of Fortunes wheel.
To show the beldame daughters of her daughter,
To make the child a man, the man a child,
To slay the Tygre that does live by slaughter.
To tame the Unicorn and Lion wild,
To mock the subtle in themselves beguild.
To cheer the Plowman with increasefull crops,
And waste huge stones with little water drops.
Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
Unless thou could return to make amends?
One poor retyring minute in an age,
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
Lending him wit that to bad dettors lends,
O this dread night, would thou one hour come back
I could prevent this storm and shun this wrack.
Thou ceaselesse lackie to Eternity,
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight
Devise extremes beyond extremity,
To make him curse this cursed crimefull night:
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright,
And the dire thought of his committed evil.
Shape every bush a hideous shapelesse Devil.
Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances
Afflict him in his bed with bedred groans:
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
To make him moan, but pity not his mones:
Stone him with hardened hearts harder then stone,
And let mild women to him loose their mildness,
VVilder to him then Tigers in their wildness.
Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
Let him have time against himself to rave,
Let him have time of times help to despair,
Let him have time to live a loathed slave,
Let him have time a beggars orts to crave:
And time to see one that by alms does live,
Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.
Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
And merry fools to mock at him resort:
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
His time of folly, and his time of sport.
And ever let his vnrecalling time,
Have time to wail th'abusing of his time.
O time thou tutor both to good and bad,
Teach me to curse him that thou taughts this ill,
At his own shadow let the thief run mad,
Himself, himself seek every hour to kill,
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill.
For who so base would such an office have
As slanderous deaths-man to so base a slave?
The baser is he, coming from a King,
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate,
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing
That makes him honored, or begets him hato:
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
The Moon being clouded presently is mist,
But little Stars may hide them when they list.
The Crow may bathe his cole-blacke wings in mire,
And vnperceiu'd fly with the filth away,
But if the like the snow-white Swan desire,
The stain upon his silver Down will stay.
Poor grooms are sightlesse night, Kings glorious day;
Gnats are unnoted wheresoere they fly,
But Eagles gazed upon with every eye.
Our idle words, servants to shallow fools,
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators,
Busy your selves in skil-contending schools,
Debate where leisure serves with dull debators:
To trembling Clyents be you mediators,
For me, I force not argument a straw,
Since that my case is past the help of law.
In vain I rail at Opportunity,
At Time, at Tarquin, and vnsearchfull night:
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
In vain I spurn at my confirmed despite:
This helpless smoke of words does me no right;
The remedy indeed to do me good
Is to let forth my foul defiled blood.
Poor hand, why quiuerest thou at this decree?
Honor thy self to rid me of this shame,
For if I die, my Honor lives in thee,
But if I live, thou live in my defame;
Since thou could not defend thy loyal Dame:
And wast affeard to scratch her wicked Foe,
Kill both thy self and her for yielding so.
This said from her betumbled couch she starts,
To find some desperate instrument of death,
But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparts,
To make more vent for passage of her breath,
Which thrunging through her lips so vanishes
As smoke from Aetna, that in air consumes,
Or that which from discharged Canon fumes.
In vain (quoth she) I live, and seek in vain
Some happy mean to end a hapless life:
I feared by Tarquins Fauchion to be slain,
Yet for the selfsame purpose seek a knife:
But when I feared, I was a loyal wife;
So am I now: O no that cannot be,
Of that true type has Tarquin rifled me.
O that is gone for which I sought to live,
And therefore now I need not fear to die,
To clear this spot by death (at least) I give
A badge of Fame to slanders livery,
A dying life to living infamy.
Poor helpless help the treasure stolen away,
To burn the guiltless casket where it lay.
Well well dear Colatine thou shall not know
The stained taste of violated troth:
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
To flatter thee with an infringed oath:
This bastard grass shall never come to growth,
He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute,
That thou art doting father of his fruit.
Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state,
But thou shall know thy interest was not bought
Basely with gold, but stolen from forth thy gate,
For me I am the mistress of my fate
And with my trespass neuerwill dispense,
Till life to death acquit my forced offense.
I will not poison thee with my attaint,
Nor fold my fault in cleanly coined excuses,
My sable ground of sin I will not paint,
To hide the truth of this false nights abules:
My tongue shall utter all, mine eyes like sluices
As from a mountain spring that feeds a dale,
Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.
By this lamenting Philomele had ended,
The well-tuned warble ofher nightly sorrow,
9 Lucrece continuing herlaments, disputes whether she should kill her self
or no.
And solemn night with slow sad gate descended
To ougly Hell, when lo the blushing morrow
Lends light to all fair eyes that light would borrow.
But clowdy Lucrece shames her self to see,
And therefore still in night would cloistred be.
Revealing day through every cranny spies,
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping,
To whom she sobbing speaks, O eye of eyes,
Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping,
Mock with thy tickling beams, eyes that are sleeping:
Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
For day has naught to do what is done by night.
Thus cauils she with every thing she sees,
True grief is fond and testie as a child,
Who way-ward once, his mood with naught agrees,
Old woes, not infant sorrows bear them mild;
Continuance tames the one, the other wild
Like an vnpractiz'd swimmer plunging still,
With too much labor drowns for want of skill,
So she deep drenched in a Sea of care,
Holds disputation with each thing she viewes,
And to her self all sorrow does compare,
No object but her passions strength renewes,
And as one shifts another straight insewes,
Sometimes her grief is dumb and has no words,
Sometime it is mad and too much talk affoords.
The little birds that tune their mornings joy,
Make her mones mad with their sweet melody,
For mirth does search the bottom of annoy,
Sad souls are slain in merry company,
Grief best is pleased with griefs society?
True sorrow then is feelingly suffiz'd
When with like semblance it is simpathiz'd.
It Is double death to drown in ken of shore,
He ten times pines, that pines beholding food,
To see the salve does make the wound ache more,
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good,
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood.
Who being stopped, the bounding banks oreflowes,
Grief dallied with, nor law, nor limit knows.
You mocking Birds (quoth she) your tunes intombe
Within your hollow swelling feathred breasts,
And in my hearing be you ever dumb,
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests;
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests.
Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears,
Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.
Come Philomele that singst of rauishment,
Make thy sad grove in my disheueld hear,
As the danke earth weeps at thy languishment,
So I at each sad strain, will strain a tear,
And with deep groans the Diapason bear:
For burthen-wise I Will hum on Tarquin still,
While thou on Tereus descants better skill.
And whiles against a thorn thou bearst thy part,
To keep thy sharp woes waking wretched I
To imitate thee well, against my heart
Will six a sharp knife to affright mine eye,
Who if it wink, shall thereon fall and die.
These means as frets upon an instrument,
Shall tune our heart strings to true languishment,
And for poor bird thou sing'st not in the day,
As shaming any eye should thee behold:
Some dark deep desert seated from the way,
That knows nor parching heat, nor freezing cold
Will we find out: and there we will unfold
To creatures stern, sad tunes to change their kinds
Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.
As the poor frighted Dear that stands at gaze,
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Or one incompast with a winding maze,
That cannot tread the way out readily:
So with her self is she in mutiny,
To live or die which of the twain were better
When life is shamed and death reproaches detter.
To kill my self quoth she, alack what were it,
But with my body my poor souls pollution?
They that loose half with greater patience bear it,
Then they whose whole is swallowed in confusion.
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
Who having two sweet babes when death takes one,
Will slay the other, and be nurse to none.
My body or my soul which was the dearer?
When the one pure, the other made divine,
Whose love of either, to my self was nearer?
When both were kept for Heaven and Colatine
Ay me, the bark pild from the lofty Pine
His leaves will wither and his sap decay,
So must my soul, her bark being pild away.
Her house is sacked, her quiet interrupted,
Her mansion battered by the enemy,
Her sacred Temple spotted, spoild, corrupted,
Grossly ingirt with daring infamy,
Then let it not be called impiety
If in this blemished fort I make some hole,
Through which I may convey this troubled soul.
Yet die I will not till my Colatine
Have heard the cause of my untimely death,
That he may vow in that sad hour of mine,
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath,
My stained blood to Tarquin i will bequeath,
Which by him tainted, shall for him be spent,
And as his due writ in my Testament.
My honor i will bequeath unto the knife,
That wounds my body so dishonored:
It Is Honor to deprive dishonored life
The one will live, the other being dead.
So of shames ashes shall my Fame be bred:
For in my death I murder shameful scorn,
My shame so dead, my honor is newborn.
Dear Lord of that dear Jewel I have lost,
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
My resolution, love, shall be thy bost,
By whose example thou revenged may be.
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me.
My self thy friend will kill my self thy foe,
And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so.
This brief abridgement of my will I make,
My soul and body to the skies and ground,
My resolution (Husband) do you take,
Mine honor be the knifes that make my wound,
My shame be his that did my fame confound.
And all my fame that lives disbursed be,
To those that live and think no shame of me.
Then Colatine shall ouersee this will,
How was I ouerseene that thou shall see it?
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
My life's foul deed my life's fair end shall free it.
Faint not faint heart, but stoutly say, so be it.
Yield to my hand, my hand shall conquer thee,
Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.
This plot of death when sadly she had laid,
And wipt the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
10 Lucrece resolved to kill her self determines first to send her Husband word.
With untuned tongue she hoarsely called her maid,
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies,
For fleet-wingd duty with thoughts feathers flies
Poor Lucrece cheeks unto her maid seem so,
As winter meads when Sun does melt their snow.
Her mistress she does give demure good morrow,
With soft slow tongue, true marks of modesty,
And sorts a sad look to her Ladies sorrow,
(For why her face wore sorrows livery.)
But durst not ask of her audaciously
Why her two suns were clowd-eclipsed so,
Nor why her fair cheeks over washed with woe.
But as the earth does weep the Sun being set,
Each flower moystned like a melting eye:
Even so the maid with swelling drops began wet
Her circkled eyne enforced, by sympathy
Of those fair Suns set in her mistress sky,
Who in a salt-wau'd Ocean quench their light.
Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.
A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
Like iuory conduits coral cesierues filling:
One justly weeps, the other takes in hand
No cause, but company of her drops spilling.
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing,
Grieuing themselves to guess at other smarts,
And then they drown their eyes, or break their hearts.
For men have marble, women waxen minds,
And therefore are they formed as marble will,
The weak oppressed, the impression of strange kinds,
Is formed in them by force, by fraud or skill.
Then call them not the Authors of their ill,
No more then wax shall be accounted evil,
Wherein is stamped the semblance of a devil.
Their smothnesse like a champaine plain,
Lays open all the little worms that creep,
In men as in a rough grown grove remain
Caue-keeping evils that obscurely sleep.
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep,
Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks
Poor woman's faces are their own faults books.
No man inueighs against the withered flower,
But chide rough winter that the flower has killed,
Not that deuourd, but that which does devour
Is worthy blame, o let it not be held
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfild
With men's abuses, those proud Lords to blame,
Make weake-made women tenants to their shame.
The president whereof in Lucrece view,
Assailed by night with circumstances strong
Of present death and shame that mightinsue,
By that her death to do her husband wrong:
Such danger to resistance did belong.
The dying fear through all her body spread,
And who cannot abuse a body dead?
By this mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining:
My girl, quoth she on what occasion break
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are raining
If thou do weep for grief of my sustaining,
Know gentle wench, it small auailes my mood,
If tears could help, mine own would do me good.
But tell me girl, when went (and there she staid,
Til after a deep groan) Tarquin from hence?
Madam ere I was up (replied the maid,)
The more to blame my sluggard negligence:
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense,
My self was stirring ere the break of day,
And ere I rose was Tarquin gone away.
But Lady, if your maid may be so bold,
She would request to know your heaviness:
O peace (quoth Lucrece) if it should be told,
The repetition cannot make it less:
For more it is then I can well express,
And that deep torture may be called a Hell,
When more is felt then one has power to tell.
Go get me hither, paper, ink, and pen,
Yet save that labor for I have them hear,
(What should I say) one of my husbands men,
Bid thou be ready by and by to bear,
A Letter to my Lord, my love, my dear,
Bid him with speed prepare to carry it,
The cause craves have, and it will soon be writ.
Her maid is gone and she prepares to write,
First houering ore the paper with her quill,
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight,
What Wit sets down is blotted still with Will,
This is too curious good, this blunt and ill.
Much like a prease of people at a door,
Throng her inventions which shall go before.
At last she thus begins: Thou worthy Lord
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
Health to thy person, next vouchsafet' afford
(If ever love thy LVCRECE thou will see)
Some present speed to come and visit me.
So I commend me from our house in grief,
My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.
Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly,
By this short sedule Colatine may know
Her grief, but not her griefs true quality
She dares not thereof make discovery,
Least he should hold it her own gross abuse,
Ere she with blood had staind her staind excuse.
Besides the life and feeling of her passien,
She hoords to spend, when he is by to hear her,
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
From that suspicion which the world might bear her.
To shun this blot she would not blot the letter,
With words, till action might become them better.
To see sad sights moves more then hear them told:
For then the eye interprets to the ear
The heavy motion that it does behold
When every part a part of woe does bear:
It Is but a part of sorrow that we hear.
Deep sounds make lesser noise then shallow fords,
And sorrow ebs being blown with wind of words.
Her letter now is sealed, and on it writ,
At Ardea to my Lord with more than haste,
The Post attends and she delivers it,
Charging the sour faced groom to high as fast
As lagging fowls before the Northren blast.
Speed, more then speed, but dull and slow she deems,
Extremity still urges such extremes.
The homely villain cursies to her low,
And blushing on her with a steadfast eye
Receives the scroll without or yea or no,
And forthwith bashful innocence does lie,
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie,
Imagine every eye beholds their blame,
For Lucrece thought he blushed to see her shame.
When silly Groom (God wot) it was defect
Of spirit, life, and bold audacity,
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
To talk in deeds, while others saucily
Promise more speed, but do it leasurely.
Even so this pattern of the worn out age,
Pawned honest looks but laid no words to gage.
His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
That two red fires in both their faces blazed,
She thought he blushed as knowing Tarquins lust,
And blushing with him, wistly on him gazed,
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed:
The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
The more she thought he spied in her some blemish.
But long she thinks till he return again,
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone,
The weary time she cannot entertain,
For now it is stale to sigh, to weep, and groan,
So woe has wearied woe, moan tired moan,
That she her plaints a little while does stay,
Pawsing for means to mourn some newer way.
At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
Of skillful painting, made for Priams Troy,
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece,
For Hellens rape the city to destroy,
Threatening cloud-kissing Illion with annoy;
Which the conceipted Painter drew so proud,
As heaven (it seemd) to kiss the turrets bowd.
A thousand lamentable objects there
In scorn of Nature. Art gave liuelesse life:
Many a dire drop seemd a weeping tear.
Shed for the slaughtred husband by the wife.
The red blood reekd to show the painters strife,
And dying eyes gleemd forth their ashy lights,
Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights,
There might you see the laboring Pyoner
Begrimd with sweat, and smeared all with dust,
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
The very eyes of men through loope-holes thrust,
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust,
Such sweet observance in this work was had,
That one might see those far off eyes look sad.
In great commanders, Grace and Majesty
You might behold triumphing in their faces,
In youth quick-bearing and dexterity,
And here and there the Painter interlaces
Pale couards marching on with trembling paces,
Which hartlesse peasants did so well resemble,
That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.
In Ajax and Ulysses, O what Art
Of Phisiognomy might one behold!
The face of either cipher'd eithers heart,
Their face, their manners most expressly told.
In Ajax eyes blunt rage and rigor rold.
But the mild glance that she Ulysses lent,
Showed deep regard and smiling government.
There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand
As'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight,
Making such sober action with his hand,
That it beguild attention, charmed the sight,
In speech it seemd his beard, al silver white,
Waged up and down, and from his lips did fly
Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky.
About him were a prease of gaping faces
Which seemed to swallow up his sound advise:
All jointly listening, but with several graces,
As if some Mermaid did their ears intise,
Some high, some low, the painter was so nise.
The scalpes of many almost hid behind,
To iump up higher seemed to mock the mind.
Here one man's hand leaned on another head.
His nose being shadowed by his neighbors ear,
Here one being thronged bears back al boln and red;
Another smotherd, seems to pelt and swear,
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear,
As but for loss of Nestors golden words,
It seemed they would debate with angry swords.
For much imaginary work was there,
Conceit deceitful, so compact so kind,
That for Achilles image stood his spear
Gript in an armed hand, himself behind
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind,
A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
Stood for the whole to be imagined.
And from the walls of strong besieged Troy,
When their brave hope, bold Hector, marched to field,
Stood many Troiane mothers sharing joy,
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield,
And to their hope they such odd action yield,
That through their light joy seemed to appear,
(Like bright things stained) a kind of heavy fear.
And from the strond of Dardan where they fought,
To Simois reedy banks the red blood ran,
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
With swelling ridges, and their ranks began
To break upon the galled shore, and than
Retire again, till meeting greater ranks
They join, and shoot their some at Simois banks.
To this well painted piece is Lucrece come,
To find a face where all distress is steld,
Many she sees, where cares have carved some,
But none where all distress and dolor dweld,
Til she dispairing Hecuba beheld,
Staring on Priams wounds with her old eyes,
Which bleeding under Pirrhus proud foot lies.
In her the Painter had annotimiz'd
Times ruin, Beauties wrack, and grim Cares reign,
Her cheeks with chops and wrinckles were disguised,
Of what she was, no semblance did remain;
Her blew blood changed to black in every vain,
Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed
Showed life imprisoned in a body dead.
On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her cies,
And shapes her sorrow to the Beldames woes,
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries,
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes.
The Painter was no God to lend her those;
And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
To give her so much grief, and not a tongue.
Poor instrument (quoth she) without a sound,
I Will tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue:
And drop sweet balm in Priams painted wound,
And rail on Pirrhus that has done him wrong,
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long:
And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes
Of all the Greeks, that are thine enemies.
Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
That with my nails her beauty I may tear:
Thy heat of lust fond Paris did incur
This lode of wrath, that burning Troy does bear:
Thy eye kindled the fire that burns here.
And here in Troy for trespass of thine eye,
The Sire, the Son, the Dame and Daughter die.
Why should the private pleasure of some one
Become the public plague of many more?
Let sin alone committed, light alone
Upon his head that has transgressed so.
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe.
For ones offense why should so many fall?
To plague a private sin in general.
Lo here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
Here manly Hector faints, here Troylus sounds,
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies:
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
And one man's lust these many lives confounds.
Had doting Priam checked his sons desire,
Troy had bin bright with Fame, and not with fire.
Here feelingly she weeps Troyes painted woes,
For sorrow, like a heavy hanging bell,
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes,
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:
So Lucrece set a work, sad tales does tell
To penseld pensiveness, and colored sorrow,
She lends them words, and she their looks does borrow.
She throws her eyes about the painted round,
And who she finds forlorn she does lament:
At last she sees wretched image bound,
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent,
His face though full of cares, yet showed content,
Onward to Troy with these blunt swains he goes,
So mild, that patience seemd to scorn his woes.
In him the painter labored with his skill
To hide deceit and give the harmless show
An humble gate, calm looks, eyes wayling still,
A brow unbent that seemed to welcome woe,
Cheeks, neither red, nor pale, but mingled so
That blushing red, no guilty instance gave,
Nor ashie pale, the fear that false hearts have.
But like a constant and confirmed Devil,
He entertained a show so seeming just,
And therein so ensconc't this secret evil,
That Jealousy it self could not mistrust,
False creeping craft and Perjury should thrust
Into so bright a day, such blackfac'd storms,
Or blot with hel-borne sin such Saint-like forms.
The well-skild workman this mild Image drew
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story
The credulous old Priam after slew.
Whose words like wild fire burnt the shining glory
Of rich built Illion, that the skies were sorry,
And little stars shot from their fixed places,
When their glass fell wherein they viewd their faces.
This picture she advisedly perusd,
And chide the Painter for his woundrous skill:
Saying, some shape in Sinons was abusd,
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill,
And still on him she gazed, and gazing still
Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
That she concluds, the picture was belied.
It cannot be (quoth she) that so much guile,
(She would have said) can lurk in such a Look:
But Tarquins shape, came in her mind the while.
And from her tongue, can lurk, from cannot, took
It cannot be, she in that sense forsook,
And turned it thus, it cannot be I find,
But such a face should bear a wicked mind.
For even as subtle Sinon here is painted,
So sober sad, so weary and so mild,
(As if with grief or travail he had fainted,)
To me came Tarquin armed to beguild
With outward honesty, but yet defiled
With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,
So did I Tarquin, so my Troy did perish.
Look, look how listening Priam wets his eyes
To see those borrowed tears that Sinon sheds
Priam why art thou old, and yet not wise?
For every tear he falls, a Troyan bleeds:
His eyes drops fire, no water thence proceeds,
Those round clear pearls of his that move thy pity
Are bals of quenchlesse fire to burn thy City.
Such Devils steal effects from lightlesse hell,
For Sinon in his fire does quake with cold,
And in that cold hot burning fire does dwell,
These contraries such unity do hold,
Only to flatter fools and make them bold:
So Priams trust false Sinons tears does flatter
That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.
Here all enraged such passion her assailes,
That patience is quite beaten from her breast,
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails,
Comparing him to that unhappy guest,
Whose deed has made herself, herself detest;
At last she smilingly with this gives ore,
Fool, fool, quoth she his wounds will not be sore.
Thus ebs and flows the current of her sorrow,
And time does weary time with her complaining,
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
And both she thinks too long with her remaining.
Short time seems long, in sorrows sharp sustaining:
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps,
And they that watch, see time how slow it creeps.
Which all this time has ouerslipt her thought,
That she with painted Images has spent,
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought,
By deep surmise of others detriment,
Loosing her woes in shows of discontent:
It eases some, though none it ever cured,
To think their dolor others have endured.
But now the mindful Messenger comes back,
Upon Lucrece sending for Collatine i^ such have, he with d^uers of his allies
and friends returns home.
Brings home his Lord and other company,
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black,
And round about her teare-distained -eye
Blew circles streamed, like Rainbowes in the sky.
These watergals in her dim Element,
Foretell new storms to those already spent.
Which when her sad beholding husband saw,
Amazedly in her sad face he stares:
Her eyes though sod in tears looked red and raw,
Her lively color killed with deadly cares,
He has no power to ask her how she fares,
But stood like old acquaintance in a trance
Met far from home, wondering each others chance.
At last he takes her by the bloudlesse hand:
And thus begins: what uncouth ill event
Has thee befallen, that thou do trembling stand?
Sweet love, what spite has thy fair color spent?
Why art thou thus attired in discontent?
Unmask dear dear, this moodie heaviness,
And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.
Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire,
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:
At length addressed to answer his desire,
She modestly prepares, to let them know
Her Honor is taken prisoner by the Foe,
While Colatine and his consorted Lords
With sad attention long to hear her words.
And now this pale Swan in her watrie nest,
Begins the sad Dirge of her certain ending,
Fow words (quoth she) shall fit the trespass best,
Wherein no excuse can give the fault amending,
In me more woes then words are now depending
And my laments would be drawn out too long,
To tell them all with one poor tired tongue?
Then be this all the task it has to say,
Dear husband in the interest of thy bed
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay,
Where thou was wont to rest thy weary head,
And what wrong else may be imagined,
By foul inforcement might be done to me,
From that (alas) thy Lucrece is not free.
For in the dreadful dead of dark mid night,
With shining Fauchion in my chamber came
A creeping creature with a flaming light,
And softly cried, awake thou Roman Dame,
And intertaine my love, else lasting shame
On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
If thou my loves desire do contradict.
For some hard-fauour'd groom of thine, quoth he,
Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
I Will murder straight, and then I Will slaughter thee,
And swear I found you where you did fulfill
The loathsome act of Lust, and so did kill
The Leachers in their deed, this act will be
My fame, and thy perpetual infamy.
With this I did begin to start and cry,
And then against my heart he sets his sword
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
I should not live to speak another word,
So should my shame still rest upon record,
And never be forgot in mighty Rome
The adulterat death of Lucrece and her groom.
Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
(And far the weaker with so strong a fear)
My bloody Judge forbad my tongue to speak,
No rightful plea might plead for Justice there.
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear,
That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes;
And when the Judge is robbed the prisoner dies.
O teach me how to make mine own excuse,
Or (at the least) this refuge let me find,
Though my gross blood be staind with this abuse,
Immaculate, and spotless is my mind,
That was not forced, that never was inclined
To accessarie yeeldings, but still pure
Does in her poisoned closet yet endure.
Lo here the hopeless Merchant of this loss,
With head inclined and voice damned up with woe,
With sad set eyes and wretched arms a cross,
From lips new waxen pale, begins to blow
The grief away, that stops his answer so,
But wretched as he is he strives in vain,
What he breaths out, his breath drinks up again.
As through an Arch, the violent roaring Tide,
Out runs the eye that does behold his have:
Yet in the Edie boundeth in his pride,
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast:
In rage sent out, recald in rage being past;
Even so his sighs, his sorrows make a saw,
To push grief on and back the same grief draw.
Which speechless woe of his poor she attends,
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh,
Dear Lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lends
Another power, no flood by raining slaketh,
My woe too sensible thy passion makes
More feeling painful, let it then suffice
To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes,
And for my sake when I might charm thee so,
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me,
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Thine, mine, his own, suppose thou do defend me
From what is past, the help that thou shall lend me
Comes all too late, yet let the Traitor die:
For sparing Justice feeds iniquity.
But ere I name him, you fair Lords, quoth she
(Speaking to those that came with Collatine)
Shall plight your honorable faiths to me,
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine,
For it is a meritorious fair design,
To chase Injustice with reuengefull arms,
Knights by their oaths should right poor Ladies harms.
Upon the relation of Lucrece her rape, Collatine and the rest swear to
revenge: but this seems not full satisfaction to her losses. She kills her
self to exasperate them the more to punish the delinquent.
At this request, with noble disposition,
Each present Lord began to promise aid,
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewrard,
But the that yet her sad task has not said,
The protestation stops, O speak quoth she,
How may this forced stain be wipt from me?
What is the quality of mine offense
Being constrained with dreadful circumstances?
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense
My low declined honor to advance?
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
The poisoned fountain cleares it self again
And why not I from this compelled stain?
With this they all at once began to say,
Her bodies stain, the mind untainted cleares,
While with a ioylesse, smile, she turns away
The face, that map which deep impression bears
Of hard misfortune, carved it in with tears.
No no, quoth she, no Dame hereafter living,
By my excuse shall claim excuses giving.
Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
She throws forth Tarquins name: he, he, she says
But more then he, her poor tongue could not speak,
Till after many accents and delays,
Untimely breathings, sick and short assaies,
She vtters this, he he, fair Lord, it is he
That guids this hand to give this wound to me.
Even here sheathed in her harmless breast
A harmefull knife, that thence her soul unsheathed,
That blow did bail it from the deep unrest
Of that polluted prison where it breathed
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeathed,
Her winged spright, and through her wounds does fly
Life's lasting date from canceled destiny.
Stone still, astonished with this deadly deed,
Stood Colatine and all his Lordly crew,
Till Lucrece father that beholds her bleed.
Himself, on her self-slaughtered body threw,
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew
The murdrous knife, and as it left the place,
Her blood in poor revenge, held it in chase.
And bubling from her breast, it does divide
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
Circles her body in on every side,
Who like a late sacked Island vastly stood
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.
Some of her blood still pure and red remained
And some looked black, and that false Tarquin stained.
About the mourning and congealed face
Of that black blood, a watery rigoll goes,
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place;
And ever since as pitying Lucrece woes,
Corrupted blood some watery token shows,
And blood untainted still does red abide,
Blushing at that which is so putrifide.
Daughter, dear daughter, old Lucretius cries.
That life was mine which thou have here deprived,
If in the child the fathers image lies,
Where shall I live now Lucrece is vnliued?
Thou wast not to this end from me derived.
If children praedecease progenitors,
We are their offspring and they none of ours.
Poor broken glass, I often did behold
In thy sweet semblance, my old age newborn,
But now that fair fresh mirror dim and old,
Shows me a barebon'd death by time out worn,
O from my cheeks my image thou have torn,
And shiuerd all the beauty from my glass,
That I no more can see what once I was.
O time cease thou thy course and have no longer,
If thou surcease to be that should survive:
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger,
And leave the foultring feeble souls a live?
The old Bees die, the young possess their hiue,
Then live sweet Lucrece, live again and see
Thy father die, and not thy father thee.
By this stars Collatine as from a dream.
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place,
And then in Key cold Lucrece bleeding stream
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
And counterfeits to die with her a space.
Till manly shame bids him possess his breath,
And live to be revenged on her death.
The deep vexation of his inward soul,
Has served a dumb arrest upon his tongue,
Who made that sorrow should his use control,
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
Begins to talk, but through his lips do throng
Weak words so thick comes in his poor hearts aid
That no man could distinguish what he said.
Yet sometime Tarquin was pronounced plain,
But through his teeth as if his name he tore.
This windy tempest till it blow up rain,
Held back his sorrows tide to make it more.
At last it raines, and busy winds give ore:
Then son and father weep with equal strife,
Who should weep most for daughter or for wife.
The one does call her his, the other his,
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay.
The father says she is mine, O mine she is
Replies her husband, do not take away
My sorrows interest, let no mourner say
He weeps for her, for she was only mine.
And only must be waild by Colatine.
O, quoth Lucretius, I did give that life
Which she too early and too late has spild.
Woe woe, quoth Colatine, she was my wife,
I owed her, and it is mine that she has killed.
My daughter and my wife with clamors filled
The dispersed air, who holding Lucrece life,
Answered their cries, my daughter and my wife.
Brutus who plucked the knife from Lucrece side
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
Began to cloth his wit in state and pride.
Burying in Lucrece wound his follies show.
He with the Romans was esteemed so
As selie ieering idiots are with kings,
For sportiue words, and uttering foolish things.
But now he throws that shallow habit by,
Wherein the policy did him disguise,
And armed his long hid wits advisedly
To check the tears in Colatinus eyes,
Thou wronged Lord of Rome, quoth he, arise,
Let my unsounded self supposd a fool,
Now set thy long experienced wit to school,
Why Colatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds
Is it reuengie to give thy self a blow
For his foul Act, by whom thy fair wife bleeds?
Such childish humor from weak minds proceeds,
Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
To slave her self that should have slain her Foe.
Courageous Roman do not steep thy heart
In such lamenting dew of lamentations,
But kneel with me and help to bear thy part,
To rouse our Roman Gods with inuocations,
That they will suffer these abominations,
(Since Rome her self in them does stand disgraced)
By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased.
Now by the Capitol that we adore,
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stained,
By heavens fair sun that breeds the fat earths store
By all our country rites in Rome maintained,
And by chaste Lucrece soul that late complained
Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
We will revenge the death of this true wife.
This said, he stroke his hand upon his breast,
And kissed the fatal knife to end his vow:
And to his protestation urged the rest,
Who wondering at him did his words allow:
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow,
And that deep vow which Brutus made before
He does again repeat, and that they swore.
When they had sworn to this advised doom,
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence
To show the bleeding body through out Rome,
And so to publish Tarquins foul offense;
Which being done, with speedy diligence
The Romans plausibly did give consent,
To Tarquins everlasting banishment.
FINIS.

