The Confession and declaration of Robert sharp Clerk, and other of that
sect, termed the Family of Love, at Pawles Cross in London the. xij. of
June. An. 1575.
WHereas I Robert Sharp, have hertofore unadvisedly, conceived good opinion of
certain books of an aucthour, otherwise unknown, save only, that he notes
himself by the Letters H. N. And was induced thereunto, partly by the strange
tytles that he gives to him self, terming himself, amongst other names, A
Prophet raised up from the dead: Specially by God appointed, and stirred up,
according to the promises for this time which he calls the last day of grace.
Affirming that he has received his message from the mouth of God himself. And
partly being also moved by the novelty of the Doctrine, and great promises
made, as though men might thereby attain to be Deified, or made as God: Now
upon conference with the Godly learned, (whereof some are in authority) being
admonished of the arrogancy of the said aucthour, in usurping the said
tyttles, and of his blasphemous sacrilege, in taking unto him other greater
tytles, as, That he is the illuminate with the true light of the perfect being:
Anointed with gods divine being: One whom God has hominified him self
withal, and who is codeified with God him self: (For with such monstrous and
unused terms, he cloketh his blasphemies, as though he were made one with God,
and God one with him) Segregating unto him self a private Conuenticle of
simple deceived men, (whom he names the Family or Comunaltie of Love) and
detesting all wise and learned men, whom he terms Scripture learned. And
also I being advertised by the said Godly learned, of a great number of
detestable Errors contained in the books of the said H. N. And specially in
those two wicked Books. Whereof the one he names The Euangely or Gospel of
the Kingdom: As though he had brought a new Gospel into the world,) which
Saint Pawle forbids, and holds acursed, though it were brought by an
Angel from heaven) And the other Book he calls, The Declaration of the
Mass. In the which two Books, and other like wicked Books, of the said
aucthour, not only the usurped authority of the Bushop of Rome, and his
Cardinals, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, with many other like wicked
errors, but also ^iuers damned heresies of the Arrianes, Pelagians, and
Anabaptists, are maintained: To the overthrow, of the true doctrine of our
iustifi^acion, and faith in Jesus Christ, and of all true Religion.

Therefore understanding now my gross errors, I do here before God and you
utterly detest, and from my heart abhor, as well the said Aucthour, with all
his arregant, and blasphemous titles, as the instrument of Satan, by him
stirred up, to seduce and beguyle the simple people: As also all his Damnable
errors and Heresies whatsoever. And do confess here before God and you, that
I am heartily sorye that ever I dealt with any such Books, or resorted to any
secreet Conferences, assemblies, or Conuenticles, with those that are named The
Family or Comunaltie of Love: And that thereby I have given so great offense
unto the Church of God: for the which I most humbly and heartily ask
forgiveness both of God and you. And do promise faithfully never to meddle,
with these, or any other such Books, or with that sect hereafter: But
utterly do renounce and forsake the same, and all other Errors and Heresies
whatsoever contrary to the Common, Nicene, and Athanasius Creedes, or to the
holy Scriptures contained in the Books of the old and new Testament. And
do also forsake whatsoever is repugnaunt to the Doctrine now taught and
pupliquely set forth in the Church of England, which Doctrine I acknowledge
and confess, to be the true and Catholic Doctrine, agreeable to the
Canonical Scriptures, and that the same of all Christians, ought to be
professed, without respect of any danger to the body, whether it be by death
or otherwise. In which profession, that I may constantly remain to my lives
end, I do most heartily beseech you, to commend me in your prayers, to the
great goodness and mercy of Almightye God.

Robert Sharp.
THe same confession and declaration which Robert Sharp has presently made
before you I. A. B. Do unfeignedly and willingly make, I detest all the
errors and heresies before by him detested. I do faithfully promise here
before God and you whatsoever he has promised. And with like peticion most
humbly and heartily beseech God and you to forgive me. And I do heartily desire
you to pray unto the Lord for me, that he in his great mercy will pardon me,
and so guide me by his holy spirit that detesting all errors, I may ever
hereafter embrace the truth of God, and constantly continue in the same, to the
end of my life. And this I crave at his merciful hands for Jesus Christ his
sake mine only Redeemer and Savior.

John Allen. Ihon Lydye. John Sharp. William Burwell.




Imprinted by William Seres.


