FIVE PIOUS AND LEARNED DISCOURSES,

1. A Sermon showing how we ought to behave our selves in Gods house. 2. A
Sermon preferring holy Charity before Faith, Hope, and Knowledge. 3. A Treatise
showing that Gods Law, now qualified by the Gospel of Christ, is possible, and
ought to be fulfilled of us in this life. 4. A Treatise of the Divine
attributes. 5. A Treatise showing the Antichrist not to be yet come.
By ROBERT SHELFORD of Ringsfield in Suffolk Priest.

S. AUGUST. in Evang. Joh. tract. 18. Non natae sunt haereses, and
perversitatis dogmata animas illaqueantia, nisi dum scripturae bonae
intelliguntur non been, and quod ab eis non been intelligitur, etiam temere and
audacter asseritur. Printed by the printers to the Universitie of Cambridge.
1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD COVENTRY KNIGHT, BARON OF ALSBOROUGH, AND
LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT SEAL OF ENGLAND, AND TO HIS MOST VIRTUOUS LADY,
ROBERT SHELFORD MINISTER OF THE CHURCH OF RINGSFIELD IN SUFFOLK, DEVOTETH HIS
BEST STUDIES AND SERVICE, WITHOUT AMBAGES UNFIT FOR SUPERIORS.

AD MATREM ACADEMIAM CANTABRIGIENSEM.
ALMA MATTER, Placeat reverentiis vestris, hoc tenue meum and semidecoctum munus
aequilibrio vestro trutinare, and denuo decoquere. Sic rusticantes nostrae
Musae inter arbusta cum cicadis lauds vestras omni encomio majores
ebuccinabunt. Petrenses sancti juvate clavibus biblioclericum vestrum, olim
famosi Perni amanuensem, Moynei and Morisoni condiscipulum, rei orbum,
desiderii in optimis opulentum, mediocritatis sectatorem. Nunc tandem sub ter
gravi Magistri praecepto pascendi ejus oves, clientelae vestrae me dedo. Siquid
digne possim, accipite dextre; siquid minus polite, me lacerna vestra donate.
Post imbres exeunt flores, praeteritis ventis venit pax in aere, post noctes
redeunt soles. Quid dies sit pariturus (favente Deo, Uraniaque veritatis ac
pietatis amica) videamus. Magna est veritas; Soli similis, in tenebris lucet;
Alexandri gladio succincta, Gordii nexus resolvit.

Sectator vester humillimus in altissima scientia, ROB. SHELFORD.

Upon the ensuing Treatises.
RIse then, immortal maid! Religion rise!
Put on thy self in thine own looks: to our eyes
Be what thy beauties, not our blots, have made thee,
Such as (ere our dark sins to dust betrayed thee)
Heaven set thee down new dressed; when thy bright birth
Shot thee like lightning, to the astonished earth.
From the dawn of thy fair eyelids wipe away
Dull mists and: melancholy clouds: take day
And thine own beams about thee: bring the best
Of what soever perfumed thy Eastern nest.
Girt all thy glories to thee: then sit down,
Open this book, fair Queen, and take thy crown.
These learned leaves shall vindicate to thee
Thy holiest humblest handmaid Charity.
She Will dress thee like thy self, set thee on high
Where thou shall reach all hearts, command each eye.
Lo where I see thy Altars wake, and rise
From the pale dust of that strange sacrifice
Which they themselves were; each one putting on
A majesty that may beseem thy throne.
The holy youth of heaven, whose golden rings
Girt round thy awful Altars, with bright wings
Fanning thy fair locks (which the world believes
As much as sees) shall with these sacred leaves
Trick their tall plumes, and in that garb shall go
If not more glorious, more conspicuous tho.
-- Be it enacted then
By the fair laws of thy firm-pointed pen,
Gods services no longer shall put on
Pure sluttishnesse for pure religion:
No longer shall our Churches frighted stones
Lie scattered like the burnt and martyred bones
Of dead Devotion; nor faint marbles weep
In their sad ruins; nor Religion keep
A melancholy mansion in those cold
Urns. Like Gods sanctuaries they looked of old:
Now seem they Temples consecrate to none,
Or to a new God Desolation.
No more the hypocrite shall the upright be
Because he is stiff, and will confess no knee:
While others bend their knee, no more shall thou
(Disdainful dust and ashes) bend thy brow;
Nor on Gods Altar cast two scorching eyes
Baked in hot scorn, for a burnt sacrifice:
But (for a Lamb) thy tame and tender heart
New struck by love, still trembling on his dart;
Or (for two Turtle doves) it shall suffice
To bring a pair of meek and humble eyes.
This shall from henceforth be the masculine theme
Pulpits and pens shall sweat in; to redeem
Virtue to action, that life-feeding flame
That keeps Religion warm: not swell a name
Of faith, a mountain word, made up of air,
With those dear spoils that wont to dress the fair
And fruitful Charities full breasts (of old)
Turning her out to tremble in the cold.
What can the poor hope from us, when we be
Uncharitable even to Charity?
Nor shall our zealous ones still have a fling
At that most horrible and horned thing,
Forsooth the Pope: by which black name they call
The Turk, the Devil, Furies, Hell and all,
And something more. O he is Antichrist:
Doubt this, and doubt (say they) that Christ is Christ.
Why, it is a point of Faith. What e're it be,
I Am sure it is no point of Charity.
In sum, no longer shall our people hope,
To be a true Protestant, 's but to hate the Pope.
Rich. Crashaw, Aul. Penb. A. B.

Ad virum clarissimum gravissimumque Magistrum ROBERTUM SHELFORD, presbyterum,
de hoc opere quinario praecipitata jam aetate sua edito.
PRaecoquis ingenii foetus quot prela fatigant!
Tu prodire tua Pallade serus amas.
Quippe solent tarde molimina docta parari;
Dum partus properans caecus adesse solet.
Quin cum forte Petri recolis tu aetate vetustas
Aedes, quis crevit Musula prima tua;
Nulla tibi visa est Petrensi digna Minerva,
Ni matura simul tempore and ingenio.
Tandem ergo prodis Petri grandaevus alumnus,
Annorum gravis and pondere judicii:
Pondere judicii, quo vindice vapulat acri
Gens ea quae ficto nomine pura cluet.
Guil. Norwich, Coll. Divi Petri Soc.

In eruditos Tractatus piissimi doctissimique senis R. SHELFORD presbyteri.
QUis novus hic nostro qui tanta negotia prelo
Fecerit, indocta non temeranda manu?
Nil spirat mortale: Dei sacraria, Forma
Virtutum, haec tanto praelia digna viro.
Plurima nunc (doleo referens) insulsa pererrat
Pagina; nunc Veneri plurima sacra facit.
Sacra Dei loquimur rari: Mysteria coeli
Abdita qui pandit, quam pretiosus erit!
Tu nobis praestas, tu tanta, piissime. Grates
Is vere solvit, qui tua dicta facit.
Rich. Drake, Aul. Penbr. Soc.

In hunc librum qui quinque exquisitissimos Tractatus continet, a R. SHELFORD
summa cum cura elaboratos.
FElici liber hic prodeat alite,
Very praesidio tutus inania
Vulgi praecipit is murmura rideat,
Nec curet rigidi fata supercili:
Lectores habeat non animo leves,
Vel frontispicii quos fug at umbra, vel
Spectatum veniunt qui Martial. lib. 2. Epigr. 6.
(...)
Lectores habeat judicio graves,
Non praejudicii quos malesana men's
Raptos turbine latura per invias
(Ignotas aliis and sibi) sit vias.
Non hic, quae metuat saxa Capharea
(Erroris scopuli) per mare turbidum
Incertis animi fluctibus appetens
Coelestem trepidus navita patriam.
Hic sincera Patrum dogmata, veritas
Non fucata, suis nuda coloribus:
Hic Templi decor, hic unica numine
Summo relligio digna, per improbam
Gentis sacrilegae saepius (o scelus!)
Subnervata fidem. --
Non neglecta Fides, spreta Scientia,
Spes calcata, trias nobilis, inclyta:
Quin hic, ut decuit, regia Charitas
Primas obtinuit. Caetera non loquar,
Quae fundata sacris omnia literis,
Sustentata Patrum munific a manu,
Felici liber hic praebeat alite.
Rich. Watson, Caio-Gon.

Ad eos qui Authorem pro novatore sunt habituri.
NOn nova fert veterum satur; at provectior annis
Scit, veterum facies queis fuit, esse nova.
Idem.

De conjunctione amoris and fidei in Tractatu de charitate pie vindicata.
QUae bis quina fuere prius praecepta, feruntur
Ad Ama Deum, Ama Proximu^

duo: lex jubet haec, haec facit unus amor.
Quin ergo quid summa fides cluet? una triumphat?
Servit amor, fidei nec comes esse queat.
Justificat, beat una fides, facit omnia, quid non?
Credam ego, factura Praecepta.
haec si siet una fides.
At fidei nisi juncta foret dilectio, fallor
Aut haec vana foret (si foret ulla) fides.
Quae dum dissociant alii, Shelforde, beato
En tuus in patriam foedere junxit amor.
In patriam dixi? felix Ecclesia nexu
Hoc, quae per duo sic juncta fit una simul.
Idem.

To the Author, concerning his learned and pious Treatise of Gods house.
RIch soul, and blessed! for so I dare go on
To voice that man, whose life's religion;
Who fears not to be good, gives God his due
In this our age and in the Temple too;
Who scorns these loathsome times, and dares learn us
To be less bold, less superstitious,
Not to make God a man, join heaven with earth,
Use him familiarly who gave us birth;
Nor man a God, by following, praising such
Who neither pray nor preach, yet teach they much.
Lord! when I view our Temples, which now be
Ruined by time, (beauties worst enemy)
Or rather by neglect crumbling to dust;
Can I persuade my self, or may I trust
Those ancient Fathers, those pure Saints should then
Fables or fruitless stories write; even when
They praise, yea bless their founders, and condemn
Their puffed up Catharists, those chair-preaching men?
Can I conceive S. Paul's expression weak,
Not like himself, when thus I hear him speak,
Ye are Gods Temples? Did the Apostle mean
Our clay-like houses should be kept unclean?
All cobwebd over with vices? that a lust
Should there inhabit, and that it should rust
The Berill, Jasper, Amethyst, those three
Celestial graces, Faith, Hope, Charity?
Or when the Priest (the soul) must sacrifice
A comely Altar, should he then despise
A pure well furnished heart? must not the place
Be hung with well knit virtues, where blessed grace
Resides? Yes sure; and he whoever has done
The contrary, dilapidation
Of that Temple shall to his charge be laid,
Because his body (Gods house) thus decayed.
Now as these walking churches must be dressed
And purged from filth by all, as well as Priest;
So must the other: that is Gods Temple too,
Though made with hands; which carelessly if thou
Profane, demolish, or perhaps abridge
That of its honor, it is proud sacrilege.
Reader, no more. That God may have his due,
Turn over this book, and it will teach thee how.
E. Gower Coll. Jesu Soc. Raptim.

De hoc opere vere Orthodoxo, in Novatores.
DOgmata qui fingunt novitatis rara supremae,
Quam facili applausu, nulloque examine cudunt!
Quin si forte Patrum sancita ad prela propinquant;
Dente Theonino lacerant, probrisque lacessunt.
Rodere sic solitus maledictis, Zoile, castum
Relligionis opus, calcans mysteria coeli,
Antiquanda doces, veterum monumenta cremanda.
Tu, Shelforde, tuum noli curare libellum:
Novimus hoc omnes, te posse problemata sacra
Edere, non virus malesanae effundere linguae.
Hinc, mea si tantum possint mandata valere,
I liber, invidia major, victorque triumpha.
Intimi amoris ergo exoptat R. LONDON.

A SERMON Shevving How we ought to behave our selves in Gods house.
PSALM 93. 6. Holiness becomes thy house, O LORD, for ever.
OUt of this Text I must undertake three great tasks.

The first, to show what Gods house is; because this is the subject of my Text.
The second, to show what God is; because he is the owner of it. The third, to
show what is that holiness and behavior which becomes this house, and the
owner. For the first, I must follow holy Scripture in describing of it. Gods
house began with an Altar (as all creatures arise from small seeds) built in
the place where God appeared to Abraham the father of the faithful Genesis 12. 7.
And the Lord appeared to Abraham, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this
land: and there builded he an Altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him. In
the eighth verse following, it is said that he built another, and called upon
the name of the Lord. With this consent were our churches built, where God
appears to us by his word read and preached. Secondly, by the Sacrament of
the Altar, (as it is called by the fathers, and styled so in our own statute
laws) in which 1. Edw. 6. c. 1. 1. Elisab. c. 2.
the sacrifice of our Lord Christ is remembered, and represented unto his
Father. Thirdly, by promise of salvation, and the kingdom of heaven. And
lastly, by prayer, in which God is called on, according to that of Isaiah 56.
7. My house shall be called the house of prayer. From hence appears, that the
Altar is the principal part of Gods house, as being the cause and original of
all the rest.

Secondly, Gods house is described in Genesis 28. by a stone, of which in the
plural number an house is made; and by a ladder, whose top reached up to
heaven, as Jacob upon the stone dreamed; the angels went up and down by it: and
from thence the Lord spoke to Jacob: and when Jacob awoke he said, This is none
other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. From whence we are
taught, that, seeing Gods house is both Scala coeli, and Janua coeli, The
ladder of heaven, and the gate of heaven, and that the angels use it, therefore
we also should use and respect it as the ordinary and beaten way to that
blessed place.

Thirdly, as Gods house is here described by a dream, so in Exodus 3. it is
described by a vision, the second mean of Gods appearing to the holy nation:
according to that of Joel, Joel 2. 28.
Your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. In this
vision Moses saw a bush burning with fire, and yet was not consumed. The bush
burning expresses the manners of Gods people in his house, who are to him as
thorns to his sides: yet so merciful is he, that he does not consume us,
though we be wood, and he A consuming Hebr. 12. 29.
fire. Can he ever be praised enough? For his Psalm. 136.
mercy endures for ever. After this, God spoke to Moses, and bad him to put
off his shoes, because the place whereon he stood was holy ground. From hence
Gods house is called A Sanctuary, that is to say, a holy place: and why? in
regard of Gods special presence, and conference between him and man; as God
here spoke to Moses, and Moses to him, about the delivering his people from the
hand of the Egyptians. Thus afterward the Tabernacle and the Temple were called
Gods sanctuary; because there was the visible sign of Gods presence, called
the Mercy-seat, from whence Exodus 25. 17.
God spoke to the high priest, and the high priest to the people. So again to
this day all our churches are called Sanctuaries, as in many other regards, so
especially in regard of the Lords table or high Altar at the upper end of them,
which is Jesus Christ's Mercy-seat; because there the memory of the everlasting
sacrifice is made, and presented to the holy Trinity. But why was Moses here
commanded to put off his shoes? To teach us, that when we come before God in
his sanctuary, we should reverence him by putting off our vices, and especially
our covetousness and earthly affections, which cleave to our souls, as the
dust of the earth cleaves to our shoes. And according to this, every sunday
and holiday we shift our common and worldly clothes, to insinuate that we
should put off our secular thoughts, and be endued with heavenly and spiritual
thoughts, not doing our own will, nor Isai. 58. 13.
speaking our own vain words, but Gods words, and his ordinances.

Fourthly, Gods house is set forth in the old law by the Tabernacle, which was
a tent or pavilion to be pitched, and taken up, as they traveled to the land
of Canaan, the figure of heaven; which signifies that Gods Church in this life
is a pilgrimage, and a passing to the place above; for which the 15 Psalms of
steps or degrees were made and used in the Temple, to teach that we ought
continually to travel from the valley of tears, to the heavenly Jerusalem, by
all the holy paces of virtues, and especially of charity. The Psalmist
speaking Psalm. 84. 7.
of this travel, says, They go from strength to strength, till every one
appear before God in Sion. Which if we apply to their Tabernacle, and to our
going into Gods house; every time we go, an holy strength and refreshing is
supplied unto us toward heavens Sion. In this Tabernacle, first was a laver of
pure water set Exodus 29. 4. and 40. 30.
at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, for the priests to wash
before they executed any part of their service: to which answers our holy
Font, placed at the door of our Sanctuaries, to wash all Christ's people with
the water of regeneration, before they be admitted to be of his number. And
this is to teach us, that ever after we should come to this place with pure
hearts to worship God: and the holy Font is to put us in mind of it. Next to
this was the Altar of burnt-offering, which continually burnt, not with common
fire, but with fire sent from heaven, as appears Lev. 9. But because the law
is now altered from material things to spiritual things, therefore our Altar
next and under the Altar of Christ's sacrifice once offered, is the Altar of our
hearts: and our fire is the heavenly fire of charity, sent down into us from
Christ's Spirit: and whosoever offers with any other fire, his sacrifice shall
be no better accepted with God then Nadab's and Abihu's incense was, Levit. 10.
Besides this, was the candlestick full of lamps shining with great light; which
signified the exceeding light of the Gospel prophesied Isaiah 30. 26. when the
light of the moon should be like the light of the sun, and the light of the
sun should be sevenfold, and like the light of seven days: which cannot be
understood but of the spiritual light of the Gospel in holy doctrine.
Wherefore, to mend this among our selves, let our light be the light of faith,
kindled with charity; and not the light of idle and proud knowledge, which can
profit nothing. Further, there was the table of shewbread, and the pot in
which Manna was put, signifying the heavenly bread of Christ's body, from whence
comes unto us the bread of his grace in holy charity, by which all good desires
and endeavors are fed and maintained in our souls, as natural heat is
maintained by material bread. Lastly, there was the Altar of incense, which
figured the most pleasant and sweet sacrifice of Christ for us, whereby we are
brought into Gods favor after our many offenses toward him. And thus much for
the Tabernacle.

Fifthly, Gods house is described by the Temple at Jerusalem, which was situate
upon mount Sion the mountain of holiness, expressed in the 48 Psalm. 1, 2.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the
mountain of his holiness. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth
is mount Sion. Again, in Psalm. 87. 1, 2. God laid his foundations among the
holy mountains. The Lord loves the gates of Sion above all the habitations of
Jacob.

Lastly, in the 48 Psalm. 3. Gods house is described by a kings palace; God is
well known in her palaces for a refuge: from hence the fathers call our greater
and mother churches Basilicae, the palaces where the high King of heaven
dwells, and where God is a refuge to his people that call upon him there, in
any trouble or difficulty. As when the subjects of a king are by their enemies
assaulted, if they can get into their kings palace, then they think themselves
safe enough: so is it with Gods people who fly to his house for refuge.

But some will say, I can pray, and serve God as well at home in mine own
house. Thou may serve God there, but not so well; because God has made
choice of this house before all private houses, in regard of his solemn and
public worship. Therefore the Psalmist says, The Lord loves the gates of
Sion Psalm. 87. 2.
above all the habitations of Jacob. In this house God has put his name, and
made promises to it above all places: I have hallowed this house which thou
have built, to put my name 1. King. 9. 3.
there for ever, and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually. If
Gods heart be here, then my heart shall be here too: and if his eyes be here,
then will I humble soul and body before him, lest I offend him. Again, God has
commanded his house to be a house of prayer by way of excellency, Isa. 56. 7.
My house shall be called an house of prayer: and our Lord in the Gospel
confirms it. Wherefore if God will hear the prayers of his people in all
places, then he will hear them sooner, and with greater respect, in his own
house, which is specially dedicated to prayer and his service. Neither does
this any way derogate from his ubiquity, but from his being ubique uniformiter:
for as his mercy (although it is over all his works) yet is it not equally in
hell and in heaven; or the measure of his justice equally poured forth upon
saints and angels, as upon the children of disobedience: so likewise, although
this be Gods attribute, to be every where; yet he is not every where alike;
both in regard of the promise of his especial presence made in Scripture, in
such houses Exodus 25. 8. and 29. 44, 45. and 1. King. 9. 3.
consecrated to his name, by which they become more especially holy; as also
because in this house God will hear for the presence of his Son. For, as S.
Chrysostom says, Homil. 36. in 1. Cor.
Where Christ is in the Eucharist, there is no want of angels; where such a
King is, and such princes are, there is a heavenly palace, nay heaven it self.

It follows now to show what God is, and that he is the great owner of this
house. Great is Gods house, but greater is the owner, because no house can hold
him: therefore my Text uses an exclamation, which intimates a great entity;
Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord! God is far greater then his house: for he
not only dwells in his house, but in the hearts of men, in the intelligences
of angels, and in all other creatures. And because nothing can contain him, he
dwells in himself most perfectly. Of all places the prophet David speaks,
Whither shall I go Psalm. 139. 7, etc.
from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up to
heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in the grave, thou art there also. If
I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea:
even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. And in
Isa. 66. 1. God challenges the whole world for his house; Heaven is my throne,
and earth is my footstool: what house will you build for me, says the Lord?
has not my hand made all these things? Wherefore when we come to worship God
in his house, we must bring this thought with us, to surrender up all our own
thoughts of serving him, and desire him to aid us with his holy Spirit. And
when after this we have done our lowliest service, and served him with our best
devotions, yet we must say, Lord we can never serve thee enough; because thou
art infinite, and we incapable of thy greatness and worthiness.

Thus far have I spoken of God and his house: but before we enter it, it is
fit to know our selves, and how we are to be qualified for it. From the highest
to the lowest, alas we are all poor creatures. At the first, originally we
were born abroad in the fields; our mothers name was the earth, and our fathers
Genesis 1. 1. Gal. 6. 3.
name was nothing: for from nothing God made all his creatures, according to
that in Ex non extantibus, fides Nicena.
Heb. 11. 3. So that things which are seen, were not made of things which
appear. Seeing then we are so poorly descended, what shall we do? we must go
to service, we must seek some good house for our preferment. The best house in
the world is Gods house: for he is owner of heaven and earth, and able to
advance all. But what are the orders of this house? what will here give
content? Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord. Would we know what this
holiness is? It is no common, but a superlative honor; it is Gods honor
which we call godliness and holiness: common honor belongs to all that have
Gods image in them; but holiness reflecteth only upon the high and mighty
God. For this cause our Savior has taught us to say, Hallowed, which is more
then Honored be thy name: according to the Psalm, Holy and reverend is his
name. Psalm. 111. 9.
And this holiness respective to Gods house consists of certain holy offices.

The first is, To adorn and beautify it fit for his greatness, as himself
gave pattern in beautifying his tabernacle: there was gold and silver, precious
stones, silks, with all precious colors, the most choice woods, and all things
framed with the best cunning that God inspired Bezaleel and Aholiab, and all
the wisehearted of that time.

Now, to prosecute S. Paul's argument, if that which was to be done away was
glorious, 2. Cor. 3. 11.
much more is that to be glorious which is to remain. (...) and Dei domus sort
well together; comeliness and holiness join hand with each other. Thus says
my Text, Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord. This office equity exacteth of
us: for seeing God has made the worlds great ornament, and our (...), our
little world, for our honor and use; should not we proportion a due ornament
for his house and service? A man's house is his state, and the greatest men are
esteemed by it. Ezra 7. 27.
And according to this Ezra says, Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers,
which has put into the kings heart to beautify the house of our God that is
in Jerusalem. And the Psalmist says, Psalm. 96. 9.
Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, that is to say, in the beautified
sanctuary, or, as the Geneva translation expounds, in the glorious Sanctuary.

But how are our Sanctuaries about us for the most part beautified? If
baseness were not more then want of beauty, I would hold my peace. One beauty
has beat out another; the beauty of preaching (which is a beauty too) has
preached away the beauty of holiness: for if men may have a sermon; prayer and
church service, with the ornaments of Gods house, may fit abroad in the cold.
Alas that the daughters should drive away the mothers! Is it not a shame for us
to see the houses of knights and gentlemen sweeter kept, and better adorned
then the houses of the King of heaven? To the one, one man's means is
sufficient; to the other, the means of a whole town is liable; and yet this
latter nothing so beautified as the other is: is not this a second shame? Our
Savior tells us, that in his Fathers house there are many mansions. Shall we
John 14. 2.
look for glorious mansions in the kingdom of heaven, and will we not prepare
comely mansions in the kingdoms of the earth? Does not God challenge us where
he challenges his chosen people? Is it time for you to dwell Hagg. 1. 4. and
1. 9, 10.
in your cieled houses, and this house to lie waste? Gods judgment follows, Ye
looked for much, and lo it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did
blow upon it: and why, says the Lord of hosts? because of my house that is
waste, and ye come every man to his own house. Therefore the heaven over you
stayed it self from dew, and the earth stayed her fruit. Then, neighbors, if
you desire the cry of our poor to cease, and the judgments of God to forbear
us, let us give God his due, and respect his house. There was a time when our
holy fathers spared no cost nor labor to build Gods houses: now let us take
our time to adorn them, as many of our devout brethren have begun. So forward
were good people in the old world to this service, that Moses made proclamation
to stay their devotions, as we read in Exodus 36. O that but half this willing
heart were among us Christians, to show our love to God in this kind!

The second office of holiness, is a holy preparation before we enter Gods
house: This is taught by Solomon, Eccles. 5. 1. Take heed to thy foot when thou
entrest into the house of God: as if it had been said, Thou can not enter as
thou ought, without a preventing and preparing thought. Why say thou not
to thy self, Whither go thou? what art thou about to do? If thou say, To
serve God; then consider what God is. Is he not the maker of all things, and
the mover of all things made? can thou see any thing that is not his? can
thou hear any thing which his hand has not made? can thou wear any thing
which his fingers have not spunne? can thou set thy foot on that which his
power has not founded? All this week before, thou have sitten at his table and
tasted of his cates; and can thou come at any time to his house to thank him
for all this, and not deeply consider what thou art to do?

The third office of holiness is, To reverence Gods Sanctuary, and as by
other acts of reverence, so by keeping off our hats while we stay in it,
whether there be Service or no Service: and this reverence is commanded in
general, Levit. 19. after such an emphaticall manner, as if the breach of it
were equal to the sin of not keeping the fourth commandment; for they are
joined together both in the same precept, verse. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths,
and reverence my Sanctuary: I am the Lord. Where ye see why God commands his
house to be reverenced; because it is his house, and the honor that is done in
it, and to it, is done to himself: I am the Lord. As the good usage which we
give to the family of a nobleman, reflecteth from the family to the nobleman;
so is it between God and his house. When we go into our kings chamber where
stands his chair of state, though the king himself be not there, yet we put off
and are uncovered in remembrance of his majesty: but our heavenly King, as he
is in all places because he is infinite, so he is in this his palace by a more
special resemblance of his holiness, but then chiefly when Gods people are
met together there: for Gods house is a little heaven on earth; here dwells the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: the Father in receiving our devotions, the Son
in directing them, and the holy Ghost in sanctifying them. Thus says the Son
of God, Where two or three are Matthew. 18. 20.
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Thou will say,
I cannot see either Father, Son, or holy Ghost in this place. I answer, God
is a Spirit, therefore not to be seen with bodily eyes; yet has he given thee
bodily eyes to inform thy spiritual eyes. See thou not Gods Minister here
speaking to God, and bowing his knees to him when he speaks? See thou not the
Son of Gods seat here, the holy Altar at the upper end of this house? and
see thou not the holy Font at the nether end, where the holy Ghost is always
ready to receive all into his kingdom? If the Son and holy Ghosts seats be
at both ends of this house, must not the Father needs be all the house over?
because both Son and holy Ghost proceed from him, and are but one Spirit, and
one God. Moses says, The Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
Lord our God is one Lord. He is in the light that shines in at the window, he
is in thy breath by which thou prayest and speak. Thou may say further, I
cannot see the holy angels here attending on him. Will thou believe no more
then thou can see? then art thou no better then S. Thomas in this case, to
whom our John 20. 29.
Lord prefers all them that believe and have not seen. See with S. Paul's
eyes in the 1. Cor. 11. 10. where men are directed to be uncovered on their
heads in Gods house, and women to be covered, because of the angels; that is to
say, lest the holy angels in the congregation should be offended at the women's
irreverent carriage with bare heads and long hair, and at the men's hats on
their heads. Wherefore, good fellow-brethren, if you respect God and his holy
place, have a special care to maintain good orders and manners in it, lest God
and his holy angels be offended at us. To conclude, as all the holy saints in
heaven behold Gods face there, so all the saints of the earth are here in this
lower heaven beholding the beauty of his holiness. Now if God be here, his
seat here, his angels here, his saints here, his word and worship here; then
what reverence and holiness becomes this house above all places in the world!
Were thou in the kings chamber, the king there speaking to thee, and thou to
the king; how would thou tremble! what passions would thou have within
thee! what thoughts of humility! what cares of oversights! But because thou
can see none but thy neighbors here, here thou art bold, and servest God De
morum civilitate in templo.
with less fear then men serve the work of his fingers. Si quis regem hominem
(says Erasmus) alloquuturus, circumstante procerum corona, nec caput aperiat,
nec genu flectat; non jam pro rustico, sed pro insano ab omnibus haberetur.
Quale est ergo illic opertum habere caput, erecta genua, ubi Rex adest ille
regu^ immortalis, and immortalitatis largitor, ubi vener abundi circumstant
aetherei spiritus! nec refert si eos non vides, vident illi te: nec minus
certum est illos adesse, quam si videres illos oculis corporeis: It skilleth
not, whether thou see them, when as they see thee; for it is as certain that
angels are present in Gods house at such times, as if thou saw them with thy
bodily eyes. Open therefore all thy eyes, the eyes of thy mind, and the eyes
of thy body; the eyes of thy body to behold the outward beauty of this house in
divine service, and the eyes of thy soul to behold the inward beauty of Gods
holiness, majesty, and greatness; and thou can not choose but be reverent
more then our usual manner is.

The 4 sort of reverence and office of this holiness beseeming Gods house, is,
at the entering in, before we take our seats, to bend the knee, and to bow our
body to him, toward the more usual and special place of his residence or
resemblance, which is the high Altar or the Lords table usually standing at the
east end of Gods house, Idque propter Christu^, qui est lux mundi, and ORIENS
nominatur, Zach. 6. 12. and ab orient etiam expectatur venturus: SICUT FULL GUR
EXIT AB ORIENT, Mat. 24. 27.
ITA ERITET ADVENTUS FILII HOMINIS. This reverence Abraham gave to the
Hittites, Genesis 23. 7, 12. See Genesis 18. 2.
And this duty of bowing the knee when we first come before them that are
great, is so ancient and frequent, that when we come before a noble man or man
of worship, before we speak a word, we begin with bowing our knee to him. Shall
we give this reverence to man, and neglect our Maker when we come before him?
Let us see holy presidents for this duty in Gods book. Psalm. 99. 5. Exalt ye
the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool; for he is holy. The Hebrew word
is (...), which properly signifies to bow; and by his footstool is meant his
Ark, which was his seat. In the 12. of Exodus we read that when Moses had told
the children of Israel of the great benefit of the passover, the text says,
Then the verse. 27.
people bowed themselves and worshipped: and in Isa. 45. and Romans 14. we have a
charge of this duty upon Gods oath; I have sworn by my self, the word is gone
out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that every knee shall
bow unto me: and no time fitter then when first we come before his presence,
or depart from his house. And this duty was practiced in the new Testament by
S. Paul, Ephesians. 3. 14. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. But many of our people come to Gods house, as the horse goes
into the stable, without any reverence at all.

Yet anciently has this duty been practiced, especially among women; and at
this day, before they enter their pews, some make their courtesy in the alley,
but it is with their faces either toward their masters and mistresses, or
toward some of their betters in the parish. Now, good men and women, understand
your duty; You come not hither to serve men, but God: therefore the first
reverence that you make, (because the house is Gods, and not man's) direct your
aspect to Gods table, which S. Paul calls the Lords Altar, saying, We have an
Altar whereof they have no Heb. 13. 10.
right to eat which serve the tabernacle. This is the great sign of Gods
residence in this holy place, as the Ark was the sign of his presence in his
tabernacle: here the great sacrifice of Christ's death for our salvation is in
remembrance represented to God the Father; and can we remember so great a
benefit, and not reverence the Father, Son, and holy Ghost for it? I do not
exhort you to give divine worship to Gods table, but to worship God toward it.
For Gods Altar is not terminativum cultus, but motivum only: as Daniel being in
captivity Dan. 6. 10.
turned his face toward Jerusalem when he prayed, but prayed not to it. Thus if
we come before God in his house with due reverence, then will he hold out his
golden scepter of grace to us, as the great king Ahasuerus held Esth. 5. 2.
out his to Qu. Esther. But if we slight God in his own palace, and he hold out
his iron scepter to us; then let us be wise and learned: Let us learn of our
mother churches, for there our reverend fathers the prelates and others make
their reverence to God on this wise, both at their entry and return. Wherefore,
to follow their good and holy pattern, we also are to do the like both at our
first coming into Gods house, and at our going out. And this will I confirm to
you out of Gods word. The first is taught in Psalm. 132. 7. We will enter into
his tabernacle, we will worship at his footstool. The second is expressed in
the second of Chron. where is showed, that, when the sacrifice 2. Chro. 29. 30
was ended, the king and all that were present with him bowed themselves and
worshipped. And thus Elkanah came yearly both to worship, 1. Sam. 1. 3.
and to sacrifice to the Lord in Shiloh; upon which place says Mendoza,
Mysterio non vacat, quod prius adorarit and postea sacrificarit, ut quanta cum
reverentia sacrificandum sit significetur. It wanted not mystery, that he
first worshipped, and then sacrificed, to signify with how great reverence he
did it. S. Gregory likewise has it, Expos. mor. in locum.
Adorans immolat, quia quo humilius divina veneratione prosternitur, eo summo
claritatis illius blandimento suavius refovetur: He worshipping sacrificed: for
by how much the more humble he was in divine veneration prostrate, so much the
sweetlier he was comforted with the pleasantness of his highest excellency.
But what is the fashion of the vulgar? as they come in with rudeness, so they
run out like sheep at a gap; except a few of our women and maids, which to this
day retain some remnant of this laudable duty. Did we know what God is, what we
have had from him, and what we are to have, we would kiss the ground for his
sake where he is, and think nothing enough for his honor.

After our bowing to God, follows our falling on our knees in prayer. For
seeing Gods house is principally for prayer, therefore next after our holy
salutation it is fit to fall down unto him in our places, and humble our selves
more low, in regard of the benefit we beg of him. And thus did the man to
Jesus in S. Matthew, There came to him a certain Matthew. 17. 14, 15.
man, and fell down at his feet, and said, Master, have pity on my son, for
he is lunatic, and sore vexed. In S. Mark another came, and kneeled Mark 10.
17.
to him, and asked him, Good master, what shall I do that I may inherit
eternal life? This question deserved a double fee. Thus Peter Acts 9. 40.
kneeled down and prayed, when he raised Tabitha to life: and thus the
disciples with their Acts 21. 5.
wives and children kneeled down and prayed on the shore, before they took
their leave of Paul when he departed from them. And so frequent was this manner
of praying in the primitive Church, that Eusebius reports of Eusebius. lib. 2.
Hist. Eccl. cap. 22. Ejus genua, quod tam assidue tum ad Deum auguste sancteque
adorandum, tum ad veniam precibus populo exposce^dam, procumdebat, cameli
instar tuberculis contractis obduruisse, etc.
S. James, That his knees were benumbed, and like camels knees, by reason of
his often and much kneeling to God in supplication: from which his singular
sanctity he was called JUST.

The fifth office is, To rise up from our seats when the Articles of our faith
are read: and this we are to do, First, by way of reverence, because the Creed
is the sum of Christ's Gospel. Secondly, as when we ask God pardon for our
sins past, or beseech his heavenly Majesty for blessings needful to sustain
us, in all reason our behavior should be with all humility on our knees; so
in the profession of our faith our gesture of standing, which argues constancy
in our hearts, best becomes us at that time, to testify before God and the
world, that we will stand up in the defense of it, according to that of S.
Paul, Stand fast in the 1. Cor. 16. 13.
faith, play the men, and be strong. The man that stands, is always ready
to resist his enemy: but he that sits or lies, is a vantage to him,
according to the verse made of the devil, Est leo, si sedeat; si stet, quasi
muscarecedit.
If man does sit, the devil will Lion be:
But if he stand, the devil a Lion's he.


Standing therefore is the fittest and comeliest of all gestures for the
professing of our faith, and putting us in mind of being constant in it. For
as we stand in the faith, so without the faith we cannot stand: therefore the
Apostle says, By faith ye stand. Take away 2. Cor. 1. 24.
from man his faith, and presently he falls. Faith is a man's rock; and as long
as he stands upon it, fall he cannot. For this cause our Savior called Simon
Peter, quasi Petra, because his faith was his rock; and against this, he told
him the gates of hell should not prevail. Wherefore seeing our faith is so
pleasing to God, and so profitable to us, we ought often to offer it to him in
profession. Next, we shall do more reverently to stand up at the reading of the
Psalms, before, after, and between the holy lessons, and at Gloria Patri;
because in these we speak unto God, and it is not good manners in a public
assembly to speak unto God sitting, as if we were his fellows. Lastly, we are
to stand up at the reading of the Gospel, in regard of the author of the
speech, which is our Lord Christ: As also because they do always Hooker Eccl.
Polit. lib. 5. Parag. 30.
historically declare something that our Savior either spoke, did, or suffered
in his own person, for us most miserable and wretched sinners. Whereupon, in
token of greater reverence to our ever-blessed Redeemer, it has been the
custom of Christian men and women to stand up, and at the rehearsal of the
Gospel to utter certain words of acclamation, as, Glory be to thee, O Lord;
and at the end thereof to say, Thanks be to God for his glorious Gospel, or the
like. But you will say, You teach us to bow, to kneel, and to stand up; yet
these are but outward ceremonies, and humane civilities, fitter for men then
for Gods high holiness of which you treat. I answer, that ceremonies and
civilities to men, when they are applied to God, change their nature, and
become holiness. The reason whereof is, because all actions are specified ab
objecto and fine, as the School teaches: but in these acts of religion, the
object is God, and his glory their highest end, next to which consequently
follows man's reward. Therefore it cannot be, that these actions of the body
accompanying those of the mind, should from their end be otherwise then
spiritual duties. As S. Thomas of Aquine has Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 84. art. 2.
it, Adoratio corporalis in spiritu fit, in quantum a spirituali devotione
procedit, and ad eam ordinatur: -- and quia per sensum Deum attingere non
possumus, per sensibilia tamen signa men's nostra provocatur, in Deum ut tendat.
Bodily worship is performed in spirit, inasmuch as it proceeds from spiritual
devotion, and is ordered to it. And because by our sense we cannot attain unto
God, yet by sensible signs our mind is incited to tend toward him. Thus you
see these expressions be not only outward, but inward too. For what makes thee
to bow to God in his Sanctuary? does not thy soul set thy knee on work? and
what sets thy soul on work? is it not faith and charity, the two principal
graces of Gods Spirit? How then should not this be holiness which proceeds
from such holy roots?

The sixth office of holiness is, To come to the Sacrament with due
preparation. First, in reconciling our selves to our neighbors where is cause
of offense. Secondly, by coming in right faith with true understanding of the
thing, in discerning the Lords body. Thirdly, by coming in charity; because
charity is the life of our souls, and the thing to be fed. Fourthly, to come
fasting where men are able; because S. Augustine says, Placet Spiritui Aug.
Epist. 118.
sancto, ut, in honorem tanti Sacramenti, prius intret in os Christiani corpus
Dominicum: It pleases the holy Ghost, that, in honor of so great a Sacrament,
the Lords body should first enter into the mouth of a Christian. And S. Paul
faulteth this among the Corinthians: For every man, 1. Cor. 11. 21.
when they should eat, takes his supper before; and one is hungry, and another
is drunken. He that was hungry, was in good case: but he that was drunken, was
not fit for the place. Fifthly, to receive it kneeling; because to receive it
sitting, is to receive it as we receive our bodies supper: yet is there a great
difference between the one and the other: the one being the food of our souls,
and received in the sanctuary; and the other being the food of our bodies, and
eaten in private houses.

The 7 office of holiness is, To keep all the holy feasts of the Church: and
they which neglect this, cut off a great part of Gods worship, and lose all the
holy lives and examples of the saints, and diverse mysteries of our salvation
besides. The lives of the saints are our looking glasses; and the reason why we
come so short of them in good life, is, because we do not see our sins in
their lives, and partake not of their holiness. For he which honors God
with the saint, is partaker of the saints holiness. So likewise they which
come to Gods house upon the day of Christ's nativity, (coming in faith and love,
as they ought) are partakers of Christ's birth: they which come upon the day of
his circumcision, are with him circumcised from the dominion of the flesh: they
which come upon the day of purification, are presented with him to his Father:
they which come upon Goodfriday, are partakers of his precious death: they
which come upon Easter day, are partakers of his glorious resurrection: they
which come upon Ascension day, ascend with him in holy desires in present, and
hereafter shall ascend in person: they which come upon Whitsunday, shall
partake of those white gifts that God bestowed upon his Church upon that day:
and they which come upon Trinity sunday, shall enjoy the blessed Trinity of
Father, Son, and holy Ghost. So again they which come upon S. Stephens day,
are in affection partakers of his martyrdom, and prepared for holy suffering:
they which come upon S. John's day, partake of S. John's love and charity: they
which come upon Innocents day, partake with them in their deaths for Christ's
cause: they which come upon S. Michaels day, shall enjoy the blessed Angels in
their administration: and they which come upon the day of All Saints, shall be
of that blessed number to stand with them on Christ's right hand in the day of
judgment: and so of all the rest. Thus in observing saints days, and in
dedicating Temples to God in their names, we have the blessed saints still
living and dwelling among us. Oh blessed we! And this doctrine is confirmed by
the Article of the Communion of saints: therefore they which neglect this holy
fellowship in joining with them to serve and worship God in this lower house,
as they serve and honor him in his higher house, do, as much as in them lies,
cut themselves from this holy Communion, and have a great loss which none can
see but they that have spiritual eyes.

But what will worldlings say? If we come Object.
to Gods house every saints day, we shall come short of our household business^,
and our poor should be hindered from providing their necessaries. I answer,
Because you come short Resp.
with God in his service, therefore he comes short with you in his blessing:
where Gods service is wanting, there means want foison. Says not Hagge so? Ye
have sown much, and Hag. 1. 6.
bring in little: ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not
filled with drink: ye clothe you, but there is none warm: and he that earneth
wages, earneth wag^s to put it into a bag with holes. What is now either gotten
or saved this way, by sparing from God? We pull from him, and he pulls from us:
who is the stronger?

The eighth office is, To use all the responsals or answers prescribed in the
holy Liturgy. The people must not only join with the minister in heart, but
in voice too; because of all outward means this is most significant and
effectual, as being the hearts eruption and interpreter. And for such as are
unlearned, it is fit for them to learn them, and to have them printed in their
hearts, to make them their own, and to use them at other times; because no
pattern of prayer can equal this. And this duty of praying and praising God
together with Gods ministers, is by S. Peter prescribed to all the faithful,
where he tells them that they are an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual 1.
Pet. 2. 5.
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. These spiritual sacrifices are
three; Prayer, Fasting, and Alms: by Prayer we sacrifice our souls to God, by
Fasting we sacrifice our bodies, and by Alms our goods. These three we have to
give to God, and no more; and these three are bettered to us by our giving to
him. Our souls are bettered by his accepting, and sanctifying of them; our
bodies are bettered by being freed from surfeiting and diseases; and our goods
are bettered by Gods blessing of them. The charitable man's cow casts not her
calf, his corn is not blasted, his fruit not eaten with caterpillars, and the
borrower runs not away with his money. Therefore Ecclesiasticus says, A man's
alms Ecclus 29. 10. Vet. Transl. Eleemosyna viri quasi sacculus cum ipso
is his purse: as if it were said, It keeps his ^^^te. Further he says, Bestow
thy treasure a^^^^ the commandment of the most high, and it shall bring thee
more profit then gold. And again, Lay up thy alms in the secret chambers, and
it shall keep thee from all afflictions. What are the secret chambers? they be
the hungry bellies of the poor: little see we what they want. But to proceed:
Shall we think our souls to be sacrificed by all manner of prayers? No: for
Isaiah prophesies, This people draw near unto me with Isaiah 29. 13.
their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
The sacrifice of prayer is no lip-labor, but a breaking of the heart before
God for sin; it is sobs, and sighs, and an ardent desire of obtaining Gods
favor in Christ, before all the goods of the world. This is the fire of Gods
Sanctuary, to kindle and inflame our sacrifice of prayer. For Fasting, this is
not, as many use it, to abstain only from flesh, and care not to swallow up
sin: but it is to beat down the body by abstinence, and to bring it into
subjection to the spirit: it is to abstain from flesh, and other delightful
food, that thereby we might be taught and brought to abstain from fleshly
pleasures, from hunting after strange women, from excess of eating and
drinking, carding, dicing, and other vanities, which feed the greedy appetite
of flesh and blood, and the soul unreformed; to abstain on fasting days from
meats for^^dden and, before thou come to Gods house to be of an empty
stomach, that God may fill thy soul with his graces; and after the sins of
thy flesh, to punish and keep down thy body with the coursest nourishments.

Lastly, for the sacrifice of our goods, this is not to give them when we
cannot well keep them any longer. When thy coat is moth-eaten, then the moth
gives it: when thy bread is mouldie, and thy meat smells, then the mould and
ill savor bestows it. This is no true sacrifice of our goods, because it
smells not sweet in Gods nostrills. But, neighbors, I cannot fault you in this
kind; for that I know you to be more charitable, and readier to give, then
others are worthy to receive. Therefore I exhort you, that when you give bodily
food to some, you would give some spiritual food with it: admonish them of
their idleness, rebuke their sin, chide them for filching and stealing, and
other misdemeanors which you hear of or know. This is as necessary for them
as their meat and drink, and more too.

But here I cannot but suspect, that our carnal Object.
Gospellers will object that our bodies and goods are no spiritual sacrifices,
but things material, and so not fit for the Gospel. Let Resp.
such learn, that though body and goods be by nature material, yet by the
principal whereby they are offered, which is the soul and spirit, they become
spiritual. Therefore David says, Not my heart alone, but ^sh Psalm. 16. 9.
also shall rejoice in the living God. And S. Paul says, I beseech you
brethren, by the mercies of God, Romans 12. 1.
that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service. And to the Corinthians he urges it from the
redemption of both: Ye are bought 1. Cor. 6. 20.
with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which
are Gods. And Joannes De nugis curial. lib. 5. cap. 3. Ille cultus qui in
exterioris operis exhibitione consistit, medio indiget, eo quod ad spiritum
corporalis nobis non patet accessus: ut tamen ad thronum illius quocunque modo
humilitatis nostrae consecadat infirmitas, in spiritu and veritate, i. anima
and corpo^e, ^^ortet adorare. Ibid.
Sarisburiensis presses this yet further, even from the glorification of both
in heaven: Sensu coli voluit, qui sensum dedit; and qui animam glorificabit and
carnem, utriusque fidelem expetit famulatum: se quoque voluit etiam
corporaliter honorari, ut quantavis tarditas infidelitatis aut negligenti^
excus^tionem non habeat: He would be worsh^pped sensibly, who gave the sense;
and he which shall glorify both flesh and spirit, looks for the unfeigned
service of both: and he likewise will be honored bodily, that the dullness of
unbelief, and carelessness of his service may have no excuse. Wherefore let us
endeavor with all fear and reverence to practice that, unto which the blessed
Apostle exhorts us, viz. Romans 12. 1.
to give our bodies (as well as our souls) a living sacrifice to our God in his
service, which differs far from the dead sacrifice of the old Law. And
according to this, our Church Service enjoyneth us to come fasting, and not
full-gorged, to holy feasts, because, as the book of Wisdom teaches, the body
is heavy to the soul; and Wisd. 9. 15.
the ^^ller it is, the heavier it is. Therefore S. Chrysostom says, that
fasting and alms are S. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 71.
to the soul wings to mount it up in prayer and contemplation to heavenly
things. Experience teaches that the stronger the body is, the weaker the
spirit and grace is; and that by the bodies delicates the soul becomes carnal,
and so adversary to things spiritual.

The ninth office is, To sing holy psalms and hymns to Gods honor in his
house: and this is taught Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess: but be filled with the Spirit: Speaking to your selves in psalms, and
hymns, and spiritual songs, singing, and making melody in your heart to the
Lord. And again, Coloss. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in
all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. In which words
is signified, not only the spiritual edifying of the soul in knowledge and
understanding, but further the special grace of holy singing, in stirring up
all our powers to praise God, and to petition unto him with greater fervencie
and alacrity. By this trumpet of heart and mouth, the devil is put to flight,
we encouraged to the spiritual war, and our sacrifice of praise pierces the
clouds. And here by the way I am put in mind of the exceeding commendation
which the ancient Divines give to the book of Psalms above other Scriptures.

The tenth office respects Gods Ministers; First, in putting on the holy
vestments: for it is not fit that the maker of heavens ornaments should be
served with common garments. Gods house is a house of holiness; therefore holy
vestments, set apart for so high service, best beseem it. These intimate to all
sorts, in what a reverent manner God is to be served. When the great Alexander,
the worlds conqueror, came to Judea the holy nation to win Joseph. Antiq. lib.
11. cap. 8. (...), etc
it, Josephus reports that the high priest Jaddus went out of Jerusalem to
meet him, wearing about him his priestly robes with which he served God in the
Temple: whom when he beheld in this solemn and sacred habit, the story
shows, that he reverenced him as Gods Minister, fell prostrate on his face
before the name of God which he bore on his breast plate, gave him his hand,
offered sacrifice to God according to his direction, and granted what
immunities and privileges he would request for his nation. It is likewise
credibly reported by historians of no mean note and renown, Sur. and Platin. in
vita Leonis and Paul. Diac. lib. 15.
that Attilas king of the Hunnes in Germany, who was called too truly (as the
Christians of those times by woeful experience testified) THE SCOURGE OF GOD,
and TERROR OF CHRISTIANS, he having now made havoc of the most part of Italy,
by sacking their towns, burning their cities, wasting their country,
demolishing their temples, and savagely massacring ^^ose primitive Saints, in
all fury and madness marches to Rome, utterly to raze down that Metropolis of
Europe. At which time, Leo, firnamed (for his piety) the GREAT, being Pope,
came out in ornaments truly pontifical to meet him: but after a pious and
learned oration little prevailing, yet the story affirms, Pontificali indutus
ornatu, ipsam religionis majestatem conspicue arguente, non precum pondere, sed
vultu gravi, habituque sanctimoniam indicante venerandam, ne Roman vastatum
iret benign persuasit: Apparelled in his priestly vestments, which plainly
proved the very majesty of religion, not with the fervencie of entreaty, but
with gesture grave, and habit declaring his reverend sanctity, he gently
persuaded him not to lay waste Rome. And were our Churches and Priests naked of
this ornament, when Turks and Ethnicks should enter them, would they not say,
Is the God of Christians so mean, that he is no better served? By this is
signified the principal robe of Ministers, fit for this house and service;
which is righteousness, signified by the Urim and Thummim on the high priests
breast plate, and rehearsed in Psalm 132. 9. Let thy priests be clothed with
righteousness. For that Minister who lives innocently toward his neighbors,
and holily toward God, always bears about with him his Urim and Thummim;
one signifying the light of knowledge, and the other the perfection of charity.

The second and principal part of the Ministers office is, not only to be
clothe^ with righteousness, and to be an honest and just man; but it is
further the true understanding, distinct reading, and decent ministry of the
Church Service, contained in the book of Common prayer. This is the pith of
godliness, the heart of religion, the Spina or Vertebrae, the backbone of all
holy faculties in the Christian body. Which way soever you turn you, here you
shall find the saying of our Savior fulfilled, Thus it becomes us to fulfill
all Matthew. 3. 15.
righteousness. Desire you new life? here is Baptism to give it. Are you gone
from it? here is the Baptism of tears and penance to restore it. Want you
weapons for the spiritual war? here is the Catechism, and Confirmation.
Need you food for the new life? here is the bread and wine of Christ's body and
blood. Want you supply of virtuous young soldiers? here is Matrimony and
Christian education. Need you leaders and governors? here are Christ's
Ministers. Want you provision for the journey to the high Jerusalem? here is
the viaticum of the heavenly Manna expressed in the Communion of the sick.

After this, a wise and discreet Sermon, not made by every Minister, but by a
man of reading and discretion, right well beseems this holy place. Preaching
is Gods mouth to his people: therefore great care must be had, that it be not
abused, either with false doctrines, or unsavourie speeches. In this case S.
Paul makes his exclamation, Who is sufficient for 2. Cor. 2. 16.
these things? How this is regarded, none but the learned see. Not how well,
but a Sermon, of the vulgar is expected. But would you know what Sermons are
fit for our holy assemblies? they are such as are suitable to our book of
Common Service, and the two heads of religion, faith, and good life. If you
would know what faith we are to follow, it must be that which S. Paul calls
the one faith. As Ephesians. 4. 5.
there was but one Tabernacle and one Temple in the old Law, to preserve the
unity of their religion; so here must be but one faith amongst us Christians
(to keep us from diversity of opinions) all the world over. This one faith,
Titus 1. 4. is called the common faith, and of Divines it is called the
Catholic faith, to show that they which hold not it, cannot be of the
Communion of saints. And this faith is contained in the three Creeds, of the
Apostles, of Nice, and Athanasius. And the false faith is that which is
contrary to this, the private faith, or fancy rather, by which men believe to
be saved by themselves absolutely, without condition or regard of the faith of
the Church.

And this is that which is mother and nurse to vice, and enemy to all good
life. And that this is not the catholic faith, it shall appear, because that
faith has not a special object as a man's private self, or Gods special
favor to this or that particular man (which is hopes object) but a catholic
object, which is the whole first truth, and every member of Gods word, as the
School teaches: This faith goes but to the truth and esse of divine things;
according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. Faith gives them a subsisting and
being in our mind; and after this, Hope lays hold of them in the will and
affections, and applies them to our selves; and Charity goes into them. Again,
the Apostle says, He that comes to God, must believe Heb. 11. 6.
that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him: not a
rewarder of thee and me (as if the Article of the faith were personal) but of
them that diligently seek him. Here is the condition: If thou and I seek him
diligently, then is he a rewarder of thee and me, and not otherwise: if the
condition be kept, the Article is just, and the faith is steadfast. Secondly, if
faith be to believe all the parts of Gods word, then none can be absolutely
sure of their salvation by faith: because the threatenings against sin (which
none are without) do as much discourage us, as the promises pull us on; and the
one must be believed as well as the other. Thirdly, whereas all hope of
salvation depends upon the promises; there is no promise but in one part of
Gods word or other has conditions tied to it; as repentance after sins,
keeping of Gods law, and perseverance to the end: from whence it follows, that
none can be secure of the promises (though he have all the faith in the world)
except he be sure of the conditions keeping; of which none can be secure,
because no man is his own judge. Fourthly, if men might be saved by such a
faith, or by faith only; then prayer to God might sleep, care of standing
might stand by, and good life, which is the nearest bond of our conjunction
with God, might be forborne: which God forbid. Wherefore, that we might preach
the right way, and you walk the right way, we must join S. James justifying of
works, with S. Paul's justification by faith; and then have we the two
principalls of faith and good life observed, by which the hope of our salvation
is confirmed and strengthened: and if you would have a breviary of good life,
it is to keep all the commandments of Gods law, and the Canons of the Church,
as far as we can; it is to fly sin, to follow virtue, to live justly, to
give to every one his own, mercy to some, and love and charity to all; because
Charity is the fulfilling of the Romans 13. 10.
law.

Thus much for Sermons fit for Gods house. Where such cannot be had, (because
such are not common) there the distinct and sensible reading of the two lessons
and the Churchhomilies, with Sermons heard abroad sometimes upon occasions,
will supply this want: and were these read as the Canon directs, Can. 49.
aptly, that is, by just distinctions and by a sensible reader, observing all
the rules of reading, with pronuntiation fit for the matter, and with due
attention of the hearer; the profit and edifying would be much.

Thirdly and lastly, to this office on the peoples part belongs attention and
devotion, without which the former office freezeth. Attention is to separate
our thoughts from all other things whatsoever, and to give them only to divine
doctrine and service; according to holy Ephrems counsel, Cave ne aurum Tom. 1.
Cap. de perfecta renuntiat.
tuum aere vel plumbo misceas; hoc est, Ne animam improbis and immundis
cogitationibus contamines, etc. Take heed that thou mix not thy gold Cultus Deo
placens hic est, ut cogitationes and tota fortitudo ac vis animae cum tota
mente in Deum absque ulla distractione ferantur. Ibid.
with brass or lead; that is, Defile not thy soul with wicked or unclean
thoughts: For as a virgin espoused to an husband, if she be deflowred by
others, becomes execrable unto him: even so the soul distracted with filthy and
immodest thoughts, becomes abominable to Christ her heavenly bridegroom. For
these impure thoughts contaminate our attention, which gives life to that we
receive into us; and devotion is the soul of that which goes out of us; the one
gives form to our hearing, the other perfection to our praying. Attention is
commanded in Proverbs 5. 1. My son, hearken unto my wisdom, and incline
thine ear unto my knowledge. The enclining of the ear is attention, without
which Gods word goes in at the one ear, and out at the other: Attention is the
souls concurrence with the ears and mouths organs. What is the reason why Gods
word read, and the Church Service, is to many so fruitless? They attend it
not, they neither mark it nor respect it. Would thou have God to hear thee,
(says S. Chrysostom) and thou hear not thy self? Had we a sermon preached
by angels, yet if we did not mark it, what would it profit? Gods service is
common, therefore it is not regarded. The sun shines daily; is it therefore
the worse? every day we say the Lords prayer; is it therefore the weaker? No,
but Vis unita fortior, Force united is stronger. The sun by its often beating
upon the earth makes the greater heat: so the oftener we beat upon Gods word,
and repeat the Churchprayers, the more the Son of Gods light reflecteth upon
us, and the more heat of devotion is stirred up in us. If God or the Church
make a prayer for our use; that is slighted: but if men make an extemporarie
prayer, or frame a prayer of their own; that is extolled. For shame let us
gather our wits together, let us put a difference betwixt God and man, and let
us attend his stablished ordinance in his Church, before the rolling wits of
men. So running is man's head, that it will stay no where. Should the best wits
in the world make a new liturgy applauded of all, yet would it not long be
liked, except it might roll as men's wits roll; that is, as continually to
alter, as the wind blows and the weather changes. People now are grown so
cunning, and proud in their learning, that if the preacher speaks any thing
which they distaste, they will fleere at it in the very house of God: such come
not to hear with attention, but to sit judges on him; they come to catch
something from him, as the Scribes and Pharisees came to take Christ in his
doctrine. This is contrary to sanctified attention, and a vice to be shunned,
when thou come to Gods house: thou must not bring a chair with thee to sit
down and judge; but if thou can not presently assent to all that thou
hear, carry it home with thee, and, with the noble Bereans, search in Gods
word whether Act. 17. 11.
it may not stand with it: and further, because thou art a private man, and S.
Peter teaches 2. Pet. 1. 20.
that no scripture is of any private interpretation; therefore thou art not to
rest in thine own sense, but thou must go further to the preachers fellows, and
to them whose authority is prevalent in the Church, and require their
judgment; because S. Paul says, The spirits 1. Cor. 14. 32.
of the prophets are subject to the prophets: and if the matter be too hard for
them, then thou must go to the Bishops, who are Gods high priests, and ask of
them, as we are directed in Deuteronomy. 17. Devotion, as has been said, is the soul
to prayer and the rest of Gods service, because it is the daughter of the
mother-vertue Charity: and this is a cheerful and free giving of our selves
to Gods service, as his household servants. Therefore this is the special act
of religion. And this devotion is derived a voto, from a vow, and is a frank
gift and free binding of our selves unto it: and a simile of this we have in
Mephibosheth, who, when king David had awarded his lands to be divided between
him and his servant Ziba, gave all from himself for David's sake, saying, Let
him take all, seeing my lord 2. Sam. 19. 30.
the king is come home in peace. According to this when we consider what God
has done for us, as Mephibosheth remembered what king David had done for him;
when we remember that he has not only made us, but after this redeemed and
saved us when we were but dead men before him, as Mephibosheth and his fathers
house were before king David; and when we remember further that in his Son
Christ he has taken us as his own sons to be at his own table: therefore now
we are willing to forsake all for his sake, to let the world and Ziba take all,
and to give our selves wholly to his service. A second motive to this devotion,
is the consideration of our own defects. For when we find our selves too weak
to persist in this purchased grace without his special aid, we relinquish our
own strength and providence, to betake us to his protection, and so we turn to
be his household servants. And because prayer is the principal mean to lay
hold on Gods help, therefore herein specially our devotion in Gods house is
occupied.

And for that many, after they have made good vows, by the worlds avocations
are called off; therefore my Text tells me that this holy service must not be
for a time, but for ever: Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord, for ever. God
is always the same, as says the Psalmist, Thou art the same, and thy years
fail Psalm. 102. 27.
not. The proverb is, Semper idem. Wherefore if we be not the same always to
him as he is to us, if we fail to serve him, he will fail to save us; because
he is always the same, as well just, as merciful. S. Jude teaches that the
angels which kept not their first habitation, verse. 6.
God has reserved in everlasting chains to the judgment of the great day. Of
how much more punishment shall they be worthy, which fall upon fall, and
finally fall away? The angels fell but once, and were immediately cast down:
but loose and careless men fall from God twice: first in Adam, whereby we have
all warning; and secondly in themselves: in which if without repentance they
persist, then is grace contemned, and their falling from God confirmed. The
devout Anna leads us a better example: for she being a widow Luke 2. 37.
of about fourscore and four years, departed not from the Temple, but served
God with fastings and prayers night and day. She would not go out of it: but
many of us will seldom come at it, especially upon Saints days, and fasting
days, when God should be served with greatest humiliation and strongest
devotion; because then the Saints in heaven join with us. Join with us, will
you say? how know you that? Thus, because in Wis. 3. 1. it is said, The souls
of the righteous are in the hand of God: but Gods hand is ever in action:
therefore the souls departed must be so too. What are they doing? because they
are of our body, which is Christ's Church, they are in continual care for us:
because S. Paul says, that the members should have 1. Cor. 12. 25.
the same care one for another. What? is their care in action? it can be
nothing but prayer for us; because they themselves are past danger: therefore
all their desires are for us. And this is represented after some manner, by
Gods ordinance toward the holy nation in getting the earthly Canaan: for God
would not give to the two tribes and half, the land of Gilead, but upon
condition that they should Numb. 32. and Josh. 1.
aid the rest of their brethren, and go armed with them into Canaan, until
they were in as quiet possession as themselves. Now if the Saints in heaven,
after their manner, aid us with their prayers; shall we be so base-minded, as
not to pray with them? O ingratitude, neither fit for heaven nor earth! The
Church our mother has ordained holy days to God for them, to acknowledge
their pains and labors which they took for Gods glory, and our good, before
they went from us: then let us upon these days bless and praise God for them.
These days are the Saints obsequies, their feast days, their days of
triumph: O let us rejoice with them; let us reverence their memories; let us
imitate their virtues; let there be a holy necessitude between them and us; let
us not be strangers. We are all of the holy blood and the bloud-royall, we are
all of Ephesians. 2. 19.
Christ's body: therefore let us join together, that God may be served of us the
stronger. In Cathedral and Collegiate churches, they serve God every day in
the week: this is the continual burnt-offering commanded Exodus Preface to the
Service.
29. In our countrey-churches we are commanded to serve God so too, specially
adding every Wednesday and every Friday the holy Letanie: on Wednesday, in
memorial of our Lords arraignment; and on Friday, in remembrance of his
precious death. And although in our particular churches we have not the people
to attend the continual burnt-offering, in regard of secular business; yet
the priest is to do it, and for the people. This serves to teach us, that
though we be not always in the Temple, as Anna was; yet the Altar of our
hearts should never be cold toward God, nor the fire of his love at any time
go out, but always burn in prayer and meditation and holy desires, as God gave
in charge by the figure, Levit. 6. 12. The fire shall ever burn upon the Altar,
and never go out. And according to this, in the new law S. Paul says, Pray
continually, or 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
without ceasing, that is to say, upon all occasions offered: and again,
Praying always with all Ephesians. 6. 18.
prayer and supplication in the spirit. In the old law were two principal
sacrifices; Juge sacrificium, and holocaustum; the continual burnt-offering,
and the whole burnt-offering. The whole burnt-offering teaches, that, seeing
God saves us not in parts or halves, but in whole, therefore we should serve
him also in whole, with all that we have, with soul, body, and goods. The
continual burnt-offering preaches to us, that, whereas God is good unto us
not at spirts and whiles, but perpetually, therefore we should at all times be
for him; continually in habit, and as often as we can in action; in the
morning, in the evening, at midnight, and at noonday: and this the Prophet
David comprehends in the complete number of seven, Psalm. 119. 164. Seven
times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments. To conclude,
thus our Church by the continual service daily has brought religion into a
practice among us; but our Solisermonists and Solifidians do what they can to
dissipate it: for, so they may have a sermon or two on the Lords day, or other,
they take no thought for the weekly service, nor other good works; because
faith, falsely so called, only supplieth all to these fruitless men.

Holiness becomeeth thy house, O LORD, for ever.
HAving showed the holiness that becomes Gods house, now I must lay out the
unholinesse which unbeseemeth it; because things contrary cannot stand
together, comeliness with uncomelinesse will not agree.

The first kind of unholinesse is a contrary preparation, to come to this
house in vain glory and ostentation, in that manner ordinarily which S. Hierome
renders of their goings into Gods house, whom the Prophet Amos pronounces a woe
against; namely, qui pompatice ingrediuntur Amos 6. 1.
domum Israel, who come in hither with stiff necks, proud gates, and unhumbled
bodies; and in gradiendo videntur quasi (...), -- I veluti (...), as Clemens
Alexandrinus Faed. lib. 3. cap. 11.
has it, and seem to march as if they would exactly measure out the earth by
their mincing, or else lead some pompous train upon the stage. Our Prophet
says, Holiness becomes this house: but these take more care for braverie,
the newest fashions, and the finest attires that can be bought for money; for
here we are looked upon. We should come hither to serve God: but these come to
show themselves. Know thou whose house this is? know thou before whom
thou come hither? is he not thy Maker? Shall we then come before our Maker
only in our own making? Shall we present our selves to his Majesty in our own
majesty? No, let us come hither with humility, in the most modest manner that
may be. It is holiness, lowliness, the souls beauty, that Gods eyes are
delighted in. The Prophet Isaiah says, The high looks of man shall be humbled,
Isai. 2. 11.
and the loftiness of men shall be abased, and the Lord only shall be exalted
in that day. This house is Gods house, and this day is Gods day; here therefore
let us exalt him, and humble our selves. Keep thy braverie rather for fairs and
markets; save thy new fashions and sumptuous dressings for great men's houses.
Thus says our Savior, They which wear soft clothing are Matthew. 11. 8.
in kings houses. Then suit the world with the world, and Gods house with
holiness. I am not so cynicall as to take from men and women their
distinctions; that we should not know the mistress from the maid, nor the maid
from the mistress. This the angels dislike; for they keep their order one
above another. Under them we see again how God has not clothed the flowers
alike, but has given more beauty to some, and sweeter smell to others. So let
us keep our sorts and orders, let us not make our selves better then we are;
and when we are in our best and richest, let us be in our own eyes lowliest,
especially when we come before God. This is comely.

The second kind of uncomelinesse, is that of men in this house, who, when
Gods Minister is not in place, and sometime when he is in place, in stead of
prayer and meditation, in stead of turning the leaves of their book, turn face
to face, and confabulate one with another, as if they were in a fair or
market. This is like to the tables of the money changers, Matthew. 21. 12.
and the seats of the dove-sellers, which Christ in his time threw out of the
Temple. Neighbors, I am not here to flatter you, nor so mean as to fear you; I
am Gods Minister, to tell you of your faults, and to speak for God and his
house. Let these things be amended, they are neither holy nor comely. S.
Chrysostom in his 36 homily upon the 1. Corinthians. says, It is not lawful in
the Church to speak to our neighbor; he means about secular business. His
words are emphaticall, and therefore I will cite them at large. (...). It is
not lawful to speak unto a neighbor, or take acquaintance of an old friend in
the Church, as elsewhere; but these things are to be done out of it, and that
for very good reason: for the Church is not a barbours or apothecaries shop,
neither a place to plead in; but a place of angels and archangels, the palace
of God, yea, heaven it self. Therefore it is most fit that the best manners and
respects possible should be maintained in it.

Thirdly, as men profane Gods house at their coming in, so they serve it before
their going out. Two, or three, or more will sit talking still upon their own
matters, as though Gods house were now changed, and things set apart for his
service may as well serve our private business. This common talk is fitter for
other places, then for the King of heavens palace. As we fan the darnell from
the wheat, so we must winnow all profane speeches out of the house of prayer.
You will say, Our speeches are not profane. Then know you what profaneness is?
Is it any thing but what is common in respect of things sacred? as S. Peter
expresses it, Acts 10. 14. Lord, I have never eaten any thing which is common
or unclean. And thus Esau is called (...), Heb. 12. 16. a profane person, one
that was for any thing. I speak not against an orderly conference without
brawling, in parleying about the good of Gods house, about the good of the
Parish, or for the poor, and such like actions of piety and devotion: for
these are warranted 1. Cor. 16. 2. I speak only against unnecessarie
confabulations: and for common matters, they are fittest for common places.

Fourthly, as some profane Gods house with their common talk; so some profane
it by their going forth with their hats on their heads, as though when Gods
service is done, then Gods house is no more Gods house. Such think that Gods
house is like to our common houses: Therefore if they come either before or
after service, they think no more reverence is to be showed. Yet still it is
Gods house, and he never is out of it; and therefore still to be respected.

Fifthly, Gods house is profaned by such as sit in time of divine prayer. For
both prayer, and praising God, is a speaking to him. Now it is unmannerly to
speak to God upon our seats in a public assembly. If we speak to a king or
noble man, either we kneel, or stand up. But many have I seen either sitting in
time of prayer, or lying along very unseemly. This is not holiness, but
unmannerly rudeness.

Sixthly, when servants are upon their knees in prayer, if their masters or
dames come in after, they will leave their service to God, to stand up to them;
as if they should say, Stay God, till my master and mistress be in their seats,
and then I will attend on thee again, and go forward with thy Minister. Is not
this to prefer the creature before the Creator? fie on these manners! This
is not thy masters house, but Gods house. Reverence thy master at home and
abroad, and reverence thy Maker here, and out of his service thou may
reverence thy master here too. But the principal end of this house is, not for
humane civility, but for divine service. Thy master himself comes hither to
serve God, as well as thou; and this must ever be thy rule, That when Gods duty
and man's come together in competition, thou must leave all, father and mother,
master and mistress, to wait upon God; though thou have a commandment for the
one, as well as for the other. Thus did Levi, as we read in Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Who
said to his father and mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge
his brethren, nor knew his own children. So must we do too: in Gods service we
must neither see father nor mother, brother nor sister, master nor mistress, nor
our own selves neither, how great soever we be, to divert or hinder us from it.

Seventhly, Gods house is profaned by wandering eyes, in gazing about to see
what others do, and who has the newest fashion: and when they see any thing
which they dislike, they make sport at it: while they look after such things,
they lose God. Eo tempore nugas obgannire in aurem vicini, eorum est, qui non
credunt illic adesse Christum: huc illus circumferre vagos oculos, amentium
est: existimes enim te frustra Templum adiisse, nisi inde melior discesseris
puriorque; As Erasmus has it. It is De civilitate morum in templo.
their fashion that think Christ is not in his Temple in presence, to tattle
toys in the ears of their neighbors: but then to roll wandering eyes to and
again, is the part of mad men: for know certainly, that thou come to Gods
house in vain, if thou departest not from it better and more pure in soul then
thou came. Therefore the Turks, though they be heathen men, yet herein they
be our betters, as report goes of them. For so do they attend their service,
that if by chance they do but scratch their heads, they think all their former
devotion to be lost. But what do our lighter women, and maidens in this place?
Among many other misdemeanors this is one, when the weather is hotter then
ordinary, they never leave fanning of wind with their napkins on their faces.
Our men do not so, though they be as hot of nature. This is women's delicacy,
unfit for Gods service. Greater rudenes is committed by the unmarried at the
holy ordinance of Matrimony. In the beginning when the banes are published,
what a smiling is there? For this the parties contracting forbear to come to
Gods house till the asking be out. But in the end of the solemnity, after the
conjunction, as though they were not in Gods house but in the Brides chamber,
they fall a rifling the Bride, in pulling off garters and shoe-tyings: Is not
this a shame to be suffered in this most holy and modest place? O whither would
rudeness run, if it might be permitted!

Further, Gods house is abused by them which bring hither hawks and dogs, which
is faulted in our Church-homilie, and whereby peoples minds are diverted from
their devotions. If our Savior Christ, as a good son, was so zealous of his
Fathers honor in his house, that he made a whip of cords, to drive those that
sold doves, sheep, and oxen, things which were all offerable in sacrifice; will
he not now with whips of scorpions drive out those who bring hither, either
unclean creatures, as dogs; or things merely devoted to pleasure, as hawks, and
the like, into his Temple? Gods service is so great, that it ought not by any
thing to be interrupted: did we see but a glimmering of Gods glory and
greatness, we would throw all away to attend him. To him we cannot come too
single, nor too separate from things worldly. As Gods house is consecrate, so
nothing ought to come into it, but things consecrated. If thou cavil with me,
and say, that thy apparel and thy book are not consecrated, without which none
come hither; I answer, that thy apparel is sacred by thy person in Baptism
consecrated, and thy book (if it be divine) by the Church-bible: for which
cause when the followers of the worthy young king Edward laid a bible for him
in a house in London, to tread on, to look out at a window to see a sight; he
took it up and kissed it, and laid it in its former room.

Lastly, all these abuses shall be shut up with such as sleep in Gods house.
Besides the contempt of God, sleep is to all holy duties an extinction. They
which use it, make an idol of this place, and banish Gods service; they can
neither do themselves good, nor good toward God. In the Acts we read, that S.
Paul Acts 20. 7.
preached till midnight: here was great diligence: when people sleep at midday,
is not this great negligence? Eutychus in Gods service sleeping at midnight,
was taken up dead: in what state of sin then stand they, that sleep thus at
midday? is not their service at that time dead? is not sleep the image of
death? To amend this fault, such as cannot attend God sitting, let them rise up
and serve him standing. Baals priests lanced themselves 1. King. 18. 28.
to serve an idol; and shall not we stir up our selves to serve the living
God?

Now, brethren, having showed you the beauty of Gods house, what is fit for
it, and what unfit, one thing I request in lieu of my labor, and for Christ's
sake I beg it, That you would follow the directions of it.

Trin-uni Deo, qui velle dedit and perficere, omnis sit laus, honor, and
adoratio in secula.
Amen.
The ten Preachers, OR A SERMON Preferring holy Charity before Faith, Hope,
and Knowledge.
1. COR. 8. 1. Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth.
THere were a sort of Christians in the Apostles time, which would not consort
with their fellows, because they understood more then they did. They would eat
meat in the idols temples with the idolaters, because they had learned that an
idol was nothing, and that all the creatures of God were good: the other which
knew less, durst not, because they had neither warrant for it, nor president.
The like difference is at this day among our professors. One sort will not
sociate with the rest of their neighbors in the house of God, because they
have not every day a sermon to teach them more knowledge. Both these the
Apostle here reproves, in saying, Knowledge puffs up; that is to say, makes
men proud: but Charity edifieth.

What the Apostle has here put down in the general, I will proceed to prove
in the particulars. And to begin with the pride of knowledge; In the creation
God made his angels exceeding bright and glorious in understanding, and then
propounded to them his Son to be their governor, to direct them in his
service, according to that Heb. 1. 6. Let all the angels of God worship him: as
if it were said, Let them follow his direction. But they, seeing themselves
made in such perfection of knowledge, were so lifted up in pride, that they
refused a directour, and would serve him after their own understanding; for
which their pride, they were thrown down from heaven to hell. After this, the
angels perceiving that the pride of their knowledge had thrown them down, they
set upon Adam and Eve, persuading them also to break their order in eating of
the tree of knowledge. The serpent-angel told them, that if they would eat of
this tree, they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil. This conceit of
knowledge did so puff them up too, that they broke Gods commandment, and were
ipso facto thrown out of Paradise. After this, when man was ejected out of
Paradise, so politic and proud grew they, that they would make a tower to
clamber up to heaven, and to defend themselves against Gods providence: God
seeing their pride, confounded their devices, by changing their language, and
then they were dispersed all the earth over, like straying herds. The like
pride has now adays puffed up our Puritanes, that being but very ignorant
people, yet they will not be content to be accounted men of any mean knowledge,
or be satisfied with any settled estate; but they will run from church to
church, from preacher to preacher, and from one opinion to another, until they
have lost and confounded themselves in the tower and Babel of their own
fancies. Knowledge puffs up, says the Apostle; and when a man is at the
highest, then he falls lowest. Knowledge threw the angels out of heaven to
hell; knowledge threw Adam and Eve out of an earthly Paradise into a
wilderness of miseries; and witty policy cast mighty Nimrod, with all
mankind, out of the city, to seek straw and stubble with the children of
Israel all the world over.

But, says the Puritan, We have no sermons, we are without a preacher, we
shall perish for want of knowledge. I answer, It is not knowledge that shall
save: because then all they that know the will of God, and the mysteries of
life, must needs be saved. But so they shall not, because our Savior says, He
Luke 12. 47.
that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes: and S. Paul says, The hearers of the law are not righteous before
Romans 2. 13.
God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. Then knowledge without
charity saves not, Add scientiae charitate^, and utilis erit scientia, non
per se, sed per charitatem. S. Aug. in Evang. Joh. Tract. 27.
but increases punishment, and puffs up. Besides, if knowledge were able to
save, then the devils might be saved, because they know more then the best
minister in the land. And whereas thou stand upon much knowledge, (for we
will yield thee that which is sufficient) I say more unto thee, that one may be
saved without any knowledge at all. Know you what you say? yes: the child of
three months old, when by Gods providence it departs, what knowledge has
that of salvation? yet the Church in all ages has taught, that such shall go
to the kingdom of heaven: and what should let? it is without original sin,
because that is washed away in Baptism; and actual sin it never committed
any, by reason it wanted the use of free will. Besides, the infant after
Baptism is within the covenant, and united to God by his grace; and God cannot
deny either his grace or his covenant. Now if the poor infant shall be saved
without any knowledge at all, why then should thou think that thou can not
be saved with mean knowledge fit for thy estate? But thou will say, The infant
is not suffered to live to the means of knowledge, and therefore he is excused
for the want of it. Then what say thou to the men and women which want the
gifts of understanding, whom some call fools, some innocents, who know not the
right hand from the left, or whether there be a heaven or a hell? what, shall
these be damned which want the knowledge that thou have? where dwells thy
charity? I will not believe thy knowledge, because that makes thee proud; and
the proud will condemn all save themselves. The School Tenet is, Amentes,
furiosi, and infantes non peccant; that is, Fools, madmen, and children sin
not. Therefore madmen, though they kill a man, are not put to death for it.
Again, the Church has ever taught, that all they that are within the covenant,
are in the state of grace, until they fall away: but these Christian innocents
cannot fall away, because they cannot sin; and they cannot sin, because
they want knowledge and freewill. And my charity teaches me to hope, that as
the Savior of the world at his first coming had mercy on the Gentiles, who
before lived without faith, and without God in the world; so at his second
coming he likewise will show favor to these want-wits and weakwits, and then
open the windows of their understanding to see God face to face; because they
are within the covenant, and are baptized Christians.

But to return to thy former challenge, We have no sermons, we want a preacher,
we shall die in our sins, we know not what to do. The Lord open thy eyes as
he opened the eyes of Elisha his servant in the 6 chapter of the 2 book of
Kings, and then thou shall see a multitude of preachers. First, all Gods
creatures are thy preachers, and daily teach thee. And to prove this, turn to
the 19 Psalm. 1, 2, 3. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handie work. One day tells another, and one night certifieth
another. There is neither speech nor language, but their voices are heard among
them. Again, turn to the 12 of Job, 7, 8. and there he will bid thee ask the
beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of heaven, and they shall tell
thee: Or speak to the earth, and it shall show thee; or the fishes of the sea,
and they shall declare unto thee. When thou travellest abroad, and see a good
piece of ground, a good cow, or a good horse, thou will say, I would my
neighbor would sell me these for reasonable money. Can thou see the
goodness of the creature in these, and not see the goodness of the Creator?
Can thou learn in these books what is good for thy body, and not learn what
is good for thy soul? Open thy eyes wider, and then thou shall see that there
could be no goodness in the creature, except God had made it; and that if the
effect be good, then the cause of this good must needs be infinitely more good;
and therefore he above all things is to be sought of us. And this is so clear
a lesson, that except a man will shut his eyes, he must see it and understand
it; because the Apostle says, Romans 1. 19, 20. That which may be known of God,
is manifest in them. For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal
power and Godhead, are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in
his works, that they should be without excuse. And these preachers are of S.
Paul acknowledged for preachers, in the 10 chapter following, and the 18 verse.
having relation to the 14 verse. Have they not heard? no doubt their sound went
into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

Secondly, Gods Word is thy preacher: And this is proved by the book of Solomon
called Ecclesiastes; for that book, as the learned know, signifies a preacher.
Again, turn to Acts 15. 21. and there the holy Ghost will tell thee, that Moses
was preached every day in the Synagogues, while his words were read unto them.
If thou say, that Gods scriptures are too high for thy capacity; then what
say thou to the 19 Psalm. verse. 7. which teaches, that the testimony of the
Lord gives wisdom to the simple? And art thou so simple to think, that when
God gave his scriptures to the Church, he gave them so darkly, that men might
not understand them? then he might as well not have given them. Thou will
object that of the Eunuch in Acts 8. 30, 31. where when Philip asked the
Eunuch, whether he understood what he read, he answered, How can I, except I
had a guide? And I answer thee again, that there is a great difference between
the Eunuch and thee, and this place of scripture which he read, and the places
of scripture which to thee are propounded: for he was out of the Church, which
is the house of light, and thou art in it. Again, that scripture was to him a
mystery, but to thee it is no mystery. For in Isaiah no name is expressed, but
it is read, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter: but what he this was, the
articles of our faith express to the simplest, that it was Jesus Christ the
Messiah of the world, who was delivered by the Jews to Pontius Pilate, to be
slain for our redemption: and therefore this excuse of darkness is utterly
taken from thee, because the Gospel is the blazing of the Law, and there is
nothing so dark in one place, but in some other it is so bright that the very
bleareied may see it. Therefore Fulgentius says, Sermon. de Dispens. Dom.
In verbo Dei abundat quod perfectus comedat, abundat etiam quod parvulus
sugat: Ibi est enim simul and lacteus potus, quo tenera fidelium nutriatur
infantia; and solidus cibus, quo robusta perfectorum juventus spiritalia
sanctae virtutis accipiat incrementa. In the word of God abounds that which
the perfect man may eat, and that which the little one may suck: For there is
both drink of milk, whereby the tender infancy of the faithful may be
nourished; and solid meat, whereby the strong youth of the perfect may receive
the spiritual increase of holy virtue.

Thirdly, Gods holy Sacraments are our preachers, while by visible and sensible
signs they teach us what we are to believe; for which they are of the learned
called visibilia verba, words visible. Therefore when we see the water in
Baptism, this brings to our remembrance the water and blood which came out
of our Saviors side: and when we see the bread and wine, this preaches to us,
that his body was broken, and his blood shed for our sins, as the water
signifies the washing away of our transgressions. And these Sacraments do that
for us that all the preachers of the land cannot do. For they by their words
can but only teach us, and enlighten our understanding; but these preachers
the Sacraments, besides the light which they give to our understanding, infuse,
through Christ's power and effectual ordinance, grace into our souls, and make
us acceptable before God. Yea, so effectually do they this, that they can never
want grace after, who rightly receive them, and preserve the virtue of them.
Therefore our Lord said to the woman in John 4. 14. Whosoever shall drink of
the water that I shall give him, shall never be more athirst: but the water
that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up into
eternal life. This water is that grace which is bestowed upon us in Baptism,
which after the Eunuch had received, as we read in Acts 8. 39. he went away
rejoicing: and we read not that he heard any more sermons, or received any
other Sacraments; for his well of water, which he carried away with him into a
far heathen country, was sufficient for him. But oh the lamentation of our
times! Who shall make our people to believe, that Christ's Sacraments bestow
grace? they say they signify only, and that faith comes by hearing only:
yet when they have heard what they can, and believe what they will, they shall
never be saved without the grace of the Sacraments, at least in desire. I can
show you of some that are saved without the hearing of the word preached; our
baptized infants: but I can show you of none saved ordinarily without the
Sacraments, in regard of our Saviors exception in John 3. 5. Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
Therefore the men which shut up all in the preaching of the word, evacuate
Christ's Sacraments, and do they know not what: for preaching is but a
preparation for the Sacraments, and there the principal grace lies hid. For
this cause our Savior said to his Apostles, Matthew. 28. 19. Go teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. For people must first be taught that God bestows grace in the
Sacraments, or else they will not receive them. And the principal Sacrament is
Baptism, because that only bestows new life, and the rest strengthen and
preserve it.

Fourthly, printed sermons are thy preachers. For as soon as there is any rare
sermon preached, by and by it is put to print, and from the press it is
dispersed all the land over. There is scarce a house in any town, but one or
other in it by reading can repeat it to thee. Then how should thou starve
for want of preaching, when the best preachers in the land, such as thou never
saw, nor they thee, yet by this means continually preach unto thee?

Fifthly, Gods Spirit is thy preacher. And to prove this, see 1 John 2. 27.
where it is written, But that anointing which ye have received of him, dwells
in you: and ye need not that any teach you: but, as the same anointing teaches
you of all things, etc. This anointing is nothing else but Gods Spirit and grace
bestowed upon Christians in their Baptism. And of this Spirit and grace
speaks S. Paul, 1. Cor. 2. 10. God has revealed them to us by his Spirit:
for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. Then if Gods
word be true, the Spirit of grace which he has given to his children, is
another of thy preachers.

Sixthly, thy conscience is thy preacher. For as soon as thou have done any
thing amiss, or left any thing undone that ought to be done, that will by and
by tell thee of it. Thus Adam and Eves conscience, when they had eaten of the
forbidden fruit, preached unto them, that they had offended God; and therefore
they hid themselves, and made them breeches of fig leaves. Who told thee, said
God, that thou wast naked? oh his conscience, the first preacher, had made a
sermon unto him. So again, when David had cut off but a 1. Sam. 24. 4, 5.
lap of Saul's garment privily, his heart smote him for it, and told him that he
had wronged the Lords anointed. And again, when he had numbered the people, his
heart touched 2. Sam. 24. 10.
him for it. Thus every man's conscience is his tutour, to teach and govern him,
not only after, but before he has done amiss. Would thou be thus dealt
withal, will it say? Thou may bribe thy preacher with a gift, and thou may
stop the mouth of the parish priest with a good tithe: but nothing will stop
the mouth of thy conscience, that is a continual preacher within thee. And of
this preacher the prophet Isaiah says further in his 30 chapter, verse. 21. And
thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye
in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, and when thou turnest to the left.
This word behind thee, is the word of thy conscience; thou can turn thy self
no way but that will speak unto thee. If thou go on thy left hand when thou
should go on thy right, it will call to thee and tell thee, Thou art out of
thy way: and when thou art in the way, if thou go too much to the right hand
or too much to the left, it will say to thee with the Preacher in the book of
the Preacher, Be not thou just overmuch, neither Eccles. 7. 16.
make thy self over-wise, play not the hypocrite nor the proud fellow: for
virtue is ever in the midst. But how comes thy conscience to preach thus to
thee? from the law that is written in thine heart by the finger of Gods own
hand, as S. Paul teaches, Romans 2. 15. Which show the effect of the law written
in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing
one another, or excusing. If thou do ill, thy conscience will preach nothing
to thee but the Law and judgment; but if thou do well, then nothing but the
Gospel and mercy; then thy conscience will be to thee a continual feast, as
Solomon says. Besides, thy conscience has another law to inform thee, and
this is the new covenant of the Gospel, spoken of Jer. 31. 33, 34. This shall
be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After those days,
says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know
the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest, says the
Lord. Is this word of God true? then how can thou complain for want of
teaching, except thou will make Gods word a liar? And here you shall further
understand, that there be two kinds of teaching; the one outward, the other
inward: The outward is that which comes from the mouth of man; the inward is
that which comes from the mouth of the conscience. And this inward teaching,
because it is next to the heart, works far more strongly upon it then the
outward does. When men had more of this inward teaching, and less of the
outward, then was there far better living; for then they lived always in
fear of offending: and as soon as they had done any thing amiss, their
conscience by and by gave them a nip and a memento for it. Then they confessed
their sins to God and their Minister, for spiritual comfort and counsel;
then they endeavored to make the best temporal satisfaction they could, by
alms, prayer, and fasting, and other good works of humiliation: but now
outward teaching, being not rightly understood, has beaten away this. Faith
only justifies, says the vulgar preacher. Then, says the Solifidian and
loose liver, what need I care how I live? no sin can hurt me so long as I
believe. Thy preacher and thou are both in an error; because Gods word no
where teaches this, but the contrary. Ye see, says S. James, how a man is
justified by works, Jam. 2. 24.
and not by faith only. Thou will say, The Fathers taught this doctrine, and
our own Church too. But how, and in what sense? to shut out works before faith
be come, and to acknowledge faith to be the only beginning in the preparations
of our justification: but our young preachers and hearers shut up all in faith
only, and stay at the beginning; and thus, verbo tenus, they prove but
half-Christians. Thine own conscience will preach better to thee; for that will
exclude no virtue, and admit no vice. And as for thee which art an hearer,
though thy principles be good, yet thy apprehension cannot well digest them,
because they be somewhat above thy reach. Therefore the Church in all ages has
provided, that the common people should be content with the common faith, as S.
Paul calls it, Titus 1. 4. and that deep mysteries should be reserved for the
learned, who have their wits exercised to discern both good and Hebr. 5. 14.
Canon Apost. 48.
evil.

Seventhly, good life and conversation of Christians is thy preacher, by which
very heathens may be won and converted to God. But you will say, How prove
you that? Turn to 1. Pet. 3. 1. where you shall find it thus written, Let
wives be subject to their husbands, that even they which obey not the word, may
without the word be won by the conversation of the wives, while they behold
your pure conversation coupled with fear. Here see the force of this preaching;
when the preaching of the word cannot prevail, then men may be won by good
conversation without the word preached: while they behold your pure
conversation coupled with fear. Good life, my brethren, is better then a good
sermon: for that with many goes in at one ear, and out at the other; but a
good life is a sermon in print, it is always before thee to behold, and it
makes deep penetration, when it speaks in almesdeeds or benefits. This I
confirm to you by examples of instance. In the second book of Eusebius his
Ecclesiastical History and the 9 chapter, we read, that when he which drew
S. James before the tribunal, saw that he would suffer martyrdom willingly,
he was therewith so moved, that he confessed himself to be a Christian, and so
was beheaded together with him, after S. James had forgiven him at his request,
and kissed him. His words are these; (...). Likewise this sermon of good life
and conversation had so won Ruth to the true religion, that when her mother
in law Naomi was to return from the heathen country of Moab, her two daughters
in law, Ruth and Orpah, bearing her company in the way, at last Naomi spoke
thus unto them, Turn again Ruth 1. 11.
my daughters, for there is no more hope of husbands for you by me. Then Ruth
thus replied, Entreat verse. 16, 17.
me not to leave thee: for whither thou go, I will go; and where thou
dwell, I will dwell: thy people shall be my people, and thy God shall be my
God: Where thou die, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so
to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me. Now if the life and
conversation of simple women and illiterate, be of such virtue to win and
turn people to God; then shall the good life of thy Minister be nothing worth,
against whom thou can prove nothing? Some parishes (as men say) have good
preachers, but bad livers; and some have mean preachers, or readers, but good
livers: which of these are best? I say, The good liver is the best preacher.
For the bad liver, as fast as he builds with one hand, pulls down again with
the other: but the good-living Minister, what he builds by his reading of
Gods word, prayer, and administering of the Sacraments, pulls not down again,
but upholds all with his good life; and therefore he is far the best
preacher. The one builds in show, the other in substance. This S. Hierome upon
the 22 Psalm confirms; Ille plus didicit, qui plus facit, etc. He has
learned most, that does most. If (says he) that which thou have learned I do,
my works do more hold the scriptures, then thy sermon which makes a vain sound.

Eighthly, parents are preachers to their children and servants. The first
world for more then two thousand years together, until the giving of the Law,
had no other preachers. Then every private man's house was a church; as it is in
the epistle to Philemon, verse. 2. And to the church in thy house. And according
to this God said of Abraham, Shall I hide from Genesis 18. 17, 19.
Abraham that thing which I do? -- For I know that he will command his sons
and his household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, to do
righteousness and judgment. And this kind of preaching was commanded by God
in the Law, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. And thou shall rehearse them continually to thy
children. And Solomon, Prove. 1. 8. thus begins his sermon to his son
Roboam, My son, hear thy fathers instruction, and forsake not thy mothers
teaching. For as the mothers milk is more nourishing to the infant, then the
milk of strangers: so the instruction of parents is more acceptable to youth,
then the teaching of the learned. My father and mother were the first that
converted me to God, by their example and teaching. And this kind of preaching
was not only before the Law, and after the Law; but it is continued also in
the Gospel, as we read Ephesians. 6. 4. Ye fathers, provoke not your children to
wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. And this
kind of preaching is so needful, that the Church has derived it from the
natural parents to the spiritual parents, (who are Gods Ministers) in
catechizing of youth. And this kind of preaching, as the most ancient and
effectual, is so highly commended of King James before all other, that in his
second direction to the Archbishop of Canterbury, he gives this charge, That
those preachers be most encouraged and approved of, who spend the afternoon
exercises in examining children in their Catechism, and in expounding the
several heads thereof; which (says he) is the most ancient and laudable
custom of teaching in the Church of England. But how is this regarded?
Preaching has preached away catechizing, and the new preaching has beat out
the old. Now adays every man's own wit is best, though it be the greenest and
youngest.

A ninth kind of preachers are thy Christian neighbors: for they have not
gone so long to church and to sermons, but they have learned something to speak
of the knowledge of God and his laws, and in the way of good living. And this
duty S. Paul requires of all in Coloss. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in
you plentifully in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another. And thus
sometime one neighbor admonishes another of his faults, sometime ancient
kindred instruct their younger in the fear of the Lord, and sometime servants
give good advice to their masters and dames, as the servants of Naaman the
Syrian did: The maidservant persuaded her mistress, that her lord should go to
the prophet in Samaria; and when that her lord was at a stand, his menservants
gave him this good counsel, as we read in 2. Kings 5. 13. Father, if the
prophet had commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? how
much rather then, when he says to thee, Wash and be clean?

Tenthly, Gods Minister is thy preacher, and the divine Service in the
Church-book is his sermon. In this service and in this sermon is contained
whatsoever is necessary to salvation. But you will say, How prove you that? I
say, thus: Whatsoever is necessary to salvation, is contained in these four
points; in true faith, in good life, in prayer, and grace. True faith is
contained in the three Creeds, of the Apostles, of Nice, and of Athanasius; the
two latter being the exposition of the former. Good life is expressed in the
ten commandments; Prayer in the Lords prayer, the Letanie, and the rest; and
grace in the Sacraments. You will say, We plain people cannot understand these
without some to explain them. I answer, Can thou tell me of one man that can
make them more plain to thee by his words, then God himself and his blessed
Apostles have done by their words? But thou will say further, that thou have
need of some body to stir them up unto thee. Have thou not thy Minister to
do this for thee every Sunday and holiday in catechizing? But thou likest not
of this, because it is not a sermon. How provest thou that? Because it is not
spoken out of the pulpit, nor delivered out of a text. I reply, Are not the
articles of the faith, the Lords prayer, and the Sacraments expressed in
scripture? are not these texts? But they are not delivered out of the pulpit.
If the pulpit make a sermon, then where do thou read that Christ and his
Apostles at any time made sermons? Did thou ever read of a pulpit in the
scripture? But tell me, thou man all for sermons, what is a sermon? is it not a
speech of God and heavenly things? and then is not the divine service this? But
thou will shift out further and say, This is not after the manner of our
preachers, who make divisions, answer objections, lay open the scope of the
text, and amplify it by diverse theses and uses to the purpose. Then what
say thou to the Churchsermons, which, for the more honor, from the Greek
tongue are called Homilies? are not (...).
these framed just after the manner of your preachers? I but thou will say,
These are dead sermons, because they are only read; in which reading there is
little or no life. Then why has the Church made them? why has the Church
commanded them to be read? would the Church have men's souls to be fed with dead
things? But tell me, what difference is there between a sermon read, and the
same sermon spoken by memory and by heart? there is the same pronunciation,
the same sense, the same invention. But I will prove to thee out of Gods word,
(if thou will believe Gods word) that the very reading of it is preaching, and
not only preaching, but lively and working preaching, working upon men's souls
to grace and goodness. And that Gods word read unto us is preaching, you shall
find it expressed in Acts 15. 21. where it is thus written, For Moses of old
time has in every city them that preach him, seeing he is read in the
synagogues every sabbath day. Where the reason why Moses, that is to say, the
Law of Moses, was preached every sabbath to the Jews, is rendered to be this,
Because it was every sabbathday read unto them. Next, that this reading is no
dead preaching, but lively and working, see 2. Kings 22. 10, 11, and 19 verses.
There you shall find, that the bare reading of the Law by Shaphan the
Chancellor did so work upon good king Josiah, that he rent his clothes, and
wept, and his heart melted before the Lord. Secondly, the bare reading of the
roll from Jeremies mouth, caused the people to fast and pray, and fear, and to
return from their evil way, as you may read in Jeremie 36. Thirdly, the bare
reading of Baruchs book made the governor, the kings son, and all the people
to weep, fast and pray, and fear, and to return from their evil way, as you may
read in the first chapter of that book. Whose preaching can work better
effects? Fourthly, by Gods word written and read, faith is procured, as you may
read in John 20. 31. These things are written, that ye may believe that Jesus
is that Christ the Son of God, and that in believing ye might have life
through his name. If men may have life eternal by reading holy writing^, then
what wretches are they which seek to discredit this! Again, this is proved from
Christ's command in John 5. 39. Search the scriptures, (that is to say, Study
them by your reading) for they are they which testify of me. From all which I
conclude, that they which deny reading of the scriptures to be a lively and
effectual kind of preaching, and disable it from begetting faith and other
spiritual virtues, make Jeremiah a false prophet, Baruch a false historian,
the second book of Kings false scripture, John a false apostle, and our Savior
a false Christ: for all these affirm it. Further, if there be no life in
reading, then what is in the Psalms which are sung in the church to Gods
praise? for they are not preached: is there no edifying in them neither? then
why does the Apostle say, Coloss. 3. 16. Teaching and admonishing your own
selves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your
hearts to the Lord? But to come nearer to thee; when our commissioners of
justice under the King send their warrants to our cities and villages, and they
are read to thee by our underofficers, do thou not understand them? do
thou not prepare thy self to perform them? Now can thou understand and
believe the warrants of men when they are read to thee, and can thou not
understand and believe the warrants of Almighty God when they are read by his
Ministers? Cannot God as significantly express himself unto thee as a
Lieutenant, a Justice, or a chief Constable? If thou take exception at Gods
greatness and his high style, know thou that he spoke to men. And though he
once wrote his law with his own finger, and spoke it with his own mouth; yet
ever since he has spoken all his divine precepts, and written all his divine
warrants by such men as we our selves are, and used too our own words and
dialects. If thou objectest the deep revelations of S. John, or the hard things
of S. Paul; then I 2. Pet. 3. 16.
will tell thee of our Church-tenet against Papist and Puritan, that all
things necessary to salvation are so plainly written, and so easy of Sermon. de
Dispens. Dom. In verbo Dei abundat quod perfectus comedat, abundat etiam quod
parvulus sugat.
digestion, that, as Fulgentius writes, there is abundantly both for men to
eat, and for children to suck. Then whosoever thou art, if thou can not here
be satisfied, the fault is thy own. For as the children of Israel loathed the
heavenly bread of manna; so thou loath^st the divine food of the soul, because
it is as common to thee as manna was to them. As our horse and kine in the
Spring, having tasted of the fresh grass, will eat no more hay: so our
Puritanes, after the taste of fresh sermons, will touch no more the common
service, but blow upon it, though there be the root and substance of all their
sermons.

Such dainty and queasie stomachs were in S. Chrysostomes time, who was the
most famous preacher of the Greek Church. His words are these, in his third
homily upon the 2 Thessalonians. where he brings in the Puritan thus speaking,
(...); Wherefore do I enter (the church) except I may hear one preaching? then
he adds, (...), This has marred and corrupted all. And afterward answers
the Puritan in this manner, (...). What need is there of a preacher? by our
negligence this necessity is made. Then he shows the reason; (...). For what
need is there of preaching? all things are clear and plain in the scriptures;
all things necessary are manifest: but because you are delicate hearers,
(hunting after pleasure in your hearing) therefore ye seek these things. Where
you understand from this famous and judicious preacher, that the besotted
negligence of our delicate Puritanes is that which makes them to run so after
sermons. God speaks unto thee every holy day by his own word; wilt not thou
understand him? or can thou not understand him? If thou say thou can not;
then thou make God but a mean teacher. But if God be a good teacher and a
plain teacher, as may appear in the articles of the faith, in the ten
commandments, and the Lords prayer; and if all things necessary to salvation
are manifest in the scripture, as that learned S. Chrysostom shows: then for
shame gather thy wits together, and understand. Will thou ever be a child?
Brethren, (says S. Paul) be not children in understanding: 1. Cor. 14. 20.
in malitiousnesse be ye children, but in understanding be of a ripe age.
Understandest thou these words? they are plain enough; and why can thou not
understand them, when they are read to thee out of Gods book? will thou ever be
like a young bird, fed out of the dammes bill? can thou not eat thy meat when
it is before thee, except another put it into thy mouth, or chew it for thee,
as nurses do for young infants? fie on this negligence!

But to conclude with thee; After thou have had so many preachers, and heard so
many sermons, the creatures teaching thee, Gods word teaching thee, the
Sacraments teaching thee, printed sermons teaching thee, Gods Spirit teaching
thee, thy conscience teaching thee, good life and conversation teaching thee,
thy neighbors teaching thee, parents teaching thee, and lastly Gods Ministers
teaching thee, ten in all, a complete number, and will not all this suffice
thee? No. Why? because thou art out of thy self, thou singest a note above Ela,
thou art puffed up, thou will be confined to no order, and to no measure. For,
whereas the Canons have tied thee to thine own Pastor, and to thine own
church, thou runnest in the forenoon to one parish, and in the afternoon to
another; no one place will content thee, if there be not a sermon forenoon and
afternoon. Would you not be loath, say they, to have but one meal a day? What
preacher taught thee that the food of thy soul is of no stronger nourishment
then the food of thy body? Eliah traveled in the strength of one meal 40 days
and 40 nights together. If he went so long unfamisht with one meal of the food
which perishes; then how long think thou may thou travel with the food
which never perishes, but endures to everlasting life? John 6. 27.

But what does this singularity work in thee, but a contempt of government,
and a condemning of all other save thy self? Government is contemned, because
they will not yield to it; their own Minister is contemned, else ask the woman
of the next parish, who called her Ministers preaching Bulls-bief: yet she paid
for good ox-bief, before the Commissarie left her. And what think they of their
neighbors that follow them not? oh they are but civil men and women, they sit
at home and starve their souls. Are not these puffed up, when they take upon them
Gods place and office? do they starve their souls, which make to God a most
humble confession of their sins, entreating him in Christ's name to forgive
them? are they but civil men and women, which make a public profession of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost? and do they starve their souls, who pray
to God for grace and for all blessings spiritual and temporal? and are they
but civil men, who every Lords day lay up the law of God in their hearts, and
follow it in their lives all the week after? If thy neighbors be in the state
of salvation, then why bear thou not them company? but if thou condemnest
thy neighbors, and wilt be singular by thy self; then I will say unto thee, as
the good Emperor Constantine said once to the Arch-puritane Novatus, Scalam in
coelum erigito, etc. Make thee a ladder, and climb up from us into heaven
alone. But thou will say, Oh but knowledge is a good thing: I would be glad to
have more knowledge. So is honey a good thing too, and yet a man may eat too
much of it, as Solomon teaches in Pro. 25. 16. If thou have found honey, eat
that which is sufficient for thee, lest thou be over-full and vomit it. Does
Solomon speak this of honies excess only, and not of immoderatenesse in
general? For as the weak stomach cannot well digest much meat; so the common
and plain people cannot govern much knowledge: and when they cannot govern and
well digest it, then they vomit it, as the weak stomach casts up the sweet
honey. Then they wax proud, and will contest with their Ministers, as Miriam and
Aaron did with Moses; Numb. 12.
then they will talk of Antichrist; then they will soar into points of
predestination, and will be moderatours between Papists and Protestants; and
what will they not do? when they find their wings but spoon-feathered, they
will offer to fly. Were the learned at this time my auditorie, I would ask of
them at what time most heresies were broached, and they would tell me, that it
was in the primitive Church, when there was most preaching; therefore afterward
they slacked it. And is it not so now too? Then ask the cobbler of Amsterdam.
There every tradesman will be a professed preacher. Is not there the sink and
drain of all false doctrine? This the ancient and learned Fathers foreseeing,
inveighed what they could against it. First, S. Hierome in his epistle to
Paulinus has, Quod medicorum est, promittunt Alii adducto supercilio gra^dia
verba trutinantes, inter mulierculas de sacris literis philosophantur. Alii
discunt (proh pudor!) a foeminis, quod viros doceant; and, ne parum hoc sit,
quada^ sacilitate verborum, imo audacia, edisserunt aliis, quod ipsi non
intelligunt. Hier. Paulin. Tom. 4.
medici; tractant fabrilia fabri: sola scripturarum ars est, quam sibi omnes
passim vendicant. Scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim. Hanc garrula anus,
hanc delirus senex, hanc sophista verbosus, hanc universi praesumunt, lacerant,
docent antequam discant. What belongs to physic, physicians profess; and
tradesmen handle their tools: only the art of the scriptures is that which all
men challenge. Learned and unlearned write poems: so the prating old wife, the
doting old man, the wrangling sophister, all presume upon the scriptures,
mangle them, and teach them others, before they have learned them themselves.
If plain men and women would profess what they know soberly, desire to learn
what they do not know, and submit themselves to governors, and live orderly;
good leave should they have to show themselves: but when they grow so proud,
that they will beard their governors, be wiser then Canons, and control the
learned; this is not sufferable.

The great clerk Gregory Nazianzen a long time abstained from preaching, and
his hearers carped at him for it: to whom at his return he made this reply;
(...). Gregor. Naz. orat. 9. ad Julian. Edit. Paris. 1630.
Ye sheep, feed not you your pastors, nor be ye lift up above them: for it is
enough for you, if ye be fed rightly. Judge not your judges, nor give laws to
your law givers: for God is not a God of tumults and confusion, but of peace
and order. Look how these men used this holy Father and learned man, the like
to us do our Puritanes; they will hold consistories against us, we must do so
and so as they would have us, or else we shall not be worthy of our livings:
are not these men taught long enough? Again, thus pert was the Emperors cook
in S. Basils time, whom he thus reprehended; Tuum est Theodoret. l. 4. Hist.
Cap. 17.
jusculorum curare condimenta: nam cum aures habeas oppletas sordibus,
sacrosancta dogmata audire non potes. It is thy duty to season the pottage:
for having thy ears stopped with filth, thou can not hear divine precepts.
Knowledge puffs up, says the Apostle: They would be doctors of the law, and
yet understand not what they speak, 1. Tim. 1. 7. S. Augustine disputing of
knowledge in his 102 epistle to Euodius, says, Si propter eos solos Christus
natus est qui certa intelligentia possunt ista discernere, pene frustra in
ecclesia laboramus. If (says he) Christ be born only for them which can
discern these things by their understanding, we should almost labor in vain in
the church. But what will our Puritanes say? If they cannot understand, away
with them, draw the bridge, let them not follow us. The same S. Augustine, in
his book against the epistle of the foundation, says, Turbam non intelligendi
vivacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissimam facit. Not the quicknes of
understanding, but the simpleness of believing makes the common people safest.
Can thou by thy knowledge tell me how God should be but one substance, and
yet three persons? thou may believe this, but thou can not readily
understand it. Therefore S. Augustine says further, in Enchirid. ad Laurent.
Fides dicta est cognitio rerum quae non videntur. Quamvis quando se quisque non
verbis, non testibus, non denique ullis argumentis, sed praesentium rerum
evidentiae dicit credidisse, hoc est, fidem accommodasse, non ita videtur
absurdum, ut recte reprehendatur in verbo, eique dicatur, Vidisti, ergo non
credidisti. Faith is said to be the knowledge of things not seen. Although when
every one says he has not believed, that is, not applied his faith to words
nor witnesses, nor lastly any arguments, but to the evidence of things present,
it seems not absurd that he should in a word be reprehended, and that it
should be said to him, Thou have seen, therefore thou have not believed. Does
not Christ say often in the Gospel, Thy faith has saved thee? but he says no
where, Thy knowledge or thy understanding saves thee. And our Apostle says,
We are saved by faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God,
Ephesians. 2. 8. but of knowledge he says, Knowledge puffs up. This proud
knowledge makes some of you to say, that your Minister is not worthy of his
living, because he preaches not. Had they as much knowledge as they would seem
to have, they would not say so; because S. Paul says to the contrary, If we
have sown unto you spiritual 1. Cor. 9. 11.
things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things? Yes, it is a
great matter with some, who prize their corn, and their calves, and their pigs
above Gods service and his grace. But, will they say, What is the service you
so much stand upon? the read service? I have a boy at home will read that as
well as you. I, but can thy boy read as a Minister, and administer the
Sacraments like a Minister? Who called him to this? when did God commit unto
him the word of reconciliation? when did God give him power to bless in his
name? who laid his hands upon him? Away with thy boy; thou talkest like a
profane fellow. Thou may as soon make a new God, as make unto him new
ordinances. The stranger in this place God threatened to be slain, as we read
Numb. 18. And Uzza being a layman 2. Sam. 6.
was presently smitten of God by death, for but touching the Ark with his hand,
to stay it up, when it was like to fall. But to return to thy Minister, who is
Gods officer; When he by his holy Sacrament has been the true mean to confer
new life to thy child, to make him a member of Christ; and an heir to the
kingdom of heaven; in this one part of his office he has performed a better
work, then all thy lands and goods are worth: and this no king, no nobleman,
no monarch can do for thee, but only Gods Minister.

But concerning the maintenance of Gods Ministers, which is so much murmured at
of many, let us compare it with the Ministers livings of the old law, and the
worthiness of their service with the worth of ours. They had all the tithes in
kind given them by Gods law, with diverse other fees of sacrifices: but our
neighbors have so gelt them to us by customs and prescriptions, that many of
our brethren are not able to live of them; and, which is unworthy to be heard
amongst us, our greatest professors for the most part are the worst tithers.
And for the worthiness of our service above theirs of the old law (when
neither prescription nor custom had any place) it is known that they ministered
but about the blood of beasts, and types and figures, which were but mere
shadows of our service, Heb. 10. 1.
and which, as S. Paul says, could never sanctify the comers thereto: but the
Ministers of the Gospel serve about the blood of Jesus Christ, the benefit of
which is bestowed in the Sacraments by our service, and that so abundantly,
that S. John says, Of his fullness Joh. 1. 16.
we have all received, and grace for grace. If this be thus, then all they that
envy the maintenance of Gods Ministers under the Gospel, are very
unthankful, and unworthy of Christ's Gospel.

But now besides the ten kinds of preaching, of which I have already
entreated, and which are able to stop the mouths of all discontented and
itching-ear'd professors, there is yet another kind of preaching, which is
not fit for every Minister, but for extraordinary and excellent men, called by
God and the Church to reform errors and abuses, or to promulge to the world
new laws and canons. And as this kind is to be performed by extraordinary men,
so it is not always so needful, but only when necessity requires: for when
things are settled, there needs no more settling, but only preserving. We ought
not to have many Moseses, nor many Evangelists, nor many Apostles. According to
this, when idolatry was spread over the land of Judah, the good King
Jehoshaphat sent his princes, Ben-hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethaneel, and
Michaiah, with the choice of the priests and Levites, and with the book of the
Law, to recall the people from the worship of false Gods, to the worship of the
true God, as you may read in 2. Chron. 17. Thus again when the Scribes and
Pharisees had corrupted the Law by their traditions, then came the great
Doctor of the Church, Jesus Christ, and purged it by his preaching upon the
mount, as you may read in Matthew. 5, 6, and 7 chapters. Again, after our
Savior had finished the great work of our redemption by his rising from the
dead, then he sent his twelve Apostles to preach the new law all the world
over. Go (says he) and teach all nations, baptizing them Matthew. 28. 19.
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Were
people now to be called and converted to the Gospel, then not only this kind
of preaching, but miracles also were needful: but, as S. Augustine says, When
all the world believes, what need miracles? and what need is now of Apostles,
and Evangelists, and 70 Disciples?

Lastly, when much needless, and some unsound teaching, by tract of time had
sued into the ark of Christ's Church, by the prelates and priests thereof; then
in the 19 year of King Henry the 8, began licenses to be granted by the court
of Star Chamber, to preach against the corruptions of the time, like to that
of King Jehoshaphat. But now, thanks be to God, the corruptions are removed,
and the ancient and true doctrine of the primitive Church by settled articles
is restored: therefore this extraordinary kind is not now so necessary,
except it be upon some notorious crimes breaking in upon our people, or some
exorbitancies of green heads broaching the froth of their own brains, which
will hardly be reformed, until many of these be unfurnisht of their licenses,
and those that are permitted be restrained to certain times and seasons. For
better were it for our Church and people, to have but one sermon well
premeditated in a month, (which is insinuated by the Canon) then two upon a
day, proceeding from a rolling brain, and mouth without due preparation. Such
sermons are abortive, like cast calves, coming out of the womb before the
time: and they run into the curse of the Prophet Jeremiah, Maledictus Jer.
48. 10.
qui facit opus Domini negligenter, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. Many of these men, partly to serve the expectation of others, and
partly to seek their own applause, after they have been in the high place, and
saluted after the descent, take it upon them, as though they were young
prophets and new apostles, to preach a new Gospel to the world, as our
Puritanes, Brownists, and other Novelists have done. I read in Socrates
Scholasticus, l. 5. c. 20. that at Alexandria the inferior priest did not use
to preach: but that order first began, when Arius turned upside down the quiet
estate of the Church. But we have so many inferior and young priests preaching
among us, that all the Bishops in the land can hardly keep down their wrong and
unseasoned doctrine, if Vox populi may be judge. Such are work-makers, and not
finishers of work. See Calvine upon 1. Cor. 1. 17. Sed cum paucorum esset
docere, pluribus autem baptizare datum fuerit. And S. Paul says, Are all
teachers? 1. Cor. 12. 29.

Having showed this kind of preaching to be extraordinary, for special men,
special times and occasions; it follows that the preaching by reading,
proved out of Acts 15. and other places of scripture, is the ordinary
preaching, ordained by God himself in his Church, as you may see in the 4.
chapter of the epistle to the Colossians and 16 verse; where S. Paul writes
thus, And when this epistle is read of you, cause that it be read in the church
of the Laodiceans also, and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea.
This was the ordinary preaching in our Church before king Henry the eighth,
and this was the ordinary preaching in the synagogues of the Jews, as you may
see in Acts 13. 15. and by the division of the three Hebrew (...) in the Hebrew
Bible. And by this demonstration of the extraordinarinesse of the kind,
person, and time, we may answer all objections made of confused and
undistinguishing wits, out of 2. Tim. 4. and all other places of scripture,
because particular precepts do not bind all persons and confine all times. For
who can expect those gifts in the ordinary Ministers of our days, which God
bestowed upon the extraordinary Ministers, and times of the first preaching of
the Gospel? And as for our large-carving professors in their way of preaching
and knowledge, this I find, that they which profess least, live more justly
then they which profess and know most; because, as my text directs me,
knowledge puffes them up, and upon their knowledge they presume: for the more
they know, the less they fear; and the less they fear, the more they offend.
Who are more bold then they which know most and fear least? The skilfullest
captain, he most hazardeth; the cunningest physician, he kills most; and the
ripest wits run into greatest oversights. Why? because they presume so much
of their knowledge; and presuming draws carelessness. Wherefore they which know
less, are the more industrious. Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth.

Now to conclude with thee which runnest after this extraordinary kind, where
thou think best; I will show the inconvenience. First, thou breakest the
Church-canon: and when thou fallest on breaking of Canons, then follows nothing
but confusion and disorder. Secondly, thou discreditest thine own Minister,
though he has better parts and gifts then the men that thou runnest after.
Thirdly, thou troublest thy neighbors seats in a strange church. Fourthly, thy
servants and children will no^ come to catechizing, because thou art absent:
the hatchet flies one way, and the helve another; thou gainest, and thy family
loses. Fifthly, when thou should help thy neighbors in singing psalms to
Gods praise, then thy trumpet is abroad in another parish. Lastly, if all the
rest should follow thee, some would fall short under hedges, and there pray
lewd parts. The Lord open thine eyes to give thee more discretion, that thou
may give a better example.

Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth.
HAving spoken of the first part of my text, now I must proceed to the second,
in which I must as much extol Charity, as before I disabled unformed
knowledge: for it was never the Apostles mind nor mine to speak any thing
against well qualified knowledge, 2. Esdras 14. 42.
which belongs to perfect men, as the learned have noted; nor yet against
moderate and sober knowledge, fit for all sorts of men, taught by the forenamed
preachers; but only to withstand the immoderatenesse and misgovernance of it
in the vulgar, who know no better how to use it, then a mad man does a sword.
If thy knowledge be greater then thy charity, then it will do more hurt then
good: but if thy charity exceed thy knowledge, then that by its government
makes all good; because charity is the master and governor of knowledge. You
may surfeit with knowledge; so you cannot with charity.

Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth. The word but signifies a
difference between charity and knowledge, because the conjunction is
discretive. And indeed the difference is great, as the Apostle expresses;
because charity is (to use the School phrase) an act giving life and
perfection, it edifieth among the virtues theological and moral: but
knowledge without charity is a matter of vanity, because it puffs up: it is
like a bladder or bubble, which have nothing but wind in them; the one lifts
up in nature, the other lifts up in God. But here it may be objected, What
means the Apostle thus to disable knowledge; seeing by it we depart from
evil, and are informed to good? and the prophet Isaiah says in his 53 chapter,
verse. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: where
knowledge is made the cause of our justification. I answer, that wheresoever
knowledge in holy scripture is taken in a good sense, there it is vox complexa,
as sapientia is by S. Bernard called sapida scientia, savourie knowledge: Id
est, scientia formata, Bonioan. 1. 2. q. 114. art. ult.
for in this knowledge, charity, which is the extern form of knowledge, is
comprehended. But here in this text of scripture, Knowledge is vox incomplexa,
standing alone by it self, and in opposition to Charity; and therefore here it
produces no good effect, but only pride, which is enemy to goodness. But
charity is the substance of Christianity, and therefore is called of the
School Divines grace it self. And this, in the building of a Christian toward
heaven, is the master builder: for the more it works in us, the better and
bigger Christians we grow, according to that of S. Augustine, Charitas
inchoata, inchoata justitia Lib. de natura and gratia, cap. 70.
est; charitas provecta, provecta justitia est; charitas magna, magna justitia
est; charitas perfecta, perfecta justitia est. Charity begun, is
righteousness begun; charity increased, is righteousness increased; great
charity, is great righteousness; and perfect charity, is perfect
righteousness. And when this is come, then there is no difference between God
and man; it is conformity between God and man; it is, as S. Paul says, the
fulfilling of the law: further then this Romans 13. 10.
we cannot go.

Yea, that which is the most comfortable Romans 8. 2. Romans 5. 5. Gal. 5. 23.
and remarkable point in all Christianity, is the law of the Spirit of life,
which freeth from the law of sin and of death: and this is the main refuge to
the distressed conscience. There are in the best two laws ruling in them;
because the best are compounded of two, the flesh and the spirit. The law of
the flesh is concupiscence, Magist. Sent. l. 2. did. 31. b Nullum peccatum
mortale secum patitur. The law of charity fulfilleth the law of facts contained
in the Decalogue.
which gives precepts only for the flesh, whose end is sin and death; and
therefore it is called the law of sin and of death: and the law of the spirit
is charity, which gives precepts only for holiness and righteousness; and
this is called the law of life, because the end of it is life. These two laws
are ex diametro opposite one to the other in the regenerate: and because they
be both of force in this life, therefore the regenerate are carried both ways,
sometimes to sin, and sometimes to holiness and virtue. But because charity,
which is the root of all good desires, is the more noble law, Romans 5. 5.
as being the law of the spirit, and is in all evil actions, first or last, or
both, opposite to them, Clem. Romans Pro delictis contra voluntatem vestram
commissis suppliciter ipsius clementiam implorantes, p. 4.
and never yields but during the violence of the passion; which being over,
it immediately returns to his former strength and virtue: therefore this
freeth from the other, so that condemnation is never liable to them in whom
this law is found. Therefore when the blessed Apostle besought God, that the
prick in the flesh, that is to say, concupiscence, the law of sin and death,
might be removed from him, he would not grant it, but told him, My grace 2.
Cor. 12. 9.
shall be sufficient for thee: and this is nothing else but charity, which
freeth the compound from sin and death; because, as S. Peter says, it
covers the multitude of sins, it will 1. Pet. 4. 8.
not suffer them to appear. And the reason why God would not have the law of
the flesh and of sin to be outed from this holy man, and from the regenerate,
was, because he would have his grace to conflict with the flesh, that after the
conflict his grace might be victour: For my power (says God) is made perfect
through weakness. But there is no greater weakness in man then concupiscence,
the lust of the flesh; which being overcome by charities desire, Gods grace and
power is advanced and perfected. And this law of the spirit, S. Paul 2. Cor. 3.
6.
opposes to the law of the letter, which is knowledge when it is separate from
the spirit: and this kills as well in the ministry of the Gospel, as in the
ministry of the Law of Moses, as S. Augustine teaches, lib. de spiritu and
litera; because the more knowledge we have, the greater shall be our
condemnation, if we want the spirit of charity to put it in practice. Will you
know then what charity is, which is thus advanced above knowledge? It is the
most noble above all virtues, as our Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 13. 13. Now
abides faith, hope, and charity, but the greatest of these is charity. He
says not, shall be, as Calvin and Beza offer to evacuate the Apostles
comparison and commendation; but is now: Now abides faith, hope, and charity,
but the greatest of these is charity. Psalm. 119. 20, 40, 174. Verbu^ his locis
est (...) concupiscere, desiderare.
This is the lust and desire of the spirit, as concupiscence is the lust and
desire of the flesh; the one sanctifies and justifies, the other damnifieth
and condemns, Gal. 5. 17. As concupiscence is the root of all vices; so this
is the root of all virtues: it is the souls sanctified appetite. Every man that
has wit and discretion, will make choice of the best and the fairest; but
charity is the best of all Gods gifts, above faith, and hope, and knowledge;
and therefore above all things I wish you to seek and follow that. In the
twelfth chapter before, the Apostle sets down all the better sort of Gods
gifts, among which he places wisdom, knowledge, faith, working of miracles,
and the rest; and then wills them to make choice of the best; But (says he)
desire Verse. 31.
you the best gifts: and when he had so said, then he said further, I will yet
show you a more excellent way: as if he had said, Now I will show you of a gift
that is above all gifts, yea better then the best before-named; such a gift
that without it all other are worth nothing. Though I speak with the tongues of
men and angels, 1. Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.
and have not charity, I am as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymball. And
though I had the gift of prophecy, and knew all secrets, and all knowledge;
yea, if I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and had not
charity, I were nothing. And though I feed the poor with all my goods, and
though I give my body that I be burned, and have not charity, it profits me
nothing. Now if all be nothing without this, then get this and get all.

But what is the reason why all other graces without this are worth nothing?
Because without charity they are as a body without a soul. Had thou a body
as well framed as Leanders and Hero's was, yet if thou had not a spirit to
move in it, thou should have but a dead body worth nothing, as S. James
teaches of faith without charity by the effect of works; As the body without
the spirit is dead, so James 2. 26.
faith without works is dead also: for where no works are, there is no
charity; and where no charity is, there faith and works and all is dead.
Therefore the Apostle says, Though I feed the poor with all my goods, and
have not charity, it profits me nothing. Why? because without charity works
are dead, as well as faith, and knowledge, and other graces. And where there is
charity, that is to say, a divine love to God and all goodness, there all
things are alive, and every grace working to salvation. Faith believes to
salvation, hope hops to salvation, knowledge knows to salvation; all work
by charities spirit. Hence the School calls charity the form of virtues.

But you may say, How prove you that divine love and charity is the spirit
that gives life and motion to all other graces? Thus, because faith, which is
the first grace, works by it: Gal. 5. 6. For in Jesus Christ neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by
charity. Then as all the members of the body work by the power of the soul;
so faith and other graces in the spiritual body work by the power of charity:
First, because charity is the impulse of the Christian soul. Neither can you
with reason say, that, because faith is the first grace in spiritualitie,
therefore all animation and motion proceeds from it; because in generation
the matter goes before the form, and in the body of man there is vegetation
and animalitie common to other creatures, before the reasonable soul come,
which is the sole beginning of actions reasonable. Secondly, I prove this,
because where is no charity, there all is dead, as S. John shows, He that
loves not his brother, 1. Joh. 3. 14.
abides in death. Again, We know that we are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren. Where love is, there is life; and where no love
is, there is no life. Thirdly, I prove this, because God is our life: but God
is charity, as Saint John shows, God 1. Joh. 4. 16.
is charity, and he that remains in charity, remains in God, and God in
him. If God be charity, then charity in the Christian must needs be his life;
because our charity flows from his charity. Fourthly, I show that charity
is the life of all virtues and graces, because it is the root of the spiritual
tree within us, as S. Paul teaches, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. That ye being rooted
and grounded in charity, may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God.
Here ye see charity to be the root: therefore so long as the root lasts, no
virtue or grace can wither in us; but if the root die, all die. All comes from
the root; the leaves, the blossoms, the fruit. If there be either ornament of
virtue, or fruit of grace in us, all comes from the root of charity. Yea, the
life of virtue not only comes from this root, but there it is kept and
preserved too: for when winter and cold storms come, then the sap for shelter
runs down to the root, and there it is preserved till the next spring: so
again, when the winter of Gods wrath, and storms of persecution assault the
profession of the Gospel, then by and by we retire to the root of charity, and
there is our profession preserved till the storm be over. Thus Peter denied his
Master thrice when he was going to his death: yet because he still loved his
Master, therefore his life remained in him; in the time of persecution it lay
hid in the root of charity.

The Apostle goes forward, That ye may be able to comprehend with all saints,
what is the length, and breadth, and height, and depth. Charity breaks forth
into all the dimensions of spiritual growth. The prophet Isaiah, rather then
he would forsake his God, was sawn asunder in the midst: others were racked and
would not be Heb. 11. 35.
delivered; they would not be delivered, but held out to the death. The blessed
Marie Magdalene washed our Saviors feet with her tears, and wiped them dry
again with the hairs of her head. Oh blessed charity! If thou have this root
in thee, thou also shall comprehend this breadth, and length, height, and
depth; and thou shall with these holy Saints say, If I had been in their coats,
or had their occasions, I would have done as they did. This is that love of
Christ which passes knowledge, and this is the fullness of God.

To proceed, Charity is the most excellent grace, because it is the divine
seed of a Christian, 1. Joh. 4. 7.
by which we are born of God and freed from mortal sin. 1. John 3. 9.
Whosoever is born of God, sins not: for his seed remains in him. This seed
S. Hierome in his 2 book against Jovinian, and S. Austine in his 5 tract
Peccatum mortale nunquam cum gratia esse possit.
upon 1. John, calls charity: for in it is contained the beginning of our
conversion to God, which is a holy desire. For no man desires any thing until
he loves it: but when he loves it, then he desires it; when he desires it, then
he seeks it; after he has sought it, then he finds it, according to that in
the Gospel, Seek and ye shall find, knock and it Matthew. 7. 7
shall be opened: and when a man has found, because he loves it entirely, he
will so cleave to it, that he will not be removed from it. So is it between the
regenerate heart and God. When God has given a man a heart to love him, then
he begins to desire him; when he desires him, then he seeks him, then he
knocks at heaven gates by prayer, and will not away till God open to him,
because his seed remains in him. And after he has found him, then he so
cleaves to him by hope, and hangs so fast upon him, that he will die before he
leave him; because faith has persuaded him that God is his maker and redeemer,
and that he is moreover a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.
6. And how will he reward him? not with gold and silver, which are corruptible;
but with life everlasting, and the joys of heaven. Oh here is enough, we will
seek no further.

Thus you see how love and charity sets the soul to desire and seek God above
all things, and so charity is the beginning of our conversion: and after it
has begun, it will never cease seeking until it has found and obtained. Were
a man by faith persuaded, that God is the author of all happiness, and that
all the goods in heaven and earth lay in him treasured up; yet if he should
love the goods of the world more then God, then he would never set his heart to
seek and desire him. But when faith has enlightened the mind to know God, then
if the love of the heart will forsake the world and things worldly, and seek
him who is supernatural happiness, then is conversion wrought, and not
before. Faith converts the mind to God: but it is love and charity that
converts the heart and will to God, which is the greatest and last conversion,
because we never seek any thing until we desire it. Our conversion therefore
is begun in the mind by faith: but this conversion is but half a conversion,
yea, it is no conversion of the whole man, except the love of the heart, where
lies the greatest apprehension, do second and follow it. We see salvation by
faith: but we never obtain it, until we desire and seek it by charities
desire. Wherefore I conclude, that, for so much as charity is the nearest and
immediate cause of our conversion, of our seeking and finding God, therefore
this is the most precious grace of God for our good, and is the greatest mean
and instrument of our justification; because justification and conversion to
God is all one: for God is our righteousness: but the greatest mean of our
apprehending of him is by charity, which lays hold of him in the will and
reasonable affection: therefore this must be the greatest mean of our
justification, signified by the Apostle, where he speaks of the several means,
Now abides 1. Cor. 13. 13.
faith, hope, and charity, but the greatest of these is charity. Which
demonstration he that prefers faith before charity would elude, by urging
this absurd consequence, Ergo rex melius Calvin. in locum.
terram arabit quam agricola, melius calceum faciet quam suitor, quia nobilior
est utroque: Ergo homo celerius curret quam equus, plus oneris portabit quam
elephas, quia dignitate superat: Ergo angeli melius terram illuminabunt quam
sol and luna, quia praestantiores. Then (says he) the king should plough
better then the husbandman, should make shoes better then the shoemaker,
because he is more noble then them both: Then a man should run swifter then a
horse, should carry a greater burden then an elephant, because he excells them
in dignity: Then angels should illuminate the earth better then the sun and
moon, because they are more excellent. But this is nothing but a running from
the state of the question; because every thing that is greatest and best to his
proper object, and in proper comparison, is not greatest and best to every
object, and in every comparison. But the Apostle here compares charity with
justifying faith and hope absolutely, and in the most excellent way, as
appears in the 31 verse of the 12 chapter beforegoing; and it is manifest,
that the most excellent way is the way of our justification and conversion to
God: and here he affirms this to be the greatest and chiefest, and therefore
absolutely so it is. Again, he prefers faith before charity, because faith
is the cause of charity. If he could show faith to be the efficient cause of
it, he should say something: but when he can prove it to be no more but the
disposing and isntrumental cause; then, by the same argument, the ax should be
greater and better then the house, because it is an instrument used in the
preparing of it: which argument is absurd.

But to prove the truth for this noble virtue, which none shall be able to
overturn, because it is founded upon the rock of Gods word, I have these
arguments. 1. God justifies, Romans 8. 33. God is charity, John 4. 8. Therefore
charity justifies. 2. The fullness of God in man is that which justifies
him. Charity is the fullness of God in man, Ephesians. 3. 19. Therefore charity
justifies him. 3. The fulfilling of the law justifies, Romans 10. 4. Charity
is the fulfilling of the law, Romans 13. 10. Therefore charity justifies. In
the assumption, let not the reader understand the power of nature or natural
love; but charity the principal grace of Christ, united to faith and hope.

In the preferring of this virtue, S. Gregory, in his 38 homily upon the
Gospel, calls charity the wedding garment, which he that wanted at the great
marriage, was thrown into utter darkness. His words are these: Quid debemus
intelligere nuptialem vestem, nisi charitatem? Intrat enim ad nuptias, sed cum
nuptiali vest non intrat, qui in sancta Ecclesia assistens, fidem habet, sed
charitatem non habet. What are we to understand by the wedding garment, but
charity? For he goes in to the wedding, but not with the wedding garment,
who, being in the holy Church, has faith, but has not charity. He adds
further to this purpose, Omnis ergo vestrum qui in Ecclesia positus Deo
credidit, jam ad nuptias intravit: sed cum nuptiali vest non venit, si
charitatis gratiam non custodit. Therefore every one of you which being placed
in the Church has believed in God, has already entered into the marriage: but
he comes not with the wedding garment, if he does not preserve the grace of
charity. There are many which come into Gods house, which is his Church,
because they have faith to believe; for this is that which first brings a man
to God, according to that, Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God, must believe that
God is: yet though they be in Gods house, and at his Sons wedding for a time;
when he comes to lift up their heads in his house, as it is said, Genesis 40. that
is, to reckon with them, they must be thrown out again, because, as S.
Augustine says, Expos. in Epist. Joh. Tract. 5. Dilectio sola discernit inter
filios Dei, and filios diaboli. Signent se omnes signo crucis Christi,
respondeant omnes Amen, cantent omnes Alleluia, baptizentur omnes, intrent
omnes ecclesias, faciant parietes basilicarum; non discernuntur filii Dei a
filiis diaboli, nisi in charitate. Only charity makes a difference between
the sons of God, and the sons of the devil. Let all sign themselves with
the sign of Christ's cross, let all answer Amen, let all sing Alleluia, let
all be baptized, let all go to church, let all build churches; the sons of
God are not distinguished from the sons of the devil, but by charity. They
are none of Gods sons because they want charity, the robe of Christ's
righteousness, and therefore they have no right to the place.

Further, that must be the most excellent grace, which joyneth the soul to God:
but this does charity; because the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 6. 17. He that
cleaves to the Lord, (as S. Hierome translateth) or he that is joined to the
Lord, (as our translation has it, which in meaning is all one) is one spirit.
But charity above all virtues causes a man to cleave to God; because, as S.
Bernard says, by charity the soul is as it were married to God; and in
marriage a man forsakes all other to cleave to his wife, and the wife forsakes
all other to cleave to her husband, according to that rule for marriage in Genesis
2. 24. Therefore shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife,
and they twain shall be one flesh. So they that have charity, will leave all
things to cleave to God, to be one spirit with him. Yea so fast does charity
glue the good soul to God, as the Greek word (...) expresses, that it will die
before it leave him, as is to be seen in all the holy Martyrs. Nothing may
quench this fire, as Solomon sings, Set me Cant. 8. 6, 7.
as a seal upon thy heart, and as a signet upon thy arm: for love is strong as
death, jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are fiery coals,
yea, a vehement flame. Much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods
drown it: if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, they
would greatly contemn it. For what is that which makes all the marriages in
the world? is it not love? if they did not love one another, they would never
come together. Now this charity is nothing else but divine love; and this
makes God and man one spirit, as natural love and marriage makes man and wife
one flesh: and it is called Charity, to distinguish it from natural love, for
that it is the most dear and precious love, in regard it is between God and
man's spirit.

Again, that must be the most excellent virtue, which makes man most like to
God: but there is nothing that makes man more like to God then charity;
because S. John says, God 1. John 4. 8.
is charity: therefore they that have charity, must needs be most like him.
It is the holy Ghosts child as I may say, sanctifying the soul. It is no where
said, that God is faith, or God is knowledge; for then the devils should be
more like to God then man, because they know more and believe more then any
man: but he is called in scripture only charity, in regard of goodness and
sanctity, for that all goodness of sanctification proceeds from charity. So
God loved the world (says our Lord, in John 3. 16.) that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Now as all good of sanctity comes from Gods love to man; so
from man's charity comes all the like goodness toward God and our neighbor.
Light comes from faith, and understanding from knowledge: but goodness and
sanctity come only from charity. And if God be charity, then what interest
have they to God and his kingdom, who live continually in malice and quarrels?

Moreover, Charity is called of Divines the universal grace, because S. Paul,
Colos. 3. 14. calls it the bond of perfection. Above all these things put on
charity, which is the bond of perfectness. He says above all, because this
is the best of all: and he calls it the bond of perfectness, first, because
it tieth man to God in the heart, who is perfectness it self; and next,
because it tieth all virtues together, as we are taught in the Collect of
Quinquagesima. Have thou charity? then can thou want no virtue, because all
are bound up in it. There is justice, there is mercy, there is liberality,
there is fidelity, there is the highest, there is the lowest, there is
magnanimity, there is humility: charity binds all together in one man. Then
get charity, and thou need not run from parish to parish to get
understanding, because it dwells in charity. According Lib 3. de doctr.
Christ. cap. 10.
to this S. Austine says, Scriptura nihil praecipit nisi charitatem, nihil
culpat nisi cupiditatem: The scripture commands nothing but charity, and
blames nothing but concupiscence. Now what charity is, the Father in that
place thus defines; Charitatem voco motum animi ad fruendum Deo propter ipsum,
and se atque proximo propter Deum. I call charity (says he) a motion of the
mind to the fruition of God for himself, and of himself and his neighbor for
God.

Lastly, there is yet another title of e^cellencie belonging to charity, and
this is Queen of virtues, because it commands and governs them all to right
ends. For say I had all knowledge and could confute all men, and say I had all
eloquence that I could with Orpheus move the stony heart, say I had all
patience, and could give my body to be burned, and say I had all faith, that I
could remove mountains; yet if I did not know to Godward, speak to Godward,
suffer to Godward, and believe to Godward, and so of all other virtues, all
this would do me no good. Why? because the Queen of virtues, Charity, which
should bend and order all these to Godward, is wanting. For every action, as
the learned know, proceeds from election; election is in the will; and the
principal power of the will is love and charity: therefore look which way
that goes, that way go all thy actions of heart and mind. If thy love be
natural, then it orders and carries all thy actions to a natural end, and
that leads to hell: but if thy love be divine and spiritual, which my Text
calls Charity, then that like a Queen regulates all thy actions to a
supernatural end, which is to serve God and to gain his kingdom. And the more
good actions thou do in this kind, the more thou edifiest, as my Text says,
Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth, that is to say, Charity builds.
As the carpenter and mason build with wood and stone; so charity builds with
good and godly actions. Faith is often idle, knowledge sleepie, and hope is
drousie: but charity is always working, because it is the hearts pulse to
Godward. As the pulse never leaves beating; so charity never leaves working:
and the more it works, the greater is the edifying. Little charity makes a
little Christian, and great charity makes a great Christian, and perfect
charity makes a perfect Christian.

The main Tenet of the scripture is, that God will reward every man according
to his works. Therefore the more good works a Christian does in the kingdom of
grace, the greater shall be his crown in the kingdom of glory. For, as S.
Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. 41, 42. As one star differs from another in glory;
so is the resurrection of the dead: the body, with the more good works it
rises, the more it shall shine in heavens glory. In my Fathers house are many
mansions, says our Savior, John 14. 2. Every man here strives to have the
fairest house, if he be a man of worth. Then if thou desire one of the better
mansions in the kingdom of glory, thou must build for it here in the kingdom
of grace. The more good works thou preparest here, the larger shall be thy
house there; the holier works, the higher habitation in heavens majesty.
Wherefore, brethren, be never weary of well doing, but, as S. Paul exhorts,
1. Cor. 15. 58. be abundant always in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. There is nothing lost but all
gotten by good life and good works.

But you may say, It seems otherwise; because the mansions there are already
built, and therefore they depend not upon our building and edifying. Yes, they
depend upon our edifying, in regard of the placing and bestowing; because the
better a man is edified in good life here, the better building God will bestow
upon him there: he made the best for the best. For thou rewardest every man
according to his work, Psalm. 62. 12. Luke 6. 38. 1. Cor. 3. 8. 2. Cor. 9. 6.
You may say again, that heaven is but one house, which is the Fathers house. I
reply, As our Savior in John calls heaven a house; so S. Paul, Heb. 12. 22.
calls it a city. It is called a house, because he is Father of the family
there; and it is called a city, because he is King of the place. Palaces have
many rooms and chambers in excellency one above another: so cities have many
houses, some more spacious, some more costly, and some more stately then
others. Why should it not be so too in the celestial Jerusalem, except we
should think that God had some wants there? There be degrees of edifying in us
here; therefore there are degrees of edifices for us there.

Charity edifieth. As charity edifieth, so it pulls down too. As the
understanding builder, when he sees something in his edifice amiss, will not
rest till it be demolisht, and set up in a better manner; so is it with the
good Christian: when he perceives some faults in his life, he will not cease
till they be Nihil eis peccati damnabilis remanere poterit, nec deerit aliquid
boni, quibus charitas omnis inquinamenti mundatio and bonorum omnium matter
affuerit. Prosp. de vita contemplat. lib. 3. cap. 14.
removed. And this part S. Paul also refers to charity, 1. Cor. 13. 5. It
does no uncomely thing, it seeks not her own, it is not provoked to anger, it
thinks no evil. Therefore if there be in thee any undecent lechery, or
gaping covetousness, or passions troublesome, or any evil whatsoever; if
charity be in thee, it will seek and endeavor to remove all, because they be
uncomely for spiritual and Christian buildings. And from this text S. Prosper
infers, that charity is the death of vices, and the life of virtues.

Charity edifieth. Lastly, as charity edifieth in a man's own self, so it
edifieth in others also. If there be any infirmity in neighbors, it will
bear with it, and help to amend it. Charity suffers long, it boasts not
it self, it is not puffed up. There is no pride in charity, but it submits
it self to all good ordinances, both in Church and Commonwealth. This will not
fly out like the disobedient professor, this will not run from his
neighbors, this will not contemn his Ministers; but this will labor to uphold
all. This will say, Come neighbors, let us hold together, we must be subject
to our governors for conscience sake, we may not do what we list, we may not
be our own judges, we may not make our selves equal with Apostles, and say in
our own causes, It is better to please God then men, and then please neither:
for now it is not as it was in the Apostles days: then were wicked governors;
now we have godly governors. Thus charity edifieth in our own selves, and
others; but proud knowledge pulls down and destroys. And in this
Predicament are they which make havoc of Church Discipline: they will not keep
holy days, though they be in honor of the Savior of the world; they will not
observe Saints days, though their examples in the Liturgy be the glasses of
our lives; to stand up in reverence when Gloria Patri, Te Deum, Benedictus, and
the rest are said, (wherein we speak to God) with them is a needless
ceremony; Confession and Absolution is flat Popery; and with such all is
superstition, save only a sermon from the spirit without premeditation, and a
prayer ex tempore, or of their own framing without authority. Might these have
their wills, there should be no face of religion among us. They profess
themselves to be hearers: but if you talk with them, then they will be
preachers. Not need, but pride, not edifying, but ambition, makes them to amble
about the country for choice hearing and precise fashions: but the true
speakers and true hearers are always in charity, Ephesians. 4. 15. (...). I will
conclude all with the saying of Hugo de S. Victore, lib. 6. Dilectio
supereminet scientiae; plus enim diligitur quam intelligitur, and intrat
dilectio ubi scientia foris est.

FINIS.
Almae Matris Academiae carmina Comitialia ANN. DOM. 1633.
hanc veritatem attestantia,
Bona opera sunt efficaciter necessaria ad salutem.

VIrtutes Charitesque omnes, redeatis ad astra:
Non audent vobis astra negare locum.
Ecce negant homines: homines, sine numine vestro,
Eximium fidei numen inesse putant.
Gratulor, o, vobis, homines, hoc credere vestrum,
Quod coelo clivum non sinit esse suum.
Quantorum facitis compendia quanta laborum!
Credere justitia est omnis, and una salus.
At non sic olim; tam mollis semita nunquam
Heroum lassos duxit ad astra gradus:
Sed labor, and virtus, and sancta superbia dextra
Non facili penna stravit in alta viam.
At neque tu, matris fidei puer aure^, credas
Coelis esse alia condition fores.
Ni sit quae tibi summa procul spes sydera mo^nstret;
Ni sit inoccidua qui face flagret amor;
Ni non larga pius tibi pocula temperet usus;
Ni justam in trutinam pendeat aequa manus;
Ni vigili stet in arce memor, mentisque pudicae
Servet inaccessas sedula cura nives:
Toll tuam (nec enim fidei fiducia tanta est)
Improbe, toll tuam, nomen inane, fidem.
Vana fides, ubi sola fides: dilectio vera,
Spes viva accedant; non aliunde salus.
His nisi sit formata fides, est mortua plane,
Proque fide fidei triste cadaver habes.
Haec sunt, quae sibi regna vocant aeterna; nec unquam
Coelorum retulit praemia sola fides.
ERGO
Virtutum sancta and speciosae caterva salutem
Divino ex pacto, quam meruere, dabunt.
A TREATISE Showing That Gods Law, now qualified by the Gospel of Christ, is
possible, and ought to be fulfilled of us in this life.
TO shun homonymie, and to state the question, that we might not fall to
andabatisme, we are to understand, that as there be two kinds of perfection,
viae and patriae; one of our way, the other of our country to which we are
traveling; so there are two kinds also of fulfilling Gods law, one of this
life, the other of the next. That of this life may stand with diverse
interruptions, because here we are not confirmed in grace: but that of the
next, which is in heaven, will admit no interruption; because there all are
confirmed in grace, and cannot sin.

That there is a fulfilling of Gods law in this life, the scripture admits,
where it says in S. James, If ye fulfill the royal law according to Jam. 2. 8.
the scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well. Here the
text makes a manifest supposition of fulfilling G^^^^ law in this life: and
first it affirms this doctrine to be according to scripture; next, it shows
how it is to be tried, that is, by the law, in loving our neighbor as our
selves: and he that can do this, there is no doubt but he loves God above all;
because without God he could not do this. Were Gods law not possible to be
fulfilled, the supposition should be idle, unfit for Gods word, and unbeseeming
one writing by divine inspiration; and then the twelve tribes might justly have
returned this caption upon S. James, You put upon us that which cannot be done.
But in this absurdity the Apostle could not be taken, because he wrote by
divine inspiration, and sootheth the thing, first by adding to his supposition
this commendation, Ye do well; and secondly, by fetching to this head all other
parts of Gods law, saying afterward, For whosoever Verse. 10.
shall keep the whole law, and yet fail in one point, he is guilty of all.
Here therefore is a general and absolute fulfilling spoken of: and here is
implied, that every one is bound to bring his obedience, not to one or most,
but to every part of Gods law; and so no starting hole is left for any one
beloved sin.

Secondly, this supposition of S. James is confirmed by our Lords prayer, Thy
will be done in earth, ^s it is in heaven. If the law, which is Gods will,
could not be fulfilled in earth, then Christ obtained not what he would, we
daily pray in vain, and Christ has in vain commanded us to pray.

Thirdly, this is confirmed by the liturgy of our Church in the collect upon
the first Sunday after the Epiphanie in these words, And grant that they may
both perceive and know what things they ought to do, and also have grace and
power faithfully to fulfill the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Where we are taught, by whose virtue men may fulfill Gods law, that is, by
Jesus Christ's grace and power.

Lastly, this is taught by the prayer upon the ten commandments, Lord have
mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Where first we are
taught to know our own misery, in that we are bound to keep Gods law with the
penalty of everlasting death, and yet of our selves we have no power to
perform it, and therefore we pray God to be merciful to us. Next we pray that
he would incline our hearts to keep his law: where is showed, that God himself
is the first mover and principal actour in this work; that we do but run along
with him, and that of our selves we are so crooked and averse, that if he do
not incline and bend our hearts, as the shipwright boweth his timber by his
instruments, the strength of his arms, and the heat of his fire to make a ship,
we should never be able to sail to the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore if we
shall fail to join our hands to Gods hand, when the principal acting is his,
the second and inferior ours; when he has used all his means toward us, his
threatenings to terrify us, his exhortations to draw us, his promises to entice
us, and propounded the end and reward of the work to be only ours, whereas the
greatest merit is Christ's: if we now be defective and behind on our part, we
shall be worthy of many hells. To conclude, in that we entreat God to enable us
to keep his law, hence appears the laws excellency, and man's benefit in
observing it. It is Gods image and similitude in which he made man; therefore
it has relation to us, and we to it: it restores us to our first perfection
and heavens felicity, it is the conformity between God and man, it is that
which makes God and us one: Therefore to the keeping of this we must strain
soul and body, we must put all that we can, we must not fly to naked
imputation, where is required our conformation. For whom Romans 8. 29.
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his
Son. His Son has fulfilled the law, and so must we too.

But here may be objected, that they which Ob.
are in Christ are delivered from the law. Romans 8. 2. For the law of the Spirit
of life has made me free from the law of sin and of death. Therefore we have
nothing to do with the law.

I answer, that in this place and in the chapter Sol.
before, by the law is understood concupiscence, the law of the members, which
gives precepts and motions only for sin; and not the law of God, which
gives precepts against sin, and for holiness and righteousness.

Again, it may be objected, that we are not Ob.
under the law, therefore we have not to do with it. Romans 6. 14. Ye are not
under the law, but under grace.

It is answered, Though we be not under Sol.
the law to be condemned, terrified, and forced by it; yet we are under the law
to Christ, that is, to be guided by it; as the Apostle testifies of himself,
1. Cor. 9. 21. Being not without the law to God, but under the law to Christ:
Therefore if the very just shall transgress, while they are within the law,
they are bound to make satisfaction by holy penance, which is secunda tabula
post naufragium.

Lastly, it may be objected, that we are dead Ob.
to the law, and therefore we have no more to do with it. Romans 7. 4. Wherefore
my brethren, ye are also become dead to the law by the body of Christ, that ye
should be married to another, even unto him that is raised up from the dead,
that ye should bring forth fruit unto God.

By the law here is not meant the law simply, Sol.
but the law and the flesh compounded together (as appears in the sixth
verse) wherein we stood in bondage to both. For the laws letter only showed us
what we were to do, but gave us no power to perform; and with this the flesh
and the old man went hand in hand: for though the law gave us no power to
perform, yet the flesh gave us power to transgress and sin. To this the
Apostle shows, that we are dead by the merit of the death of Christ's body,
that we might be married to another, that is, to Christ in Baptism, by whose
Spirit and grace we might be enabled to fulfill that which the law taught and
commanded, to bring forth fruit unto God and our own salvation. And from hence
it appears still, that the law of it self is good, and we have need of it,
though it be not sufficient for us; because it is our schoolmaster, to show us
our sins, and to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. Romans 7. 7. I had not known
sin, but by the law.

Having made an end of confirming my first argument from the scriptures
supposition and grant, now I proceed to my second argument, which is founded
upon the efficacy and end of Christ's suffering for us, which I hope no good
Christian will extenuate.

If Christ has merited, that the righteousness of the law should be fulfilled
in us who are his members, then the law is not impossible to be fulfilled of
us: but Christ has merited, that the righteousness of the law should be
fulfilled in us: therefore the law is not impossible to be fulfilled of us. The
major is true, because it is blasphemy to discredit the efficacy and end of
Christ's merits. The minor is as true by this scripture, Romans 8. 3. For what the
law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh: that is to say, In sins room he condemned sin. If sin be
condemned, then it cannot hurt us, the fuit is at an end. But to what end did
God send his Son, and condemn sin in the flesh? It follows in the text,
that the righteousness of the law might be Verse. 4.
fulfilled in us. It is not said, That the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in himself, or for himself only, (because he died not for himself,
nor had need of such a righteousness, for that he was the lawgiver, and had
always the laws fullness in himself before he wrought any thing) but, That the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us. And how is that to be done?
not by faith only, or by bare imputation alone, as the ignorant understand it;
but by our actual walking in divine precepts: and therefore it is said, verse.
4. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

But in our walking, though it be after the Ob.
Spirit, the law is often broken of us by sins of commission and sins of
omission, and therefore the laws righteousness is not fulfilled of us.

I answer, As it is often broken of us, so it is Sol.
as often repaired and satisfied, and so all is made whole again, and so he is
in statu quo prius. Tremelius upon the text has, Restituitur and redintegratur
a malo, He is restored and made whole from the evil. Which in Saint Augustines
words is a spotless and blameless walking in Gods laws. For in his book de
perfectione justitiae, speaking of many places of scripture urged for the
perfection of the Saints, he says thus, Horum testimoniorum aliqua currentes
exhortantur, ut perfect current; aliqua ipsum finem commemorant, quo currendo
pertendant. Ingredi autem sine macula non absurd etiam ille dicitur, non qui
jam perfectus est, sed qui ad ipsam perfectionem irreprehensibiliter currit,
carens omnibus criminibus damnabilibus, atque ipsa peccata venialia non
negligens mundare eleemosynis. Some places exhort the runners, that they may
run perfectly; some mention the end to which they should tend. Therefore he
may be said without absurdity to enter spotless, not who is already perfect,
but he which runs inculpably to that perfection, wanting all deadly sins,
and not forgetting to expiate his venial sins by alms. If he rises not
again so often as he falls either in number or virtue, then he seems to be no
more a just man. Wherefore let every one, as soon as he is down, presently rise
again.

Our sins of commission are repaired and reversed by repentance. Ezech. 18.
21, 22. But if the wicked will return from all his sins that he has
committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he
shall surely live, he shall not die: all his transgressions that he has
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him. If it be thus to the wicked,
shall it not be as much to the godly, when they sin less, and not with a
full consent? Our sins of omission are salved and supplied by prayer, as S.
Augustine insinuates upon this point of giving the law unto us, Admonet nos
Deus facere De nature. and great. cap. 43.
quod possumus, and petere quod non possumus: God, by giving his law to us,
admonishes us to do what we can, and to ask that which we cannot do. Whereupon
it follows, that obedience as far as we can, and prayer where we cannot, in
regard of the frailty of the flesh, makes Gods law to us possible; because in
his Gospel he Matthew. 7. 7. John 15. 7.
has promised to give us that which we pray for, as we ought to pray: in which
are included all our sins, as well of commission as of omission. These are
the helps which the Gospel affords. How are we to respect and frequent these
two, upon which our salvation so much depends! were it not fit that these two
should always lie by us, to be ready at every need? The old law only
commands, Lex praedicat iram, evangelium gratiam; lex monstrat culpam and
poenam, evangelium remissionem culpae and absolutionem a poena exhibet; lex
demum morbum and aegrotum, evangelium medicum and remedium porrigit. Psalm. 119.
32.
but gives no power to perform: but the new law not only gives precepts, but
also power and helps by the sacraments to perform, because it is written in
Christ's blood, and so has Christ's spirit and life going together with it.
Therefore it is called of S. Paul, The law of the Spirit of life; and of S.
James, The law of liberty: not because it gives men liberty to sin; but
because it freeth from the lets, and enlarges man's heart through the spirit to
perform it with alacrity and cheerfulness, according to that of David, I will
run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. And to
this belong the counsels of the gospel, which go beyond the precepts of the
law: of which S. Chrysostom speaks, (...) Hom. 19. in Heb. and Hom. 18. de
poen.
Christ commanded nothing impossible, insomuch that many go beyond the very
commandments. And if it be demanded who ever did this, he forthwith answers,
(...) S. Paul, S. Peter, even all the quire of saints.

Lastly, as Christ's spirit and grace gives such power to go beyond the
precepts; so it is not incongruent that it should so modifie sins in his
members to make them venial and not killing, in regard they are not done with
a full consent, but with a desire of doing the contrary: of which the Apostle
says thus, Romans 7. 20. But if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do
it, but sin that dwells in me.

A third argument I have from the kinds of fulfilling Gods law, which are two,
the inward and the outward. The inward is the fulfilling of the law in desire:
The outward is the fulfilling of it in the bodies members, prompted and put on
by the minds direction and affection. The inward is more noble, because it is
more near to the mind its original and fountain, and without whose act the
bodies members could act nothing: yet the outward is the more ample, because it
breaks out further. The inward fulfilling of necessity must be acknowledged,
or else we destroy the inward man, and frustrate that great work of man's
redemption. Of this inward fulfilling thus speaks the Apostle, Romans 7. 22.
For I delight in the law of God after the inward man. This delight is the wills
fullness, often spoken of in the 119 Psalm, O how I love thy law! it is my
meditation all the day long. Again, Therein is my delight. I will observe it
with my whole heart. Now the whole is the fullness of a thing; therefore there
is an inward fulfilling of Gods will. Notwithstanding we must not here rest,
but proceed to the outward also, because the body is a part of the whole, and
so bound by the law to follow its inward principle. By this outward fulfilling
God is more glorified to the eye of the world; and without the outward the
inward is not seen: wherefore upon every good opportunity they ought to go
both together. But here we must take knowledge, that the body in its own
principle is so far from fulfilling Gods law, that it is a contrary law to
it, and is called of the Apostle the law of the members, and the Romans 7. 23.
law of sin and of death. I see another law in my members, warring against
the law of my mind, and leading me into captivity to the law of sin, which
is in my members. That is to say, as S. Augustine expounds it, captivare
conantem, Lib. 1. de nupt. and concup. cap. 30.
endeavoring to lead me into captivity to the law of sin in my members.
How may we be freed from this? by another law, that is, the law of the mind,
called the law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8. 2. For the law of the Spirit of
life, which is in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and of
death. Then the law of the members cannot hold us in captivity. Here therefore
come to be considered of us three laws in Gods word expressed. The first is
that which is called the law of God; and this is the glass of our lives,
showing what we should do, and what we should not do. The second is called the
law of the members, and the law of sin and of death, because it labors and
endeavors to draw us to sin and to death. And this is concupiscence, giving
precepts and motions for sin, which in the unregenerate draws death after
it. The third is the law of the mind, called of S. Paul, Romans 8. 2. the law of
the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. And this law is bestowed upon us habitually
in baptism, and is nothing else but holy charity, which sanctifies by the
power of the holy Ghost, and purifieth the mind before God, and is opposite to
concupiscence. And because this is the strongest law, and seated in the mind
which is man's form and principle, therefore this both freeth from the law of
the members and of sin, and also fulfilleth the law of God, which is man's
conformity with him. And this is confirmed by that main conclusion, Charitas
est legis plenitudo, Charity Romans 13. 10.
is the fullness or fulfilling of the law. Which is thus to be understood,
says S. Augustine; Diffunditur in cord charitas Dei, unde fiat legis Ad
Hilar. Epist. 89.
plenitudo, non per vires arbitrii, quod est in nobis, sed per Spiritum
sanctum, qui datus est nobis. The love of God is diffused in our hearts, from
whence proceeds the laws fulfilling, not by the power of free will, which is in
us, but by the holy Ghost, which is given to us.

It may be objected, that the law of the Ob.
members, or concupiscence, is imputed by God to the whole man, being it is
opposite and rebels against the law of the Spirit.

I answer, that the sin of the flesh is not Sol.
imputed to the whole man, because the flesh is not yet redeemed in execution;
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 23. But we also which have the
first fruits of the Spirit (that is, the law of the Spirit of life in our
minds, by which we are sanctified and consecrated to God) even we do mourn in
our selves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our bodies; that is to
say, the deliverance of our bodies from concupiscence: which is thus done,
says S. Augustine; Liberari a corpore mortis, est, omni Contra duas epist.
Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 11.
sanato languore concupiscentiae carnis, non ad poenam recipere corpus, sed ad
gloriam: non enim a corpore mortis impii liberabuntur unquam, quibus in
resurrectione eadem corpora ad aeterna tormenta reddentur. To be freed from
this body of death, is to heal all the languour or infirmity of lust in the
flesh, and not to receive the body to pain but glory in the city of God: for
the wicked shall never be freed from this body of death, to whom the same
bodies at the resurrection shall be restored, to suffer everlasting torments.
And the reason why God has not redeemed or delivered our bodies, is, because
God has ordained, that man should not attain his end and perfection without
difficulty, or at one instant, as the angels did; but to go to heavens
happiness by much opposition, and by many sighs and sorrows, as our head has
done before us by many sufferings; and that according to the difference of
every ones conflict and striving, they might be rewarded with the different
orders of the glorious angels. For which cause all they who have generous
minds according to the dispensation of grace, must put on in the way of
godliness the best that they can, knowing with the Apostle, that their labor
shall not 1. Cor. 15. 58.
be in vain in the Lord. And from hence it will follow, that, whereas
Christians have longer time and more difficulties to go to their end then the
angels had, therefore their rewards shall be greater, and more then theirs,
though their grace be more and greater then that of Christians. Wherefore when
they both shall meet, there shall be a blessed harmony and sweet rejoicing in
God together.

And to show a little further the difference between the angels and men's
travel toward the end, this shall appear from man's combat under the three
laws warring one against another. The law of the members challenges the law of
the mind and spirit; and the law of the mind and spirit challenges the law
of the members; and the law of God challenges both, saying, Thou law of spirit
and grace come too short for man's salvation; and thou law of members art out
of measure sinful, and therefore killing. What shall the distressed conscience
now do, when so many fists are one upon another in one man, beside the unknown
stratagems of the devil, the multitude of the worlds incursions, and the
manifold falls into sin? O the fears, the cares, and the labors! Is not here
S. Paul's exclamation, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me Romans 7. 24.
from the body of this death? At last comes in our captain to our comfort; and
then the Apostle says, I thank God through Jesus Christ Verse. 25.
our Lord. Then take we heart, and say further with the same, Then I my self
with the mind serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin. The
Savior of the world strikes in with his law, and in the end with much ado we
overcome. Thus stands the difference between men and angels travel toward the
end: the one had a short cut without difficulties; the other has a long race
in many infirmities and miseries. Therefore of these it is said, Apoc. 7. 14.
These are they which came out of many tribulations.

To return again to the laws possibility, a fourth argument arises from the
nature of a law. For if God should give such a law which could not be kept of
us, then it could not bind us; because by the rule of justice no man ought to
be bound to that which is impossible, for that were a wrong both to nature and
grace: Therefore the School verse says,

Ultra posse viri non vult Deus ulla requiri. A fifth argument is from the end
of a law, which is, to be kept: for if God should command things impossible,
then he should make a law not to be kept, but to be broken; which is contrary
to the right end of a law and of a lawgiver. But God for his infinite wisdom
will never give a law to a wrong end: therefore he will never command things
impossible.

But the adversaries to this truth will perchance Ob.
object, that when God first gave his law to man, it was possible to be kept:
the impossibility now proceeds only from our selves, because through our own
default it is that we are disinabled: and therefore God may justly still oblige
us to it, though impossible.

But to this it is answered, that Christ has Sol.
made a full satisfaction for that default of ours, and by this means
discharged us of that obligation; insomuch that God can no more in equity now
require impossibilities at our hands, then he could at first at Adams. Neither
does he, if we may believe S. Paul, who says, I can do all things by Christ
that Phil. 4. 13.
strengthens me.

But it may be further urged, that the law Ob.
is still the same it was, and therefore of it self does oblige us now to as
exact a performance as ever it did Adam, though God for Christ his sake is
pleased to remit from the rigor of it, requiring sub poena no more of us, then
we being assisted by his grace are able to perform.

To this I answer, that the law obliges us Sol.
no further then the intent of the lawgiver was to extend it: and therefore if
God intends not now (as questionless he does not) to exact of us the
performance of the law, as it stood in its rigor quoad omnes gradus, neither
does it in reason oblige us now to any such perfection. And so by consequence
the law, as given to Adam, is not the rule whereby we are to be judged, but as
it was given to us in Christ; which every Christian ought and therefore may
perform. And here we may observe, that it is most convenient to reason and
justice, that the law should be exacted so far as the possibility of the
obliged could reach, and no further. Adam in his integrity might have
perfectly kept it, if he would; and therefore the fulfilling of it in rigor
was expected sub poena of him, and that justly: we now fallen would perfectly
fulfill it, but cannot, by reason of the punishment inflicted on us by our just
judge: and therefore, durante poena, he cannot in equity now expect that
perfection in keeping it, which Adam had. For to mutilate a runner, or oppress
him with weights, and then to command him to run with that agilitie and speed
he formerly could, unless he were endued with his first integrity, strength,
and liberty of limbs, is absurd: so to think our good God now in this our
languour and reluctance of nature will under pain of death tie us to absolute
obedience, and not restore us to the state of innocence, wherein 'twas
possible, is altogether as senseless and unreasonable.

A sixth argument is from the goodness of the lawgiver, which is God. If God
should command things impossible, then he should be more cruel then a tyrant,
who will not offer to ask of his subjects such a tribute, which he knows cannot
be paid, nor make such a law which cannot be kept; because this is against the
common good of every state: but God is good to all, and no tyrant, because his
mercy is over all his works: therefore he will not command any thing
impossible. And to this accords S. Augustine, Deus nec impossible aliquid
potuit imperare, quia justus est; nec hominem damnaturus est pro eo quod non
potuit vitare, quia pius est: God could not command any thing impossible,
because he is just; neither will he damn a man for that he could not avoid,
because he is merciful. Now it is manifest, that God gave his law in Moses
time many hundred years after Adams fall, and therefore he gave it to be kept
according to the condition of man's present estate. And in this estate it
pleased the Almighty to make a league of friendship betwixt himself and
mankind: whereupon Abraham (who lived before the law) was called the friend of
God, and holy David a man Jam. 2. 23. 1. Sam. 13. 14
after his own heart. Now let any man tell me, how a father that has received
his prodigal son into his grace and favor, and forgiven all, can yet exact
of his son, without tyranny or ridiculousnesse, to perform as many acts of
hospitality, or otherwise, now in the estate of his decocted patrimony, as in
his full riches; unless the father had restored him again unto as great an
inheritance? To confirm this answer, take this argument; A man can either do as
much as Gods grace inables him, or not. If not, how does grace enable him? If
he can do all which Gods grace inableth him to do; how is it possible for a
most just and good God either to desire, or at least require more then his own
with all usury possible? Secondly, to impose on man his friend precepts
impossible to be observed, neither suiteth with the true rules of friendship,
neither is compatible with the majesty of so most just a Creator; especially
seeing he has now supplied man's fall with his Sons grace, which is far
greater and better then that in paradise: for Adam demerited but one sin to
his posterity, viz. original, which cannot be augmented; but Christ has
poured out the abundance of his graces for our salvation: as S. Paul speaks,
Not as the offense, so Romans 5. 15.
also is the free gift: for if through the offense of one, many be dead; much
more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ,
has abounded unto many. Valor meritorum and satisfactionis Christi long
excedit demerita Adae; idque non ex acceptatione divina, sed ex rigida justitia
and valor ipsorum operum, quem habebant ex dignitate personae operantis and
patientis: so the Sermon. 12. de Passione.
School. And S. Leo thus, Ubi abundavit peccatum, superabundavit gratia; and
qui cum peccati praejudicio nati, potestatem acceperunt adjustitiam renascendi:
validius donum factum est libertatis, quam debitum servitutis. Where sin
abounded, there grace has superabounded; and those who were born with the
guilt of sin, have received power to be reborn to righteousness: for the
gift of freedom is made of more force, then was the debt of bondage and
slaverie.

But it will be objected, that God might justly Ob.
command things impossible to man fallen: for the law was given to Adam in
paradise, though not written in tabulis lapideis, yet in cordibus hominum, as
we read, Romans 2. 14. For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by
nature the things contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law
unto themselves: which show the work of the law written in their hearts. If the
Gentiles, much more had our first parents this law of nature, which is nothing
else but the nature of God written in their hearts likewise. And therefore
because man by his free will made himself unable to keep this law thus written,
God may now justly exact impossibilities of us, in this our present misery and
wretchedness.

I answer, that although the law may be Sol.
truly said to have been given to Adam in paradise (though there not
promulgated, as by Moses afterward) as likewise that man was able in paradise
to perform the whole law of nature, or moral law; but afterward God
subtracting his grace (as justly he might) for his sin, this inabilitie fell
upon him as a punishment: now it is tyrannical and cruel, (therefore
impossible for Almighty God) to require that ability which he himself thus
took away, and of those too that are his friends and in league with him,
unless he had restored it again. And so surely he has, by giving us gratiam
potentiorem, though Adam had laetiorem: for grace now by Christ is more
powerful, because Adam in his purity had less reluctancie, and therefore
less grace might suffice: as S. Augustine plainly, Per Adam amissa De bono
persever.
est gratia, qua homo perseverare possit: per Christum datur gratia crebrior
and uberior, ut in tanta infirmitate inter tot hosts fortior stet, and actu
perseveret.

It may be objected, that the two precepts, Ob.
one of loving God with all our heart and all our strength, and that other, Non
concupisces, Thou shall not covet, are impossible to be kept, seeing as long as
we carry about with us this body of flesh, concupiscence or the law of the
members must be in it; as S. Augustine de perfectione justitiae, and elsewhere
seems to affirm.

For the first, we make no doubt, but every Sol.
child of God does keep that, though not with the same intention we shall do
in heaven, where nothing is to distract us. And is not that to love God with
all our hearts and souls, when we prefer him above all the world; as the
Martyrs did, which endured for the love of God most exquisite and horrid
torments? What an excess of charity was in S. Paul above all imagination, who
desired not only to die, but to be accursed (if it were possible) for the
glory of God in the salvation of his brethren! And here I may cry out (...)!
as well as the Apostle in another case. Secondly, this is no express
particular commandment in the decalogue: therefore it follows that he
necessarily fulfils that eminent and general commandment, which keeps the ten
particular commandments; and therefore Christ says, If you love me, keep my
commandments. Joh. 14. 15.
And lastly, God commands us to love him, as much as ever we are able; and if
we do that, (as doubtless we may) what can God desire of his children more,
then to love him as much as they can possibly in this life?

As for the last commandment of all, Non concupisces, I take it that the
consent of the will is only forbidden, and the cherishing of the first motion
to sin, according to the scripture every where; Let not sin reign in your
Romans 6. 12.
mortal bodies; and, Go not after thy concupiscence, Romans 13. 14.
to fulfill the lusts thereof. Touching which opinion S. Augustine most
clearly, Quantum ad Ad Julian. lib. 2. prope finem.
nos attinet, sine peccato semper essemus, donec sanaretur hoc malum, si ei
nunquam consentiremus ad malum: and so it is rather praeceptum medii, quam
finis, a precept of the means to labor to resist, and to keep those motions
from overcoming us, and leading our will captive. The end it only shows, and
points out that which by these actions we should tend to, even that perfection
which we cannot fully attain in this life, but shall be most consummate in our
country and celestial city of God; and that is, not to feel the motions of
concupiscence. To which purpose S. Augustine writes to Asellicus thus, Hoc lex
posuit dicendo, Non concupisces, Epist. 200.
non quod hoc valeamus, sed ad quod proficiendo tendamus. Now the end is not
enjoined in commands, but demonstrated only: as if a captain bid his soldiers
overcome their enemies; if they fight valiantly, though they do not utterly
overcome, we may in reason suppose the commandment of the general truly
fulfilled, though the end be not fully accomplished. The Apostle surely was of
this mind, when he said, If I do that which I would not, Romans 7. 16, 22.
I consent unto the law that it is good: for I delight in the law of God,
according to the inward man: as if he had said, I work not that which the foam
and sourse of concupiscence within me entices unto; and therefore though he had
these motions of concupiscence, yet for all that he kept the law, as he
concludes in the last verse, Igitur mente servio legi Dei; Id est, Contra 2.
epist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 18.
says S. Augustine, Concupiscentiae non consentiendo: non enim damnatur, nisi
qui concupiscentiae carnis consentit ad malum. And that which was beside his
mind, was none of his, neither was he guilty of it; as is plainly set down in
that chapter. Secondly, that concupiscence without the wills consent, is not
sin, is more then intimated by S. Augustine from the Lib. 2. contra Julianum.
words of S. Cyprian, in his epistle de mortalitate: We must encounter (says
he) with covetousness, immodestie, anger, and ambition, with carnal vices
also, and secular enticements: a daily and dangerous strife we must endure. The
mind of man is every way assaulted and environed with the devils wiles; it
scarce withstands them, scarce resists. If avarice be overcome, arises lust;
if lust be vanquished, ambition then succeeds; if ambition Concupiscentia, cum
conceperit, parit peccatum, Jac. 1. 15. Unde partus', a pariente discernitur;
pariens enim est concupiscentia, partus peccatu^: non parit, nisi conceperit;
non concipit, nisi illexerit, hoc est, ad malum perpetra^dum obtinuerit
voluntatis assensum. Aug. contra Jul. lib. 6. c. 5.
be trampled on, anger rages, pride swells, drunkenness allures, envy
marres concord, and by emulation friendship is quite dissolved: so many
persecutions the mind daily suffers, with so many dangers the heart is vexed,
and yet delights here long to stay amids the devils engines, when rather it
should desire and pray, by death to be prevented, and forthwith to repair to
Christ. Thus S. Cyprian: to which S. Augustine, Absit autem ut sanctum
Cyprianum aut avarum existimemus fuisse, quia cum avaritia; aut impudicum, quia
cum impudicitia; aut irae subditum, quia cum ira, etc. confligebat: God forbid
we should think S. Cyprian covetous, because he strove with covetousness; or
unchaste, because with unchastitie; or subjected to anger, ambition, carnal
delights, worldly vanities, lust, pride, and the like, because he was therewith
hourly molested. Imo vero ideo nihil little erat, quia his malis motibus,
partim de origin, partim de consuetudine venientibus fortiter resistebat, non
acquiescens esse, quod eum esse cogebant. Yea verily (says he) he was none of
these, because he valiantly resisted these evil motions, partly arising from
nature, partly from custom, not yielding to that they would have compelled
him. Furthermore, if it had been possible for Adam in his purity to have had
these sudden ictus, or blows of concupiscence in his soul; yet had he not
consented, without question he should never have been turned out of paradise:
for not to consent to evil suggestions is so far from the least demerit, that
by this means rather merit is highly increased: for, Ubi maxima pugna, ibi
maxima est victoria.

Lastly, it may be objected, that the very Ob.
best works of the saints are unclean, impure, menstruous, and mortal sins;
therefore it is impossible for any man to keep the law.

I answer, They that say so, cannot (in my Sol.
judgment) be excused from extreme blasphemy: yet seeing it is out of
ignorance, they may happily obtain pardon, as the Jews did that crucified our
Savior, as S. Peter told them. Acts 3. 17.
Can the works and fruits of the holy Ghost be impure? Has Christ purchased to
himself naught but a filthy and impure generation, which can do nothing but
sin, and that mortally? How can this but derogate from the grace and wisdom
of God? from grace, in that it cannot purify the heart from filthiness; from
his wisdom and justice, to reward menstruous rags (for so they term them) with
heaven. Can he reward sins? how then shall he judge the world secundum
judicium and veritatem? Now the least addition of evil (we know) in a good act
makes it sinful, because bonum est ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet defectu.

Seventhly, King James upon the Lords prayer affirms it to be blasphemy, to
say that any of Christ's precepts are impossible; because this is to give him
the lie, who out of his own Matthew. 11. 30.
mouth told us, that his yoke is easy, and his burden light. And his inward
disciple S. John says, His commandments are not grievous. 1. Joh. 5. 3.
From whence S. Basil the great averreth, (...) Hom. 3.
Impious it is to say the precepts of Gods Spirit are impossible. S. Augustine
likewise thus, Nunquam In Psalm. 56.
imperaret hoc Deus ut faceremus, si impossible judicaret, ut hoc ab homine
fieret. Si considerans infirmitatem tuam deficis sub praecepto, confortare
exemplo; utpote adest ille qui praebuit exemplum, ut praebeat and auxilium. God
would never command us to do this thing, if he judged it impossible to be done
of man. If thou therefore, considering thine infirmity, faintest under the
precept, be comforted by example; for he that gave his example, is at hand,
that he may also afford his aid. Moreover, this holy father abhors this
doctrine Sermon. 191. and Hieron. in symb. Nican. epist. 17.
as accursed in the heretics of his time. Execramur eorum blasphemiam, qui
dicunt impossible aliquid homini a Deo esse praeceptum; and Dei mandata, non a
singulis, sed ab omnibus in communi posse servari. We detest their blasphemy,
that affirm God commanded any thing impossible to man; and that Gods
commandments cannot be kept of any man in particular, but of all men taken
together: which erroneous doctrine is there much faulted. Far be it therefore
from us to attribute that impiety to our heavenly Father, which we cannot
justify to be in a tyrant or cruel governor. Secondly, in this doctrine of
impossibility, all exhortations to virtue, and comminations against vice must
needs be overthrown, Cum nemo ad impossibilia teneatur, as the lawgivers have
expressed it. Thirdly, if Gods law must be broken of us necessarily, how shall
God come to judge the world in righteousness, and the people with his truth?
as holy David says, Psalm 96. 13. But this blessed Patriarch was doubtless
of another mind, when he said, I will run the way of thy commandments, Psalm.
119.
when thou have set my heart at liberty. I love them above gold and precious
stones, yea all the day long is my delight in them, etc. How then can these
precepts be insupportable, which Contra duas epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 8.
are so easy, lovely, and delightful? And although (as S. Augustine truly)
lex jubere novit, cui succumbit infirmitas; gratia tamen juvare, qua infunditur
charitas. For the end of the 1. Tim. 1. 5.
commandment is charity out of a pure heart, good conscience, and faith
unfeigned. And thus S. Leo is most true, Just instat praecepto, qui praecurrit
Sermon. 9. de jejun. and alibi.
auxilio; He may command what he will, that makes man able to obey, and, not by
enforcing the will, but by infusing grace, aids and elevates its actions to a
higher end. So where nature comes short, there grace supplies the defect. Gods
enemies and the unregenerate cannot possibly fulfill the law, because S. Paul
says, The natural man receives not the things of the 1. Cor. 2. 14.
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. But Gods sons and servants are able
not only to discern and know them, but also to observe and fulfill them;
because S. John says, Whosoever is born of God, sins 1. John 3. 9.
not: for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is born
of God. Again, Love comes 1. John 4. 7. and 5. 3.
of God; and every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God. This is
the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not
grievous or heavy. To the unregenerate they are very heavy and grievous,
unsupportable: but to sons and friends they are easy and light, because Gods
Spirit comes in to their aid. Wherefore get to be friends with God, and then
you cannot stand out for any aid: obtain to be his, not in name but in deed,
and then you shall want nothing that is good. O that the world knew how good
and rich God is! then every one would strive to be toward him; for all things
work together Romans 8. 28.
for the best to them that love him. Again, in the regenerate there are two
men, the old and the new, the flesh and the spirit. According to this we affirm
that the old man cannot fulfill Gods law, because S. Paul says, I know that in
Romans 7. 18.
me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. Again, I see another law in
my members, warring Verse 23.
against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of sin, which
is in my members. But the law of the Spirit freeth from the law of the flesh,
Romans 8. 2. Therefore the Apostle says further, Gal. 5. 23. Against such there
is no law. And this freeing law of the Spirit is nothing but charity; as S.
Augustine says, Id In Psalm. 98.
agit gratia, ut dilectione impleantur mandata Dei, quae timore non poterant.

To draw to an end, Were the law impossible to be kept, then all the
exhortations and threatenings in Gods word should be idle, then all men's labors
would wax lazy, and then good life which is after the rule would be exiled,
for that no man would strive against the stream. Wherefore great enemies are
they to Christians growth and reward in the way of godliness, which are
against this doctrine: they are like to the man in the parable, who laid up his
money in a napkin, and at last had it taken from him.

A surplus argument I have from the unworthiness of them that are against the
argument. Origin in his ninth homily upon Annon tibi videtur inter mulieres
existimandus ille vir, qui dicit, Non possum observare quae scripta sunt? Et
ibid. Qui dicit, Implere non possum, quid tibi videtur aliud quam inter
mulieres, quae nihil virile Possunt, esse numerandus?
Joshua gives this censure, that they are to be compared to women, which say
that Gods commandments cannot be kept. Indeed I grant, that it is easier for
flesh and blood to break Gods law, then to keep it: But when God has for man
ordained it as his highest form, promised his blessing and helping hand unto
it, and set a kingdom and a crown at the end of it; they are all base-minded
that will not bring their best endeavors to it.

Hearken to Jehoshaphats good counsel in 2. Chron. 19. 11. Be of good courage
and do it, and God shall be with the good. Hearken we further to Gods
encouragement to good Josh. 1. 5.
Joshua, There shall not a man be able to withstand thee all the days of thy
life: as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee. Lastly, let us listen to Christ's counsel and encouragement for
us all, Matthew. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you: and lo, I am with you always unto the end of the world. Many
examples also have we of those that fulfilled Gods law by scriptures warrant.
But to shun tediousness, I will use only two couples; the first of Enoch
and Elias, who so walked with God on earth, that they are now translated to
walk with God in heaven. The second is that of Zachary and his wife Elizabeth,
of whom it is thus written, Luke 1. 6. And they were both just before God,
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless. If they
lived so well then in the time of the law; what may we do now in the time of
grace, when the law of the Spirit reigns, and when the light of the moon is
as Isai. 30. 26.
the light of the sun, and the light of the sun is sevenfold, and like the
light of seven days?

Now though I hold this in thesi, that Gods law might not be impeached, his
grace not shortened, nor good endeavors hindered; yet will I be no patron to
any that shall presume and boast of it. For my self, I will ever put it off to
others, and give all the praise of my ways to God only: for pride is the laws
break, and humility is a member of its fulfilling. Wherefore when I have done
all that I can, I will pray with the Publicane, God be merciful to me a
sinner. Thus in condemning my self I shall be justified by the law it self.
James 4. 10. Cast down your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
Toward the godly, mercy and justice go both together. Therefore with the
Psalmist will I sing, My song shall be of Psalm. 101. 1
mercy and judgment: unto thee O Lord will I sing. Again, All the paths of
the Lord are mercy Psalm. 25. 9.
and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. To which S. Leo
exhorts very Sermon. 9. de jejun. sept. men's.
well, saying, Non comprehendi potest quod promittitur, nisi custoditum fuerit
quod jubetur; We cannot attain to that which is promised, unless we observe
that which is commanded. But because without the grace and mercy of God this we
cannot do, he adds further upon the words of our Savior, BE YE HOLY AS I AM
HOLY, etc. thus; Cum videtur difficile esse quod jubeo, ad jubentem recurrite;
ut unde datur praeceptum, praestetur auxilium: Seeing it seems difficult which
I do command, run for aid to the commander; that from whence the precept is
enjoined, help of accomplishing may be afforded. Which he that of nothing made
us, and by rebellion fallen redeemed us, grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.
Theologia amantis Deum, OR A TREATISE OF THE DIVINE ATTRIBUTES.
S. LEO Sermon. 1. de Pentecost. Etsi nemo de Deo potest explicare quod est, nemo
audeat affirmare quod non est: excusabilius enim est de natura ineffabili non
eloqui digna, quam definire contraria.
TO speak of Gods greatness what flesh can but tremble, while he is the
Transcendent incomprehensible? Sacra scriptura tradit nobis spiritualia and
divina sub similitudinibus corporalium. Sum. p. 1. qu. 3. art. 1.
S. Thomas teaches that we cannot speak of him properly, but by a proportion
from things created. And Dionyfius shows in the fourth chapter of his
mystical Theology, that all things are more truly denied then affirmed of
him: it is understood of man's, and not of Gods affirmations. The reason is, for
that no man can rightly speak of that which he never saw: and God says, No man
shall see me and live. Why? because Exodus 33. 20.
he is incomprehensible, as Athanasius has in his Creed. For as the sun
being gazed on, destroys the eyesight; so he that striveth to comprehend his
Maker, the brightness of his Majesty will break his life. The Son of God
says, No man has seen God at any time; the only Joh. 1. 18
begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
Then so far as he speaks we may speak with him, or speak consectaries to
his sayings; because he being in his Fathers bosom, inwardly knows him. As
Jacob, when he wrestled with God, would Genesis 32. 26.
not let him go till he had blessed him; and as the Philistines could not find
out Samsons Judge. 14. 18.
riddle, till they had plowed with his heifer: no more can we find out the
mysteries of God, unless we plow with his Spirit, and wrestle with him by
prayer. This being done, then God will bless us, as he blessed Jacob; and then
he will show us his hinder parts, as Exodus 33. 23.
he did unto Moses, by created means.

These he expresses to us by his divine attributes, whereof the foundation is
his substance or essence. And this Essence God challenges as his name to be
known by: for when Moses demanded of God his name, he told him it was (...),
which signifies essence, I am, or Exodus 3. 14.
will be. So that to be, properly belongs to God, from whom all things have
their being. And this is seconded by these sayings of Gods word Isai. 42. 8.
Ego sum Jehova, hoc est nomen meum; I am Jehovah, this is my name. This name
expresses his eternity, Apoc. 1. 4. Which is, which was, and is to come. This
name Jehovah is derived from (...) esse, to be. In this name Jehovah are
contained the 5 vowels, which are the sinews of all languages. As without them
no tongue can be expressed; so without the true knowledge of Jehovah no flesh
can be saved. This name Pagnine calls ineffabile nomen. This name of Gods
essence was so reverenced of the Jews, that they thought not themselves worthy
to speak it; therefore whenever it came to be read in the old Testament, they
pronounced some other name of God for it, as Adonai the Lord, or Elohim God.
This expression of the name Jehovah is further confirmed in Isai. 43. 10. where
it is said, Ye shall understand that I am; where is showed, that his essence is
to be. Again, verse. 13. Before the day was, I am. He was before the creation,
before there was day or night; therefore he is the only proper and true being.
All creatures, yea the most perfect, as angels, are not perfect essences,
because there was a time when they were not; and it is a thing possible for
them not to be again. It is as possible for them to have an end as to have a
beginning: but they had a beginning; therefore for any thing that is in their
being, they may have an end, and so their essence is not absolute, but from God
borrowed. It sorteth with all creatures to be images and shadows of true being,
not to be true being it self. The image is understood of men and angels,
because they come nearest to true and perfect life; the shadow, of sensitive
and insensitive things. Thus Plato denied things sensible truly to be. And
Seneca says, that they make a show, and for a time put on a countenance of
being. And for the immortality of angels and men mentioned in holy writing,
this is not to be derived from the immateriality or excellency of their
essence, but from the special grant and charter of their Maker. The Almighty
has ordained it to be so from their creation, and therefore their immortality
shall hold.

But here between the Fathers and Scholists there is difference about the
essence of angels and spirits of men, as we may read in the second Nicene
Council and the fifth act; where they are held to be materiate and corporate.
Damonum ea est natura, ut aerei corporis sensu terrenorum corporum sensum
facile praecedant; celeritate etiam, propter ejusdem aerei corporis superiorem
mobilitatem, non solum cursus quorumlibet hominum vel ferarum, verumetiam
volatus avium incomparabiliter vincant. S. Aug. lib. de Divin. Demon. c. 2.
Their reason is, to put a difference between Gods simple essence and their
compounded, which of necessity must be gross in respect of Gods, and to
withstand their infiniteness; because that which may not be circumscribed or
limited, must be infinite: but angels and spirits of men are not infinite,
therefore they must be bounded and defined with matter. And this may be upheld
by these reasons. First, because they are not absolutely eternal, but frail in
regard of their matter, and eternal gratis. Seneca epist. 58. Manent cuncta,
non quia aterna sunt, sed quia defenduntur cura regentis: immortalia tutore non
egent. Haec conservat artifex, fragilitatem materiae vi sua vincens. By this,
all things that are, are frail or mortal in regard of the frailty of their
matter, and immortal by God who keeps them so: for things by nature immortal
need no preserver. Secondly, there seems to be as much reason for spirits to
be made of matter rarefied and sublimate, as the Alchymists speak, as for
natural bodies to be made spiritual bodies in the resurrection, by
rarefaction and sublimation. 1. Cor. 15. 44. It is sown a natural body: it is
raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual
body. Thirdly, Berardus Bonioannes the expositour of S. Thomas, insinuates
this, Sum. par. 1. q. 14. art. 1. Formae secundum quod sunt magis immateriales,
Forma dicitur actus.
secundum hoc magis accedunt ad infinitatem quandam. From whence arises this
argument; In absoluta and mera immaterialitate non est magis and minus. In
formis angelorum and hominum est magis and minus immaterialitatis. Ergo in
illis non est absoluta and mera immaterialitas. Fourthly, the materiality of
man's spirit seems probable in regard of the union between the body and the
spirit, because contraries expel one the other: hence there seems to be some
materialitie in the spirit, that the connection and alliance might be the more
easy and familiar. Fifthly, the materialitie of spirits is showed, because
they suffer from the matter of fire in hell, Matthew. 25. 41. prepared for the
devil and his angels: but in immaterialitie there is no proportion for sense,
because sense is in matter and quality, without which there can be no passion.
Sixthly, this may not seem strange to us, if we compare the angels with the
winds, which in the holy tongue have the same name that angels and spirits
have, which is (...), ventus, spiritus, anima, angelus. So simple is the winds
substance, that it is no more subject to our sight then angels are; and for
strength it is little inferior, while it turmoyls the great ocean, overturneth
trees and houses, and makes the steadfast earth to quake and tremble: yet is
this materiate, and then why not the other, though they be more simple, and in
a degree higher?

The Scholists, following S. Thomas, exclude materialitie; and their reasons
are these. First, because it is consonant to the universitie of things, that
some should be Gods images in intellect and will: but intellect and will are
immateriate, for that they are distinct from sense which rises from bodies. As
some things are purely materiate, as the elements; some things mixed of matter
and form, as men; some of matter and spirit material, as beasts; some of
matter and spirit intellectual, as men: so it is requisite, that some things
should be purely spiritual, as angels; because it is requisite, that in every
kind there should be some perfect: but in man's soul his intellect is imperfect
because it gets knowledge by corporal senses from things sensible: therefore
it is fit that some substances should be merely intellectual without bodies,
not to gain knowledge by so base means, but to have the roots of intelligence
innate in themselves, which are their powers replete with principles or
species. This then is the difference between the spirits of men and angels: the
one have a body united to them, to receive species, and to understand from
bodily objects; but the other have species of intellect connate with them, and
separate from bodily reason which is by discourse. Secondly, they show this,
because spirits and souls have not commensuration with places, for that they
want quantity which bodies of matter have, and have no situation in continuo.
The incorporeall substance rather contains then is contained, as the soul is
in the body, containing it by its virtue and power, and not contained;
applied, and not circumscribed. Because it wants quantity, it cannot be
divided; and because it wants matter, it cannot be corrupted, except it be
understood of loss of quality, as of grace and good being, contrary to Gods
will.

Yet they hold that angels are compounded of act and potentialitie, of subject
and accidents, of essence common to all, and existence, in which is contained
their difference in degrees, offices, and perfections. By reason of this
composition they are all frail; because whatsoever is compounded is subject to
dissolution: but in God is no composition: therefore his essence only is
simple. Herein Scholists join with antiquity, in affirming their act and
potentialitie to be quasi materia and forma.

To return to Gods essence, it is wonderful in two respects: First, in that it
is communicable to three persons: upon which the Arians sung in their scoffing
anthems against the Catholic Christians, Where are these fellows that (...);
Socrat. Scholast. l. 6. cap. 8.
affirm three to be but one power? Secondly, in that his essence is so simple,
without any composition: for he does not consist of matter and form or
potentialitie, as the creatures do; but he is all form or act, without matter
or mixture: for mere matter has no life in it, but only potentialitie to
receive life from its form. The creatures have composition in their very forms,
as appears in the soul of man consisting of Intellect and Will. In which
composition there is this infirmity, that though the Intellect offers to the
Will never so right things; yet the Will, being of a diverse and domineering
power, like a queen will do what she list; for that election, which is the
immediate cause of every action, is in her jurisdiction. This is seen in the
saying of Medea, -- Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor: --
and again in this, Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. And by this
composition angels and men fell. For whereas they both were made for an end, as
all other creatures are; and to this they were to go by their wills election,
and by due and proportionable means, in which consisted their assurance for
consummation and confirmation in it: herein they failed. Their end was to serve
their Maker, which they could not but understand, in regard they were made in
perfect intellect, and whereupon they could not desire to be Gods equal and
compeer, as some have imagined; but only his copartner, and like unto him in
freedom of will. And that this end was by God propounded to them upon their
creation, in regard they were made in free appetite, it appears from this
interrogation, Hebr. 1. 14. Are they not all ministering spirits? And this is
also confirmed by reason, for that there can be no higher end to any creature,
then to serve the Creator. But to go to this end, it was requisite they should
have a direction and a mandate from the Creator, because he knew best how he
would be served: wherefore God set before them his own Son, who is his Word,
to follow as their Lord and Captain. And to this end it is said in the Psalms,
Worship him all ye gods: and again, Psalm. 97. 7.
Heb. 1. 6. And let all the angels of God worship him. Thus the only true way
to the end of Gods service is his Word, that is, his only Joh. 1. 1.
begotten Son, the second person in the Trinity, by whom also he made the
worlds, as the Heb. 1. 2.
Apostle testifies; and therefore he knew best how they were to be governed.
And this is averred by the testimony of the Son, John 14. 6. I am the way,
and the truth. This being propounded as grace from God for their proceeding;
part of the angels, (whose ringleader was the prince of devils, whom we call
Called, Matthew. 12. 24. Beclzebub.
Lucifer) considering their own excellency, their own intellect and strength
of nature in which they were made, by their arrogancy neglected their Makers
direction and aid, and thought themselves sufficient to do this of themselves:
and thus of their free will they made election to serve God, not as he would
have them, but as they themselves listed: whereby they fell from God. So now
they serve him after their own will, in tempting and trying his servants among
men, and in being the instruments of his anger in punishing the rebellious.
This they do willingly, and God suffers willingly, because he knows how to
turn it to his own glory, though it be not to their ease, because they forsook
him: and so their service, which, if they had been ruled by him, should have
been a pleasure unto them, is now become their punishment by their own choice;
and upon this they are confirmed in malice, and thrown out of heaven, according
to that in Isaiah, applied to the Babylonians also, How art thou Isa. 14. 12.
fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning?

The other part of the angels, whose number is greatest, (because the best
deserve to Draco traxit tantum tertiam partem stellarum secum in terram, Apoc.
12. 4.
be most) having the general mean to their end propounded as to the former,
which is Gods only begotten Son; beside this general grace, he propounded
to their intellect his special grace, which was the object of their own
frailty, and of his greatness, to cause them to fear and to take heed what
they chose, which was to them a motive most available to wisdom, according to
that in the Psalms, The Psalm. 111. 10.
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: upon this Michael the prince of
angels (whom all the rest of the wiser sort followed) withstanding pride, made
election of Gods Son and his direction, saying, as it is in the Psalm, Quis
est sicut Jehova Deus noster? Who is like Psalm. 113. 5.
unto the Lord our God? from whence he obtained to be called in the Hebrew
tongue (...) Michael; which name is compounded of three words, (...) quis,
(...) sic, and (...) the strong God: which being put together is this, Who is
such as Almighty God? Wherefore him he with his fellows chose to follow: and
upon this election all they arrived at the happy end of their creation, and
were confirmed in grace, and now daily serve him in pleasure and delight.

Lastly, when Adam was created, in whom by propagation were all men, the same
mean again to their end was propounded by God under his word and command, and
the type of the tree of life, which signified the Son of God who is the true
life, according to the testimony Joh. 14. 6.
of the Son, I am the way, the truth, and the life: upon this tree if they
would have fed, they had been confirmed in grace for ever. But they, leaving
Gods grace and his order, partly by the preventing temptation of the fallen
spirit, and partly by their own pride, chose to go to their end by forsaking
his word, and breaking of his command, in eating of the forbidden tree. Thus by
forsaking of God they also fell, which was their sin: for sin is the
undoing of the compounded substance, which before the undoing was held together
by Gods grace, till the bond was broken by the voluntary act of the creature;
according to the saying of S. Austine, Quid est gustato cibo prohibito Lib 4.
in Jul. cap. ult.
nuditas indicata, nisi peccato nudatum quod gratia contegebat? gratia quippe
Dei magna ibi erat, ubi terrenum and animale corpus bestialem libidinem non
habebat. What is the reason why nakedn^sse appeared when the forbidden meat was
tasted, but because that was by sin made bare, which before grace covered?
for the grace of God was there great, where the earthly and animal body had
not beastly lust.

And that the sin of angels and men arose from the frailty of their
composition and nature, (yet without necessity, or else all should have
sinned) it appears, for that absolute simplicity and unity cannot admit
alteration. Secondly, because sin originally springs Ecclus 10. 13.
from pride; and the subject of pride is the intellectual appetite
inordinately desiring its own excellency. And the reason why this appetite is
inordinate, is, because it is founded in an unconstant and mutable nature,
which is free will, to which the creature was left after his creation,
according to the saying of Ecclesiasticus, He made man from the beginning, and
Ecclus 15. 14.
left him in the hand of his counsel, and gave him his precepts. And S.
Augustine says, Sic Deus Lib. de cor. and great. c. 10.
Dominusque omnium angelorum hominumque vitam ordinavit, ut in ea ostenderet,
primum quid possit liberum arbitrium, deinde quid possit suae gratiae
beneficium, justitiaeque judicium. And to this accords the saying of Eliphaz,
Job 4. 18. He found no steadfastness in his servants, and his angels he charged
with folly.

But you will say that this composition is as well in God as in the creature,
because in him there is also will and intellect. I answer, that though both
these be in God, yet in him they are without composition, for that in him they
are not really distinct; but in him the whole is intellect, and the whole is
will, because he is simplex and totus simul. Whatsoever is compounded may fall
asunder; therefore that which is uncompounded must be immutable and eternal.
Man's intellect is compounded of simplex and compositus, as the Physics teach.
The simple intellect, is that which apprehends the truth and species of
things by sense and experience. The compounded is that which is occupied in the
discourse of things, by gathering one thing from another; from whence is the
discussing of doubts, and the constituting of axioms. But in God there is no
such method, because he does all things without discourse, for that he sees
all things, and electeth all things at once without any circumstance: but man
first sees by his intellect, next by reason deliberateth, and lastly electeth.

From the simpleness of Gods essence follows his real existence in all
creatures. The Spirit of the Lord fills the world, Wisd. 1. 7. Thine
incorruptible Spirit is in all things, Wisd. 12. 1. Do not I fill heaven and
earth? Jer. 23. 24. Lord, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations,
Psalm. 90. 1. In him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17. 28. For so
simple is he, that no creature can out him or withstand him. And were not his
essence in the creatures essence, they could not exist. Therefore when God
leaves the creature, that leaves to be; because there can be no second
essence without the first supporting it. If God were not in the hard stone and
in the spisse iron, they could not hold, but they would first fall to powder;
and if after that he should not be in the powder, it would vanish into nothing.
The creatures essence cannot be without Gods essence, which sustaineth all
things. As no accident can be without a subject; no more can the creatures
substance exist without Gods substance, to which it belongs as an inseparable
accident. But though Gods essence be in all things, yet is it not there by way
of matter or form, or as a part of things; for so he should be in composition,
and then he could not be the first cause of things: besides, all parts are
imperfect, because they are not the whole. And if God should not be in all his
creatures, in all places, and beyond all places and creatures, then he should
not be infinite, but finite, where the creature is and he is not. He is in all
places, not as occupying or filling them like the creatures, but as causing
places, and containing them in himself. And he is in his creatures three ways;
by his essence, by his presence, and by his power: by his essence, in causing
them to exist; by his presence, in beholding them; and by his power, in
upholding them. Applicat suum esse ad illorum esse, alioqui non essent amplius.
And this is approved by the School verse,

Enter, praesenter, Deus hic and ubique potenter. But it may be objected, that
if God should be in all things, then he should contract defilement from the
baser things, according to the proverb, Qui tang it picem, coinquinabitar ab
ipsa. It is answered, that Gods simpleness and purity is such, that it cannot
contract impuritie; because he is not in any thing by way of composition or
participation, but seorsum, and per se. As the pure light, though it shines in
the most impure things, yet is still pure, because it mixeth not with them: so
though God be in the devils and wicked men, beholding their hearts and
thoughts, yet he cannot contract any defilement, being purer then the light;
because he is only in their essence which is always good, and not in their
defection wherein lies the defilement: for by sin only the creature fell
from God. Wherefore the error of Illyricus, in affirming sin to be the
substance of the creature fallen, is exceeding foolish; seeing the Apostle
says, 1. Tim. 4. 4. Omnis creatura Dei bona est.

Further, God is in his creatures generally, by upholding their essence and
governing their ways; but in the regenerate only, by reducing them to their
order, inflecting their hearts and thoughts to their right end. And this
demonstration I confirm from these grounds of Gods word. Acts 17. 27, 28.
Though doubtless he be not far from every one of us. For in him we live, and
move, and have our being. Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or
whither shall I flee from thy presence? And verse. 13. For thou have possessed
my reins. We therefore are all in God prime modo, id est, per essentiam: but if
he be not in us and we in him secundo modo, per gratiam and ordinem, it will
profit us nothing to our chiefest good.

Lastly, to this attribute of the simplicity of Gods essence, accreweth the
attribute of his immutabilitie. All corruption is in composition: therefore the
things which are more simple, are farthest from alteration, and nearest to
eternity. So pure is Gods essence, without any mixture of matter and
potentialitie, that it cannot alter: but all things created, in that they are
made and compounded, have a mixture of infirm matter or potentialitie, and
therefore are mutable.

Consectaries.
From hence arise these consectaries, that if God be in every one of us
upholding our essence, this shall be our greater condemnation, if we do not
seek and find him who is so near unto us, and turn to him who is within us.
Secondly, this argues Gods infinite greatness, in that no creature can escape
his presence, which is as well in hell and in the hardest adamant, as in the
glorious heavens. Thirdly, to see this wonderful God with the eyes of our
mind (whom we cannot see with bodily eyes) to see him who is in all things
supporting all as a root or foundation, with him to converse, to walk, to talk,
and to do nothing without him, is the only security that is in the world. And
this appears by this saying of S. Paul upon Moses, For he endured, Heb. 11.
27.
as he which saw him who is invisible; and is seconded by David, Psalm. 16. 8.
I have set the Lord always before me, therefore I shall not slide. Fourthly,
to be content with God only, and not to mix our selves with worldly things, is
man's simplicity.

Gods attributes.
1 Unity.
Having spoken of Gods essence, it follows to speak of his attributes. Of
which the first is Unity, the first of the 3 great passions Metaphysicall,
Unum, Verum, Bonum. And this is testified by these affirmations of Gods word.
Hear O Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. See now that I, even
I am he, and there is no god with me, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. That which is the beginning
and cause of all things, must be one and no more. As one is the beginning of
all numbers; so one God is the beginning of all creatures: therefore Parmenides
said, Omnia unum sunt. Multiplicitie of things visible is but the multiplied
shadow of invisible unity. According to this Seneca said of God, Est totum
quod vides, and totum quod non vides. But this must cautelously be understood:
not that God in the stone is truly and properly a stone, as Servetus wickedly
affirmed; but that he is the only cause of the stones being, and of all things
else.

1. If there were more Gods then one, then there would be some difference
between them; because multiplicitie admits difference and variety: and
therefore something should be in the one which is not in the other; and so that
God which wants, should not be a perfect God.

2. That there is but one God, shall appear from all things that are, because
he has set his mark and stamp upon them: for all things speak but one. Though
there be millions of men in the world, yet every man is but one man. Though
there be many species of things made, yet they all consist of individuals.
There is nothing but is one thing. Multiplicitie and collectives end in one.
Many members make but one body, many sheep but one flock, many beasts but one
herd, many men but one kingdom, and all creatures make but one world.
Wherefore one is the mark and image of God, who as he is but one, so he
comprehends all in himself.

3. If there were more then one, then war would not cease between them, till
one had gotten the upper hand to be above the rest. For, as Tertullian
disputes against Marcion, Advers. Marc. lib. 1.
he which is God must be summum magnum, the chiefest great above all other; and
this can be but one. Again, S. Cyprian thus, Unus omnium Tract. de vanitate
idol.
Dominus Deus. Neque enim illa sublimitas potest habere consortem, cum sola
omnem teneat potestatem. Ad divinum imperium etiam de terris mutuemur exemplum.
Quando unquam regni societ as aut cum fide coepit, aut sine cruore desiit? If
an earthly kingdom will not suffer a fellow, how should that celestial
highness endure another? And Ennius says, Nulla sancta societas nec fides
Cic. de offic. lib. 1. Just. lib. 11.
regniest. Alexander likewise told king Darius, Mundum non posse duobus solibus
regi, That the world could not be governed by two suns.

4. If there were more Gods then one, then as fast as the one did bless us,
the other would curse us; according to that of the Poet,

Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo. Then again the creatures would
not so well agree as they do: for if one creature were made by one God, and
another by another, then there would be nothing but relucting. The earth would
swallow up the water, the fire would burn up the air, the host of heaven would
set upon the hosts of the earth to depopulate it; yea, heaven it self would be
divided: Saturns planet would spoil the planet of Mars, the light of the sun
would waste the other lights; and every creature, as his God should be best
able to aid, would overcome his fellow or inferior. But now because there is
but one God that has made all, therefore he has care of all alike; therefore
they agree as they do, and mutually serve each others benefit.

5. The government of commonwealths, where diverse and strange dispositions
combine themselves into one body, for one common good, shows that nature
imitateth the Creator, which is one.

6. Contrariety and discord, though it be never so great, yet it cannot
overcome unity, but unity overcomes it, as an army concatenate prevails
against an army scattered. This shows that there is but one God ruling over
all, which is the God of unity and concord.

7. The general desire that all creatures have to come to one common end,
which is good, argues this: for the Philosopher has, Omnia bonum Ethic. lib. 1.
appetunt, All things desire good. Wherefore as all things join in one
concerning the general end, (though all use not the right mean) this argues
also that there is but one beginning, which has given but one common appetite
to all creatures.

Now having showed God to be but one, from hence it follows that in him there
can be no plurality: therefore his essence is not one thing, and his
attributes another; neither may we say of his attributes, This is not that; but
his truth is the same that his goodness is, his goodness the same with his
power, his power the same with his essence, and so there is no difference nor
distinction numericall or specificall, but in God all is one, and one is all:
and to think otherwise, is to make God in himself finite and limited; because
look how much one attribute has of infiniteness proper to it self, so much
the other must want, and so be limited. Thus therefore are we to affirm of God
and his attributes as convertibles: God is truth it self or the first truth,
and the first truth is God. God is goodness or the first goodness, and the
first goodness is God. God is power, and power it self is God; and so of the
rest. Next, as God is one, so he is all; because all things are contained in
this one. Therefore if all the goods of men and angels and all things else were
lost, in him they might be found again.

Consectaries.
The consectarie doctrine is, that, whereas all things are but one in the
individual, and have but one root or beginning, which is God, therefore we
should not part his honor among others, but give it wholly to himself: and
among our selves we should not break the bond of unity by discord; because
there is but one heaven to which we tend, there to meet with the one beginning:
and to come to this there is but one mean, which is the will of this holy One,
written and sealed in his holy word. By departing from Gods unity, truth, and
goodness, men and angels were destroyed. Division breaks unities bond: by
reuniting, man is restored.

Gods Truth and Intellect.
The second attribute is his Truth, which is the second in the three principal
passions, Unum, Verum, Bonum, Unum notes the first person, from whom is the
unity of essence; Verum the second, which is the Fathers intellect and
wisdom; and Bonum the third person, who is the Father and Sons goodness.
Now Gods truth is his perfect intellect in all things; for truth according to
our capacity comes from right, and right from the light of intellect: but
because there is no composition in God as in the creature, therefore in him
there is no descent from thing to thing; but his truth, light, and intellect is
all one, which we call his knowledge. From hence proceeds the rectitude which
is to be found in his creatures: for what in them is right, is true; and what
is true, is right. Agreeing to this the Psalm has, O Lord, how manifold are
thy works! in wisdom Psalm. 104. 24.
thou have made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. They are true made,
because they are made by the light of Gods wisdom. From which God is called,
Jam. 1. 17. the Father of lights: and he is so called, because as all the
childrens goods descend from the father, so the rectitudes and excellencies of
all creatures are from God derived, and are to him to be referred as to their
fountain. Every good and perfect gift (says he) comes down from the Father of
lights, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. Here God is
compared to the sun and moon, the two great lights in the firmament, to
confound their light. For the moons light (as we know) is variable, because it
is borrowed from the sun by diverse positures, and therefore is not always
light-alike; and the suns light leaves a shadow behind it, by his turning
from one horizon to another: but Almighty God has no variableness, because
his light is his own; and he leaves no shadow by turning, because he is
always in the midst of his horizon, which is every where. And from hence is
this comfortable saying of God to his people, Malach. 3. 6. Because I the Lord
am not changed, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

And in God is the truest knowledge, because by how much any thing is remote
from matter, by so much the more it is intelligent, for that it is not
straightened by its matter to which it is united: for the book of Wisdom has,
The corruptible body presses down the soul, Wisd. 9. 15.
and the earthly tabernacle weighs down the mind that museth upon many
things. And from hence it is that the angelical nature is more intelligent then
the humane soul, for that it is more immateriall, and therein comes nearest to
God: for God has no matter, but is purus actus without potentialitie, and
therefore his knowledge must needs be perfect. And, as I said before, his
intellect is not by discourse or success, because this implies difficulty
contrary to omnipotency: but God sees all his effects in himself, as in the
cause at once, for that all things are to him always present in regard of his
eternity: and for this cause reason is none of his attributes, but vision in
place of it; because reason has discourse, but vision has none, but is only
a direct aspect. And after this manner man's reason in the next life shall be
advanced, when it shall behold God, not any more by reason, but by vision. Now
we see 1. Cor. 13. 12.
through a glass, darkly; but then shall we see face to face: now I know in
part, but then shall I know even as I am known.

Lastly, the height of Gods knowledge is observed in beholding himself, by
which from eternity he begat his Son, who in holy Writ is called his truth,
wisdom, and image. And John 14. 6.
this is illustrated by the looking-glass, as one demonstrateth. For as when a
man looks in a glass, he produces an image of himself so like as no
difference can be found, not only in shape, but also in motion; for when the
man moves, the image moves too; and this image is not long in making, nor by
instruments, nor by labor, but in a moment by one look: in like manner
Almighty God beholding himself in the glass of his divinity with the eye of
his understanding, does beget and produce an image most like unto himself. And
because God has given to this image all his own substance and being, (which we
cannot do in beholding our selves in a glass) that image is the true Son of
God, though our images which we see in glasses are not our sons. And for that
God the Father has always and does always behold himself, therefore his
Son is not younger, but full as ancient as his Father; he always begotten,
and his Father always begetting, according to that of S. Augustine, Semper
gignit Pater, and semper nascitur Epist. 174.
Filius. And by this perfect image God the Father made all things created, and
daily upholdeth and governs all, and therefore all must needs be perfectly
made and governed, according to this testimony of S. Paul, In these Heb. 1. 2,
3.
last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he has made heir of all
things, by whom also he made the worlds. And again, Bearing up all things by
his mighty wo^d.

Consectaries.
The consectarie doctrine is, that whereas all the treasures of knowledge,
wisdom, and truth are in Jesus Christ the Son of God treasured up, and for
that our chief happiness consists in knowing and seeing of Christ, who is
the way, the truth, and the life; therefore John 14. 6.
all other knowledge should seem base unto us in respect of this, and we should
desire this theorie above all things else.

Gods Goodness.
Gods third attribute is his Goodness: and this is splendent in two respects:
First, in that he is the cause efficient of things; and next, the cause
appetible; for good and appetible are convertibles: what is good, is to be
desired; and what is to be desired, is good. Therefore Aristotle says, Omnia
bonum appetunt. Thus we distinguish between the substance of things and their
goods: for substances are but empty vessels without their goods adjected: and
these goods are certain similitudes or conveniences in which things rejoice;
for like desires like. From whence it follows, that if the created similitudes
be goods appetible, then much more God the creator of them must be good, yea
the chief good, as the fountain of them. Now there can be no better similitude
for man the image to delight in, then God his exemplar, and his Son by flesh
and blood to him allied. Therefore he above all things is of him to be desired.

Thus from these three great attributes we have the great and infinite God
described; who in English is called God, of good. From these three he
expresses himself in the creation of the world his image. From his unity in
essence we have our essences to be individuals; from his truth we have the
perfection of our composition; and from his goodness we have our end in
desires, which is the height of our growth: so from the beginning we have our
beginning and active principle; from the truth we have our medium and way to
our end; and from goodness we have the complement of our desires in the end,
which the School calls quies in bono.

Now to show the good things of God for man's good created, he in this life
offers to the intellect the contemplation of things intellectual,
mathematical, and material, as the causes and reasons of things, by which
Solomon spoke, from the cedar that is in Lebanon, to the hysope that springs
out of the wall. Again, he offers to the will the good divided into utile,
honestum, delectabile. Utile shows the means by which we tend toward things
good; honestum is that which is good of it self; and delectabile is the rest
and joy in the good obtained. Lastly, he offers to the senses their proper and
desired objects; as fair sights to the eyes, harmonies to the ears, sweet
smells to the nostrills, pleasant meats to the taste, and smooth things to the
touch. But as the goodness of God thus shows it self in this life, so it
exceeds all our expectation in the next life, where is our last rest and
chief good. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have 1. Cor. 2. 9.
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him: for some of Gods goods are so great and so good, that this life,
though it be good, is not capable of them.

Hitherto of the goodness of God in the state of nature: now follows the
goodness of God in the state of grace. And this is principally to be seen in
his justice and mercy in redeeming mankind. The goodness of Gods justice
appears in that no mercy could appear without it: for mercy presupposes
misery, and misery is the pay of justice. Where therefore there is no
justice, there can be no mercy. Had not God permitted men and angels to fall,
neither angels nor men could have been sensible of Gods love the root of
goodness, in keeping some from falling, and in saving others after the fall.
Therefore fit it was for God to make justice his way to show his mercy, by
which above all his goodness is applauded. And these two in the redemption of
man the greatest of Gods works are to be observed, wherein they met and saluted
each other, according to the Psalmist, Mercy and truth are met together:
righteousness Psalm. 85. 10.
and peace have kissed each other. He showed his justice upon his own Son; he
showed his mercy in ransoming all mankind: and here is verified Samsons
riddle, Out of the eater Judge. 14. 14.
came meat, out of the strong came sweetness. What is more strong and
devouring then justice? and what is more sweet then mercy? God gave his Son
to death, and by this he redeemed the world. Mercy kissed justice, and justice
yielded her right to mercy. Mercy (says S. James) rejoices or glories
against Jam. 2. 13.
judgment. In the death of Gods Son mercy and justice contended; mercy
overcame, and therefore she triumphs. Now therefore mercy has the
preeminence all the world over; yet not without justice, as they met at first,
lest man should run out of mercies bounds, and fall into relapse: both
therefore, because we are saved by both, and preserved by both, are to be
respected of us as our special good from God.

In the next place we are beholding to Gods goodness in the 3 graces, Faith,
Hope, and Charity, and the Sacraments, by which Gods ransom is applied to us.
By faith God restores our understanding; by hope he sanctifies our
affections, and gives us state of the kingdom of heaven; and by charity he
draws us out of our selves, and takes us into himself by making us partakers
of the divine nature. And the Sacraments are outward means by which God
bestows on us his inward graces, to teach us that grace is not bred in our
selves, but given to us forinsecus.

And this goodness of God natively proceeds from his will, as thought and
truth proceeds from his mind. The one is immanent, the other always
erumpent. Goodness is known by its going forth. Therefore we call him the good
man, not which is good to himself within, but good to others without. Wisdom
and truth never come forth but in the company of goodness. Therefore the
Psalmist says, Mercy and truth are met together. Psalm. 85. 10.
When they meet, mercy comes out first, and brings truth and wisdom with
it.

Now the will of God, because it is the supreme dispenser of all things, as it
is one, so it is universal: and because it is universal, it contains in it
all wills, and by consequent all things under it. And thus it comes, that with
one and the same will he permits things most contrary to be willed, and yet
his will is still one and the same. And it must be so, because otherwise the
wills of his creatures which are contrary to his, should not move under it,
but without it and above it, and so God should not be omnipotent. For though
God did not positively or with pleasure will that men and angels should sin
and fall, because the Psalmist says, Thou art not a Psalm. 5. 4.
God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall my evil dwell with thee;
yet per accidens and permissive, according to his order or decree of
contingencie, he would leave men and angels to themselves, to see what they
would bring forth. And rather then he would violate the order of nature in
depriving men of the liberty of their wills (which is essential to them) it
pleased his all-swaying providence to suffer evil to be done (being he knew how
to bring good out of it) then to permit none at all. And this is ratified from
the words of S. Augustine, Saluberrime confitemur quod rectissime De cor. and
great. cap. 10.
credimus, Deum Dominumque rerum omnium, qui creavit omnia bona valde, and mala
ex bonis exoritura esse praescivit, and scivit magis ad suam omnipotentissimam
bonitatem pertinere, etiam de malis benefacere, quam mala esse non sinere: ut
ostenderet primum quid possit liberum arbitrium, deinde quid possit gratiae
suae beneficium, justitiaeque judicium. We most savingly confess, which most
rightly we believe, that the God and Lord of all things, who created all things
exceeding good, and foresaw evil would arise from the good, knowing also that
it more appertained to his most omnipotent goodness, even out of evil to bring
good, then to suffer no evil to be done at all: first, that he might show what
free will could do; secondly, the benefit of his grace, and power of justice.
For if men and angels could have sinned whether God would or no, therein they
had been superior to Gods will: but this they could not: therefore God would
suffer it, to show his omnipotency, in being not only able to make all things
good, as he did in the beginning; but in a degree further, to make good of
evil, in turning their evils to a greater good, by his justice toward angels,
and by advancement of mercy toward men. So that now since man's fall, God, by
his resulting and superabounding mercy, has provided such a remedy, which
should not restore him to his former paradise in puris naturalibus, but to a
supernatural happiness in the kingdom of glory; not to wade in reason, but
to walk in vision, to enjoy glory above the suns light, and to reap content
above all conceit. But for such as shall fall double, from less and from
greater grace, and never rise; for such whom no warning will amend, for such
justice has a double due, a natural and a supernatural death, seated not
only in poena damni, but in poena sensus, which the torments of hellfire
afford. S. Thomas well teaches, that God by no means will have evil or blame
Quid melius, quid omnipotentius eo, qui, cum mali nihil faciat, been etiam de
malis facit? Et rursus, Omnipotens Deus, qui operatur bona etiam de nostris
malis, qualia dabit bona, cum liberaverit ab omnibus malis? Aug. lib. de
Continentia, cap. 6.
simply, as it is evil, (because he is all good) but only as evil is joined to
some good: as he that would have justice, must also be willing to have
punishment; and as he that would have the order of nature to be preserved, must
also be willing to have nature corrupted: but to desire evil as it is only
evil, or to approve evil of blame, God by no appetite, either natural,
animal, or intellectual, desires. And this is confirmed by S. Augustine;
Miro and ineffabili modo non fit praeter ejus voluntatem, quod fit etiam contra
ejus voluntatem; quia non fieret si non sineret; nec utique nolens sinit, sed
volens: nec sineret bonus fieri male, nisi omnipotens etiam de malo posset
facere bonum been. By a wonderful and unspeakable manner, that is not done
without his will, which is done against his will; because if he did not suffer
it, it should not be done; neither does he suffer it against his will, but
willingly: neither would he that is good suffer evil things to be done, but
that he being omnipotent is able of evil to make good things well.

By this you see, that if God should not suffer evil, and admit contraries,
there could be no world. And this liberty God has bestowed also upon man. For
we many times suffer the evil of blame and displeasure willingly, to see how
far our adversaries will proceed against us, because we know how to reverse
all again at our pleasure, and to right it by taking satisfaction of
punishment, or to merit by sufferance. Yet this permission neither in God nor
man imports any approbation, but dislike, while an evil act ensues upon an
innocent license.

Now in regard of the universalitie and comprehensivenesse of Gods will, the
School-divines for our better understanding have distinguished it into diverse
kinds; as his will antecedent and consequent, his will of sign, and his will
of good pleasure. The antecedent will of God is expressed in these testimonies
of his word, Who will have all men to be saved, and to 1. Tim. 2. 4.
come to the knowledge of the truth. Again, Not 2. Pet. 3. 9.
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. And
this will is confirmed by his will of sign, which is the will of his word. And
this consists of these five particulars, prohibition, precept, counsel,
operation, and permission. By his prohibitions he forewarneth of all evils that
are against his will antecedent; by his precepts he informs us of all the
means that lead toward it; by his counsels, which go beyond his precepts
(because God has given to man free will to get what he can in the state of
grace for the state of glory) he shows him some exceeding means to grow to
this life's perfection, and to improve the common reward of glory for the next
life; as, Sell that thou have, and give it to Matthew. 19. 21.
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. Here we are counseled to
change temporal riches for eternal which are the better: secondly, we are
counseled to change permitted fleshly pleasures for heavenly pleasures, where
it is said, Qui potest capere, capiat: thirdly, we Matthew. 19. 12.
are counseled to deny our selves and our lawful Matthew. 16. 24. Mark 8. 34.
liberties, to follow Christ through the worlds difficulties, to receive a
hundredfold more enlargements in the kingdom of glory. These are Gods
counsels, which of the primitive Church were put in practice, but in our times
they are put off with a Non placet.

The fourth part of Gods will of sign is his operation; and this is the sermon
of his works which he makes all the year long to instruct us. By his works of
justice and punishment he calls us to repentance; by his works of favor and
mercy he procures us to praise him. This the Apostle expresses in Acts 14.
17. Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, in that he did good,
and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and gladness. Thus by his operation he really preaches unto us.

The fifth and last part of this will, is his permission; and by this he
suffers man to do what Nec peccatum nec recte factum imputari cuiquam just
potest, qui nihil secerit propria voluntate: est enim peccatum and recte factum
in dibero voluntatis arbitrio. Aug. lib. 83. q. 24. Quid illud, quod tam multis
in locis omnia mandata sua custodiri and fieri jubet Deus? quomodo jubet, si
non est l^berum arbitrium? Aug de great. and lib. arb. cap. 2.
he will under his divine rule and measure. And this will he affords to man
in three respects; in regard of his creation, in regard of his judgment, and
in regard of excuse. In his creation he gave to man free will; therefore it was
fit to grant him together with it sufferance and free liberty to exercise it:
otherwise it were all one as if God should make hands, and then bind them as
soon as he had made them. Again, the will of Gods sufferance is due in regard
of man's last end, and Gods judgment: for if God should not permit man to do
his actions freely, then he could not in justice punish him if he did not as he
should, because he wanted free liberty; nor give him reward, by reason of
necessity. For as God will not call the beasts of the field to doom at the
last day, because he gave them not free will; no more would he call man to
judgment, if he wanted permission to execute his free will. Lastly, God
suffers man to live long, to expect his repentance: wherefore if he do not
repent, his excuse is prevented. In this respect the Apostle says, Romans 2. 4.
Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long
sufferance, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?

Having spoken of Gods will as it is antecedent and of sign; now it follows
to speak of it as it is of good pleasure, and of consequent. The will of Gods
good pleasure is expressed in the 135 Psalm, verse. 6. Whatsoever the Lord
pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the seas, and in all deep
places. This is Gods proper and essential will; first, because it is of the
nature of the will to do of pleasure; and next, because it is most general,
and not restrained to any place or person. His will of sign is not always
done, because it is his will for men and not for himself respectively.
Therefore his precepts are broken, his prohibitions slighted, his counsels not
regarded: but his will of good pleasure is above the law of the Medes and
Persians; this cannot be put by, because it is divina (...).

Lastly, after that God has showed man all his favors by his will of sign
and word revealed, to which he adds the effects of his grace expressed by S.
Prosper in these seven particulars, persuading by exhortations, admonishing by
examples, terrifying by dangers, inciting by miracles, giving understanding,
inspiring counsel, and lightning the heart with faiths affections. When all
these are despised and rejected, then God proceeds with his will consequent,
which is the will of his justice. First he would have all men to be saved by
his will antecedent: but because all men will not consent to this, therefore,
to maintain man's free will, God will not save all in effect; but the same will
turns from mercy to justice, which before turned from justice Matthew. 25. 41.
to mercy, and says, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his angels. Neither is Gods will altered nor broken,
because it turns from mercy to judgment, for that it still retains its
former mercy, and man his former resistance Matthew. 23. 37.
to receive it. How often (says our Savior) would I have gathered thy
children together even as a hen gathers her chickens, but ye would not? If
God has not bound man to one object, but given him free will to turn from
object to object, according to reasons rule; then should God be bound and man
free? The will of God is wider then all wills: all his divine attributes may
rest in it; his truth, his wisdom, his justice, his mercy, his power, his
pleasure and displeasure: yea all the contraries that are in the world, are
within it, and lie under it; as life and death, sickness and health, good and
evil, salvation and damnation: and without this there could be no world.

Notwithstanding, though Gods will be never so wide and comprehensive, yet it
imposes no necessity upon man's will, because all will by Gods creation is
free; and if it were not free, it were no will. Necessity and will are
incompatibilia, they cannot stand together. Nature and things without will are
of a strait disposition; therefore for them God has ordained necessity, and
determined them to one thing: but man's will, because it is the image of Gods
will, is wide and capacious; and therefore he has provided for it the ocean of
contingencie. He has set fire and water before thee, (says Ecclesiasticus)
stretch out thy hand Ecclus 15. 16, 17.
unto which thou will. Before man is life and death, good and evil; and whether
him likes, shall be given him. Now no man can justly complain while all things
are set before him, and he has free choice to all. Election expels
necessity, and necessity thrusts out election. If man's will were not free
from necessity, then there could neither be merit nor demerit, that is,
neither reward nor punishment; and then the two great streams of Gods bounty
and justice should be dried up: but now he has given to man free will; and to
maintain this, he has ordained contingencie, and added his grace to aid his
will, that there might be no defect on his part: for freedom natural to good
Theological is not freedom, but stubbornness without grace.

And this grace and goodness of God, as it orders and aideth things natural
to their natural ends, so it orders and aideth man to his supernatural end,
which is to live with his God in heaven. And this goodness of grace is like to
the virtuous magnet the most remarkable of all stones, the guide of the dial,
and the direction for sea-travell: for as the pin and needle of the dial being
touched with it, the needle will stand no way but north and south; so the heart
of man being touched with Gods grace in his regeneration, will stand no way but
to heavenward. And this touch is that which Divines call the habit of
charity, always enclining and bending to heaven and heavenly things through
all the rubs of the world. Though the touched needle for a while is shaken and
justled from its former due station; yet as soon as the shaking is over, it
returns instantly to the same point: right so, though the heart be for a time
justled either by the lust of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes, or the pride
of life from its right standing; yet as soon as the force is over, presently it
returns to its former station to heavenward. And the only reason is the
touch of Gods goodness in the regenerate soul, to which above all things man's
heart is beholding.

And this goodness proceeds from the holy Ghost, as truth proceeds from
the Son of God: for as the Son is the Fathers essential truth, so the holy
Ghost is the Fathers and the Sons essential goodness. And as the holy Ghost
is the increate goodness of God in himself, so love and charity is the create
goodness of the holy Ghost in man. And until this be wrought in us by the
holy Spirit, we may be men and true men, but we cannot be good men, nor for the
kingdom of heaven. Therefore S. Augustine says, Sola Tract. 5. in epist. Joh.
charitas dividit inter filios regni and filios aeternae damnationis. So
excellent is charity, that God is called by it, 1 John 4. 8. God is charity.
And so good is it, that Divines call it grace, per Antonomasiam, because it is
the principal grace. And S. Paul calls it the greatest; The 1. Cor. 13. 13.
greatest of these is charity. Yea so great is it, that no good can be done
without it, because it is the cause impulsive of every good action. You may
believe without it, but then your belief is not good, because it wants his
right end, which must proceed from charities election and direction. Therefore
in this sense, S. Paul gives faiths action to charity; It believes all
things, it hops all things, etc. Verse. 7.
Why? because it enliveneth faith and all other virtues by giving spirit unto
them. Faith is the candle to charity, and shows her light how to work,
according to Gods word: but charity, being the impulse of the regenerate soul,
acts all.

And whereas bonum is by Divines distinguished into verum and apparens, the
true good, and the appearing good; the true good is that which has order to
the best end, which is Gods glory and our eternal good: of this kind are all
holy habits, qualities, and good works commanded by God. The appearing good is
that which has no order to the best end, but is only for this world, and
appears glorious to the natural man. And this is expressed by S. John in
these three particulars, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
1. Joh. 2. 16.
pride of life. The lust of the flesh is fleshly concupiscence, the lust of the
eyes is covetousness, and the pride of life is a man's animositie, appearing in
anger, arrogancy, and the like. All these, as S. John says, are not of the
Father, but of this world, and are the devils baits to hook the unwise
generation.

Lastly, here may the question be moved, Whether the goodness of substance in
man be better then the goodness of quality. To this I answer, that the
goodness of substance is de esse; but the goodness of quality is de been
esse, which is Gods grace qualifying substance, and therefore the better. For
the souls of the damned have their esse in hell, and are miserable: but the
souls of the Saints, by Gods grace and the good quality, are in heaven, which
is their chief good. Grace and the good quality is the perfection and
complement of substance. A holy and a good man is better then a man; because
holiness and goodness is the perfection of a man. As the soul is the form of
man; so grace and goodness is the form of the soul: it heals nature, it
gives to man quoddam supernaturale, it is the root of virtues, it is the
greatest of gifts, it is correspondent to eternal glory, by it the holy Ghost
inhabiteth in us; and therefore in this life this good is maxim appetibile.

Thus far of the goodness of God in the state of grace: but the greatest of
his goodness is to be seen in the state of glory, because the state of glory
is the end and perfection of the state of grace. In this state his goodness
consists of joy and glory. Joy is the crown of the heart, and glory is the
crown of the head: the one is the complement of the will and appetite, the
other of the mind and intellect. The intellect shall there be filled with the
vision of God, the will and affections with the fruition of his love, and the
lower part of the soul with its proper objects. And that this may the better be
effected in that blessed estate, God has ordained certain means for the
possessing of it, which S. Thomas calls dotes, dowries: and these are certain
glorious habits or dispositions, fitting the souls and bodies of the saints for
the enjoying of eternal bliss, because without means nothing may be applied.
And these dowries are three; vision, which answers to faith in this life;
apprehension, answering to hope; and fruition, answering to charity. Besides,
in that blessed estate there are degrees of joy and glory, insinuated by our
Lord, saying, In my Fathers house are many mansions; and Joh. 14. 2.
by S. Paul, comparing, As one star differs 1. Cor. 15. 42.
from another in glory, so is the resurrection of the dead; again, by the
parable of the seed sown in good ground, which brought forth some an
hundredfold, some sixty, and some thirty-fold. To this agrees S. Gregory,
Quia in hac vitanobis Mor. l. 5. c. 42.
est discretio operum, erit proculdubio in illa discretio dignitatum; ut quo
hic alius alium merito superat, illic alius alium retributione transcendat. So
also has S. Cyprian, In pace coronam vincentibus candidam pro operibus dabit,
in persecutione purpuream pro passione geminabit: and further thus, Certent
nunc singuli ad utriusque honoris amplissimam Ad Martyr. epist. 6. lib. 2.
dignitatem. Accipiant coronas vel de operibus candidas, vel de sanguine
purpureas. Here shines Gods justice in distributing rewards according to the
variety of his own grace in this life bestowed, and Christians works by their
free will to the best end employed. And because there are certain excellencies
of works, in overcoming the greatest difficulties; therefore the School, after
the former demonstration, argues certain privileged crowns, which they call
aureolae, to be due to them which have conquered best; to Martyrs for
overcoming Apoc. 2. 17. and 14. 3.
persecutions, to Virgins for conquering the flesh, and to Doctors for putting
the devil Dan. 12. 3.
to flight from their flocks.

And this goodness of God is so great, that in the kingdom of glory he
gives not even rewards to any, but exceeding to all, according to his riches
in the parable expressed, Give, and it shall be given to you; good measure,
Luke 6. 38.
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall they give into your
bosom.

Lastly, so great is Gods goodness every way, that it sustaineth even the
worst things, that is to say, all evil: for such an infirmity is evil, that it
cannot exist except it lean upon some good, as on a subject: for there can be
no sickness but in the body, no blindness but in the eye, no lamenesse but
in the member; no more can there be the evil of pain but in the organ of sense;
nor sin, which is the evil of blame, but in the soul receding from grace: for
sin in the action is nothing else but the leaving of the divine order to the
good end. The subject is good, and the action as it is an action is good; but
the running of it without order to a wrong end, that only is evil, and is no
way to be righted and resisted, but by the other evil, which is the evil of
pain: but of the two, the evil of blame is the worst and greatest, because it
is opposite to Gods goodness, as the evil of pain is opposite to the creatures
good.

Consectaries.
The profitable consectarie is, that, whereas all true good proceeds from
God, as from the cause both efficient and appetible, the one being the
beginning, and the other the end of all true delights, therefore he above all
things is to be desired of us, as the most appetible: but with this caveat,
that he can never be enjoyed of us, except we first become good, like unto him
by divine charity: and further, that as he is good to all, by causing his
sun to shine and his rain to rain as well upon the bad as the good; so should
we be good to all, in praying for our enemies, in converting sinners, and in
shining upon all our poor distressed neighbors with the light of mercy and
liberality.

Gods Life.
The fourth attribute is Gods Life, from which in holy scripture he is called
the living God. By his life he is distinguished from idols, images, and
statues, which are dead gods: wherefore to countenance the great idol Bell with
this attribute, his priests, with their Hist. of Bell.
wives and children, eat up for him every day twelve measures of flower,
forty sheep, and six great pots of wine. But eating and drinking are no
signs of Gods life, which is not supported by means like the life of men and
beasts, but by its own acting: for he is the first mover, and the fountain of
life to all things living. First, he moves himself, by begetting his only
Son of his own substance, and by producing the holy Ghost of the same
essence. Secondly, he moves his creatures, by giving to them life and breath
and the order of their ways, according to that of Daniel to Belshazzar, And
the God in whose hand is thy Dan. 5. 23.
breath and all thy ways, him have thou not glorified.

And because God ever lives, therefore he continually acts, by begetting his
Son, and producing the holy Ghost, while he always understands himself,
and always loves himself. And by this acting he continually enlightneth men
and angels, and enflameth them with love. And the image of this continual
motion of God is man's breath and the Anima est hominis actus, id est,
principium ejus vitae, and imago Dei. Sum. 1. quaest. 67. art. 1.
pulse of his heart, but especially his pulse, which never cease beating
night nor day. You may for a time retard and stay breath, but by no means you
can stay pulse: no more may all the devils in hell interrupt the living welfare
of Gods saints either in earth or in heaven, because the Almighties pulse never
leaves beating. He is purus and continuus actus; he always moves, and never
cease. Therefore the Psalmist says, He that keeps Israel, Psalm. 121. 4.
neither slumbreth nor sleeps. And this life, fountain of all lives, is that
which Philosophers call animam mundi, and naturam universi, according to that
of the Poet,

Spiritus intus alit, totosque infusa per artus Virg. 6. Aeneid.

Men's agitat molem. --
Gods Providence.
To Gods life allie two other attributes, his providence and his power. His
providence is his foreknowledge, by which he provideth for his creatures their
ends, and the means leading toward them. Gods providence is his law by which he
governs his creatures: for when he had made all things, it was not fit then
to leave them to themselves. If he should not have made them to some end, then
he should have lost by his work; and if he should have provided them an end,
and no means to go toward it, then both he and his creatures should fail:
wherefore after the creation, it is fit that God should execute the law of his
providence, for the ordering of all things to their ends. The end of the
inferior creature is to serve man, who is Gods image; and the end of man is to
serve his Maker, for making of him in his own image.

The order to these ends is to be seen in these three; in the order of
necessity, in the order of inclination, and in the order of free will. The
order of necessity serves for creatures inanimate, which are farthest remote
from free will. Of these the Psalmist says, He has made them an Psalm. 104. 9.
ordinance which none shall pass. Thus the fire burns, and the water of
necessity quenches, except for his pleasure he dispenses with his ordinance.
The order of inclination and instinct is for sensitive creatures, because they
come nearest to free will: by this the be gathers honey, and fish serve
several coasts at several seasons, as if they were sent upon a message. The
order of free will is for man; to which, because it is the highest, God adds
his special grace. And by this man travelleth either to his home of
happiness, or his home of heaviness. In this order, though it be never so
free, and suggested by a sea of possibilities, yet none can outflee Gods
providence (which the School calls Fate) for that the second cause cannot
move out of the first, no more then the lower orb can turn above the higher.
The reason is, for that man's will is ordered by contingent objects, and God is
the commander and orderer of objects, and applies them as he please. And thus
God by causing a sound to be heard in the ears of Sennacherib, 2. Kings 19.
of king Tirhakahs coming against him, of freewill he brake up his siege
against king Hezekiah. Thus again by the light of lamps and the Judges 7.
sound of trumpets, God discomfited the great host of the Midianites. Thus also
God by leaving the wicked and reprobates to their free will, to grace
sufficient, and the objects of pleasure, covetousness, and pride, for all
their free will and power of nature, they cannot free themselves from eternal
sorrow. Lastly, thus God by man's free will, by his word and Sacraments, and by
grace habitual and influent to man's free will added, saves his faithful and
elect, and brings them to eternal life.

And this providence of God concerning man's will thus distinguished, (first by
grace general to all mankind added; next by mere free will, to which man is
left in himself; and lastly by grace habitual and effectual, by which only
the godly and elect are moved and governed) this, I say, is answerable to the
threefold motion of the heavens; the first moving from east to west, the next
turning contrary from west to east, and the third moving sometimes to the
south, and sometimes to the north. So the first degree of Gods providence
moves all men generally to grace and goodness; and this is Gods motion only,
answering to that of the primum mobile. The second, contrary to this, is the
motion of nature; and this is man's only, oppositely crossing God and his
grace. The third, going both ways, is the motion of Gods sons, who are
compounded of nature and grace; and they move sometime to virtue and goodness,
and sometime to vice and wickedness.

Again, for the better knowledge of the state of free will, to which many
doubts and questions are liable, we are to understand, that it runs under
two orbs subordinate to Gods providence. The first and nearest is the orb of
Contingencie; the second and more supreme is the orb of Fate. The orb of
Contingencie is decreed of God for the proper element of man's free will to
expatiate in, as fishes swim in the water, and fowls fly in the air. And were
it not for this, man's will could not be free, but shut up as it were in a
prison, and so could neither be rewarded nor punished, neither move to heaven
nor go down to hell, no more then the brute beasts which want understanding and
the objects of contingencie.

To show how man comes to have free will, it shall appear by these four
particulars. First, because God has given to man reason and understanding, by
which his will is not bound to one object, but has liberty to make a free
choice among many. Secondly, because it has an orb of contingencies or
possibilities to elect in. Thirdly, whereas God has made man's will in his own
image, by which it is capable of a spiritual good or a spiritual evil, in
this respect God has given freedom to it, by giving it a conscience wherein
the rules of nature are written, either to excuse it if it do well, or to
accuse it if it do ill, Romans 2. 15. Fourthly and lastly, whereas God has
ordained to man a supernatural end, to go to a heavenly paradise, he has
added the highest enfranchisement to his will, in affording it his grace, by
giving to it his law positive, his sacraments, and ministers to apply this
grace Ephesians. 4. 11, etc.
daily. And in this respect our Lord says in the Gospel, If the Son shall
make you free, ye John 8. 36.
shall be free indeed.

Next, we are to know what contingencie is; and this is the possible mean
between necessity of being, and necessity of not being, of being such or not
such, of doing or not doing, etc. Further, we are to know, that the events of
contingencie in this orb are neither good nor bad, but merely indifferent to
free will, and are only matter or occasion of good and evil, yet ordered and
guided by the providence of God, as may appear by these particulars. On a time
it fell out, that king Pharaohs butler Genesis 40.
and baker had each of them a dream in one night; and that two years after
king Pharaoh Genesis 41.
had two dreams in one night, the interpretation whereof was the matter and
occasion of Joseph's great good and advancement. Again, it fortuned on a night,
that king Ahasuerus Esther 6.
could not sleep; whereupon he called for his chronicles to be read, and by
chance the record of Mordecai his discovery of the treason of Bigthana and
Teresh against the king was lighted on, which was the matter of Mordecais
advancement, and Gods Churches deliverance. By chance Achan saw a wedge of
Josh. 7. 21.
gold and a Babylonish garment in the spoil of Jericho, and stole them; which
turned to the utter extinction of him and his seed. Lastly, by chance David
walked upon the roof of his palace, from whence he espied Bathsh^^a washing her
self; by which sight he was so caught, that he not only committed filthy
adultery, but also cruel murder, which was a scarre upon him all his life
after, and retaliated 2. Sam. 12. 10, 11.
with punishments of like nature. Yet did not these objects of contingencie
more necessitate David and Achan to sin, then the temptation of Potiphars
wife could prevail upon Joseph, or the supposed stolen kid could cause Tobit
to entertain it, though he was both Tobit 2.
blind, and so poor that his wife labored for his living.

Now to prove contingencie to stand with holy Scripture, against the men which
attribute all to fate and necessity, my first argument shall be from the
Hebrew adverb of chance (...), which is often used in the old Testament, and by
Pagnine and Hierome translated, ne forte; and specially in the 91 Psalm, verse.
11, 12. where the speech is attributed to God himself, the author both of Fate
and Contingencie. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee
in all thy ways: they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest happily thou dash
thy foot against a stone. My second induction shall be from the Hebrew
conjunction (...), si, which formally argues chance, as may appear by this and
such like speeches in the old Law, Deuteronomy. 11. 13. If ye shall therefore hearken
unto my commandments. It is said If, because it was a great chance, if many of
them did. My third is from the Greek adverb (...), in the new Testament, Acts
5. 39. Lest happily ye be found to fight against God. Then so it might fall out,
and so again it might not fall out. Lastly, from the conjunction (...), sin or
si: as in Matthew. 11. 21. If the great works which have been done in you, had
been done in Tire and Sidon, they had repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
From hence our Savior insinuates, that the great works which were wrought in
Corazin and Bethsaida, might have been wrought in Tire and Sidon; therefore
this was contingent: and if it had been so, the one would have repented,
whereas the other did not; and this is another contingent, and the more
notable, in that the mean should have been all one between both without any
difference. Again, contingencie in event is expressed in Acts 3. 10. where the
people are said to be amazed at that which happened.

Further, contingencie is proved from the rule of justice: for if there were no
contingencie, then there could be no free will; and if no free will, then
neither praise nor dispraise, neither hope of heaven nor desert of hell:
because then men's hands should be so bound with the cords of necessity, that
they might not do otherwise then they do, and so deserve nothing. Therefore the
souls that are in heaven and in hell, neither merit nor demerit, because in
those states there are no contingencies, but all necessity: but they only are
worthy of praise or dispraise, of reward of glory, or retribution of
ignominy, which live here in this middle place of contingencie, unconfirmed
either in goodness or malice. And this is verified by the saying of
Ecclesiasticus upon the tried man, Let him be an example of glory, who Ecclus
31. 10, 11.
might offend, and has not offended; or do evil, and has not done it:
therefore shall his goodness be established. Lastly, this is proved from
absurdity: for if necessity should reign alone amongst us, without
contingencie; then all exhortations, promises, and threatenings in Gods word
should be idle: for that it is in vain to call upon them, where there is no
possibility to do otherwise then they do.

But though man's will be thus free in the orb of contingencies, as has been
proved; yet is it not absolutely free, but has only a conditionate freedom
under the orb of fate, and divine necessity in Gods providence, that is to
say, such a freedom as is subject to Gods will, the supreme moderatour and
governor of all things. And this the very heathen acknowledged, as the Orator
shows in the excuse of Pompey, At mihi quidem, si proprium and verum nomen
nostri mali quaeratur, fatalis quaedam calamitas incidisse videtur, and
improvidas hominum mentes occupavisse; ut nemo mirari debeat, humana consilia
divina necessitate esse superata. If the true and proper name of our evil be
sought, a certain fatal calamity to me seems to chop in, and so to occupy
the improvident minds of men, that no man ought to marvel, when humane
counsels are by divine necessity overcome. But to pass from humane frailty,
we affirm, that neither the will of angels, nor of Christ himself as he was
man, has an absolute liberty, (for which cause he said, Not as I will, but as
thou will) but Matthew. 26. 39.
only God, whose liberty of will is also a liberty of necessity, because it
can will nothing but what is good. And this kind of will is most noble, for
that it is of divine essence, which cannot alter, nor is subject to defect or
corruption. And in the order of causalitie this will again is most excellent,
because it is most absolutely free, not depending upon any other but it self.
Were the will of man in the orb of contingencie absolutely free, then it should
not depend upon Gods will, then it would not say, Thy will be done, and then
Gods will could not be omnipotent, because man's will might outgo it; then man
would strike at heaven, and break open hell if he could; then Phaetons horses
would rend their halters, and the course of nature would be overturned. But, as
it is in the proverb, God gives a cursed cow short horns: God gives to man such
a liberty of will as is answerable to his power, that is, that he shall not in
all things will what he would, nor be able to do what he will. But herein
stands his liberty and freedom, to do what he can, and will what he will in
the way of grace and goodness, wherein God will aid him to go beyond himself:
but in the doing of evil, God will not give him leave to do what he list; but
he so overruleth his will by his divine fate or decree, that he can do nothing
but what he will permit him to do, either for the just punishment of sin, or
for the expression of his power in making good of evil.

Thus then stands the liberty of the second will under the orb of the first
will, that it is always subject to it. And to demonstrate this to the
safeguard of both, man's will is compared to a multitude of birds, and Gods
providence to a wide cage, as we may imagine, of a mile or two over; in which,
some may fly south, some north, some east, some west, and all which way they
list; yet when they become to the cages bounds, they can fly no further. And
so is it with man's freewill: when it is come to the bounds of Fate, which God
himself has spoken, it can fly no further. And this is confirmed by these
evidences of Gods word, Who has resisted his will? Romans 9. 19. Prove. 19. 21.
Prove. 16. 1, 9. Intelliguntur haec loca de voluntate absoluta, non conditionata.
Many devices are in man's heart: but the counsel of the Lord shall stand. The
preparations of the heart are in man: but the answer of the tongue is of the
Lord. The heart of man purposes his way: but the Lord does direct his steps.

And if we would know what Fate is, it is the decree or counsel of Gods will
about the doing or leaving undone of all things that are to be done or left
undone to the worlds end. S. Thomas defines it thus, Fatum pro divina Part. 1.
quaest. 116. art. 1.
ponitur providentia omnia praeloquente. And his expositour Bonioannes thus,
Fatum est dispositio seu series causarum secundarum. And this is confirmed by
these testimonies: He spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it Psalm. 33. 9,
11.
stood. The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the thoughts of his
heart throughout all ages. Who works all things after the counsel of his
Ephesians. 1. 11.
own will.

But here it may be objected, How can man's Ob.
will be free, while it is subject to Fate or Gods will? It is answered,
Because it is neither forced Sol.
nor necessitated, but only ordered, disposed, and persuaded, as Solomon
expresses in the former allegations, and again in this, The kings Prove. 21. 1.
heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: he turns it
whithersoever it pleases him. Thus he turns it without any touch of
necessity or force, by offering to it such objects as are congruent and
acceptable to the kings will. As he that makes an oration to persuade men, does
not thereby take from them their free choice: so does Gods providence, by
adding of objects, and altering contingents after his own pleasure, dispose all
men's wills and ways to the right end of their own good, if they will yeed to
him; or to his own glory, if they will not turn.

Gods Power.
Next, for Gods Power, this must needs be omnipotent, because he made the world
and all things in it of nothing. Angels have for a time made themselves bodies
in which they appeared to the saints of the old world, and men have made all
the gorgeous buildings on earth: but how? the one of the air by them
condensed, and the other of wood and stone and other materials: but herein is
the power, to make of nothing, which is proper only to the omnipotent. Next,
he not only made all things of nothing; but he daily supporteth and moves all
things made, without any other aid then his own. The lives of all things move
in his life, and the virtue of all things is operative by his virtue. Alexander
conquered the world, but the power was Gods; Cyrus won Babylon, but the policy
was the Lords; and men wrought the seven wonders, and yet they were but Gods
instruments; in him they all moved. Therefore the Psalm says in general, If
thou hide thy face, they are tro^ubled; if thou take Psalm. 104. 29.
away their breath, they die, and return to their dust. If God should only
have made his creatures, and then immediately have left them to themselves, the
world would have grown old in one day. And whereas he made the world in six
days, as fast as he made the succeeding days works, the works of the former
days would have expired: for which cause it is no less virtue to the
Almighty, to sustain the world made, then to make it of nothing: and at this
the Apostle aimed, when he said, Bearing up Heb. 1. 3.
all things by his mighty word. The sustaining of the world is as it were a
continued creation: wherefore our Lord says in the Gospel, John 5. 17.
Hitherto my Father works, and I work: and that which God spoke in the
beginning, he speaks Genesis 1. 11.
still to this day, Bring forth fruit, and multiply.

So potent is he, that he works not only ordinarily, but extraordinarily by
working wonders, according to the Psalm, Qui facit Psalm. 72. 18.
mirabilia solus. He makes the Salamander to live in the fire, he causes the
Chameleon to live by the air, the island Delos to swim in the sea, the earth
to hang upon nothing, and the waters to fly in the midst of the air. Lastly,
he does not only wonders more then ever we have heard, but he is able to do
more Jer. 32. 27. Where is an essence and a faculty to work, something may
come between and hinder: but God is simple, all essence; therefore nothing may
come between him and his work.
then ever he did; and therefore he says, Is there any thing too hard for me?
There is nothing hard for him, because there is nothing to withstand him; there
is nothing hard for him, because he works not by hand and instrument, but by
word and power; there is nothing hard for him, because he studieth not what to
do, but understands all things afar off; there is nothing hard for him,
because he is never weary, as being all spirit and act, and no matter: lastly,
it is as easy for In the Babylonish furnace God separated between the fire and
the heat, which was the executive faculty, and so it could not burn. Dan. 3.
him to make a world, as for one of us to think a thought. And whereas our God
assumed the space of six days to make the world in, this was not for that he
could not have made it in a moment; but to teach us to take time in our works,
that they might not be untimely ripe; and next, to consider separately of his
several works, that the Jews might the more seriously praise him upon his
Sabbath, and to proportion a fit time for us between our works and his service.

Lastly, Gods power is thus described by the worlds parts; his eyes pierce to
the bottom of hell, his ears apprehend the stirring of the still thought, his
voice is the rending of the clouds, and roaring of the seas: when he moves,
the earth quaketh; when he frowneth, the course of nature is out of frame. Oh
blessed shall they be, which shall rest under his shadow, when he comes
terribly to shake things higher and lower.

But here is to be observed, that things of infirmity and defect, things
passive, things impossible and contradictorie, are not liable to Gods power;
and therefore it is of his omnipotency not to do them; as to sleep, to cease
to work, to suffer unwillingly, and to make contradictories to be both true.

Consectaries.
The consectaries are, first, that seeing God is the first mover, and the
fountain of life, all they which desire to live must seek life in his life, and
live in him and to him.

From his providence arises this, that whereas his foresight goes infinitely
beyond our own providence, therefore they which depend upon it, shall ever fare
better then their heart can wish.

From his power follows this, that for so much as it is above all our
expectation, therefore in case of difficulty, we may with faithful Abraham
believe in God beyond hope, and Romans 4. 18.
admit no reason where he has spoken. God is Psalm. 46. 1.
our ref^ge and strength, a very present help in trouble.

Gods Perfectness.
The fifth attribute is Gods Perfection; which to illustrate, is rightly to
distinguish of perfection: for perfection is twofold; one growing and having
degrees, the other without growth, and without degrees. The first is of the
creature, the second is of the Creator. The perfection of the creature is the
top of its growth: for when the creature is grown as much as it can grow, then
it is said to be perfect. This perfection is competent to men, and the Son of
man as he was man. Of men it is said, Matthew. 5. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, as
your heavenly Father is perfect. This is an exhortation to grow to our
perfection, which is finite, as Gods is infinite. Of the Son of Gods
perfection as he was man, it is said, Luke 2. 52. And Jesus increased in
wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man. The second perfection,
which is of God only, is the absolute perfection: for that which cannot be
better nor worse, must needs be absolutely perfect: but God is so good, that he
cannot be better; and again he is so good, that he cannot be worse: therefore
he must be absolutely perfect without degrees or growth. And this perfection is
from his essence, which, because it is infinite, can admit no increase; and
because it is eternal, it will suffer no decay.

First therefore he is perfect in his essence, because he is (...), Ero, vel
Sum. Secondly, Exodus 3. 14.
he is perfect in his understanding, because he is (...), the Word. Thirdly, he
is perfect in his Joh. 1. 1.
will, because he is (...), the Charity. Fourthly, 1. Joh. 4. 16.
he is perfect in strength, because he is (...), the Strength. And fifthly he
is perfect in all respects, because he is (...), All-sufficient. Genesis 17. 1.


Next, he is perfect, Quia perficit secundum tres canones, mensura, numero,
pondere; as the wise man has, Thou have ordered all things in Wisd. 11. 21.
measure, number, and weight. In measure, by geometrical proportion, in
altitude, longitude, latitude, and profunditie: in number, by arithmeticall
proportion in all due parts: in weight, by natures proportion, in soliditie,
raritie, and elementarie quality. And this is confirmed by Gods survey in the
creation, And Genesis 1. 31.
God saw all that he had made, and lo, it was very good, that is to say,
perfect. If he made all things perfect, then much more must he be perfect, who
is the author of perfection. He must be perfect, because he is without want,
and is fullness it self; In him dwells all the fullness Coloss. 2. 6.
of the Godhead bodily.

Though all creatures have their perfection in their kinds, wherein they bear
the image of their Maker; yet have they not an absolute and universal
perfection, but a particular, that is to say, so far only as they
participate of the first perfection. And this participation consists of
diverse degrees: from whence it follows, that the perfection of angels is
above the perfection of men, and the perfection of men above the perfection of
beasts, and the perfection of beasts above the perfection of plants; because
all these more or less participate of Gods perfectness, as they come nearer
to, or are further off his essence by degrees and portions: but in God there
are no degrees nor portions, because he participates of nothing, but all things
participate of him; therefore he only is absolutely perfect, that is to say,
fullness, according to that of S. John, Of Joh. 1. 16.
his fullness all we have received, and grace for grace: from whence are
convinced our impure Puritanes, who will admit a perfection to all creatures
save only to Christians. But in comparison of Gods perfectness, all are
imperfect. Therefore Eliphaz says of the angels, Job. 4. 18. Behold, he will
not credit his servants, and his angels he charged with folly. Some read, He
would put light to his angels. The noun (...) signifies both light and folly,
and both here implie defect: else why should God put light to them who have
light enough of themselves? Yea the angels light is but a made light, and a
borrowed light; and therefore in conference with Gods light it is imperfect,
and goes out before his.

Consectarie.
The consectarie is, that seeing God only is absolutely perfect, and that the
most perfect creatures have but a borrowed perfection, then why should any
stand upon their excellencies? What have thou (says the Apostle) 1. Cor. 4. 7.
which thou have not received? Then angels and men, kings and priests, ought
all to throw down their crowns of holiness and highness before him who is the
Ocean of perfection, as the four and twenty elders in heaven a state of
perfection do, Revel. 4. 10.

Gods Infinity.
The sixth divine attribute is Gods Infiniteness. And this the ancient
Philosophers thus defined, Infinitum est, extra quod nihil est. Aristotle and
his followers define it otherwise, Infinitum est, extra quod semper aliquid
est. The first put infinity in him that comprehends all things, extra quod
nihil est; and this is God, because nothing is without him, as the Poet
expresses, A Jove principium musae, Jovis omnia plena. The second place
infinity in that which goes beyond all things, extra quod semper aliquid est;
and this again is God only. For when we have cast our eyes all the world over,
yet there is still somewhat without, and this is God. Lastly, Divines show
infinity from the capacity of the receiver. Thus that is infinite, which
cannot be comprehended or received of any. Therefore of Athanasius in his Creed
God is called (...) incomprehensibilis. Further, God is infinite, because he is
not compounded of matter and form: for that which is in any matter, is
contracted and determined by its matter: but God, because he made all matter
and forms, is beyond all matter and forms; he comprehends them, but they cannot
comprehend him: he only therefore is infinite. All greater orbs receive within
and under them the less: but God, being the first and largest essence,
comprehending all things under him, cannot be received totally of any
inferior: therefore he must be infinite and incomprehensible.

That which has no bounds nor borders, must be infinite: but Almighty God
has no bounds, because nothing bordereth upon him, and there is nothing above
him to confine him. He has no adjacent, no equal, no corrivall: for this
cause the Logicians will not entertain him into any Predicament, but put him
alone by himself in the Transcendent, mounting above all things: for though he
may be apprehended of his inferior, yet he cannot be comprehended of his
compeer. And this his incomprehensivenesse and transcendencie, we show first in
regard of his understanding and will; secondly, in regard of motion; thirdly,
in regard of place; fourthly, in regard of time. In regard of understanding and
will, because at one act and instant he understands all things, and at the
same act and instant he wills all things. His understanding never preventeth
his will, and his will is never subsequent to his understanding; because they
have both but one present esse incomprehensible. His act is never abrupt, but
always one and permanent: therefore he only is the true (...), whose act,
end, and perfection is always in himself. In regard of motion Dionysius says,
Nec stat, nec movetur. He stands De Divin. Nomin. c. 9. (...).
not, because he is always moving his creatures; and he is not moved, because
there is nothing to stir him. He is primus motor; and if he move not, all
things lie asleep. In regard of place, he is incomprehensible, for that he is
every where and no where. He is every where, where there is a place; and he is
no where, where there is no place: and he must be in no place, because no place
can contain him. Every where speaks finite, because all places are created: but
no where speaks infinite, because it is not created. And though he be no where,
yet he is not out of himself; therefore he himself is infinite. Lastly, in
respect of time he is infinite, for that he had no beginning; and because he
had no beginning, therefore he can have no ending, a relatis. He has neither
terminum a quo, nor terminum ad quem: therefore in time also he is infinite.

And this infiniteness in God, is that which will suffer no man to see him as
in himself he is. No man shall see me, and live, says God. Exodus 33. 20.
Therefore when the Saints stood before God, they fell down upon their faces,
or else God held his hand before their faces, as he did unto Verse. 22.
Moses. The rest of Gods attributes, his truth, his goodness, his mercy,
justice, power and providence, we may in some measure endure: but his infinity
no creature can sustain, because it has no measure. If we look to the
antecedent of Gods eternity, after the first or second prospect, the rays of
our minds eyes are broken; if we look to the sequent, after our sight is
reflected from the heavens, we can see no further: further then the walls we
cannot go. If we look but upon the image of his infinity, which is his works
and his ways, our eyes begin to dazzle. Peter cried out at the draught of
fishes, Lord go from me, for I am a sinful man: and Luke 5. 8.
Paul cried out, O the depth both of the wisdom Romans 11. 33.
and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! Lastly, Job says, He does great things, and unsearchable, Job 9.
10, 11.
yea mavelous things without number. When he goes by me, I see him not; when
he passes by, I perceive him not.

Lastly, here the plausible description of Trismegistus (affirming God to be a
sphere, whose center is every where, and whose circumference is no where)
holds better with a metaphor of the creatures residence in God, then with any
formal verity or reason of infinity; because every where has relation to
place, which is finite, for that it is created: but in God there is nothing
finite. If therefore we will assign a center to the infinite, we must extend
it beyond every where, because the center must be proportionate to the
circumference: but in God there is no proportion, because he is all infinite:
therefore as his circumference is no where, so his center in proper speech must
be no where too. To which we may apply the doctrine of Dionysius in his book
of mystical Theology, cap. 4. Verius and subtilius omnia de Deo negari quam
affirmari.

Consectarie.
The consectarie use is, that, seeing God is above all our reach, therefore we
should never speak rashly or ex-tempore of him, like bold Puritanes, which many
times rather babble then speak; but with all reverence and maturity, like sober
Christians, and like to that of Solomon, Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let
thy heart be hasty Eccles. 5. 2.
to utter a thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth:
therefore let thy words be few.

Gods Eternity.
The seventh and last attribute is Gods Eternity, and has reference to time,
which is always flowing and running; and the further it goes, the more it
gets; and the more it gets, the more it argues its want and indigencie,
in that it needs: but eternity, as it can get nothing, so it needs
nothing, because it always is, and has neither antecedent nor subsequent, but
is one individual, having no parts, no more then Gods essence: for to be is
Gods eternity. Time has parts, the first, the middle, the last: as it had a
beginning, so it shall have an ending. Therefore time stands within eternity
as an inferior orb, and eternity is the supporter of it, so long as it shall
stand. Time is the shadow of eternity, and eternity the substance; therefore
time shall vanish with the shadow, because it is following eternity, as the
shadow follows the sun: but eternity cannot vanish, because it is a durable
substance, yea being it self. Eternity is one permanent instant, not admitting
division: it always was, and cannot cease to be. But here the question may be
made, that if God was ever, before either time or place, where then should God
be? The answer of Divines is, that before the creation he was in himself.
Tertullian says, Ante omnia Advers. Praxeam.
Deus erat solus, ipse sibi and mundus, and locus, and omnia: solus autem, quia
nihil extrinsecus praeter illum. Caeterum ne tunc quidem solus: habebat enim
secum quam habebat in semetipso rationem suam. By reason he means his
intellect. And further, he had not only with him then his intellect or
understanding, but he had also with him his will: so in all there were three,
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; to S. Thom. part. 1. quaest. 15. art. 3
which three the world and all things that now are, were then present in their
idea's.

But to return to Gods eternity, this must be a life, because it is life that
makes things to last. Therefore Boethius thus defines it, Aeternitas est vitae
interminabilis tota simul and perfecta possessio; Eternity is the possession
of an unterminable life whole together. This life must have no term: for if it
should, then God could not be God, because then either the previver or the
surviver would carry it away. If any thing had been before God, then that
previver had been God; or if any thing should be after him, then the surviver
would inherit. Wherefore it follows, that that which is always, must be God,
and so his life subject to no term.

And this eternity of God is expressed unto us in holy Scripture two ways;
privatively, and positively. Privatively in Melchizedech Christ's figure, who in
Heb. 7. 3. is said to have neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but is
likened to the Son of God, and continues a priest for ever. This is thus
said of him, not simpliciter and absolute, but respective; because he was but a
figure, and not the substance of eternity. And it is said of him so, for that
neither the beginning of his days nor the end of his life is in holy Scripture
discovered: but this is absolutely and simply true in the Son of God, because
he was before the day was; he was before the creation, when Isa. 43. 10
there was no distinction of time; and he shall be after the worlds
dissolution, when there shall be no more time, according to that of the angel
in Apocalypse 10. 6. who swear by him that lives for ever, that time should be
no more: for then time shall be turned into eternity. Therefore he which was
before the day and before time, and shall be after the day and after time, he
which has neither beginning nor ending, must needs be eternal. Positively he
is in Apocalypse called Alpha and Apoc. 22. 13.
Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last. If he be the
first, then nothing was before him; and if he be the last, then nothing shall
be after him. And from hence it follows (because it is absolutely spoken)
that he is Principium sine principio, and Finis sine fine, as the School
speaks.

But in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 10. it is said, that we also shall live together with him:
therefore we also shall be eternal. It is answered, that our life is not
eternal absolute, but participative; because if we should not live with
Christ, we should not live eternally. Again, man's eternity is but half an
eternity, because it is not vita interminabilis. For though man's life shall
have no end by enjoying Christ, yet it had a beginning at its first being.

Lastly, where Boethius says, that eternal life is simul tota, the whole
together; this shows that it has no partition, nor passion, neither of youth
nor age. And the image of this eternity is the sphere of the heavens, which
has no fracture in beginning or ending, but is all whole within it self, so
that you cannot say, Here it begins, or here it ends: from whence arises the
axiom in Schools, Spherica figura est perfectissima. Gods eternity is not like
our lower world: for it has neither orient nor occident, spring nor autumn,
youth nor age; but his life is all of one vigor, his life and durance is simul
tota, he has neither praeteritum nor futurum, but his ever-present esse.

From hence is this comfortable consectarie, that though it be an
impossibility for any creature to adequate God in his eternity, yet he has
ordained all his sons in Christ to partake of it by living with him
eternally. This is the Christians summum bonum, their last rest, their verum
delectabile.

Aeterno and omnipotenti Deo laus and gloria in secula seculorum.
AMEN.
A TREATISE Showing the Antichrist not to be yet come, Out of the 2. Chapter of
the second Epistle to the Thessalonians.
1. Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by our gathering together unto him,

2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor
by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ were at hand.


WHen S. Paul that blessed Apostle had in his former epistle taught the
Thessalonians the doctrine of the resurrection, the foundation of our faith and
hope in Christ; it may seem, some busy spirits stirred up by the enemy of
mankind, had gone about to weaken this strong foundation, to the future and
final subversion thereof, by adding false doctrine unto it. Whereas he had
taught them the certainty of our resurrection, they would confine it to a
short time. The devil their schoolmaster made this project, that if the
Thessalonians might be persuaded of the soon coming of Christ, then when they
should be frustrate of their expectation, they might make doubt of their faith,
from doubt fall to despair; and so their foundation should by degrees be
shaken, and in the end turn to nothing. And from hence are to spring the
mockers in S. Peter's second epistle and third chapter, saying, Where is the
promise of his coming? for since 2. Pet. 3. 4.
the fathers died, all things continue alike from the beginning of the creation.

Now whereas this project of Satan was so fatal to the subversion of our
faith; the blessed Apostle, as in cases of weightiest importance, compoundeth a
prayer, mixed with an adjuration, to bind the Thessalonians from this wrong
conceit. First, he prays them, We beseech you brethren: next he adjureth
them, by the coming of our Lord, and by our gathering together unto him. The
first is the period of our expectation, the second the consummation of our
happiness: by both these he beseeches and adjureth them, that they would not
hastily look for the day of Christ, nor design to themselves the time of his
coming, because this was not expedient for them, as he insinuates in the fifth
chapter of his first epistle. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1.


And to the end they might flee this main inconvenience, first he exhorts
them to constancy, that they would not be shaken in mind, nor troubled, that
is, that they would make no doubt of this doctrine; because he that doubts,
shakes in faith; and after shaking comes ruin and falling; and after
perturbation of mind follows confusion of mind, which is the subversion of
all the senses. Next, he forewarns them of three kinds of imposture or
cozenage; that is, by spirit, by word, by writing. By spirit men cozen, when
they father false doctrine upon the spirit; by word, when they feoffe it upon
true doctrine; and by writing, when they forge a letter, and put another man's
name unto it. Now denying the proceeding of impostours by these three, he
utterly bars the Thessalonians from admitting this false doctrine, that
Christ's coming was then at hand. And therefore he adjoyneth this general to
these particulars, Let no man deceive you Verse. 3.
by any means. Though they prophecy in the spirit, though they preach out of
the pulpit, though they show a letter signed as it were with mine own hand; yet
believe it not, according to the like monition, Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an
angel from heaven, preach unto you otherwise then that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed.

The two antecedents of Christ's coming.
For that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that
man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition.
The Apostle having bound the Thessalonians from the hasty expectation of
Christ's coming, now he gives them two infallible antecedents which must go
before; so that till these be come, Christ may not come: and when both these
are come, then the time which we look for must be at hand; so saying our
Savior, When ye see all these things, Matthew. 24. 33.
know that the kingdom of God is near, even at the doors. The first
antecedent is the falling away; the second and last is the uncovering of the
man of sin. These two, by reason of congruitie, must go before: for before
these two parts be acted, how should Christ come to judgment? Cuique sua est
tempestas, says Ecclesiastes; Every thing must have his time. Eccles. 3. 1.
Before Christ can judge the deficient, they must have a time to fall away in;
before Christ can crown the constant, they must have a time to be tried in;
before Christ can fight with his adversary, his adversary must first show
himself, and come into the field: so there must be a world before there can be
an end of the world: besides, in generation there is privation ever before
form; therefore in the breeding of Antichrist before the end defection must
precede.

The falling away.
Whereas the first antecedent is a falling away, we must enquire what is meant
by this. It Is not a falling away from the Roman empire, as some have imagined;
(for what has Christ empire to do with the Roman empire?) but it is a falling
away from the faith of the Gospel: it is the greatest defection that can be;
because it is a falling from Christ to the breeding of Antichrist. Thus S. Paul
expounds himself in 1. Tim. 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks evidently, that in
the latter times some shall depart from the faith. He says some, because all
shall not. But that this some shall be the greatest some, our Savior shows
in the Gospel, by an interrogation: But when the Luke 18. 8.
Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Defection spiritual
is like a river; the further it runs, the greater it grows: therefore the
fittest time for the great Antichrist is the last time.

Where the falling away is.
Next, the question is, where this apostasy is to be found; in what part of
the world: whether in the east church, or in the west church. Let us search the
new Testament, and see if we can find any thing for it there. First the Gospel
was preached to the Jews, many embraced it at the first, as we read in the
Gospel: but now they be all gone from it, looking for a new Messiah. Where is
the Church of the Corinthians, the Church of the Galatians, the Church of the
Ephesians, the Church of the Philippians, the Church of the Colossians, the
Church of the Thessalonians, to all which S. Paul wrote? what is become of the
twelve tribes, to which Saint James wrote? and whither are gone the seven great
Churches of Asia, to whom S. John wrote? All these East Churches founded by the
scripture, are fallen from Christ, and become Mahometans and Nestorians. Their
falling away was prophesied by S. John in the 2 of the Revelation. The Church
of the Ephesians was challenged for leaving their first love; and were
threatened with the removing of their candlestick, if they did not repent. The
Church of Pergamos was challenged for maintaining the doctrine of Balaam, and
the doctrine of the Nicolaitans; and was threatened to be fought against with
the sword of Christ's mouth. The Church of Thyatira was charged for suffering of
Jezebel to deceive the people; and was threatened to be cast into a bed of
affliction. The Church of Sardis was challenged for being then dead, or at
least a dying; and was threatened to be come upon, as a thief comes,
unexpectedly. The Church of the Laodiceans was challenged for that they were
neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm; and were threatened to be spewed out of
Christ's mouth. All these with all the Churches of Africa, as lamentable
experience proves, a long time ago are gone, in denying Christ totally, and in
receiving of circumcision the mark of the beast. Therefore here, that is, in
these Churches of the east (which at this day are all under the great Turk)
this apostasy, of which S. Paul speaks, of necessity must be understood.
Thus the Church which rose in the east like the moon in the firmament, is going
down in the west, expecting Christ's coming. Then from this great defection let
us acquit Christendom, whether they be Papists, Protestants, or Lutherans;
because though there be some differences amongst us in ceremonies and
expositions (which destroy not) yet still our head Christ by Baptism stands
upon our body, and the substance of the Gospel is entire and whole amongst us,
by retaining the articles of the faith, the volume of the new Testament, and
the practice thereof by faith and good life. But where Baptism is removed,
there is perfect apostasy, because there the head is cut off from the body:
And this is contrary to the commission of our Savior, Matthew. 28. 19.

The authors of the falling away.
To proceed in this point, next it is expedient to know the authors of this
defection, how long it has continued, and who is the upholder of it. For the
first, we find that the first author was the arch-heretick Arius, Ariani
Filium esse creaturam, Spiritum vero sanctum creaturam creatura, hoc est, ab
ipso Filio creatum volunt. Aug. lib. de Haeres.
who, as we read in S. Austine, held the Son of God to be a creature, and
the holy Ghost to be the creature of a creature. Hence he is called of S. Lib.
5. de Trinitat. (...). Socrat. Schol. lib. 7. cap. 29. (...), etc. Euagr.
Schol. l. 1. c. 2.
Hilarious Principium Antichristi, the beginning of Antichrist; and in the
Council of Sardis he is named (...), a fighter with Christ. The second author
was the heretic Nestorius, who affirmed Christ to be only man. And he was
termed Ecclesiae incendium, the firebrand of the Church, as we read in
Socrates; and, officina blasphemiarum, the shop-house of blasphemies, as we
read in Euagrius. The third and last author was the false prophet Mahomet,
who by the help of Sergius the Nestorian Monk forged his Alcoran, in which as
in the sink of heresies is contained the perfection of all apostasy. This
falling away began in the reign of Heradius the Roman Emperor, who lived in
the year of our Lord 637. And from that time to this the issue of defection
has continued, spreading it self over Asia and Africa, being aided by the
great Turk the successor of Mahomet, who daily increases the monarchy of
this defection, by captiving of Christians, making them his Basshaws and
Janissaries, and by taking in of Christian kingdoms, to more then the third
part of Europe. And if Christian Kings do not by divine providence combine
themselves against this beast, it is greatly to be feared, that he will lick up
all Christian kingdoms, as an ox licketh up the grass of the field.
Polychronicon shows, that by Polychron. lib. 5. cap. 14.
the Christians discord this beast was bred of the Hagarenes. And M. Fox in his
history Act. and Mon. p. 738.
of Turks affirms, that the first letting in of Turks into Europe, was by
dissension of the Princes of Greece. Discordia cuncta ruunt. Be wise now
therefore O ye kings: be instructed ye judges Psalm. 2. 10.
of the earth. And you Christians leave off your divisions, which are the
bridge for the Beast and Antichrist to pass over to us. The Polychron. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
river Euphrates was a famous defense unto Babylon: but after that king Cyrus
had divided it into four hundred and threescore channels, the enemy at ease
went in at the empty and dry hollow, and won the city before invincible.
And right so, if we Christians shall cut our main current into many small
creeks, by dividing our selves into diverse sects of religion; there is great
likelihood that the Turk will overrunne us all. That speech of some Christians
has always been held of me for profane and heathenish, that they had rather
live under the Turk, then under the Pope, or the king of Spain. But what is
their reason? because under the Turk they may have the liberty of their
conscience. And what will their conscience-libertie unbounded bring them to? to
break open hell gates, to live without faith, without law, to do what they
list, to dispute of the Trinity, and to deny Christ's divinity, as the
Transilvanians and Hungarians Danaeus de haeres. cap. 49.
Turkishly and Jewishly have begun. For the passion of Christ, good Christian
brethren, let us give over our hostile dissensions. When two of the Hebrews in
Egypt fought and quarrelled, what said Moses unto them? Sirs, Acts 7. 26.
ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another? The Papists and we call one
God our Father, one Lord our Savior, one holy Ghost our Sanctifier; and we
have but one mean to unite us into this heavenly Unitrinitie, which is holy
Baptism: how then should we not be brethren? and why then should we wrangle
and fight one with another? Said not Abner to Joab in that hot conflict of
brethren, Shall the sword devour for ever? know thou not 2. Sam. 2. 26.
that it will be bitterness in the latter end? how long then shall it be, ere
thou bid the people return from following their brethren? If we shall fight and
quarrel so long, that Ottoman come in to make us his slaves (because we will
not enjoy Christ's peace;) will not this be bitter? Oh blessed Jesus, raise up
one to bid the people return. Blessed be that peacemaker among men, as the holy
Marie is blessed among women. Oh sweet Jesus, smell a savor of rest. Nulla
salus bello, pacem te poscimus omnes. Virg. Aeneid. 11.
There is no health in war, (says the Poet) we all desire peace. Otium bello
furiosa Thrace, Hor. Carm. lib. 2. Od. 16.

Otium Medi pharetra decori.


Shall furious Thracians and barbarous Medes desire rest from war, and we
Christians delight in combats and quarrels? are we not yet full with more
then fourscore years blood? If we withdraw not, will not Christ withdraw from
us? Oh that the prophecy were revived, to beat our swords into plowshares,
Isa. 2. 4.
and our spears into pruning hooks, that we might unlearn to fight; that the
wolf might Isa. 11. 6.
dwell with the lamb, and the leopard lie with the kid, and the lion and the
fat beast might feed together! Seek peace, and ensue it, says David the Psalm.
34. 13.
sweet singer: and the blessed Paul says, If it be Romans 12. 18.
possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men. Is it not possible
that Christians should agree? There be differences which hinder. What then? In
the body though one leg be lame, yet if the other set forward, that will
dragge after as well as it can. Among the Greeks there were diverse dialects,
and yet they had but one language; they held together in the main. So though
Papists have a letter more then we, or we one letter for another; yet we may
hold together in the radix. If they sing, Gloria Deo inexcelsis; we may say,
Glory be to God in the high heavens. The founder of Churches S. Paul, he could
bear with differences, expecting Gods reformation: Let us therefore, as many as
be perfect, be thus minded; Philip. 3. 15.
and if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same unto you. Then
for the present let us be patient; and afterward God will show where the error
lies. Why should we presume so much of our skill while we are in our nonage,
and know but 1. Cor. 13. 9.
in part, and prophecy but in part? Have not better men then we been deceived?
Did not Elias say, Lord they have killed thy prophets, 1. King. 19. 10
and dug down thine altars; and I, even I only am left, and they seek my
life to take it away. Yet God told him, that he had reserved Verse. 18.
seven thousand men that had not bowed their knee to Baal. And did not that
blessed vessel Saint Paul say, that he verily thought in himself, Acts 26. 9.
that he ought to do many contrary things against the name of Jesus of
Nazareth? Then let neither side be too stiff; but let us try all things, let
us follow our leaders, let us hold that which we have till we see better. But
above all things let us put on charity, which is the bond of perfection. Then
as the clear eye helps the blear eye, the sound hand aids the withered hand,
and the comely parts cover the uncomely; so shall we Christians cover one
another infirmities, and help each other, till Christ mend us all. Let
Protestants love the Papists, because they have kept the holy oracles and
sacred mysteries for them; and let Papists love the Protestants, because they
are descended from them, wear the badge of the covenant with them, and by a
light and oblique dissent provoke them to better life and more refined
learning. Have not dissenting Fathers and sliding Scholists been always born
with in points of religion?

To come again to the defection, it is a matter not unneedfull to know, by what
means the falling away was first broacht, and then dispersed. And this was by
preaching of heresies and false doctrines. Never were so many heresies set on
foot, as in the first five hundred years after Christ, when preaching was at
the most. Then preaching, of its own nature, is indifferent, and may as soon be
abused as well used. Therefore the managing of it is not for all men, but only
for such as are of a stayed head, long understanding, and good life. It is for
men of age, who are able to digest strong meat, and through long custom have
their wits Heb. 5. 14.
exercised to discern both good and evil. The more dangerous an instrument is,
the more careful we should be into whose hands we put it. Now the word of God,
Heb. 4. 12. is compared to a two-edged sword: which if it be put into many men's
hands, some will do as much hurt with it, as some do good. Experience of former
times, and exclamation of our days prove this.

The second Antecedent.
And that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition.
Having spoken of the first antecedent, which is the falling away; it follows
to treat of the second, which is the unmasking of the man of sin, and is
imminent to the worlds end. This man of sin, by general consent, is the
great Antichrist, expressed by his description, in opposing himself against all
that is called God, Verse. 4.
or that is worshipped: but Christ is not only called God, but is the true
God, and worshipped; and therefore the man that opposes himself to him
totally, must be the Antichrist. But here we must take heed, what manner of
Antichrist we mean; because there are many Antichrists, as S. John teaches in
his 1. epist. 2. chap. verse. 18. Little children, it is the last time, and as
ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists.

These Antichrists were the heretics of S. John's time, to whose number we are
to refer all the rest which have followed, as also all the persecuting
Emperors, from Nero to the Turkish Emperor Achmeth, sending defiance to the
renowned Christian king Sigismund of Poland, in the year 1612. Christ is two
ways opposed; by heresy, and tyranny; the one fighting against the body, the
other against the soul of Christ in his members. These Antichrists are the
lesser Antichrists, which in certain parts, and modo quodam, oppose themselves
to Christ: but the man of sin, of whom S. Paul speaks, is the great
Antichrist, who is an universal opponent both in heresy and tyranny to
Christ and his whole kingdom.

Antichrist one man.
Next we must enquire, whether this Antichrist is to be taken for one man, or
for a state or kingdom; as some would have the reign of Popes, some the
reign of Turks to be the Antichrist; and some would make Antichrist a twin,
like the image of Janus, which has two faces, and looks contrary ways;
affirming the Turk to be the elder brother of Antichrist, and the Pope the
younger. But to such conceits I cannot yield.

First, by reason of the denomination, which is (...), and not (...), that is,
a contrary Antichristus est nomen personale a persona Christi.
Christ, and not a contrary kingdom. Christ was but one person: therefore his
great and direct opposite must be but one person too.

Secondly, because my text calls him (...), that man of sin, that son of
perdition, which Beza translateth, homo ille sceleratus, filius ille
perditionis, which signifies that wicked man, that son of perdition; and not
those wicked men, those sons of perdition. And therefore Antichrist, as he is
here described quoad literam, must be but one person in the singular number.

Thirdly, this is further confirmed by conference of Scripture, Joh. 5. 43.
where our Savior prophesying of Antichrists coming, speaks in the singular
number, and in the particular: I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me
not: if another shall come in his own name, him will ye receive. Our Redeemer
here makes no feigned supposition, but a true one; which shall come to pass,
because he is no trifler, but the God of prophecy and truth. And that here he
intends Antichrist, it appears, because the Jews to this day look for their
Messiah; and therefore their Messiah must be the Antichrist-Messias, for that
there can be but one true Messiah.

Fourthly, this appears, because Antichrist shall come in his own name, and
not in the name of any God; for that it is said, Who 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
opposes himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped. And
thus it is prophesied of him, Dan. 11. 36. He shall not regard the God of his
fathers, nor regard any God; for he shall magnify himself above all.

Fifthly, from hence also it appears, that Antichrist shall be but one
person, because our Savior here opposes to himself another man in the
singular number; and so he opposes person to person, and not kingdom to
kingdom, or sect to sect. As Christ therefore was one man; so that man of
sin, which is the great Antichrist, must be but one man too: and it is
evident that the Jews expect but one Christ, and not many Christ's.

Sixthly, S. John, in his first epistle and second chapter, distinguishes the
great Antichrist Verse. 18.
from the multitude of Antichrists, by the singular number. Little children, it
is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now
there are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time; that is
to say, the last time is now entering. Where ye see a manifest distinction
between (...), and (...), between them that were present, and him that was to
come.

If we should make the Antichrist a state of men, or a reign of men; then we
should confound S. John's distinction between the Antichrist and the multitude
of Antichrists, which are the forerunners of the main Antichrist. And then we
should feign a huge and Chimerick Antichrist, who with his hands should
apprehend the Apostles time, and fasten his feet in the end of the world. Then
again we should make S. Paul and S. John to jarre, if the one should affirm him
already to be come, and the day of Christ to be instant; and the other at the
same time to adjure the Thessalonians, that by no means they should admit this,
but expect the falling away first, and the removing of the Roman empire. And
to reconcile S. John with S. Paul about the last 1. Joh. 2. 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2.
time and Christ's coming, we say that S. John intended by the last time the
last age of the world, which then was in inchoation, to stir them up to
preparation; and not the last time precisely, because we know there have been a
thousand and six hundred years since.

Seventhly, this is proved from Antichrists figure in the 11 and 12 of Daniel,
upon which Calvine affirms Daniel to speak of Antiochus Epiphanes according
to the letter, and allegorically of Antichrist whose person Antiochus did
present; and so commonly the ancient Fathers understand. But this Antiochus in
the seventh chapter of that book is not called a kingdom or reign, but one
little horn besides the ten horns of the fourth beast, as appears in the 8
verse; and one king besides those ten kings which stood up out of the fourth
kingdom, as Daniel expounds in the 24 verse. This fourth kingdom or fourth
beast was the reign of the Seleucians in Asia, from which the holy nation
received many mischiefs; and the little horn was Antiochus, who plagued the
Jews above all the rest. From whence arises this argument, that if Antiochus
the figure of Antichrist was but one man; then Antichrist, which must answer to
his figure, must be but one man too. And to this agrees S. John's prophecy in
Apoc. 13. 17. where a particular name and a particular number is given unto him.

Lastly, this is showed from the circumstance of time. For Antichrist is to
reign but three years and a half; as appears in Dan. 7. 25. where Antiochus
is foretold to reign over the holy nation, until a time, and times, and the
dividing of a time, which is three years and a half. And with this consents
the prophecy of Antichrists reign under the Dragon in the 12 of the
Revelation; where the woman, that is, the Church, is said to be nourished in
Verse. 14.
the wilderness, for a time, and times, and half a time. To this is added the
treading down of the holy city by the same Antichrist for the space of forty
two months, and the prophesying of the two witnesses in the same time by the
space of a thousand two hundred and threescore Verse. 2, 3.
days, as it is manifest in the 11 chapter of the same book. All which
several accounts by years, months, and days, make but three years and a
half, as that most judicious Father S. Austine most boldly delivers. And with
this further agrees the prophecy of Christ concerning Antichrists end of
days (as appears by alluding to Daniel, about the abomination of desolation
set in the holy place, that is to say, of the sitting of Antichrist in the
temple of God, as S. Paul expounds it) And except those days should be
Matthew. 24. 22.
shortened, no flesh should be saved. But here we see these days to be
shortened, by the last year cut asunder in the midst. And this is more
illustrated by reason of congruitie: for as Christ preached but three years
and an half; so it is not meet that Antichrist should preach more, lest he
should seem to prevail upon Christ.

The testimonies of Fathers confirm this. Irenaeus in the end of his 5. book
has these words, Antichrist shall reign three years and Cum vastaverit
Antichristus hic omnia in hoc mundo, regnans annis tribus and mensibus sex, and
sederit in templo Hierosolymis, tunc veniet Dominus de coelis in nubibus in
gloria Patris.
six months; and then shall the Lord come from heaven.

Hierome upon the 7 of Daniel has these, Tempus annum significat: Tempora,
juxta Hebraici sermonis proprietatem, qui and ipsi dualem numerum habent, duos
annos praefigurant: Dimidium autem temporis sex menses, quibus sancti potestati
Antichristi permittendi sunt: ut condemnentur Judaei, qui non credentes
veritati susceperunt mendacium. A time signifies a year: times, according to
the property of the Hebrew speech, which has the duall number, prefigureth
two years: but half a time six months, during which time the saints shall be
permitted to the power of Antichrist: that the Jews might be condemned, who
believing not the truth, have received a lie.

S. Augustine in his 20 book of the city of God, and 23 chap. says, The most
cruel reign Antichristi adversus ecclesiam saevissimum regnum etc.
of Antichrist against the Church, that it is to be sustained for a very short
time, he that reads these things, though he be half asleep and half awake, is
not suffered to doubt: because A TIME, AND TIMES, AND HALF A TIME, is one
year, and two years, and half a year; and so three years and an half. This
also appears by the number of days afterward put down; and Dan. 12. 7, 11
Revel. 11. 2.
sometime in Scripture this is declared by the number of months. From these
testimonies it is clear, that if Antichrist in his reign shall not exceed
this prescribed time, then it is not probable that he should be more then one
man.

But against this computation it is objected, Ob.
that the foresaid prophesies of years, months, and days, are to be
multiplied and understood according to the prophecy, Ezekiel. 4. 6. where is
said, I have given thee a day for a year. Then these years, months, and
days, will fetch in a long succession of Popes into Antichrists chair.

I answer, Then the foresaid Fathers and all Sol.
the rest (for all in this point agree in one) were much overseen in not seeing
this prophecy to be so much against them. Next, I answer, This is a particular
prophecy, and no general rule to rule other prophesies, I have given thee a
day for a year, and so I have not done to the rest of my prophets: for if
times should be understood of years, and then every day in the year should be
multiplied again into so many years more as there be days in every year;
then where it is prophesied of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 32.
that seven times should pass over him in his expulsion from his kingdom, it
should follow, that he was banished two thousand five hundred and fifty five
years; which are more years then he ever lived by a thousand at the least:
and thus the prophecy of his restoration should be utterly false.

But these times in Daniel must be understood only of years, as Tremellius
and Junius note upon Dan. 4. 13. after our division of chapters; but upon the
16, as they begin their chapter. Again in the 11 of Daniel, verse 13, in the
text, (...)
he reads exactis illis temporibus, id est, annis, following the Hebrew
original. And thus again it is noted in our Church-bible in the margin of the
same chapter and verse, at the end of times of years. Therefore Revel. 12. 14.
during the great persecution of Antichrist, caused by the devil the old
serpent, the woman, Irenaeus, Hieron. August. Tremel. Junius, in locum.
that is, the Church, is provided for, but for a time, and times, and half a
time, that is, but for three years and an half, as both ancient and modern
interpreters consent.

The second prophecy of the durance of Antichrists reign is by months,
Revel. 11. 2. And the holy city shall they tread under foot two and forty
months. This the opponent will not Ob.
understand of bare months as the Fathers expound, which make but three years
and an half; but they will alter the property, and turn months into so many
days as be in forty two months; and then they will turn days again into
years, that is, 1260 days, which are in forty two months, into 1260 years.

Here I would demand of these men, what Sol.
rule or warrant they have in any part of Gods word, to turn months into
days, and then days into years. I read in Levit. 25. 8. where God gave this
rule to the Israelites, to number years by weeks or sabbaths: Thou shall
number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, and the space of seven sabbaths of
years will be unto thee nine and forty years. Now let them in like manner
show where God has given a rule to number years by months resolved into
days, as here we read of a sabbath of years; that so there might be a month
of years too; and then am I confined. Otherwise they make rules out of their
own brain, and add unto Gods word.

The third prophecy of the durance of Antichrists reign is by days, Revel.
11. which days are there expressed to be 1260. and these days they turn into
so many years, to serve their own turn.

Here again I require their rule. They offer Gods direction to Ezekiel, I have
appointed thee Ezekiel. 4. 6.
each day for a year. I reply, God did not appoint Ezekiel this rule to be a
general rule to number by; but to lie and sleep upon his left side, and upon
his right. For because it had been too long for him to lie and sleep openly for
a sign to the Israelites, three hundred and ninety years on his left side,
and again to lie forty years on his right, to signify so many years of
punishment, according to the years of their sleeping in sin; because, I say,
this had been too long a time (if not impossible) for the Prophet to make this
sign; therefore God for his ease appointed him a day for a year. And because
these days were not given to Ezekiel to number by, but to signify by;
therefore both Tremellius, and Junius, and our Geneva translatours upon the 8
of Daniel and 14 verse. do not take days for years, as Moulin and others would
have us; but for natural days: where when the question was asked how long the
vision of taking away of the daily sacrifice, and the desolation and treading
down should continue; it was answered, Unto the evening and morning two
thousand and three hundred, that is, unto two thousand and three hundred days,
as it is in the Church-bible, agreeing to that, Genesis 1. 5 And the morning and
the evening were the first day. Now if these two thousand and three hundred
evenings and mornings, which make two thousand and three hundred days, should
be taken for two thousand and three hundred years, as these men would have it,
the Universitie of Divines would cry shame upon it; because it is palpably
known that Antiochus, by whom this abomination of desolation was set up, and
the holy city trodden under foot, did not live the tenth part of these years.
See Psalm. 90. 10.
Therefore our Geneva note upon this text says honestly and truly, that is,
until so many natural days be past, which make six years, three months,
and an half: and with this Tremellius and Junius do for the most part agree,
expounding thus, annos sex, tres menses, and dies ferme octodecim.

Again, in the last chapter of Daniel (where is prophesied not of the whole
time of treading down of the holy people as before, but only of the taking
away of the daily sacrifice, and setting up of the abomination of desolation,
which was the statue of Jupiter Olympius, as we read in 2. Mac. 6. 2.) there
is put down in the text a thousand two hundred Dan. 12. 11.
and ninety days: this Tremellius and Junius interpret anni tres, menses
septem, and dies quasi tredecim; that is, three years, seven months, and, as
it were, thirteen days. But if you shall number the thousand two hundred and
ninety days for a thousand two hundred and ninety years; then nothing will
fit: and then you must extend the abomination and desolation many hundred
years after the death of Antiochus; the text in the next verse being against
it, saying, Blessed is he which waits and comes to the thousand three
hundred and thirty five days, that is to say, to forty five days after, as
Tremellius and Junius interpret; because Antiochus Epiphanes should then be
dead, and then Antiochus Eupator his son granted to the Jews full peace and
free liberty of their religion, as you may read in 2. Mac. 11. 22. Which
thing was done the same year that his father died in.

From these two examples out of Daniel, the numbering of days for years, to
cross the Fathers, and to serve their private desires, is found to be very
false; and, that Ezekiels rule was peculiar to himself. And from the last
prophecy, to the comfort of Christ's people, I observe, that when Antichrist
shall come, his time shall not be long, as is before declared by S. Augustine:
because under Antiochus the De Civitate Dei lib. 20. cap. 23. Dan. 12. Apoc.
11. 2.
temple was profaned but 1290 days; and in the Apocalypse it is prophesied,
that under Antichrist the court of the temple and the holy city should be
trodden under foot but 42 months, which are 30 days fewer. And here it is
worth the observing, how near Antiochus time over the Synagogue, Christ's time
over the Church, and Antichrists time in the end of the world, do conspire in
one; all being about three years and a half, as Scriptures have expressed, and
the learned computed.

But against this computation it is objected, Ob.
that if it be admitted to stand so near to Christ's coming to destroy
Antichrist, as in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. is expressed; then the day of Christ's coming
to judgment may be known: which in Matthew. 24. 36. is denied.

I answer, This consequent is not good. First, Sol.
because we have no warrant in Gods word, when this account of years, months,
and days is to begin: wherefore the beginning being but conjecturall, the end
can be but conjecturall too; and so nothing certain. Secondly, no Scripture
has revealed that the day of Christ's coming shall be tangent to these three
years and half, as if it were to follow the next day after; because the Gospel
has interjected certain signs and prodigies between Antichrists persecution
and the end of the world, saying, And immediately after the tribulation of
Matthew. 24. 29, 30.
those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man.

To return to the demonstration of Antichrist one man, this is further proved
from the name Antichrist, which signifies an opposite Adversarius.
to Christ. Now a sect or kingdom is not so proper an opposite to Christ, as
one person is opposite to another. Should the opposition be in a kingdom or
sect, then the Mahometicall kingdom and the sect of Arius should be the
Antichrist; because these principally oppose Christ, in denying him to be God.
But the Fathers understand Antichrist of one man opposite to Christ in person
and qualities, in whom shall inhabit the devils malice and nature corporally,
as in Christ does inhabit the Godhead corporally. Thus properly shall person
Col. 2. 9.
be opposite to person; one Christ, one Antichrist.

The description of Antichrist.
Verse. 3. And that man of sin be revealed, that son of perdition, who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he does sit as God in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God.
These words are the description of Antichrist; in which, as in a table, ye may
see his stature, complexion, and portraiture limmed to the life. First, he is
called by an emphasis that man, that is, that singular man singled from all
other men, as having no equal. He is that man of sin, quia totus ex peccato:
He is made of sin; sins are his materials. Other sinners have some good
parts in them, though but few: but as there is no goodness in the father of
sin, so there is no more in the son of sin; for he is a great mass or
mountain of sin. Him does Irenaeus thus anatomize in his 5. book and 23
chapter; Diaboli virtutem suscipiet Antichristus, qui veniet ut impius and
injustus, sine lege quasi apostata, iniquus and homicida quasi latro,
diabolicam apostasiam in se recapitulans, idola seponens, ad suadendum quod
ipse sit Deus; se autem extollens unum idolum. Again, in his 24 chapter he
has, Omnis nequitia, dolus, and vis apostatica confluit in Antichristum.
Antichrist shall take up the Devils virtue, who shall come as unjust and
impious, without law like an apostate, wrongful and killing like a thief,
engrossing in himself Diabolical apostasy, putting away idols to persuade
that he is God, and extolling himself the only Idol. All wickedness, deceit,
and force apostaticall, flow together into Antichrist.

Verse. 3. That son of perdition, (...), that son of destruction.
In that he is called that son of destruction, this argues his relate
father, for he is son and heir to the Devil. He was a murderer from John 8.
44.
the beginning, as S. John says; and the same Apostle in Apocalypse the ninth
calls him in Hebrew Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, Verse. 11.
that is, the destroyer. Now of this destroyer Antichristus est universorum
perditio, id est, natus ad hoc ut perdat alios, and tandem ipse perdatur; qui
scilicet homo pestifer adversatur Christo, ideo vocatur Antichristus. Anselm.
in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Psalm. 49. 8.
comes this son of perdition. And he is so called, as Anselm says, because
he destroys others both with temporal death, and with false faith. Them that
will not yield unto him he will destroy with death, and them that yield to him
he will destroy with false faith. This of the twain is the greatest
destruction; because the first is of the body, which may be repaired; but the
second is of the soul, which cannot be restored. Therefore the Psalmist says,
It cease for ever. And because Antichrist cannot kill the second way, but by
yielding; therefore our Master Christ bids us not to fear him: Fear ye not
Matthew. 10. 28.
them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear
him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

Verse. 4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped.
Hitherto of Antichrists materials; now follows Homo peccati, in quo fons
omnium peccatorum est: and filius perditionis, id est, diaboli; ipse est enim
universorum perditio: qui adversatur Christo, and ideo vocatur Antichristus.
Hieron. Algas. quaest. 11.
his form, whereby he is distinguished from others. And this consists in
these two points, that is, in his opposition and exaltation. From his
opposition he takes his name, from his exaltation he has his actus or (...)
for pride is the spirit of sin. In this he outgoeth others, and in this he
shows himself to be indeed the Antichrist, that is, the man that is most
opposite to Christ. For Christ was the most humble man that ever lived; because
when he was in the form of God, he took upon him the form of man: but
Antichrist being a base man shall take upon him the form of God; in which
arrogancy and insolency he shall outrunne the most insolent that ever were.
Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord? but he Exodus 5. 2.
shall say, I am the Lord. Sennacherib said, Has 2. King. 18. 33
any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king
of Ashur? but he shall promise to his followers the joys of Fox in Apo. 9.
Paradise like a God. Alexander, he sought Justin. lib. 11.
the kindred of the gods: but Antichrist, he shall not respect any God, but
magnify himself above all. Antiochus the figure of Antichrist, 2. Mac. 6.
Polychron. 5. Aetate de vita Antiochi.
he set up the statue of Jupiter in the Temple: but Antichrist, he shall set
himself up in the Temple; he shall exalt himself above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped. Here is a full opposition, and a full exaltation. It is
full in the parts, and it is full in the main. It is full in the parts, because
he shall exalt himself above all that is called God; that is, above all titular
gods, or inferior gods, as Monarchs, Hieron. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Kings, Judges, and Idols. In the main he shall exalt himself above the only
true God, where it is said, or that is worshipped, (...), aut numen. Against
all these he shall Act. 17. 23.
proceed, not only like a Thraso, by way of bragging and boasting; but by way
of opposition, that is, so seeking to set up himself, as thereby to throw all
other gods down. Here is the Dragons throne and power to do two Revel. 13. 5.
and forty months. And this is further demonstrated by these testimonies of
S. Chrysostom: (...). In 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 3.
He (that is, Antichrist) shall not lead any into idolatry, but he shall be
an opposite to God, and shall destroy all gods, and shall command himself to be
worshipped for God, and shall be set in the temple of God. And again, (...)
Theoph. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Professing himself to be God above all.

Antichrists seat.
Verse. 4. So that he as God does sit in the temple of God, showing himself that
he is God.
In these words Antichrists seat and end is set down, the mark that he shoots
at; that is, to show himself to be God. Because he cannot be God in deed, he
will be God in show. Therefore he shall be the arch-hypocrite. We read that
Satan transformeth himself into an angel of light: but Antichrist, being more
impudent, shall transform himself into God. And to do this, he shall take the
most gainsome way: for he shall usurp Gods house, and there place himself as
the proper owner. If my counter fail me not, he shall erect his throne in the
Sanctum Sanctorum, the most holy place, where the ark of the covenant in the
old law stood, where were the cherubims and the mercie-seat. From hence he
shall give oracles, and receive the vows and prayers of his seduced crew, with
the greatest devotion and prostration they can devise. Some of the Fathers say,
that this seat shall be the temple at Jerusalem, which Antichrist shall labor
to reedifie, that there he might keep his court; and some, that he shall sit in
the Churches of Christians; and some, that he shall usurp both; which I deem to
be the likeliest.

Irenaeus says, When Antichrist shall sit in Lib. 5.
the Temple at Jerusalem, then shall the Lord come. Hippolytus martyr, He shall
build the (...) Orat. de fine mundi. Catech. 15.
temple at Jerusalem. S. Cyril of Jerusalem thus, (...). Antichrist shall hate
idols, that he may seat himself over the temple of God: he means, he shall
attempt to make up the dissolved temple of the Jews; God forbid that it should
be this wherein we are. Hilarious, Com. 25. in Matthew.
A Judaeis susceptus, loco sanctificationis insistet; Antichrist being received
of the Jews, shall make the holy place his abode. Sedulius says, Templum In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Hierosolymae reficere tentabit, He shall go about to Quaest. 11. ad Algasiam.
repair the temple at Jerusalem. Hierome, He shall sit in the temple of God,
either at Jerusalem, as some think, or in the Church, as we more truly
suppose. S. Chrysostom, to whom I attribute In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
most, says, (...), etc. He shall command himself to be worshipped for God,
and to be Romanum nomen, quo nunc regitur orbis, tolletur de terra, and
imperium in Asiam revertetur, ac rursus Oriens dominabitur, atque Occidens
serviet. Lactan. de Divin. pr. libr. 7. cap. 15.
placed in the temple, not only at Jerusalem, but also in the Churches. He
shall seat himself in the temple, to give satisfaction to the Jews his
principal followers: and he shall place himself in the Church to oppose the
Christians: to the one he shall counterfeit the Messiah; to the other he shall
disclose himself to be the Antichrist. And this sense does Theodoret and
Theophylact follow. Lactantius says, In Antichrists time, the chief kingdom
shall be in Asia; the east shall rule, and the west shall obey. And Irenaeus
has, Antichrist on a sudden shall Irenaeus lib. 5.
rush into diverse kingdoms of the Roman empire to challenge a kingdom to
himself. Sibyl says, that the greatest terror and fury of his Sibyl. orac.
lib. 8.
kingdom shall be by the banks of Tybur.

(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
A king shall rise with whitish head,
and neighboring seas name bear,
Viewing the world with poisoned foot,
obtaining gifts by fear.
All mysteries of magic arts
he shall exactly know;
An infant god himself he will show;
what is worshipped here below
He will deface, and then begin
his errors to unfold.
Then all shall mourn like turtle sole,
which do this beast behold:
Then fathers grave with children small
shall direful fates blaspheme,
Alas, alas, thus howl and curse,
on banks of Tyburs stream.
Thus far of Antichrists seat; and next follows his ostentation, showing
himself that he is God. Because he cannot be God in deed, he will seek to be
God in show. He shall be but an earthen God, (...), as S. John describes him,
Revel. 11. 4. These are the two Diabolus est deus mundi, 2. Cor. 4. 4.
Antichristus est Deus terrae, Apoc. 11. 4. Vide ejus antithesin Apoc. 11. 13.
(...).
olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth.
Beza translateth passively, put before the God of the earth: signifying that
they are so placed by the true God against the false God; thus agreeing with
the adverb (...), e regione, vel, ex adverso posita, placed overthwart to him.
Wherefore for all his ruff in his forty two months time, yet he shall not
have his full will and pleasure; because Gods two witnesses shall interrupt
him, by prophesying against him, and by vexing his earthen worshippers with
plagues 1260 days, which is the just time of his forty two months.

But here a great question arises, Who shall be these two witnesses. Our late
Divines say, The ordinary Ministers of the Church for that time. But the
Fathers understand them to be Enoch and Elias. Though there be no express
warrant for either of these, yet until I understand better, I follow the
Fathers; because their sense fitteth best with the circumstances of the text,
and the description of the persons. And first, because the persons are but two,
but the ordinary Ministers are many. And if it be said, that the number of two
is put for all the rest; I reply, that this is not agreeing with the scripture,
which in such cases uses numbers of perfection, or numbers of allusion, (...).
The number of seven, being a number of perfection, is thus commonly used
through this book of the Apocalypse: as, the seven stars are put for all the
Ministers of Asia, and the seven lamps for all the virtues of Gods Spirit, and
the number of twelve thousand for all them that were sealed of every of the
twelve tribes. But the number of two is no such number, and therefore not fit
to comprehend a whole. Secondly, for the word witnesses, this is fit for Jude
verse. 14, etc.
Enoch, in that he rebuked the first world, and testified of Gods coming to
judgment against them. And this squareth as just with Elias, in rebuking of
sin and testifying for God; insomuch as John the Baptist the great reformer,
is prophesied to come in the spirit and power of Luke 1. 17.
Elias. Thirdly, it is said, that if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds
out of their mouth, Apoc. 11. 5.
and devoureth their enemies. And so again, as soon as Elias opened his mouth to
command 2. King. 1. 10, 12.
fire to come down from heaven, the fire fell and devoured two captains with
their two fifties. Fourthly, it is said, that these have Apoc. 11. 6.
power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophesying: and
this power had Elias, and executed it, as we read in 1. Kin. 17. 1. Fifthly,
it is said, that these two vexed them Apoc. 11. 10.
that dwelt on the earth: and thus did Elias vex king Ahab, when he said unto
him, Art thou 1. King. 18. 17.
he that troublest Israel? and again, when he provoked Baals prophets to cut
themselves with Verse. 28.
knives and lancers. Sixthly, it is said that their enemy shall kill them: and
this is fit for Enoch and Elias, because hitherto they have Heb. 11. 5.
not tasted of death, but one day they must die, because the scripture says,
It is appointed to men Heb. 9. 27. Vide Tertul. lib. de anima. Translatus est
Enoch and Elias, nec mors eorum reperta est, sed dilata. Caeterum morituri
reservantur, ut Antichristum sanguine suo extinguant.
that they shall once die. Their death therefore seems to be deferred, to a
more famous end, to a congresse with the great Antichrist. Seventhly and
lastly, it is said, They shall ascend up to heaven, and their enemies shall see
them: and so have Enoch and Elias already done; and therefore they know the
way to do so again. These two therefore, be they who they may be, may well be
called Enoch and Elias; because in their deeds they so resemble them, as if
they were themselves. And these reasons I have for the reverend Fathers, whose
understanding and judgment I much regard. And I see no reason, why these two
may not as well in the end of the world come to this service, as Elias and
Moses in Christ's time came to him Matthew. 17. 3. Mar. 9. 4. Luke 9. 30.
upon the mount upon the like service; that is, to testify to his disciples
that he was the true Messiah, and that he was to suffer death according to
Moses law, to make satisfaction for the sins of the people: and therefore it
is said in Luke 9. 31. that they spoke of his decease which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem. Elias before his translation testified 1. King. 18.
36, 37.
for the true God against the false God; after his translation he came again
upon earth to testify for Christ the true Messiah: then being thus his
approved witness, why may he not come once again in the end of the world, to
contest with Antichrist and his false prophets? for the true Christ against
that false Christ? And if it be objected, that Elias did not in substance come
to Christ upon the mount, but as a spectrum; to such Calvin upon the place will
give this honest and reasonable answer; Quanquam res est in utramque partem
disputabilis, mihi tamen magis probatur, ipsos vere in eum locum adductos esse.
Neque enim absurdum est, quum Deus corpora and animas habeat in sua manu,
mortuos ad tempus in vitam ejus arbitrio restitui, dum ita expedit. Tunc autem
Moses and Elias non sibi resurrexerunt, sed ut praesto adessent Christo.
Calvin. Harm. Evang. in loc. Though the thing be disputable on both parts, yet
to me (says he) it seems more probable, that they were truly brought into
that place. Neither is it absurd, seeing God has in his hands bodies and
souls, that at his will the dead should for a time be restored to life, when it
is so expedient, etc. But for this business, the coming of Enoch and Elias is
most expedient, for that it is said of Antichrist, that he shall come after the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
and lying wonders; and therefore they who are to buckle with him, had need to
be more then ordinary men, such to whom none were like, (as Ecclesiasticus
reports of Enoch and Elias) Ecclus 48. 4. and 49. 14.
and endued with true miracles. And this is further confirmed by the prophecy
of Malachi, Behold, I will send you Elias the prophet, Malac. 4. 5.
before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord.

But this our late Divines turn aside, by applying Ob.
it to John the Baptist, and to Christ's first coming, according to that in
Matt. 17. 12. I say unto you, that Elias is already come.

To this I reply, that as there are two comings Sol.
of Christ, a first and a second: so there are also two Eliahs; the true and
proper Elias, John denies himself to be the proper Elias, John 1. 21.
who was the Prophet; and the spiritual Elias, which was John the Baptist, so
called because he came in Eliahs spirit. This spiritual Elias, as our Savior
most truly reports, came before Christ's first coming; and the proper Elias
is to come before his second coming. And this, as Jansenius on this point in
the Gospel says, communiter intelligitur. Thus are both true, Elias is come,
and not come. The spiritual Elias is come, and has done his part: but the
proper Elias is yet to come, because Malachi says, He shall be sent before the
great and Malac. 4. 5.
terrible day of the Lord. Now it is manifest, that Christ's first coming was
not that great and terrible day, because the scripture calls it the day of
salvation, and, the acceptable time. Isai. 49. 8. 2. Cor. 6. 2.
Therefore it is left, that the true and proper Elias is yet to come before the
great and terrible day, so called of the prophets, because Jerem. 30. Joel 2.
1, etc. Amos 5. 18. Zeph. 1. 14, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
it is a day of judgment and revenge.

Verse. 5. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these
things? Verse. 6. And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in
his time.
After the Apostle has laid out the two antecedents of the worlds end, the
apostasy and the Antichrist; now he confirms his doctrine, and chideth these
Thessalonians for being so soon removed from the tradition of the truth: as if
he should have said, Did ye hear me so slightly, that ye have so soon
forgotten me? I told you something then which is not fit to be written, namely
that the apostasy cannot yet be ripe, nor the man of sin be revealed, for
that the Roman Emperor will not suffer it. He will admit no man to play Rex,
or to display the banner of Antichrist. But the time shall come when his date
shall be out; then shall defection flourish, and after that the man of sin
shall be in his colors. This S. Paul would not write, lest the public
prediction of the ruin of the Roman Empire, should spur them up to an
exasperation against the Christian profession: for it is not good to wake a
sleeping dog, nor to draw troubles which will come too fast of their own
accord. When sheep are sent among wolves, they had need to be wise as serpents,
and innocent as doves. And this doctrine both Nisi prius venerit defectio, quam
regni Romani abolitionem superius intelligendam memoravi: ut cum desecerit and
venerit Antichristus, tunc adventus Domini imminere credatur. Ambros. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 6.
S. Ambrose and S. Chrysostom confirm upon these words, Ye know what
withholdeth. S. Ambrose says, Post defectum and abolitionem regni Romani
appariturum Antichristum: After the defect and abolishing of the Roman
kingdom Antichrist is to appear. And S. Chrysostom, (...). When the Roman
Empire shall be taken away, then shall Antichrist come.

Antichrists original and seed.
Verse. 7. For the mystery of iniquity already works.
Here is demonstrated Antichrists seed and original, which is iniquity.
Iniquity in the Greek text is (...), anomie, or a life without law; and is the
mother of apostasy, and apostasy is the breeder of Antichrist. In the
primitive Church before canons were made and government established, men would
preach what they listed (for without law no man is confined:) and then were
heresies broacht in plenty. Satan wrought cunningly and by degrees upon their
green wits; and therefore their anomie S. Paul calls a mystery. Anomie began
in the Apostles days, and continued to Mahomets time: apostasy stood up in
Mahomets time, and to this day expects Antichrists time. The Turks daily look
for their Mahomet, and the Jews for their Messiah: when both these are met in
one, then shall be that great monster, the man of sin. Then if we will not be
deluded in the birth and original of Antichrist, we must look for him out of
the apostasy: there is the fittest matter of his breed. He must be no
Christian that shall be the Antichrist, by reason of the opposition. But it is
wondered at that he should be so long in breeding: for the mystery began in
the Apostles time, and S. John says, that then were Apparet adversarios
Christi Antichristos omnes esse, quos constat a charitate atque ab unitate
ecclesiae catholicae recessisse. S. Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 6.
many Antichrists (which were his forerunners;) and yet as yet he is not come.
I answer, As the great Comet is a longer time in gathering, then the ordinary
stella cadens; and as all great works have long and great preparations; so has
this man of sin. In the first six hundred years after Christ he was an
embryon; since that time to this, he has been in his animation; and now we
expect his viperous birth.

Verse. 7. Only he who now lets, will let, till he be taken out of the way.
Why does the Apostle apply this let only to the Roman empire, seeing there
were other and far higher causes of this dilation, as Gods will of
sufferance, and the administration of angels? Of the first it is said, Psalm
115. 3. Our God is in heaven, and he does whatsoever he will. And S. Paul, Romans
9. 19. says, Who has resisted his will? Of the second we read in Daniel 10.
13. that the angel who was prince of the kingdom of Persia, withstood that
other angel who was prince of the holy nation, until Michael one of the chief
princes came in to his help. To this we say, that where diverse causes be
concurring to one end, there the naming of one does not exclude the other: but
because our eyes are more conversant in beholding inferior and nearest causes,
therefore the Apostle directs us to this here; and thus only the Roman
empire was the letting cause. One tyrant will not suffer another tyrant to
rise, because he would be tyrant still. But one must not always continue; the
worlds race requires this. One generation passes, and another comes. When
one Comedian has acted his part, he goes off the stage, and another comes on.
Let Christ's little flock therefore be of good comfort: for when the whole
generation of Antichrist have played their parts, they shall all be taken away
in the end: As Moses said to the children of Israel, Exodus 14. 13. The
Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see them again. And this
demonstration is confirmed by S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 4.
upon this chapter. (...) (...). As those kingdoms were destroyed which were
before the Roman Empire, as the kingdom of the Medes by the Babylonians, the
Babylonians by the Persians, and the Persians by the Macedonians, and the
Macedonians by the Romans: so the kingdom of the Romans shall be destroyed
of Antichrist, and he again of Christ, and after that he shall obtain no more.

The discovery of Antichrist.
Verse. 8. And then shall that wicked be revealed.
That wicked in the Greek text is (...), id est, exlex, that outlaw; for he
shall live without law. And herein is verified the prophecy of him in his type
Antiochus, Dan. 11. 36. And the king shall do what him lust. His will shall be
his law, as if he were a God. Here is the patience Apoc. 14. 12.
of the saints: for what he will they must undergo. Then shall that wicked be
revealed, Ait [Apostolus] Ut reveletur in suo tempore, nec dixit post quantum
temporis id futurum sit. Et subjunxit, Mysterium operatur iniquitatis, nec
expressit quamdiu hoc operetur. Anselm. in loc.
that is to say, disclosed. Before this time Antichrist was in his egg; as you
may see in the seventh verse: he was closed in a mystery: the dragon then sat
upon it, and now here he breaks forth. But here we must observe that which
Anselm and Carthusianus do upon this place, that the Apostle does not define
the time of Antichrists uncovering, but leaves it at large, saying, That he may
be revealed in his time, setting down no special time: again, in saying, For
the mystery of iniquity does already work; but he does not express how long
it shall work. Yet certain it is, that after the falling away Antichrist shall
come, though it be not known how soon, or how long after. And as Carthusianus
says, Verisimile est quod post discessionem statim veniet Antichristus, vel
nascendo, vel public praedicando: It is likely (says he) that after the
falling away Antichrist straightway shall come, either in springing up, or in
public preaching. And upon this he says further, Ideo de adventu Antichristi,
qui est secundum quod praecedet diem judicii, subditur, ET REVELATUS FUERIT, id
est, manifestatus mundo: Therefore (says he) of the coming of Antichrist,
according to that he is to precede the day of judgment, it is added, AND THAT
HE SHOULD BE REVEALED, that is to say, manifested unto the world. Thus that
judicious writer makes a double coming of Antichrist: one in his preparation,
and another in his corporal presence: the one immediately after the defection,
and the other immediately before the worlds end. The first, that is, of his
preparation, I cannot better apply then to the preaching of the Alcoran in the
Turks empire: First, because (as I have already showed) there is the absolute
apostasy: And next, by comparing Mahumetisme with Papisme. For in the Papacy,
there, as Quemadmodum ita saepe diruuntur aedificia ut fundamenta and ruinae
maneant; ita non passus est [Deus] Ecclesiam suam ab Antichristo vel a
fundamento subverti, vel solo aequari, sed ab ipsa quoque vastatione semirutum
aedificium superesse voluit. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 2. sect. 11.
Calvin says, Ecclesiae fundamenta manent, the foundations of the Church
remain; but in Mahumetisme, there is all rent up and overturned: in the Papacy
he says, there Christ is semisepultus, that is, but half buried; but in
Mahumetisme he is whole buried: in the Papacy he says, there is semirutum
aedificium, the house of God half ruinate; but in Mahumetisme, there is not so
much as a groundsell or a raft to be seen, neither stick nor stone. Moreover,
because in the Alcoran there Mahomet Antichrists immediate forerunner is
preached and expected. And lastly, because Antichrist is called of the Apostle
(...), the man without law: and the Turk has no other law to rule his people
by, but his own will. Wherefore from his kingdom we are to expect the great
Antichrist. And with this agrees S. Paul's sequel, which is, That the man of
sin could not appear, till the Roman Empire were removed. And it is known
that the Turkish kingdom grew upon the ruin of the Romish in Heraclius time.

The two Beasts.
These two kingdoms, the Romish and Turkish, are the two beasts that S. John
writes of, Revel. 13. and are to precede the Antichrists coming. The first
beast is the Roman Empire, which rose out of the sea, that is to say, from the
city of Rome; because that famous arm of the sea Tybur flows through it. Vide
Carranzam in Council. Toletan. 13.
And this beast is described in this monstrous shape, in the form of his body
to be like a leopard for his various government, by Kings, Consuls,
Decemvirats, Dictatours, Cesars, etc. in his feet to be like a bear, to lay
hold; and in his mouth like to a lion, to devour and tear. And by this beast
was the Church most lamentably rent and torn, during the time of the ten
persecutions, as we read in Ecclesiastical histories.

The second beast is the Turkish Empire, which is there said to rise out of the
earth, that is, out of the dry, rockie, and desert land of Arabia, Regio
aquarum inops, and inculta, as Sturmius says. Out of this country, as
history Sturm. Cosmogr. eathol.
affords, Mahomet sprung up. And this beast by his original in Greek is
(...), id est, terrae filius, the son of the earth, in regard of his base
birth; which fitteth well with Mahomet that scum of the earth. Again, he is
(...), that is to say, a giant, in regard of his monstrous and huge dominion
spread so far over the earth. And this beast is compared to a lamb in the
frame of the Alcoran, (which praises religion, and offers content to every
sect, as being patched up of all the pleasures of heretics) in assoiling the
nations that dwelt nigh him, as Ranulphus testifies, and in doing Polychron.
lib. 5.
by craft and guile, what he might not do by deeds of arms. But after he had
raised his kingdom by flatteries, as Antiochus did his; Dan. 11. 21.
then he spoke like a dragon, saying, that he was sent of God to compel men to
his religion by the sword; and that they which will not obey his law, must pay
tribute, or be put to death: for so be the words of the Alcoran. Fox in Acts
and Monum. Apoc. 13. 12.


And this beast exercises all the power of the first beast before him, that
is, in speaking great things and blasphemies, in making war with the saints,
and overcoming them, and in having power over all kindreds, tongues, and
nations, as we read in the fifth and seventh verses of that chapter. And this
he does (...), before the first beast, that is, in his sight, or right over
against him. Before the first beast be extinct, he plays the tyrant; for it is
a thorn that pricks betimes. But after that his short horns were grown, of a
lamb he became a ram; and then he pushed more strongly, in exercising the
power of the first beast, that is, in speaking of great things and blasphemies,
in making war with the saints, and in having power over all kindreds,
tongues, and nations.

The first, of speaking great things and blasphemies, is verified in the
letters defiatorie of Achmeth to Sigismund the third, king of Poland, in the
year 1612.

AChmeth Sultan, son of the most puissant and highest Emperor of the Turks,
King of Macedonia, Arabia, Samaria, Grecia, and little Egypt, King above all
kings that dwell upon the earth, a King that dwells on the earthly Paradise,
an anointed Prince and son of Mahomet, keeper of the lower Hungary, Prior of
the earthly Paradise, and keeper of the grave of thy God, Lord of the tree of
life, and of the river Elisky, Conqueror of the Macedonians, borders of
Hungaria, and of the city Bettune, a great persecutour of his enemies, a most
perfect jewel of the blessed tree, the chiefest keeper of the crucified God, a
Prince and Lord in whom the Pagans trust, and a great persecutour of all
Christians;
To Sigismund the third, King of Poland, our greeting;
if thou desire our welfare, and art friend to us, and our Lieutenant
general of (...) forces which we will send. But thou have long since broken
and falsified our friendship, and yet art neither ready nor fit to wage war,
or to fight against us. But thou have some secret advice with other confederate
kings, to deliver thee out of our hands. If therefore thou thus persevere to
oppose thy self against us, then fear; for thy death, and the death of all thy
people is determined. We tell thee, we will overcome thee from the rising of
the sun to the going down thereof, and we will show our majesty in our own
person and sight, unto the uttermost parts of the earth. Our very thoughts
shall be a terror to thee, that we will perform all that which we have herein
denounced: and we will make known unto thee the powerfulness of our dominions.
And thou, O king, which put trust in strong forts and castles, shall have
experience of my might and power. I will root thee out altogether, I will
ruinate thee without any resistance. I will destroy thy Craccaw in sign of
triumph. I will leave there my bloody sword, my belief shall be spread abroad
through all thy dominions, and I will utterly root out the very remembrance of
thy crucified God. Let thy God be angry, I care not; he may then help thee.
Thy anointed Priests I will surely put to the plague; wild beasts and wolves
shall suck the breasts of thy women. Thou shall forsake the religion which thou
have: that which remains of all things, shall be consumed with fire. Herewith
rest thou satisfied. I do not tell thee what I will do or mean to do with thee;
Understand it if thou will, or can.

From our residence Constantinople most strongly guarded.

If this be not a forerunning of Antichrist, and a greater opposition to Christ
in open terms then ever has been among the Christians, let the equall-minded
judge.

For the second point, of making war with the saints, and overcoming them;
let men read the history of the Turks in the Acts and Monuments, Fox Act. and
Monum.
where they shall find that the Ottomans have spoiled more then the third part
of Christendom, and that their cruelties against the Christians have exceeded
all former cruelties, either of Pharaoh in Egypt, or of Nabuchodonosor in
Babylon, or of Antiochus in the time of the Maccabees. See the story of the ox
drawing the four quarters of the slain Christians together, in which as in a
glass you may behold the unreasonable beast condemning the savagenesse of the
reasonable beast.

For the third and last point, in having power over all kindreds, tongues, and
nations; what man of reading, seeing, or hearing, sees not this to be true,
both in the Turks dominions, and in captiving some of all nations, whereof he
makes some to be his slaves, some to be his Janisaries, some his Basshaws? so
that now his Empire is nothing else but a miscellaneum of all tongues and
kindreds.

Further, this fecond beast shall work miracles, Apoc. 13. 13.
which the first could not do; and cause fire to come down from heaven in the
sight of men, which was done partly by the necromancer Mahomet, and more fully
shall be done by the Man of sin when he shall come. He shall make Verse. 14.
an image to the first beast, he shall pattern Nero and Maxentius in all their
cruelties, which Maxentius had the wound of a sword from Constantines hand. And
in this image he shall cause himself to be worshipped, because of philautie And
he shall make all, both small and great, bond Verse. 16.
and free, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their forehead. A mark
in the right hand I once did see on the hand of an English man, whose name was
Bowin; and it was Achmeth graven in a silver plate, and fastened to his right
hand. And this being the name of the great Turk at that time, as you have seen
in his letters to Sigismund, most fitly answers to the print of the Beasts
name in Revel. 14. 11. and without this mark, he told me, that he could not
pass the country to come home. And the Vide Amb. in 2 These. 2. Ex
circumcisione aut circumcisum illum venire sperandum est, ut sit Judaeis
credendi fiducia illi. Gal. 5. 2, 4.
mark in the forehead as yet I cannot better understand, then to be
circumcision in the foreskinne of the flesh; which is the most general mark of
the Beast. And this is most Antichristian, because S. Paul told the Galatians,
that if they were circumcised, Christ should profit them nothing, and that they
should be abolished from Christ, and fallen from grace. Then who cannot but
see, that the great defection or falling away must be in the Turks empire,
where this mark is altogether used? They that will receive neither of these,
being in this beasts dominions, must neither buy nor sell, but live as slaves.

For the number of the Beast resulting into the name of a man, some say it is
(...), some (...), some one thing and some another: but because the Apostle
challenges all that have Vide Adonicam in Ezr. ^ 2. 13. Andreas Caesar. in
Apoc. super hoc caput.
wit to cast up this number, therefore I dare not meddle with it. Andreas
Bishop of Cesaria upon this, has this observation from the ancient, Si nomen
Antichristi cognitu necessarium esset, Spiritus sanctus proculdubio illud
manifestaret, ut veteres admonent: tempus and experientia viris prudentibus
manifestabit hoc. Were the name of Antichrist needful to be known, out of
doubt the holy Ghost would have manifested it: time and experience shall make
it manifest to the prudent.

Now from this demonstration of the two beasts arises this argument, That the
Antichrist could not rise up under the first beast, he was his only let: And
because there are but two of these beasts, therefore it is left that he must
rise up under this last, as Antiochus Antichrists figure rose out of one of the
four horns of the goat in the end of that kingdom, Dan. 8. 23. Therefore in
the sixteenth of the Apocalypse he is yoked with this beast and the dragon under
the title of the false prophet, where is said, And I saw three unclean spirits
Apoc. 16. 13, 14.
come out of the mouth of that dragon, and out of the mouth of that beast, and
out of the mouth of that false prophet, -- to go unto the kings of the earth,
and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty. By the Dragon is meant the Devil, as S. John interprets; Apoc. 20.
2.
by the Beast is understood the Turk, which is the second and surviving beast;
because where the first beast ended, there the second began; therefore it
remains, that the false prophet in the last place should be the Antichrist,
that is, that singular man, whose name consists of these Greek letters,
(...), and whose coming, as S. Paul says, shall be after the 2 Thessalonians. 2 9.
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders: To these
ends: First, to make the people to believe in him as the only God, the Turks
as if their Mahomet were returned, and the Jews as though their Messiah were
come: And secondly, as S. John testifies, to gather the world together to the
battle of the Apoc. 16. 14.
great day of God Almighty, which shall be at the worlds end.

Hence it is apparent, that the second beast cannot be the Papacy, as some
have interpreted. First, because the Papacy rose up, and to this day resideth
where the first beast rose up, that is, out of the sea at Rome: but the second
Apoc. 13. 1.
beast, as S. John shows, rose out of the Verse 11.
earth. And secondly, because the second beast and the false prophet conspire
together: but the Turk and the Pope are enemies one to another. Thirdly,
because the blowing of the sixth trumpet, and the pouring out of the sixth vial
in Apoc. 9, and 16, (as M. Fox and most interpreters do consent) belong to the
kingdom of Antichrist, and is properly understood of the Turks dominions, as
appears from the circumstance of the river Euphrates, where the four angels
were loosed to destroy the third part of men, and the river dried up to prepare
the way for Antichrists army. And if the Pope should be the second beast, then
we must make the Turk to be the third; because he teareth more then the other:
and thus we should have one beast more then S. John saw. So that now it lies
between the Turk and the Pope who shall have the horns: and let the wiser sort
judge. Lastly, if the Pope should be the second beast, or the Antichrist from
him, (because all interpreters understand Antichrist to belong to the second
beast, as Doctor Whitakers writes in his answer to Sanders) then he must not
arise at Rome, which is the first beasts original; for that this is found
contrary in Revel. 13. and 11 verse being compared with the first verse.

But there remains a stumbling block to Ob.
be removed; which is the misapplying of the prophecy of the whore of Babylon
in the 17 of the Revelation. For all there understand the Whore to be
Antichrist, in regard of her cup full of abominations and fornications; and the
beast upon which she sits, to be the city of Rome, or the governor
thereof, by a metonymie. Verse 3. I saw a woman sit upon a scarletcoloured
beast, full of names of blasphemy, which had seven heads, and ten horns. These
seven heads are by S. John expounded to be seven mountains, in verse 9. Now it
is confessed on both sides, that this city consisting of seven mountains is
Rome; and therefore the men which would have the Pope to be Antichrist, affirm
it, because at this day the Pope sits on that seat.

I answer, Though the Pope at this day sits Sol.
on that city which is called the beast, (because the first beast, which was
the devouring empire of ethnic Rome, there resided) yet the Pope shall not
always there sit (except he sit beside his cushen;) because when the great
Antichrist shall come, toward the end of the world, aided by the second beast,
which is the Mahometicall empire; then shall the Pope be outed, and the second
beast and the Whore Antichrist shall come in: where sitting by the space of
three years and an half, the Beast, the Whore, and the City, (for so I find
them conjoined in this chapter, as making but one body) shall be drunken with
the blood of the saints and martyrs, which they shall then shed in abundance:
and thus at last the second beast shall sit on the first beasts seat, and so
become as it were one beast, as it is in the 8 verse of this 17 chapter, where
it is said, When they shall behold the beast which was, and is not, and yet is.

The beast which was, must of necessity be understood of persecuting Rome, in
the time of the primitive Church. That Rome at this day is not the beast, is
manifest, because the Pope there now sheddeth no blood. Yet this first beast at
this day is in his successor the second beast, which is the Mahometicall
empire, doing all things that the first beast could, as you may read in the 13
chapter and 12 verse. Thus the first beast shall be in his esse, by the second
beast and Antichrist the last of that wicked line in the end of the world, and
shall sit upon the seven-hilled Rome, abounding with blasphemies, spiritual
fornications, and blood, until the moon be turned into blood, Joel 2. 31. Act.
2. 20.
and the great and terrible day of the Lord be come.

And that Antichrist when he comes shall sit at Rome, I prove it first from S.
Paul's testimony, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
saying that he shall sit as God in the temple of God. Where by the temple of
God, we are not to understand the temple at Jerusalem (as Bellarmine would have
us:) for that was to cease with the old law, and was long since demolished by
Vespasian and Titus; and when Julian Heilin Cosm.
the apostate would have built it again, to increase the Jews, and to lessen
the Christians, no sooner were the foundations laid, but an earthquake cast
them up again, and fire from heaven consumed the tools of the workmen, with the
stones, timber, and other materials; which is a sign that God will not have
that temple to be built again. But by the Temple we must understand the Temples
of Christians, which are our Churches; because the Apostle wrote this to the
Christians at Thessalonica, and not to the Jews. And thus Oecumenius
interprets S. Paul, saying, (...). He does not say the Temple at Jerusalem;
but, the Churches of Christ. And according to this sense, our Savior (Matthew.
24. 15.) speaking of Antichrists seat, does not say, When ye see the
abomination of desolation stand in the temple at Jerusalem: but he says, stand
in the holy place, that is to say, in the Church, which is more holy then ever
was the temple at Jerusalem, by reason of the time of grace. And this reason
also evinceth. For if Antichrist should not have his residence in the Church
among Christians; what opportunity could he have to tread under foot the holy
city by the space of forty two months, and to compass the tents of the
saints about, and the beloved city, which is the Church of Christ prophesied
of in the 11 and 20 chapters of the Revelation? Lastly, to this comes the
prophecy of Sibylla speaking of Antichrist in the 8 book of Oracles, and
quoted by Jewel upon the 2 Thessalonians. 2. where she has these words, The greatest
terror and fury of his empire, and the greatest woe that he shall work, shall
be by the banks of Tybur. And to this agree the Remenses, saying, Credibile
omnino est, Romae sessurum Antichristum: Romans in Apoc. 17.
It is altogether credible, that Antichrist is to sit at Rome.

Secondly, this is showed from the Fathers. S. Hierome, quaest. 11. ad Algas.
says, He shall sit in the temple of God, either at Jerusalem, as some think,
or in the Church, as we more truly suppose. S. Chrysostom upon 2 Thessalonians. 2.
He shall command himself to be worshipped for God, and to be placed in the
temple, not only at Jerusalem, but also in the Churches. S. Augustine, de
Civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 11. speaking of Antichrists persecution, says, Haec
erit novissima persecutio novissimo imminente judicio, quam sancta Ecclesia
toto terrarum orb patietur, universa scilicet civitas Christi ab universa
diaboli civitate, quantacunque erit utraque super terram. This shall be the
last persecution (the last judgment hanging over our heads) which the whole
Church shall suffer in all the world, that is to say, the whole city of Christ
from the whole city of the devil, etc.

But to stop the mouth of these testimonies, Ob.
some perhaps may say, that there is no Church at Rome.

To such will Calvin give answer in his Sol.
fourth book of Inst. chap. 2. sect. 12. Hinc igitur patet, nos minime negare,
quin sub ejus quoque tyrannide Ecclesiae maneant: From hence it is plain that
we deny not, but that under his tyranny the Churches may remain. Likewise in
the 11 section he has, Ut manebant olim inter Judaeos peculiares quaedam
Ecclesiae praerogativae; ita nec hodie Papistis adimimus quae superesse ex
dissipatione vestigia Ecclesiae inter eos Dominus voluit. As in time past among
the Jews, certain peculiar prerogatives remained; so neither do we at this day
take from the Papists the steps of the Church, which the Lord would have to
remain among them out of that dissipation.

Here again may some other ask why Antichrist Quaest.
may not as well make choice of some other Seas in Christendom, as of Rome,
and namely among the reformed Churches.

I answer, Of necessity he must sit at Rome, Respons.
to fulfill the prophecy, Revel. 17. and because this was the seat of the
first beast. Reason also will run with the prophecy; for that conquerers
will aim at the fairest, as the Turk the second beast has made choice of
Constantinople, as being the principal city of the East Church.

The Papist and the Protestant strive about Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap.
13.
the seat of Antichrist; the one would have it to be at Rome, the other not. In
my judgment the Protestant sets the saddle on the right horse. Wherefore if
the Papist will be advised by me; let him yield the horse and saddle too, and
save the rider. Let him free the Pope, amend his teaching, especially whereby
he shed so much Christian blood, and maintain peace and charity with his
brethren, who dissent not from him in the main; and let the devil and
Antichrist take Rome when the time comes. They had it at the first, and they
will have it again at the last, sit the holy Father as sure as he can. When the
great deluge and overspreading shall come, spoken of by Daniel Dan. 9. 26.
Apoc. 20. 9.
and John, then all shall down; the Pope must stoup, his Cardinals shall be off
their hinges, and his triple crown shall lie in the dust. In the mean time, God
of his great goodness have mercy on us all.

Antichrists destruction.
Verse. 8. Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming.
In these words Antichrists destruction is prophesied, to the great comfort of
Christ's little flock. The overthrow is described to be given as it were by a
double blow, and a twofold weapon, to show the certainty and inevitabilitie of
it. The Lord Christ shall utterly consume and destroy his enemy; but how?
Spiritu oris sui, with the spirit of his mouth, that is, as Carthusianus upon
this place says, With Suo praecepto jubens eum occidi a Michaele, vel per
seipsum eum occidens suo aspectu. Ansel. super 2 Thessalonians. 2.
his precept, in commanding him to be killed by Michael the archangel, or else
in killing him by himself, that is to say, with his look: or, as Anselm has
it, SPIRITU ORIS SUI, id est, invisibili virtute spiritus sui, etc. WITH THE
SPIRIT OF HIS MOUTH, that is, with the invisible virtue of his spirit: which
spirit is the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, and is the
power of the Godhead. In short he shall destroy him, not by the preaching of
his Ministers, as some would have it: but, because he is his personal
opposite, he shall destroy him in his own person, by his divine power and
command, whose command is to do; not in the multitude of an army, nor in the
strength of soldiers, nor in the aid of angels: but as darkness is banished
by the suns presence; so by the luster of Christ's coming, by the look of his
countenance, and by the breath of his nostrils he shall destroy him; (...), By
the brightness of his presence, when he shall say, Ite maledicti in ignem
aeternum, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

Whether Antichrist be yet come.
I answer, No: because the scripture testifies that he shall come in the end
of the world: for when he is come, and has reigned his three years and an
half, as is before declared; then our text says, that Christ shall come to
consume him with the spirit of his mouth, and to destroy him with the
brightness of his coming. Some understand this of Christ's spirit in his
preachers by created graces: but this cannot be good; because the Greek has
(...), which signifies by the appearing of his substantial or personal
presence. Secondly, because the preachers of that time shall not kill
Antichrist, but be killed, as appears in the prophecy of the two witnesses,
Revel. 11. 3, 7. And lastly, it is more congruent, and most for Christ's honor,
that whereas Antichrist is Christ's personal opposite, therefore he should be
suppressed by Christ's personal presence. Again, it was a received thing in the
primitive Church, that Antichrists time and the end of the world shall
coincidere, fall in one, as we read, 1. John 2. 18. Little children, it is the
last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are
many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time. Thus by Antichrists
time ye may know the last time, and by the last time ye may know Antichrists
time. But here seems a difficulty, in that S. John makes the last time to be
in his days. I answer, He speaks this inchoative, to stir up his children
to watchfulness; because then the last day was coming on, and even then there
were many Antichrists, the forerunners of the main Antichrist, that man of
sin.

Secondly, Antichrist cannot be yet come, by reason of the circumstances which
holy Writ has fastened to his time. For in Antichrists time the daily sacrifice
shall be taken away, and the abomination of desolation shall be set up in place
of it, as appears Dan. 12. 11. and is confirmed by our Savior, Matthew. 24.
15. For the abomination cannot be set up, till the daily sacrifice be removed.
So in the figure, after Antiochus had taken away the daily sacrifice from the
Temple, he set up in place of it the statue of Jupiter Olympius. And this is
further 2. Mac. 6. Polychron. lib. 3. cap. 35.
illustrated by the opposition between Christ and Antichrist. For he that is
Christ's opposite, cannot endure Christ's service before his eyes: but at this
day, neither is the daily sacrifice taken away, nor the abomination of
desolation set up; for that no land of the Christians is yet divasted, nor the
temples of Papists or Protestants left desolate: but the Christian world every
where offer up their daily liturgies, and the holy Eucharist; Papists by
themselves, and Protestants by themselves, without disturbance: and therefore
as yet that great Antichrist is not come, who will take this away, and set
himself in place of it, as S. Paul teaches; so that he does sit as God in the
temple of God; which is the abomination: and this abomination cannot be
erected, till Antichrist by his soldiers have made the temples of Christians
desolate. Therefore Beza translateth, illam abominationem vastatricem, the
abomination In Matthew. 24.
making desolate: and so our Church-Bible also translateth in Dan. 12. 11.

Thirdly, I show this from the description of Antichrist, which is this, Who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped. But as yet no man has done thus. Therefore as yet that Antichrist
is not come. The assumption is proved from particulars of importance. The first
beast the Roman Cesars have acknowledged and adored the multitude of Gods, as
Jupiter, Mercury, Diana, Venus, etc. The second beast the Turk to this day
worshippeth a supreme God, as he says (which is neither the Father, nor the
Son, nor the holy Ghost) and that with great devotion, as our own country
travelers report. Lastly, the Pope acknowledges the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, as is manifest from the Apostles Creed, the Nicene, and
Athanasian, to this day used of him; and from calling himself Christ's vicar,
which is to say, his substitute or vicegerent upon earth; and from concluding
all his prayers to God the Father, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, by our
Lord Jesus Christ; and from singing to the holy Trinity, Gloria Patri,
Filioque, and Spiritui sancto, that is, Glory be to the Father, to the Son,
and to the holy Ghost.

And that the Pope is not to be held for Antichrist, I prove from S. John's
descriptions, 1. Joh. 2. 22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is
that Christ? the same is that Antichrist, that denies the Father and the
Son. But the Pope denies neither of both, as is before declared; and
therefore he is not to be held for Antichrist.

A second description of Antichrist is in his fourth chapter of the same
epistle, in these words, Every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Verse. 3.
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; and this is that spirit of
Antichrist. From whence I thus reason; Whosoever is not of Antichrists spirit,
cannot be Antichrist: but the Pope is not of Antichrists spirit: therefore he
cannot be Antichrist. The assumption is proved thus; Antichrists spirit will
not confess that Christ is come in the flesh: But the Pope confesses that
Christ is come in the flesh, that he was born of the virgin Marie, and suffered
death under Pontius Pilate for the sins of the world: Therefore so long as
the Pope holds this mind, he cannot possibly be the Antichrist.

But Doctor Whitakers, to cross these two Ob.
manifest demonstrations of Gods word, affirms, that though the Pope denies
not Christ to be come in the flesh, verbo tenus, and in the first; yet, that he
denies him in the second, that is, by consequent. First, says he, he denies
him to be the only King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church; and next, in
subjoyning to Christ's merits and passion other subordinate means, as the use of
Sacraments, penitential sorrow, forgiving of injuries, giving of alms, the
abundance of charity, and all the kinds of good works. From whence it follows
(as Doctor Whitakers thinks) that where so many concurrent means are joined
to Christ's death and merits, there Christ's coming and suffering in the flesh is
in a manner or by consequence denied and diminished.

I reply, that if we should understand Antichrists Sol.
denying of Christ by such consequents and comments of our own brain, then
Luther should be the Antichrist; who, in his comment upon the epistle to the
Galatians, calls Christ a sinner, yea, the greatest of all sinners: by which
blasphemy though Christ's coming in the flesh is not absolutely denied, yet his
meriting in the flesh is absolutely denied, by the former way of consequence;
because a sinner can make no satisfaction, nor merit any thing. Again, by such
sequence, Calvine should be the Antichrist, who absolutely denies the
sufficiency of Christ's bodily death and suffering for us, thus writing, Nihil
actum erat, si Instit. lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 10.
corporea tantum morte defunctus fuisset: Nothing had been done, if Christ had
died only a bodily death. Again, Eam mortem pertulit, quae sceleratis ab irato
Deo infligitur: He bore that death which is inflicted by the angry God upon
wicked men. But if Christ were dead in soul, and suffered hell torments, such
as a damned man should do (which are deprivation of grace, and eternal
torments) then he could not have redeemed us, as the worthy Doctor Bilson
observes upon this; because he which is dead in soul, can deserve nothing. Yet
God forbid I should put the term of Antichrist upon these my brethren; because
they opposed not Christ direct, but indirecte and oblique; ex ignorantia, and
non ex rata malitia: not directly, but indirectly; of ignorance, and not of
confirmed malice. In which case they traveled along with the blessed Apostle
before his conversion, he saying of himself, I was a blasphemer, and 1. Tim. 1.
13.
a persecuter, and an oppressor: but I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorantly in unbelief.

The Doctors reasons against the Pope, in that he acknowledges other Kings,
Priests, and Prophets, beside Christ, and other means in the mystery of man's
salvation besides Christ's merits, are not worth the answering: because these
officers and means are instituted and commanded by Christ himself; the officers
for agencie under him, and the means for application of his merits and
conformity to his life, without which Christ's merits can profit nothing.

But laying aside this wringing of scripture in denying Christ, we must
understand it of the direct and absolute denying of him in words; because he
cannot be a full opposite and Antichrist, such an one as S. Paul describes,
showing himself that he is God, and exalting himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped, but he must deny, extinguish, and disable Christ,
as openly and as publicly as he can, that he may be taken for Christ in
Christ's room. And to effect this, insinuations, half speeches, and oblique
inferences will not serve the turn. We blind judges, children in our nonage,
take upon us to judge before our time: and who do not say as we say, though
they do better then we do, yet we condemn them as Antichristian, which is as
much as Anathema, Maran-atha, the greatest of all censures. And wherefore judge
we so eagerly? For holding of errors. And are any without them? The Prophet
David says, Who can understand his Psalm. 19. 12.
errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. Some errors we may bear with,
because they distermine not from the head, no more then a wound or malady
extinguisheth the life of the body. Again, errors of ignorance, and not of
affected malice, commonly find mercy, as S. Paul shows, I was a blasphemer,
a persecuter, and an 1. Tim. 1. 13.
oppressor: but I was received to mercy, for I did it ignorantly, in
unbelief. Thus charity teaches me to judge: errors of Christians are errors
of ignorance, and not of intention or affected malice. For I believe, that
wittingly and willingly neither Papist, Protestant, nor Lutheran would wrong
their Head Christ, whom they daily profess: and therefore let us, brethren,
pray for one another, and help one another, and not envy and hurt one another.

Fourthly, to return again to argument, None is to be held for the great
Antichrist, before the Church (which only has power to determine of
heretics, and to judge malefactors) has declared him so to be: But the
Church hitherto has neither declared the Pope, nor any other to be the great
Antichrist: Therefore as yet he is to come.

The major is proved, first, from Christ's precept, Matthew. 18. 17. Dic
Ecclesiae, Tell it to the Church. From whence it follows, that if the Pope,
or any other have carried themselves so badly, that they have deserved to be
denounced that man of sin, we should appeal to the Church, and require her
definition, and not intrude our selves into public magistracy, which is the
ruin of States.

Secondly, this is proved from the institution of Synods, and the Apostles
practice, Act. 15. 6. Then the Apostles and Elders came together to look to
this matter. Though Paul and Barnabas being Apostles, had of themselves power
to determine the question then raised; yet they yielded to go to the Synod, the
Church assembled, for example sake, to teach us what we ought to do in like
cases.

Thirdly, Moses, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. says, Judicium Dei est, The judgment is Gods.
With this consent the words of our Savior concerning Synods, Matthew. 18. 20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. Again, Acts 15. 28. it is said, It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to
us: But no private men, though they be never so many, have this authority of
judgment; therefore this is well forbidden in the ancient verses,

Est verum vitae, doctrinae, justitieque:
Primum semper habe, duo propter scandala linque:
There is a truth of life, doctrine, and justice: have thou the first, two
leave as scandalous. Fourthly, in all difficult points the law commands us to
go to the Senate of Priests, and to the Judge for resolution. Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, etc. thou shall come
unto the Priests of the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those
days, and ask; and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment. But to
define of Antichrist, is a difficult point: and therefore King James, in his
book of Antichrist, would not urge it, page 51. As for the definition of
Antichrist, I will not urge so obscure a point as a matter of faith to be
necessarily believed of all Christians.

The minor is manifestly true, because no universal Synod can be found to
bring forth such a definition (and it is fit that such an universal enemy
should have an universal sentence) neither is there any such declaration to be
found in the harmony of the reformed Churches, printed at Geneva in the year
1581. From whence I conclude, that for so much as the Church has not yet
detected and determined the Antichrist, therefore as yet he is to come.

And were there no other argument to free the Pope from being the Antichrist,
among the Fathers this is sufficient, for that he maintains images. For so
jealous is Antichrist of his usurped deity, that he cannot secure himself of
it, so long as he sees them set up. Therefore Irenaeus says of him, Idola
quidem seponet, Lib. 5. cap. 21.
etc. He shall put away idols, to persuade that he is God: but he shall extol
himself the only Idol. And Hippolytus says, Antichristus idololatriam non
admittet, Antichrist will not admit idolatry. And Cyrillus has, Idola odio
habebit Antichristus, Antichrist shall hate idols. I am not of mind that all
images are idols, but only when they are worshipped for Gods. This is
manifest, first from the word Idololatria, which signifies the worshipping of
idols with divine worship, which in Greek, as it is used of Divines, is (...).
Again, this is showed from the distich,

Qui sacros facit ex auro vel marmore vultus,
Non facit ille Deos; qui colit, ille facit.
Otherwise our Geneva bible should maintain idolatry, in picturing Ezekiels
vision of God, Ezekiel. 1. 5.
in the form of an old man. Yet such is Antichrists jealousy, that he will be
afraid of every shadow. Images, statues, idols, all must down before him;
because he will admit no other God, neither in substance, nor in representation.

Antichrists wars.
Fourthly and lastly, the great Antichrist is not yet come, because the
scriptures which speak of his troubles and foretell of his wars, are not yet
fulfilled. In the 12 of Daniel, where the end of the world is prophesied, it is
said, that then there shall be such a time of Dan. 12. 1.
trouble, as was not since there began to be a nation until that time. And in
the sixth and seventh verses, where question is moved of the time and durance
of this trouble, the angel swear by him that lives for ever, that it should
be for a time, times, and an half, that is to say, for three years and an
half; and after this it is said in the text, And when he shall have
accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, (that is to say, when
Antiochus has made an end of oppressing the Jews, and Antichrist of treading
down the holy city among the Christians) then all these things shall be
finished: that is to say, then shall be an end of the Jews persecutions, and
then shall be an end of the Christians oppressions, when the world shall end,
and the day of resurrection come.

With this consents the threefold cable of prophesies in S. John's Revelation.
The first of the blowing of the sixth trumpet in the ninth chapter, where the
four angels bound at Euphrates, were loosed to slay the third part Verse. 15,
16.
of men: And the horsemen of war were twenty thousand times ten thousand;
which multitude, as M. Fox says, agrees best with the Turks Fox in Apoc. 9.
armies. The second of pouring out of the sixth vial in the sixteenth chapter,
where Euphrates Verse. 12.
is seen to be dried up, that the way for the kings of the east might be
prepared, that is, that the Scythians or Tartars might join with the Beast and
the false Prophet in the battle of that great day of God Almighty. And the
third of the loosing of Satan in the twentieth chapter, to gather Gog and Magog
together, (that Verse. 8.
is, the Turks and Tartars, with the people of the four quarters of the earth)
whose number Verse. 9.
shall be like the sand of the sea, -- to compass the camp of the saints
about, and the beloved city, which is the Church and the Christians. And that
this great war is to be understood of Antichrists war in the end of the
world, it is apparent, both from the testimony of interpreters, and specially
from the evidence of scriptures, and the effects following. For the
interpreters, I will use one for all, which is S. Augustine in the 20 book of
the city of God and 11 chapter: This shall be the last persecution, when the
last judgment shall hang over our heads, which the holy Church through the
world shall suffer, that is, the whole city of Christ from the whole city of
the devil. For the scriptures, in the 24 of Matthew we read, that immediately
after the tribulation of those days, Verse. 29.
the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the
stars shall fall, -- and after this the Son of man shall come in the clouds
with power and great glory. In the 10 of the Apocalypse, after the blowing of
the sixth trumpet and the war ended, the mighty Verse. 5, 6, 7.
Angel (that is, Christ) lift up his hand to heaven, and swore, that time
should be no more, and that in the days of the voice of the seventh trumpet
(which S. Paul calls the last trumpet, 1. Cor. 15. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
and the trumpet of God) the mystery of God should be finished. In the 16.
chapter, after the pouring out of the sixth vial and the war ended, the
seventh angel poured out his into the air, and Rev. 16. 17.
there came a loud voice out of the temple of heaven, and from the thrane,
saying, It is done. - And Verse. 20.
the isles fled away, and the mountains were not found. Lastly, in the 20
chapter, after the gathering together of Gog and Magog, after they had
compassed the camp of the saints, and the beloved city, after they had had
their full pleasure over them; then fire fell down from heaven upon them; the
devil, the beast, and the false prophet, were cast into a lake of fire and
brimstone, the white throne was set up, the books were opened, and the dead
were judged. All these testimonies being testimonies of the last wars, show
them to be Antichrists wars; because they jump together with the abomination
of desolation in Matthew. 24. 15. and with S. John's saying, Little children, 1.
John 2. 18.
it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now
are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time.

Hitherto we have seen the intestine and civil wars of Christians: as yet we
have not seen the troops of the Ottomans, we have not seen Gog and Magog the
Scythian nations; we have Rev. 20.
not seen the kings of the whole world gathered together by the three spirits
of the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet; we Rev. 16.
have not seen the army whose number imitateth Rev. 20.
the sand of the sea; as yet they have not spread the breadth of the earth, as
yet they have not compassed the camp of the saints, as yet the Beast has not
imprinted his character upon us: but we use our liberty, we buy and sell,
great thanks be to our God. Therefore as yet that great Antichrist is not come:
but we look for him, to resist him in the faith, and to overcome him with
suffering. What if he handle us, as Antiochus handled the mother and the seven
brethren? if he kill us in the morning, shall not our souls be crowned with joy
in the evening? shall not he for whom we suffer take away the edge of our
pains? is not the death of the sword shorter and easier then the death of the
bed? and is not the weight of the recompense above all rewards? would not a man
run through a river of blood to go to a kingdom? oh, this shall be the
joyfullest suffering that ever was seen; because our Lord Jesus shall come from
heaven in person, to make an end of it, and to crown it. When ye see Luke 21.
28.
these things begin to come to pass, (says our Redeemer) lift up your heads;
for your redemption draws near. And again, Know that the kingdom Mar. 13.
29.
of God is near, even at the doors. Wherefore we will not faint at
Antichrists great looks, nor at the multitude of his armies, nor at the
cruelty of his soldiers. For though at first he get the field of us, yet in
the end the victory and triumph shall be ours, when that man of sin shall be
consumed with the spirit of Christ's mouth, and destroyed with the brightness
of his coming; when all his armies shall be gathered into Armageddon, Apoc. 16.
16. Judge. 5. 19. Ezekiel. 39. 11.
where were slain the kings of Canaan, and into the valley of Hamon-Gog, where
they shall be buried, to free the holy nation from their stink for ever.
Wherefore rejoice ye Christians of a true heart: for the overthrow is
determined, and the place of burial is appointed before the enemy come.

Antichrists furniture.
Verse. 9. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power,
and signs, and lying wonders.
Hitherto we have seen Antichrists description, and his wars; and now we are
to behold his furniture and setting forth. He is furnished with all the devils
power; and therefore his marching shall be like the marching of Jehu the son
of Nimshi, who marched furiously. But here we must observe with Carthusianus,
Duplex ponitur Antichristi adventus: primus occultus, qui pertinet ad ejus
generationem; alter manifestus, pertinens ad ejus praedicationem. Carth. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. Anselm. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that Antichrists coming is twofold; the one secret, the other open. His secret
coming belongs to his breeding, of which I have already spoken in the
apostasy: and his open coming belongs to his preaching and progress in
conquering when he shall show himself to the world in the person of Christ, and
in the form of God: secundum operationem Satanae, according to the working of
Satan. And how is that? That is, as Anselm interprets, diabolo instigante,
the devil inciting him. He shall be possessed with a devil, and at his
instigation he shall do all things: not like a phrentick without sense; but
with forecast and deliberation. He shall put his will to the devils cunning;
and the devil shall put his cunning to his will. The one shall devise and plot,
and the other shall perform and effect. As God was in Christ, reconciling the
world to 2. Cor. 5. 19. Sicut Deus erat in Christo mundum reconcilians sibi;
ita diabolus erit in Antichristo mundum seducens. Ib.
himself; so the devil shall be in Antichrist, seducing the world from God to
himself. And as Christ says in John 14. 10. The Father which remains in me,
he does the works; so the devil dwelling in Antichrist, he shall do all that he
does too. Thus they shall confer their forces, that they may do the more
hurt, according to the proverb, Vis unita fortior, United force is the
stronger. With all power, and signs, and lying wonders.

Because Antichrist has two ends, the one to be honored as a king, the other
to be worshipped as a God: therefore he shall come instructed and furnished
with full means, with all power of man's arm, to throw down and to enthrone; and
with all signs and lying wonders, to prepare faith for him. With the first
agrees the type, with the second the antithesis accords. Of the type it is said
in Daniel, The Dan. 9. 26.
prince that shall come shall destroy the city, and the sanctuary, and the
end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the battle it shall be
destroyed by desolations. So when Antichrist comes, he shall spread the breadth
of Apoc. 20. 9.
the earth with his armies, as a flood covers the dry land. For the
antithesis, look how Christ won the world to his faith by true signs and
miracles, so shall Antichrist prevail with the reprobate by his false signs
and lying wonders. And as when Christ came, not he only wrought miracles, but
his disciples also did the like; so when Antichrist shall come, his ministers
shall work as false miracles as their master. Therefore it is said in Matthew.
24. 24. that the false prophets shall show signs and wonders, as well as the
false Christ's. Hitherto there have been many false Christ's, and many false
prophets, as we read in story: but the last false Christ, and the last false
prophets, which are Antichrists false prophets, shall outgo the rest: for they
shall mork miracles, which the former could not do; for they shall cause fire
to come down from heaven in the sight of men, as it is, Revel. 13. 13. because
at that time Satan shall be loosed, and Apoc. 20. 7.
they shall have all his power.

And these miracles of theirs are said to be lying wonders, in respect of all
the causes; matter, form, efficient, and end. In respect of the matter, because
many of them shall be fantastic, deceiving the eye like the tricks of
juglers. Such were the rods and serpents of Pharaohs Exodus 7. 11, 12, etc.
inchanters, which were devoured of Aarons rod; because they were but shadows,
and his was a substance. In respect of the form, because though they have a
matter, yet they shall not exceed the force of nature. And such are the
prodigies of Necromancers, while by the help of the devil they conjoyn natural
causes, to the producing of some strange effect, beyond the ordinary course of
nature. And thus they may cause fire to fall down from Apoc. 13. 13.
heaven; for that in the air there is the element of fire, and the fuel of
exhalations for the fire to feed upon. But true miracles have no natural
causes; and therefore they are miracles not only in the sight of men, but also
in the sight of devils and angels. These are competent to God only, as it is
Psalm. 72. 18. Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel, qui facit mirabilia solus:
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who alone does wondrous things. And our Lord
Christ says, Joh. 15. 24. If I had not done among them the works which no
other did, they had not had sin. Again, in regard of the efficient they are
lying miracles; because the devil the father of lies shall be the principal
agent: whose coming 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
is after the working of Satan. Therefore the Fathers affirm, that Antichrist
shall be a notable witch, and that the devil shall inhabit him from his
conception, or at least from his cradle. Lastly, they shall be lying signs in
regard of their end; because they shall tend to show that Antichrist is God,
and the Messiah, which is a Jewish and devilish lie. For as Christ by his true
miracles proved his divinity; so shall Antichrist by his false miracles labor
to do the like: but all in vain, because lying miracles are but idols, and
prove nothing. And for this cause miracles are called signs, for that they
signify to the world some strange and wonderful thing.

Verse. 10. And with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness in them that
perish.
In these words is expressed a second member of Antichrists provision to obtain
his purpose; which is his hypocrisy and dissembling. His life in outward show
is righteousness; but inwardly it is unrighteousnes: therefore to such as
cannot unmask it, it is deceiveablenesse. He shall feign notable justice to
give all the world content: his forehead shall be made of equity; but his
intralls shall be fraught with iniquity. Therefore he shall be the
arch-hypocrite. Ephrem Syrus in his sermon of Antichrist has these words, Ut
omnes fallere possit, falsus atque Hieron. catal
falsiloquus, humilem se simulabit and blandum, etc. That he might deceive all,
he being false and a false speaker, shall counterfeit himself humble and
fair-spoken, despising injustice, preferring piety, gentle, poor, studious,
beautiful beyond all admiration, pleasing, cheerful to all; he shall
endeavor to please all, that he might soon be sought of the people, and be
beloved. The books of this Ephrem were thought so notable, that they were read
in the Church, as S. Hierome testifies. To proceed, Carthusianus upon this
text says, Variis modis Antichristus decipiet mundum, videlicet, simulatione
sanctitatis, scripturarum allegationibus, sapientia and ornatu sermonis,
eminentia miraculorum, promissione divitiarum, terrore minarum, potestate,
prosperitate, ac multitudine ministrorum suorum: Antichrist shall diverse ways
deceive the world, with counterfeit holiness, with allegation of scriptures,
with wisdom and ornament of speech, with eminency of miracles, with promise
of riches, with terror of threats, with power and prosperity, with multitude
of attendants. All testimonies of scripture, which prophecy of the Messiah, he
shall apply to himself. What man of the world would not be drawn with these
enticing baits? So great and so effectual shall be his deceit, that (as our
Savior says) if it Matthew. 24. 24.
were possible, the very elect should be beguiled with it. For, as Anselm upon
this place of my text says, Illa Antichristi tentatio cunctis praeteritis
major apparebit, quando pius martyr corpus suum tormentis subjiciet, and tamen
ante ejus oculos miracula tortor faciet. Quis enim ad fidem convertatur
incredulus, cujus jam credentis non paveat and concutiatur fides, quando
persecutor pietatis fiet etiam operator virtutis, idemque ipse qui tormentis
saeviet ut Christus negetur, miraculis provocabit ut Antichristo credatur? This
trial of Antichrist shall seem greater then all former trials; because when
the godly martyr shall submit his body to torments, even then he shall behold
his tormentour to work miracles. And again, What unbeleever shall now be
converted to the faith, what believers faith shall not now be shaken, when the
persecutour of piety is also a worker of virtue, and the same man which is
cruel with torments that Christ should be denied, shall provoke with miracles
that Antichrist should be believed? Yet for all this, he shall prevail only,
as the Apostle says, in them that perish, that is to say, in the reprobates.
But as for Christ's flock, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And
Matthew. 16. 18
our Savior says further, My Father which John 10. 29.
gave them me, is greater then all; and none is able to take them out of my
Fathers hand. It is Christ Romans 8. 34.
which is dead, which is risen again, who is at the right hand of God, who
makes request for us; can Antichrist then carry us away? Who shall Verse. 35,
etc.
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written,
For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter) Nay, in all these things we are more then conquerers, through him
that loved us. For if neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor the height of heaven,
nor the depth of hell, nor any other creature were it more potent, can remove
us from the love of God in Christ, as the Apostle there shows; then shall
Antichrist be confounded: And when he has spent all his cruelties, when he is
bankrupt in all his flatteries, when he is at the ground sheaves of all his
deceits, stratagems, and policies; yet still there shall be a remnant, which
will not yield to him.

Antichrists nation.
Verse. 10. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved.
In the former part of this verse S. Paul showed what kind of people they were
whom Antichrist should deceive; that is, the worser sort, whose end is to
perish: and here in this second part is set down the reason why; and that is,
because they received not the love of the truth, that is, of Christ, who is the
way, and the John 14. 6.
truth, and the life. Hence is insinuated, that the Jews are here especially
meant, because they above all other refused Christ, when they cried, Not this
man, but Barabbas. And next, John 18. 40.
this is manifest in Acts 13. 46. where S. Paul said thus to the Jews
contradicting him and railing on him, It was necessary that the word of God
should first have been spoken unto you: but seeing ye put it from you, and
judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life; lo, we turn to the Gentiles.
These are they which beat away the Lord of the vineyards servants, and killed
Luke 20. 15.
his son and heir, and cast him out of the vineyard. And these are they of
whom our Apostle in his second chapter of his former epistle to these
Thessalonians says, Who both Verse. 15, 16.
killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us: and
they please not God, and are contrary to all men; and forbid us to preach to
the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fulfill their sins always. These
therefore are they which had not received the love of the truth in S. Paul's
time, and to this day spurn against it, expecting another Christ: and therefore
these he here intends, because he speaks in the preterperfect tense, and then
knew their aversion. And as for the Gentiles, they were then ready and willing
to receive Christ; therefore he excepteth the Thessalonians out of their
number, in the thirteenth verse of this chapter, saying, But we ought always
to give thanks to God for you, brethren, because that God from the beginning
has chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and the
faith of truth. But for the Jews which would not receive Christ when he came
amongst them, they are without excuse, in that they looked for the Christ; and
the Gentiles looked for no Christ. And had their Christ, whom they still look
for, come first, and been born of a virgin according to the prophecy; then
might they with warrant reject him that should come after, as the Antichrist;
for that there can be no Antichrist until there be first a Christ, in regard
of the opposition: but Christ is already come, their own nation have preached
him, and the world have received him; and therefore whosoever shall usurp this
name after him, he must of necessity be either a false Christ, or the
Antichrist. From hence by good consequence the Fathers have collected, of what
nation or kindred Antichrist shall be when he comes; that is, of the Jews. For
as they were the first that rejected Christ; so in all reason they shall be the
first that shall receive Antichrist; because they to this day look for their
Christ, and they will admit none but of their own kindred, in regard of the
prophecy to this day observed of them in Deuteronomy. 18. 15. The Lord thy God will
raise up to thee a Prophet like unto me, from among you, even of thy brethren;
unto him shall ye hearken. Wherefore as Christ the true Messiah was of the
Jews; so Antichrist the false Messiah shall be of the Jews too: and as Christ
came first to the Jews of whom he was expected, and after that adjoined the
Gentiles unto him; so shall Antichrist come first to the Jews of whom he is
looked for, and after that he shall gather to him all other nations.

And that Antichrist shall be a Jew, it is confirmed from his figure Antiochus,
Daniel 11. 21. And in his place shall stand up a vile person, to whom they
shall not give the honor of the kingdom: but he shall come in peaceably, and
obtain the kingdom by flatteries. Again, from the prophecy in Dan. 7. where
he is compared to a little horn. But it is known that the Jews are a vile kind
of people, dispersed like vagabonds amongst all nations, having no kingdom nor
kingly honor, but are subject to the laws of other countries among whom they
dwell: and among us Christians, whom we detest, we call a Jew. Wherefore S.
Hierome, upon this place, after he had first applied it to Antiochus, says
thus, But our men better and Nostri autem and melius interpretantur and
rectius, quod in fine mundi, etc. Hieron. in Dan. 11.
righter interpret, that in the end of the world Antichrist shall do these
things; who is to rise from a small nation, that is, from the people of the
Jews: and he shall be so vile and despised, that the kingly honor shall not be
given him; but by fraud and deceit he shall get the principality. Again, upon
the 11 of Daniel he writes, No Nullus Judaeorum absquam Antichristo in toto
unquam orb regnabit, etc. Ibid.
Jew without Antichrist shall at any time reign over all the world. These
despised Jews, when they shall get the day, shall rage more terribly then any
other, according to the proverb,

Asperius nihil est humili, cum surgit in altum.
The basest ever is the most severe,
Once having gotten power to domineer.
Verse. 10. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved.
In that the Apostle joyneth love with the truth in the way to salvation, this
shows that none can either attain the truth, or stand long in it, without love,
which is the most sanctifying grace of the holy Ghost. For so high are the
mysteries of godliness, and so contrary to man's reason, that none can
apprehend them, except divine love do bend his wits that way. This appears
from the scoffing anthem of the Arians in Socrates Scholasticus, Where be these
fellows who affirm three to be one? Therefore then is man's understanding
capable of divine truth, when the holy Ghost, who is Love, goes before. Before
love come 1. John 4. 8.
we will dispute of the truth, and with Pilate ask what is the truth, though
the truth stand before us, as Christ stood before Pilate. This is the reason
why babes and fools of the world, perceive that which the Scribe and the
disputer cannot see. And though they see it, yet without love it is unsavourie
to them, they are not the better for it. This S. Paul shows in 1. Cor. 13. 2.
Though I had the gift of prophecy, and knew all secrets, and all knowledge,
and had all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and had not love, I were
nothing. Wherefore, where love and truth go hand in hand, there is right faith
and good life, the two complements of our salvation. But the principal of
these two is love; because love makes use of truth; but truth without love is
idle.

Verse. 11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie.
Here S. Paul sets down the just judgment of God against the receivers of
Antichrist, which is effascination, or strong delusion, (...), the power of
errors working, which the creature of it self is not able to resist. Such was
the working of Pharaohs inchanters, Exodus 7.
that when he saw them to throw rods out of their hand, and they turned into
serpents, therefore he would not believe Moses and his miracle, though his rod
devoured their rods before his eyes. And so strong was the old prophets lie to
the man of God, that prophesied 1. King. 13.
against the altar in Bethel, that because he would not obey the revealed word
of the Lord, therefore the lie prevailed upon him to his destruction. So will
the devil fat men in a plerophorie of Antichrists false doctrine, that they
shall be so far from doubting of it, that they will exult and triumph in it.
But here may be demanded how God should be cleared from sin, when he sends
such strong delusion, which is the cause of sin. To this I answer, that this
is not here spoken of God properly, but tropically: Mittit non physice, sed
permittendo and deserendo; He sends not delusion naturally, but privatively,
by way of forsaking and suffering. For when God upon just desert withdraws his
grace from any, then he gives the devil leave to go in; and thus Gods forsaking
is in place of sending: because God knows, that when he is departed, the strong
seducer will not be long absent. And herein is God justified, in that he never
forsakes any, until he be forsaken of them, according to the School-axiom,
Deus non deserit, nisi prius deseritur. If the Jews would not have forsaken the
true Christ, they should not have been left to the lies of Antichrist. God for
his mercy sake grant to us Christians, that we trust not so much to the
strength of our own new phansies, that we utterly abolish the ancient truth.

Antichrists doctrine.
Verse. 11. That they should believe a lie.
This is the sum of Antichrists doctrine: it is a sermon, yea a volume of
lies: A capite ad calcem, from the* head to the heel, all is but a lie. The
Fathers have expressed some particulars, as that he should command
circumcision, the Jews sabbath for our Sunday, the temple at Jerusalem to be
reedified, the ceremonial rites to be observed, and that he himself is to be
worshipped above all gods. Though Antichrists doctrine have many branches, yet
all is but a lie. As a tree, though it has many arms and boughs, yet it is but
a tree; and a body, though it has many members, yet it is but a body: so is
Antichrists doctrine in all his parts and members but one main and continued
lie. Or else there shall be one masterlie, which is, that Christ is not Christ;
and all his other lies shall be of the family of this. And in regard of this
his false doctrine, he is called the false prophet in the 16, 19, and 20
chapters of the Revelation, as Christ is said to be the true Prophet in John 6.
14. This is of a truth the same Prophet that should come into the world.

Verse. 12. That all they might be damned, which believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.
Here is the end of false faith and bad life, which is, to swim in infidelity
and the pleasures of sin for a time, and then in the end to reap eternal
damnation. For when the sins of Antichrist shall be ripe, when his followers
have sucked in all the delights of unrighteousness, when they have fatted
themselves to the day of slaughter, when they have played their pageants, and
are in their full ruff; then of a sudden, as our Apostle says to these
Thessalonians, when they shall 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
say, Peace and safety, the sky shall alter, and the weather shall change,
and then the signs and prodigies of the worlds end and Christ's coming to
judgment shall act their parts.

The signs and prodigies of the worlds end.
The first is the rising from death to life of the two witnesses, after they
have been dead three days and a half, and their ascending up to heaven in the
gaze of their enemies, which is a sign of the resurrection, and of their
fellows following shortly after. Here begins Antichrists horror, as we
read in Revel. 11. In the three days space and half, while the witnesses
bodies lie dead in the streets and uninhumed, the Antichristians shall make
great mirth, and send gifts one to another: but when they shall see them to
stand again upon their feet, and after that to go up to heaven; then shall
great fear come upon them.

The second prodigy is the blackness of the Matthew. 24. 29. Acts 2. 20. Apoc.
6. 12, 13
sun, the bloudines of the moon, and the falling of the stars. As in the
worlds creation the light was the first days work; so in the worlds
destruction the light shall be first obscured. And as when the candles are put
out, men take their rest; so when sun and moon shall be extinct, the
righteous shall be translated to the rest of souls. To the wicked the light
shall be put out with utter darkness: but the godly shall go from the light
variable, to the light of glory. These two lights of sun and moon, shall be
to Antichrist and his company, two glasses to behold themselves in. The glass
of the sun (which represents the Father of lights) by his black darkness
shall reflect upon their consciences the light of Gods countenance removed from
them, and the blackness 2. Pet. 2. 4. Jude 13.
of darkness reserved for them in the pit of darkness. The glass of the moon
(which sembles the Church) by her bloody color shall oppose to them the
multitude of Christian blood by them shed in their persecution for the space of
three years and an half. And the falling of stars like mountains of fire
dashing before their faces, shall daze them with unspeakable perplexity, and
record unto them their falling from grace.

The third is the great Terrae-motus, such an earthquake as was not since men
were upon the earth, as it is in Revel. 16. 18. One says it shall be so great,
that neither man nor beast may stand upon the earth. Shaking goes before ruin,
as a sign of falling. Hereupon the Apostle infers, that the things which
are not shaken Heb. 12. 27.
may remain.

The fourth is the roaring of the seas and waves, expressed Luke 21. 25. And to
this Maris-motus he adds, that the sea shall lift it self forty cubits
above the height of mountains; insinuating, that now the waters prepare
themselves to claim their ancient right, which they had in the creation; which
is to be above the earth, as then it was, till God commanded the contrary for
the seat of men and terrene creatures. And this is confirmed Revel. 6. 14.
where is said, And every mountain and isle moved out of their places. Which is
not so to be understood, as though they were to leave their situation; but for
that they shall be no more seen, the mountains being demolished to make Ezekiel.
38. 20.
the orb even, and the waters being drawn over their faces, like a carpet over
a table.

The fifth is the horror of the air by fearful voices, thundrings and
lightnings, and the fall of hail, Every stone about the weight of a talent,
expressed Revel. 16. 21. and Ezekiel. 38. 22. All the elements shall be out of
order, presaging their dissolution, and the fearful punishment which
Antichrist must expect, when shortly after the element of fire shall be out 2.
Pet. 3. 12.
of his place, and flaming all the world over.

The sixth is the falling of buildings, mentioned Ezekiel. 38. 20. and Revel. 16.
19. And every wall shall fall to the ground: Et civitates gentium ceciderunt,
And the cities of the nations fell. When houses and castles fall, then there
will be no more dwelling here. Therefore it behooves all beforehand, to provide
for buildings made without hands.

The seventh is the strange behavior of living creatures, intimated Ezekiel. 38.
20. The fishes of the sea, the fowls of heaven, and the beasts of the field,
and all that move and creep upon the earth, shall tremble at my presence. One
interprets, that all the sea-beasts shall be gathered together above the sea,
and shall give a lowing up to heaven. The fowls shall flock together, and sigh
and howl one to another. And the beasts shall go lowing to the field; and when
they come there, shall refuse to feed, thereby portending their expected end.

The eighth is the cleaving and rending of rocks and stones, prefigured by the
stones rending at Christ's death, and demonstrating the hardness of
Antichristian hearts, which refuse to melt at the death of Christians, when the
inanimate and hard stones break in many pieces. And to this end the woods,
trees, and herbs also, shall sweat blood, as Sibylla foretold, (...). Sibyl.
Orac. lib. 8.


The ninth is the opening of graves, and the coming forth of bones standing by
the graves, rehearsed by one, and foreshewed by the graves opening, and the
bodies coming forth at Christ's resurrection. For if such demonstration was made
for the beginning, then the like premonstration is to be looked for in the
fulfilling, as a competent consectarie.

The tenth is the appearing of the sign of the Son of man in the firmament,
which the Fathers understand to be the sign of the cross upon which Christ
suffered. S. Augustine says, Quid est quod omnes noverunt signum Christi,
Tract. in Joann. 118. circa finem.
nisi crux Christi? Quod signum nisi adhibeatur, sive frontibus credentium,
sive ipsi aquae qua regenerantur, sive sacrificio quo aluntur, nihil eorum rite
perficitur: What is that which all have known to be the sign of Christ, but
the cross of Christ? which sign unless it be applied either to the foreheads
of believers, or to the water it self whereby they are regenerated, or to the
sacrifice wherewith they are nourished; none of these are rightly performed.
This the Gospel places as the immediate Matthew. 24. 30.
preceding sign of Christ's coming, like the mace or rod born before Kings and
Judges when they go to their tribunals, or like the ensign or standard carried
before conquering Emperors. For in this our Lord Jesus triumphed over his
enemies, as is expressed Coloss. 2. 14, 15. where it is said, that he nailed to
his cross the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, and spoiled
principalities and powers, triumphing over them in it. Wherefore upon the sight
of this sign it is said, Then shall all the Matthew. 24. 30.
tribes of the earth mourn: because then the Jews which put Christ to death
upon it, and Antichrist the Arch-Jew, with the whole earth adhering to him,
shall see him with his cross coming to take vengeance upon them. And Zech. 12.
10. Joh. 19. 37.
then shall the saying be fulfilled, They shall see him whom they have pierced.

These prodigies with others by S. Luke intimated, under the shaking of the
powers of heaven, Luke 21. 26.
and the things coming upon the earth, shall interpose themselves between the
end of Antichrists persecution, and Christ's coming, and shall so follow on the
neck of one another, that they shall be heartlesse and witless, not knowing
what to do by reason of fears and perplexity, in gazing upon such insolent
accidents. For now they shall see the heavens and elements to muster against
them, now Christ's people Luke 21. 28.
shall begin to lift up their heads, and come creeping out of their holes where
they lay hid from Antichrists finding; and now Antichrists Apoc. 12. 14. Apoc.
6. 15.
army shall seek holes to hide themselves in. Kings, great men, rich men,
chief captains, mighty men, bond and free, all shall run into caves and
dens, and the clifts of rocks Isa. 2. 19.
and mountains, and cry out unto them to fall upon them, and to hide them from
the face of Apoc. 6. 16.
him that comes against them so terribly.

Now when all things are thus prepared, when apostasy is at the furthest, when
idolatry is at the highest, when the man of sin has done his worst, when
God has been most opposed, and his little flock most oppressed, when all
things are out of form and order; then shall our Lord Christ come from heaven,
to reform all: he shall come in a day and hour unknown, to prevent men's
thoughts, to cause continued preparation, and greater admiration: millions of
angels shall attend him: he shall come in a shout, to procure astonishment; he
shall come with the voice of the Archangel and with the trumpet of God, to
sound alarm to the troops of his enemies: all creatures shall be moved at his
presence, all harbor shall be removed, the heavens shall run together like a
scrowl, and a white throne shall be set up. Then shall the dead arise, and
Christ shall send his angels to gather the world before him; a separation shall
be made; the sheep shall stand on his right hand, and the strong-sented goats
on his left: and in the midst of these on his left hand, as remarkable above
the rest, shall stand the Beast and Antichrist with all their marked flock,
when the high Judge shall say to them all, Depart from me, ye cursed, Matthew.
25. 41.
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. Then shall the
Beast inwardly roar, Antichrist shall bite his tongue for sorrow, and all his
followers hanging their heads shall follow him into the lake of fire and
brimstone, Apoc. 20. 10.
where they shall be tormented night and day for evermore. On the contrary,
then shall Christ's flock have all tears wiped from their eyes, their foreheads
shall shine like the sun in the firmament, they shall enter heaven gates with
the King of kings, and there reign in bliss and rest world without end.

Praise, honor, glory, and power, be unto him Apoc. 5. 13.
that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore.
AMEN.

