THE MOTIVES of Richard Sheldon Pr. for his just, voluntary, and free
renouncing of Communion with the Bishop of Rome, PAVL the 5. and his Church.

I saw the woman drunk, with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus; and I admired when I saw her, with great admiration. Apocal.
cap. 17. 6. Go out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her Sins;
nor receive of her punishments. Apocal. 18. 4. Published by Authority.

London printed for NATHANIEL BVTTER, and are to be sold at his shop near S.
Austines gate. 1612.

To Mr. George Birker, the Archpriest, and all other Priests, with the rest,
professing in England communion, with PAVL the 5. Bishop of Rome, that now is.
THese my inducements passing over with silence many others, by which I have
resolved to relinquish and renounce the communion of the present Bishop of
Rome, and to adioyne my self to the Catholic, and truly Apostolic Church of
England; I do not therefore address unto you, thereby to crave your
patronages, but to require your seuerest censures: expecting only, and humbly
begging (...) and do daily multiply obloquies against me; yea and libell also
against me, in respect of my book written in defense of my Prince and
Country: do presume to Dedicate these my Motives, (which will prove nothing
acceptable to Rome, or to some of your tastes) to your worthy persons and
names: the truth is, the cause of this, is my considence in truth, which I
deliver: the which being grateful to her veriest enemies, cannot but be
grateful to many of you, to whom I know the very sound of truth is pleasant,
though through the seducements of your lead^rs, and your little reading of Gods
Word, and books of controversy, you are now misled m^gn^rance: but ( veritas
filta temporis truth is the daughter of time, she does not always appear at
the first, as God wot she has very lately (would God sooner) to me; yet now
she is come and appears, (I profess without lying God is my witness) I
sen^^bile feel (in such sort as the soul can feel) my understanding and
sou^e, as it were a new enlightened, illustrated, consorted, and encouraged by a
new change and translation out of the (...) 1.
shadow of darkness, into the Ad Col^ss 1.
Kingdom of Gods beloved son Jesus: for whose testimony, Oh how happy
should I be to suffer even death it self. But because I am grown of late so
contemptible with you (wherein I rejoice) have, and do undergo the same
fortune which my (...) 6.
dear Savior, and only Master Jesus did sustain, being conversant upon
earth; in respect of the honor of the cause which I have undertaken ( sufferte
modicum quid insipientiae meae) suffer a little of my folly (to use the words
of the 2 Ad Cor. 11.
Apostle in like sort, beginning to commend himself) in commending of my self
to you; in such things whereof, for some circumstances, I take now no comfort,
but rather am ashamed of them, and with my very soul do lament them. When I
lived in the Roman English College (I begin there, if any one can say any
great ill of me, before that time or since, let him not spare to speak, he
has good leave) it is well known, how I was reputed to have profited, being
there better esteemed, (then I ever thought of my self) and for learning
compared with your Doctor Norrice, (a man of far worthier parts then my
self,) with whom also, (had not his oppositions against the governors of the
English College; and the general commotion of the same College let it) at
that very time I had defended public Theses and Conclusions out of the whole
corpse and body of Divinity; the same being with their Epistle Dedicatorie
allowed and ready printed for that purpose: but because Doctor Norrice might
not have that honor (in respect he was the^ in opposition against the
Superiors): I was desired not to expect (lest also the Bishop of Cassano,
Doctor Norrices Patron, and favorer then, should be discontented thereat)
the same at Rome; but I was promised to perform it in Spain, whether I was
sent with letters of as favorable commendations, both from the superiors of
the College, and their General Claudius Aquauiua, as ever any English Priest
had: and also with as ample faculties into England (yea in some things as it is
well known concerning The Rect ^r of the English College, ^i^hed me to set
down in writing, what faculties I desired, and that he would procute from the
Cardinal protector confirmation, and allowance of the same, which was
accordingly done so largely, as none had so large before, whereof I have a Copy
to show.
dispensations in all degrees of marriages contracted, or to be contracted
touching all Ecclesiastical positive impediments, letting or dissoluing
marriage, more ample then any other ever had before me) as any Priest or
Ignatian then in England had. And if I was not in good esteem then and there?
why did the Superiors of the English College request me only alone above
others to write a short letter, rather then a Petition to the Pope, who then
was Clement the 8. by the same to give testimony to that Pope, of their
upright government in the College, which then was so eagerly called in
question by most of the English there? I could use more folly (courteous
Reader) in adding many more very favorable particulars, as of my free access
to Cardinal Catetane Protector; to their General Aquauiua, etc. but I have
been too foolish already, being constrained thereunto. Since my coming into
this Kingdom, it is well known, I have been too too industrious in exhorting,
preaching, etc. And it is as well known that my conversation and
entertainment has been with the best (Honorable not excepted) let those,
who have known me last and longest, (who are very Worshipful, very true
hearted English, and unacquainted with the Equiuocating Spirit) Speak what my
carriage and conversation has been. But good Jesus, why do I thus trouble my
self, thus to waste paper and ink? calumniated I am, and most disgracefully
calumniated I shall be (as the Right Honorable my Lord of Canterbury his Grace
presaged to me when I first told his Grace of my resolution) but I will rejoice
therein, and shall esteem all as dungge, so that I may glory Ad Galat. 6.
in the Cross of Jesus Christ the only comfort and joy of my soul, the Act.
4.
only hope of my salvation. Let hell it self spew out against me all most
disgraceful taunts and calumniations: I will to God commend my cause, he will
bring the truth of my innocence in the end to light: I will in the mean use
patience, the anchor of all Christian souls in times of any tribulations and
distresses. Thus most humbly be^eeching, with heart prostrate, and in all your
behalfes the mercies of the 1 Ad Tim. 2.
only Advocate and Savior of Mankind, that you may return to the Isai. 51.
and ad Corinth. 1. cap. 10.
Rock ( vnde exctsiestis) from which you are cut, and here after build only
upon the Ad Corin. 3.
rock and foundation Jesus Christ (commending you all to his mercies and
protection) I take my leave of you all, this present Sunday, being, the 26. of
January. Anno Salutis, 1612.

Yours in Jesus Christ, RICHARD SHELDON Priest.

TO THE CHRISTIAN, AND CHARITABLE READER,
THE God of mercies, in his most gracious providence, concerning such, as he
has segregated to himself, from all eternities; does often, contrary to
their intended purposes, and designs; dispose, and design of them: then
working their conuersions to him, when they least dream thereof: yea, when
they are purposely, and obstinately striving against it. So he dealt with
Saul, who brought up at the Acts 22 and 26.
feet of Gamaliell, profited so much in Iudaisme, that by profession he became
a Pharisey, and so zealous Galat. 1.
an Emulatour of his forefathers traditiens, that at the merciful appearance
of the Savior of mankind Jesus Christ, he was so repleat with Ignorant zeal,
and so Acts 9.
breathing out of threatenings against Christ, that he obtained letters of
commission; from the Acts 12.
Chief Priest in Jerusalem, to go into Samaria, and to bring up bound, all
those who should profess his name. But prosecuting this design, because he
did it in 1. Ad Timoth. 11.
ignorance, he obtained mercy, and therefore by the most gracious voice, and
shining light of him, whom he persecuted, he was most happily prostrated to
the ground, in his way to Damascus; and being led to Samaria (the Place, where
he intended most to oppose against Christ) he was there not only converted,
by the ministry of Ananias, but he was further, so conforted and strengthened
by the Spirit of God; that of an instrument of wrath, he became a most Holy
vessel of Election, Ibidem.
confounding the Jews, in their Synagogues (the Jews I say, in their
Synagogues; who were erst, the elect People of God Ad Romans 9.
whose were the Promises, and the Lawgiuing, who justly gloried in that they
were the Ioh. 8.
Children of Abraham, to whom the 2 R^g. 3 and Ierem. 33.
Eternal Covenant with him and his posterity was made by God; of whose temple
God had promised to make Psalm, 13^
his dwelling place for ener.) But, these Jews, first so peculiarly elected
by God: yea and even then, in some sort his true Church; (though afterward
wholly rejected, and abandoned) this most excellent witness of Christ, did Act
9.
confound every where, throughout their Synagogues; teaching that Jesus the
Just one, whom they had denied and betrayed, was the Messiah Genes. 22.
promised to Abraham and his seed for ever. Myself, who a far of can only
admire the virtues of this admirable witness, do most humbly entreat of God,
that I may in the lest model imitate his zeal, in the professing and
testifying of Christ's truth. Having been brought up in Papisme, and much
profited therein, I became so zealous an Imitatour, and defender of all Romysh
humane traditions, and doctrines; that I would most willingly, have spent my
blood for the profession of the same: earnestly laboring, by preaching,
exhorting, writing, early and late, to draw all to a zealous profession of all
doctrines of that Church, (for so much as meerlie concerned matter of Religion)
as diverse both may, can, and will witness: which course I also prosecuted most
zealouslie being grounded, as I then thought, upon an invincible Rock, to
wit, the Authority of the present Roman Church. And although (I call the
heavens to witness) ever since I entered into the study of Divinity, and
serious perusing, and discussing of diverse controversies; as (to wit) of the
worshipping and adoration of Images, of Indulgences, of Purgatory, of Merits,
and inuocations of Saints (as necessary to salvation,) of the Popes
transcendent Supremacy; of the imagined transubstantiation; of the Canon of the
Mass; of the Public seruic^ in unknown tongues; and most specially of the
maine, principal, and fundamental controversy of Justification: I oftentimes
remained much unsatisfied in my understanding; notwithstanding all I could
read, in Bellarmine, Stapleton, Sanders, Vasques, etc. against all such doubts,
as either out of Scriptures, ancient Fathers, or Councels, were produced
against the doctrines of these controversies as they are now most stiflie
maintained, by the Roman Church: yet in respect of the misconceiued dignity,
and inerrabilitie of that See, and her Bishops (supposing that she would
decree nothing, nor had decreed nothing as matter of faith, but by general
consent of the whole Church.) I did so captiuate my understanding, in obedience
to her, and so firmly receive all that she taught as faith; that I would
have accounted my self most happy, to have suffered death for any point of
her doctrine, delivered as a point of faith by her. Thus walking in the way
from Jerusalem, into Samaria: it pleased him, who (as I most confidently
trust) has assumed me to his mercies; to knock at my conscience, and to
prostrate my soul, to a humiliation in her self, to open my eyes and ears,
to the harkening of his voice; bidding me beware of the way, in which I
walked, and look whi^herunto the corruptions of that Church, which I followed
did lead me; the which he vouchsafed, so sweetly to work with his gracious
illustrating, and freeing of my understanding, that I could not much doubt; at
first, but that it was ( Psalm. 117.
dextra Domini) the right hand of the Lord which did touch my understanding:
and as he thus wrought in my understanding, so he did also internally, and
immanentlie (as me thought) move my will, to a most sweet, sincere, and burning
1. John 4. Prou. 8. and John 14.
love of his Majesty; to a most resolute detestation of all my former sins,
greater or smaller; even to lament them ( Isai. 38.
in amaritudine animae) in bitterness of soul; purely for his love only,
moving me also to a longing desire, to be out of this wretched world; and to
be Ad Philip. 1.
dissolved, and to be with him: and withal, so long as I should breath, to
bear a resolute resignation to avoid all occasions of sins whatsoever,
(which also since my illustration, has so accompanied me, that look, as when
I resolve, to follow the truth offered, so I increase in detestation of sin;
look, as I have temptations and suggestions, moving me to waver from the
same either in respect of credit, love of my old acquaintance, and of the
world, or of former means, and maintenance; so also, I had inclinations, to
yield to other sins, and a weakness also, to withstand temptations as
before.) It pleased also his infinite goodness, at these times jointly to
inspire, and suggest unto my soul, that in his mercies, and by his death and
passion only, I was redeemed, and to be saved: not as with a wretchlesse
presumption, believing Jacob. 2..
this out of a dead faith, but withal, that by his holy assistance I was
necessarily to live and persevere, in his holy love and fear; and in the Math.
7
observation of all his most holy commandments, so far as humane infirmity,
or ignorance would permit me.

Thus being touched (pardon me Christian Reader for this disclosing the
secrets of my soul) I did often prostrate my soul, and my heart, beseeching
that Ad Titum. 3.
humanity, and benignity of Jesus, my only Advocate, that he would not, for
my Psalm. 78.
former sins, and ignorances of my youth abandon me, but that he would Psalm.
24.
vouchsafe to Psalm. 5*
confirm me with his principal spirit: and to remove from my soul all
shadows and deceits of Satan, and to bring me to his iotes: for in him only,
with him only, and for him only, I desired to live or die; yea so resolved
therein, that whatsoever should betide me, either in this life or the next;
yet I esteemed it all happiness that his name should be glorified in me,
either by justice or mercy. As my Soul, was thus communing with herself, and
my Savior; jointly, did present themselves to my memory, many my former
thoughts, against the Roman human traditions and doctrines (especially the
pernicious Breefes, of Paul the fifth, against the Oath of allegiance) yea and
even th^n, by happy occasion, chanced into my hands, a Remes ^ estament, where
happily I light upon Annotat. in 22 Luc upon those words, Simon, Simon, and
Ann^tat. upon the first of the Acts, and upon the 1. 10 the Corinth. 14.
some of their corruptions, and abuses: yea and one pernicious error, or
rather heresy, the which as I had often observed before, but had passed it
over, in respect of my blind obedience to their doctrines: so then I
reconsidered more seriously; and withal proposed it to some in this place
(who are worthily esteemed learned) but they gave me little satisfaction,
because as the corruptions were wilful, and inexcusable* so the error was
pernicious, and indefensible. But above all other; two considerations, then did
offer themselves, to my serious, and pensive understanding; first, how not
only the Bishop of Ro^e himself, but also all his Canonists (some very few
only excepted) all those of the society of Ignatius, and all other the
greatest firmaments of the present Roman religion; do obstinately maintain,
that the Popes judgment alone, teaching the whole church, was to be believed
(believed I say) as the infalible Oracle of God; which to my understanding and
faith, was so clear an heresy, and blasphemy against God; contrary to all
Scriptures, all ancient Councels, Fathers, yea all Ancients (some few Popes
only excepted, whose testimonies are either counterfeited, or else giving
testimony for themselves, their testimonies are not true, and worth-receiuing)
that I fully resolved, not to give, an obedient and obsequious ear to the
present Roman Church therein; because she did so perniciously err in the
very rule of faith it self. For if the square, and rule be crooked, or
uneven, how can any thing, that is to be leuelled therewith, be right and
straight? the blind, leading the blind, both fall into the ditch Luc. 6.
says Christ. Secondly I observed, by what preposterous means, contrary to
all Antiquity, and Christ's most express institution, in Mat. 22. Mar. 12.
S. Matthew; the Popes do now challeng, and assume power to depose Princes,
dispose of Kingdoms, dissolve fidelity (though with oath confirmed) not only
in case of heresy, in the Prince, by him so termed (although this his
mystical power, was at first only pretended by the learned Ignatians,
against notorious Heretics, and manifest Apostates) but in case also, of any
enormous delict, or insufficiency, in any Princes whatsoever: yea and to
speak plain English; in what case soever, it shall please his holiness
iudicially to proceed. For who of the Pontificians, dare See page 43. following.
retract his sentence? who ever resisted him and had peace? or was not thundered
against; with excommunication, deposition, or deprivation? which when I
seriously pondered; as in the sight of God, I could not but think, that it
was sovereignty, not religion; increase of possession, not salvation of
souls, which the later Popes aimed at; as also I shall, most clearly deliver
in my motives following.

Further, I observed, that for the fortifying of this mystical power of the
Image of the Roman Empire, they endeavored to make hereof a new article of
Faith: for indirect furthering whereof; most impudently without all forehead,
Upon the feast of the invention of the Cross, P. W. in a public assembly, and
at a public panegericall oration made for the Martyrs honor at Lo^aine,
prayed thus unto him S. Henrice intercede pro no^is. Holy Henry pray for us, I
do not hear that he made R. Houldcorne a Saint, which may well be admired.
diverse of the Ignatians do labor tooth and nai^e, to make the late
Archtraitour Garnet, a martyr (a fit martyr indeed with his Consorts, for this
their new article of faith) and by a pseudoprodigious, and mendacious straw
(the imaginary face of which, was first observed and found, by a notorious
dicing and carding priest, etc) to make the Author of all goodness, as a
witness of the innocence, and integrity of that man; who with other his
Accomplices, was not only acquainted, but also (as the public records of this
Realm published accordingly to his trial, made in the face of the whole
Kingdom do witness) was a Concealer, an Abettour, and principal Furtherer
of the same.

I must needs confess Christian Reader, that these two considerations, did
produce in my soul a kind of horror, and dread, to be partaker of that
Church; which was to be supported by so weak and fallible a rule of faith, as
the Popes variable judgment is; and to be ampliated, and enlarged, by such
means, as none but the very smoakie Apocal. 9.
Locusts, arising from out of the bottomless pit, would offer to attempt. Thus
my soul wavering and being tossed; I, with all humility knocked often at the
gates of his mercy, who Math. 7.
promises to open, to all such, as confidentlie knock thereat: I entered into
a more serious search of these matters; I read with great diligence; I
conferred also with such as are reputed learned, and Chiesetaines in this
place; so long as I saw One of these, M. G. B. Archp. being very lately dead is
falsely by some reported to have changed his opinion for the Oath of Allegiance.
them willing to give me any satisfaction; but when I clearelie observed, that
their answers to the sacred Scriptures, and ancient Authorities produced by
me, were mere tergiuersations; and that they resolutely rested upon the
authority of the present Roman Church, and her practice, disesteeming
whatsoever, was clearly brought against her (against whose authority,
command, and Breefes, notwithstanding some of them do practice) I could not
but resolve, to leave off conference with them; remembering that of the Isai, 6.
Act. 28.
Prophet Esaias, unto the Jews, and used also by the Apostle S. Paul in like
case: Incrassatum est cor populihuius, etc. The heart of this people is become
gross, and with their ears, they have heard heavily, and they have closed
their eyes, lest perchance they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I heal
them. This their estate, as I did and do, from the very bottom of my heart
lament, so it did greatly increase my doubts, mustring themselves to my
Conscience, against the novel traditions, and vncatholike doctrines of the
Church of Rome; whereof (Christian Reader, with thy patience and good
acceptance) I will communicate part, to thy courteous view: not because, I
esteem my self so learned, as though I were able, to produce any new learning
never thought on before, (for in very deed, I do rank my self, amongst the
meanest of Gods servants, and Priests) nor, because, I do seek in matters of
Religion, to be applauded by the worlds judgment, or to please human
censures; but alonely, that thou may consider, upon how weighty inducements,
I have relinquished the intolerable, and pernicious burden of human
traditions; reared up, against Gods institution, that if thou be wavering from
the Firmament of Truth, of Gods word, and holy ancient Church; thou may with
me be stayed; if thou art already sedu^ed, (as I have been) thou may be
reclaimed, to the sweet yoke of Jesus Christ.

My heart bleeds, to think how many in this Kingdom (and some of them my
special acquaintance, virtuously and zealously disposed) are carried away with
most dangerous errors; obtruded unto them, only upon the Roman Bishops
prerogative, of not erring: (and yet heaven and earth proclaims that Popes may
err and be Heretics:) God of his infinite mercy, vouchsafe to open their
eyes, that they may receive the charity of Truth; that they may see that
defection, and apostasy accomplished in them, and their defendants; which the
2 ad These. 2
vessel of election, so long ago for^told; and whereof the Prophet and Apoc.
17.
Apostle in his Revelation so clearelie discourses; showing that Kings and
Nations should be drunk, and be bewitched with the Cup of Romes Fornications:
Fornications he says, thereby most clearly demonstrating; that some Roman
Church, or Congregation, (for most clear it is, and best Pontificians deny it
not, that of Rome he prophecieth) erst a Spouse, but after a Strmpet, (in
respect of her spiritual aduoutries) first pure, but after most impure; first
Christian, but after Antichristian: (for her doctrines and practices, against
the most pure doctrine, and humble conversation of Christ) first with a cup of
Christian simplicity in her hands, deuoid of humane dregs; but after, with a
Ibidem.
cup, full of abominations, and corruptions; with which, she should delude all
Nations, and Kingdoms of the earth: making merchandise and negotiating with
the souls of men: the which, if it should not be already fulfilled in the Roman
Church, it must be hereafter at least, if the Prophet truly have forespoken:
The later of which, especially touching the merchandising of souls in
avarice, how clearlie it is already completed, in the Roman Church; diverse
earnest professors agreeing in all points of faith with the Roman Church in
their times, will plainly b In ementitam Constantini donationem.
testify: Saepissime.
as Baptista, Mantuanus In Henr. 3.
Valla, Robertus Lincolriensis in c Matthew of Paris, In Epist. 1. ad Titum.
Claudius Espencaeus, S. ^ab Cons. ad Eugenium.
Bernard, Constitut. Imperial page 39
Frederike the Emperor in his Epistle to all Prelates, Baronius 992.
Arnulphus in a Synod at Rhemes in Baronius; and read Baronius also in the
year 912. where you shall find him affirming; how at the lust of whores,
diverse Popes most wicked, luxurious, and auaricious, were thrust into Peter's
chair; and how that custom lasted not for a short while only. Claudius
Espencaeus as he is now set forth, is wholy corrupted, you must read his
first Edition.
All these, with infinite others, do demonstrate the corruptions of the Roman
Church, would God, effectually for the conversion of seduced souls. Wherein, I
can conceive, no great hope; first, of all such popish servants, as reap
profitte, or living by that profession; nor of such children, as are under the
command of some obstinate recusants: nor of any such bankrupts, and
malcontents, as expect alterations, and long for troubled waters to fish in:
nor of such scrupulous good souls, as will not dare to peruse, or read any
part of holy Scripture (though of the Rhemists Testament it self, falsified
with their Annotations) lest they should prove Heretics (as some of them have
told me) or else, remain perplexed in their Consciences: nor of some of their
Priests, who are resolved for the maintenance of their credit, conseruing of
their means, and some such other respects, with their fauoritesses (I mean,
such like favors as will move men to travel up to Rome, to procure
dispensations for marriages; and yet in their absences and long pilgrimages,
such painful pilgrims, notwithstanding stripped of their fauouritesses, by
some of their own brotherhood, which have come betwixt them and home) are ready
without examination of Scriptures, or Fathers, to receive whatsoever the Roman
Church shall obtrude unto them. Neither may I conceive hope of any such younger
persons who expect preferment, by One of the most special practices of the
Pontificians in England, to enlarge their religion, is to procure matches in
marriages: do thou make the inferences, Christian Reader. There is a mystery
in it, if the natures of young spirits be considered, who commonly at such
seasons are rather full of the heat of carnal love, then of that fire which
Christ came to send into this world, Luke 12.
matching into some stock and family, the which as it abhors the reading of
the Scriptures, so also is inueterated in Papistrie. My chiefest hope, may be
of those, who as they are judicious, so embrace that faith merely out of
conscience, and are nothing dependant of others; who either, through the
peremptory, auaricious, factious, and unchaste lives of their Priests; or
generally, for the hateful opposings and uncharitableness amongst them all;
(by which they demonstrate themselves to be no disciples of Christ, whose
proper badge and stem is Ioh. 13.
dilection and love of each other:) or else, through the vain multiplicity of
devised fables and miracles, out of their old Legends: and withal through the
inexcusable ignorance of their Priests, in Gods sacred Scriptures (which I dare
boldly affirm, is so great, that there are, scarce, a hundred amongst diverse
hundreths of them, in this Kingdom, who can tell, either how many books there
are of Gods Scripture, or how many Chapters there are in any of the books.) Or
else, through the inuallid successes, or events of their vows, being either
not heard, or not regarded by them, to whom they are made: or else, through the
contiuuall disquietnesse, and torment of their consciences, in the I disprove
not' but highly commend the use of Auricular Confession, when it is voluntary,
without sacrilege used, and for comfort; not abused as the very means and cause
by which sinners are justified in the sight of God: much like as the Mexicans
used Auricular Confession. Botero Relationi universally. Part. 4. lib. 2. nel
fine.
use of their Sacrament of confession (as it is now by them most peruersly
abused to the injury of Christ, and subversion of diverse souls) receiving no
It is not imaginable what inconsolable lives some (that are frequente in the
use of Confession, as necessary to salvation) do lead, there is no stony
heart, which would not pity them, knowing their torments.
rest day nor night, Ierem. 16
as serving Gods who cannot give it them, are grown into some distrust of the
Roman Church. Of these might be conceived some just hope of their
conuersions, if they would vouchsafe either to read holy Scriptures, or else
to read some learned books, written by some learned Priest or Preacher of the
reformed and Catholic Churches, of Christendom: but I greatly doubt they will
not dare, without leave of their Priests so to doc: and I am most assured, that
by them they shall never be permitted. A certain Bishop of Italy, was not
ashamed to tell Claud Espene. Comeut in cap. 1 ad titum.
Claudius Espencaeus, a famous Pontifician, that the learned men in Italy it
self, were afraid to study the holy Scriptures, (lest thereby they should
become Heretics) and that therefore they employed themselves in commenting
upon the Popes lawbookes, deerees, and the Decretals; (the which Book,
thoughfull of lies, contradictions, impertinencies; yet because it is the Popes
Book it must be respected, whilst the holy Scripture lies as it were in the
streets neglected. But to these may not that of Christ be justly objected; (
Serui nequam) wicked servants, out of your own mouths I condemn you?
Assuredly, these and like Italianized Prelates, (of m Luke 19.
which, for greatest number consisted the Tridentine Council) are none of
those, who are reputed blessed by the Prophet Psalm. 2
David, for meditating in the law of God day and night. But to shorten this my
letter, addressed unto thee, Christian and Catholic Reader; I humbly request
thee to accept with charitable interpretation these my Motives, and to pray for
my constancy in profession of Gods truth: I must needs confess that I did
find great difficulties in this my conversion: First some suggestions (by
Satan suborned) how greatly this my conversion would turn to my
disestimation, with all of the present Roman faith, and those my dear and old
acquaintance, of whom I affirm, that they are virtuously disposed for whose
saluations vtinam vt Anathema superimpenderer: Would God, to speak with the Ad
Romans 9. and 2. ad Corint. 12
Apostle, I might as an Anatheme be sacrificed, yea offered and offered again,
so that they might be saved. Some other lesser difficulties I found; all were
humane, terrene: but when I considered that of the Ad Galat. 1
Apostle, if I should seek to pleasemen, I should not be the servant of
Christ; and that of Luke 12
Christ; Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the justice thereof, and then all
these things will be added unto you: I fully resolved for the charity, and Ad
Philip. 3
supereminent knowledge of Christ, to esteem all that is in the world as very
dung, and rather to dwell poor Psalm. 83
in the house of God, then to dwell in the rich Tabernacles of sinners: And in
this my resolution I was somewhat the more confirmed, in respect, that from my
very youth; even then, when I was too too zealous an Emulator of all Roman
superstitions: I have ever had often suggestions, and inspirations in my mind,
that a time would come, when I should be calumniated, and greatly abused by the
Papists, and persecuted by the Pope himself, whom I then admired as an
heavenly Oracle upon earth: but most of all I was filled with such
foreapprehensions, and presages (being in Rome) upon Anno Dom. 1594 the 20. of
June.
the same day and hour, when that glorious and renowned Christian Marsh
suffered the cutting off, of his right hand; the gagging of his mouth (by the
Counsel of the Ignatian Cowlin, who boasts himself thereof in England) after
that, the pulling, tearing, and burning of his flesh with hot glowing pincers
for many hours together, through many streets, of the City of Rome; and lastly
death it self by fire; with such admirable patience and constancy, that the
Romans themselves did greatly admire him therefore. His act, for which he was
so tormented, was, because he had thrown down their Sacrament, as it was
publicly carried through the streets of Rome in public Procession, to be
adored, worshipped and inuocated as God himself (an idolatrous superstition
lately crept into that Church, contrary to the custom and practice of all
ancient Churches whatsoever.) And yet notwitstanding all such suggestions, and
inspirations at that time (which I constantly rejected as temptations) I did,
being earnestly entreated and urged thereunto by the Superiors of the English
College, make an Oration, and a most vehement This Oration was ready penned to
me, because I had little above a day to provide my self for the prpnouncing
thereof, before, so public an Audience.
inuectiue against that fact of his, in the presence of diverse Cardinals and
Prelates; assembled together, in the English Church, to keep a solemn Mass
of the Sacrament, some month after the death of that glorious Christian. But
what may I now (upon this event) interpret those presages, inspirations, and
forewarnings, else to have been, then sweet motions, and inducements from him;
who as I trust has segregated me, to preach the Gospel of his beloved Son
Jesus? the which then I passed over with a deaf ear, but his goodness
vouchsafing now, to open my ear; I may not contradict, but bless him
eternally, for that he has made me a child of Ad Romans 8. and ^. P^t. 2
adoption, of acquisition, and election: believing with Ad Rom 10.
heart, and confessing with mouth, for my justification and salvation only,
and alonely in Jesus Christ. But before I conclude, I entreat the Courteous
Reader, that Ad Galat. 5. Jacob. 2.
both by faith and conversation; by godly Act. 2
frequenting of the most venerable Sacrament, of Christ's body and blood; by
devout Ad Col. 3. and Jacob. 1
attendance, and harkening to Gods word, so daily, so clearly, so lively
preached in this Kingdom; by daily Psalm. 1.
meditating in Gods holy Scriptures; and above all by conseruing his soul
Jacob. 1. and 2. Pet. 3. Luke 8 Matthew. 3
impolluted from alliniquity of sin, and the contagion of al worldly desires,
and solicitudes; by exercising 2. Ad Corint. 9
chearefully, plentifully, all charitable offices, to all such as are in
affliction and necessity; by keeping his body 1. Ad These. 4
a clear vessel from all impurity, and impudicity; and his tongue from all
scurrill Ad Ephesians. 5 Ad Romans 13
and unseemly speeches; seriously to endeavor to make 2. Pet. 2
sure his vocation; and to 1. Pet. 2.
stop the mouths of such, who in respect that some of the reformed Churches
(especially of the Clergy) live not conformably to their doctrine, do blaspheme
the sacred Truth of Christ's immaculate Gospel. I have seen much into the
lives of the Adverse part; the which although, I find to be more impure,
auaricious, proud, uncharitable, then ever I could have imagined; yet that is
not the cause, why I left them, but the impurities, abominations, and
superstitious impertinencies of their doctrines, worships, laws, and customs;
which my soul hates: assuring it self, that if I should still continue, in
communion with them, I could have no part with Christ my Savior: to whom, for
having most mercifully 2. Ad Corint. 5.
reconciled me, to his Father in himself, be only, and alonely, with his
Father and the holy Ghost, Honor and Glory, for ever, Amen.

Yours in Christ Jesus, R. S.

The Contents of this book of MOTIVES.
THe Preface, showing the first occasions, inducements, and manner, of the
Authors conversion. The division of the Motives. 1. Into Motives out of the
Pontificious Erroneous Doctrines. 2. Out of their dangerous and wicked Laws.
3. Out of certain observations touching the dangerous Spirits of sundry
Chief English Romanists. Page. 1.
Motives of Doctrine.
FIrst Motive touching Doctrine, is out of the Pontifician unsound rule of
Faith, to wit, the Popes sole Judgment, defining ( ex Cathedra) out of the
Chair, as Pastor of the Church. Page 2. Second Motive is, out of another rule
of their faith, to wit, Apocriphall Scriptures. Page 27. Third Motive is, out
of their most Idle rule of Faith traditions; as they do pretend them. Page 31.
Fourth Motive is, out of the usurped transcendent power of Popes in Temporals,
and Spirituals. Page 41. Fifth Motive is, out of the most Superstitious Roman
Doctrine, for the Adoration and worshipping of Images. Page 69. Sixth Motive
is, out of diverse observations, touching sundry superstitious fooleries,
contradictions and impertinences of the Roman Mass. Page 86. Seventh Motive
is, out of their most vain and intolerable Doctrines, and abuses touching
Indulgences. Page 119. Eight Motive is, out of their irreligious Doctrine,
against the use of the public Liturgies, and Church services in known
tongues. page 128. Ninth Motive, briefly touches their most unchristian
Doctrine of Aequiuocation. page 137. Tenth Motive, briefly taxes their
tyrannical denying of Indifferent Reading of holy Scriptures in the vulgar
tongues. page 140.
Concerning their wicked Customs, and Laws: the Author touches only a few.
FIrst, the wicked custom and Law by which their Popes strictly forbid, that
there be any public commemoration in their Masses for the conversion of any
Infidels, Heretics, or excommunicated persons, etc. or for the temporal
prosperity and safety of Sovereigns, being by them reputed Heretics. page
144. Second, hypocritical law, and custom, touching their fastings, and days
of fasting. page 148. Third, most impure permissiue law, for their houses of
prostitution; even in Rome it self: not without great gain to the Popes
Coffers. page 151. Fourth, most unchristian law, that in case of no extremity
the venerable Sacrament may be celebrated without their Massing vestiments,
altarstones, etc. and such like humane devises and institutions. page 152.
Fifth, most injurious law, by the which, the Laity contrary to the Institution
of Christ, and practice of all antiquity; is debarred of the cup, in the most
holy and dreadful Sacrament. page 153. Sixth, unchristian law, is the
necessary annexing of the vow of Chastity, to all their greater holy orders; by
occasion of which law, the vile impurities of the Roman Cougregation are
grown innumerable and inexpressible. page 154.
Touching certain observations out of the Pontifician Spirits.
FIrst, the Author discovers by diverse notable particulars, the disloiall and
unnatural Spirits of the Ignatian Cheefetaines of the English: in the manner of
their preaching, and their propagation of the Roman Gospel in England. page
1. alpha. 2. Secondly, he shows in diverse particulars, how they do most
shamefully calumniate the Church of England, for her Doctrines and her public
Liturgy. page 13. alpha. 2. Thirdly he shows how generally all
Pontificians, deny consent of Ancient Fathers; being produced, against diverse
points of their novel Doctrines. page 20. Fourthly, he shows how the younger
Ignatians, do imitate the unnatural and disloiall Spirits of the old. page
24. In the Conclusion he shows more largely, both out of Scriptures, and
Fathers, that the Church of Rome, notwithstanding her visibility and
Conspicuity, may Justly, and (in respect of her corruptions) necessarily, ought
to be forsaken. page 32.
THE NOVELL AND HERETICAL Rule of the Roman FAITH.
Division of the Motives.
THE Savior of mankind who has vouchsafed to illustrate the eyes of him, who
sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, to know his truth: will also, I
hope, vouchsafe so to confort him, that he may rather convert some then
confound any; of those, who call themselves true Jews, and Catholics, which
they are not, but are indeed only the Synagogues and Congregations of the
Bishops of Rome: who in Dictatus Greg. 7. apud Baron. anno 1175. As Bell.
admits Papa, properly signifies a Father, that begets children, and
therefore all begotten of him and to him, are denominated of him, Papists.
Gregory the V 11. did first of all by decree assume unto themselves
(excluding all other Priests and Bishops from that name Papa) the name of
Fathers of the whole Church, to wit, to be only called Papae, from which name
all their children by denomination are called Papists; rather, then from
Christ, Christians: which ( Papae) Fathers also, somewhat before that time, at
that time, and now also, do peremptorily challenge to be the only Universal,
Catholic, and immediate Pastors and Fathers of all, who do Ad Romans 10. (...)
a greek preposition, signifies properly as much as the Latin preposition pro
for: so taken. Math. 17. (...): and Math. 20. (...), and in composition it
signifies properly for instead: as (...) In some words of composition, it
signifies also opposition as (...). Yea and in (...) it is also in such a
signification to be indifferently used according to the natural signification
of the word.
invoke the name of Jesus, be they Patriarks, Primates, Bishops, Priests, or
who elsesouer: so that they only and alonely must be the immediate Vicars of
Christ, for Christ, and in Christ's steed; and if it please you to use the
Greek words in their own sense, they are sole Vicars, * (...) Vicars for
Christ: so that agreeingly to Bellar. lib. de Romans Pont. saepissime.
Bellarmines doctrine, and almost all of his Society (directly against the
prerogative of Christ) the Church is to be called Ioh. 20.
one fold, and one visible flock, because it has one Pastor and one
Sheepe-heard the Pope; and so accordingly he must, forsooth, only be the door,
and dorekeeper of the Church, only to let in and to shut out. And would God,
they would also prove to be at least of the good shepherds to give their lives
for their sheep, would God they would at leasly vouchsafe 1. Tim. 1.
to preach to their flock, and not place all the governing of their flock, in
idle decreeing faith, and ambitious enacting of laws: such laws as tend so
greatly to Christ's dishonor, to the scandal of the whole world, and setting
up of their own Papacies, and the augmenting of their temporal Dominions. But
alas these courses of them being the very shipwreck of good consciences, are
also evident signs of shipwreck in faith, and where the Psalm. 35.
foot of pride has moved them, there the foot of infidelity also has
followed, by the working of wickedness, and the malignant enemy. The motives
which have moved me to leave their communion, so far as they have abandoned
and left the purity of the Roman Primitive Church, which was no sooner
planted, but it was sliding, if you will believe Onuphrius annotat, in Platinam
in vitam Petri. Of the Roman Church also is meant that which Genebr. ad ann.
898. out of Platin. Negligentia Episcoporum, etc. by then negligence of Bishops
manyabuses crept into the church Which in respect of the wars could not be
repressed. Thus they.
Onuphrius, I will divide into three principal heads: The first shall contain
Motives, out of their pernicious and heretical doctrines. The second, Motives
out of their most dangerous and wicked laws. The third, Motives out of the
observations which I have made of the Spirits of the English Chieftaines of the
Roman profession. I thought to have had adjoined, fourthly, some general
observations touching the corrupt lives; especially of some principal ones of
their Clergy, wherein I could produce many particulars, and such as could not
be gainsaid: but Eccles. 3.
omnia tempus habent, if occasion require and they desire it, they shall well
understand that they have little cause to brag of the innocence and
integrity of many of their English Apostles and Martyrs.

Motives touching doctrine.
The first Motive.
FIrst, I suppose for truth, as clear as any demonstration, that what Church
soever does perniciously err in the rule of Faith, must or may perniciously
err in all conclusions and propositions of faith, deducted out of that
erroneous Rule. Now that the Roman Church does perniciously err in the very
rule of faith, I make it thus manifest. The rule of faith with the perfect
Romans, is the Popes sole judgment, when he defines ex Cathedra, that is (to
expound their phrase in their What the Romans mean by their Popes defining,
Ex Cathedra.
own sense) when he so defines, that he intends thereby to teach the
whole Christian Church, (for some of them not wholy Romans will not
obstinately, and in express terms say, that he, cannot err when he defines
and pronounces for a particular Church) to believe and practice as he
decrees, and defines, and that this is the only inerrable rule of faith,
with the Romans; and that in the Pope alone resideth infallibility of
defining, and that all other means, as consent of Fathers, without him, either
in Counsel, or out of Counsel, may be subject to errors, deceive, and be
deceived, it is the most express sentence and doctrine of 2. 2. q. 11. art. 2.
ad 3. and refer. cause. 24. q. 1. cap. Quotiescunque.
Aquinas, Bellar. lib. 2. de Christo, c. 28. lib. de Conci^^s saepe.
Bellarmine, Valentia in his Analysis of faith, where he has this conclusion,
lib. 8. c. 1. 2. and 3. Quo, tiescunque, etc. As often as the Pope in desining
questions of faith, uses that authority wherewith he is endued, that
doctrine must by divine precepts be received of al christians as a sentence of
faith, and we must believe, that so often he uses that authority, as often as
in controversies of faith, either by himself, or with his Council of Bishops,
he shall so determine one part of the question, that he will bind the whole
Church to receive the same.
Valenti, Coq. in his Treatise against our Kings Premon. very often.
Coquaeus, Endaemon in his Parralell.
Endaemon, Par. in his Philopater,
Parsons, Baldwin. lun. lib. de Romans Pont. cap. 9. prop. 1. and 2. ex Bellarm.
operibus in sua solida si dei demonstr.
Baldwinus Iunius, Siluester in sum. verbo Fides. Coquae. page 27. The
purpured Fathers are Senators and Counselers of the Pope, and with them he
judges the whole world. Thus he.
Siluester, all Canonists, very few excepted, two only (to wit, Panormit.
Zabarel:) which I now remember: of all of the Society of Ignatius; of
Baronius most often in his Annals, and in his Parenisis* to the Venetians, and
in his Voto to Paul the fifth: of Suares, Vasques, Azor, Coccius in his
voluminous aggregat most often. Sanders, Allen, Genebrard, Gretser, Becan,
Carerius, the two Bozius, Mancinus, Boter: with infinite others, all whom it
is both impossible and needless to relate. Let the decrees of Leo 10. in the
Council of Laterane, Boniface the 8. Vnam Sanctam, and the two decretall
Epistles of Sixtus the 5. and d Clement the 8. set before the late vulgar
editions of those two Popes, (pretended by some to be the whole, by others only
the amended translation of S. Hierome (for yet they are not agreed) stand for
all: now what Pontifician can without note of impiety, or infidelity, call
in question this their doctrinall and dogmaticall position, which is so
clearly and resolutely maintained by them, practiced and defined by their
Popes? yea, and by Leo the tenth in his Laterane Council, and Eugenius in his.
And although some moderate Romanists to smoothe this uneven rule, will seem
to say, that the Pope ought to take advise of his Brethren the Cardinals, or of
Bishops (his deputies) when he will define: notwithstanding, such politic
excusers of their shame, and all other defenders of this their position, do,
and must maintain, that the infallibility of any definition is from the Pope
alone. Here-hence it is, that all English Ignatians, and most English Priests
at this present in England, and else where, are such violent enemies against
the Oath of allegiance, and esteem all such as take or allow of it, as
Heretics, as lapsed from the Catholic Roman faith; because (say they) the
Pope in his Briefes has defined, and decreed, that there are diverse points in
it against the Catholic faith (Roman he should say) and yet I suppose as very
clear, that none of the English Secular Priests did expressly know, against
what special points of faith the Oath was, till now of late a certain A
Brief declaration, etc. together with a recapitulation, etc. by H. I.
Ignatian recapitulater, under a double title promising a double book, but
bringing forth only a short pamphlet, and that a namelesse one, (and therefore
a Libell) has showed in his namelesse defense of the Roman faith, that Pope
Paul the 5. in his Breues has Page 32. Ibidem page 56.
defined the same Oath to be heretical, and unlawful, because it denies the
Popes power to depose Princes, and dispose of Kingdoms (an article of faith
with him in his libell, although not naming himself, I may justly say, Rom 1.
My ears have heard many Ignatian Priests constantly affirm, that Paul the 5.
had defined in his late Breues that the oath could not be taken, and that his
Brief was a definition of faith: so R. B. G. B. I. F. R. L. M. W. T. T T. F.
I. K. with diverse others of that profession.
erubescit cuangelium, he is ashamed of his Gospel.) But no marvel that the
Ignatians, are so well acquainted with the mysteries of the Popes faith, for
since their Father Ignatius his beatifying, who had so many Apud Ribadin in
vita Ignat.
idle revelations, I doubt not, but that they have received new illustrations
from that Code and Deske of all law, faith and right (the Popes breast) which
the ancient Church never knew. But when The Recapitulater in the Title of his
unlearned and seditious pamphet: and for his traitorous doctrine, see him page
43.
Promised Leonard Lessius comes forth with his demonstrations (for he would
seem to demonstrate in all his books) as this pamphletter of Louaine (not H.
I. but P. W.) has covertly promised; doubtless, he will reveal the hidden
mystery which was* not known in the Primitive Church, though then darkly
working, but was to be 2 Thessalonians. 2.
revealed in these times, with which the world is likely to end.

But to return to what I have to prove. It being manifest, that Popes, and the
Roman particular Church, with all those of the society of Ignatius (not
excepting any one) do dogmatically maintain, that the Pope defining, ex
Cathedra, is the infallible, uncontrollable, vnappellable, and only necessary
Judge in all controversies of faith, it should be lost labor in me to stand to
prove that this their position is believed by them, as a point and article of
their faith; nay, I should say as a principle, and very maxim of their faith.
For, can any the simplest idiote doubt, but that the infallible rule of faith,
which declares faith, squareth faith, must be believed as faith, and by faith;
But by this their novel article of faith, by inevitable consequence it
follows, that they differ in the most fundamental point of belief, from all
such Fathers, Councels, and Doctors, as did maintain, or as yet do, that the
most infallible rule of faith is the doctrine of the Scriptures, especially
when it is publicly declared out of the same Scriptures, by the authority of
free General Councels, and the public voice of the universal Christian
Church, the which rule of faith, as I am most assured all Conc. Hierosol. Act.
15. Greg. in ep 1. ad Corin^h. apud pateriu^. Vinc Lirin. contra hereses cap.
4. S. Austen most clearly. contra Donat. lib. 2. contra epist. funda. tract.
vltimo in Ioh. contra Crescon. and alibi sepissime Cyprian. lib. de vnitate
Ecclesiae. in epist. ad Pomp. Patres conc. chal cedo. Sinod. 6. 7. 8. conc.
Constan. Basil. Consta^tinus apud Eusebius. in eius vita. Con. Constantinopol. in
epist. ad ep^sc. Romans congregatos ^arissime, apud Zozom. l. 5. c. 9. l At this
pre^ent now in ^aris it is required of the Ignatians amongst other articles, to
wit, that the Pope cannot depose Princes etc. to subscribe also to the
superiority of the general Council ^boue the Pope
ancient Fathers did teach and believe, so it cannot be doubted, but that many
learned, both in Germany, England, and q France, do still profess and
maintain: to all whom, as to the ancient Fathers, and Councels, the later
Popes, with their Pontificians, who obstinately maintain and believe this
novel rule of faith, must in truth be reputed heretics, yea obstinate
heretics, because pertinaciously erring in the very fundamental rule of all
faith: And if any learned Priest retort against me, and say, that (as I here
confess) all Papists concur not to maintain this pontifician rule of faith:
and that many Sorbonist Doctors teach it not, neither do believe it: This is
true indeed, but let him take this inference with him, that notwithstanding all
their bragges, for the certainty of their faith, they are yet most uncertain,
as being not as yet agreed upon the rule of faith: yea they are so opposite,
that one side believes (as the Pope with his) what the other disbeleeueth and
condemns as erroneous; yea, and this in Councels, as in those Conc. Constan.
and Basil. opposite to the Lateran under Leo the 10. and the Florent. under
Eugenius the 4. deposed by the Fathers at Basil.
of Laterane, Florence, Constance, Basil, Frankeford Colen, etc. which being
so, that themselves are not agreed upon the rule of faith, why will they not
give leave, and allow to true Christians the word of God, as it is expounded,
clearly, constantly, and universally by the ancient Fathers, to be the
inerrable rule of faith, as his most excellent Majesty in his learned
premonition to Christian Princes justly requires and exacteth, according to
ancient and learned Vincent. contra here is. cap. 4.
Vincentius his rule.

It follows, that I demonstrate this rule of faith devised by the Popes, and
Pontificians, to support the Roman soueraignties to be mere novelty, and so
to prescribe against it by antiquity. This I must now do contractly: not
doubting, but that I shall have occasion more to enlarge my authorities and
reasons, when these my motives shall be impugned; as doubtless they will be,
unless it seem good to the wise men of Saint Omers (as their own libel
terms them) to answer them by some libelling ballade, as they of late have
thought meet to answer An answer made upon Sheldons book to a private
friend beginning, laugh, laugh, etc. which libell has often moved the persons
against whom it is to very much laughing at the Ignatians follies and wisdoms.
with a libell a certain Priests book for the oath of allegiance, for
Quicquid illis libitum, licitum. Whatsoever likes them is lawull with them, if
it be to hoyse up the Popes sovereignty.

First, this rule is against the practice of all the Hierosolimit. sub Iacobo.
^cen. Constantin. Ephesians. Calced. Sinod. 5. 6. 7. 8. saepe.
Ancient, and Primitive Church, which ever in occasion of controversies
recurred to the doctrine of the Scriptures declared by the general voice, and
testimony of the whole Church by her Bishops, Priests, and other learned men,
pronouncing and defining out of Gods holy word, which was always laid before
them being assembled in the general Councels: so the eight first general which
the Popes themselves with oath profess to receive, (although few of them keep
their, oath) yea the Apostles themselves, who all had infallibility by virtue
of their Apostleship of not erring in matters of faith, to give an example to
succeeding ages, would by common consent, and authority of the Christian
Church (not otherwise by Peter's sole authority) decree, and define out of the
word of God, (for out of it Act. 15
Peter himself brings allegations for his doctrine) touching the
controversy then risen at Antioch, about the observation of the legal laws
and ceremonies of the old Testament: which their example was ever followed as
necessary, till of latter times, when Popes have presumed to define by
themselves alone; having before made some small Consistorian consultation; with
which, this their prodigious position is in some sort by some Some of the
Ignatians do idly bring the heresies of Pelagius, and the Priscillianists to
have been only condemned by the Popes of Rome, but this against all histories
which mention the condemning of the same heresies, by sundry Councels,
throughout the whole Church. Baron. in his Annals, Genebrard. in Chrono.
few of themselves colored. For scarce any hold it absolutely necessary. And
here I ask the adversary whether that Axiom received by all, rejected by
none, God and Nature do nothing in vain: and that other; In vain are many
things required to do that, which as well, or better may be done by fewer, may
not take place in this question touching the infallible power of defining and
decreeing: I think none so impudent an idiote, as to deny it. Again I
demand whether those most reverend Fathers, of the first four general
Councels which Saint Gregory equalleth with the Gospel (although the manner
of his speech be not herein to be imitated) and of other later Councels did
know these principles, and Axioms, and did withal believe this Roman rule of
faith, to wit, That the Pope alone had infallible authority to define and
declare faith, and that Christ prayed only, and was heard only for Peter and
his successors, that they might never err in faith (as the Rhemist. annota. in
Luc. 22.
Rhemists do most heretically teach) if they did so, why did they not send al
their doubts (which did so shake the whole Christian world with such horrible
commotions and contentions) to the Popes of those times, Siluester, Damasus,
Lco, etc. and receive from themas from Judges of faith and the Oracles of Gods
mouths, (so termed by Coquae. contra. Premonit. Reg.
Coquaeus and Lessius his equiuocating Recapitulater. pa. 13. 32. and 56.
recapitulater, and as the vnappellable determinations of all their doubts? In
so doing infinite charges, many contentions would have been avoided; and as for
scandal, none could have followed, because both all those Fathers, and the
whole Christian Church with them (if it please you to believe the Pontificians,
who would so persuade us,) did then believe, and teach that the Popes were the
infallible Oracles of God, the only inerrable Judges in controversies of
Faith, and al-though ancient Priests and Bishops perhaps reputed themselves his
Senators and Counselors, yet they thought also, that they could add nothing
to his infallibility. But alas good Constantine, Theodosius, Martian, and
other Emperors knew not this faith, who were at such great charges to summon
and assemble those ancient and thrice reverend Councels: Nay Pope Leo himself
(who takes enough to the Sea of Rome, and joins Epist. 89.
Peter into the society of the individual unity, to wit, of the blessed
Trinity) held general Councels, necessary for determining of faith, and
settling of the peace of the Chtistian Church: Read Leo. epist. 24. 23. and 26.
him Christian Reader in diverse of of his Epistles written to the Emperor,
Empress, and Clergy of Constantinople: and as thou shall sinde, so judge.

Secondly, thus I argue. Three Sinod. 6. Act. 12. 13. 16. 17. 18 Sinod. 7. Act.
7. Sinod. 8. Act. 7.
general Councels, with diverse Popes as Agatho, Leo. 2. in epist. ad Constant.
Leo, Adrian. in Sinad. Romae congregata, and Theod. Patriar. with his council
at Hieru-salem.
Adrian, did condemn, (yea the Councels accursed and execrated) Honorius Pope,
for a dogmaticall and heretical Epistle, by which he labored to infect the
two Patriarchs of Constantinople, and Alexandria, with the heresy of
Monothelites. Can any one then be so frontlesse, as to think that those
Fathers, and Popes did believe, that the Bishops of Rome might not be, (as
they were Bishops of that See) heretics, or teach heretical doctrines in
their decretall Epistles? And the holy Ghost, to be so infallibly chained to
them, that they could not endeavor to infect the whole Church? who rather will
not thus argue, and thus infer? Three general Councels, (the which, with the
five other ancienter, all Popes at their entrances into the Papacy, do, or
ought to swear inuiolably to keep, according to their own Canons) with
diverse Popes, all antiquity, all later and best Pontifician H^storians, till
Pigh. lib. 4. cap. 8. Hier.
Pighius led Bellarmine and Baronius the way to call the matter in queston, for
which Canus. lib. 6.
Canus and Bannes in 2.2.
Bannes scornefully reprove him) did accurse or condemn Honorius for a
Monothelite heretic: Ergo Paul the fifth, who is not fuller of Gods Spirit,
then his predecessor Honorius was, in his late Breue. Paul. 5. interpreted by
the Recapitu. later. page 32.
brief ex Cathedra, out of the chair defining himself, to have power to
depose Princes, and to dispose of Kingdoms, may err, and be an heretic as
without all doubt he is, because contrary to Christ's Matthew. 22.
institution he assumeth power to forbid Caesar's due to be given unto him. For
what is more due to a Caesar, then fidelity and allegiance of subjects? but the
doctrine of Christ forsooth is expounded, and the heresy cleared: for he
forbids not obedience to Caesar's so long as they are Caesar's, but because he
can vncaesar them, and unking them: therefore no longer Caesar's, no longer
kings, no longer obedience. So answered C. 8. and 22.
Bellarmine against Doctor Barkly: so blundering Coquaeus against his Majesty's
Apology.

Thirdly, was there ever any ancient true Christian Catholic, who affirmed
not, that the Sea Austen. epist 112. and epist 1. 9. and de Unit. Eccles. ca.
16. clarissime
sacred word of God contained in the old and new Testament, was an infallible
and fundamental rule of faith? but concerning this rule of faith, two of the
Roman rules of faith, to wit, Sixtus the fifth, and Clement the eight have
been egregiously ouerruled with the spirit of error and heresy: for they have
by their Epist. decret. Sixti. 5. and Clement. 8 ante editiones. suas.
two decretall and definitive Epistles, defined two opposite, contrary and
contradictorious editions by themselves and their deputies being discussed, and
rediscussed, to be the very sayings, letter, and sentences of the holy Ghost:
charging and decreeing the same to all Christians, under the curse of
separation from the Church, and Gods beauiest displeasure. So that Sixtus has
accursed Clement and all approuers of his Bible; Clement, Sixtus, and all the
followers and defenders of his edition: and although it has pleased the
Authors of the Praefatio in Biblia Clementis 8. ibidem.
Preface to Clements edition, to avouch in a few lines many thousands of
untruths, and that against their own knowledge and consciences: to wit, that
Clement did only amend certain scapes of the print in Sixtus his edition, the
which Sixtus himself intended to have corrected, as there most lyingly they
affirm; when as it is as clear as the Sun, that their two editions have in
them innumerable substantial differences of whole lines and sentences. The
which being so, can any man but of ordinary judgment believe in good earnest,
that Roman Bishops, with their Cardinals defining ex Cathedra, cannot err?
For what can be an error, or heresy ex Cathedra, if to define heretical
editions of the Bible, commanding the whole Church under pain of greatest
curse to receive them, be not error and heresy ex Cathedra? This matter
tormenteth the adversary greatly, and by diverse it is diversely repulsed. Some
there were in Clements time, who excused Clement with the Roman Church, which
has received his edition, but condemned Sixtus. (The dead indeed bite not, and
it most concerned the living Romans that their living rule erred not.) This
opinion was most strong in Clement his time, when I was in Rome, and it was
greatly favored by the Ignatians: Others forsooth (consider how wilfully they
are wedded to the Popes infallibility) either impudently, or most ignorantly
deny, that Sixtus ever made any such decretall Epistle. A manifest untruth to
be confuted by a world of witnesses. Others grant the Epistle, but say it was
never published. This is so manifold an untruth, as there were editions of
Sixtus Quintus Bible before Clements edition, all which had his decretal.
Epistle before them. I my self have seen, and read of them in Rome, but
leaving those who make ( Isai. 28.
spem suam mendacium) a lie their hope, others as Doctor B. and P. W. etc. do
affirm, that Sixtus indeed did write and publish such an Epistle, but he did
it as a private This is their c^mon refuge, that when Popes in their decre tall
Epistles or their provincial Synodes as Celestine. Stephen the sixth,
Honorius, Greg. the second, decre^ any heretical doctrins, they do it all as
private persons, not as Popes, although it be most evident, that they intend to
command all, and to teach all to do according to their decrees which by them
are concluded in their Synodes.
person; not as Pope, and so he might err (O immortal God) have these men
eyes, and yet see not? or will not see? are not Sixtus his words most
express, that he defines, he decrees, and that out of the fullness of his
Apostolical power? and does he not annexe the sentences of excommunication,
and Gods heauiest displeasure against all such, as should refuse or reject his
edition? Jesus Christ vouchsafe to open the eyes of the misled, that they may
see the ambitious, and erroneous proceedings of those Bishops, and renounce
their communion, and return to the rock of thy sacred word, which is so by
them in part neglected, or rather wholly abandoned.

But I may not thus leave Clement and Sixtus, for I must needs tell their
followers, that against their own knowledge, (and therefore more inexcusably)
they have decreed that to be the very sentence of the holy Ghost, which without
al doubt, they could not but more then probably and wittingly think to be
otherwise: I will at this present (to discover the ignominy of their fallible
Spirits) insist only upon two or three examples, and dare herein challenge (as
in many like) all the Pontificians, sworn to the Popes infallibility, to
clear the heads of their Church, from most manifest and wilful error herein.

Their first corruption is in Genesis, where In vulgat. editio. lussu Clem. 8.
Genes. 3.
they read ( ipsa conteret caput tuum) she shall bruise thy head: putting the
feminine article for the masculine, appropriating that to the Virgin Mary (who
most worthily is Luc. 1.
blessed, and to be blessed amongst all women) which the holy Ghost
prophetically intended, precisely of him, who was to cast Satan Ioh. 12.
out of his Kingdom, and by whose only name and power, both his Mother, and
we, do daily Romans 16.
tread Satan under our feet. They publish St. Hieromes either whole, or
amended translation; for they agree not yet, whether: but the Vulgar Rhemist.
Pref. upon the Testament.
they confidently call it; and because some few manuscripts and readings had
the feminine ( ipsa, she) although some of them had otherwise, as the Theolog.
Louani. in notat. Fransc. luc.
Louanists confess, and Hieron. tradit. Hebrai. in Genes. cap. 3.
St, Hierome also accounts the other the better reading, and does also so
expound it: and diverse also of their own learned Canus de locis. lib. 2. and
alij.
Authors suspect, that the letter (a) which makes of the masculine a
feminine, crept in by the negligence of the manuscribers, yet these Papal
correctors, contrary to all the Hebrew originals, and Chaldaick Paraphrases,
contrary to all translations of the Septuaginta, contrary to the best learned
of the Roman Church, will needs read, ( Genes. 3.
ipsa, she) for the Virgin; not ( ipse, he) for Christ: thereby giving us to
think, that they had rather understand this prophecy, that the Virgin Mary,
rather then Christ, should bruise the Serpents head: out of which doctrine
goodly inferences may be inferred against them. I do in good earnest ask of
these Interpreters; wherein Satan's power over mankind did consist? if they
answer in sin, as they needs must; then according to their own reading,
not a he but a she bruised the Serpents head, and delivered mankind from the
guilt of sin. Alas, into what errors would these ouer-ruling Popes lead us?
All the faith of the ancient Churches in the Hebrew Originals, Chaldaick
Paraphrases, and Greek editions of the Septuaginta, reading otherwise then
these Popes do, must be corrupt: all the ancient Fathers, Greek and Latin
(two or three only excepted) misexpound and misinterpret (rather then Sixtus
and Clement in their editions.
Sixtus and Clement, who have some 1000. of other irreconciliable ^arres,
although they agree in this) must be thought to have done amiss. And I demand
of the Romanists, * Genes. 3.
why might not the Manuscribers, in some of the copies change (e) into (a) and
thereby make she of he, as well as some late Romanists, either wilfully, or
through the fault of Manuscribers, have changed in Li. 4. Epist. 38.
S. Gregory (exercitus Sacerdotum) an army of Priests, into ( exitus
Sacerdotum) the destructions or ends of Priests: a manifest corruption it is,
and I hope Saint Boromeus would not with his coadiutours wilfully do it,
because it most clearly shows that an army of Priests was to serve and set
up the King of Pride, some Bishop, a great step indeed to show that Bishop,
who now is served with the whole army of all the Priests of the Roman Church,
and who calls himself the only universal Bishop (which is the ambitious and
Antichristian title of the King of Pride, against whom that Father inueigheth)
to be the very King of Pride, prophetically delineated, by that ancient Father,
and Pope. Read the Epistle, courteous reader, and pass thy judgment as thou
shall see cause.

The second place of their corruption, is in the 2. Match. 12.
Machabees, where to establish the Chymera of their Purgatory fire, both in
their Biblia and Missalia edita Iussa. Clement. 8.
Bibles and Missals, they read ( pro peccatis mortuorum) for sins of the
dead, whereas they should read thus only ( pro peccato) for sin: and yet
this in their own knowledge, is against Edition. Grec. Venet. German. Complut.
all the Editions in the Greek, yea and against an ancient Latin Vatican
edition, set out by Sixtus; and also against some other ancient Latin
Manuscripts: and yet forsooth, for Purgatory sake, al those readings must be
corrupt, and Judas Machabeus with the whole true Church of God with him, be
made so ignorant and superstitious, as to make sinne-offerings for the dead;
whereas they full well knew, that there was no such sacrifice appointed by God,
neither in the law of Nature, nor in the law of Moses, not no ceremonies, nor
rites ordained for the same: neither do the Jews at this day practice, or
believe any such sin sacrifice for the dead.

This their corruption in the words of sacred Scripture is by addition: but by
the patience of the courteous reader, I will in this place (somewhat fit for
the purpose) mention one of their corruptions by the figure of Subtraction. In
their Breuiar. edit. Iussu. Clement. 8.
last Editions of their Breui^ries, they have pared out of the Prayer of the
Feast of St. Peter's chair at Antioch, (at Antioch, I say, for the feast of
Peter's chair at Rome, is a devise of later Popes, devised by Paul the 4. as
Angelus Rocca Schol. in Sacrament. Greg. prim.
Rocca affirms, the word ( animas) Souls, least the same word should,
according to the faith of the ancient Church, restrain the Popes omnipotency
(so called in late Neapolitane Theses) to the spiritual bands and chains of
the soul only: but that word and doctrine cannot agree with the Spirits of
those men, who challenge power to command and dispose of Kings and Kingdoms,
Bellarm. against a certain Venet. Doct.
Bellarmine busily endeavors to defend this change, the work of his own
fingers. But Rocca. annot. in Sacrament. Greg. 1.
Rocca will tell him, that the most principal and ancientest Manuscript in the
Vatican had the word ( animas) Souls; and I must tell him, that all the best
readings have it so, and with just cause I ask him, why they have not rather
subtracted the fabulous tale of Siluester, consecrating Altar stones; and the
fabulous Legende of S. Catherine the Martyrs dispu^ing with 50. Philosophers
and converting of the Empress? His brother Baron. in annot. in Martyr.
Baronius turns and winds himself, not knowing how to defend the History:
Brouiar. reformata edita Iussu. Pij Quint.
some of their Breuiaries have this Title over the Legend of Catherine, Ex
historia Ecclesiastica, out of the Ecclesiastical history: others have Ex
Eusebio, lib. 7. cap. 26. out of Eusebius, the 7. Book and 26. Chapter, and
yet I suppose he that shall find this fable in any authentical history, or
in Eusebius himself, shall be a greater Historian then Baronius himself.

Fourthly, against the infallibility of this their rule, thus I argue: That
which makes the Pope, and all his followers therein, heretics, cannot be the
rule of Christian faith. But the Popes proper and peculiar judgment does this:
Therefore* The first Proposition, I suppose; the second, or the assumption,
thus I prove. Proper, and peculiar choice, and election, to define in matter of
faith, in whomsoever it be, is forbidden, and Ad Titum. 3. and 2. Pet. 1.
((...) haeresis) heresy, and apparent it is, that choice, and election to
define, and believe, is always taken for heresy, when it is singular, and
alone, in any one person: unless it be grounded upon some special and
immediate revelation; now, that it is single, Obis vera, niex nostro arbitrio,
licet inducere, sed nec eligere, quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. It is
not lawful for us (in matter of faith) to bring in any thing out of our own
choice neither to choose any thing which another by his choice shall bring, in
Tertul. lib. de Praeser.
and alone in the Pope, I suppose it, as the very proper and special position
of the Adversary, maintained by all Pontificians, but impugned by all true
Catholics; That the Pope ordinarily has no new immediate revelations from
God, I suppose as truth, till any one shall be so impudent, as to affirm the
contrary. The Pope then being an heretic, because the rule of his faith (to
wit, private choice and election) in matters of faith is heresy Ad Tit. 3. and
2. Pet. 2. Heresies are called (...), electiones, choises which takes place in
Popes also. What marvel, if the Ignatians give infallibility of not erring in
faith, to the Pope, when they chal^enge the same to every one of their own
Order. as learned Caussabon proves in his book to Frontoduc, page 52. citing
out of the Apologist for the Ignatians, these words. It night and day may be
joined together in one, and darkness with light, heat with cold, health with
sickness, life with death then there may be some hope, that heresy can fall
into the head of a Jesuit: thus he. According to this, if Clement with the two
or three hundred Ignatians assembled in Rome, had joined in Council, there had
been an infallible assembly.
it self, it must necessarily follow, that all those who pertinaciously follow
him herein are to be accounted pertinacious Heretics.

Heretofore Christians were taught that holy Scriptures expounded by the
Universal and General voice of the Church, were the rule of faith, and
accordingly all agreeing in this rule, they were called Catholics: but this
rule being left by Popes, and the infallibility being given to them by their
followers; thereupon worthily of Popes, the heads of their faith, they have
been, and are called Pontificians and Papists. I may justly think, that upon
belief of this rule, some late Pontificians have plainly granted to me, that
the Christians of these times are bound to believe explicitly, and expressly,
somewhat which the Apostles themselves, and the Primitive Christians did not
expressly, and in explicit terms believe. An example at first, was granted in
transubstantiation it self, but upon better consideration, denied again; but
when I roundly urged them, to show me, where, or how, in explicit or equivalent
terms, transubstantiation was believed in the Apostles times; because they
faltered in their answers and defenses, our conference ended; to no small
comfort of my soul, so lately delivered out of the Egyptian servitude.

The Adversaries seem to produce diverse authorities to prove infallibility of
judgment in the Pope, but in truth they force not. Overthrow two, and the rest
fall of themselves. I will take a little pains with these two; The first of
them is taken out of Math. 16.
St. Matthew, where the Evangelist brings in Christ thus, speaking of St.
Peter, upon his confessing of Christ's divinity: Tues Petrus. and super hanc
petram, etc. Thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. There the adversary
triumphs, saying: it is clear, that Christ builded his Church upon Peter,
for by those words ( this Rock) Peter is most expressly designed. I will not
now stand to confute this exposition, by the authorities of Scriptures, and
testimonies of some ancient Fathers, who with St. Austen expound those words (
this Rock) for Christ the Rock whom Peter had confessed: and from whom Peter
had his name, as In sacro eloquio etc. In holy Writ when the word Rock is put
in the singular number, who else is signified but Christ? Paul witnessing, but
the Rock was Christ: but when rocks are so called in the plural number then
holy men are signified, which are confirmed by his strength, Greg. apud Pater.
in 1. ad Cor. Aug. tract. vltim. in Ioh and in Retractationib', Chrysoft.
homil. 55. in Math. Greg. in Psalm Paenit. super illud initio tu Domine. Isidor.
lib. 7. Etym c. 9.
St. Gregory and St. Austen expound it; or else of Peter's confession and
faith. Thou art Christ the son of the living God, as Theophil. in Math. 16.
Hilardo Trin. lib. 2. The Papists will not by any means in the words of
consecration of the Sacrament, ( this is my body) admit, the demonstratiue
article ( this) to demonstrate the bread, which Christ taking into his hands,
giving thanks broke and delivered, saying, take eat, this is my body: the
cause is, because if the article ( this) do demonstrate Bread, (which cannot
possibly be Christ's true body, no more then his body can be true bread) then
they should be constrained to admit of a sacramental presence only of Christ's
body, in the Sacrament: which they cannot abide, but here the article ( this)
must needs demonstrate the person of Peter, because it makes for their Popes
supremacies.
Theophilactus expounds it; but I will only demand at this present, how they
can violently against the nature of the demonstratiue article ( this) draw it
unto Peter's person? who in the same proposition of Christ to him, was designed
by the article demonstratiue ( thou) as though ( thou and this) in one
proposition, when one person is spoken unto, must needs both of them
demonstrate the very same one person, to whom the speech is made, and not
rather, according to the nature of the pronounes demonstratiue, one of them, to
wit ( thou) demonstrate the person, to whom the speech is made; and the
pronounce ( this) to demonstrate the thing, or person, of whom the speech was
made before: I put a familiar example. John has two sons, Thomas and
William, he calls his eldest son Thomas with his brother unto him,
demanding a question or two of him, and withal discourses of his younger
brothers wit, and capacity for learning. To which his eldest Son accordingly
answers, that his brother is indeed witty, and fit for the University; To
which his Father replying, says: Thomas thou art my eldest son, and shall
inherit my living; and this son I will send to the University; there to
make profit in learning: what might Thomas conceive upon this speech, that he
should be sent to the University, and not rather his brother William? many
like comparisons might be made, by which it would appear, that the
demonstratiue article this being understood personally, does not demonstrate
the person to whom, but rather the person of whom the speech was made. Again,
manifest it is, that Christ built his Church upon that Rock, against which the
gates of hell should never prevail. But if the words ( this Rock) be
applied, not only to Peter, but also to his Successors; themselves cannot
deny, but that the gates of hell have often prevailed against many of those
stones, or rocks, to the ruin and perdition of innumerable souls. As against
Boniface the 8. Siluester the 2. John the 12. Stephen the 6. I am assured
Platina in vitis.
Platina will not stick to avouch so much in effect of two Bonifaces the 7.
and 8. and of Siluester the 2. and Genebrard. in Chronol. lib 4. saeculo 10. ad
ann. 107. and alias saepe.
Genebrard a most furious enemy against the reformed Churches, does boldly
pronounce, that diverse Popes were rather Apostaticall, then Apostolical, and
that they came not in the right way by election, but through the backedore by
intrusion. What Baron. ann.
Baronius himself recounteth of the Monster Stephen 6. one of their Popes, how
he abused the body of his Predecessor Formosus, arraining it, condemning it,
cutting off his fingers, and casting the body into Tiber; and in a Synod
gathered even in Rome, (that See and Rock which cannot err, as it pleases
our Adversaries) he decreed, all such as had been ordained by Formosus to be
reordained again. Of John the 12. this Cardinal cannot write bitterly enough:
and yet he inueigheth against Otho the first renowned and worthy Emperor, and
the whole Clergy of Rome, who in a Synod gathered in Rome (the infallible
Sea) deposed that monster John, and placed in his steed Leo a worthy man. But
to make have, (for of like examples of Apostaticall Popes, much might be said)
I do in good earnest ask of any of Baronius his profession, whether the gates
of hell prevailed not against that John (call him the 10. or 11. whether you
will, for since the Papacy of the Papisse Ioane, called by some John the 7. by
others John the 8. the numbering of Pope John's has been different) I say, I
ask, whether the gates of hell preualled not against this John? who as Baron.
anno 925. and 928.
Baronius himself acknowledges, was exalted into the Apostolical chair, by
the means of the impudent strumpet Theodora; with whom also he lived most
impurely in the time of his Papacy (or shall I say rather her Papacy, she
ruling the roast) for which cause by the Ibidem.
Cardinal himself this John is worthily reputed for a false high Bishop, an
Apostata, an Intruder, and a most iniust possessour of the Apostolical See.
Therefore, it being most clear that the gates of hell have prevailed against
these instable and impure stones (being themselves with innumerable others, who
embraced their decrees and wicked customs cast down into hell) who can say,
that the most wise and powerful Architect Christ Jesus, did build his Church
upon them? what? will they be so impudent, as to affirm Christ kept not his
promise, or prophesied not truly, rather then their rocks and stones must be
found defectible? Therefore to conclude, it is clear that upon that Rock
Christ Hilar. lib. 8. de Trin.
built his Church, which is ( Psalm. 118.
verbum Domini quod manet in aeternum) the word of God remaining for all
eternity: or else upon that confession (which exposition concurreth with the
other) Math. 16.
thou art Christ the son of the living God; which as yet sounds throughout
the world; and shall, until the son himself come to judge both quick and
dead.

The second place is taken out of the 22. of St. Luke, Ego Cardinal Aliaco
lib. de Authorit. Eccles. Directly denies this place to be understood of the
personal faith of Peter, but of the faith of the whole Church, as diverse of
the Sorbone Doctors now also doc.
rogaui pro te Petre, etc. I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail
not, and thou being converted, confirm thy brethren. Here they triumph, here
they insult; but God wot, without cause: for what coherence? Peter, thy faith
shall not fail, ergo Popes cannot err? Peter, thou being converted confirm
thy brethren? ergo Popes being converted must confirm, instruct, and teach all
Patriarks, Primates, Bishops, Priests, whatsoever. Therefore his faith, and his
voice must be received as the very oracle of God, and be as such obeyed? but
let us consider the holy text it self, the which does manifestly teach us,
that Christ considering, how Peter assaulted by Satan, in the time of his
taking, would be drawn, out of fear, both to deny and forswear him; lest he
by such a denial should by Satan's guiles be also swallowed up into despair;
Christ comforting him, foretells, that he has prayed for him, and that his
faith should not fail, that is, according to the exposition of St. Chrysostom.
bom. 83. in Math. Beda in Lucam.
Chrysostom, should not utterly perish, and be extinguished (as the Greek and
Latin words signify) but remain firm in heart, although it should fail in
his mouth: as if Christ should say, Peter, I know thou will through fear be
drawn to deny and forswear me with thy mouth, yet thy heart shall be still
firm to me; yea, and after thy fall, thou shall be so converted and so
erected, that thou shall be enabled to encourage thy brethren, that they may
What doubt is to be made? for Peter Christ prayed, and did he not pray for
James and John not to mention the rest? it is manifest all are contained in
Peter. Aug. q. 75. Quest. Ex nouo Testam.
stand firm in confession of my name, the which I admonish thee accordingly to
do: Christ, not thereby meaning to pray for Peter alone, or that the rest of
the Apostles should so need his instruction in faith, and confirmation in
faith, that without him, they might either err in faith, or fall to deny their
faith For after the Act. 1.
descension of the holy Ghost, all the Apostles which were to be the Ad Ephe.
ca. 2. and Apoc. cap. 21.
foundation stones of the new Jerusalem, were by virtue of their Apostleships,
as firmly roborated and confirmed in faith as Peter himself, and therefore the
Apostles Creed was made by them all Leo. epist. 13. ad Pulcer. Aug. sermon. 115.
Ruffin. in explic. Simbol.
jointly, which contains 12. articles, because every Apostle put to his
article (wherein Peter had only the privilege to make the first) if their
own, i Cathechismes speak truth.

Further I ask, where those words, ( Cathechis. Vaux and Bellarm.
and thou being converted, confirm thy brethren) did not contain a promise
that Peter after conversion should not fail again? and whether was the
privilege to accompany all Bishops of Rome? who so shameless as to affirm it?
doubltlesse, it failed, in Baron. in Annalibus Platina in vitis.
Marcelline, offering incense to Idols: in John the 22. who Gerso. sermon. 4. de
Pasch. Adrian Pap. in 4 de sacrament. confirmat. aly.
taught, and that very peremptorily, that the Saints see not God till the
general judgment: in John the 23. who in a Platina in vita. Ioh. Conc.
Consta. in sess. 11.
Council of Constance had so many horrible accusations of blasphemy, heresy,
impiety proved against him that he was the erefore iudicially deposed. Many
such examples might be produced: but it greeueth my heart to discover the
ignominies of that See, which was erst the spouse of Christ, and where the
tiumphs of the Apostles do seem still to remain, but thus much I have done
only for truth sake, wishing with my whole heart, there were no just cause for
any to write thus of the Popes, but so it must and will be; for God will
doubtless vouchsafe ever still to raise some even from the dust to oppose
against them, till they be fully reformed, the which God mercifully grant, it
may be speedily accomplished. I cannot here omit to set down a peruicious
error, nay rather heresy of the Rhemists writing upon this Rhemists writing
upon this place of S. Luke; The which although I had often read, heretofore,
and much misliked the same, yet it wrought not effectually with me, till by
good chance I light upon it at that time when God vouchsafed to begin to open
my eyes: Thus then they write, upon those words, Simon, Simon, etc. Annotat. in
Luc. 22. annot. 31.
Lastly, to put them out of doubt, he calls Peter twice by name, and telling
him the devils desire to sift and try them all to the uttermost, (as he did
that night) says, that he had specially prayed for him, to this end, that his
faith should never fail, and that he being Note their words, uphold, establish
the rest, and consider their goodly inferences thereupon.
once converted should after that for ever confirm, establish, or uphold the
rest in their faith; which is to say, Peter is that man whom he would make
Superior over them, and the whole Church: whereby we may learn that it was
fit in the providence of God, that he who should be the head of the Church,
should have a special privilege by Christ's prayer, and promise, never to
fail in faith, that none other, either Apostle, Bishop, or Priest may
challenge any such singular and special prerogative, either of his office or
person, otherwise then in joining in faith with Peter, and by holding of him.

Thus they: with much more to like purpose, wherein the Christian Reader,
cannot but observe, how eagerly (for the Popes sake) they pursue Peter's
privilege, and would most perniciously against the very foundation of our
Christian religion, show that Christ prayed only for Peter, and that neither
the Apostles nor Evangelists, by virtue of their Apostleship, Offices, or any
other means, had infallibility of not erring in faith, but by joining with
Peter, and holding of Peter. So that Saint Paul writing his fourteen Epistles,
(whereof one was to the Romans, the only infallible Sea, the only Catholic
Apostolic, one and holy Church, if you believe the Pontificians, espccially
Valentia in aualis. lib. 6. in titulis. cap. 9. 10 11. 12. 13. 14.
Valentia) Saint James, Saint John, and Jude their Epistles, Saint John his
Revelation, Saint Matthew, Mark, Luke and John their Gospels, had therein
instruction from Peter: and holding from him, thereby they had infallibility,
that they could not err: otherwise they might have erred in faith, had not
Peter, (to use their own phrases) confirmed, established, and vpheld them in
their faith. If this be not pernicious doctrine, subuerting the very bulwarks
of Christian Religion, what can be such? for tell me I pray you all ye the
Dowists their successors in often reprinting those corrupt annotations, where
did either the Apostles or Evangelists confess this dependancie from Peter?
what record of Scripture or other authentical Author does deliver unto us,
that Peter assisted the Evangelists, when they wrote their Gospels? Does not
Saint Paul Galat. 2.
expressly protest that he neither received the Gospel which he preached (
neque per hominem, neque ab hominibus) neither by man, nor from men, but from
Jesus Christ his immediate revelations? does not the same Apostle expressly say
of Peter, (nihil mihi contulit) he gave me, he furthered me nothing? meaning of
the Gospel of Christ: nay rather did not the same Apostle give somewhat to
Peter, Ibidem. Quia non ambulante sequndum veritatem Euangelij epist. ad Galat.
2. Peter walked not according to the truth of the Gospel, and after he was
converted was here once strengthened by his brother Paul.
when indewed with the holy Ghost, he reprehended his humane spirit; with which
moved and misled, he walked p not according to the truth of the Gospel? What
Christian did not ever, as reueuerently and religiously embrace any part of
Saint Lukes Acts of the Apostles, because it was Saint Lukes, as the whole
Epistle of Saint Peter, because it was Saint Peter's?

But these men regard not how they weaken the very foundations of Christian
religion, (so Ad Ephcs. cap. 2. and Apocal. cap. 21.
termed in holy Scripture) so that they may enhanse the Popes monarchical
supremacy, which is the very life and soul of their religion; whom they
pretend to be Saint Peter's successor in place and Sea, and we grant it (as the
Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Ephesus at this day succeed S.
Mark, S. Peter, S. James, and Saint John) but heaven and earth will proclaim
that in conversation they do nothing at all succeed Peter, and as for doctrine
and faith, the sacred Scriptures, and ancientest Churches prescribe against
them. Would God, imitating Saint Peter, they would ( 1. Pet. 5.
Pascere gregem verbo) Feed their flock with preaching of the word, and holy
example of life: but alas by temporal possessions given by Constantine (as it
is written in the life of ancient Siluester Pope) an Angel pronounced that
poison was cast into the church, which more or less ever since has
Sanctitatem in pontificibus, etc. Sanctity in Popes, no man requires in these
times, they are reputed best, if they be but a little good, or not so evil as
other mortal men use to be Papirius Masson in his book of the Bishops of the
City in ^ulius the third, which book he writes notwithstanding to set forth
the worthy acts of Popes.
infected the Bishops of Rome, having put on for Peter's pouertic ( tiphum
seculi) wordly pride and pomp, not keeping themselves within their own
precincts and limits, but thrusting their Sythes into the haruests of other,
dominering, but not ruling the Clergy, and dominering over the Princes of the
earth, to whom they were first subject both in fact, and of right Bellar. li.
2. de Romans Pont. c. 29
as Bellarmine himself once confessed before his red hat: and into what proud,
auaritious, ambitious, secular and worldly conversation, and usurpations, the
Bishops of Rome have degenerated, the Contaren. Sadolet. Poole. alij. Council.
delect. Cardin. and alior. Praelat. tomo vltimo Conc. Cornelius Mus. or at. in
Conc. Triden. Espen. in Titu^. Bernard. li. 1. de considerat.
best of their Prelates and learned cannot deny? and what marvel then if
they be found to degenerate in faith? for the shipwreck of faith, either
sooner or later, ever follows the shipwreck of good consciences and life.
The Sea of the Popes, to wit the Roman Particular Church was a branch inserted
into the tree of the Jews, and Jewish Church, (for so he is described by the
Apostle, in his C. 11. ad Romans
Epistle to the Romans, and therefore, she was carefully to look to her self
that she fell not: for if she should grow proud, she should (says the Apostle)
be shaked off as well, as the tree it self was rejected: and that her only
way to remain steadfast and firm, was to be Ibidem.
permanent in goodness. I wish with my whole heart, that the Popes were so
good, and so religious, that they might still deserve to have the honor due
unto the chief Partriark of the West, according as his most excellent Majesty
In his kingly premonition to Christian Princes.
professes, he would be willing to acknowledge them, if they would return to
that faith, and Apostolic belief of the Christian Church, from which they are
horribly degenerated.

Having thus traced the Rhemists, with thy patience (courteous Reader) let me
give thee a taste of Bellarmines dealing for the same project to enhance the
Popes supremacy. In his Dictates at Rome, not in his printed work, (for they
do not always print what they dictate) he most egregiously depraved the sense
of that sentence of the holy Ghost: Isai. 28.
Ecce ego pono in Sion lapidem etc. Behold I put in Sion an approved, a corner
stone, and a precious one laid in the foundation. This prophecy, although S.
Peter 1. Pe^. 2.
most expressly expounds it of Christ himself, yet Bellarmine in his dictates
would needs have it to be understood of Peter, not of Christ. His profound
reason is, forsooth, because the Isai. 28.
Prophet adds of this stone, that it must be ( in fundamento fundatus)
founded in the foundation, that is, laid in the foundation: which may not be
understood of Christ, but fitly of Peter, founded upon Christ: So Bellarmine:
but in his Bellar in praesat. in lib. de pont. Romans
printed Preface, he has somewhat mended the matter for he is content to
understand principally, this prophecy of Christ; secondarily of Peter: so that
Christ and Peter must still rank together, Christ principally, but Peter
secondarily. Baronius in his Voto against the Venetians to Paul the 5. in
Consistory publicly applied to him to be the stone, upon which Matthew. 21.
whosoever falls (says the holy Ghost) shall be bruised, and upon whomsoever
it falls, it shall break them in pieces: but alas the Cardinal failed the
Pope in his Prophecy, for by his sentences of excomcommunications, interdicts,
etc. he did so little bruise the Venetians, who so constantly opposed against
him, that The manner of the Venetians reconcilement with the Pope, for which
the Ignatians euerywhere exclaim against that state, only they are wary
before whom.
they could not by any means be brought to make any submission, for any
offense imputed to them, or to acknowledge any fault: so that at the last, the
Pope was contented, to accept of a show of submission made to him by some third
persons (and as it is reported, suborned also by the court of Rome thereunto)
and so with his honor, to be reconciled unto them again: a notable example
for posterity against the usurpations of Popes. I could here more enlarge my
discourse, to show how Bellarmine, Sanders, Baronius, Stapleton, do all they
can, and labor earnestly (though most vnsou^dly) to bring all Christians to
that pernicious persuasion and faith, to wit, that it is not enough (according
to Decretal. Bonifa. 8. vnam sanctam.
Bonifaces decree) for their saluations, to be in communion with the Catholic
Church, dispersed through the world, and with the head thereof Christ Jesus,
unless they be in actual communion, and blind obedience to the Bishop of Rome,
as the only one, and supreme head of the visible Church. It is a sufficient
assecurance for my conscience, that according to the sense of ancient Church it
is against S. 1. Cor. cap. 1.
Paul's express doctrine, who in his Epistle to the Corinthia^s does most
grievously reprove all such as went about to make a special joining either
with Peter, Paul, or Apollo, nothing herein differencing S. Peter from Apollo,
or himself: doubtless he was nothing acquainted with the present necessary
subjection and union to the Bishops of Rome, the pretended only successors of
Saint Peter. But rather he instructed, and most earnestly Jhidem.
commanded all Christians to acknowledge Christ Jesus for their only head, of
whom they were named, in whose name they were baptized, and who only was for
them crucified, dead and buried; and risen again to life. Surely, if Saint
Paul did believe such a necessary headship in the Bishops of Rome, doubtless
his faith therein was only implicit, for his express doctrine is against it:
but I dare here boldly say, that if ( per impossible) by an impossibility
such a headship in the Popes had been respected in the Primitive Churches, yet
later Popes are now so degenerate from what their predecessors were into all,
most abominable, and tirannicall conuersations to the corruption of faith,
against the temporalty and spiritualty, that Gods infinite mercy would excuse
such, who (to give them most just cause, and motives to rank themselves in
their own degrees) should leave their communion with them, and adhere only to
Jesus Christ, to whom (upon him only resting with King Psalm. 118.
David, I humbly complain ( tempus faciendi domine, dissipauerunt legem tuam.)
It is high time O Lord to do, for they have dissipated and and broken thy law.

The second Motive.
THus they having most egregiously erred in co^stituting a false rule of their
faith, to support the present Roman profession; to the same end they have
perniciously depraved the true rule of faith, by adding to the sacred word of
God, such books as antiquity worthily rejected for Apocriphall, that is of
doubtful and uncertain authority, not fit to confirm and prove the
dogmaticall doctrines and articles of Christian faith, thereby distinguishing
them from the Canonical Scriptures, Gods infallible word. Such are Hieron. in
Prolog. Galeat Epiph. lib. de mensur. August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 18. cap. 36.
Athanas. in Sinop. Epipha. haere. 8. and 76.
esteemed and accounted the books of Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Toby, the
Machabies, and all such like doubtful parts of Chapters of the old Testament,
(as by neither the Jews before) nor in Christ's time, nor in the Nicene and
Laodicenc Councels, nor ancient Fathers, (purposely setting down, and defining
the Canons of holy Scripture) were ever received into the Canon 1 Con. Nice.
and Laodic. in Cano. de Canonicis scripturis. Hieron epist. 10. and 115.
Joseph. contra Appto lib. 1 Russin. de Simbol. Apost.
and rule of Christian Faith. Against this their devised rule, it is most
easily and manifestly showed, that considering the Jewish Synagogue, (when it
was the true Church of God) received not these books into their Canon, we
ought not to receive them, having no new revelations for them; nor no better
warrant then they had: especially considering, that the Septuaginta
interpreters (who took upon them to interpret all the books of Gods word, to
Ptolomeus) neglected them Christ and his Apostles never cited any thing out of
any of them, as they did out of the other Scriptures. And further the thrice
reverend Fathers of the Nicene Council, and those worthies of the Council of
Laodicea, (both which Counsels, were celebrated in the East, nearer the place
and time, where and when Christ's Church, might best inform her self, which
were the books of Sacred Scripture) rejected and cashired them out of sacred
Canon of holy Scripture. Neither is there any new revelation for them now, nor
any just cause why the Pope and Pontificians, should be so eager to put them
into Canon of Scripture, but for that they seem in some places (contrary to
the undoubted Scriptures) to favor some of their vain and corrupt doctrines,
as of Purgatory, Prayer, for the Dead, Merits of good works, etc. As for The
contra dictio^ betwixt the 5. ch^pter of Judith, and the 10. ^^irreconcilable
and so man^^est that the same euinceth the author of the same book, not to be
the holy Ghost who cannot lie. See courteous Reader how Bellarmine tra uaileth
to defend this book from contradiction Bellar de verb. Dei. lib 1. c. 12.
Iudiths book in particular, I cannot but marvel, how any one can think,
that the holy Ghost would ever approve that decking and trimming up of her
self, for such an impure and luxurious project, thereby to draw Iud. 10. and 12
Holofernes into an unlawful burning lust, and concupiscence of her. (if so
they will teach and affirm, may I not here charge their doctrine with
affirming God to be the approuer and Author of sin, more justly then they
charge Calvin therewith?) Was not that of the holy Ghost in Rom 3.
St. Paul, law and right, in Iudiths days? ( Non sunt facienda mala vt
eueniant bona.) Things that are evil, are not to be done that good may come
thereby. Besides, it is too too apparent, that in the story there are some
untruths, and unreconcilable contradictions, which are clearelie against the
other sacred Scriptures. And therefore by evident consequence it is to be
affirmed, that the book is Apocriphall, and not of that undoubted and certain
authority, which holy Canonical Scriptures have: by which only ( Dogmata
fidei) articles of Faith are to be decreed and tried; as the ancient Church
ever beleft: from whose faith (because faith must ever be the same) no
Christian can without hazard of Salvation depart.

Against the books of Machabees, many particular and unanswerable doubts might
be produced: I will content my self with two or three. Does not the Author of
them, (I should say, the abbreuiatour of Iasons larger history, as himself 2.
Match. 2.
professes to be) against the faith and doctrine of undoubted Scriptures,
approve and admire the fact of 2. Match. 14.
Razias murdering himself? does he not crave pardon of the Reader, if he have
not answerably to the condition of a good 2. Match. vlt.
Historian, behaved himself? belike the holy Ghost who is not accustomed, nor
cannot acknowledge himself nor his Scribes, to be subject to any humane
error, in writing thus, here left him; but not above, in the 12. Chapter of
this 2. Match. 12
book, where he mentions prayers and sacrifices for the dead, (and yet this
by the help of false fingers also) and therefore he here, not there, craved
pardon, if he had not arightly performed his office. Doubtless he who will
think the holy Ghost can crave pardon of man, as though he might be subject to
error, has little of the holy Ghosts grace in him. Which things considered
with diverse other impossibilities against the truth of history, I cannot be
persuaded that Lib. de Ciuit. Dei. 18. c. 36.
St. Austin and the Fathers of the Council of Carthage, did otherwise approve
them to be read then as a probable history, containing some good moral
matter, if read with Cont. Gaude^t.
sobriety (to use St. Austens own phrase) but not as to receive them into the
Canon of sacred Scripture of Gods word. And if St. Austen may not be thought
to contradict himself, within the compass of half a dozen of lines; some
Manuscriber has egregiously corrupted him: for Aug. lib. 18. de Ciuit. Dei.
cap. 36.
first, he seems clearly and absolutely to affirm that they are not
Canonical, and proves thereupon a truth, upon which he there discourses,
and presently he is made to say thus, that although the Jews receive not the
Machabees into Canon, yet the Church of Christ receives them: but who smells
not false fingers here? especially, if infinite like forgeries of Manuscribers
be observed. Further, I am more confirmed in my judgment against these books,
because Did. 15. cap. Sancta Romana.
Gelasius a Pope of Rome, before any greater corruptions had deeply tainted
that Church, did with a whole Synod in Rome (recounting a Canon of the
Apostles for the same purpose) exclude the Machabees out of the Canon of holy
Scriptures: and although the Canon beginning Sancta Romana etc. in which this
exclusion was, be now so maimed and mangled that no man can justly say, this
part or line of it is sound: yet Anton. 3. part. sum. l. 18. c. 6.
Antonine Archbishop of Florence, and a Saint in their Church, confesses that
he himself had read the exclusion of these books out of Canon of Scripture,
in that decree of Gelasius, and according to the Canon of the Apostles there
mentioned. All these things concurring out of Antiquity, and the undoubted
Churches of Christ, with the authority also of some learned Pontificians their
later Doctors, (and that of Tertull. lib. de praescript.
Tertullian ever taking place in Christ's Church: Quod antiquissimum verissimum,
that which is most ancient is most true.) What may be thought of that Conc.
Trident. Sess. 4.
congregation at Trent, who has given equal authority to them with the
undoubted word of God? and have accursed with their idle Anatheme, all those
who shall with the ancient Church of the Jews, the Nicene Council (which St.
Gregory esteemed as the Gospel) with the I aodicene reverend Fathers, and
almost all other ancient Fathers reject them as Apocripha^l? Doubtless, the
curse of God, against the idle curses of men, may be justly given unto them;
who Apocal. vlt.
have added the word of man to his word, and have made the word of man equal
with his most infallible and inviolable word. ( Iud. Epist.
Imperet illis Dominus) The Lord God reprove them. It is not possible, if these
men had esteemed of the undoubted Scriptures, as all the Aug Epist. 71 ad
Marcell. in prolog. lib 3. de Trin. Epist. 1^1. and Ep 166. ad D^natist (...)
Epist 62 Basil (...) de si* de (...) me. Chrysostom. in opere im^^rfect. hom^lia.
49.
ancient Fathers did, who ever required the writings of all men, to be examined
and tried by the certain word of God, they would never have coupled humane
authority with divine, and have equalized them in one degree of truth: but they
may be excused in dealing so warily and politikely herein: for their desperate
cause of Porgatorie fire, prayer for the dead, etc. otherwise would to the
ground with many like of their superstitious trumperies.

The third Motive.
BEsides the corrupting of the true rule of faith by adding the Apocriphall
books, they have also depraved the same Conc. Trident. Sess. 4.
rule by their unwritten Traditions, Anathematizing all, who shall refuse or
disesteeme the same Traditions, and not hold them in equal reputation with
Gods most undoubted word. This rule of Traditions they hold to be an unwritten
Deposit; left in the Roman Church, and kept inuiolably by her until these
times; which if they can show, what good Christian is there who will not with
reverenced esteem, receive, or commend, whatsoever those most irreprehensible
Founders of the Church have delivered, either concerning faith or Church
discipline. But I must tell them (being thereunto urged by manifest truth and
reason) that it is not enough for them upon their bare words, to affirm this
or that is a tradition Apostolical, or this, or that, is a doctrine
Apostolical; because it is now generally observed through out all those
Churches, which communicate with the Bishop of Rome, (no, though at such times
when there was no notorious or famous Church on earth to oppose against her)
and whereof no express beginning can be showed: unless they can withal for
such their Traditions, ascending upwards even unto the Apostles times, or the
days of their immediate Successors and Scholars, clearly and soundly deduct
by grave testimonies of Ancient and Catholic authors, that such things were
ever more or less observed, and received as from the Apostles themselves,
throughout the Church of Christ, if they will refuse this honorable trial of
their Traditions, and stand only upon this idle answer and defense, that the
Church Roman now generally has them, and there is no beginning of them to be
showed; ergo they are Apostolical: they shall show themselves to be mere
wranglers, wilfully wedded to most corrupt errors, as I will most clearly
demonstrate. And herein I dare boldly challenge (being most confident of this
truth) any Pontifician whatsoever, be he Benedictine, Fransciscan, or Ignatian,
to show me some ancient sufficient authority out of Councels or ancient
Fathers, that whatsoever might be observed, or should be observed in the later
times of the Roman Church, whereof no express beginning could be showed,
should be therefore accounted Apostolical, because generally observed in her.
Epist. 118. ad Ianuar.
St. Austen indeed is urged by the Adversaries, to affirm so much of some
unwritten Traditions in his time, generally observed throughout the whole
Church; but St. Austen is misunderstood, and his rule commonly cited not
without corruption: misunderstood, because his rule is of such Traditions,
whereof although nothing is written in holy Scripture, yet they are mentioned
in approved Authors, and Historians, more or less from the Apostles days
till his times: besides, great is the difference of 1200. years, (for so long
is the time from St. Austens days to us) for carrying down of Traditions from
the Apostles; and in so many ages, many things vnapostolicall See Onuphr.
Genebrard, and Platina. supra page 3.
might creep into particular Churches, and consequently into the whole,
whereof no certain beginning might be showed.

Again, St. Austens rule is commonly mis-cited. For whereas that Father
writes thus in effect in his Epistle to Epist. 118.
Ianuarius: If the authority of divine Scripture prescribe in any of these
rites and ceremonies, what is to be done: I I cite not the express words of
the Father because editions are so different, but all have thus in effect.
answer, there is no doubt to be made, but that we must do as we read; the
like I say, if any of these rites which we observe, and the whole Church
throughout the world at this present time observes: for to dispure that we
should do otherwise, were insolent madness: but the Adversaries commonly when
they cite this place, leave out first what he writes in the beginning of the
sentence, touching the authority of Scriptures. Again, they leave out commonly
those words which restrain his meaning to his days. And in Saint Austens
time, it is manifest, that the Christian Churches were not so divided, as since
his times they have been, and withal, that a little before his time, the
general Councels of Nice, and Sardica had ordered most things, and brought
many things to light, and yet notwithstanding this rule, it is well known, how
Saint S. Aust. in the same Epistle pronounces, that Christ instituted very few
ceremonies. Epist. 118.
Austen complained against multiplicitie of rites, and ceremonies, brought into
diverse particular Churches in his days; wherewith the Christians were more
heavily clogged then the ancient Jews had been under Moses: which if it were
ever true, then it is now amongst the Pontificians most true, who have from
their Popes, some 1000 of rites, and have also innuerable laws, binding under
the censure of their curses, and heauiest excommunications, and so frequently
that a man may justly suppose that there are few of that profession, who are
not more or less touched It is not credible to what number their
Excommunications are grown since their tyranical use of them. See Nauar. Man.
cap. 27. number. 50.
by their lesser or greater excommunications, his holiness only excepted, who
will be bound to no laws, no not to those which he swears inuiolably to
keep* ^e being indeed, that (...), exlex iniqnus, outlaw, which Saint 2. These.
2.
Paul has prophesied should sit in the Temple of God, as I will more fully
declare hereafter. But I will demonstrate, that there are diverse practices and
customs observed throughout their Roman Church universally, whereof no beinning
can be showed, and which themselves will not dare to affirm to be Apostolical,
and so their rule by their own confessions shall to the ground. First, is it
not an universal (though impious) practice throughout the Pontifician Church
to paint God the Father in the form of an old man, and God the holy Ghost in
the form of a Dove? by the same, not only to represent two persons of the
most inenarrable and inexpressible Trinity, but also by the same, and in the
same, to adore and worship those two infinite Persons; what will they, or can
they show me, when this custom pr^cisely began? No I wis: what? must it
therefore, be a tradition Apostolical? it were impudency, or mere ignorance
so to affirm: and I think there is none of them as yet so shameless, as to
affirm it. Novel I am assured it is, utterly forbidden by the ancient Fathers
of the sixth Sinod. 6. Cano. 82.
general Council, reputed an impudent thing by worthy John Damas. Orthodox.
sid. lib. 4. ^ap 17. Sinod. Nicen. 2. act. 4. 5. 6. 7.
Damascene, (reputed a renowned Saint in their Church and a famous Patron for
the use of other Images) and by their Italian Polid. lib. de inuentor.
Polidore Virgil accounted mere folly: and which of their own men Abulens.
Lira Alij.
commenting upon the fourth of Exodus, do not more or less condemn it? and
yet, now the present Roman Church is so generally infected thereby with the
leprosy of superstitious Idolatry, that no man whose heart is zealous of Gods
honor, cannot, seeing it, but lament therefore.

Of this kind also is the prostrate adoring of the Crucifixe it self upon
good Friday, generally observed throughout the Roman Church. Can their best
antiquarie amongst them show me a beginning hereof? no God wot: what is it
therefore a tradition Apostolical? shame will not suffer them to affirm it.
To this I adioyne their most Catholic and vain custom of adorning their
Images (like as the old Paynims adorned Venus, Juno, Ceres their vain Gods
Images) with rich attire, imbrodered garments, and robes upon their massy
bodies, crowns of gold upon their stony heads, rings upon their marble or
wodden singers, bracelets of Amber or Pearl upon their wristes, rich Jewels of
Pearl and precious stones hanging about their necks, down even to their
shining and lasci^iouslike breasts; drawn by the painters rather to give
occasion of impudike thoughts then religious cogitations: Of this their
profane and heathenish custom, in their most religious places, can they
precisely show me a beginning? no I warrant you: belike therefore it is an
Apostolical tradition? so to affirm, I could account it no less then
blasphemy. At least (if it will please the Ladies amongst the Pontificians to
hear with patience) it is no tradition Apostolical, that their sacred Images
are often trimmed with the rayments of strompets, a thing very frequent in
other countries (like as in England, where very often their Priests This is a
custom so frequent and so common in England that no Priest who has either
shame or honesty can deny it.
Massing vestiments are framed of the petticotes, kirtles, or gowns of such
persons: whereof some are not of the best fame) so loathsome a thing, that
doubtless if their images which they adore, had sense, they would exclaim
against the abuse thereof, and cry fie. These Roman customs so universally
observed does any man once imagine to be Apostolical? Read two of Saint Greg.
Epist. ad Secundin. and Epist ad Seren.
Gregory's epistles read Epipha Epist. ad Johan. Hiero.
Epiphanius, read Thrasius the Patriarks discourse in the seventh synod, at
Nice, Saint Augu. in Psalm. 113. and de fid. and Symbol.
Austen upon the Psalms and you will understand, what manner of Tradition, the
use of God the fathers image and the adoration of images is. But here of more
anon.

Again, touching their universal and general custom of receiving of the
Sacrament under one kind, as so only necessary, so only sufficient, so only
commanded for a man's whole life; can they show me an express beginning
thereof? no God wot: what? must it be therefore a tradition Apostolical? I
will not deny, but that perhaps, some ancient particular Churches, might
sometimes practice in one kind, and yet most of their examples, which they
bring for that purpose, are either of counterfeit books; or else little to the
purpose: but I deny, (and challenge the Adversary to prove the contrary) that
ever any Ancient Apostolical Church held it sufficient, as only necessary,
only commanded to receive the Sacrament in one kind for a man's whole life:
They bring some places of Luc. 24. Act. 2. and 20.
Scripture for this purpose. But first, if the places prove their use, then it
is not only a tradition, but a written truth. Again it is as manifest as the
sun, that those places they bring, do prove as well against them, that their
Mass may be used in one kind, and the Sacrament consecrated in one kind,
which they detest as the greatest impiety and sacrilege, making the sacrifice
to consist most intrinsecally and essentially in both kinds that no Pope can
dispense against it. Again, Rhemist. in ca. 1. act. Baron. annalib. anno 48.
Christ number. 17. Zuares Isingr. Catherinus a^^^.
their belief touching the assumption of the blessed Virgin Mary's body, (at
whose due honors I greatly rejoice, and beseech Jesus her son, and Savior,
ever to indue me with a reverent respect of her greatness, and her blessings
above all Women) is it not generally received, and the feast thereof
universally practiced, throughout the Roman Church? And is there any one who
can show the time, when this belief began? no God wot: What? must it be
therefore a Tradition Apostolical? nothing less. Baron. anno Christ. 48. number.
9 12. and 13.
Baronius his Doctrine will overthrow that Tradition.

The Annotations upon the first of the Acts verse 14.
Rhemists in their annotations upon the Acts of the Apostles, endeavor to prove
it out of a counterfeit book of Dionise of Areopage, Saint Paul's scholar, and
they are not there with content unless they may abuse egregiously the same
book also, by their manifest and wilful corruption: for they dare assirme
that St. Dionyse in that Dionis. lib. de Divine. nomin. the Rhemists cite it
Epist. ad Timoth.
book, reports that he himself heard the melodious singing of Angels, at
the Virgins monument, which lasted for three days together, a thing no where
to be found in that book* Again, they affirm that Dionyse of Areopage was
present at the Virgins departure, which happened as themselves Their Table of S.
Paul and Baro. affirms anno Christ 52.
deliver, the 48. of Christ. And yet withal they avouch that S. Paul came not
to Athens til the 52. of Christ; where and when S. Dionyse was with Damaris
Acts 17.
converted: so that by their contradictorious account, Saint Dionyse was
converted, and made a Christian, and presently also at the blessed Virgins
death; before his conversion. Thus the Rhemish lights of the English
Pontificians, are caught in their folly, when of late I objected this wilful
corruption, and main contradiction of the Rhemists to a certain graund I. C.
cheefetaine in this place where I now am; I had only a kind of ^ush for an
answer, with this grave epiphoneme, it is an ill bird that beraieth his own
neast, might not I more justly inueigh against such seducers of youth, who by
such deprauations, seduce their young F^ye, and beray their young birds in the
neasts of their seminaries; where they must take all upon trust even as their
masters shall please to dictate unto them: and be you most assured, they shall
hear nothing that shall jar from the Popes behests, and Roman Churches
practice, whose Soldiers they are, trained to fight his battle or holy
quarrel as Sanders in his Letters to an Irish Gentleman.
Saunders calls it.

Again, concerning the universal practice, of ^ating of blood, and strangled
meats, throughout the Pontifician Church: can they precisely tell me, when
the same began? no in sooth: what is it therefore a Tradition Apostolical?
ask the Apostles, and whole Church of Jerusalem concerning this Tradition,
who decreed by express Acts 15.
Canon, that Christians should abstain from things immolated to idols, from
blood, from strangled meat, and fornication: Lo here is a custom generally
observed, no beginning thereof be ^ound, and yet no tradition Apostolical.

Further it is manifest, that the vow or promise of Chastity, is Thom Aquin. 2.
2. q 88. Durand. lib. 4 Did. 35 and 37. aly Scholast^c. communiter ibidem.
Sot^s de iure and iustitia. lib. 7. and Petrus de Soto in institut. sacerd.
lect. 5. Valentia. de Celibatu. lib. 2. Scotus 4. did. 37. Cai^t. quod 1. q.
^2. See S. Athanasius Epist. ad dracont Sincsius Epist. ad Euoptium. Polid.
lib. de inuento. 5. Alphonsus a Castro. verbo. sacerdot. here is 4. Eusebius. li. 4.
ca 23. Niceph. lib. 4. cap. 55.
not by Gods institution either in the old, or new Testament, annexed to
priesthood or Episcopacy, and yet as evident it is, that now it is generally
observed throughout the pontifician Church, (to promise chastity but not to
keep it) and, can any pontifician show me, when the custom of adioining of
the promise of chaste life to priesthood, and other holy orders, begun? no I
wis: (some attributing it to Siricius Pope, others to Gregory the first: others
to Gregory the second, others to Gregory the seventh,) and what? must it be
therefore an Apostolical tradition? The Apostles will tell you, in one of
their Canons, where they have thus decreed. Can. 6.
Let not a Bishop or Priest by any means under pretense of Religion, cast off
his own wife, but if he shall cast her off, let him be excommunicated, and if
he persevere, let him be deposed: thus they. This their tradition, they
learned not of Ignati. Epist. ad Philad^lp.
Ignatius nor I^^o Epist. 85.
Leo the first Pope, nor out of the sixth General Synod, nor the Council of
Gangres, nor out of the first Council of Toledo: out of which Gratian Did.
34. Can. is qui no^ habet.
relates a Canon the seventeenth in number that he who has not a wife, must
or may have a concubine, unless those fathers thought a wife or a Concubine
necessary for the laickes only in that hot climate, but were persuaded
sufficiently, of the Continency of their Clergy (if so, out alas, how is
Spain now become so reretrograde?) and therefore the permission for concubines
in steed of wives excuses not them: yet by their leave (courteous Reader) I
cannot but think that the like merry custom with that which Lib. de
praesulib. sim^^iacis.
Clemangis records, is some occasion out of this Canon: to wit, that the
people were so persuaded of their Clergies incontinency, that in many parishes
they would not otherwise accept of their Priests, unless they had their
concubines, thereby as they thought providing for the chastity of their wives.
And truly if they would but seriously consider, what turpitudes, impunities,
nefarious and abominable lusts, have repleated the Roman Clergy, both
religious and secular, they would have little cause to brag of this their
Tradition Apostolical: but this surely is as much Apostolical as that their
other, most frivolous, and irreligious use, of their hallowed graynes, meddals,
etc. the which as they are generally observed; received and believed throughout
the whole Pontifician Church, so it is as manifest, that they are mere
novelties, without any seeming show of Antiquity at all. And yet, as novel as
they are, to find out the precise beginning of them, it would trouble their
best Antiquary. Let any one of them do it, and he shall wear the Laurel bough
for his pains.

Their universal use, of their round Wafercakes, (which they use, in their
most religious service at Mass, and for their consecrations) will they call
them Apostolical? who would not laugh thereat? and yet very novel they are,
although no express beginning of them can be showed by any adversary. What
said I? no express beginning of them? yes, the Author of the Roman order, (as
Cassander in his Li^urgick reports) at the beginning and bringing in of them
into the Church, greatly complains against them, because instead of great
loaves which were offered before by It is very probable that Round wafers and
elevation came into gether, but it can not by any Pontifician whatsoever be
specified when they precisely were brought in, although G^mma. animae seems
to bring them in above a thousand and a hundred years after Christ. Gem. an.
cap. 29. some cite idly a sentence out of Epiphan. in Ancorat. for this purpose.
the people, now such scraps (to use his words) were brought, and offered.
Doubtless, when Idolatry grew ripest, and the elevation most frequent, then
came in the round wafers, for in all antiquity there is no other mention made
of other bread of the Eucharist, then such as good Christian women made at
home, and brought with them to the Churches to be offered and distributed:
Whereof themselves also took part at the holy communion, and carried also part
away home in clean linen clothes to receive at convenient times as Tertulian
Tertul. lib. 2. ad vxorem.
reports, whose saying the Papists abuse.

Such is also their observations of Lent, as it precisely consists of forty
six days of fast and abstinence, containing Sundaies and Feries, and I
challenge any adversary to show me a beginning of such a precise Lent of six
and forty days. They cannot do it. What? must it be therefore in this
precise fashion a tradition Apostolical? who would not smile thereat to hear
of such a tradition? who have read Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. cap. 24 Socrat. lib. 5.
ca* 21 Zozamen. lib. 7. cap. 19. See Niceph lib. 11. cap. 34. and 35.
Eusebius, Socrates, Zozomenus three ancient Historians well acquainted wi^h
the Lents of the Primitive Churches, who do so differently distinguish the
different observation of Lent, in diverse Apostolical Churches of the East, and
West, that whereas Saint Hierome and Saint Ignatius, affirm that the fast o^
Lent or Quadragesme is a tradition Apostolical; they must not be understood of
the precise fast of forty days, or six and forty days abstinence used by
the Romans, but of some certain set fast, before the holy feast of Easter,
which was diversely observed according to the diverse acceptances, of the
Catholic and Apostolical Churches of those times: Hear Saint Austen much for
this purpose clearly pronou^cing. If you August. Epis* 8^. ad Cass^^*
ask my opinion concerning this matter of fasting, I find in the writings of
the Evangelists, and the Apostles, and all the new Testament, that we are
commanded to fast: but what days must we fast, and what days we must not
fast, I find it not determined by any commandment of Christ or his Apostles.
Thus he. I have been very large, (courteous Reader) in producing many
instances, to show that rule of theirs to be vain, upon which their traditions
are built, to wit, that whatsoever the Roman Church generally obscrueth,
whereof no beginning can be showed, that must needs be a tradition Apostolical,
infinite like instances might be made, yea and most justly and soundly in all
such rites, laws, customs, and articles of faith, which they teach contrary
to the true reformed Churches. But I have here produced so many, that I think
my self to have been too careful in proving that which otherwise of it self
is most clear, but seeing, the life of the Roman religion, rests upon
traditions (which they pretend to be Apostolical) overthrow them, and down
must all that same religion, as a learned Priest lately in this house
acknowledged to my self, being urged thereunto by force of argument, and
evidence of truth. And so to conclude these my Motives about their idle rules
of faith, the Christian Reader, who is careful of his own salvation, and
gives obedient ear to that prophetical light of Gods sacred Scriptures,
(expounded by the ancient Church) which Scriptures Saint Peter 2. Pet. 1.
prefers above that vision, which he and his brethren had of Christ in mount
Thabor: he cannot but easily observe, what consequences are likely to follow
out of three such corrupt Rules of faith as are in request amongst the
Pontificians, to wit, infallibility solely, and only in the Popes definitive
judgment, authority of Apophricall Scriptures, and the vain authority of
their traditions, pretended to be Apostolical, where as they are nothing
less. The adversary will for the validity of these rules, stand upon the
authority of their present Roman Church, which has received them, of which
their defense conformably to all antiquity, and ancient Fathers, (who taught
otherwise,) we must also conformably to their proceedings, search out of Gods
word, whether the Church of which they brag so much, be the true Church.
Succession in Sees only will not suffice, as by their own confession is
manifest in the Churches of Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople etc. but there
is required also succession in doctrine according to Gods word, by which trial
must be made of all Churches, and of all doctrines, and all after-traditions,
to which if they be not agreeable, without peril of damnation they must not be
received, and this is the most express doctrine and faith of Saint Austen in
August. lib. 1. de doctrina Christiana. cap. 37. lib. de unitate Ecclesi cap.
2. but cap. 16. so clearly that I do suppose no Pontifician Priest dare scarce
read, that Chapter to his family.
sundry places, yea of Bellarmine Bellarm. lib. 2. de verbo doi. cap. 2.
Basil. sermon. de fide.
himself, (though as it may be thought) he not very willingly confesses this
truth. Other means, says he, may deceive, but nothing is more certain then
the Scripture, and therefore by confession of all, both ancient and modern
writers, the trial by Gods word is most firm and assured.

The fourth Motive.
THe fourth Motive, and that very effectual The fourth. Motive.
with me, is, that transcendent power, both in all temporals and spirituals,
which later Popes contrary to Christ's institution and practice of holy
Primitive Popes, challenge, and which the Roman Canonists, and Cardinals
ouer-liberal of that wherewith they have nothing to do, do flatteringly thrust
upon their Roman Monarchs. In spirituals he challenges, and they grant unto
him, to be the only supreme; and immediate Pastor over Christ's flock, so that
look how ample, and immediate Christ's jurisdiction for salvation of souls
was, so is his; he glories in that title, and they give it him, which Greg
lib. 4. epist. 38.
S. Gregory so much detested as the very badge of Antichrist, he will in the
government of Christ's flock have no Peer nor Colleage. He is content to be
honored with that title, yea, and above that ambitious title, the which
Constantius the Arian required, for he was content with ( numen nostrum.) our
power or divinity, but the Pope can willingly acept of ( supremum in terris
numen,) the supreme and highest divinity or power upon earth. O ye heavens be
astonished, and everlasting gates be desolated, the pretended only Vicar of
Christ, the successor in some sort of that poor fisher, who Act 3.
gloried, in that he had neither gold nor silver: must hear, and that from
renowned Proesat. ad Grego. 13. in principia doctri.
Stapletons mouth, the Spanish kings professor in Louane, and the English
Pontificians chief champion, thus: thy supreme divinity upon earth; just God,
how more justly may we lament, with those words (of Saint Gregory against John
of Constantinople for his extraordinary fasting surnamed ( Ieiunator) the
faster,) Grego. lib. 4. ^p. 38.
O alas, all things that have been forespoken, are come to pass; the King
of pride is at hand, and that which is a wickedness to be spoken, a whole Army
of priests is prepared for him; because those serve the proud neck of elation,
and pride, who have been set to give example of meekness and humility. Thus
that Father in those times, when the mystery of iniquity began to work most
apparently in the Patriarch of Constantinople; but appeared more clearly in one
of his next Successors, to wit, Boniface 3 who emulating the Constantinopolitan
Patriarks for their pride, obtained of Phocas that hateful and traitorous
usurper rather then Emperor, to decree by constitution, that the title of
Universal Bishop, should for ever after belong and be given only to the
Bishops of Rome: this is a matter undoubted of by ancient Sabel. Aenead. ^.
lib. 6. Platin. in Bonifac. 3. Otho. lib. 5. Paulus. de gostis Longobard.
Marianus anno. Dom. 608. Duerenus. de sacris Ecclesioe ministris. lib. 1. cap
10 Abbas in Phoca and poene emnis aly Sigebert. Regino Luitpran. Anasta. Baron.
annal. ad annum. 606.
Historians, and yet perchance, this Boniface did not assume by that title, so
much unto him as these latter Popes do, (to wit) to be immediate pastors of
all the whole Church, comprehending all Partriarkes, Bishops, etc, or that,
there is no power nor jurisdiction in any Prelate, or Pastor of the Church
whatsoever; which is not dependantly from them and of them; so that they can
and may peremptorily call to their court all causes greater or smaller, and
according to course of law, or otherwise, finally, and Iudicare etc. to judge
and decree whether it be necessary to depose a Prince belongs to the Pope, of
whose judgment, whether it be right or not, no man may judge. Bellar. contra.
Barck. ca. 12.
vnappellably end, and determine them: and if any either Emperor, Prince,
Prelate, or University, would offer to appeal from any of their sentences,
(though most exorbitant and tirannicall) they should thereby deserve to be
cursed with Bell, Book, and Candle. I cannot think that in Bonifaces time the
Roman Bishops were grown to that height of Antichristian pride that was left
for later times, when the Devil was to be let loose after the thousand years
of his binding. Notwithstanding he challenged by Phocas his constitution to be
only called, universal Bishop of the Church, against which title Saint Gregory
so vehemently and Christianly exclaimeth in Greg lib 4. ep 32. 34. 38. 39.
diverse Epistles: testifying and demonstrating most plainly, that that
Antichristian title robs all Bishops of their honor, and makes that the
Assumer thereof should be reputed Antichrist. This being so in this Ancient
Father, how durst D. Stapleton Staple principi. doctr. lib. 6. cap. 7.
that renowned Professor of divinity endeavor to make Saint Gregory speak
against himself in this very epistle; and out of him labor to prove the
present Roman supremacy, and Monarchy, which that Father so much detested?
Whereas Lib. 4. epist. 38.
S. Gregory in a learned discourse writing against the Patriarch of
Constantinople John, who claimed to be universal Bishop of the Church, and
had procured Maurice the Emperor to write to Saint Gregory for the same
purpose: shows that Christ is only head of his Church, and that there is no
other head but he, adding much to that purpose, he adioyneth thus: Certe
Potrus Apostolus primum membrum sanctoe, etc. Certainly, Peter the Apostle, the
first member of the holy Universal Church, Paul, Andrew, John; what else are
they but heads of particular people? and yet notwithstanding, they are all
members of the Church, under one head, and that I may bind up all within a
short compass of speech, the Saints before the Law, Saints under Law, Saints
under Grace, all these perfiting one body of our Lord, are all placed in the
members of the Church, and no one would ever have himself called universal.
Thus far he, with much more in that Epistle, the which whosoever shall
read, if he respect Saint Gregory's authority, confirming his doctrine also
out of Scriptures; it is not possible, he should believe the present Roman
Monarchy. How then (thou will demand) can Doctor Stapleton find any thing in
this very Epistle, for the Popes exorbitant supremacy? he has found somewhat,
yea and in this very sentence by me cyted; but he has used a certain figure
called of addition, by thrusting into the text, (as he cites it) the word (
Petro) Peter. And makes Saint Gregory speak thus. Truly, Peter is the first
member of the Universal Church, Paul, Andrew, and John what are they else, but
of singular flocks, heads, and yet all under one head Peter are members of the
Universal Church. Thus he. Some Dowists and precise Pontificians will perhaps
say it is not possible, that learned Stapleton should so corrupt this ancient
Father, let such take pains to examine Grego. lib 4. epist. 38. Staple.
principia doctrina. lib 6. c. 8.
and then judge as they find. I could show also how he corrupts by
subtracting, but that upon some other occasion. I must needs confess, when I
read this egregious corruption in him, that I resolved never to trust
Pontifician doctor again without trial, citing any sentence for the Popes
monarchy. It is not imaginable, what suppositious books have been obtruded
upon the world to support this declining Monarchy; but ( ruet, ruet) it will
fall, it will fall: and God grant it may rather be ruinated ( Lino) as an
ancient Sibile prophesied, that is, with paper (to wit) learned books, rather
then with fire, sword, famine cold, as the Sibill Delphicke prophesied under
Romulus reigning and Rome triumphing, and according as Saint John Apoc. cap. 18.
has fore-prophecied in his Revelation.

I cannot now stand prolixly to overthrow See for this purpose Cusanus conco^d.
Cathol. lib. 2. and ca. 20. and Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. cap. 25 and 26. especially
consider how the Council of Chalcedon in the 16. action did most resolutely
oppose against the Pope, and their decree has prevailed.
this ambitious Monarchy of the Popes by the decrees and constitutions of
ancient and later Councels of Nice, of Constantinople, the first and eight of
Chalcedon, of Sardica, Carthage, Constance, Basile, and by uniform consent and
practice of the Greek Church, I will therefore here only adioyne somewhat
concerning the other branch of this my motive, to wit, the Popes arrogant, and
persumptuous claim Bulla. Pij. 5. in Elizabet. Clemen 7. in Henri. 8. Clement.
8. in Henric. 4. Franc. Sixti Quinti. etc.
over Princes, and kingdoms, wherein he assumeth that honor and power which
was never given him by Christ, the mystery of which iniquity has wrought so
powerfully in these latter Popes, to fulfill the prediction of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Saint Paul, that the Roman Empire according to the exposition of the ancient
August. 20. de ciuit. 19. Tertul. lib. de resurrect. carnis. Hieron. epist. ad
Algasia^. q. 11. and in Danielem. Aeneas S^luius, lib. de ortu Roman. Imperij.
Irenae. Theod. Bellarminus lib. 3. de Roma. Pont. Ribera. viegas in Apoc.
Chrisost. Amb. Theoph. Primas. in 2. ad Thessal. 2.
fathers was not to be taken away until a certain Antichrist should come (I
said a certain Antichrist, not because, there shall be only only one in
number or person; but to distinguish him from some other kinds of Antichrists
described in some places of the Revelation and other parts of holy Scripture)
but then at his coming the empire must ( De medio fieri) be done or taken out
of the way, but whether it shall be taken out of the way, by the direct means
of Antichrist or not, the Scriptures do not expressly affirm it: some of the
Fathers, yea the Rhemists, do incline to think so; and doubtless it is most
probable that the holy Ghost meant so, because he makes the standing of the
Roman Empire, to be a let, and hindrance against the coming of that man of
sin Antichrist which 2 Thessalonians. 2.
is here prophesied by the Apostle: the which thing if it be true, it cannot
possibly be avoided, but that the later Popes be that Antichrist, of which the
Apostle here foretells, who mounted not to their perfect height of iniquity
until the Roman Empire was made out of the way; which was done by them, as I
will anon show. For my part I do very resolutely affirm that whosoever
shall have taken the Roman Empire out of the way, and shall have made himself
the direct or indirect supreme Monarch of the world, and withal, shall sit in
the temple of God, that is, shall challenge only to sit without peer, and
equal in the universal Church of Christ to Teach all, Govern all, Censure
all, Command all, and necessarily not to be taught censured or corrected by any
whatsoever, The Popes extol themselves, neither the triple crown, nor
adoration was first freely given but exacted by themselves.
that this must needs be the man of sin, the son of perdition, the outlaw
or man without law, who extolleth himself, above all that is called God (mark
extolleth himself) or that is worshipped. Now whereas it is manifest that the
Popes by their practice and decrees do challenge the later, to wit the
spiritual Monarchy, and universal supremacy in the chair of Gods temple; yet
they have not perhaps professedly by decrees challenged, to be the supreme
direct monarchs of the whole World in temporals. I said perhaps, for the
decrees Alexander the 6. his decree of dividing the East and West Indies which
he pretends to do ex plenitudine potestatis, and gratuito out of the
fullness of his power and frankly. Bonif. 8. his decree vnam sancta^, and his
Epistle to King Philp the fair, a king of France Leo 10. as Petrar^h reports
him, lib. de rebus me* m^rand^s, gave the kingdom of Saracens to Sanctius, who
required him wih the Caliphship of Baldach.
of certain Popes, make me think there wants no good will but only
means, and possession; which their Canonists and Ignatians labor a pace in
every place where they can find footing, by their preachings, secret
conferences, and books to procure unto him. And consider this, what books are
with more favor received, printed, and published at Rome, then those of this
stamp, and kind? For this respect, Pesantius, Bozius and such like shall be
cherished there Bell^rmine in the time of Sixtus the Monarch of the world (who
had devoured England in his vai^e Psendopropheticall hope) Bell^rmine (I say,)
because he applauded not the Papal Monarchy of Sixtus but wrote against it,
found no favor but was glad to avoid Rome, for fear of frying but B^llar.
against Barkley. and his an^wer to a Ve netia^ Doctor. saep^ssime* and de Rom
Pon. ^. 5. c. 6
now, by end euouring to b^ing the Monarchy of christendom under the Popes
command, with the distinction of indirect and direct, he has profited so much
that he has purchased a Cardinals hat, the next step to the Roman Monarchy
it self, the which if he ever obtain, doubtless he will speak as Sixtus
did; for as his doctrine is much changed from that it was in Sixtus time, so
doubtless if he prove Pope it will Hanores mutant mo^^s.
come to greater perfection. Baron. in annalibus saepissime* Steuch. lib. de
donat. Constant. Bozius, alij.
Cardinal Baronius good God, how he trauaileth as though he were which child,
to bring forth this Monarchy throughout his Annals! and Augustinus Steuch. more
earnest then he, (if it may be) how carelfully does he record Diplomes and
Charters, by which the Popes challenge the direct and supreme Soueraignties
over most kingdoms of the West! as of Spain, France, England, Ireland,
Hungary, Norway, Sicily, and of which not? but such baubles I pass over and
the trying of those Charters I put off to those whom it concerns, I will
only a little examine, how this man of sin, that sits in the Temple of
God, is said to sit in Gods Temple, doubtless it cannot otherwise be well
understood, then of some principal part of the externe and visible Church of
Christ: there being no other temple of God, of which it may with any
probability be expounded. To expound it of the Temple in Jerusalem, were very
incongruous, yea impossible; considering, the same is destroyed and that the
desolation thereof shall continue til the end as Dan. 9. Hieron. ibidem.
Daniel the Prophet has foretold; yea and Christ himself seems also to have
Math. 24. In the time of Julian the Apostata when the Jews attempted to have
reedified their temple in Jerusalem, they were miraculously let by God, a
toke^ that the same shall never be reedified. Baronius his Annals in Iuliano.
Theod Socrates. lib. 3.
foretold so much: to say, that Antichrist when he comes, shall reedifie the
Temple of Jerusalem in the same place where that of Solomon stood, and it
therefore to be called the Temple of God, by the Apostle, is too too improbably
and idly said: with as much congruity, as to say that the turkish moskyes in
Constantinople are the Church of God because standing in the same places and
within the same material walls in which once the True and only God Jesus
Christ was worshipped. The Pontificians would be offended to hear their Church
of the blessed Virgin Mary and all the Martyrs in Rome, to be now called the
Temple of all false Gods, because it was so once called by the name of
Pantheon. Besides; if we will believe the Rhemists, and The substance of
Lessius demonstrating book, consists in that h^ confounds diverse
predictio^s concerning the states of diverse enemies of Christ and diverse
calamities of the Church to the imagined 3. years and a halfes reign of one
singular man Antichrist.
Leonard Lessius in his laborious and demonstratiue book of Antichrist, we
must think that Antichrist when he comes shall worship no God: a toy: for if
so, how then shall he be thought, to build a temple to the true God? what?
Worship no God, and yet build a Temple to the true God? a Paradoxe. But most
clear it is and to me it has been often confessed by diverse learned Papists
that Antichrist is said to sit in the Temple of God because he shall use a
tirannical, proud, usurped imperious government in the visible Church,
excluding the society and paritie of any other in that usurped office of his,
changing that form of government, which Christ left in his Church, and by
tyranny seeking to draw all to himself, Annotation. in 2. ad. these. 2. an. 5
as the Rhemists themselves affirm. But that this Antichrist of which Saint
Paul speaks shall sit in the visible Church of Christ (visible I said, for
so they are to be expounded) diverse ancient Aug lib. 20. de ciuita. cap. 19.
Hieron. ad Algasia^. q. 11. Greg. l. 4. epist. 34. 38. 39 et in 2. ad These.
cap. 2. apud Paterium clarissime Robertus lincolniens. apud Math. Paris. in
Henrico 3. anno. 1162. Coruelius mussorat. habita in con. Trid. dominica 3.
adue^tus. Athanas. in epist. ad solitar. vitam agentes Hilar. li. cont.
Constan. Lucifer. in lib. moriendum pro filio dei. Bernar. ser. in conc. Rem.
et sermon. 33. in cantica. Hieron. in Dan. 11. Hila. cont. Auxent. This greek
word (...), Antichrist, in properlinar gie and signification according to the
different use of the preposition (...) in Greek, signifies one, that is, for
instead or against another, all which three significations are united in the
man of sin called Antichrist, being anointed instead and against the true
anointed Lord Jesus Christ.
Fathers either expressly affirm, or by most evident consequence, it is deduced
out of them. S. Austin, S. Jerome, S. Gregory and others expressly, Cornelius
Mus. seems to affirm so much, although he dare not speak it expressly;
Athanasius also agreeingly with Hilary, and Lucifer Calaritane, make therefore
Constantius the Arian Emperor Antichrist, because he assumed to himself all
rule tiranically in the Church, and against Churchmen. Saint Bernard not far
from this conceit, where he charge the Churchmen for serving Antichrist.
Saint Gregory is most clear, for otherwise how unworthy an argument were it in
that Father, to call John of Constantinople Antichrist, and the Title of
Universal Bishop Antichristian, if Antichrist when he should come, was not to
be either a Bishop, or not to challenge any such usurped power, or any such
name. Along while King Henry the eight, and Queen Elizabeth both of renowned
memory were certain Antichrists with the Pontificians, in respect they
challenged the titles of chief Governors, in the Church of England, the sense
whereof being now sufficiently explaned, and by the same made evident, that
they require no more, then what their predecessors had, and used, though not
with the name of Heads, or chief Governors: yea made so plain, that Parsons
in his Catholic letter against our Kings Apology Iobn Heart also acknowledged
the same to Doctor Reinolds Conference. cap. 10. in the end.
Parsons himself acknowledges that as our Our King in his Apology.
Soueraign does declare and explane, his Title of headship, and Supremacy, it
is sound and in some sort allowable: they have left that saying: but yet
thereby it is clear, that Antichrist in their own estimation, when he shall
come, shall be a kind of tyrannical and usurping Churchman. The prouerbiall
prophecy of of Saint Hildegard, spoken of by many, has the same meaning, vnum
vos monco, Cauete Antichristum, etc. One thing I admonish you, beware of
Antichrist, you are ill carried away, with the love of walls; naughtily do you
worship the Church as if it were within couers and edifices: badly, under these
do you offer the name of peace; what? can it be doubted, that Antichrist shall
sit in these? Mountains, Woods, Lakes, Prisons, Whirlepooles shall be more
secure to me, for Prophets either staying in these, or thrown into these, have
prophesied, with the spirit of God, thus she. who has not heard of the
Prophecy of Ioakim Abbot? which ought to be of credit, with the Pontificians,
considering how eager Stapleton Stapleton in promptu.
is against the very hair, to make him prophecy of the Order of the
Ignatians, as of a special Order, to be raised up by God, for defense and
propagation of the Roman Church.

But for prophecies, the like might be produced out of Lib. reuelat. 4. Ciril
lib. reuelat. related by Aytmger in Method.
Briget and Ciril; and others: these may suffice. But hear a more forcible
testimony, out of our English Pontificians the Annotat. in 2. ad thessalo. 2.
annot. 5.
Rhemists themselves, who grant that both Saint Austin and Saint Hierome do
interpret the sitting of Antichrist in the Temple of God, for his sitting in
Christ's Church, but not (say they) as though he should be chief member of the
Church of Christ, or a special part of his mystical body; if they mean that
in truth and verity Antichrist should not so be; they never wrote truer
Doctrine: but if they mean that in the sense of the Fathers, he should not as
a pretended ruler, and chief of the Church, or as a pretended mystical head
of his body, sit in the same, it is most vain, and against the very hair, for
what? do they or can they else understand, by sitting in the Church; but to
rule and govern in the Church? and therefore he alone is said to sit in the
Temple; because he alone challenges independently, monarchically, and
Soueraignely, (according to the doctrine of Bellarmine, Bellar. lib. 1. de
conci. cap. 17. Baron. in Annal. sepissime Allen. his defense of english
Catholics cap. 5.
Baron Sanders, Allen, and all other, who make the Church-Gouernment a
Monarchy) to Govern the whole Temple. All other Bishops and prelates
whatsoever being but his substitutes, (according Bellar. lib. 1. de Romano
pontific. cap. 9. paragr. proinde Turrecremat. in sama lib. 3. cap. 44.
to Bellarmines Doctrine) as Viceroyes are substitutes under absolute Monarchs.
Yea these Rhemists, forgetful of what they said some few lines before, (by
force of truth constrained) thus they add: that Antichrist, if he ever were
of, or in the Church, he should be an Apostata, and a runnagate out of the
Church, and shall usurp upon it by tyranny, and by challenging worship,
religion, and government thereof, so that himself shall be adored in all
Churches of the World; which he list to leave standing for his honor, and this
is to sit in the Temple, or Observe Christian reader these gramarians they
would make the prepositio^ in, with an ablative case to stand for against.
against the Temple of God, as some (what some are these?) interpret: if any
Pope, did ever this, or shall do, then let the adversaries call him
Antichrist. Thus they; Observe Christian Reader by their own confession; they
acknowledge, that the Bishop of Rome may be justly called Antichrist, if these
things can be proved of him: These Doctors never wrote truer line. That he is
adored in all the Churches and congregations which he would have to stand, or
has reared upon the ruins of such Churches, as he has destroyed, who can
deny it? it is as manifest as the sun: he is not named in the Mass or
Letanies but with reverence, and as for the outward external adoration, and
worship, which is given him, wheresoever he personally sits, it does not
only surpass all adoration and Honor given to any earthly Prince or
Potentate; but it far passes that which is given to their Sacrament it self
(which to them is not only called as God, or worshipped as a God, but is
believed to be very Christ himself, yea and that the most blessed Trinity is
to be worshipped as specially present in that Sacrament) for to this Sacrament,
and God in it, one adoration, and genuflexion will serve, when you come to
pray, but come to sue or supplicate to him, that sits in the Temple, one will
not serve, but you must have two or three adorations, and genuflexions, and as
many at your departing whether you obtain your suite or not: and almost
prostrate also, you must kiss his feet, before you depart, if you may be
admitted to that Favor. (For I assure you in Rome it is esteemed a favor, to
kiss the Popes foot greater, then in Aethiopia to see the great Presbyters
great toe) for which Purpose, he has caused the sign of our redemption to be
drawn upon his slippers, where doubtless sometimes it has homely drops
fall upon it, but it little mattereth for Christians mouths, save the Popes
grooms of their labor, which adoration and sweet licking if you please, to
believe the Cretian Eudaemon parallel. cap. 8. page 403.
Ignatian Eudaemon, was prophesied by King David, Pii, Principes etc. Let Godly
Princes knowing what they owe to God in his Members and in his Ministers adore
them with demisse countenance, and lick the dust of their feet: thus that lying
parazite; pardon me Christian reader, for calling him so, He that shall read
his calu^nious book written aga nst the temperate and iudlcious book of the L.
Bishop of Elye will easily perceive how desperate that cause of the Pope is
which has such desperate Raylers set a work to maintain it. what have the
Ignatians no better Eudaemo^ then this Cacodaemon? Pardon me courteous Reader
the foul mourhed Demon who in every page almost gives either the lie or
exprobrateth aua^ice to that worthy and learned Prelate deserves no less.
he is doubtless the most impudent liar, and most shameless calumniator and
vainest parazite that ever put pen to paper, and for his comfort some may tell
him, he is so esteemed by almost all indifferent and judicious Pontifician
Priests within this Kingdom. To go on, let us consider the adorations, and
acclamations, which are given him being mounted upon men's shoulders, with a
triple crown upon his head, which he wears as some affirm to signify his
absolute Sovereignty, in all matters, temporal and Spiritual; others to
represent that he is upon Earth insteede and Vicary of the most infinite
Majesty of the Father Son and holy Ghost: (but alas here is a difference,
they three have but one crown, the Pope has three, but that is answered thus:
as there, is a unity in Trinity, so here is a unity of a crown in a Trinity of
Crowns) others say, it represents the three Crowns which the now pretended
Roman Emperor, receaueth at three special cities of the Empire; one of Iron
in Apuisgrane, one of Silver at Milane, another of Gold at Rome: if so, may I
not, justly call it an image of the last beast? an Image, because it
represents what he aymeth at, and has not yet fully gotten in his
possession; an image, because it represents what the glory of the Roman
Empire was, as being the last Empire, and most glorious, concluding as it were
the three former of the Assirians, Persians, Grecians in one. I said of the
beast, because as the other ancient Monarchies of the Assirians, Persians,
Grecians, were Dan. cap. 7. and 8.
described by the holy Prophets in the forms of beasts (not in respect of
their temporal Soueraignety and power, which was sacred and holy) but for that
they should set up Idolatry and should wickedly or impurely govern their
Monarchies; so also was the Roman Empire for the same respect described by the
fourth beast, as in like sort under diverse forms of beasts she is described
in the reuclation of S. John: and if the Roman bishop, may be caled an Image of
the beast. I leave the reader to make the consequences out of many places of
the Revelation of S. John, One thing I note how, that in the dreadful Apocalip.
13.
persecutions, and afflictions of Christ's Church, none shall be permitted
either to buy, or to sell, who have not either the image or Character or the
number of the name of the beast, (what is the Image? but the Popes supreme
Roman monarchy? what the Character but the oath or promise of obedience to
him? what the number of his name, but (...) in Latin and linglish signifies
Roman, and has the number 666. So the learned affirm also that the word in
Hebrew signifying Roman has the same number.
Roman? which is now the only mark of the saithfull among the Pontificians
more esteemed then Christian) and it is so provided, by the most vigilant
industry of the Bishop of Rome; whersoeuer he rules, what by his
excomunications, interdicts suspensions etc. That no man can either buy or
sell, or have temporal or spiritual commerce, who adoreth not the image, or
has not the character, or the number of the name of the beast.

But to return to the Pope, mounted upon men's shoulders with a triple crown
upon his head, and with those acclamations from all adoring him upon their
knees (live holy Father, live holy Father) expecting also remissions and
indulgences of their sins in Purgatory for the same meeting, and honorable
attending upon him: can any man say, be is not adored? yea he is adored
sitting, yea and sitting in the temple, yea the temple of God: if Saint Peter's
Church in Rome be Gods, or if the Roman Sea and Church be Gods. Yea, and if
Saint Marks Church in Venice be Gods; he was adored there, when he sitting,
the famous Frederick, and one of the most renowned Emperors came prostrate
unto him, kissed his foot; which submissiue action when he was doing, ambitious
Alexander, not the great, but the third, set his foot upon his neck in a most
contemptuous manner: this History although both Baronius, Bellarmine, and
Parsons, for very shame would deny it, yet it is most certain: for besides,
approved Nauclerus generat. 40. anno. 1177. Iustinia. lib. 2. rerum venet.
Massonius in Alexandro. 3. Hieron. Bardus. la lib. de hac historia edito. where
he cites many Pontisician historians for the same.
Historians which mention it, the same is also painted in tho Popes pullace at
Rome, in the very next room to the old chapel, it is also, to be seen
painted in Venice in one of their Council rooms, and if any of them be now
lately defaced, they have but the fortunes of Papisse Ioanes pictures, where of
one was removed lately out of the Church of Sienna, by Clement the eight his
commandment; as Baron. epist, ad Florimond apud eundem.
Baronius joyfully writes to Florimond, the other by Pius the fifth in Rome,
and cast into Tiber to remove the memory of the feminine Pope: although some
shamefully do affirm that Sixtus the fifth removed it, because it was a let
to his building. But to proceed, as he was adored in Gods Church in Venice, so
wheresoruer he sits he is adored by all, either suppliants to him or his
attendants. Furthermore, out of their Lib. 1. ceremonial.
ceremonial book hear a little more, for his adoration, whether you be
Princes or people, that you may know how to behave your selves, when you shall
meet the Pope: Sovereign Kings, and absolute Princes themselves, if they
chance to be with the Pope, must have their seats so placed, that they may sit,
not equally by the Popes side, but as it were toward his feet: he must not
rise up to Princes when they come to him, to the Emperor only, after reverence
(if so much) done unto him, he must rise a little to honor thereby the
Emperor, and must also give him his hand to kiss, and further, if he be to be
carried upon men's shoulders, if any Princes be present, they must make offer,
and a seeming to bear him upon their shoulders. O ye heavens be desolated,
what? is not this man adored sitting, and sitting in the temple? The Laterane
Sess. 3. and 10.
Council under Leo, says, that the Pope is to be adored of all people,
because he is most like God, called therefore by Prefat. ad Gregor. 13. in
princip. doctrinal.
Stapleton, (supremum in terris numen) the supreme Godhead, or divinity upon
earth: and by a certain Neapolitane in his Theses, ( vice-deus) a Vice-God,
and his power called the Pontifician omnipotency, and by the Extrauagant. Ioh.
22. cum inter. See lib. ceremoni. Sect. 7. lib. 1. August. Steuchus-sepissime.
de donat. constantini. Our most holy Lord, our most blessed Father, his
holiness. See the Canon of Pope Nicholas. cap. omnes did. 22.
gloss upon the extrauagant ( Dominus Deus noster) our Lord God the Pope:
which gloss Parsons did ignorantly often deny to be found upon the
extrauagants. Histories are full fraught with such relations of adorations, and
most adulatorious Epithites given to his Holiness, the proper name and calling
now of the Pope, amongst his adorers and followers: and do you think the Pope
knows not, or affects not this his greatness: observe his pride (excuse me
Pontifician reader) when he says not private Mass himself, but is in his
public Chapel, When I saw these things, I was astonished, especially to
observe, the oscitancie of the purpured Fathers at that time, and their talking
one with another, and you shall scarce ever see one Cardinal amongst them who
hears Mass devoutly much like the Nuncio at Brussels, although an Archbishop
he must not kneel when he receives upon any solemn feast the Sacrament his
very God, he comes from his Chair of State down to the Altar, and stands
close cheek by cheek to the Priest that celebrateth, (who also must then
reverence him) and when he receives of the Chalice, he must forsooth standing,
have a quill of silver, and drink as much as pleases him, out of the
consecrated Chalice. O most foolish and apish foppery, what? must Popes needs
show their majesty's, in that place of the dreadful mysteries? Not long since,
when our Sovereign came to the Crown of England, Relation of a reverend
Priest then in Rome.
there was a deliberation had in Rome amongst the Cardinals, whether it were
not meet to salute and congratulate his Majesty with some humane and kind
letters: it was resolved upon, both by Pope, and most Cardinals, that it did
not become Such was the spirit of the Roman Clergy in S. Bernards time
against which he most vehemently declaimeth. lib. 4. c. 2. de consid.
the Majesty and greatness of the court of Rome, (for in the name of court
the Romans take more delight then in the name of Church, and in Rome it self
few call it the Church, but the court of Rome and the Popes Pallacc, etc.) to
condescend so far as to write first to his Majesty. O inexplicable pride!
tell me Oye Roman Bishops, whose Vicars do you challenge to be? not his, who
suffered death, and all ignominy to save souls? tell me, by what means have
you got your supremacies and dominions? not from Christian Kings, the most
fruitful sheep of the Church? what? you care not belike for the sheep having
got the fleece? tell me, did not your selves often pretend, vainly to have had
conceits and hopeful expectations of his coming to your Church, and
doubtless most hopeful your expectations might have been, and most
effectual for the reformation of the Church, if you would have had accepted,
or woul yet accept of his most royal offer to have had a free general and
universal Council, but God permitted it not, the sins of Rome and our sins
cry vengeance. The abominations within the walls of your Temples, and the
impurities within the walls of your Palaces cry for the just judgment of
God upon your Ezech. 8.
backs set against the Temple, and doubtless although Rome have been as a
Jeremy. 22.
ring upon the finger of God, yet for her impurities, idolatries, and
abominations, she will be cast off as Iechonias was. Read 2. 3. 6. 7. 10. 22.
23. 44. of Jeremy, and then tell me, whether God will be so infallibly tied to
any Church, though of his own appointing and establishing, so that if the same
fall to wickedness, and impiety, that he will not forsake the same, and cast
her off. Ierem. 7. 11.
Read also the Epistle to the Romans. These things considered, will the
Rhemists deny, but that the Popes are adored in the Church? which is one of
their own marks of the man of sin: neither can they deny, but that he has
universal and immediate government, in and over the whole Church, for so to
affirm and believe, is the very essence, and soul of their profession, but by
this only they will excuse it and say, he has it not tyrannically, and that
he is not an Apostata, nor a Renegate, out of the Church. Truly, if they should
confess so much, they might be well bought for fools: and for them to say he
is no Apostata, nor Renegate out of their Church it is a toy or a paradoxe, for
he is their very Church and life thereof, therefore to say he should be an
Apostata or a Renegate out of the Church were all one with this, to affirm
that he is an Apostata from himself, but I must tell them that it is enough to
make him a certain Antichrist, the man of sin, even in their own
judgments, to show that he has subverted the government instituted by Christ,
applying by singular tyranny, and usurpation all to himself; and I would in
good earnest demand of any friend of the Rhemists, what excellent power or
jurisdiction is there, or can be in the church which the Pope has not applied
to himself? and so universally, that whosoever in the Church has any power or
jurisdiction (both in the Popes, and in the Ignatians belief, and the purpled
Fathers belief also, as Papa, etc. the Pope and the purpured Fathers Judge the
world. ^oquae. in respons* ad praemon. Regis.
Coquaeus calls them) it all comes from the Pope, and is so dependent from
him, that at his pleasure without cause, validly and effectually, (although as
some of them say not without sin) he may take it from them: but at this
present sufficiently of this.

I will here add somewhat how the Popes by taking away wholly, or else helping
to take away the Roman Empire, do show themselves to be the men of sin, and
children of perdition, which were to come, at the taking away, and destruction
of the said Empire according to the prediction of 2 Thessalonians 2.
Saint Paul. To begin, that of the Apostle, (only that which now holds hold,
until it be taken out of the way) the Annotation^ upon the second to the
Thessal. 2. cap.
Rhemists themselves, admit that some ancient Fathers expound of the Roman
Empire (they might have said, most of the August. 20 de ciuitate cap. 9. Hieron
epist. ad Algas. q. 11. in Dan. and ad Geronti* de monogamia. Tertul. de
resurrectione carnis. Ciril. Hieros. catech. 15 Chrysostom. Amoro. Theoph.
Primas. in 2. ad These. Bellar. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 13.
ancient Fathers, and have called it the true exposition also) during the
continuance of which in full state, God shall not permit Antichrist to come.
Observe Christian reader, how with their own weapons they pierce their own
sides. God shall not permit Antichrst to come, so long as the Roman Empire, or
Emperor stands in his full state, thus they most truly, but to their own
confusion: for in good earnest I demand of any Rhemist, or of any Dowist in
their behalfes, whether the Roman Emperor, or Empire is now, or has been a
long time in former state or not? and if it be not, as most manifestly it is
not (the named Emperor, being now only Sovereign over Bohemia, and certain
small states and provinces in Germany) then I demand again, who has removed
him? doubtless Antichrist the man of sin, or the man of sins great
precursor, and the outlawes forerunner. Answer me in good earnest, is not
sovereignty, and an vnappellable supremacy in temporals, so essential,
intrinsecall, and substantial to Imperial state and dignity, that the same
being taken away, imperial state and dignity. is also taken away, who can
deny it? agreeingly, who, that has read any thing can deny, but the Roman
Bishops have taken this supremucie, and sovereignty from the Roman Emperors?
what do not the Roman Emperors homage to the Popes at their Inaugurations?
are they not then made by their oaths of fealty and liege service, homines
Papae, the Popes men, as they are called? do they not at their inaugurations,
Radeuike de gestis Frederi.
renounce the royalties of Rome, and resign them to the image of the beast,
and promise neither to come to Rome, nor stay in Rome, without the Popes free
allowance? Read the ceremonial Book in their inaugurations, and you will
find it so. Trust not the Dowists, some of them (perhaps out of ignorance)
will deny it: they that doubt of this truth, of which all histories make
menttion, and the very observing of Romes government will show it (where the
Emperout has as much sovereignty, and as many royalties and imperialties as
the great Turk, or the French King has) let them read Clement. 5. in cap de
iureiyrando.
Clement Popes decree, and Gratian. did. 63. in his two papal Canons for this
purpose concerning Emperors fealties to Popes, and so expounded by their
glosers.
Gratian, but for all others, most clearly their late zealous and religious
historian, Onuphrius in vita Grego. 7. Auentihe. lib. 5. Annal. Boior.
Hildebrandus, etc. subverted the Ecclesiastical state, and disturbed the
kingdom of the Christian Empire as a whole Sinode of Bishops affirmed. apud
Abbat. Vrsperg. ad annum. 1080.
Onuphrius writing and pronouncing thus. Gregorij 7. decreto etc. by the decree
of Gregory the 7, not only the Emperor Henry the 4. but all the Latin and
western Kings, to have been attempted, and violated, and after them also the
Bishops, and the whole Clergy of France, of Italy, and Germany; the Majesty
also and dignity of the Roman Empire, by the same ouerturned and euerted, and
that (which was far worse, such foundations were laid; by which, all the
power of the said Empire was weakened and beaten down: thus he. Hearken
Christian reader to a truth manifest in it self, and ingenuously acknowledged
by Onuphrius here, the majesty and dignity of the Roman Empire euerted, by
whom? by decree of Gregory the seventh. Hear the euersion of all the Bishops
of France Italy, and Germany? by whom? by Gregory the seuenths decree: hear
such foundations laid, by which all power of the Roman Empire was beaten
down; by what means? by the decree of Gregory the seventh: what? was he a
Pope? yea a Pope who came presently after the thousand years when the Apoc. 20.
devil was to be let loose. This man therefore did take the Roman Emperors
dignity out of the way he did withal many prodigious wonders, and lying
miracles as the Pontificians affirm of him, thereby making him a Saint:
forgetting that according to Saint 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Paul's revelation, the destroyer of the Empire, should in himself, and by his
ministers work many prodigies and wonders: for the Apostle writes thus of
him, that his coming should be in all power, and in all lying signs and
wonders (note the words, mark the mysteries) to the seduction of those who had
not received the charity of truth, his miracles and prodigies shall be See
Saint Grego. in 2. ad These. 2 apud Paterus, where you shall find that Father
discoursing that the miracles of the true Church in respect of those of the man
of sin, and his servants should be very few, for then the grace of doing
miracles should be taken from the Church.
many mighty and great, to the seduction of the greatest part of the world,
(for the greatest part receive not the charity of truth) yet lying, because
appearing as true miracles: but are not: lying also, because wrought for the
supporting of errors and lies; lying, because wrought by the power of Satan
parent of lies. Truly, the holy Ghost (see the concordancie of Scriptures) most
lively describes these manner of men in the revelation under the horsemen that
sat upon the red, black and pale horses, to whom power was given to take peace
from the earth: and by their hypocritical lies to deceive the world: for since
and when these Popes attempted the taking of the Roman Empire out of the way,
together with their prodigious lies, and fabulous legends, they have filled the
whole world, with such rebellions, civil commotions, most dreadful wars,
and horrible impurities, suppositions, hipocrisies, that no man (whose eyes are
not wilfully shut) can be ignorant, but that they were I doubt not to
interpret thus, that as by the white horse Apoc. 6. Christ and all holy
Church-Gouernours were signified, so also by the red, pale, and black horses,
other wicked governors in the v^sible state of the Church were designed.
ibidem.
the red, black, and pale horsemen, who were to take peace from the earth; and
to set Christians together by the ears; under color of preaching the Gospel
of Christ: but in truth to preach the Papal Gospel of temporal Monarchy and
idolatry. But such as have the charity of truth (that is, of Jesus Christ z)
who is the only way to life and truth) and do wholly confide in his mercies,
and rest upon the redemption and justification in him, walking in good works;
in which he has ordained, commanded, and appointed them to walk in, shall not
be seduced by these men; but will rather suffer many deaths for the testimony
of Jesus, as a S. John in his Revelations has foreprophecied of the last It is
most evident that such as of later times have been put to death by the Pope
and his, for that they would rest only for their salvation upon the merits of
Jesus, and would not adore the Roman Images and Sacrame^tal God have been put
to death for the testimony of Jesus, as of late ^^ very credibly reported o^ a
worthy Christian and English man M. Mold whom the Pope has caused to be put to
death for the testimony of Jesus.
Martyrs of the Church.

But a little more of the taking away of the Roman Empire by the Popes: for I
demand, how can the present pretended Roman Emperor, be styled by the title,
Romanus Augustus, Imperator Augustus, and Emperor of Rome? who has nothing at
all to do in Rome, not so much in sooth as the Ottamans of the East, who have
gotten the Empire of the East, and sit in the throne of Constantine, who was
sometimes the Emperor Augustus of Rome: And doubtless, if the Alman Emperor,
or King of Boheme, ought to have Sovereignty and imperialty in Rome, the Popes
who keep them from enjoying of their rights, must needs be reputed tirants and
usurpers. Time was, when Did. 10. cap. de capitibus.
Leo the fourth Pope, acknowledged himself subject to Lotharius Emperor (long
after the time of Gregory the first, (who was also a faithful subject to
Maurice not the best Emperor) and himself subject to his laws; and this
subjection of Popes to the Roman Emperors continued a long while after
Charles the Greats days, Sigon. deregno Italiae. lib. 4.
Sigonius a Pontifician historian reports truly, that although Charles gave
the possession of Rome it self, and large territories thereabouts, to the
Bishops of Rome, with the profits belonging to the same, notwithstanding he
kept the sovereignty to himself and his successors the Roman Emperors: but
the Popes not content with the profits only of such Seignories, by little and
little have enc^oached upon their Seigniours, and what by their threatening
letters, and excommunications, they, though at first were only Tenants have
driven their Liege Lords from their rights. And it is worth observing, how the
quarrel began betwixt Frederike the Emperor, and Adrian Pope, The grievous
offenses of Frederike the Emperor against the Pope, and the beginning of the
holy quarrel of the Pope against the Emperor. Read the Epistles of Frederike
the Emperor, and Adrian Pope to each other.
for sooth Adrian takes exception against the Emperor, for that in his
letters to his sanctity, he names himself first: again, because the
Emperor required that such Bishops as had any estates or Seignories of the
Empire, should therefore swear fealty to him: for the signories the Pope
agreed the Bishops should take, but fealty they should not promise) thirdly
because the Emperor would not permit the Popes Legates freely to range up and
down the Empire, to the spoiling of the Clergy, and the great scandal,
generally of all the Churches of the same. Upon these occasions the quarrel
began; and good God, with what detestable, and dreadful commotions was the
whole Christian world overwhelmed, when Frederike came into Italy to challenge
his Sovereignty over Rome, and other Cities of that country, who had rebelled
against him? Some acknowledging the Popes for their Lords; others breathing
after liberty; some neutrals; others adhering to their true Lord and Prince: by
which occasion, the dreadful factions of Guelphes and Gibellines arose;
Guelphes Platin. in Bonif. 9.
for the Popes, Gibellines for the Emperor: names fatal, to the Country of
Italy, threatening the dreadful and utter ruin thereof. But observe, Courteous
Reader, how justly in the judgment of God, the Roman Emperors were served.
First, Charles Martell, then Pipine: after, Charles the great, concurring to
the rooting out of the Longobards from Italy: (which Charles fully
accomplished) whereas they should either have compounded with the Emperor of
the East, and have restored to him those dominions which they took from the
Longabards: (to him I say, to whom in right they belonged) contrariwise
reserving the regalty and sovereignty to themselves, they bestowed the
possessions and profits upon the Bishops of Rome, who kept them a while as good
Tenants, but in Sigoniu^ l^b. 12 (...). de (...) Frederic^ Primi lib. 1. epst.
Fre^er and Adriani Pap.
Adrians time they changing tenor, would hold them as Lords: whereupon that
Pope sent word expressly to Frederike the Emperor, that he should not after that
time send any more messengers to Rome, without his consent: considering (said
the Pope) that all the regalities and Magistracies in the City of Rome are S.
Peter's: so you see, by the profession, and a whole consent of the Cardinals,
and the Pope, the Roman Empire beginning to be done out of the way. Oh how
true is that of f Hieron. in 2. Daniel.
Saint Hierome upon Daniel? as nothing was stronger, then the Roman Empire in
the beginning, so nothing shall be weaker then it to wards the end thereof.

It is here worthy observing, to consider the time when the Roman Bishops,
more apparently began to usurp over, and powerfully to suppress the Roman
Emperor, to wit about the time, when the Devil was to be let Apocal. 20.
loose, which was bound for a thousand years: for clear it is, in all ancient
records, and S^g^n. l^b. 7. de regno Italiae. See did 10. can. de Capitibus.
Sigonius has it expressly, that the Popes had not the Sovereignty of Rome,
till some time after the 973. year of Christ, for of that year and time thus
he writes. Illo tempore, Pontifex Romam, Rauennam etc. At that time, the Pope
held Rome, Rauenna, and other dominions, by authority rather then Empire, or
command; for that the Cities, did acknowledge, the Pope as Prince of the common
wealth, but the King as their Sovereign Lord, to whom they paid tributes, and
yielded their service. Thus he, in that year: but not long after the case was
altered, and the Emperors stripped of their Sovereignty, This was fully
completed in Gregory the 7. his time.
since which time, it were a mere mockery, and Chymera, to call him Roman
Emperor, who has neither Sovereignty over Rome, nor any tributes, or services
paid him and done him by any Romans, or any acknowledgement of fealty from
the Pope, the Absolute Prince of the Roman state. and if Popes, when they
took the Roman sovereignty out of the way, had also taken the names of Roman
Emperors upon them, the same their fact might have been interpreted, a change
only of the state of the Empire, from one lineage, or stock to another, not the
subversion thereof: but it was Gods blessed will and holy pleasure, he should
completely at last destroy, the Emperors dignity and regality, over Rome, and
not assume the name of Roman Emperors, that so the man of sin, might be
revealed, (revealed says the Apostle, for his presence in the world, and the
mystical working was long before he was revealed.) And so by those, who were
endued with the 2 Thessalonians. ^.
Charity of truth might happily be avoided. And I doubt not, but that since his
regal dignity, he has stuck faster to his triple crown he has taken, then
to his pastoral staff: a Crown he has taken (taken I say) for it was never
given him: as for a pastoral and Episcopal staff, he has none (pretending
by a fabulou^ tale, that Saint Peter sent it into Germany) and this not
vnmeetly; for what should he do with a spiritual shepherds staff, who has
shaken off all shepheardly care, and has plunged himself into all worldly
solicitudes and cares for the enlarging of his Empire? This being so, and
seeing it is evident, that the Roman Empire is taken out of the way, and only
a shadow or image thereof remaining in the Pope: I will ask of the Rhemists, or
Dowists for them, whether that Antichrist the man of sin be as yet come or not?
if he be come, then I desire them to point me out some illustrious person,
some Arrogant Bishop, who sitting in the Church challenges all rule, and
Empire to himself, to judge all, to be judged by none: who challenges to be
honored and worshipped as an earthly God, extolling himself above all things,
that are called God, (mark what the 2. ad These. 2.
Apostle says, which is called God, not thus, which is God) again, showing
himself, as if he were a God, but not the true and only God: for it is a mere
imagination, that the Antichrist here described, shall make himself to be the
very true God indeed: for he shall only by his tyrannical, outlawish and
Godlike behavior, in usurping, in commanding, doing and undoing, in
dispensing, and binding, against al laws divine and humane, hear himself, as
if he were a God. Read to this purpose Greg. in 2. ad These. 2. apud Paterium
Baron. ad anno. 992.
Saint Gregory, and withal, the resolute verdict of Arnulphus, a French
Prelate, cited by Barontus in his Annals.

But, if the expositions of some learned Pontificians be true, that Antiochus
Epiphanes, (who adored the God Ma^zim, and despised the Gods of his Fathers)
Antichrist was prefigured; then doubtless he shall worship some God. And if
the exposition of some other Pontificians take place that Dan. 11.
Daniel in that Chapter prophesied of Antichrist himself, and that he should
worship the God Maozim, who will gainsay it, and affirm that Antichrist shall
worshipe no God? but here I desire the Reader, by the way to remember that of
the word Maozim there is a treble interpretatio: by some it is interpreted (
summi roboris or fortitudinis) of greatest strength or fortitude: so that the
God Maozim is the God of greatest power. I find also that Maozim is
interpreted ( inhabitatio tabernaculi) in-dwelling of a Tabernacle (so the
interpreter of the Hebrew words in the old Bibles of Saint Hieromes edition)
it is interpreted also ( turris fortitudinis) a tower of fortitude or strength
etc. by all which interpretations, fitly agreeing to the nature of the word I
leave it to the Christian Reader, to judge whether the God of the Tabernalces
or Sacramental towers, amongst the pontificians be the God Maozam, God of
Fortitude of which the Prophet foretold, that Antichrist should worship. One
thing I marvel at, why the interpreter of the Hebrew words, in the last
editions of the bibles, interpret not this word ( Maozim) which is so greatly
to the purpose for one side or other: as for my part, I will absolutely judge
nothing of these interpretations: Jesus Chrisi vouchsafe to open our eyes that
we may both, see his truth and embrace it, and beware that we worship not
falselie and idolatrouslie any false God in Turrets or Tabernacles.

The Roman Empire, thus dissipated and overthrown and dissolved into diverse
Kingdoms; according as it was prophesied by Daniel 2.
Daniel. The Popes still by their undermining indirect power, and by the
earnest defenders of the same the Ignatians and other favorites do strongly
endeavor to bring all Kingdoms of the world under their command; wherein he
uses the spiritual power, as he would seem, of the lamb, pretending to
proceed only against Kings and Kingdoms in holy Churches necessity, and for
the temporal quietness, and necessary safety of commonweals, but not, for
that he aymeth at any profit thereby, but only to reduce them to holy Churches
obedience; Wherein, for my part, I give no more credit, unto such a saying,
then I did to the great Admiral of Spain some 16. years ago, who (in my
hearing) affirmed, that his Philip the 2. King of Spain.
Master the King of Spain, sent not the great Armado in 88. so much to make a
conquest of England, as to convert it to the Church, and to make it a friend;
for my Master the King, (said he) has already, so many Kingdoms, that he is
scarce able to govern them with peace and content; and surely, the proceedings
of Pandulph Legate, with King John do lively demonstrate, what the Popes aim
at, when they presume to correct Princes, and dispose of Kingdoms, our
Historians will tell us, that it was not enough to have the kingdom to be
(idlye) made feudatary by that King to the Pope but also there must be yearly
sums, sent up to Rome in token of this subjection. Doubtless, Platina in
vita Paschalis. 2.
Paschal the second; was well acquainted, what Popes aimed at by their direct
and indirect powers, when at his installing a mystical girdle with seven keys
and seven seals hanging at it was put about him.

I have spoken sufficiently against this indirect power in my book upon the
oath of Allegiance; which as yet I see no otherwise answered, then, by a
libell; from some of the wise men's punies of Saint Omers, (as is reported) who
esteem the same, a sufficient answer to it: doubtless ( desperata causa)
their cause is desperate, being grown to libelling. But alas, that is too
too common with them: for what book almost comes from them with any name q
John 3.
or any more insinuation of the Author; then with N. D. H. I. or some two like
letters? the truth is they are ashamed or afraid of their Gospel, and
therefore as children of darkness they deal so covertly, and will not come to
the light because they fear reproouing, yet before I leave this matter, I will
set down, a sentence or two, out of two of the Pontificians books, by the
which the Courteous Reader may gather, to what their indirect power of Popes
tends. Hear their Coquae. pa. 170.
Coquaeus, in his most se^itious book, against his Majesty's Premonition to
Christian Princes, thundering rather against our Sovereigns Person (whom he
reputeth a notorious Heretic) and his Kingdom, rather then against his
Doctrine, Si autem crimen haeresees sit notorium et publicum etc. But if the
crime of heresy (says he) be notorious or public, in a Prince; Was not this
Catsbyes atheistical position, on which, the powdermine of the Ignatia^s and
the Ignatianed was grounded?
the subjects may lawfully before any declaratiue sentence of the crime, if
they have strength, withdraw themselves from the obedience of such a Prince:
for evident notice of such a fact, is instead of a sentence. Whereas therefore,
the crime of Heresy is notorious in the King of England, so that by no
tergiuersation it can be avoided, it is certain, that neither, for the form
of the Oathe, nor for any respect of the person, to whom the Oath is made, that
his subjects are bound therewith. Thus the most seditious Coquaeus: but if I
should heereto adioyne, how in his 48. or 49. page, he in the like case of
notorious crime of heresy: approves the murdering of Princes, ( non
expectata sententia Iudicis) no sentence of any Judge expected, and endeavors
also most profanely to prove the same out of Deuteronomy. cap. 13.
holy Scripture, I should make the moderate Pontificians admire, to think what
manner of seditious ministers the Pope has and uses to set up his indirect
monarchy, but I protest that such doctrine is in him, which I dare not, for my
duty, to Prince and Country, once mention, otherwise then by way of
detestation: yet this Coquaeus is a great man and a holy confessor in Florence;
and his unlearned (though most seditious book) must for sooth be both printed
and published for the producing (God auert it) of new Catsbyes, and Piercies.
God inspire into the hearts of the Magistrates of this kingdom that as they be
vigilant, so they may ever continue against such books; which tend only to the
subversion of this state, and all other of like condition. Alas the
Ignatians, and Ignatianed, will have them though utter ruins of whole families
should ensue thereupon.

There was one Philopater, Robert Parsons by name, who if in that book which
he so named had loved his Country as well as the Pope his holy Father (or else
the fathers of his order) would have Titulo libri.
called himself by (...) (or such like name a lover of his Country) not (...)
a lover of his Father or Fathers: for Philopater signifies, so much, but
(pardon the good old man he was no Grecian but only desned a Greek, and a
strange name, as having abandoned the native affection of his Country,) This
man in his Philopater Sect. 2.
Philopater, delivers not welnye, as strange doctrine as Coquaeus, but in
some respect far worse; because he makes his Doctrine an article of faith: and
by consequence, all the Pontificians of England; that believe him ( ipso facto)
are traitors, and such as believe not, heretics. Hinc etiam infert, vniuersa
theologorum etc. Hereupon says he, the whole school of Divines and
Ecclesiastical lawyers (to wit Canonists) infer, and it is certain, and of
Faith, any Christian Prince, whatsoever, if he shall manifestly decline
Posscuine in his biblioth: would feign cast this book from Parsons and lay it
upon. D. Stapleton doubtless it is the brood of a pair of Fathers.
from the Catholic (that is in his sense the Roman) religion, and shall draw
and call others from the same, presently thereupon, by the very force of law
both divine and humane; to loose all power and dignity, and this, before any
sentence, of the supreme pastor, and Judge given, or pronounced against him;
and all, subjects, whatsoever, to be free from all obligation of oath, which
they had made to him of obedience, as to their lawful Prince, and that they
may and ought (if they have strength) to cast out such a manner of man, as an
Apostata, and Heretic, and a forsaker of Christ our Lord, and as an Enemy of
the Commonwealth, out from all rule of Christian men. Thus far that
Pseudophilopater in his Ignatian says. What true English heart, is not awaked
with such a seditious sound? and do you think O ye loyal Britains and
faithful of Jesus: that his brethren the Ignatians, have not the same
Doctrine, they have it, they have it, believe me, and they teach it also, where
they sind ground convenient and fit for such seditious seed. In Rome it was
taught in effect as very probable above 16. years since, when I my self
refused, in open school to receive and write any such doctrine. But I leave to
stir this filthy sink any longer. I humbly beseech Jesus Christ to vouchsafe
to illustrate the eyes of such, who have often told me, that if they thought,
the Ignatians did teach such Doctrine, as I have here, expressly and truly
delivered out of Pbilopater, they would little regard them in other things. So
it is (Christian Reader) that these most egregious Equiuocaters do not deliver
This doctrine is not the milk but the solid meat of the Ignatians easily
swallowed by those, as are inclining to the impious doctrine of the damned
crew; of which was Catsby etc. Another Priest was in like sort denied
absolution for the same cause of the Oath by an Ignatianed Priest; who not
withstanding easily absolved and admitted to the dreadful Sacrament one who
often fell into the sin of Bestiality: and to deny absolution for allowing or
taking the Oath of Allegiance, is the ordinary practice of all Ignatia^ Priests
in this land, and almost of all oher' excepting some few honest loyal and
learned Priests, who are therefore extremely hated and avoided as Spies by the
Ignatians.
this doctrine, but to their Priuates, and old acquaintance; which makes many
moderate recusants to suspect that they are unjustly charged with such
seditious and heretical doctrine as this: is but such as my self who have
conuersed too long with them, know assuredly, that they teach both this
doctrine, yea some of them as badde as the very worst of Coquaeus which I only
glanced at above in this Motive. And that they are in this matter egregiously
equiuocaters, understand by this, within these 3. years and less, * A
principal Ignatian amongst them denied, me absolution, and to take my
confession. (I protest before the heavens I lie not, neither do Iagrauate
against them) because forsooth I only held this general position that the
Pope could not cause and authorize subjects to depose their lawful Princes:
and yet this man, who dealt thus with me, and who (as I know) taught this
doctrine both at his residence, and in other places, that the Pope might depose
princes, and deprive them of their kingdoms: yet in some other places and
before some persons, would speak very coldly thereof, yea and he seemed to deny
it in that very house where he so dealt with me, where also he refused not, to
admit a notorious co^cubiner to both the sacraments.

The fifth Motive.
THe fifth motive, is their most pernicious, impious doctrine concerning the
adoration and worshipping of Images with the same worship, and adoration,
wherewith the Persons themselves, whereof they are Images are adored, save only,
that the persons are adored and worshipped without any extrinsecall respect,
(and only for the intrinsecall dignity which is in them) but the Images are
adored and worshipped for the dignity and excellency of the persons, which
they represent, This doctrine is delivered, by the English Priests, and
Ignatians very Bell. l. 2. de imag. 22.
fearfully, nicely and mincingly, and therefore I find that many devout
people of this kingdom, have not yet perfectly drunk of the impuritie of this
cup; but it is the most express, and self doctrine taught by the most
Pontificians and learnedest Ignatians in their schools, and books (they are
only wary in respect of scandal, how they preach it in their pulpits) taught
3. q. 25. art. 3. Council of Trent as it is expounded by Vasq. lib. de adorat.
2. Suares. Tom. 1. disput. 54 Nauar. in manual. cap. 31. Number. 32. yea Vasq.
apud Eudaem. in parralel page 292. teaches that a man may worship God with a
sincere faith in a stonc, or by a stone. He teaches also that a man may
worship God by the devils substance (as he is cited by Eudaemon) l. 3. numer
31. Caieta. in 3. q. 25. art. 3. Azor institut. lib. 9. cap. 6. Valentia. lib.
2 de idololat. cap. 7. Bananent. Albertus. Richar in. 3. did. 9. al^i poene
omnes.
by Thomas Aquinas their Angelical Doctor: by the very Council of Trent as
Suares and Vasquez expound it, of divine adoration of Images, and other
Ignatian Readers of divinity at Rome, as I have often heard. It is the most
express doctrine of rheir famous Casuist Navarre, and almost all their
Summists, of Valentia, wherein he is most vehement, of Vasquez who as Eudaemon
cites him, teaches that a man may worship God with a sincere faith, ( per
lapidem vel in lapide) by a stone, or in a stone, and if I forget not, he
affirms that a man may sincerely worship God in and by the Devils substance.
u Bellarmine would seem to have an opinion and explication by himself, but
wherein he would seem to differ, he affirms as badly, if not far worse,
then others do, he would have forsooth, the prototipon, or person to be
worshipped directly, and ( per se) for it self, or by it self: but the Image,
( per accidens) accidentally and indirectly, as it is considered and used as an
actual representation of the Prototipon: by which doctrine he composeth in
truth a certain Idol of Christ's Images, and the Images of Saints with their
persons making of them and their Images one object of adoration: Valentia. lib.
2. de Iodol. cap. 7.
Valentia seems in this doctrine to be impudent, persons for the good
Ignatian will not stick to affirm, that divine worship and honor, may and
must be given directly, and per se to the Images, so it be not given to the^ as
to Gods themselves and so (says he) it is not Idolatry, ( O curuam animam:) O
earthly and crooked soul: It were impertine^t to cite. Authors for this
purpose, it is generally by them all most expressly affirmed: by famous
Cardinal Palliotto; and Azorius the Ignatian (my master in Rome) delivers
Azorius. lib. 9. institut. cap. 6.
that it is generally the doctrine of all their doctors, that Images are to be
adored and worshipped with the very worship of the Persons which they
represent, for the Persons sake. But I here protest before God, that as often
as I have read this doctrine in the Pontifician doctors, yet I never received
it, and ever I have persuaded my acquaintance neither to believe it, nor to
practice it (and therefore as I hope I have the sooner found mercy:) but yet I
am blameworthy, that I would so long continue in communion with such impious
and most abominable Idolaters, yea, and also sometimes do some external
worship before Images, but my intention was ever carried from the Images to God
and his Saints. I call this doctrine of adoration of Images, most impious and
abominable, because most expressly, against the sacred Deuteronomy. 4. Exodus 20. Sapi.
14. ad Romans 1. Epist. Ioh. 1. cap. 4. Isai, Ierem. Baruch. Psalm. saepissime.
word of God, and his second eternal commandment of the decalogue which they
curtalled and mamed, do deliver in their Catechismes, because they would not
have there ignominy discovered: it is also aagainst the authority of all
ancient Fathers whatsoever (and I challenge all the adorers and worshippers of
Images, to produce but one authentical sentence ont of some ancient Doctor of
the Church for their adoration and worship.) They that will understand what the
ancient Church did believe concerning the adoration of Images, may read Saint
August. in Psalm. 113. epist. 119. and 59 Tertul. lib. de idololatria soepe. Amb
deebitu Theodosij in epist. ad Valentinian. 31. non ^ult. se deus in lapidibus
coli, God will not be worshipped in stones. Et in epist. D. Pau. ad Ephesians. And in
his comment upon the Epistle to to the Romans by what reason, or by what
authority may the Images of Saints or Angels be adored, when as the Angels and
Saints would not suffer themselves to be adored? Lactant sapissime. Hieron. m
2. Dani Minutius Felix. in Octauio alii omnes.
Austen with other Fathers, fully and clearly pronouncing against the adoring
of such creatures. The Council of Frankford consisting of all the Bishops of
the West, assembled in the time of Charles the Great, against the Nicene
Speudosinode under Constantine and Iraenes, where the adoration, and
worshipping of Images (although not so abhominably as is now taught by the
Pontificians and Ignatians) was decreed, utterly condemned, and detested the
adoration of Images. But it is a world to see, how Bellar lib. 2 de imag. cap.
14.
Bellarmine endeavors to shift of the authority of this Council of Frankford,
which sometimes he would gladly have ^o be counterfaite, sometimes he
endeuoreth to say, that the Fathers at Frankford did not condemn the second
Nicence Council, which commanded the adoration of Images, but another Council
of Constantinople, which consisting of almost all the Bishops of the East, did
command the abolishing of all Images, in respect of the horrible abuses
committed in the worshipping of them (the which Council ought to take place,
as being both before, and as frequent an assembly of Eastern Prelates, as that
of Nice was) but it is too too apparent in the Council of Liber Caroli magni
prafat. See Roger Houe den continuat. Bedae. anno. 792. and Regino adann. 594.
Hin^ma. Archbishop of Rhemes in his Epistle against Hin^mar. of Laoun affirms
as much. clonas Episc. Aurel^an. lib de cultu Imag. Abbas Vrsper. Also
testifies as much, although the word Constantinople be foisted into his
Historic Chron. 793.
Frankford, that they condemned that Eastern Council of Nice in express
terms, which had commanded the adoration of Images, and therefore the Fathers,
with joint voice concurring, pronounced that although sacred Images, were to be
kept, yet notwithstanding they would not adore or worship them, least by so
doing they should make c Idols of them. Observe Christian reader, the cunning
impiety of the Pontificians: God having proclaimed in the institution of his
law by Moses in the second commandment against the adoration and worshipping
of any Images of any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, yea and of
himself, as is there most perspicuously delivered according to the exposition
of the ancient Origin. contra Celsum. lib. 4. Damasc. de orthod. fide. lib. 4.
cap. 17. Theod. in Deuteron. q. 1 Sinod. Nicen. 2. Act. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. August.
de fide and Simbol. c. 7. Nicet. lib. de imaginibus. Abulensis in 4. Deutron.
Lira. Arnobius contra gentes. lib. 8. Omnes antiqui and ex recentioribus
quamplu. res.
Fathers, and their own best later doctors they have to blind the eyes of
the simple, deprived them in their Catechismes, of the second commandment,
yet because they must deliver a decalogue of Gods commandments, ten in
number, they have divided the last (as having most words in it) into two, in
which division, although they pretend Saint Austen for them, yet the whole
stream of orher Fathers (some doubt is only made of Dionise of Alexandria) is
against them, therein who all otherwise deliver and expound the same: I urge
them not so much for their division, as for that they being so continually
reproved, for this their abuse, yet they will not Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven thing, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above,
or the earth beneath, thou shall not bow down to the^, nor worship them, for I
thy Lord God am a jealous God, etc.
set these words down in their Catechismes, at least as a part of the first
commandment, that such simple persons as by them are forbidden to read the
Scriptures, might at least be instructed, the law of God in their Catechismes:
who conceiueth not, what is the cause of this? truly their horrible and
Paganish abuse of making and worshipping Gods pictures, which they would not
have discovered to the simple and ingenuous Papist. But, how do these profane
Pagane Philosophers, (Divines and Christians I dare not herein call them) defend
themselves from the sin of Idolatry? Justly as Dio. Chrisost. or at. 12. de
prima dei cognit. maxi. Tir. sermon. 38. Lamprid. in Alexand. see Austen. in
Fsal. 113.
Dio, Chrisostomus, Maximus, Tyrius, Mercurius, Trismegistus, Lampridius, and
other heathenish Philosophers did defend themselves against the ancient
Christians, obiecting unto them idolatry, in their Image and
Idoll-worshipping, (an Idol and an Image adored is all one.) For as they said,
summum primum maximum etc. We worship and adore the chiefest, first, greatest
God, creator of all things, and conseruer of all things, in and by the Images
of gold, silver, and ebonie: not as though they did believe those Images to be
God himself, but the representations only of him: even so, do our
Pontificians excuse themselves. The Tridentine Fathers in their Catechis.
Trident. in expos. primi praecepti. See Ferus in 17 Act. Apost. Caietan. in 3.
q. 25. art 3.
Catechism, do seem to acknowledge, that the wisest Ethniks did set diverse
of their Images to represent the true God, and that the Jews also did by their
golden Calfe, which they worshipped, represent the true God of Israel: which
also most clearly agrees with holy Scripture, where Aaron says, that the
Exodus 32.
feast which he appointed (having dedicated an Altar for the golden Calfe) was
a feast instituted to Iehona: the same also was done, and professed to be done,
by Micheas his mother, Judge. 17.
who protested of the silver, whereof she had made her Idol, she had
sanctified it to Iehonah. And truly it is a matter so clear in the old Panims
that there is scarce any ancient Eusebius in l. b. de praeparat. Euang. soepe,
Var to apud August. de ciuit. lib. 7. and Sceuola apud eundem ibidem. lib. 4.
Plato in Phoedon. Iudaei. in Egypto apud Ierem. cap. 44.
Historian with Eusebius, who delivers not their Pontificianlike excuses for
their adorations of Images, when the ancient Christians objected Idolatry to
them. So these men, Vasques, Cajetane, Paliot, Nauar, Zuares, Valentia
acknowledge, that they give divine honor to the Images of Christ, but they
commit not idolatry, forsooth, because they do not give their worship to
Images as to Gods; or for that they believe any divinity to be in them: but
this their excuse makes them more inexcusable, as Jonas Aurel. lib. de cultu
imagine.
Jonas, Aureliane^sis worthily shows, because, not esteeming them as Gods,
nor believing any divinity to be in them, yet notwithstanding they yield unto
them the same worship, as to God himself, for Gods sake and respect. (O ye
heavens be astonished) they bow, they adore prostrate, groueling upon the
ground, to dead Images, senseless papers, blocks; they burn incense, lights,
and candles to the same; and yet forsooth they must not be called Idolaters,
because they worship God, with the Images, and all the worship they give to the
Images is for his sake. (O most crooked, metaphisicall conceits,) Heathenish
Philosophy is the parent of most blasphemous idolatry, which is so generally
observed amongst you that there is no Church, no Chapel, nor private
Oratorie, where you commit not these idolatrous fornications.

I remember how conformely to this their idolatrous divinity, the famous
Ignatian Valent. lib. 2. de Idolatria. cap. 7.
Valentia writes, whose saying I could never read without astonishment: thus
it is: Neque absurd profecto putaueres, B. Petrum, etc. Neither shall thou
absurdly think, blessed 1. Pet. 4.
Peter, to have insinuated some worship of (simulachrorum) graven things, (to
wit, sacred Images) to be lawful, when as he would by name dehort the
faithful from the unlawful worships (Idolorum) of Idols: for what See how
this doctrine of Valentia agrees with sacred Scripture. 1. ad Corinth. 12.
Act. 7. and 15. 1. Ioh. 5 where the Latin word fimulachrum is used for Images
worshipped, that is, for Idols.
needed he, so determinately to note unlawful worshippes (simulachrorum) of
graven things, Images, or Idols; if he had altogether judged, no worships
(fimulachrorum) of Images, or graven things lawful? Thus far most absurdly
their Morish and Pagane Valentia: alas Christian Reader, into what extremicie
are these men driven, when they will thus deprave Scripture, to maintain their
superstitious kind of image- atrie or Idolatry to be lawful? Their own
consciences tell them, that traditions they have none, (if they have, I
challenge them to produce them) Grego. epist 111. lib. 7. and ep. 9. lib. 9.
Saint Gregory the first has Traditions for them. I wish them to read him;
and when they shall have read him, I give them leave to adore Images if they
regard his authority: I ask them also what tradition Saint August. in Psalm.
113. epist. 119. alias soepe in lib. de ciuitate dei.
Austen delivers, commenting upon the Psalms, and writing to Ianuarius, who
in the later place has this saying: Precepto primo prohiberi, ne quis colat
vllam imaginem Dei, nisi vnam candem, cum ipso, videlicet Christum: It is
forbidden (says he) by the first commandment, that any man worship any Image
of God himself, but one and the same with himself, to wit Christ: and here
you see by the way, Saint Austens division of the ten commandments, makes
nothing for them, whose doctrine is so express against all adoration of the
Images of God himself, as nothing can be clearer, but belike they will expound
him with all the ancient Farhers, forbidding the worshipping of Images; to
wit, that they must not be worshipped as Gods themselnes, but may be worshipped
for Gods sake, with divine honor. So most vainly, the vain Ignatian Valentia
answers, and Cardinal Bellarmine the Roman Cardin. Bellar. lib. 2. de
Ecclesia triumph: writes thus, Si imagi, etc. If the same worship be given to
an Image which is given to God, the creature is worshipped alike with God,
which certainly is Idolatry: for idolatry is not only when an Idol is
worshipped, and God is forsaken, but also when an Idol is worshipped together
with God: thus Bellarmin: by which it is clear, that by his own judgment he
is an Idolater giving the same worship to the Image of God for Gods sake as to
God himself.
pillar for Idolatry. But I demand in good earnest of these Pontificians,
whether Carpocrates, who worshipped the Images of Christ, with incense and
adoration; and Alexander Seuerus the wise and learned Emperor, who also
worshipped the Images of Christ and Abraham, with those of some Philosophers,
whether they reputed those pictures of Christ, to be Christ himself? can they
be so shameless, as to say it, of such intelligent persons? and yet was not
Alexander, reputed an Idolater? and Carpocrates by Saint August. de haeres.
cap. 7. Epiphan. haeres. 27. Irene. lib. 1. cap. 24.
Austen accounted an heretic, for maintaining such worshippes of Images, for
the holy persons sake, which they represented; and what may, and must we
esteem of such, who are obstinate and pertinacious approuers of their doctrine
herein? what else, but account them idolatrous heretics, and avoid them as
Carpocratians. And surely whenever the ancient Fathers and Scriptures do
seem to attribute to the heathens, that they esteemed their statues, and
Images for Gods, they are to be understood (interpretatiue) by interpretation,
(to wit) because by their honors of adorations, incenses, sacrificing and such
like, done at and before the presence of their statues, and to them for the
Gods sakes which they did represent; they were by the same adorations
interpreted to make the very statues and Images their Gods (like as now the
Pontifician Images are called by many, the Papists Gods) for otherwise it is
most clear in all See Eusebius lib. 2. 3. and 4. de preparat; Euang. August.
in Psalm. 113. de ciuit. lib. 8. cap. 26. and alibi soepe Diodor. Sicul. lib.
16. Pausan. in Aread. and alij, agreeingly to sacred Scripture. Sap. 13. and
14. ad Romans 1.
ancient records, that the wiser heathens, did not believe the very massy
statues, and other pictures of their Gods, to be the very Gods themselves; for
although they did think that in some of their principal statues, where the
devil gave Oracles sometimes, that there dwelt some spiritual powers, in them,
yet most commonly, and for most part they protested of all other their Images,
and statues, that they were but representations of the Gods which they
worshipped; as of the Sun and Moon, which the Egyptians worshipped, and as
the Jews in Taphnis in Egypt, sacrificed to the Queen of heaven, for which
Jeremy so grievously reproved the^. Iere. 44. And truly, this their divinity
for adoration of Images, in respect of their representing, does quite overthrow
all such Such arguments are used by Bellarmine, Heskins Harding Coccius, out of
S. Austen. Epist. 118. and in Psalm. Areopag. de Hie rarch. lib 3. Op. tatus.
lib. 6. Chrisost. Homil. 24. in 1. ad Corinth. Ciril. Catech* mistag.
arguments as are brought by their divines, for transubstantiation and real
presence of Christ in the Sacrament out of those Fathers who (as they pretend)
say, that the Sacrament, it self is to be adored with divine worship and
adoration: for if divine adoration and worship may be given to the pictures of
Christ, and God the Father, because they do represent their most excellent and
divine persons: why may not those dreadful mysteries of bread and wine,
instituted by Christ, to put us in mind by reverend and religious use of the
same, of his death and passion, and of himself hanging upon the Cross, (by
which also the worthy receivers have a true and real communion and
participation of Christ's body and blood, and a real communication of the
infinite merits of Christ's death and passion) be, for such their effectual
representation, remembrance, and lively signification of Christ himself,
agreeingly to their divinity, adored and worshipped with divine worship? not
because they are by consubstantiation as the Lutherans, or impanation as
Rupertus and some others, or transubstantiation as the Lateranistes, really and
carnally, the very body and blood of Christ, or Christ himself: but because
they were by Christ himself instituted, as most lively Images of himself,
crucified and dead for mankind? a far more holy dedication, than the
dedications of the Images of Sichem, Mount Serratto, Loretto, etc.

A diversity and difference herein I demand; the which, because it cannot be
showed, down to the ground, fall, all their pretended Authorities, for
Adoration of the Sacrament it self, to prove their pretended real carnal
presence, and novel transubstantiation; to their no small loss. For the
mystery of the Mass, is one of the gainefullest trafficks, they do use: as in
like sort, not a little profitable is the adoration, and worshipping of images,
which causes such a confluence of gifts at Loretto, nostre Dame de Hall, and
at Sichem etc. A great inducement, doubtless, to many, to uphold with their
utmost power such like worships, both there and in many other places. When I my
self was last at Sichem, some year since, I was with my admiration informed
by a Reverend Priest of that place, that there was very small credit to be
given to the wonders, that were reported of that Image; before which I saw such
adorations, prostrations, inuocations, that as in some I suspected
superstition, so in others I lamented their indiscreetly zealous ignorance, and
many their unprofitable offerings. At Florence, in a field, hard without the
City, some sixteen years since, I my self, saw before another like Image, of
the blessed Virgin, such inuocations, Implorations, Oblations, of all sorts,
not without my astonishment, that I was in conscience affrighted, to be present
at such their superstitious devotions (and yet I my self, at that time was in
heart, most strongly addicted to the present Roman Church and Faith) but when
I consider the superstitious confidence, that was then and is still put in that
image, I do not marvel that ^neas siluius. lib. 2. Comment. editorum a
Ioha^ne Gobell^o.
Aeneas Siluius (afterward called Pius the second Pope) delivers in his
Commentaries, how the Florentines, with other People there abouts do ( mira
religione venerari eam imaginem) with wonderful religion, worship that Image,
esteeming the same, ( beneficam pluuiae donatricem) the liberal and bountiful
giver of rain; and therefore many religious pilgrimages, are made unto it, by
those superstitious people, to the great profit of the Priests of that place.
If I had not seen these things I should have hardly believed this Pope
reporting them.

Not many years since, there was a certain piece of wood, of the tree, where
the Image of Sichem stood, which being framed into a picture, and representing
the image of Sichem, was at Saint Omers by the Bishop of that City,
superstitiously dedicated and set up to be adored in the French Ignatians
Church, with such often incensings, adorings, bowings, prostratings, lifting up
of hands, that truly it might justly be meruailed, how Gods vengeance, did not
fall upon such impudent Idolaters, or the earth not open and swallow them up:
but great was the commodity and profit which thereby redounded to the
Ignatians: and therefore the rather such contemptible creatures may and ought
to be honored with divine worship, though they have neither tradition,
Scripture, nor Ancient Father to justify their proceeding herein. The Clerk
of a poor Church, A pretty prank of a Saint Omeristia^ Clark.
in that City observing, what immense profit, came to the Ignatians there by,
to bring some commodity to his poor neglected Church, deuiseth a pretty pranke
for that purpose. He cunningly and secretly remoueth a picture of the blessed
Virgin, from an obscure place, in which it stood, into a more eminent, and
principal place of the same Church, making and giving out, as though the
blessed Virgins picture, discontented with her former standing, had removed it
self, to a place, fitter for adoration, and worship. This picture was by some
superstitious people presently admired, and frequented, and the miracle by the
Bishop and the Ignatians also defended as probable; considering, said the wise
men of S. Omers, the daily wondrous operations of the Images at Sichem, and
Loretto: but the Estcheuines, and Magistrates of the City, suspecting some
legerdemaine, very shortly by great diligence found the knavery, and according
to his deserts, caused the vilanous Clerk to be punished. But here I observe
how easily the superstitious Bishop and Ignatians, might have been seduced,
and how credulous they are in such things. Like credulity, was observed certain
years since, in the learned and Peerless University of Doway, where in a
certain small and poor Chapel, was the picture of the blessed Virgin Mary,
as lying in Childebedde after travail (such fopperies were permitted in that
famous University) the which also, was with a linen veil covered, as the
fashion is for women lying in Childbed: this image, upon a certain time to some
devout and simple women which came to supplicate for happy deliverance, seemed
to move, and stir it self: the report whereof, flew up and down the City,
as if the Virgin her self had been come down to lie in childbed again. This
report caused admiration, amongst the Dowists: admiration, caused great
devotion; devotion, frequentation to the picture: frequentation a necessary
purpose to remove the picture, and to place it in some more capable Church or
Chapel: the remoouall whereof, being attempted; those Masons who went about
it, instead of the Mother of Clemency, and Virgin Mary, felt the wrathful
vengeance of the just Judge; for one of them was with stones that fell down
upon him, presently slain, the second wounded, and the third very hardly
escaped. Torment a paucorum, exempla sunt omnium, the Torments of a few are
examples for many. But 2. ad Corin. 2.
the God of this world has so blinded the eyes of these men, that seeing these
things, they see them not, but still most eagerly, give themselves to believe
lies; doubtless these are the times of which Greg. apud Paterium. expos. in 2.
ad Thessal. 2.
S. Gregory so lively discourses, showing that Antichrist, and his Ministers,
shall work so many lying prodigies and wonders, that all which the true Church
shall do, in comparison of them shall seem nothing at all.

But to proceed, although this Adoration, and worshipping of creatures in this
sort, be most inexcusable, yet more inexcuseable is their invocation of the
pictures, and cross it self. I do not here impute this error, to the
learned, who are acquainted, with the figure of Prosopopeia, taking one person
for another, and inuocating one, in steed of another but in respect of the
simple, and ignorant; for how can they without manifest danger of idolatry,
understand that invocation of the Cross it self, ( O crux Aue, etc.) All
hail O Cross, the In passion week the cross or crucifixe is the only hope,
but at other times when Salve regina is song the blessed Virgin is their hope
and life also. It is not imaginable what like abuses of prayers were used in
the old time devised by the superstitious monks.
only hope in this time of Passion, increase justice to the pious, give pardon
to the guilty? And how can they understand, that the Cross should increase
Justice, give pardon? But there is a prayer to be made to the face it self of
Veronica, to the devout rehearsing of which John the 22. Pope gave Indulgences
of a thousand years as it is expressed in a book entitled Antidotary of the
soul. This prayer cannot be excused by the figure of Prosopopey by one person
being taken for another: for the prayer is directly made to the corruptible
figure; that it would bring the suppliant to the incorruptible face. Thus it is
in meeter.

Salve nostrum gaudium, in hac vita dura,
Labili et fragili, cito peritura;
Nos deduc ad propria, O foelix figura
Ad videndam faciem, quae est Christi pura.
All hail our joy, in this hard life,
Both slippery, frail, and swift in her decay,
O happy figure, bring us all to our true life.
To see Christ, his pure face, for ever, and for aye.
In which prayer I cannot but wonder, what excellency John the 22. could find,
to grant to the devout rehearsing thereof a 1000. years pardon, it may be,
because he held that the blessed Saints should not see Gods face, until the
general resurrection; the same persuasion moved him, to give such a liberal
pardon to those, who would devoutly behold, and inuocat e a material, and
corruptible shadow, and figure, of that infinitely resplendant, and shining
majesty. Surely this kind of inuocating figures, and pictures, was in some sort
practiced by those three (of ten wicked Devils, cast out of one Catharine Bus
as Roberts Chambers in his book of the miracles of Sichem page. 214. that the
Devils words were these in french Uine^ nostre Dame de mountagu qui nous sait
sortir. Which he englisheth thus. Honor be to our Lady of Mountagu who makes
us to depart.
Chambers reports, who at their going out, cried out thus, Viue, nostre dame,
du Sichem. Uiue, nostre dame du Sichem. Live our Lady of Sichem, Live our Lady
of Sichem, who constrains us to go out. What? may it be thought, these
wicked Fiends did call upon the most blessed Virgin Mary of Heaven with the
name of our Lady of Sichem? what meant they? tell me O Chambers when they
called the Image of Sichem our Lady of Sichem? was it; because the same is
there worshipped, and adored too too divinely? yea with more honor, then the
most blessed Virgin her self would accept of, if she were conversant amongst
us upon earth: doubtless, for no other respect, did they call that image (
nostre Dame) Our Lady, but because therein, God is most profanely dispoiled,
of a great part of his honor, which is given to the Image, and taken from God.
I should be blasphemous, to call any image, which may represent that immaculate
Virgin, and sacred Mother of my Savior Jesus, in that respect only that it
does represent her, or put us in mind, of the great Luke 1.
things which God has done unto her and for which she shall be called blessed,
for all generations I repeat and say again, blessed for all Generations: But I
dare pronounce, with the Fathers of the Council of Francford and
Constantinople, and withal the Ancient Church, that not only any of that
blessed Virgins pictures, but even the Pictures of God himself, are to be
accounted as very Idols; if they be adored and worshipped, with religious
worship, such as is due to the persons, whom they represent: and that indeed,
such Images being so adored, and worshipped, with religious worship, such as
is due to the persons, may be deseruingly so called by Beelzebub, and all his
crew (our Lords, our Ladies) O immortal God, what marvel, that they thus
superstitiously abuse, and adore thy images, when they give such religious
worship, to their holy water to their Agnus Deis? being small pieces of wax
with a little Balsamum and Oil mingled together? What injury do they to thy
precious blood, Missalia. in forma benedict. aquae.
when safety both of body, and soul is both prayed for, and hoped for by
sprinkling of a little holy water, ( salui facti sunt omnes, ad quos peruenit
aquaista) they are all saved (say they) to whom this water comes, or upon
whom this water comes, says their Priest, sprinkling holy water. What
blasphemy against the Merits of your sacred passion, that they should Laber
ceremonial. cap. de consecra. Agnus dei. Their late S. Boromey. did in his
Council at Millaine provide diverse superstitious ordets for the worshipping of
these Vanities.
teach thus of their Agnus Deis, little pieces of wax, with the form of a
lamb upon them ( omne malignum frangit ficut Christi sanguis et angit) they
drive away all that is malignant and break sin, as the blood of Christ. O
intolerable blasphemy: no marvel that our Pontificians, will keep them with
the hazard of a praemunire, if they be of like force, with the blood of the
lamb, that they think no plague, no pestilence, no A prodigious huffing out of
a Candle, by an Agnus Dei, is reported by a certain Ignatia^ doctor Nor. my old
schoolfellow. It is thus: two or 3. Gallants put to a burning candle an Agnus
Dei, to make trial whether (as it is reported) it had force against fire or
not. Hear the miracle; the candle was twice huffed out, the beholders left in
darkness and at sight of the prodigy 2. or 3. of the beholders were converted
to the Popish Church as the said D. glories.
fire no Devil can annoy them, if they have one of these Jewels. But I protest
here before the heavens, that I have known diverse, much addicted to them, and
to the wearing of them and yet inconsolably tempted, and afflicted, yea and it
is most assured, the Devil has not so much power over any as over such, that
leave to put their whole asfiance in the invincible name and power of Jesus;
and do flee, to such base elements, and contemptible Creatures, devised by
their Popes rather for wares of Merchandise, to their Courtiers, then
otherwise. But as precious Jewels, as they are, you shall scarce know any
Priests to use them: I have interpreted, the neglect of them in Priests to
their knowledge of the weakness of them; and the veneration of them in the
laity, to mere ignorance, as likewise of their grains, which are so eagerly
sought for by the most ignorant, but little regarded by the judicious, and
intelligent: yet the Merchandise of graynes, is so profitable, that many of
their Priests, inculcate, and commend the use of them; to their Families
amongst whom, you shall find some few, of that superstitious, Noble, Iaponians
disposition and judgment, who being newly converted to the Popes Faith, and
baptized by one of the Ignatians, presently Literae Iaponicae in which I have
read this often.
was enterteined, with the loss of all that ever he had by fire: but he found
forsooth a full recompense and happy exchange: for one of the Ignatians bestowed
a blessed grain upon him; by which he should assuredly get a plenary
indulgence and escape the fire of purgatory. Although he had here lost all his
worldly substance by fire: and he was so glad of that grain, that (if it
please you to believe the Ignatian relater) he esteemed the loss of all his
wealth as nothing having gotten such a An Agnus dei after loss by fire would
have come too late: therefore a grain against purgatory fire.
Jewel. O vanity of vanities, how forcibly does the spirit of error, work
with such, who have not received the Charity of truth: but, if the grain of
the Iaponian stood him, in no more steed for a plenary, then the plenary
absolution, which a certain Pope, appointed his Ghostly Father, to give
himself at his death, he might perhaps escape purgatory fire and light upon a
worse fire notwithstanding his grain. The History, of that Pope is thus
written, by one Iaco. de parad. Carthusi. in speculo magno Exempl. verbo
indulgentia p. 424.
Iacobus a Pontifician. The Pope being near his end, called a Priest, and gave
him authority to give to himself a plenary pardon, the which he devoutly
receiving so dyed with his plenary: not long after, he appeared to the Priest,
like a man damned; to whom says the Priest, what? are you damned? why? did not
you receive a plenary indulgence? I did so, says the Pope; but the Supreme
Judge, did not approve that absolution: doubtless the supreme Judge, approves
none of their vain indulgences, by grains, by which they draw Christians from
their only affiance in the blood of his son in whose name Acts 4.
only is salvation; and to put hope of Sanctification and salvation where none
is, nor can be. Dreadful are their abuses, in many of their confecrations: how
horrible, that For mae Orationum ad benedicendum in manual. secundum vsum sarum
in vsu apud nostros Anglor.
when they require and beseech the divine grace, should come down into their
Patents, the holy Ghost should come down into such books as they bless; the
holy Ghost, should come down into their belles, which they most
superstitiously, and vainly bless and consecrate, with an apish kind of
Baptism. Yea they anoint the bells, with their most sacred oils, into which
oils the very Holy Ghost by means of their inuocations Pontifical. in forma
conserat. Chrism.
does specially reside and dwell as they openly profess and pronounce in their
Pontificalls. Many of these things are found, In their rituall according to the
use of Sarum and now used in England with Master Maihews the Monks and my old
Roman Schoolefellows annotations upon it, and they have for conclusion of many
of their fopperies this Note of what omnipotency over the grace of the holy
Ghost the Popish Church makes her Priests to be.
sanctifying prayer by which any Priest may bless, or consecrate any creature,
he shall please, so effectually that (to use Benedictio ad omnia quaecunque
volueris. A form of blessing upon what things soever thou will. Manual* used by
English Priests page. 168.
their own words) by the coming down of the holy Ghost, upon it, by the
religious uses thereof, any one, may obtain, both safety of soul, and health
of body. Infinitely, are their corruptions and vanities, All which, when I now
observe with my self not only as abuses and practices of private men, through
corrupt affections, but as laws, and ceremonies, generally observed throughout
the Roman Church, I do not without great confusion, and shame, lament and
bewail my bewitching, to think with my self, that either I, or any one but of
ordinary knowledge of Christ's doctrine, should have lived in the idle
servitude, of such comtemptible creatures, and to have given any jot of that
honor and confidence, which is due and peculiar to the immortal and everliving
God, by joining or partaking with such, who have joined the adoration of divine
Majesty, with the adoration of earthly corruptible cretures, his Images:
surely, as the Saint omeristian Libell, which is out against me, calls me
for my writing the book for the Oath of Allegiance lunatike, I was so then,
when I believed such trumperies, bewitched with Romes cup. (Of what force, good
God is education in any religion and present possession and profession of any
faith) but now with heart prostrate, I adore that Clemency of Jesus the man and
God orient, who Luke. 1.
through the bowels of mercy, has illuminated me who sat in darkness, and
directed my feet into the way of his peace.

I could never whilst I was in Rome, and a trauailer through other hot
countries, hear of the ouerflowing and inundation of those most nefarious,
abominable, and not to be named sins amongst them: nor never read the first
Chapter of Saint Paul's Epistle to the Romans, where the exectable crimes of
Idolatry, and the other nefarious, and not to be named crimes are by the
Apostle coupled and associated together, as individual companions following
each from other, either by corruption of nature, likeness of spirits, or Gods
secret judgment: but I ever had withal some secret suggestions, lest as the
old Paynims, and heathenish Philosophers, were delivered over into reprobate
senses, to change natural use into abomination, for that they had changed
Gods glory, and given the same to corruptible creatures, and corruptible
Images: so also the Romanists in respect of like changing of Gods glory, and
communicating part thereof, to corruptible Images, were given over, to such
reprobate sense, as to change natural use, into almost nefarious
abominations: Pardon me, O ye Pontifician Prelates, Laikes, etc. God knows,
I write not this to calumniate you, or to aggrauate against you: what was the
sin of Ezech. 16.
Sodom? hear the holy Ghost telling you, pride of life, saturitie of bread,
and idleness of life O most merciful Savior of mankind, open their eyes,
that they may see and lament all the abominations which be committed within
thy house within thy walls: and inspire into their hearts, to keep their vessels
in sanctification: and rather to use, that remedy by thee and nature provided,
then to commit one of those nefarious sins, for which only, thy most just
wrath might be justly moved, to desolate the whole world, and to destroy not
only the actors, but their associates and partakers in their idolatries,
although otherwise themselves not to be touched with those enormious crimes,
for which thy just wrath with fire consumed those five Cities of old, as in
like sort within this thy kingdom, thou did with fire consume, for like
abomination, a Monastery Genesis 19.
of certain religious as lib. 4. hist. ca. 25
Beda relates: and as at Valencine in the Low countries it is fearfully and
horribly reported by a M. R. P.
reverend Priest there, that it is doubted in that City by religious persons,
that thy wrath did consume with fire, the Church and house of the Capuchine
friars, for some like abomination committed in their Church: although by some
others it is given out, that the heretics (so they call those of the reformed
Church) did for malice cast fire upon their Church, which was first of all with
that reuengefull flame consumed.

The sixth Motive.
THE sixth Motive I deduct out of certain observations touching the Mass.
These The sixth motive.
sixteen years and upward, having practiced the same, I have oftentimes had
clear suggestions against the authority of it, as not to be Apostolical, and
of Christ and his Apostles institution: as they most eagerly (not without cause
it being the very foundation of their religion) pretend, but any substantial
reason for their pretended Apostolical tradition herein I could never read, I
rather found in Platina, Gulielmus Durandus, Stephanus Durantus, Almarius,
Sigibertus, Gabriel Biel, Polidore Vrgil, and diverse other their Pontifician
Doctors, who either have commented upon their rites, or mentioned the
institutions, and beginnings of the substantial parts of their Mass, that
they did attribute, all the parts of the Mass to the institution and ordaining
of such Popes as lived, after the Apostles times, yea many of them diverse
hundreds of years; yea they related these things so weakly, and with so small
show of proof out of antiquity (just none at all) that sometimes I greatly
suspected the Mass, to be like a garment, of rags patched together, and
gathered from diverse places unknown, so the Mass to be patched up, with
diverse prayers and parts, the Authors whereof could not possibly by any means
certainly be produced: but that which most of all troubled me, was to read in
Saint Grego. lib. 7. Epist. 64.
Gregory himself confessing that the Apostles did consecrate with the Lords
prayer only: and withal acknowledging that one called Scholasticus, had
composed the office and Canon of the Mass: not withstanding, all these doubts
I rejected then as temptations, not doubting but that the Canon of the Mass
was of the Apostles instituting: although I saw evident demonstrations to the
contrary, so powerful with me, was the authority of the present visible
Roman Church: but ( quia ignorans feci misericordiam consecutus sum,) because
I did it with most zealous ignorance I have obtained mercy. I now plainly see,
that it is a thing morally impossible that the Apostles should be the authors
of the Roman Canon of the Mass, and yet should never use the same, (being so
much Acts. cap. 6. and 13.
given to prayers, and preaching) but celebrate the divine mysteries, with our
Lords prayer only: as not only Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 64 Cardin Cusan. ep. 7.
Ama larius de Eccle. officys lid. 3. Rupert. de diuinis off. lib. 2. Hieron
lib. 3. contra Pelag. Naucler* Platina Cassander alii.
Saint Gregory, but diverse others do deliver, using a Lyturgie, as it is
described, by Saint Iustine, doubtless, more like the English Lyturgie then
the Roman Mass: I observed also, that down must the authority of all those
Historians, Platina, Almarius, Polidore, Durandus, Durantus, and very many
others, who attribute the institution and ordaining of all parts of the Mass
to diverse Popes living long after the Apostles: down also must that notable
miracle, written by Iacobus in vita Grego. primi.
Iacobus a Voragine an Archbishop amongst them in Italy at Genoa: the miracle
was thus, and showed in the time of Adrian Pope, when there was great
contention in the Church, about the Canon of the Mass. Thus it was, the
missall of Gregory was laid, with that of Saint Ambrose together upon the
Altar, in Saint Peter's Church, and left thereupon all night: that God would
vouchsafe by miracle to demonstrate, which of those two he would approve for
the use of the whole western Church: God did so, accordingly, says the wise
Archbishop. For the missall of Saint Gregory was The Roman Canon has ever
worst success at such trials, for as it was here rent so Don Rodrigo
Archbishop of Toledo, above 300. and 40. years ago reports, lib 6. cap. 25.
of his history, that when trial was made betwixt the Gothian and Toletan
Canon, and the Roman, first by private combat of two Knights, after by fire
et both trials the Toletan Canon prevailed, the Knight for the Roman Canon was
overcome, and at the second trial the fire consumed the Popes Canon, that of
Toledo being untouched.
rent into leaves, and cast up and down the body of the Church: but that of
Saint Ambrose laid open upon the Altar ready to be read: and so those ancient
sages, with Adrian their head, gathered, that the renting of Saint Gregory's
missall, and scattering of the leaves of the same about the Church did show,
that it was Gods will, that the same should be used throughout the whole
western Church, but Saint Ambroses missall (because it was laid open in Saint
Peter's Church upon an Altar, as ready to be there used:) therefore the same
forsooth must be used only in Saint Ambroses Church of Millane. What wise
coniecturer would not rather have gathered the contrary, that the missall of
Ambrose should be used, but that of Gregory despised, but had you gone O ye
Pontificians ( ad legem and ad testimonium) to the law and testimony, to the
divine Scriptures (as you Isai. 8.
are commanded) and not tempt God with expecting of testimonies from the dead,
which is, dangerous, superstitious, damnable you would never have so shamefully
forgotten your selves. And how is it imaginable, that if the Apostles
instituted a Canon of Mass delivered to the Roman Church (which also Saint
Ambrose being made of a Catechumen a Bishop could not but find used, and
practiced in his Church of Millane) (how durst that Bishop afterward, attempt
to frame a new Canon for his Church, omitting to use that of the Apostles?) but
perhaps he used theirs in the forenoone, and his own in the afternoon or else
the two Canons had their turns one after another. Alas how are the sages of
Pharaoh, caught in their coniecturing. And consider Christian Reader, how can
this miracle stand, if the Canon of Mass had been instituted by the Apostles,
and accordingly had been practiced both in France and Italy, and other
Churches (for I hope Mass was said throughout Italy and France before the
miracle) what needed then Charles the Great to have assisted with his Imperial
authority, Adrian the Pope for the bringing in to use the missall of It is
mere vanity to think that the Canon as it is now, was so in Saint Gregory's
days.
Saint Gregory? and the exclusion of that of Saint Ambrose (Millane only
excepted where it is now used) from all other Churches? away, away with these
vanities: Again, I demand how could Scholasticus a private person of the
Church or City of Rome, or some other Church (although Bellarm. lib. 2. de
missa. cap. 12.
Bellarmine the profound Cardinal, would to the laughter of all, feign
Bellarmine called great pillar of the Church, and the Auflen of our time by
Eudaemon in his confutation of Anticott. pa. 48.
have Saint Peter signified under the name of Scholasticus) compose the Canon
of the Mass, if the Apostles had made it, and the whole Christian western
Church, had practiced it before? Did Saint Gregory know that the Apostle made
the Canon, and that Scholasticus was only gatherer, or setter together in some
better method of that which the Apostles had composed, and the Church of Rome
in some sort perhaps neglected till Scholasticus his time, and so to need his
ordering and amending? (doubtless S. Gregory names M. Thomas James worthily
observes out of S. Gregory that Scholastians was a usual name, and often
mentioned in S. Greg. lib. 2. epist. missa scholastico duci. and lib. 9. epist.
14. epist. missa. scholastic. defensori. and lib. 7. ep. 32. lib. 6. ep. 26.
lib. 3. ep. 38. lib. 6. cp. 45. and alias.
Scholasticus as a man well known to John of Siracuse, to whom he wrote that
Epistle: and I think it would prove the wits of Bellarmine and all the
Ignatians to find where S. Peter, or any of the twelve Apostles were surnamed
by the name Scholasticus) if S. Gregory knew this, why does he not express
it? nay why does he most expressly insinuate the contrary affirming expressly
that the Apostles celebrated the dreadful mysteries, only with the Lords
prayer? In his 64 Epistle of his 7. book these are his words! Orationem vero
dominicam, etc. the Lords prayer, we therefore said presently after the
prayers, because it was the custom of the Apostles, that they did consecrate
the host of oblation at our Lords prayor only: and it seemed to me very
inconvenient, that we should say the prayer, which Scholastious had composed,
over the oblation, and should not use the tradition, which our Lord had
composed, over his body and blood. Thus most expressly Saint Gregory, the
which authority must down to the ground, or else S. Gregory be appeached of
equiuocating or of ignorance, that he knew not the tradition, upon which the
Canon of Mass was founded; as our present Romanists would now persuade the
world: But nothing, be it never so manifest, must overthrow the Canon of their
Mass (which indeed is the very life of the present Pontifician Church, and
the liuelihood of their Priests, Monks, and Prelates) and yet through the many
impertinences, contradictions, contrarieties which are in it, down it will.
For, if Introit. ad altar.
the very first prayer almost, which is this, ( Oramus te Domine, etc. We
beseech thee O Lord, by the merits of those Saints, whose relics are here,
that thou vouchsafe to give us pardon of all our sins) may take place, and
that by the merits of Saints sins are forgiven, and pardoned; what need to
expect a further propitiatory sacrifice in the Mass? I proposed not long
since, to the M. G. Bl.
chief in this house, how, a certain prayer in the portesse which has thus,
( vt merit is sanctorum aeternitatis gloriam consequamur, that, by the merits
of Saints, we may obtain the glory of eternity) was to be understood?
Considering and pausing a while, he yealded this answer; by their
intercessions; to which I replied, out of their own doctrine, thus; that
intercessions of Saints in Heaven are not merits; and Romans 8.
that glory being first due unto us, by virtue of justification in Christ
Jesus, through Galat. 5.
faith working by chatitie, it was not in any sense, to be given to us, for the
merits of Saints: some replies passed betwixt us, and in the end he came, to
affirm this proposition, to be Catholic, to wit, ( Saluamur meritis
sanctorum) we are saved by the merits of Saints, of which proposition,
demanding the opinion of a M. A. H.
learned Priest sitting by, his answer was, that it was a sound proposition, (
sano intellectu) being well understood. Thus they. O Jesus only Redeemer,
what vile wrong is done to thy infinite merits, when thus they associate with
thy merits, the merits of Saints, to have a real and meritorious concurrence,
for remission of our sins? And when jointly of thy merits, and the merits
of thy servants, is by them composed the treasure of the Pontisician Church: by
which they pretend to deliver souls from Purgatory? But alas, rather they
delude many simple fools, and dispoyle them of their treasure and wealth.

To proceed, whereas in the Offertorium.
Prayer, when the bread is offered up to God upon the Patten, it is expressly
called, ( Haec immaculata hostia,) this immaculate host, and is said to be
offered, ( pro innumerabilibus peccatis) for innumerable sins ( pro viuis and
defunctis,) for the living and the dead: ( vt illis proficiat ad salutem, and
vitam aeternam) that it may profit them to eternal life and salvation: and
likewise, when the Chalice is offered up with wine only in it, in their own
confession, as being long before the time of their imagined transubstantiation
it is thus said of the same Chalice of wine ( pro totius mundi salute in
conspectu, etc.) that it may ascend as a sweet smell before the sight of the
divine Majesty, for the salvation of the whole world, by the two which
oftertories it is evident, what manner of sacrifice, the Authors of them two
believed to be in the mass: truly the very same, that Finitis ab eo, qui
prefectus est, says Iustine Apolog. 2. Thankesgiuings and prayers being ended
by him, who is the chief as prefect, and acclamations being made, by the whole
people, the Deatons, whom we so call give to every one present, a part of the
bread, and of the water and wine, consecrated, and do carry to those, who are
not present. Origin in Leuit. hom. 7. Irenae lib. 4. cap. 32. and 34. Chry^ost.
in Psalm. 22. Amhros. de sacramentis lib. 4. cap. 5. August. de doctrine.
Christian. lib. 3. cap. 16. and in Psalm. 98 and tract. 59. in Job. Hieron. 26
in Math. Author. operis imperfect. in Matthew. Homel 11. clarissime. Bertram.
lib. de corp. and sangu. Domin. Theodoret. in cap. 8. ad Hebre. Fulgen. de fid.
ad Petrum. cap. 19. Lyturgiae Ambros. Basil!
Saint Iustine, Irenaeus, and other ancient Fathers, deliver, to wit, of
thanksgiving, commemoratiue, and of Gods creatures, not of the very body and
blood of Christ, transubstantiated. But observe, now comes Clement the eight,
and he in his missals (what mystery is in it, God knows) in that short
prayer of offering, which the people make, being thereunto invited by the
Priests, and in which, they pray thus, ( suscipiat Dominus hoc sacrificium, de
manibus tuis, etc.) Our Lord, receive this sacrifice from thy hands to the
glory of his name, for our profit, and of all this holy Church: he has
commanded the article ( hoc) this, to be left out: the mystery of which
subtraction, who may not conjecture? because the demonstratiue article ( hoc)
this, in this place, does most specially and peculiarly demonstrate, the
sacrifice offered up to God for the honor of his name, and benefit of his holy
Church: therefore lest the people, who pronounce that prayer, should by the
same be brought to understand, what manner of sacrifice the ancient authors
thereof delivered, the word ( hoc) this, must be rased, and they left to expect
another sacrifice, truly propitiatory forsooth in the Mass. Such a Sacrifice
as the Autours of this prayer, and of many others that go, both before
consecration, and after, never knew nor taught: so that if a man will
understand them ingeniously, and with an impartial eye, read them, it will be
morally impossible, for him to think that they believed the Laterane
transubstantiation, as it is desended by the Pontificians: I will herein only
except the authors of the rubrickes in the Masses, which are almost
contioually more or less, changed as now of late in the last edition, Missa.
Clement 8. in. rubric.
Clement forsooth (mark a pretty trick) will have, the Priest not loudly to
the people and eleuating of the Chalice, (as the former Clement also has
lately instituted that the Laics must receive at their Lotio^s wine mixed with
water per haps to imitate that of S. Chrisostomes Lyturgy where it is appointed
that after consecration sodden water is to be mixed with the wine consecrated
that the people were to receive Missa Chrisost. edita a Plantino and translata
a leone Tusco.
custom was) but secretly, and at the setting down of the Chalice, to say
those words of Christ: ( hac quotie scunque, etc.) as often as you shall do
these things, you shall do them in remembrance of me: wherefore, is this
change now made?

Doubtless, for no other end, (if there be any other mystery let it be
showed) but lest now in these times, when the only and infinitely inestimable,
sacrifice of Christ's Cross, is so daily, by the true Catholic Church, and her
Ministers extolled, and set forth, and the Lyturgie of our Lords Supper,
delivered to be a lively, holy, and express Bellar. lib. recog. page 85. To
show that in his first book of the Mass and last Chapter he had justly
denied any true sacrifice of Christ's body to be offered upon good Friday in
their Church, answers thus an objection that is made against him out of their
service of good Friday. whereas that days oblation of Christ's body (as it is
by them believed and there adored) is called a sacrifice; he says, that is to
be understood, improperly; and there, to pr^ue that, he compares their
offering of Christ upon good Friday with the Sacrifice of incense and paschall
candle, which is offered by them the next day, and in this his assertion he is
so eager, that he heapeth authority upon authority, out of his brethren
Pontificians, to prove it. Bellar. lib. recog page 85. 86.
commemoration, and remembrance, and commemoratiue sacrifice, of that which
Christ did and suffered for us;) the sincere, and religious hearer should
perceive, by those words, (as often as you shall do these things you shall do
them in remembrance of me) appointed in all former Missals, to be loudly and
distinctly pronounced, by the Priest, at the time of the showing of the
Sacrament, that the ancient authors of that part of the Canon (which is the
principallest) did understand, that all which was there done, was only a
commemoration of that, which Christ suffered upon the Cross, but not to be
Christ himself, truly, verily, carnally, really, there in body, by a
commucation, or transubtantiation of Elements present. But what marvel that
they have corrupted the Rubricks of their Mass? when some of their Popes, if
not Scholasticus, have most shamefully corrupted the words themselves of
consecration: for in the consecration of the Chalice, they do put to Christ's
words, all these, ( noui et eternitestamenti, misterium fidei) of the new and
everlasting Testament, the mystery of Faith: the which words, although they do
yield a very godly sense, and do directly impugn their transubstantiation,
yet to bring in Christ, as speaking those words, which not one of the Math. 26.
mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Corinthians. 11.
Evangelists, or Saint Paul, describing the manner of blessing, and the very
words which Christ used at his last supper have set down: it is too to
improbable. To say that either the Evangelists, or S. Paul, should omit to set
down any of the necessary words, or integral parts of the form of consecration
and that Scholasticus, or some other illuminated Pope, should be so diligent, as
to supply the And as they have thrust into their forms of consecration the word
( enim) for: so they have left out in consecration of the bread these words (
quod pro volis tradetur) which shall be delivered for you.
negligence of the Apostles were vain: here is a most manifest, and
heretical abuse, and yet rather then the Mass, which Scholasticus as they
falsely pretend composed, shall down: down must the Authority of Gods word,
as not sufficiently delivering the form of consecration of that life-giuing
life-quickning, and inestimable Sacrament, by which Christ crucified, is most
lively commemorated, and all his graces, most really and effectually received,
by the faithful, and worthy receivers, who come unto that divine Table, with a
resolved Faith, a burning Charity, and a pure Contrition, and bewailing of
their sins; but to others, who come unfaithfully and with purpose, or half
inclination to wallow still in their sins it will be, as it was to Judas
(buccella intincta mortis) a dipped morsel of death: but in the worthy
receiver, (O miracle! O in estimable benefit!) there is a real conjunction,
and participation of that Christ, who sits at the right hand of his Father;
like as the Regenerate in Baptism, are truly Ioh. 3.
and really regenerated, and borne of the holy Ghost, not because they have the
substance of the Holy Ghost, anewe imparted to their souls, to their
sanctification; but for the real graces, which they by that Sacrament receive
of the holy Ghost; even so, in this most divine Sacrament not the flesh it
self, which was crucified, to use S. Aug in Psalm. 98
Austins words is carnally eaten, but the virtues, and graces of the flesh,
which was crucified, is really eaten by the soul, in that sort as the soul
can eat; that is spiritually and really by her affections, and other immanent
real and internal operations, so here: as the food is spiritual, so the
manducation, by faith, love, and thanksgiving, is spiritual, here the mind,
not the belly or stomach, is to be prepared: Like as Saint Augustine speaks.

And like as before their consecration, so after their transubstantiation, and
elevation, such prayers, and actions are used, by him who composed their Canon,
that either he, must be reputed an egregious Arian Impostor, or some Nestorian
seducer, making Christ either a Creature, or a sanctified man only: or else,
he did not believe that real presence of Christ himself, and the most Blessed
Trinity, which is now imagined, and taught by the Pontificians; For if he did
believe, that after their elevation, Christ in person, was really present, as a
Complete, and Consummate sacrifice, what Arrianlike impudency, was it in him,
to Per totum Ca. no. in missal.
appoint so innumerable signings, and crossings by the sinful and earthly
hands, of sinful Priests upon, and over Christ, and the sacred Trinity it
self? (but be like his many crossings did sanctify before consecration, but
not after, when they are only used as significations, or else because Christ
himself the sacrifice, needs no sanctification, they are used only to drive
a way Devils, from the sacrificing Priest, (for Zuares and others will not deny
but that the Dinels may and do come so near to their Sacrament, that they can
both carry it away, and abuse it also) doubtless, Scholasticus would not have
been so Sacrilegious to have ordained Without all question the lesser is
blessed of the greater. ep. ad Heb. 7
Christ himself to be signed and blessed so often, by sinful hands, and
therefore if he appointed so many crossings, he did not believe a reail
presence of Christ, but only a commemoratiue sacrifice, in his Creatures. And
in good earnest, I put a certain demand to the Pontificians, whether any one
of them or their Priests, believing Christ, to sit, at the right hand of his
Father; may without maine Sacrilege offer to sign and bless him with one of
their crossings? or whether the blessed Virgin Mary, or Saint Mary Magdalene
beholding Christ upon his Cross actually consummating that Sacrifice, that
oblation, by which once offered (to use the words of the Ad hebr. 10.
Apostle) he has sanctified, and consumated all those who believe in him, (
in aternum) for ever: might without in explicable presumption, and sacrilege
have offered by blessing, crossing, or prayer, to have given him any
sanctification or assistance in that his dreadful sacrifice, manifest it is,
that as in that sacrifice, he would endure no helper, nor suffer no
compartner, so neither in this, if he were, as truly sacrificed, and offered
upon the Altar, as they pretend.

But Scholasticus the Composer of the Canon, does yet more perspicuously, show,
that he did not believe the Pontifician Transubstantiation; for besides, that
he calls the Sacrament ( panem vitae aeternae, et calicem salut is aeternae)
the bread of everlasting life, and the cup of eternal salvation; he also
desires God, to behold the same sacrifice, with a propitious and favorable
countenance, like as the sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, Melchisedech etc. The
which Priests being of the Law of nature, did justly, and necessarily desire
God, to look propitiously upon their sacrifices, because they were not perfect
with any absolute perfection, being only creatures, and only acceptable, for
the devotion of the offerers, which might be tainted, with sin and
imperfection; but to say the same of the sacrifice of Christ himself, if he
were really present and really sacrificed, were horrible blasphemy; and I
demand, whether Saint Magdalen, kneeling at the foot of the cross, might
without sacrilege have desired God the Father, to have looked down with a
propitious and a favorable countenance upon the sacrifice of his infinitely
beloved son Jesus, as he did upon the sacrifice of Abel? (to wit a lamb, or
a sheep) undoubtedly if Scholasticus believed as the Pontificians do, he was
an egregious Impostor to rank the Creator of infinite Majesty with his
creatures, and to equalize, or compare the sacrifice which was both acceptable,
and satisfactorious, ( exrigore institiae) in the very rigor of Justice, with
those imperfect sacrifices of Abel, and others, which did not, nor could not
sanctisie the Offerers.

But further, yet in that which follows, he quite overthrows the Papists,
presence of Christ, in the sacrifice: for thus he prays Ibid. in Can.
( Suppliceste Rogamus etc.) We humbly beseech thee Omnipotent God, do thou
commannd these things to be carried by the hands of thy holy Angel, up to thy
high Altar, into the sight of thy divine majesty: thus there: Here I demand of
them, what in their consciences they think the Author understood by those
words of the prayer ( iube) command and ( haec) these things: who is here
commanded? What, Gods special Angel, Christ himself? but if you please, to
understand Saint Michael, or some other Angel, mark the Consequence: Christ
himself, or Saint Michael must carry up these things; either Christ Christ
himself, or Saiut Michael Christ, up to the high Altar, before the sight of
the divine Majesty; then what a profound Gramarian was your Scholasticus, to
call Christ ( haec) these things, or else what a Sacrilegious impostor, to
desire God the Father, to command Michael to bring up and offer up his
infinitely beloved son before his Majesty, who ever Heb. 4. 1. Col. 3.
sits at his right hand, Romans 8.
making intereession for mankind, and all those who seek to him. And if you
will understand your demonstratiue Article, ( haec) these things, of the only
accidents of bread and wine, they are in good sooth not worthy carrying so
high, neither by Christ himself, nor his Angel Saint Michael Charge not
therefore, Oye Pontificians, Scholasticus with such sacrilegious imaginations:
had he believed as you do, he would have prayed either in this or the like
sort. O most morcifull Father, here before me upon this Altar lies only
dear son Jesus, (of infinite dignity and unspeakable Majesty) by me
sacrificed to thee; him, in respect of his infinite dignity, thou canstinot
refuse nor reject: for his sake, reject not, refuse not me, thy Priest,
offering him to thee, make me partaker of his graces. etc.

But thou will say, perhaps Scholasticus did undoubtedly believe
Transubstantiation: for he says, that there is a participation, of Christ's
body, from the Altar; true he says so, if he be not corrupted: but what
then? Christ said more, Eat, this is my body: know ye not O ye
Pontificians, that it is a great mystery? It is a Sacrament of the new
Testament, and as a Sacrament it must be understood, used, and practiced?
remember S. 1. Corin. 10.
Paul, twice repeating, do this, or do these things in commemoration of me?
without all question within this space of a 1000. years. the canon, and
liturgy of Mass has been so often pared and clipped, that it is hard to say,
what Scholasticus composed: and therefore unless Scholasticus were a
contradicting Scholar to himself, he must needs be corrupted if in any place
of the Canon he seem to speak for your transubstantiation. But I will acquaint
thee by the way, courteous Reader) with a certain accident: when I was writing
upon this very matter, in comes to my Chamber M. 1. Col.
one of the Ancient Priests of this place, pretending not to come to confer,
but conferring with me, perhaps to draw somewhat out of me touching my
resolution: but he ingenuously confessed to me at last upon conference that the
Apostles did not institute the Canon of the Mass: for arguing with him about
some other points and about traditios, he acknowledged that traditions
Apostolical, must be carried up, hand in hand, from Author to Author, until
the Apostles times: what then (said I) think you of the Canon of the Mass? is
it a Tradition Apostolical? yes, without all question (said he), a tradition
Apostolical: show me (then said I) how, this Canon is carried up, hand in
hand, from Author to Author, from Record to Record, till the Apostles times: he
failed, (as Bellarmine himself, must fail) for he could not go higher then
the time of Gregory, and yet not authentically, and sufficiently, to him
neither (as I easily showed) and so fell down, the Apostolical Tradition of
the Canon: but he replieth (for they are resolved to see and not to see) yea
but the Doctrine of the Canon, was a tradition Apostolical and may be carried
up to the Apostles times: where said I, find you then the elevation and
transubstantiation mentioned in, or before Saint Gregory's time, or in Saint
Gregory himself? I came not to reason, (said he) well then I replied; at
least you grant that the very sorme, of the Canon, as it is now used in the
Roman Church cannot be carried up, from record to record, from Author to
Author, until the Apostles time; he ingenuously granted it, and so fell down
the Apostolical tradition, of the Canon of the Mass, and withal, so ended
our conference.

And here also, concluding, to speak any more concerning transubstantiation
out of Scholasticus, I pass over to another observation in this their Canon;
and will show that their Scholasticus did not believe Purgatory flames, etc. And
so down, must their suffragatiue, and propitiatory sacrifice, for the burning
souls in purgatory; if the Authority of their Mass must stand.

I find expressly, that those dead persons, for whom prayer is now pretended
to be made by the Roman Church, as though they were in the flames of
Purgatory, are In Canone msse in erati^: que incipit memente. domi. etc
here most significantly said, to rest in Christ, to sleep in the sleep of
peace; now I pray the Pontifician Reader to teach me what peace in Christ,
what sleep in rest is it to be tormented incessantly, in that dreadful fire
of Purgatory? (for extremity and anguish equalized by the Pontificians with the
fire of the damned) do thou understand Christian Reader? do thou think,
that Scholasticus if he were the Author of this prayer, would call the burning
flames of purgatory, the rest in peace: the sleep of peace? a very sweet rest
of peace, doubtless, for such especially as shall continue in it, until the
day of Judgment: for they affirm so much that some who are burning in that
rest, shall restlessely there rest, until the general resurrection: and
perhaps, when they end their Masses of purgatory rest, and of requiems they In
fine miss^.
thus conclude them, ( requiescant in pace) let them rest in peace: d^siring
thereby, that the souls departed may rest in Purgatory, yea rest in Purgatory
still. Doubtless, whatsoever they mean in their daily requiem-Masses, the
Author of the Prayer whosoever he were, desired that they might rest in peace,
and in the sleep of peace, to wit in some place of rest, until the day of
General judgment, and resurrection: For most probable it is, that the Author
of this prayer for the dead, was of opinion, of many of the Tertull. lib. de
anima cap. 55. delivers it as a matter assured in his time that all souls of
the faithful departed are kept in some lower part until the general judgment
Laotant lib. 7. cap. 21. Yea in Saint Bernards time this error was rife he
held it Sermon. 3. De omnibus sanctis and who is ignorant that John the 22. Pope
held it and would have defined it and caused preachers publicly to teach it.
Gerson Sermon. de pasch. Ioh. Viltan. in Historia. See S. Austin in Psalm. 36. and
his Enchirid. cap. 108. the like have S. Chrisost and Theoph. in 1. ad Corinth.
11. Justin. lib. Questiq. 60. et. 67. r Grego, Niss. orat. 3.
Ancient Fathers, of the Church, and some latter Popes, to wit, that the
souls of the Faithful departed, remained in some certain appointed place of
rest, until the day of Judgment; which place some of them call under the
Altar, but most manifest it is, that if the Author of the prayer, were in his
wits, he would not esteem the dreadful flames of purgatory for a sleep of
rest, peace of Christ, sleep of peace, unless it may be said, that he
thought that souls departed, do put on the natures of Salamanders, small
little beasts, who as fishes do swim in the waters, so they live and breath
in the fire it self. Or else perhaps, he was of Saint Gregory Nissenes
opinion; with some of the other Ancients of the Church, who in one of his
Orations, upon the resurrection of our Savior Christ writes thus: (animam
vero, per se separatam, etc.) But the soul being by it self, and separated
from the body, fire cannot touch, neither can darkness be irksome or
grievous unto it, because she wants eyes, and therefore with these agreeing
considerations, and reasons, we are compelled to approve the resurrection of
the dead, thus be; proouing by the impassibility, of the souls separated, a
resurrection of the body, that in it, the soul might be punished, and
afflicted, and so according to this Fathers opinion, the flames of purgatory
should nothing at all afflict the souls departed, and therefore they might be
said to rest in them, and to sleep also a slecepe of peace in them.

Or else most probable it is, that he thought, the state of the souls
departed, in respect of damnation or salvation, was in some sort uncertain,
until the general judgment, (according as many of the ancient Fathers seem
to have taught) and this until the sentence of damnation, or salvation were by
the Judge pronounced: and therefore, although they were in a kind of rest, and
expectation of that which was to come, yet in respect of the communion of
charity, which is, betwixt all members of the Church, he might think that
prayers of the living might be available for them, so that by them they might
find their Judge more propitious. And this very aptly, yoa necessarily
accords, with other like evident matters in their Masses for the dead: for as
by their Missal. in comemorat. omnium fideliu^^ defunct.
sequence, which begins thus ( diet irae, dies illa, etc.) A day of wrath is
that day, they have often relation, to the day of general judgment; and to
the general account, which is to be made that day, and therefore, the whole
sequence is purposely pronounced, as in the persons of the dead, who See all
this most evidently in their sequence. dies Ire, etc. ibidem.
desire ^^ favorable, and a merciful judgment at that day, and to be
delivered then, when the Goats shall be set on the left hand, and the sheep
upon the right hand, so that there can be no tergiuersation at all, but that
the author of that sequence, prayed that the souls of all faithful departed,
(for be prays for all faithful departed, none excepted,) might find a
merciful judgment, at the day of the General account.

And agreelingly to this, are livers prayers also of the dead: And most
expressly is their (...)* in their daily Masses of the dead: which is thus: In
missis quotidianis pre defunctis.
( Domine Jesus Christ, etc.) Lord Jesus Christ, deliver the souls of the
faithful departed, from the pains of hell, and the deep lake deliver them
from the mouth of the Lion, that hell may not (note this sentence) swallow them
up that they fall not into the dark; but let thy flander bearer or Signifer
Michael, represent and exhibit them into that holy light which thou have
promised to Abraham and to his seed for ever; Thus there: he who seriously
considering this prayer, pondereth those words, (the souls of all faithful
departed) and those, that they may be delivered from the deep lake, and that
they be not swallowed up by hell, nor fall into the dark, he cannot easily be
persuaded to think otherwise, then that the Author of this prayer, did think
(as many ancients did) that the state of the souls departed, August. lil. 1.
retract. 14. and 12. de ciuit. cap. 9. epist. 111. ad Fortunat. Irenae. lib. 5.
cap. ult. Ambros. lib. 2. de Cain. cap. 2 and lib. de bono mortis. cap. 10.
Chrisost homel. 28. Haeb. Origin hom. 7. in Leuit. Hilarious, in Psalm. 138.
Theoph in 1. ad Corinth. 11. and in 11. ad Hoebr. Theodor. ibidem.
was not certain until the day of Judgment: and that none of them were to
see the glory and face of God, until after the day of Judgment, and general
resurrection, when they should receive the promises as Theophilactus proves
and discourses. This error had very many and ancient patrons, as Bellarmine
himself cannot deny; and without all question it may be thought the parent of
another error, of praying for the souls departed, to deliver them from the
fire of Porgatorie. Doubtless, a Novel error, and no Apostolical tradition,
because not clearly known, nor received in Saint Austens time, who most
expressly in the learned, and perhaps the last book he ever wrote (except his
Retractations,) affirms that August. lib. de ciuit. dei. 21 cap. 26. see also
the 16. chapter.
perhaps it is true, (note the word perhaps) that there is a purging fire after
death; by which, it is most manifest according to other places of him, that the
Church in his time did not make Purgatory sire a tradition Apostolical, or
article of faith: but of late, the Pseudosinode, and Schismatic Council
under Eugenius the fourth gathered against that of Basil, which had deposed
Eugenius before, and substituted Felix) contrary to the ancient faith, of the
Latin and Grecke Church determined Purgatotie pains for a point of faith. But
of these imaginary, and fatuous flames else where perhaps more largely. The
word of God, as it is expounded of the ancient Fathers, does dispell, condemn,
explode them, for if there Epist. ad Romans 8. and 2. ad Corinth. 5. ad These. 1.
cap. 4. Apoc. cap. 14.
be no damnation to those, who die in Christ Jesus, believing in him with
faith, working by charitier? and if all those who die in him, even from that
moment of death rest from their labors? and that no sooner the earthly
habitation is left off, but an heavenly habitation is put on? and those who
believing Christ love Christ, desiring to be dissolved, and to be with him, are
with him? and if generally the Apostle exhorts and commands, that
Christians should not be so much as contristated, for those who die in Christ?
in Jesus, and by Jesus, by whom, and in whom they sleep; with many such like
sayings: who, that is not either seduced by his education in popery, or else
for his ouercredulitie to their Priests misled, will believe, the imaginary
flames of Purgatory? And here I constantly affirm, and the contrary cannot
be showed (to wit) that all those Fathers who allowed prayer for the dead, were
more or less to be touched with some one of these errors, either that the
states of the faithful departed, could not be certain until the day of
judgment, and that they were to be kept in certain receptacles till that
time, and that none of the departed were to see Gods face, until the day of
judgment: Austen, writes doubt fully here of in his Enchirid, cap. 109. where
he affirms that sacrifice is offered for the dead, either that they may have
full remission, or else that their damnation may be more tolerable. He teaches
the like, lib. 1. de orig. enime. cap 9. and 10. and lib. de cura pro mortui^
cap. 1. Azor. lib. institut. 10. cap. 22. affirms that it was the doctrine of
certain ancient that their Mass did profit and ease the souls damned in hell.
or else that the very souls of the damned in hell might be holden by
prayers, as John Damascen, erat. de mortuis. ciacon. Aquinas alis.
Damascene approuingly, relating the history of Trajanes soul doliuered by
Saint Gregory seems to hold: and all those who account the history of
Falconillas delivery, by the prayers of Tecla to be authentical, seem to
affirm. And as for the history of Traians delivery by Saint Gregory's
prayers, although it be impugned by some later authors, yet the history is to
be seen painted, in Saint Gregory's Monastery at Rome, the which also, the
great Ignatian Salmeron acknowledges: by which it is most manifest that the
opinion, teaching that damned souls in Hell might be helped or eased by the
prayers of some living, seemed not so extrauagant and improbable in the Roman
Church, when time was: by all which, and much Ciprian seems to show how the
commemorat^ue sacrifice was offered for martyrs in co^memoration of them.
Cyprian epist. 62. lib. 3. and lib. 4. epist. 5. in like sort Ciril. speaks
in Cateches.
more, that might be said to the same purpose, the courteous Reader may observe
how one error breeds another, to wit, uncertainty of estate of the souls
departed, until the day of judgment, prayers for them; prayers for them,
Purgatory fire; Purgatory fire, requiem Masses, and Purgatory sacrifices for
them, and their fabulous Indulgences with such like errors.

There be many other things which I might justly tax in the Canon of their
Mass, as repugnant to all antiquity, and consequently not Apostolical: the
dreadful elevation of the Sacrament (not only to be reverenced, as a
Sacrament of God) but to be adored and inuocated as the divine Majesty it
self, their carrying up and down, the said Sacrament in their processions.
But as execrable, rather then as inexcusable, I do abhominate that Papal
custom, and Novel fashion of theirs, by which, they set the Sacrament upon a
white palfrey to be carried before their holinesses, whithersoeuer they shall
make their progress, to show perhaps that they will be like the virginal
Saints in heaven Apoc. 14.
who follow the Lamb, wheresoe uer he goes. O merciful Savior of mankind, (
Psalm 118.
tempus faciendi, dissipauerunt legem tuam,) It is high time to do, they have
dissipated thy law: in steed of thy divine Majesty, they have set up a God,
dwelling in their tabernacles in their towers, and call the same, their God,
the God of fortitude, the God of strength, and instead of that thy only
sacrifice of the Cross (daily honored, inuocated commemorated, by thy
faithful Servants) the Chimericall and imaginary real, carnal, sacrifice of
your self, in bread and wine upon their idolatrous Altars. Open their eyes,
thou who art the only Sacrifice, oblation, redemption, and deliverance of all
mankind, by that oblation which thou did once make for us all upon the
Cross, look down and consider how they abuse thy holy rite, and institution
which thy Majesty appointed, and all thy ancient Church received according as
thy Math. 28. Mark. 14. Luke. 22. 6. Paul, 1, ad corinth. 11.
Evangelists and Apostle delivered unto them, that all thy faithful, should
receive the Sacrament, whole and entire in both kinds, yet now Conc. Trident.
sess. 21.
comes the Tridentine Fathers, and they do not only decree, one kind to be
enough, but they also accurse, and execrate (they curse, and thou will bless)
all those, who shall observe and teach as necessary thy institution, and shall
practice according as all the Prime, and ancient Churches did: and this their
treachery, they will excuse, by protesting (take a Helen without an excuse, so
the Tride^tine is named by Espencaus in his Commentary upon Titus) that the
ancient Church never used the Sacrament under both kinds, out of opinion of
necessity: as though your holy institution, your commandment delivered, and
inculcated by the Apostles and Evangelists did not bind under necessity: But
they will thus at their pleasures only like the 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Outlaw or lawless man (by whom they were authorized for this) described by
your Apostle in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, change your law and dissipate
the eternal league of the new and eternal testament.

It will here be expected perhaps, that I deliver my sense, and Catholic
belief touching this most venerable Sacrament: It is truly the same with that
of the ancient Fathers of the Church, in whose words I will by and by express
my faith, the which I see also most clearly agreeing with the reformed
Lyturgie of the English Church: and the articles concluded and agreed upon by
public consent, in the conuocations of the English Church: which Lyturgie and
Articles, when I lately most seriously perused, and considered, I saw a
vehement propension and resolution in the authors of the^, with all reverence
to embrace what was most agreeing to the word of God, and to that which the
ancient Primitive Church taught and delivered: the which had I never read, I
could never so have thought of the^: the english church and Lyturgy thereof both,
are in such vile obloquies with the Pontificia^s. But I now perceive that the
adversaries Isai. 28.
( posueru^t spe^ fua^ mendaciu^) they have made not one ly, but infinte lies
and calumniations against the Church of England, their hope: for in their
schools and Seminaries they commonly make their adversaries speak what they
list, and so to impugn and confute them, and teach their young soldiers of
Sanders his holy quarrel to do the like. But to return to my purpose, my
Catholic faith concerning this dreadful Sacrament, I will deliver in the
words of some of the ancient and Catholic Fathers. Saint Austen expounding
that Job. 6.
sentence and commandment of our Savior, ( nisi mandus aueritis, etc.)
unless you shall eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you
shall not have life in you, August. lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. cap. 16.
says thus: he seems to command a crime, and a wickedness, it is a figure
therefore, commanding us to communicate with our Lords passion, and that we
profitably and sweetly lay up in our memory, that his flesh was wounded and
crucified for us. The same he confirms in his Tractat. 27. in John.
Treatise upon S. John, where he greatly taxes the ignorance, and mistaking of
the Capharnaites, who thought, that Christ intended to give them such flesh to
eat as themselves were, that is, true flesh, whereas (says Saint Austen)
Christ in those words, covered a grace. And in another place upon the Psalm. 98.
Psalms, thus he writes most perspicuously, ( Spiritualiter intelligite,
etc.) understand that which I have spoken, spiritually, not this body which
you see, you shall eat, neither shall you drink that blood which they, who
shall crucisie me, will shead: I have commended unto you, a certain Sacrament
which being spiritually understood, will quicken you. And how this Divine
mystery being a Sacrament, takes the name of the thing, whereof it is a
Sacrament, hear him clearly declaring the same to Epist. 23. ad Bonif.
Bonifacius an Earl in Afric. Sacraments (says he) have a certain
resemblance of the things whereof they are Sacraments See Theodoret for this
purpose in dialog. impatib.
and for that resemblance they take the names, commonly of the things
themselves: and therefore, as the Sacrament of Christ's body, is after a sort
Christ's body, and the Sacrament of Christ blood, his blood, so the Sacrament
of faith (to wit) Baptism is faith, thus he, like is the authority related in
their De consecrat. did. 2. cap. hoc est quod.
Canon Law, (Sicut ergo celestis, etc.) Therefore even as the heavenly bread
which is the flesh of Christ, after this manner, is called the body, whereas
it is truly a Sacrament of the body of Christ, that, which visible, palpable,
mortal, was put on the Cross, and the very immolation which is done by the
hands of the Priest, is called the passion of Christ, the death of Christ, and
the crucifying of Christ, not in truth of the thing, but in a signifying
mystery, so the Sacrament of faith, which is Baptism, is understood faith.
Again: Contra adima^t cap. 13.
Saint Austen, (non dubit auit, etc.) Our Lord doubted not, to say, this is my
body, when he gave a sign of his body, and therefore, upon Saint Tract. 59.
in John.
John, although he acknowledged Judas to have received ( buccellam dominicam,)
the Lords morsel, yet he received not, (says he) bread the Lord, but the
bread of the Lord: of which words, what other meaning can there be? But that
bread of the Lord is only the outward Sacrament, which Judas received: but
bread the Lord, is the same Sacrament received by the religious and faithful,
who withal believes, thinks, loves, and hops in and upon Christ
crucified as his Savior, and so in soul by faith and love eats him, and
receives bread the Lord: according to that of the same August. tract. 25. in
Ioh.
Father, believe, and thou have eaten: and that of Saint Bernard. sermon 3. in
Psalm qui habitat.
Bernard, when they heard him, say unless you eat the flesh of the Son of
man and drink his blood, they said, that this is an hard speech, and departed
from him, and what is to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, but to
communicate with his passion, and to imitate that conversation, which he held?

To these Fathers, for this purpose, I adioyne Saint Ephrem. in Harding against
the challenge of D. lewel.
Ephrem, thus confessing, Inspice diligenter etc. Behold diligently, how
taking bread into his hands, he blesses and breaks it, in a figure of his
immaculate body, and in a figure of his precious blood, he blesses and gives
the Cup to his disciples: thus he. Lib. 4. contra Marcio. cap 40.
Tertullian, when he was a sound Christian Catholic, thus pronounced: Jesus
Christ, when he took bread and distributed it to his disciples, made it his
body, saying this is my body, that is to say, the figure of my body. And a
gain in another Lib. 3 cap. 19. contra Mar.
place he speaks thus, to Marcion: God in your Gospel called bread his
body; that by the same thou may understand, that to bread he has given to
be a figure of his body, but a figure it should not be, if it were not a body
of truth: thus he.

I will adioyne two places out of Eusebius, who lived then, when the Pastors
of the Church were most vigilant against all errors and heresies: and
therefore they would not have suffered this doctrine in Eusebius, touching the
Sacrament, if it had not been agreeing to the Catholic faith of that time.
Christ having offered, Eusebius de demonst. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 10.
says he, himself for a sovereign sacrifice to his Father, ordained that we
should offer a remembrance thereof unto God, in steed of a Sacrifice: which
remembrance we celebrate by the signs or simboles of his body, and blood upon
his Table; and pleasing God well, we offer a Sacrifice without blood, and
reasonable, and acceptable unto him: thus he. In which authority of Eusebius I
note that the Greek word ((...)) is to be translated without blood, to wit, a
Sacrifice without blood, though not without the signs of blood; and the same
Greek word therefore in our English tongue is to be translated without blood,
not unbloody, for that word does not sufficiently express the signification
of the Greek (...). Secondly this Father constantly Lib. 8. de demonstrat.
Euanli^a demonst. 1.
teaches thus: Jesus delivered to his disciples the signs (or simboles) of
his divine dispensation; commanding them, ((...)) to do or celebrate the
Image of his true body, for since he has no more received the Sacrifices of
blood and diverse creatures, ordained by Moises; he has appointed, to be
served, with bread, for a figure of his body, thus he. Ambr. de sacram. lib. 4.
ca. 4. S. Ambrose did not believe Transubstantiation, because many more
wo^^rous actions should concur to Transubsta^tiation then were in Creation, and
his argument is from a greater wonder to show a less, a ma^ori ad minus as it
is said
Saint Ambrose, thus. If there be, so great strength, in the word of our Lord
Jesus, that all things began to be, when they were not how much more shall it
be of force, that the (elements) should be the same, they were before, and yet
be changed into another thing? S. Ireneus is often cited by the Adversary for a
propitiatory sacrifice and transubstantiation, but it is not possible for any
one to write more effectually to overthrow their imagined propitiatory
sacrifice and transubstantiation then he does, and I desire the Christian
Reader, with patience, and with an impartial eye, to read what I shall,
somewhat more largely, deduce out of his express doctrine, in two of his
Irenaus lib. 4. cap. 32. et 34.
chapters, of his fourth book against heresies.

For first, he not so much as once mentions either propitiatory sacrifice, or
transubstantiation, but rather he expressly compares the same sacrifice of
bread and wine with the sacrifices of the old testament, and makes that the
same is no more needful to God then those were. He also most significantly
avouches that it is a sacrifice of the things which are from us; and having
made a general asseueration, that sacrifices do not sanctify the man, but
that the pure conscience wherewith the Sacrifice is offered, does sanctify the
Sacrifice: he presently adds thus, that therefore, the gift of the Church,
is called a pure sacrifice, because the Church with simplicity offers, it
(would he have spoken thus, if Christ the Author of all sanctity, had been
really present?) further observe, those words of him.

This oblation, the Church, only offers, pure to the maker, offering to him,
with thanksgiving, of his Creature: and in the two and thirtieth chapter, he
calls the oblation, ( primitias, ex suis creaturis) the Primicies of his own
creatures, and there he further adds, that God, who gives us his gifts, for
nourishments; the Church offers the first fruits, of those gifts; which,
(says he) is the very oblation of the new Testament which the Church received
from the Apostles: and of these gifts, in the five and thirty Chapter, he
says, ( terrena quidem, etc. the earthly things, which are disposed for us, it
behooves to be tipes of those things, which are celestial, yet made of the
same God; and disputing against such Heretics, who offered of the same
creatures, of bread and wine, with the Church to God, the Father of Christ, and
yet denied God the Father of Christ to be the Courteous Reader observe all this
discourse clearly and truly gathered out of that Ancient Father, or for proof
hereof vouchsafe to read him and for the same purpose, see S. Chrysostom and
Theodoret in Epist ad Haebr.
maker of them, but another God, he twiteth them thus: that they make God who
is the Father of Christ as it were needy, and to be desirous to be served and
honored with the Creatures of another God (would he have spoken thus, if
Christ himself really offered had been the sacrifice)? And in his 32, and 34.
having clearly showed, that God, rather requires innocence, and integrity of
conscience, then sacrifice, yet in respect of gratitude (says he) not as
though God had need thereof, sacrifice must be offered unto him: and then
adds these words, speaking of the Church, offerre oportet igitur, etc. It
behooves therefore to offer to God, the first fruits of his creatures; even as
Moses speaks, thou shall not appear empty handed, before the sight of the
Lord thy God, that in those things in which man has been grateful to God; in
the same things, being so deputed, he may receive that honor which is from him;
and it is not the kind of oblatious which is refused; oblations were there,
and oblations be here; sacrifices in the people; (to wit the old Testament)
and sacrifices in the Church, but the special manner, is only changed;
because it is now offered, not from servants, but from such as are free. Thus
he; and also expressy, in the first lines of this Chapter, he says that
therefore, the Church offers a pure sacrifice, not as though God had need of
it, but because, he that offers the gift, is honored in the gift, that is
offered, if it be accepted of. Would he have spoken thus, if he had believed,
that Christ himself were really present, and really offered by the Priests
hand? nay expressly, he adds, that the Church offers by Christ, and by the (
Word) Christ, a pure oblation. By all these and many such like observations in
that learned and holy father, it is evident what manner of oblation he thought
the Church had received; to wit of Gods creatures, of bread and wine. But the
adversary, notwithstanding all these evidences, insisteth upon these words of
him: Christ taking that, which of a creature is bread, said, this is my body,
and the Chalice, which is of that creature, which is according to us;
confessing it, to be his blood: these be the words, upon which they insist:
which may seem to make some what for the Lutherans Consubstantiation, but
nothing at all, for the transubstantiaters. Tell me O Christian, did Christ in
verity, make the creatures of bread and wine, which are according to us, to be
his body, and blood? that implies contradiction, and is of those things which
cannot be done; (as the Pontificians themselves will confess) but tell me O
Christian? did not Christ, when he said, bread was his body, and wine was his
blood? did he not institute a Sacrament? it is clear. Who will not therefore
thus infer? that bread must be his body, and wine, must be his blood, in that
manner, in which Sacraments, are called, and said, to be the very things,
whereof, they are Sacraments, to wit, Sacramentally, in signification,
operation, efficacy. Saint Irenaeus means (as it is most clear) that
natural bread, and natural wine (which are the things offered, as he most
often, and significantly affirms) Christ, confessed to be his body, and his
blood; the which because they can not be truly, and really, without implying of
contradiction, or without destruction of the creatures; (which he most clearly
denies, and is most evidently, against all, the whole discourse of that
Father,) they must be therefore the body, and blood of Christ, sacramentally,
according to the doctrine of Saint Austin, in E^pist. 23.
his Epistle to Boniface: and according as Baptism, wherewith we are
regenerate, is called water and the holy Ghost; not as though the substance of
the Holy Ghost were a substantial part of the sacrament. And whereas the same
Father expressly delivers thus: ( Quemadmodum enim, qui est etc) for even as
the bread which is from the earth receiving the invocation of God, is now no
more common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, earthly and
heavenly: so our bodies, receiving the Eucharist, are not now corruptible,
having hope of resurrection. It is here manifest, that he will have the
Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Church, to consist of two things, one earthly,
the other heavenly, that is of bread* which is earthly, and of the earth: and
the heavenly which is heavenly, because sitting in Christ, at the right hand of
God his Father, and so according to the nature of Sacraments, it is easily
conceived how this Sacrament may consist of two things, one earthly the
element, and the other heavenly the thing of the Sacrament: (like as Baptism
consists of John. 3.
water, and the holy ghost) one signifying, the other signified; one present,
the other absent; one visible, the other invisible; one corporal; the other
spiritual; one touching the body, the other working in the soul: but it is
against the nature of Sacraments, to have them truly, and really, to consist
both of the things signified and signifying as together: by an essential and
real conjunction of presence; as is manifest in all other Sacraments with them:
but especially in baptism, in which a moral and vertuall union only, not a
real conjunction, and Although the substance of the holy Ghost by his infin^ty
and immensity be present in all things even in the water of baptism:
notwithstanding Formally, and in respect of this presence he works not in the
Sacraments.
presence of the holy Ghost in substance with water, and in water is necessary.
Moreover this holy Father affirms, that like as the bread of the Eucharist,
is not common bread, ^^ter invocation of God, so our bodies, receiving the
Eucharist are not corruptible, having hope of the resurrection: consider
courteous Reader how our bodies are by this Fathers saying incorruptible, to wit
by hope of Resurrection, not because they are by substance, or any intrinsecall
quality in them, made incorruptible, but only for the relation, and the
respect, to incorruption, which they shall put on, at the general
resurrection; even so, the bread and the wine, are still earthly, and after
consecration, they loose not their natures: as Dialog^ Impatib.
Theodoretus says: but, in respect of the sacramental conjunction, respect,
and relation which they have to Christ's body, and his blood, they are said with
the same body and blood to make the Eucharist: and so the Eucharist, to consist
only of two things, one Earthly, and the other Heavenly, as this Father
delivers: and this is that which Ciprian de unction Crismat. If this book be
his, the Adversaries use it.
Saint Ciprian says, (speaking how bread and wine are the body and blood of
Christ) different kinds (says he) and names induced to one essence, and the
signs signifying, and the things signified, called by the same names. And
saint Ambrose thus; Amb. lib. 6. ca. 1. de Sacram.
therefore for a similitude, thou receiuest the sacrament, but obteinest the
grace, and virtue of the true nature.

I will yet, with thy patience, (courteous Reader) add one sentence, of an
Africane Father, in his book de fide ad Petrum, which book, many assign to
Saint Augustine, but the Author is Fulgent. de fide ad Petrum. c. 19
Fulgentius, an Ancient Father and Saint, ( firmissime tene etc) hold most
firmly, neither in any sort doubt of this, that the only begotten Son of
God, taking our flesh upon him, did offer himself, as a sweet smelling
Sacrifice to GOD; to whom, and the Father, and the Holy Ghost, the Prophets,
the Patriarchs, and Priests, in the old Law, Sacrificed brute Beasts, and to
whom in the new Testament, now, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, the Holy
Catholic Church, throughout the universal World does not cease, in Faith,
and Charity, to offer the true Sacrifice of Bread and Wine: in those carnal
Sacrifices, there was a figuration of the flesh of Christ, which he should
offer, and of the blood which he should shed, for the remission of our sins:
in this sacrifice, there is a thansgiuing and a remembrance, of the flesh,
which he has offered, and of the blood which he has shed for us: thus he,
describing the faith of the Apostolic Church in his time, and of the Reformed
English Church now.

Weighing all these authorities with infinite like, which may be brought out
of all Antiquity, I have greatly meruailed how Transubstantiation has crepte
so far into the Church, as to have the same defined in so great a Council,
as that of Laterane was: doubtless, it is to be imputed to some hyperbolical
speeches, of certain Fathers; and to that disposition of all sorts of people,
who (like as the Exodus 32.
Jews in the wilderness,) desire some visible God to go before them, whom
they might adore as present, and invoke, and offer sacrifice unto him: but
doubtless most of all, it is to be attributed to the pride of the Roman
Bishops, in whose Sees the mystery of iniquity has been ever working more or
less, within some small space after the Apostles times, that thereby the
Prophecy of two Apostles 2. These. 2. et Apocal. 17.
S. Paul, and S. John, might take place: and Rome with her spiritual whor^
domes might apostatate from Christ, and fornicate with the Kings and Nations of
the world: and that of Christ be fulfilled, that when the Son of man
comes, he should hardly find faith upon earth. It cannot be doubted, but
that there have been always some, still succeeding the Ancient Fathers; such
as Bertram, Berengarius, Scotus, Wallafrid, Alfrike Archbishop of York in his
Epistle to Wolstane, who more or less, have written against
Transubstantiation: the books of whom, as well as of diverse others, we may
think have been suppressed, as well as that many others for the supporting,
of Transubstantiation, and of many other Popish Positions, have been devised,
by some Popish Monks, of the Roman Church, before the Art of printing was used
in Europe, or the West. I have lately perused, the painful, and commendable
labors, of one Master James in a certain book of his, in which out of the
works of the Pontificians themselves, he has showed, a 187. Treatises, to
have been counterfeited, and set forth in the names of Ancient fathers: and
out of my small reading I am assured, he might have added many more which may
be proved alike counterfeit, out of the confessions of the Papists themselves;
whereof when I spoke unto him, he told me, that there was above 300, or 400.
more treatises, which with like probable reasons, will be hereafter showed to be
supposititions: One thing, I have specially noted, that the most pregnant
authorities, which are commonly brought by the Pontificians, for confirmation
of their errors, are, for the most part, taken out of the supposititious and
counterfeit works of the Fathers. Here, in this place upon this occasion of
their counterfeiting fathers, I will tell you, of a certain devised Miracle
(devised for their transubstantiation) which was carried up and down this
Kingdom, by some Ignatianed Priests, some two years since. A certain Church,
(says the relation) with all that was within it, with the very Tabernacle, and
tower it self of the sacrament was consumed with fire, (the Sacrament only,
remaining untouched, and hanging in the air, until, that an Altar, being by
order of the Bishop of the place erected, and a Priest appointed, to say mass
under it, the same Sacrament of it self, descended down, upon the Altar:) (but
mark, what is delivered also, in the same relation) and forsooth also at time
of the elevation, when the priest, that said Mass, elevated that host then God
(which he had My master valques in Rome taught, (and it is the opinion of
diverse Spanish Divines) that Christ is truly and really produced by as many
new and several substa^tiall act ons productions, and makings as there be
consecrated Hosts in the world: otherwise said he (and that most truly)
tra^substantiation cannot be defended.
made and consecrated) the miraculous host, hid it self, and could not be
seen, till after elevation; when it showed it self again as before, hanging in
the air: this, is the substance, of that miraculous narration, if I do not
misremember, but, for the name, either of the city, where the miracle was
wrough, or of the name of the city of the Archbishop, who was sent unto, upon
the appearing of the miracle, I do not remember; neither could I, when I read
the narration, twice or thrice seriously over, think in what country those
cities should stand; neither could any of the three Ignatianed Priests, who
were in the house, conjecture where the Cities should stand: And the names of
the Cities, were so obscure, that (I protest) I could hardly carry them out of
the Chamber, where I read the narration. I was some year since at my going
over into Flanders very inquisitiue, of this miracle (because, as the Priests
said, the miracle came from out of Flanders, or France, from some of the
Ignatians there) but I If any one shall say, Christ is in penitrals (in Pixes)
or if any one say lo he ere is Christ (at Brussels) lo there is Christ (at
Louain) do not believe them says Christ, for many falls Christ's shall arise.
Mat. 24. Mar. 13.
could not by any means possibly hear, any the least news thereof; by which
I esteemed it as a mere tale (like those of Brussels, and Louaine) as I indeed
suspected also so much, when I read it, though the three Ignatianed priests
could not endure to hear any doubt to be made thereof, because both they, and
their great Family, in which they were resident did believe it. Vouchsafe O
Savior, to open their eyes, that they may understand, how thy infinite love
did appoint and ordain, at thy last supper, a venerable sacrament, and a most
holy commemoratiue Sacrifice, as all antiquity and the true Catholic Church,
has ever taught: but not The superstitions Mexica^s were accustomed the eve of
their God Vitzilpuitzli to make a massy image of wheat, honey and the herb blit
mixed together like the wodden image of their God in the Temple: the women also
made certain bones, and pieces of paste, the which with their Massy image
after diverse inuocations and prayers of their Priests over and upon them,
having first carried them up and down in procession they did eat with
dreadful and horrible reverence; believing the same to be the very flesh and
bones of their God Vitzilpuitzli. Botero: Relationi universally. part. 4. lib.
2. fine.
acomestible God, not a Visible God, not a Sensible God, not a tractable God,
proposed as thy divine majesty it self to be adored, inuocated: who wet to
ascend up to heaven, and not to be found here, or there in the desert, or in
the secrets of houses, upon earth (as at Brussels, Louane, etc (vntilthy
glorious appearing, in all majesty, with millions of all Angels: and if your
humanity, and Majesty, bad intended to have remained lying in the Sacrament,
where you should need bearing up: and lying in the sacrament, (not able to go
it self) should need security, as locking up under lock and key: need adorning
with gold silver, and precious stones, to trim you up, thereby to procure
devotion: Math. 26. Mar. 14.
how could you have said, to your Apostles, and in them to us: the poor, you
shall have always with you: but me you shall not have always with you? Good
Jesus, if you were truly, really, and transubstantially, to remain in the
Sacrament, how should you not be always with us? yea, and in more need of our
help, of oil, and lights to burn before you, of lock and key to defend you,
of Tabernacles made of gold and silver to bear you up, and to lodge you, etc.
then the poorest lazare, that is, who more or less, can help himself?

No, no, sweet Jesus, you were not to remain in this sort under such sensible
signs. A Sacrament, a divine Sacrament you instituted, and even as you told,
John. 3.
Nicodemus, and in him, all, that no man, unless he be borne again of water
and of the holy Ghost, should enter into the kingdom of heaven, (not as though
the substance of water should be regenerated in them, or transubstantiated into
them, nor their souls be sanctified, with the substance and the essence of the
holy Ghost; In whose divine person, there is nothing which is not an infinite
substance, and an infinite essence) but that the regenerate should be washed
with water outwardly, and their souls be inwardly sanctified with graces of
the holy Ghost: so also in this your divine Sacrament, all the faithful, were
with their mouth to eat corporally the elements of bread and wine, and their
souls to be inwardly fed, and sanctified by the graces of your body and blood
efficaciously working in them. And seeing the adversaries great Champion
Harding in his answer to Jewels challenge. page 139.
Doctor Harding, commends and produces to prove the Roman presence in the
Sacrament, the similitude, wherewith Martin Bucer in comment. in 16. Math.
Bucer used to express the manner of Christ's presence, and how his body
works those graces in the souls of worthy receivers: I will (it being as
fit as similitudes use to be) here use the same: ( vt sol vere in vno loco
coeli visibilis, circumscriptus, etc. Even as (says he) the visible Sun is
truly circumscribed in one place of heaven, and yet, as present in his beams,
is truly and substantially exhibited throughout the world: So the Lord,
although he be circumscribed in one place of the arcane and divine heaven, that
is, of the glory of his Father: notwithstanding by his word and sacred
Simboles truly as whole God and Man; he Observing this sentence out of Bucer,
may not Parsons his calumniating spirit, be called in question, who reports
that Martin Bucer should affirm to the Duke of Norfolk (who asked his opinion
of the real presence) that if all the Evangelists had written were true, then
Christ's body must needs be there: what presence he taught, you have here
heard by himself confested, and by Harding approved: but Parsons brings his
answer to the Duke, as though that worthy man had doubt^d of the truth of th
Evangelist, a manifest ca^umny as you here see: but Parsons is sul of such
stuff.
is as present exhibited, in the sacred Supper, and for that really,
substantially: which presence the mind does not, less certainly acknowledge,
believing these words, and simboles of the Lord, then the eyes see, and have
the Sun presentially demonstrated and exhibited by the corporal light. This
is a hidden thing, and of the new Testament; a thing of faith; therefore hither
are not to be admitted cogitations of the presentation of a body, which is
consisting after the manner of this passible and fluxible life; we must simply
adhere unto the word of our Lord, and faith must yield supply to the defect of
senses: thus far that learned man: and I wish the Reader to observe the
simplicity of Doctor Harding, who produces this place against Bishop lewel,
as proving the Roman transubstantiation. It proves indeed, that Christ in his
graces is truly and exhibited to the worthy receivers of the Sacrament, which
the Church of England in her I^yturgie, and articles of the convocation,
constantly with all the ancient Church Catholic delinereth. O how happy had it
been for Christendom, if learned men leaving off too deeply, to search into
this dread. full mystery, had with a Christian simplicity, applied themselves
only to the devout and frequent use of the same, and not so peremptorily to
have defined Christ, really and corporally to be present, either by impanation,
as Rupertus Abbot, or consubstantiation, as the Lutherans, or
transubstantiation, (which is most improbable: and against the very light of
all antiquity) as Pope Innocent and his I ateranists: but such is the pride of
the Roman Bishops, all their Doctrines forsooth must be uncontrollable all
their uses vnreprehensible, all their sentences vnappellable: but if they would
have vouchsafed to have squared their faith to the ancient Church, they would
have persuaded and inculcated the reverent and devout often receiving of it, as
of a divine Sacrament: but as for the manner of Christ's presence, (seeing his
Majesty has not more expressly delivered it, then as in a Sacrament) they
would have been reverently silent. But the Apocalip. 17.
Cup of abominations, was to come from Rome; for which one day, she will be
consumed and destroyed, even by those Kings and Kingdoms who have been drunk
with the Cup of her fornications and abominations.

The seventh Motive.
ANother Motive with me, and very forcible, The seventh Motive.
is their intolerable, or rather execrable abuse in their vain indulgences,
the which being void of all foundation in holy Scripture, are nothing at all,
to be grounded See ^ajetan. lib de Indulgent cap. 1. Roffensis consutat.
assert. Lutheri Act. 18. Alphons. aduersus hereses. verb indulgentia.
upon any Apostolical tradition, or authority of ancient Fathers. Those
pardons lay as hidden, and little regarded until that profane Pope Boniface
the eight, (of whom his predecessor Celestine, reputed by the Romanists for a
Saint prophesied, that as he had entered like a Fox, so he should live like a
Lion, and die like a Dog, as accordingly it fell out) did by his impious, and
superstitious Bulls give pardons, to the visiters of Rome in the years of
Iubilies, Platina in vita Bonifa.
appointing the same, to be kept every hundredth year, (although they are now
ordained to be kept every five and twenty, by Sixtus the fourth, as a little
before they were kept every fifty year, by the ordinance of Clement the
sixth,) and in the same his Bulls did cast abroad the dregs of the filthy Cup of
his abominations: I call them dregs of the Cup, because being so injurious to
the death and passion of Christ, so perniciously overthrowing all discipline,
and as a canker destroying good life, that I can hardly think of a name, vile
enough for them. Dregs they are, therefore, because partly founded upon the
imperfect and impure defects of sinful men, of whom there was never yet found
one without many sins, or so perfect that he could Psalm. 48.
make redemption for himself, much less for his brother. Dregs, because this
treasure, upon which papal Pardons, are grounded, is blasphemously compounded,
jointly of the infinite merits of Christ and his Saints: they seem to
acknowledge Christ's merits, to be inexhaustible and infinite, and yet they will
needs have compartners with him, as Saint Laurence, Saint Paul, etc. in the
founding of this Pontifician treasury: Dregs and most vain dregs, because
this treasury is founded upon the actions and merits of Saints, not as they
were meritorious, for so say they, they are rewarded in their own persons, but
as they were satisfactorious forsooth: (as though an action, in that it is
painful, may not be, and is not also meritorious according to their own
principles,) and therefore, because there were some Saints, who had more
satisfactions then their sins required, (as though every sin, though in
Saints, had not an infinite malice, according to their own principles, and
every action, in that it is satisfactorious according to their own principles
also, had not a finite, and a limited virtue) these their satisfactions
remaining in the Popes Vatican treasury, he may dispense thereof, to whom he
shall think meet. What need then of the pecuniarie tax of the Apostolical
Chancery, or penitentiarie, if there be such a treasury? yes, that is to fill
the purse, but not to enrich the spiritual treasury of merits of Saints: and
rather to buy some of them which are inexhaustible. I demanded not long since
of the M. G. B.
Archpriest that was, upon what authority of Scripture, the Pontifician
treasury of Indulgences was founded: considering seriously, he produced that
of Ad Colless. 1.
Saint Paul, (adimpleo ea quae desunt, etc. I fulfill those things which are
wanting of the passion of Christ, for his body, which is the Church. I replied
that according to the exposition of ancient Fathers S. Paul was said to fulfill
what was wanting of the passions of Christ, because Christ was to suffer in his
members until his Gospel was peaceablye planted: and therefore the Act. 9.
passions of Christ's Saints were called the passions of Christ, and I added
that it was mere blasphemy to say, that Saint Paul added any sufficiency to
the passions of Christ, as though they were not sufficient in themselves: this
and some like replies, he took so hamously (for he is exceeding troubled, if
you seem to call in question any other Popish error, then that which is
contained in the Popes Breuia. Paull. 5. contra iuramcatum fidolitatis.
Breefes against the oath of allegiance) that since that time I never had any
conference at all with him, and whosoever shall confer with him shall find
little profit thereby, for he is a man who can endure no replying. A just
Pithagoras, ipse dixit. Again dregs; because whereas the Popes protend by them
to deliver ( a pena and culpa) from sin and pain, they deceive the simple,
for they themselves teach, that pardons do deliver only from pain or
punishment, but they must forsooth needs here also equivocate, and that in
their holy Bulls, to make their merchandise more sailable: and yet perhaps the
ancient Bonif. apud Platin. in vita.
deuisers of Pardons and most expressly Boniface the 8 did hold that they did
deliver from sin also, for their most express words be ( a pena and culpa)
from pain or punishment and sin; but now they are refined forsooth, and they
do deliver only from any pains, whether already enjoined, or to be enjoined, or
to be suffered in fiery Purgatory, but not from sins.

Dregs, for where as they all generally teach, that as they are like in
efficacy and virtue as they are in sound, so they do give plenaries, and most
full plenaries of Pardons, Indulgent. concess ad in stant. collegij. Anglica.
for very trifles and toys; and I could not but think my self to trifle the
time, if I should stand to set down any of their particulars herein,
especially of those most large vain pardons, which the late Empress, mother
to this Emperor, obtained for her self and all others, unto whom she should
vouchsafe to bestow for a favor one of her silly granes of glass or horn: I
my self had some forty of them by that Empresses own hands delivered unto me
as a special Jewel. One thing I note in one of their Pardons obtained by the
English College, that whosoever will obtain the same, 13. Pardon.
must say the Letanies before God, or some Image; they well make a distinction
betwixt God and the Image, for as Lactantius long ago said, where an Image is
set up to be worshipped, God cannot be there.

Dregs, and most vain dregs, because these pardons, are tied to little
granes of glass or horn, etc. so that if a man call upon the name of Jesus
devoutly at the hour of death, he shall have a plenarie, (provided he have an
English grain) I call it not a dregge to say, that whosoever calls upon the
name of Jesus, at the hour of death, beleleeuing in him as in his redeemer, by
that says which works with, and in charity, that he shall thereby have
remission of all his sins in Christ, and consequently of all pains; for (
exempto reatu, eximitur and pena) the guilt of sin being taken away, the
punishment is taken away also: as ancient Tertul. de baptismo. cap. 5.
Tertullian pronounces. But I call it a vile dreg to say that such a one shall
have remission of all pain, provided he have a grain (a very character of the
beast) as though Christ's passion were to work by grains. The Popes trea surie
indeed may, but not Christ's passion, which works no otherwise then by faith
and love, in his word, and his holy Sacraments by him expressly instituted, and
not by man devised. I noted not long since, how Ignatius the Parent of the
Novel society, (unworthily called of Jesus) is painted upon his deathbed,
breathing out the name of Jesus, but to assure us all, that he escaped
Purgatory, it is expressed in the same pictures, drawn according to his life
written by Ribad. in vita Ignat. and his pictures according to the same.
Ribadinera an^ Ignatian, that he died not, without a plenarie indulgence:
belike he, who is already beatified by Paul the fifths authority, and shall
doubtless ere it be long, be sainted, when the Ignatians shall have provided
money enough for the Charges of canonization, had not satisfaction enough for
himself when he died, and therefore had part of the Roman treasure given him:
but when he is sainted, he will have such store of merit and satisfaction
(having gotten it in heaven belike) that there is no doubt, but he will greatly
add, to the treasures of the Church: and this addition had been made long
before this, if diverse thousands of Masses offered for his canonization to a
certain Popes Nephew, could have procured It is a complaint which I and diverse
others have often heard from the Ignatians, perhaps the purse for good uses
posted up and down, is intended for these charges.
the same. But* want of money is the cause why he is not, yet sainted, as many
of themselves have complained: and I suspect, that the time of his sainting
does approach, because now the Ignatians begin every where, to broach abroad
those co^mentitious wonders, the which less then some two decades of years
ago, were scarce known or not to be heard of in Rome. But Saint Richard
Holdcorne, and Saint Henry Garnet have already greatly increased this
treasure, for they did great satisfaction, dying as glorious Martyrs: and how
glorious and potent a martyr Saint Henry Garnet is you may gather, by the
picture of the strawface, which they have procured to be drawn of him beyond
Seas: in which his face is drawn, as if it had appeared in the straw most
shining with a crown upon his head, (to show perhaps he is a king in heaven)
with a star in the forehead (to associate him perhaps with the twelve stars
of the Apoc. 12.
Apocalips, signifying either the twelve Patriarchs or the twelve Apos^es) with
a Cherub also, (to show perhaps that he is assumpted, to the second quire of
Angels, of the intelligent Ch^rubins,) but they should rather have exalted him
to the Seraphins, for surely he had more good will for the Popes cause, then he
had learning to defend the Popes Monarchy, as it was evident at his trial
when he gave not satisfaction as was expected. For my part I greatly lament the
man's case, knowing that he was otherwise of a civil conversation, although not
deserving the applause which is now given him, his conversation being very
ordinary, and himself much given to drink hot Sacks, (of which also he took
very plentifully the day before his death, as very honorable persons do
testify) a liquor not fit for such as live with ease (studying little, and
praying little) and have saturitie of bread, and converse much amongst women:
but he is with his Judge, and has received accordingly as he was found going
hence either good or bad, and if his repentance were sincere, doubtless he
has found mercy.

Again dregs, because this their Papal Antonine a Saint with the^ holds
that the Pope by his absolute power can deliver all souls out of Purgatory.
Anton. 3. titulo. 22. cap. 5.
Monarchy of the Pope over the souls in Purgatory, is not to deliver the^ there
out by way of impetration or intercession only, but by way of suffrage, and
just exchange by paying pain for pain, debt with debt, the pain of souls,
with the pain of Christ, and his Saints; and yet I call these dregs, because
as it seems few Pontificia^s, do believe them, to be of like force, as they
sound: for the most of the^, after they have procured trentals of Masses upon
trentals for their departed friends souls, yet still they remain in doubt of
their friends states, and do procure new Masses upon Masses. Doubtless it were
good his holiness would determine what number of Masses is sufficient (bing
accompanied with his powerful grains) to deliver a soul out of Purgatory, as
well as he determines, what number and manner of miracles are sufficient, for
the inrolling one into his Calender of Saints, for otherwise the judicial and
discreet Pontifician will easily grow to suspect, that neither Mass nor grain
are of so great validity, and valor, as is pretended, if after so many of the^
celebrated for one soul, yet still more are required. Surely Robert Parsons
who died not long ago in Rome, had one of these grains and plenaries for you
shall seldom hear any Ignatian (according to their fashion for others) pray
for the rest of his soul: perhaps they repute him a Saint as some seemed to
do in Rome, who got some of his hair, to keep it for a relicke, (therein
some what more wise then a certain person within this City, of no very good
name, who washing (the night before his death) Roberts the Monks feet lately
executed at Tiborne, pared off, some of one of his nails, to keep the same
for a great relicke) but Robert Parsons, as his life and conversation, was but
ordinary, not passing virtuous in any respect, as all indifferent persons will
say who have conuersed with him, so his end was but ordinary, in respect of
Sanctity, and in some respect not like a Saint, because as I have been
credibly informed, by those that were there at his death, he talked idly, and
raued some whole days before his end, (a thing though very ordinary with such
as dye of burning fevers as it is reported he did) yet not usually in Saints:
and it is thought, that his sickness, first grew upon him, for that there was
a question made, about the having his books examined in the inquisition, and
it had so been, if their great Cardinal Bellarmine, with Aquauiua their
General, had not stood for him, as is reported. But, to return to indulgences,
it seems, that Popes themselves have little better esteem of them then
dregs, who make such hauock of them. Great is that privilege of the
Carmelites, who have obtained of some holy Pope or other, that no one of their
order, shall abide longer in purgatory, then until the next saturday after
their death. This their privilege was publicly defended in Paris, in the
year of our Lord 1601. by James Rampont a Carmelite, under the moderation of
their most wise and learned Master Bartholmew Girart a Nauarricke as Mounsieur
Pierre Moulin delivers in his defense of his Majesty's Pierre du moulin en sa
defense Article vingtvniesme.
most Christianlike and learned premonition to all Christian Princes. As
liberal, if not more liberal, was Innocent the fourth, who granted to all
such, as fought by his authority, and command, against Conradus, forgiveness
of all their sins, not only for themselves, but for their friends also, as
Paris. in Henrico 3. ad ann. 12^1.
Matthew of Paris records: like was the great liberality of Pope Epist.
leodien. contra Paschale^
Paschall to the Earl of Flaunders, if he would upon his commandment,
despoile and afflict the Church, and Clergy of Leedes, for joining in true
obedience to their lawful Emperor Henry the fourth, with innumerable such
like dregs, have Christian People and kingdoms, been bewitched, since the
time of the Devils rage and losing. Who can sufficiently deplore, the miseries
of these times? Who will not cry out? O manners, O Times! and bewail these
crooked and distorted souls of men; bewail such Marchandizing and traffic
of souls, which is now grown so usual, that at Rome, there is a book
printed, called the Liber intitulatus Taxa cancellariae. seu penitentia.
Apostolicae.
tax of the Apostolical penitentiary; in which book, there are taxes for
dispensations, for absolutions of all sorts, and according to the greater or
lesser difficulty, of the dispensation and absolution, greater or lesser is the
mony-taxe; for money is all in all and all is vendible at Rome for money, God,
Altars and all, as Baptista Mantuanus long ago deplored: yea and Berv. de
considerat. ad Eugen. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Saint Bernard, challenges Eugenius Pope thus. Give me but one, in all that
populous City of Rome, who gave consent to thy election, to be Pope, but either
it was for present payment or for hope of pa^ment. If so o holy B^rnard, then
hardly was Eugenius an Apostolical Pope: for if Simon, who would only have
bought for money, power to give the holy ghost, lost all the lot and part he o
Acts. Apo. c. 8.
had with Christ, as that Peter said, which could not deceive: then Eugenius,
who really came into the Papacy, by Simony (as almost all others now do, as
both Heaven and earth will witness) has no lot, no part, ( in sermon isto,)
(says Ibidem.
Peter) in this speech, in this Faith and Church of Christ; and so Eugenius no
Pope, and so neither his successors.

There was lately in this City, a very unlearned Franciscan Friar, who had
store of this treasure, out of the merits of his Parent Saint Francis* (for all
men who knew his conversation, will swear, he had no superfluity of merits of
his own, to bestow upon others, and yet he The worst Po^tifician Priests
commonly most ^ought after.
was daily more frequented, and visited, then the grauest in the prison where
he was, (for so it is that many English pontificians, seek such ignorant, and
intemperate Ghostly Fathers, as by experience, can have compassion of others
infirmity, be it in any sin of etc. This brother forsooth, had the life of
his holy Father, he had also certain girdles with certain knots upon them;
the which, whosoever should wear, and devoutly say some certain prayers, upon
every Mark the Practices of this Pardonmonger:
one of those knots, he should for every one of them, have some great pardon by
the merit of Saint Francis; and by the wearing of the girdle, he should come
to Heaven, and should have so great a blessing, never to diesodain death. These
bauld pardons when I read in a copy out of his own hands, with astonishment I
admired thereat, and procured an Assistant in the house, to speak with him,
and to persuade him, to desist from selling such merchandise any longer: but I
profited nothing, for whenever, his sheep came to him, (not unlike those,
who in the field were wonted to hear his Father S. Francis preach, when men
neglected the same) he would still in steed of setting forth the infinite
merits of Christ's death and passion, inculcate, unto them the Merits of Saint
Francis, and of his miracles, and of the knots of his girdles, upon the which
holding them in his left hand, he would with his right hand point out the
attributes and perfections of them, not without the laughter of some of them
that have beheld, and contemned the man's superstitious folly. That this is
true, I appeal to the consciences, of such, who have often heard him, and who
have also sent him better Angels, for his girdles, then any he could give them:
God pardon him; and open his eyes, and convert him, to his mercy: if the man,
did not perniciously, still labor to bewitch others, with such trumpery, and
if he were not a most vehement enemy against the Oath of Allegiance (so
vehement that to my face he has judged me worthy to be burnt for my book of
the Oath of Allegiance) I would not so much as have once glanced at his
proceedings; but if he hold himself discontented, and if the glory of God
require it, there is much more behind, and he shall, if he desire it, drink
the dregs of his own cup, until he surfeit. But lea^ing to discourse
longer of this matter, I infinuate this one thing, that there are of my
acquaintance, some English pontificians, as worshipful, as ingenious, and as
zealous (yea too to zealous,) as the best of them, and yet as they have often
professed unto me, they could never understand, nor conceive, the mystery of
indulgences, which diverse have often labored to inculcate unto them. Jesus
vouchsafe it may be in the end for the salvation of their souls, and that they
may understand with what trumpery they are still pestered from Rome, and I
entreat the courteous and Christian Reader of these my Motives to pray for their
conuersions.

The eight Motive.
ANother Motive is their manifest abuse, in commanding and decreeing, the
public Liturgy of the Church, (in, and at which, with common consent, and
concording devotion, God is to be honored, by all sorts present) to be
celebrated, and done in tongues unknown to the Laity, which cannot, but be a
most intolerable and inexcusable abuse, to any one, who with an indifferent
eye, shall peruse the 14. Chapter of Saint Paul's first Epistle to the
Corinthians: where he so strictly charge (adding that 1. Corin. 14.
they are the Lords commandments) that Church, and in her all other Christian
Churches, that their public service and Liturgy, (which consist of preaching,
praying, exhorting, and ministering of the Sacraments) should be done to the
edification of the whole assembly: which he in that Chapter, most earnestly
and effectually, labors to show, could not be, if their public
preachings, exhortations, prayings, conferences, singing of Psalms and other
liturgicall actions, were performed in tongues, not known, nor understood by
the assembly, and especially, (to confound the R^mane tyranny, against the
Laity in whose ignorance their victory stands,) mark, those words of the
blessed Ibidem.
Apostle: But if thou bless in the spirit, (to wit in an unknown tongue.) he
that supplieth the place of the vulgar, how shall he say, Amen, upon thy
blessing, because he knows not what thou say? for thou indeed give
thanks well, but the other is not edified. Does he not in these words euince,
that in the service which is public, (especially in the commemoratiue
sacrifice, offered by all, and for all) such it ought to be, that the La^ty,
the Vulgar, may understand, and thereby be edified? and he expressly speaks
of edification, by understanding the service: and I challenge any adversary, to
show that the Apostle here speaks of edification, by dumb Rites,
Ceremonies, or unknown tongues: upon this Chapter of Saint Paul, the
Annotations in 14. 1. ^orinth.
Rhemists have made many impertinent Annotations, and those very long (for
that is their fashion, when they are in a Labirinth of difficulties, to make
many large windings, and turnings, either to confound the Reader, or else to
make him think they can say much, and so cunningly slide away) but if it
please the Courteous Reader to peruse them, he shall find, that they do not
cite, any one sentence of Ancient Father, Commenting upon this Chapter: their
consciences telling them, that by citing of the Fathers, they should therein
discover their own turpitude. For if it would have pleased them to have read
Saint Hierome, Saint Chrysostom, Theophilact, Haimo, yea Thomas Aquinas, and
all those Ancient Fathers, who have made Comments upon that Scripture, the
fourteenth of the first to the Corinthians, they would have seen their own
turpitude, discovered, and their mystery of unknown tongues, in public
service condemned; and that subverted, which most of them with other Roman
errors, swear to observe, and ke^pe in their ungodly oath made by their
vnpious, Pius the fourth Pope of that name.

But I must tell them also with their patience, that this their practice, is
against a certain Canon of their great and Admirable assembly of above a
thousand of Prelates under Innocent the third, (one. Later. c. 9
where it is decreed, and appointed, that where di^ers people had sundry rites,
and languages, there should be Priests provided, to minister them divine
service, according to their rites and languages; and in the end of the Canon
this reason of this constitution is added, as cause of the constitution it
self, that the Priests might preach and edify the people, ( verbo et exemplo)
with word and example. But the Roman Bishops, in practicing against this,
seem to imitate the old Roman Ambitious Conquerours; who in such lands as
they powerfully subdued, did egregiously endeavor to exile the ancient, and
natural tongues of the inhabitants, and to bring their own in use: being
wisely persuaded, that it is the politikest, most peaceable and surest way, to
obtain secure possession of the conquered. So these later Romans, in their
stiff and obstinate requiring, to have their language, reign in the divine,
and public service throughout all Churches of the West, what else do they
intend, but that the Pope may reign throughout all those Churches? which more
or less, through his excommunications, interdicts, promotions, presentations,
and through the imbecility of Princes, and the blind ignorance of Christian
people, he has conquered to his tyranny: Baptizing them after the name of his
See of Rome, Roman Catholics, not after the name of Christ, Christian
Catholics: for Christian is a name now out of use, unless it be in the
reformed Churches of Christ, where Christ is truly, and only honored and
glorified: but howsoever, the Popes tyranny, be applauded in service of
unknown tongues, doubtless the 1. Petr. 5.
Roaring Lion, laugheth thereat, to see by his institution, wars to be
proclaimed against Gods Scriptures, and all Antiquity; God to be deprived of
his Honor, (which consists in the understanding, service, and religion of
the heart: for he being a spirit, John 4.
in spirit and truth he must be adored) the Christian flock to be
dispoiled, of their spiritual devotion and comfort, which is not possibly to
be had, without the conceiving, and understanding of such things, by which the
spiritual comfort is to be brought and engendered in their souls. They pretend
forsooth that the mysteries of their Mass, will be had in greater admiration,
if they be not in a tongue understood, by the common people. Alas, how wisely?
for I hope, their people must understand the mysteries of the Mass, and
therein be instructed, as their Tridentine Catechism commands, and as the
Rhemists glory in their preface to the new Testament: and if they must be
instructed, to understand the Divine rites and Ceremonies; Why may they not be
permitted to have the service in a tongue that they do understand? Their
goodly argument, that some of the ancient Fathers, carried the mysteries of
the Church closely in the primitive days, falls of it self: for was not
that done in respect of the Infidels and Catechumens? but as for the faithful,
they all well knew that phrase ( norunt fideles) the faithful have known; and
they understood all the mysteries for the most part. The primitive Church,
practiced faithfully that of Christ, ( Mat. 8. Luc. 12
quod in aure etc) that which you hear in the ear, preach upon the tops of
houses: but although you were justly afraid to have your Mass mysteries
celebrated, in known tongues, in respect of infinite impertinencies, and
contradictions that are in it; why should you not suffer so much, as is read of
holy Scriptures in your Liturgies, to be read and song in tongues, known to
the Church? And what may be thought, that Christ's Apostles, would write their
Gospels, and Epistles, in the Greek tongue, (Saint Matthew in his Gospel, and
Saint Paul in his Epistle to his Countrymen, writing in the Hebrew tongue,
only excepted), but for that the Greek tongue, was most common, throughout
the East part of the world where Christian Religion was, first planted? And in
the Primitive Church al I desire the learned Pontificians to tell me whether
the Apo^riphall Liturgies of James, Basil, Chrisostom, Ambrose, yea of S. Peter
also (which they falsely pretend) were not written by them in the most vulgar
tongues used then in their churches? confess your tyranny O ye Romans and
abuse Gods Church no longer.
Church-seruice, was in this part of the World of Europe, and that of Asia for
most part in the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin tongues: because the same were more
or less common, where Christianity was first planted: as for other countries,
where the Gospel was preached: as first in AEthiopia: who is ignorant, but
that the Churches Liturgy, was from the time of the Eunuch, until this day,
in the Ethiopian tongue? Sclauonians had the like, Armenians the like,
Egiptians the like, Grecians the like, Latins the like, Hebrews the like: and
what doubt can be made, but that the Indian Conuerts by Saint Thomas had the
like? And wheresoever the Apostles planted any Churches, what question can be
made, but that they did observe the rule and 1. Corin. 14.
commandment of the Lord, to his Apostles, that every thing should be done
to edification, and that glorious prophecy should be fulfilled, every Philip.
2.
tongue shall confess to his name: yea, the very Forms of all
Church-seruices, do clearly show, that the People and Clergy were
answerablye to conioyne their prayers together, and to answer each other, as
it is delivered in the Constitut. Apostol. Clementis. Cirill in Catech.
mistagog. Justin. Apolog. 2. ad Anto^mum. liturgiae Iacobi. Chrisosto. Ambro.
Basil saepe.
constitutions of the Apostles, the old Liturgies, and other Ancient Fathers:
and what else did the coming down of the Holy Ghost in the forms of so many
fiery tongues, at Whitsontide, else portend and signify, but that every tongue
should confess the name of our Lord JESUS? and where this more meetely, then
in their public assemblies, where they were to honor GOD, and yield to each
other all spiritual Comfort, and consolation? which could not, nor cannot be
performed, in dumb and barbarous shows.

I cannot here omit to set down a point of simplicity of their great Doctor,
Doctor Harding, who answering an objection, made by D. Jewel out of Saint
Basil. Hexamer. hom. 4.
Basil, affirming that the people together, men, women and children made a
sound in their answers in the Churches, in the public service to God, like to
the sound of a wave, striking upon the Seabanks: This profound Harding answer
to Bishop Jewels challenge. page. 8.
Doctor would have Saint Basil understood only, of the peoples sounding the
word Amen: wisely insooth. Doubtless, the Doctor was in a dream, or else
forgot what Countryman Saint Basil was, or of what country people, that Father
speaks: e August. in Psalm. 16. expos. 2 Harding. supra.
if he had remembered Greece, or ever read any of the Greek Lyturgies, or seen
the Greek public service, which upon the day of Saint Athanasius, the
Grecians are permitted to celebrate in their own tongue, in Rome, he would
have well understood, that the Grecian Christians make longer answers and
responses, in the public Church service then Amen. But his answer to an
authority produced by that learned Bishop out of Saint Austen perhaps is
wiser; no insooth, more fond, hear it: ( Quid hoc sit, etc.) what this is
(says Saint Austen) after we have prayed to God to make us clean from our
private sins, we must understand, that we ought to sing as with humane
reason, not with voice as birds do, for Owsels, Popiniayes, Ravens, and Pyes,
and such like birds oftentimes be taught of men to sound they know not what:
thus Saint Austen. Now it is manifest that these words are to be taken, of
understanding what is sung: but what answers Doctor Harding to them? marry
thus: These words are to be taken of the understanding of the sense (says he)
not the tongue, which the service is sung in. Now, the Vicar of Saint Fools
should be his ghostly Father, were he living. How is this Rabby taken in his
folly? these words are to be understood, that the People must have
understanding, of the sense of the words, but not understand the words. Help
out your Doctor you of Doway: for doubtless he is grauelled: what would here
become of him, if more of the sentences of the ancient Fathers which comment
upon the 14. Corinthians first Epistle: had been by himself produced, and
other out of Saint Austen upon Genesis ad literam: he would doubtless have
run out of the field, or else have been stricken down to the ground,
especially if he had heard that miraculous voice from heaven, which Pius the
second Pope writes of. The Doctor was much delighted with visions in his life
time, and therefore I will now for his sake set one down for the Dowists to
demurre upon it. There was a great controversy betwixt the Pope and his
Cardinals, (as a Pius. 2. hist. Bohem. cap. 13.
Pope relates) whether the Morauians and the Russians converted to the
Christian faith, by Ciril, should be permitted to have the public Lyturgie,
and service in their known tongue or not. Their Apostle Ciril was earnest for
it, with some of the Cardinals: others contradicted it, which contradiction
miraculously was checked with a voice heard from heaven, speaking thus to them;
Let every spirit praise the Lord, and every tongue confess him: and so the
Pope with his Cardinals were by the Angelical vision, instructed how to
understand those Scriptures by the Angel cited, and thereupon gave way to
Cirils request; that the Morauians and Russians should have their public
service in their own tongue, which they have to this day: wherein they
doubtless find such a comfort, that by no means they will relinquish that
holy use, though some have often attempted against it. I have observed how
since the English Pontificians have had their Primers set forth both in English
and Latin together, that they do far more willingly, and more devoutly read
their prayers in the English tongue, the^ in the Latin: protesting that they
receive far greater comfort thereby; wishing also that the public
Church-seruice might to their like comfort be proposed in that tongue which
they understood. Before God of his mercy, first touched my heart to liste^ unto
his gospel, I would sometimes out of a contemptuous kind of curiosity (where I
was not known) hear a piece of a Sermon in some of the English Churches here
in London: but by no means would I stay or listen to the hearing of the singing
of their Psalms, (for I did both loath and detest them) but when God vouchsafed
to touch my heart, first with consideration of the Roman abuses, both for
doctrine and discipline, I began sometimes to commune with my self, whether
perhaps, the English Church Lyturgie were not calumniated? Whereupon I would
sometimes more considerately, and (where I was not to be known) begin to give
more careful, listening unto the English Preachers, and also most curiously
observe the manner of the singing in the Churches: both which at very first me
thought were performed with that simplicity, integrity, and gravity, that I
began to think thus: perhaps God is amongst them; but when upon often, and
further more curious observations, I found that all their service (except some
few prayers, and those very holy also) was composed out of the infallible word
of God, his holy Scriptures: I resolved that the same must needs be good, if no
essential part of service, were otherwise wanting. And when I found also that
the Preachers continually did inculcate to their Auditors, integrity of
conscience, and holiness of conversation with necessity of good works, and of
that faith which Ad Galat. 5.
works by charity to salvation: I well and clearly perceived how the Church
of England was most egregiously calumniated by the Roman Doctors. And when I
found also the ministration of the two principallest, (and singularly so
termed) Sacraments: to wit Baptism, and the holy Eucharist, so sincerely and
Euangelically, and so void of all superstition, ministered in their Churches,
and withal found that Confirmation, Penance, Marriage, Orders, Visitation of
the sick, were for the substances thereof, religiously used in their Churches,
I was not a little edified. But that which most edified me, was to observe, how
in their public Lyturgies, their minds seemed to me, (or at lest that they
might) to concur jointly with their tongues, and with their religious and
pious sounds, to beat the gates of heaven, and beg mercy at his hands
only: whom, with the most blessed Father, and the holy Ghost, I saw only
worshipped with divine worship in their Churches. And although I wanted in some
sewer that lowly, humble, and religious carriage, which the place, the manner
of prayers, and assembly required; especially in some of the young sort: yet in
the ministers themselves, and the matrones with many aged men, and others of
riper years, I saw them often kneeling with great devotion and attention to my
great edification. There I observed not that drowsy oscitancie, leaning, and
yawning, which is so frequent in the papisticall Churches, yea even amongst the
Bern. in coena Domini. cap. 3.
religious Monks. There I observed not the impudent and shameless attendings,
courtings and obseruings of fine dames within their Churches, the which how
intolerable it is in the papisticall Churches, especially in Italy and at Rome
it self, I refer to the judgment of all indifferent trauailers: doubtless
their Churches there be still repleate, with 2 Pet. 2.
adulterous, lascivious, wanton, and incestuous eyes. Observing these things: O
how happy thought I, art thou O England, if as thou enioyest the light of
Christ's Gospel, so also thou would more and more by holy and pure
conversation, labor to excel the Churches of Sodoma, and Gomorha, where all
impure Idolatry, and abominations do reign? Here I observed also, the
glory of God ever commended. Faith, Hope, and Love in Jesus Christ,
incessantly inculcated, the Fathers of the ancient Church reverently cited, the
memories of the most blessed Virgin Mary, and Christ's Apostles reverenced and
honored: yea in their public Prayers, and Sermons their virtues and noble
acts, preached, commended, inculcated, to be followed, and imitated: The
burial of the dead, very religious and pious, and altogether Apostolical:
which observing, me thought these men sure do strive only for truth,
rejecting all uncertain traditions. And then with all I could not, but
inwardly be moved in my very soul, against Stapleton, Sanders, Allen,
Parsons, Bellarmine, and other like Pontificians, for their horrible
calumniations, against the Church of England, and the government thereof, as
though they buried their dead like dogs; persuaded not their people to good
life, but only to faith; that they ministered their Sacraments, very
irreligiously, with such like imputations, all which I found to be mere
calumniations. And I found the same Church so Apostolical, so Christian, that
me thought I saw the very Primitive faith, and practice of the Apostles, and
the very rites of their Church to be in it observed. And in these observations
I began more inwardly to be moved, because as my knowledge and inclination to
allow of the Church of England, and to abhor the Roman heresies and abuses
increased: so also my soul increased in the love of God, detestation of sin,
and avoiding the occasions of sin, the loathing of this life, and an earnest
desiring to be with Christ: whom (since my renouncing of Papistrie,) with the
Father, and holy Ghost (as my soul, evidently testifies unto me) I do most
sincerely love and esteem above all things in this world, and so fully with my
whole soul and heart, that me thought I could comfortably and confidently say
unto it with the words of the holy Prophet, Psalm. 114.
( conuertere, etc.) my soul be couerted into thy rest, for the Lord has done
well to thee. And I could not, me thought, hinder the working of God within me,
nor refuse that testimony of S. Paul: the holy Ad Romans 8.
Ghost gives testimony unto our souls, that we are the children of God, yet
so if we suffer with Christ, that we may also reign with Christ.

The ninth Motive.
I Should here add somewhat largely of their pernicious The ninth Motive.
doctrine, of equi^ocation, which has been another, no small Motive with me
for my conversion: which doctrine the Ignatians have specialy set a foot, at
least in practice within this kingdom: they forsooth, who will not permit that
the Scriptures of God, should be promiscuously read by the vulgar people, have
in their vulgar language, in Pamphlets (rather libels being without name)
dispersed throughout this kingdom, the pestiferous doctrine of equivocation,
with their strange and paradoxicall half propositions, and Amphibologies:
propositions (forsooth out of their Treatise of equivocation written or
published by Henry Garnet.
Ignatian Logic) half written, half spoken, half concealed: and why, bring
they not in also as well propositions of a triple difference? whereof one part
may be spoken, a second written, a third concealed, and not uttered? and why
not propositions of a quadruple difference, as part written, part spoken, part
by signs, and part by concealment? and so make mental, verbal, written, and
dum or silent proposition all in one, to set up their vain doctrine of
equivocation. Some ingenious Pontificians of my acquaintance there are, who do
what you can, yet you cannot drive this doctrine of equivocation into their
heads, but such as have been brought up under the Ignatians, and are devoted
unto them, they have their lesson at their fingers ends. Not long since there
was John Koome.
one of these Ignatian Priests, who being examined by the Archibishop of
Canterbury not long before his death, did not only deny himself to be a
Priest, but also by religious oath, did forswear the same: being challenged
for it, he excused the same by the art of equivocation, stoutly auouching that
he had been so taught by his master, a reader of the society of Ignatius, and
indeed it is the doctrine almost of them all, that any proposition whatsoever
is or may be allowed, by the art of equivocation, the same also may be
confirmed, and auerred true by religious oath: and yet this equiuocating
swearer so ready to forswear and deny his Priesthood was a most bitter enemy
against all such as would take or allow the taking of the oath of Allegiance
in any sense whatsoever. I could produce many such examples of equiuocating
Ignatians, one I will not omit of a friend of the Ignatians, who wouldfaine
have been an Ignatian, before this, but that Master Strange the Ignatian
lately banished R. C. the common collector for Recusants by the art of
equiuocatio^ protested to certain Priests in the Clinke (coplaining of their
wants) the very day before the 1000, and certain 100 of pounds were taken from
him that he knew not in the world where to fetch 20 shall. this man had not
sorgotten his Accidence rule, huic habeo, non tibi, I dare avouch there is no
day passes, in which he does not religiously use this art. Some three days
since the 9. of January he has sent in writing an equiuocating super sedeas
that because he was the sick (with an il stomach for the oath of allegiance)
he would provide for the Clinke prisoners no longer
out of the tower, told him that his imperfections should not be laid upon
their order, being of such rare pharisaicall perfection forsooth. This man is
gracious with diverse worthy persons of the feminine sex, into whole favors,
he has wound himself, so greatly that he can obtain one of their favors to
wear next his skin, and over his whole body a whole week together, yea in
the time of his holy imprisonment to comfort his imprisoned corpse: Freshly upon
the discovery of the damnable powder treason, it was his chance to be taken,
and to be brought before the honorable Lord Mayor of London, by whom being
examined upon suspicion of his person, and religion, and asked whom he thought
to be head of the Church of England, without any difficulty, he answers thus,
the King: which his answer might well have deceived, that honorable person, if
he had not more narrowly, observed some other of his answers, in which he found
him faultering: and thereupon committed him to the Counter, where he staid not
long: he being afterward questioned withal, by some zealous Roman Catholics,
how he could without denial of his faith concerning their article of the Popes
supremacy, acknowledge the King to be supreme head of the Church: what?
replieth he peremptorily: I meant not the King of England, but the King of
heaven: (the truest word he ever spoke, for the King of heaven is indeed the
only supreme head of the Church of England) and he added that he thought in
respect of the dangers of the times, that he might justly use such
equivocation. Pardon me courteous Pontifician Readers, that I thus,
particularize this man (there is more in store) I do it only that our English
Ladies, and some worthy persons of the devout sex may know, what manner of
men those are, to whom they commit their secrets. And if he hereafter deal
with some of them, as he has already dealt with a very worthy Lady, (too
worthy for him or any other Pontifician Priest) they will have no great cause
of Comfort in him or his like: I could discipher the spirits of some other
equiuocating, and dicing western Priests (to conceal the rest) God turn
their hearts to consider the states in which they stand, and vouchsafe O
merciful Jesus in 1. Pet. 2.
whose mouth was found no guile nor deceit, rather to confound them, then
suffer them to defend their equiuocating practice by your most sacred doctrine,
and immaculate examples of your purest conversation.

The tenth Motive.
TO proceed, the tyranny, by which they deny The tenth Motive.
the indifferent reading of Gods holy Scriptures, in the vulgar tongue, is most
inexcusable: doubtless the cause is, they do fear the taxing of their most
manifest heresies, even by the simplest: I cannot blame them, for their
policy herein. For manifest experience teaches, that wheresoever the word of
God is translated into vulgar tongues, and the same devoutly read, there
popery still falls more or less, an invincible argument, that the spirit
wherewith the holy Scriptures were written, works in the humble readers. Have
ye forgotten ye Pontificians, that the Jewish Church, had the holy Scriptures
written, and read unto them in their vulgar tongue? why therefore shall the
Christians of the new Testament be debarred of the use of the same? are not the
holy Scriptures, their riches, their treasure, and the cause of all consolaion
to the devout readers? why do you not then permit unto them the use of that,
which is their own? but I must cry you mercy: for the Scriptures are only
the treasure of the Romans, and only as part of the Popes Patrimony, are at
his disposing: Would God also he would seriously peruse them and practice them,
for in them is his Religion condemned: if you say, they are abused, by some of
the simplest; and that promiscous reading of them breeds heresies: alas,
alas, as though the simple people were the Deuisers or Authors of many
heresies: how many heresies can you reckon, devised by such as understood none
of the learned tongues? and what if some do abuse the holy Scriptures? so
innumerable abuse pletures; innumerable abuse confession to horrible and
abominable proiects: innumerable abuse your Masses and indulgences: and what is
there, in the world, which is more abused, then the chair of Peter it self,
which is so continually bought and sold? What must we away with it therefore?
and is there no abusing of your voluminous decrees, decrees, your decrotals,
extrauagants, Clementines, etc? I) there no abuse of your Philosophical
learning in your Churches? What? must all things, that are abused my our Church
be removed? if so, doubtless, you would have a single-souled religion: for
then away with the pictures of God the Father, in the form of an old man:
which to my knowledge and experience, has possessed many in this kingdom with
the Anthropomorphitan conceive, as though In the same Pictures and many idle
aparitions: one I note in which it is expressly, that when Ignatius elevated the
Host, Christ apeared miraculously not in the Host: but over the Host, in
certain clouds in the form of a man. Apud Ribad.
God himself had limbs and true members may I not say that some of your
Ignatianed with Ignatius were so persuaded? in the Ribadiuer. lib. 1. cap. 7.
pictures of whose life, there is lately described, how the mysteries of the
blessed Trinity was revealed unto him, in which God the Father was portraited
like an old Man, with a Globe in his hand, and the holy Ghost drawn like a
Dove, and Christ Jesus with a Globe also in his hand. O Vanities, O horrible
abuses: O ye Ignatians; is this the mystery, of the most dreadful Trinity
revealed to your holy and beatified Father Ignatius? Doubtless the Devil
deluded him: and if, his Revelations from Christ, and Saint Peter; and his
Eleuations up in the Air, prove no sounder, they will prove but rotten and
superstitious ware.

But to proceed, if you fear seduction of your simpler Sheep in reading of
the Scriptures, why are not your learned Priests, more daily in them? Why have
they no set Lectures, upon them? Why are not your Divines, bound to study some
Comments upon them? The true cause is, your Spirits, your Traditions, which you
must not leave, (unless you leave Rome and her very word of God) agree not
together: yet for a fashion forsooth, the Scriptures must be read (as in Rome
and Spain) in your refectories: when your Scholars are at Dinner and Supper:
and somwhere, upon full stomachs (so full as short Commons can permit) after
Dinner and Supper, in one of your Seminaries, (for it is not used in all) and
then they must hear some quarter of an hours commenting, upon some piece of
scripture, (the study of one piece whereof requires a man's life) in which
exercise, how greatly your Priests profit, one who lately came from your Famous
Dowyan Seminary, will lively discover. It was my fortune lately to see, and
read a letter directed from this Priest, out of the North, unto another Priest,
remaining in this house with me: in which letter he excuses himself, with the
other Priest, his friend here, and defends (as well as he can) himself
from touch of inconstancy in friendship, which the other had objected unto him:
using these and the like words: do not think good sir, of me, as though I
were inconstant in my love to you, I am still the same, according as the
Hebrews 13.
Apostle says, Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day, and the same for ever which
application of Sacred Scipture, when I read, I could not but laugh heartily,
and I pitied withal, the state of the English Seminaries, and English Roman
Catholics: (for I was not then alienated from them in my heart) and I think
that whosoever shall read this, will easily observe what a profound
Scripture-Clerke he was; many such like Clerks there are in this Kingdom:
pardon me Courteous Reader, if I glaunce at one other, who has a good will:
for he will forsooth preach commonly every holy day in a certain Cathedral
residence of his. But his preaching is commonly out of the Legends forsooth, or
else out of the great looking glass of examples, for, as for scripture, he is
so penurious, that one day hearing of him preach upon the Gospel of Christ's
tempting in the wilderness, he cited a sentence or two of that days Gospel,
and both times broke Priscians head: but he scandalized as I think Speculum
magnum exemploris.
no man's head, there being scarce one, besides my self there, who understood
Latin, and such a good ^lde Harry perhaps y Math. 4.
as did think that the Scripture might use sometimes, false Latin for a
mystery. I would not glaunce at this man's insufficiency, but that he is so The
Pontifical Spirit of this man, you may gather by this: being in a Vitling
house upon Tower Wharfe and ready to depart the land (being banished with some
nine other Priests) he puts his Arm out of a window, and (contrary to the
liking of al his brethren) publicly and Bishoplike he blesses and crosses all
the people, which caused shame in some, and loud laughter in others.
egregious a Champion against the Oath, damning all that take it, yea and not
allowing confessions of those, who have gone to such Priests as allow it, he is
surely a very worthy Merchant to tell a fable to a Gentlewoman, but enough
hereof now all things have their seasons. But to conclude, this my Motive, it
has been by my self ever observed, that such as adict themselves to the
reading of holy Scriptures, are ever more or less inclining, to think well of
the reformed Churches, and of their doctrines, which are so lively delivered in
them: and out of my reading of holy Scriptures, which I have ever daily used
more or less, it has fallen out that I have many times contended (for
argument sake) against some doctrines and practices of the Roman Church, and
therefore it is, that the wise men's libeller charge) me with the spirit of
Contradiction: blessed be that spirit of contradiction, which has brought me
to be a child of adoption, as I humbly trust, and believe I now am. z 1. Peter.
2.


A second General Head of Motives out of their wicked Laws.
COnsidering, many and unjust Laws, unto which the Roman Bishops, have
against all Christian holy liberty, and to the subversion of many souls, and
the great dishonor of God, tied their followers: the which, as I have
oftentimes heretofore greatly admired, not seeing how they might be defended,
so God, now vouchsafing to open my understanding, I do greatly detest them.
For me to express all those which are both paradoxicall, and pernicious, were
too great a labor: I will therefore touch some few of them, which are in truth
very many and yet I marvel they are no more. Considering the pernicious, and
shameless Doctrine of Cardinal Bellar. lib. 4. de pont. cap. 5. lib. Pecog.
in recog li. de sum Pont. cap. 19.
Bellarmine, who both in his controversies, and in his recognitions reaches,
that although the Popes, should command any things in their Laws, as Virtues,
which are Vices: yet the whole Church, is bound, to obey the voice of their
pastor, and to receive the same vicious Laws, as if they were Laws of
Virtues; but, he will seem to mitigate this his strange position forsooth; by
adding that this his doctrine is to be understood of laws concerning doubtful
Acts, of Virtues, or Vices, not in Acts necessary, Thus he very wisely
breaths hear and cold together, and what Bellar. colume^. Ecclesie. et (...)
tempestutio Augustinus. ^^d^mi confutat. l Anti. p. 48.
O Bellarmine tell me, you that are by Andrew Eudemon your Cretensian Ignatian
brother, called the Pillar of the Church, and the Augustine of this our time:
cannot the infalliblenesse of the Popes Spirit, so guide, and assist him, that
he shall not err in proposing any universal law to the Church, the which,
she is bound to receive, as you say? And tell me O Ignatian pillar, what
mattereth it to salvation, or damnation, whether the things of themselves, be
necessary or not? if the Pope by his Commandment, make them so necessary as
the whole Church shall be bound under pain of mortal sin, and consequently
under pain of damnation, to receive them (though vicious) as you teach? alas,
how perplexed is the state of Pontificians; if this Bellarminian doctrine be
true? they must commit vice, to obey the Pope, and so be condemned therefore;
or else for the Popes sake, God will favor them so much as not to judge them
according to their works, but according to the Popes corrupt affection,
contrary to his general decree, delivered by his Ad Romans 2. and 13. and Psalm.
61. and Job. 34.
Apostle, that every man shall receive according to his works.

The first Law.
AMongst many of these Laws first occurreth to my mind, that, wherewith the
uncharitable Popes straightly charge, that Caput a vobis secundo, and cap.
sacris de sententia excomm. Council. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 2. and 6. Aqu. 3.
q. 79. art. 7. ad 2. Sotus. lib 9. de instit. q. 2. art. 2. ad 3.
the sacrifice of their Mass (the which they believe, to be the propitiatory
oblation, and self same Christ, which was sacrificed for the whole world, upon
the Cross) to be offered by any of their Priests, for any excommunicated
person, or by name for any Infidels, and Heretics, by them for such reputed,
whether they be subjects, or Sovereigns. A law and custom most contrary to
the nature of the propitiatory sacrifice of the Cross; the which as it was
once most sufficiently, and abundantly offered, for the redemption of all, so
it should be continually remembered, and faithfully believed for the salvation
of the whole Church of Gods Elect; yea, and most religiously to be inuocated,
and prayed unto, for the conversion, and salvation of all sinners whatsoever,
Turks, Jews, Heretics, or Infidels, for so much as may lie in us to do and
procure: considering that it is the holy 1. Tim. 2.
will of the most immaculate and pious sacrifice of the cross himself, that
all men should come, to the knowledge of his truth: for which cause also his
blessed Apostle, the vessel of election ordained, that obsecrations, orations,
postulations, and thanksgiuings, should be made for all Men, for all
Magistrates, and all such as are in Authority; and he gives the reason of
this his ordinance: because, as much, as in him is, God would have all men to
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his truth.

And although the Pontifician Remists Annotations in 2. Tim. 2.
Remists themselves, do vehemently challenge by these four different kinds of
prayers, that the whole order of their Mass is comprehended, and specially
distinguished; citing Aug. Epist. 59
Austens authority for the same: yet malice suffers them not, to see their
own errout, most clearly condemned in this ordinance of the holy Apostle:
(even as it is by themselves expounded) in which he expressly appoints, that
those four kinds of prayers (of which, the very second, the Annot. ibidem.
Remists themselves eagerly expound, of that part of their Mass, when their
Consecration is made, and when their Christ sacrificed, is most specially
offered:) Obsecrations, Orations, Postulations, and Thanksgiuings, (and yet who
conceiueth their Divinity, that the word Orations in English, in Latin
Orationes, in Greek (...), should signify properly their Consecration,
Transubstantiation; or Propitiatory oblation) to be made for all men, for
Kings (who were Heathens when this ordinance was made) and all that are in
preeminencie. But let the holy Apostle ordain what he will, let the Father
St. Austen and others, even (in their own sense) expound this ordinance of
their propitiatory Sacrifice; yet forsooth, the Roman Bishops will seem to
be so pure, that they will not only refuse Communion with such persons as
they do excommunicate, and with Infidels; but they will further also out of
more then pharisaicall contempt, renounce the communion of charity, due to
enemies, and refuse so much as to pray in their public sacrifice and service
by name, for the Conflit. Clem. lib. 8. cap. 15.
conversion of Infidels, or any Heretics: much less for any Temporal
blessings and prosperities, to them: yea, although they be their Magistrates,
their Liege Sovereigns. Who knows not, how the zealous Pontificians, and
Ignatians, will make outcries against such a man, as would in any public
service pray but for the conversion of their Sovereign, by them reputed an
Heretic? but to add a prayer for his prosperity or safeguard, it were not
sufferable; but no more of this, it touches to the quick. Yet God, from whose
knowledge nothing is hid, knows that this which I write is true, etc. I
have heard very credibly of a superstitious Monk, who has often protested,
that he will not by name in Mass, pray for the conversion of any one, no, not
of his own Father: O hypocrisin blasphemam, O more then most blasphemous
hypocrisy! damned Dives had in Hell greater charity, when by name, and
specially in what he could, he desired, and procured the salvation of his
Brethren upon earth. Some one will reply, perhaps, and say, that in special
and by name they pray for all, Jews, Infidels, and Heretics, upon
Good Friday: I grant it; but hear withal, that upon Good Friday they have no
Propitiatory sacrifice offered; which may be polluted with public prayers
for the conversion of Infidels; and here by the way I marvel, what mystery
is in it, that specially upon that Anniuersarie day when Christ suffered, they
will have no Propitiatory sacrifice offered, no receiving of the Lords
Supper, used in their Churches. For some one of their Priests in every Church
receiving and offering of Christ (only under the form of bread) does not with
them offer a perfect and proper sacrifice: Christ, forsooth, must be under
both kinds, else he is not a perfect and proper Sacrifice, according to the
Bellar. lib. recog. page 85. where he cites many for the same opinion.
Bellarminian doctrine. Who detesteth not such fopperies? the wise are caught
in their wisdom. Oh, that they were rather converted then confounded.

Further, what a marvel, that they who pretend to be so zealous for
conversion of sinners, that they willingly travail Math. 23.
over Sea and Land for that purpose, and to make their Proselytes twofold more
children of hell, should be so hypocritically pure, that in that sacrifice
(which themselves make to be the propitiation of the whole world, there should
not be some commemoration had, at least, for the conversion of such their
Magistrates, and Sovereigns, whom they repute Heretics: The ancient Jews,
and their holy Priests, did pray in their public sacrifices, yea offered 1.
Match. 12. and 2. Match. 3. Esdr. 1. cap. 6. Baruch. saepe.
public sacrifices for such as were Aliens from the worship of the true God
(although joined in amity with them) as the Machabees do expressly deliver.
The ancient Clemens. l. 8. Constitut. cap. 15 Ignat. epist. ad Smir. Tertnll.
Apolog. ad scapula^ cap. 2. Ambros. and Chrysostom. in hunc locu^. Aug. Epist 59
and alibi saepissime. Prosp. de vocatione Getium, l 1. cap. 4. Chrysostom. hom.
79 ad Pop. Antio. l. 6. de Sacer. and hom. 77. in Ioh. homil. de Adam. and Eua^
^iturg. Jacob. Basil. Chrysostom. Some Ignatia^s to temper this uncharitable
position so mince the matter, that you may pray for increase of faith, in that
place, where none but Heretics are provided that you do not personat any. So
my Master in Rome. Azor. aly.
Christians with their most religious Bishops prayed publicly, and offered
sacrifice (so says Tertullian) for the health and safety of the Emperor; and
all antiquity concurreth herein with joint approuance of public prayer for
all: If the Adversary reply, and say, such excommunicated persons, such
Infidels, are not capable of any good from the sacrifice: what? not of
conversion? not of repentance? not of reconcilement? apagesis: is your
sacrifice so weak, that it is not potent, and powerful, to do any good that
way? yea, but the Church has forbid it, for a correction of the
excommunicated? what? for a correction of the Infidels also? indeed, your
Church, that is, your Pope, has of later years since, they put on ( tiphum
secli) secular pride have forbid it, but it was not so of old: let us ask our
Fathers, and they will tell us, it was not so of old: bring out one ancient
Father, O ye Pontificians, that joins with you in this? I am assured you
cannot; God forbid you could stain ancient Christian doctrine, so far, as
that it should forbid any public prayer, to be used for the conversion of
Infidels, Heretics, etc. or for the temporal prosperity, and safety of
lawful Sovereigns whatsoever: by, and from such Priests and Prelates, as are
their subjects.

The second Law.
Hypocritical also and vain, is that custom and law, by which they strictly
forbid the eating of flesh upon their appointed Fasts, and yet permit, and
allow the drinking of wines of all sorts, and in what quantity it shall please;
with eating also of preserues, and conserues, of any kind, marchpanes with
spiced, and sugared cakes (only provided, there be no dram of butter nor
cream in them, when they are used either in lent or upon fasting-nights) so
that their fasts seem to pinch and afflict, only the poor (whose purses reach
not to dainties) not the rich, who may drink wine, till they surfeit, and yet
not break their Papisticall fast. And whereas the Primitive Christians in
their solemn fasts (according as the ancient Jews) fasted till night, which
custom continued a long time after, Caput solent. de co^secrat. did. 2. Epiph.
Haeres. 80 Tertull. aduers. Psychi. c. 14.
but was afterward fully broken for above some 1000. years ago: since when,
the time of eating upon public fasting days, began to be used about three
of the clock in the afternoon: from which custom, they are now so far
degenerated, that the Ignatianed Pontificians, will most commonly prevent
noone, a whole hour, and the precisest of them (mark the superstition) say,
it is enough to keep the fast, so that a man be, in the midst of his repast,
just at noone: and now also, the precisest fasters will have their drinkings at
night, and almost all of them will eat either a good quantity of bread, with
sweet meats, with fruits, or some kind of broth: so that their fastings as they
are now used, are indeed mere mockeries; I should say, as they are commonly
used: and yet forsooth, these men must be reputed the precise The Pontificians
who stand so strictly for their manner of fasting; I ask them why have they
broken the fast of the fourth and sixth Ferie, and Saturday in Rome which the
ancient Roman Church held for a Tradition Apostolical? See Innocent. 1 Epist.
ad Decent. and cap. Sabbato de co^secrat. did. 3. and cap. Quia di^s. distin.
5. de consecrat. Conc. Elibert Can 26. Clem. constit. lib. 5. cap. 16. 19. and
vlt. Canon. Apost. Can. 68. Ignat. Epist. 3. ad Phill. Epiph. ^eres. 80. and
75. caput. de esu. carn. did. 3. de consecrat. Pene omnes antiqui.
Imitatours of the Apostles in their fasting, and none reputed to fast, but
they, no, though they abstain all a whole day, and then make most sparing and
temperate meals with a little flesh, at night only. With them, you may cramme
your paunch to the brimme, you may drink till you be drunk (ten times a day
if you please) and yet you shall not be reputed to have broken your fast, so
you make but one (though lucullian) meal of Fish only in Lent; and of Fish and
white meats out of Lent: but if you live never so soberly, fasting till night,
and then eat but a morsel of flesh, a Lollard must be your name, a faggot
your reward. O hypocrisy, simulata sanctitas, duplex iniquit as, dissembled
sanctity, is double iniquity; yet herein I must needs Apologize, for some of
the good, simple, and devout Pontifician Women of this Kingdom, who in very
truth observe, sober, and godly fasts: for which I cannot but commend them, and
will be glad ever therein to imitate them, as far, as the liberty of
conscience, and Christian charity may permit. I have heard a very probable
narration, how Robert Parsons (he who had provided rules of reformation,
against These rules were most of them devised by Cardinal Allen, but he being
dead, least the child, should have been fatherless, Parsons challenged them
as his own.
the conversion of England, as he speaks) upon a fasting evening, commending
a kind of order for fasting, which he had in his head, and greatly taxing the
liberty used by the English Roman Catholics, spoke thus: Well said he, if
England be ever converted, I make no doubt, but that I shall set down an
excellent order for fasting: and that stricter, I hope, then that, which
himself at that present used (or else it would have been easy enough) for
that very evening for his part, he eat up a pretty box of marmalet. And here
by the way, I must needs say that I have seen in that man more care of diet,
then ever could justly be objected against Calvin (whom the Pontificians so
calumniate for his spiced bread and purestwines; But surely Calvin could not
be justly taxed more for his belly, then this man might be. But that you may
know, how, many of the Pontifician Priests keep their fasts: hear what I also
have most credibly heard. There comes a certain Formal Priest to a certain
Ladies, one fasting evening: for his entertainment, she provides some two or
three sorts of fruits, yet withal seems to excuse herself, that it was no
better: this is well Madame, (somewhat solemnly) replieth the Priest; but at
such a Ladies said he, we have seven or eight several dishes upon fasting
nights, etc. but enough of these their Apostolical fasts: for my part I
condemn none, (I wish my whole heart more fasting were used by such as are
able) whose weakness requires such favorable fasting; but I utterly
condemn the hypocrisy of their Doctors, who challenge their fasts only to be
Apostolical, and Christian, whereas it is most evident, that they are nothing
less then such; and no where worse then in Rome the inerrable See.

The third Law.
THat there are permissiue and toleratiue laws, for houses of prostitution, in
some Papisticall Countries, I do not so much admire (although they are utterly
to be condemned) considering the circumstances of those Countries, and
dispositions of the people; but, that in the City of Rome, the Mother-Citie;
(the Mother Church) in the City of the Apostolical See, there should be
public tolleration, and Papal permission, with a civil protection, both of
bodies and goods, of such impudent prostituted Queanes, that is wonderful; but
more wonderful, and most intolerable, that the only Vicar of Christ, the
Suffragane of the blessed Trinity, the Vice-God of earth, should receive tole
out of such a Fair of prostituted Whores: but most execrable it is, that
through permission of such abominations the hearts of Cardinalitian and Papal
Courtiers, are so linkeed with those infamous persons, that they cannot live
without them: I will not speak of the Clergies impuritie; St. Bernard shall
speak for me in their behalfes; p Bern. lib. 4. de considerat. c. 2. sermon. ad
Pastores in Synod.
charging them with keeping of Queanes in their private chambers. But hear how
the souls of those lascivious Courtiers and Romans, are glewed to those
filthes. When Pius Quintus (a man of many moral good parts) endeuonred
seriously to purge Rome of that sink, by banishing the Whores from out of the
City, with them he drove away so many of the Courtiers, so many of ignoble
Nobles, so many of the voluptuous Citizens, that Rome seemed almost naked and
dispeopled, so that thereupon the irresolute Pope, by a conniuencie was content
to permit the filths to return again to their old trade in Rome, and the
Roman Bishops to receive still their customary tribute for that wicked liberty
and impurity. O most abominable, and most filthy purpured city, thy sin is
preached abroad, like that of Sodom and Gomorrhe, and thou art not ashamed (
Frons meretricis facta est tibi) thou have gotten the forehead of a strumpet:
show me the like abomination amongst the reformed Churches. You pretend many
great matters: but doubtless, in comparison of their Rome, the very serrals of
Constantinople, Adrianople, are pure and chaste: yet who will excuse or defend
the impurities of any reformed Churches? not I, amendment will be the best
defense, God grant it.

The fourth Law.
HOw wicked and sacrilegious is that law of theirs, by which they will not upon
any extremity whatsoever, celebrate or say any Mass, without their Altar
stones, Altarclothes, Corporals, or Candels, etc. And although, they (almost
all) hold, that to receive the Sacrament at the hour of death, is absolutely
necessary ( necessitate precepti) under necessity of precept, yea, and as my
Master Vasques in Rome with diverse others held, that it is necessary (
necessitate medij) by necessity of mean, like as faith is, without which by
Gods ordinary power it is not possible for any one to be saved, yet forsooth,
they must and will let their sheep go out of the world without this
Sacrament, if so be they want either Mass Vestiments, or Altar stones, or
Altar clothes, to say their Roman Mass withal: O vain Traditions of men,
against the Commandment of God: is it not here most manifest, that ( Math. 15.
irritum fecerunt, etc.) they have made void the Commandment of God, for
their own Traditions? their own Traditions, I said, for there is not one of
them who can show any authentical record, that either St. Peter, or any of the
Apostles, or any of the Primitive Priests, used at celebration of the divine
mysteries, massing Vestments, Altar stones, burning lights, etc. it were a
mere toy to challenge these things to be Apostolical, which they cannot
otherwise prove, then either out of some counterfeit Martial or Abdias, or
else the commentitious Pontifical (as they pretend of Damasus) whereof the
Author is not yet certainly known, and if he were known, yet their own
Cardinals and Doctors have pared so much of his credit away, with charging the
book with lies and fables, that his authority alone may not carry away such
a matter as this is.

The fifth Law.
THat Law and custom, by which they command the Laity, to receive the
Sacrament under one kind only, is sacrilegious (to use Pope Gelasius his
phrase) and is an error in excusable. But the Tridentine Fathers have found
out an excuse for this inexcusable error, this forsooth: that although Christ
instituted, and commanded all to drink of the sacramental Cup, the Apostles
ordained as much, and withal the primitive Church ever so practiced: yet this
was all done, not as a matter of necessity, but of election, or choice for the
faithful to receive under one kind or both. Epist. Jude.
Imperet vobis Dominus. Our Lord command you, and let the mouths of such as
speak so wicked things be stopped. What a doctrine of devils is this, to say
that the institution of Christ, the commandment of Christ, ordinance of the
Apostles touching the use of the chiefest Sacrament of the Church, makes not a
law of necessity? when their imagined transubstantiation came in, then also by
degrees, brought they in the receiving under one kind (as sufficient for a
man's whole life) pretending that whole Christ is really and substantially under
both kinds, yea under any the least particle that may fall from the host, or
any lest, moisture of wine-liquour that may hang and stick upon their Chalice
side, or upon their Priests lips (which being by them thus professed and
believed,) I marvel, and note by the way how Henry Garnets great M. A. V.
fauouritisse in presence of him, and of other Ignatians, and diverse
worshipful did scorn publicly at table, one D. Cecill for his licking with
his finger, the patten which he used at celebration of the Mass. I desire the
reader to judge of their spirits. I my self hearig her derision excused the
Doctor seriously, but since that time (some one and twenty years) I was never
very grateful to her, nor to her reverend Father Henry Garnet: they had then
opposition with that Doctor, and therefore he was derided for licking up such
crummes as they esteemed their God.

The sixth Law.
THey annexe to holy Orders, the vow of Chastity (and yet few, who take Orders
make the said vow expressly, although all such consent to undergo their law of
chastity) by which they most strictly command neither Priest nor Bishop to
marry, and if any were married before Orders, then after them they must abstain
from the lawful use of their wives. This is one of their traditions, such a
one as S. Paul spoke of, when 1. Ad Tim. 4.
he foretold that some would come in later times teaching the doctrines of
devils, forbidding to marry, etc. By occasion of this law, their presumptuous
spirits have implied almost the whole Roman Clergy more or less, with all
kind of impurities, yea some so nefarious, as are not by a modest pen to be
expressed: perhaps, (though very rashly and inconsiderately) the first Authors
of the Law, intended to have brought in Chastity and purity into the lives of
their Clergy, but it has fallen out far otherwise: for it is a shame to
speak what is done by many of them in secret. It is a shame says Bernard.
sermon. 33 in Cantica. see him in sermon. ad Pastores in Sinodo congregat and lib.
4. de considerat. cap. 2. and alibi.
S. Bernard, to utter what they do in dark, yet what should I shame to speak
that which they are not ashamed to do? O worthy Bernard might you justly write
thus in your time? A stinking contagio^ creeps this day through out the whole
body of the Church; all are friends, and yet all are enemies; yea all seek
their own; they are the Ministers of Christ, yet do service to Antichrist.
And a little after: these are the men, and yet they will needs be
Church-Gouernours, Divines, Archbishops, Bishops: and how do these men keep
their chastity, who being given into a reprobate sense, do things, that are
unmeet, for it is a shame to utter what they do in the dark: yet why should
I be ashamed to speak that which they are not ashamed to do? thus Saint
Bernard: the which with infinite much more that might be cited out of all
zealous Pontifician preachers, as Cornelius Musse, Panigarole, Ferus,
Granatensis, Stella, Espencaeus, Genebrard, Bapt, Mantuan. Aluarus Pelagius,
Nicholas Clemangis, Polydore, Matthew of Paris I touch only, to show what
abominable impurities and filth has redounded by virtue of that Law, into
their vowing Clergy: (whom they permit notwithstanding to eat and drink
liberally and indifferently of wines, and all manner of meats, as the laity,
and to live also freely, and to converse indifferently amongst women.) They
impose a necessity of that which Christ himself ordained should be free in
such as have the Math. 19.
gift of continency: but they will perhaps say none is restrained to this law
of Chastity, but such as do freely enter into holy orders, unto which this
law of chastity is annexed: and such as have made trial of themselves before:
good God, what trial is made of such persons whom they nourish, and mew up in
the prime of their youth, in their Seminaries, and Colleges? far from all
society of women, (whom if they would keep still at short diet, and without
wines, I could not condemn their vowi^g) who never made trial of themselves,
whether they had the gift of continency or not? how many are there of your
Clergy, who either because their parents so appoint it: or else, because they
find it a ready way, and step to promotion: are willing to addict,
themselves to that course of life, before they know by experience, whether they
can be continent or not? nay rather which of them is there, (I appeal to their
own consciences) who by often yielding more or less, to some of the morosous
cogitations, (as they call them) do not find by experience, before they take
holy Orderrs, that they have not the gift of contiuencie, but do more or less
burn with their morosous desires, and cogitations. The Pontificians are such
favorers of Vows of chastity, that I know some married couples, who living
together commit horrible impurities, and yet they will not prevent them by the
remedy of nature, because against their own vows. I know diverse Ignatians are
very forward to persuade married couples to vow such pernicious continency.
I could here particularize somewhat, but will not, having appealed to their
own consciences, and the consciences of such ghostly Fathers, as hear the
confessions of their Divines, who are at the next step to Orders.

But let their ancient Histories be searched, and they shall find that the
Church of the East, (where religion was first planted, and the ordinances of
the Apostles well known) would never admit of the necessity of continency in
Clergy men, which some endeavored to impose upon them: In the holy Scriptures
it is most clear, that married Priests and Bishops were permitted to use
their wines, and also to perform all Church-offices: so clear this truth is
in Saint Paul 1. Ad Timoth. 3.
to Timothy, that he takes order how the wife and children of such persons
are to be ordered. And who is so ignorant a D^uine as not to know Valentia. de
celibatu. cap. 2. Th^^. (...) 2. 2. q. 88. Durand. lib. 4. did. 34. 37. and
alij. Scholastic. communiter ibidem Solus de iure and iustitia. lib. ^ and
Petrus. a Soto in institut. sacerdot. l^ct. 5. Alphonsus a Cast^o aduersus.
here is. verbo sacerdot. Azor. institut. lib. 13. cap. 12.
that, with Valentia the Ignatian Divine, all the chiefest Pontifician Divines
do acknowledge, that the Law, and Vow of chastity is only annexed to
Priesthood, and holy Orders by man's law, to wit, by the laws of some Roman
Popes, and by their Sinodicall constitutions at most: and that Christ and his
Apostles appointed nothing therein. I have often marvelled how Pop^s, who have
been so liberal to dispense in all Church laws, in all manner of Vows and
Oaths (yea and with Laics most often in the vows of Chastity) either Thomas
is Aquin. 2. 2. q. 88. art. 10. ad. 3. Azor. lib. 6. cap. 1. Tom 1. and
Theolog. omnes communiter.
for some great good, to the parties who had vowed or sworn: or to remove some
evil from them, or else for some spiritual good, or temperall profit to
others: or, to remove, some occasion of spiritual or temporal evil and hurt,
or else in respect of impotency or unableness, to keep the Vows: yea, who have
dispensed, and daily dispense, with promises, and oaths of fidelity, made to
princes and other third Persons, will not, for the souls healths, of some of
their polluted Bishops, and Priests, and to remove so general, and Universal a
scandal, from their Church, dispense with all such of their Clergy, who by
their own confessions, and experience of the whole world, are so far from
being continent, that they do like impure horses ( hinnire) neigh after the
Wives and Daughters of their Diocesians and Parishione^s. I do here,
constantly, and Christianly affirm, that it were more tolerable, and more
agreeing to the use of the most pure Sacraments, that all Priests, and Bishops
in the World, being dispensed withal or otherwise freed, should marry, and use
marriage, then that one only, incestuous sin, or Sodomiticall impurity, by
occasion of the Law of Chastity, This my discourse falls, if there be sin in
marriage, as the ancient Encratites and Tatians held: otherwise it is
invincible, for doubtless dispensation must be granted when otherwise sin
through impotency cannot be avoided. See Abbas. in c. c^ olim de clericis
coniugat. Sotus. lib. 7. de iustit. q. 6. art. 2 Good old Azor lib. 12 cap. 13.
grants that for temporal peace, the vow of chastity may be dispensed
withal, as though the removing of sin were not a greater cause for
dispensation in any cause whatsoever.
should be committed. For as in the first (secluding the Law of Chastity
ordained only by Authority of some Roman Bishops, not expressly instituted by
God) there should be no sin, so in the other there is sin inexcusablie,
which in malice, (because insinite) surpasses all the good of Chastity,
(because finite) that may be in all other Priests. Had it, not been better,
that the impure Venetian Abbot (whose excesses, in soliciting of matrones, that
worthy state would have corrected, if the Pope would have given them leave)
should, have been dispensed withal, to have married, rather then to have
been by his most impure conversation, part of that scandal, by which the
whole Christian world, had like to have fallen into a most dreadefull
commotion? Had it not been far better for the Legate Cardinal of Cremona his
soul, and more for Romes honor: that he should have bin dispensed withal; and
have brought a wife with him, rather then he should the same night, after that
day in which he most bitterly had inue^ghed against the Marriage of Priests, be
found in bed with a common strompet, as Math. Paris in Henri. 1. ad. ann. 1125.
Huntingd. Westmonast. Flores ad cundem annum.
Matthew of Paris, with others, condently deliver? had it not been far better
for the Honor of the Apostolic See, that John the 12. should have dispensed
with himself, and have had, one lawful wife, rather then to have kept three
infamous strompets, Stephana, Anna, Raynera? as Luitprandus Luitprand. Tic.
lib. 6. cap. 6. et. c. 7. Onuphrius in Annotat. in platinam in Johan.
affirms: and accusing him also to have committed many other most impure
villainies? What should I mention any thing of Pope Sergius, John the 8. John
the 20. the 22. Alexander the 6, and diverse other most impure Popes etc. But
what care, these Pharisees, how impure and filthy that of the dish is within so
that they may be thought at lest to vow chastity? and to have wills to be chaste
and pure? I thought not, to name any particulars concerning this point in any
living; but seeing the Ignatians are so holy that they will cas^ off al such
faults, upon others, as though they desired not so much as any conversation
with women: (and yet who be they that now give first entertainment to the
gallant women at Saint Omers? who those that daily converse with them? be they
not Ignatians?) I will deliver here one certain thing which happened, (pardon
me courteous Reader, if I abuse thy patience with relating of it) in their
famous Dowist University and one of their Ignatian Schools, and by an
Ignatian also, who was Witnesses M. I. S. M. T. S. and M. W. C.
observed by Persons of worthy credit often to pollute himself most shamefully
in the open schools, yea and so apparently, that it was thought the Reader
could not but observe it: the like is testified, and proved of another in the
same Schools, but he was no Ignatian; and the like I saw of another, in the
Divinity School of Rome, but he was no Ignatian, but under their Government
only.

But what do I insist, to inueigh against their wicked Law* promiscuously
binding all, that take Orders, whether they have the gift of continency, or
otherwise, not to marry? they will doubtless object to me that I long after
Marriage; they may Calumniate me at their pleasure: how I have conuersed, it is
well known (even, amongst many Modest, Chaste, very worthy, and worshipful
Gentlewomen) and I here protest before God, that I never found a more real
and sincere detestation, against all carnal thoughts and molestations, or any
desires of that kind, then at this present I do: yet, I esteem it far more
meet and agreeing* to Christ's institution, and the Holy Apostles doctrine for
any whatsoever he be, rather to Marry then to burn; yea so much as to have any
least unlawful o^ sinful desires, and rather (according to the General and
Universal Doctrine of all their own Divines in all other Vows or Oaths) to
be dispensed with his inconsiderat^e Vow, or else to have it interpreted, and
declared unlawful, rather then through impotency, impossibility, or imminent
danger of not keeping of his vow, to commit any other sins of impurity or to
give any scandal to any other person. And so here I conclude this matter,
with a saying of Pope Pius, the second, as Platina in vita Pij. 2.
Platina reports him, that as there were many reasons, to forbid Priests
marriage, so there were more to allow them marriage: how many there are, he
that will read Pelagius de planctu.
Aluarus Pelagius and Clemangis de corrupto statu ecclesiae.
Nicholas Clemangis, will easily acknowledge: and the Verdict of that Pope to
have been most just, and necessary.

To Conclude this matter it is as clear as the Heavens that the Pontificians
are favorers of al impudicity in their Clergy* by forbidding them marriage,
and yet permitting them to eat, drink, and converse as indifferently as the
married do. So are they also in many other cases, Authors, and Abetters of
much Impurity: and here I observe, by the way (I know not by what secret spirit
it comes to pass) that our English Ghostly Fathers, are for most part, easy
interpreters and absoluers in case of most impure sins, but if a man disobey
a Popes brief, none or else very difficult is their absolution. A crooked
deformed Priest, would not a Priest forsooth, allowing the oath of Allegiance;
and that Ignatian who denied me absolution, for that I held the Pope, had not
authority to depose Princes, yet could he absolve the Master of the house, who
was more then thought to haunt common queanes, himself also not unacquainted
with the notoriousnesse thereof. He was just another Peer Cotton. God
vouchsafe, to open the eyes of the seduced, to leave the society of that
Congregation, which has so shamefully Apostated from Jesus Christ his sacred
doctrines and most holy institutions, and has thus repleated her congregations
with all nefarious impurities.

Sundry other Laws there are, which might justly be called in question: and
whosoever will with indifferent eye consider all such laws and customs
wherein the Romanists, do most differ from the reformed Churches, he shall
find that they al have express respect to set up the Roman Monarchy; either
in Temporals or Spiritualls: as for example, the Law and Custom wherewith they
endeavor to exempt from all correction of Civil Magistrates all Clergy men,
though their offenses be enormious and such as cry for vengeance from Heaven.
Like is their Law of reserving certain Papal Cases, which causes many
sacrilegious confessions: like is their Law and Custom for their Penitents to
confess an entire number of all their sins with the Circumstances thereof
(changing the nature of sin) which causes inexpressible conflicts and
scruples, especially in consciences of their Women Recusants. But I omit to
write any more of these, and so pass to my other Motives.

The Third General Head, out of the observation, of English Pontificians
Spirits.
THus having set down some of my chiefest motives, out of the pernicious
doctrines, and most wicked Laws of the Pontifician Church: I am to prosecute
the other two General heads, out of some observations of the Spirits, of the
Chiefetaines of that profession, in the propagation of their Gospel; and of
their lives and conversation. But for some respects I will at this present
pretermit the latter (being not willing to descend into particulars of that
kind) and for the other, my discourse shall It were bootles to descipher the
lives and spirits of latter Popes: they are far worse the^ those of who^ Masson
a famous Pontifician writes so liberally in Julius the 3. at whose boldness I
marvel when I consider what the famous D. John of Paris lib. de potest. Reg.
and papal. writes: Every fact, says he, of the holy Father, must be
interpreted in good part, and if it be theft or any thing that is ill in it
self, we must interpret it to be done by Divine instinct, thus he. So Sixth*
his pride, drunkenness, cruelty. Alexander the sixth, his impurity. Gregory the
14. hypocrisy and anarice, etc. al was by Divine instinct, etc.
only (omitting their Popes) touch the Spirits of such as have bin Ringleaders,
against the present state, and Church of England: in prosecution whereof; if I
seem sharp and bitter, and to touch to the very quick, not the skin only,
but the very soul of the Ignatious Spirits: I desire the Readers favorable
construction, and to interpret that I do nothing out of malice, or for
revenge, but only that Britany may see, what serpents she nourishes within
her bowels (would God, not too near etc?) and how extreme dangerous it is,
for the publik weal of this State, that Pontifician English are permitted to
have such free conversation with them in Flanders, France, Spain, etc. and to
demonstrate, that if Britanie, have just cause to fear Rome, and the Popes
Dominions; the last and least Cause, is not, because the Ignatians are there,
powerful favorers of al hot and malecontented Spirits; providing Sanctuaries
and Cities of Refuge, for Tesmonds, Owens, Gerards, etc. which men also in
Flanders, England, etc. change not their Spirits but the air; being every
where the same in their undermining and indirect courses, for setting up, the
Papal Monarchy.

First therefore, whereas they pretend, to be Apostolical men in the manner
of their amplifying and their planting of the Roman Religion (in which action
if in any, man necessarily must be guided by Gods Spirit) it is not possible,
that their pretense should be sound; unless they therefore hold themselves
Apostolical, because they do in the worst sort, imitate those two Apostles
who desired of Christ, that fire might come down from heaven and consume those
who would not receive him: Luc. 9.
to whom the good and meek Shepherd, answered: ( Nescitis, etc.) you know
not, of what spirit ye are, by which answer, he utterly condemned, the
spirits of all such, who seek, to bring in Christ, and Christ's Doctrine, by
subversion of States and Kingdoms. And what are the Pontificians tainted with
this spirit? O ye heavens! speak for me; nay, the very stones will speak,
that the Of Gregory the 7. Paschall, Victor Alexander, Innocent, Boniface, etc
Fathers of the Roman Church described, by them, that sat upon the red,
black, and pale horses, have often, under pretense of religion, taken peace
out of the Christian world, causing such dreadful Commotions, as the very
memory thereof cannot but affright a tender and Christian mind. It is
needless to recount the thundering sentences of Popes against Emperors; fresh
in memory, are the impious sentences, of Pius the 5. Sixtus the 5. against our
late Sovereign of famous memory; tending to the whole subversion of this
Kingdom; who by their bulls of deposition, and excommunication Bull. Sixti 5.
Pij. 5. contua Reginam.
charged under the pain of excommunication, all English Subjects, forceably to
deprive that most Gracious Lady, and Queen Elizabeth: and although God of
heaven had set her over us, yet the earthly god, with his triple crown, to
whom all power upon earth was given (as one of them speaks) sitting in the
high throne of his See, did Bull Pij. 5.
vnqueene her; and make her as another ordinary Subject. But what? were the
English Chiefe-leaders guilty of any one of these plots, and practices? Let
Cardinal Allen, march first, who although he Related by the moderate Answerer.
would seem to touch, and reprehend those, who gave information to Pius the 5.
it was not for want of good will to the matter it self, but because the state
of England did not then permit it ^ the Pontificians, being not strong enough,
to put in execution, Pope Pius his depositiue sentence; for otherwise in his
book called the defense of English Catholics, he does most eagerly defend
the Popes power, to depose Princes, and constantly avouches that he may charge
all Subjects, and authorize them to deprive Princes in case of Heresy, and
other needful occasions of Church, and Common Wealth: the which doctrine as he
does, most politikly and cunningly seek to establish, by sophistical reasons
and many devised untruths: so is he most learnedly confuted, by that
singularly learned and judicious Prelate, the Bishop Bilson of the supremacy.
Bishop of Winchester, so soundly, that neither Allen himself, nor any of his
Seminarists, durst ever, yet attempt to make any reply against that very
learned and judicious work.

Again, call to mind Cardinal Allens declaration, to the Nobles in England
in 88, the which he himself conceived and dictated, in very great haste to
three or four Scribes, together at once, to have with speed more copies to
send hither into England, thereby to incite the Peers and all Pontificians of
this Kingdom, to join with the Armado; which King Philip of Spain sent
hither, for the conquering of this Kingdom: which Spanish fleet came also
full fraught, both with Pope Sixtus his prophesies, his blessings, and curses,;
and with the blessings of their maid of Lisboe, with a vain prediction of
their victory; but through the power of God, both Horse and Horseman, were
drowned in the Seas, where, most of their ships, with the Popes blessings and
curses, made shipwreck, God converting their curses upon their own heads.
These books of this Cardinal, with many other of his discontented speeches,
against the English State before 88. do discover lively, how much he had
borrowed of a worse spirit, then that was which our Savior f condemned in two
of Luc 9.
his Apostles: I say before 88. for I have observed since that time (God
checking by that miraculous overthrow his spirit,) he has been far more
moderate, then Robert Parsons; into whose soul, how a double spirit of that
kind has ascended from below, it is almost superfluous, to stand to prove.
His Doleman, which I know by some speeches that I have heard from his own
mouth he purposely intended against the undoubted Title of our most Gracious
Sovereign (whom Jesus vouchsafe long to preserve) and to entitle as much as
lay in him, the Archdutchesse with an imagined and chimerian title to the
English Crown; and to that purpose he dispersed as many of those books into
this kingdom, before the death of Queen Elizabeth as he could conveniently:
earnest he was with me, some fifteen years since to have brought some of How
often have I heard this man rejoice at the shuffling and civil commotions
which he foreimagined would light upon the English at Queen Elizabeth's death.
How often have I heard him say and Ios. Creswell also with diverse other
Ignatians, that England will never be happy and fully converted, without the
sword and a conquest thereof.
his Dolemans over with me into England, which I utterly refusing, highly
displeased him therewith. Again his public reioicing, when he heard by a
false Alarm, that the Spaniards had safely landed in England in 88. and his
dejected countenance, when that false news, by true report was checked: How
joyfully did he trot up and down, to carry the first news amongst the Popes
friends and Englands? Enemies But good God; how was he confounded, at the
hearing of the second news, of the burning and drowning of the Spanish Fleet?
All Elements concurring to the confusion of Pharaohs host. This Diverse worthy
persons have observed this spirit in Parsons, especially that worthy Deane of
Life, D. G. who for his love to his Country, and openly disliking the
Ignatians courses, was by Parsons and others of his fellows procureme^ts,
banished out of the low Countries.
man's spirit was ever thought to be plotting and devising, for Englands
conversion by Englands subversion: against which time, he had provided certain
rules of reformation; amongst all which I will tell you one pretty one. When
England is converted, at first (said he) there must not be admitted into it any
religious, excepting poor Capuchins, and the contemplative Carthusians and his
own brethren the Ignatians, for some self pretenses as is observed. A
politic devise, that so he, and his, might have the shooting at the purse and
the hitting of it; for * When in Spain by a witty libell the Capuchine Friars
were described to shoot from the purse, the Franciscans wide of it; the
Ignatians were described to hit it in the very midst; with this posie (
teattino) which word signifies ( Theatine) and I hit thee Of this the
Ignatia^s complained, to the present King, who wittily replied to them: Do ye
not then his the purse Fathers, and all will be well.
the Capuchines having no possessions, shoot from the purse; the Carthusians
being contemplative should not so much as draw an arrow to shoot at the purse;
and so he and his might carry away the bell, and do all, and purse all.

How Joseph Creswell, another of that society, and an English Chieftaine, has
been tainted with that spirit, it is too to manifest; he must forsooth,
carry Priests, that come from Spanish Seminaries into England, up and down to
visit the Peers of that Kingdom, and to take their leaves of them, that they
may bring some comfortable news, to the oppressed English of their Kings
intentions, for England; he must carry them also, unto the late King of
Spain, to kiss that Kings hands; and to hear from the Kings own mouth,
words of comfort, (not of patience) to carry to the distressed English
Catholics; that he forsooth, would aid and assist them, as soon as possibly
he could, etc. Oh, how did I my self see, and hear the same man about some
fifteen years since, applaud, and commend a certain Spanish Adelantado, is an
Admiral.
Adelentado, for protesting and vowing, that if his master the King of Spain,
would give him leave and allowance, he himself would employ, all he could
make, toward the subduing of England, (this was the Admiral, of whom I
mentioned before, that he affirmed his King and Master, had no need of
England) and the reducing of it, to the Roman Religion? Again the
entertainment, and encouragement, which the same The same Cres. caused a Te
Deum to be said in the Roman College, for a false alarm of the Spaniards
good success in Ireland.
Creswel gave to Winter in his traitorous project, stands firm in our
English records; and the acknowledgement of Garnet himself, to have been
partaker of Winters plotte, do demonstrate, both, of what spirit Creswell was,
and also, of what spirit the English Ignatians probably are, whereas their
Provincial Garnet, was so deeply by his own confession tainted. By The
relation of the solemnity Wherewith Philip the third and his Queen were
received by the College of the English in Valladolid. page 31.
those verses (amongst diverse others set up in the college of Valladolid, in
Spain, when the King that now is, with his Queen, was by the same
entertained) with this posie over them, ( fugient a facie ignis.) they will fly
from the face of fire; and over the same posie, being set also the Arms of
England, the Lions; and the Arms of Valladolid, which are Fire. Those verses I
say approved, by such Ignatians as did read them, and many since which have
defended them, do demonstrate the Ignatians holy spirits, against this Country.

These are the verses, first in Latin.
Perdomat indomitos, effrenatosque Leones
flamma; feras vincit, vincitur igne Leo.
Angliacisaeuo, ne lanient dente Leones,
innocuas pecudes, innocuosque greges:
Ferteciti Hesperias, Britanna adlittora, flammas;
indomitasque feras Pincia flamma domet:
Sic fugient timidi, posita feritate, Leones;
sic poterit tutum, viuere mite pecus.
In English thus.
The untamed Lions, stern and bold,
with fire are overcome.
Fire tames them, when naught else preuailes,
with fire, it must be done.
Lest English Lions, with their teeth,
and with their cruel paws,
Should tear the tender English flock,
which are to near their jaws;
Bring Spanish fire to British shores,
bring forth your Pincian flame:
So will they leave their cruelty,
and fly away for fear;
So shall the gentle cattle, live
in safty, ever there.
But William Hoult another, who in 88. was all in all, in Flanders; was not he
to be touched with this spirit? doubtless the state of England, is not
vnacqainted with his proceedings; but one thing I can here report of him, from
the mouth of a certain English Ignatianed Priest, correctour of the press at
S. Omers, to wit, that the said William Holt, in 88. sent into England as many
currants, as stood him in five hundred pounds; by that means, to convey some
letters, into the same Kingdom: (doubtless, those letters carried some
mystery with them, that were so closely and with such great care to be
carried.) But the practical spirit of that man, and his solicitudes for
England, are to well known, therefore, of him enough. But one word with the
Corrector, who iumpe at the time, when the damnable Powdertreason should have
been acted, came down from Rome, and in the company of some five or six
Ignatians, (a matter not usual to have so many Ignatians sent together in one
mission for England) appointed and purposed with all expedition, to pass for
England: but so soon as they understood, of the discovery of the powder plot,
they all, and this Corrector, also, changed their courses and settled themselves
elsewhere, one of the speciallest of them now playing the Rector at S. John's
mount in Louain. At the same time with like care, all the The sudden,
unexpected, and diligent inquity and search made after these books, was much
noted by diverse of the Seminary of Doway, and much descanted upon in secret,
when the Powder Plot was discovered, and many thereupon inferred, surely the
Ignatians fingers were in it.
books of Doctor Stapleton, were sought for with such have, as though they
should have been presently put into the possession of the Ignatians; to whom
Doctor Stapleton, had bequeathed them, for the first college they should have
in Oxford. What these things might portend, I would it were not too to easy to
conjecture. For my part, I will not judge any certainetie, only I observe,
how in that most hellish attempt, when Apoc. 9.
Abaddon, with his smoakie Locusts, would have blown up together all the
glories of this kingdom; there were none but Ignatians, as Garnet, Gerard,
Holcorne, Tesmond: or Ignatianed, as Catesby, Rookewood etc. (who loved the
Fathers so dearly, that they esteemed of none, who did not highly reverence the
Fathers) were to be found, partakers, or abettors of that hellish attempt; and
yet the Ignatians, and their friends beyond seas, what with their John Gerrard,
and Oswald Tesmond do beyond seas with most horrible oaths protest, that they
had no knowledge of the ^owder* treason.
equivocations, protestations, etc. have so cleared themselves, that amongst
those outlandish people, there are very few who think the holy Fathers guilty:
but all suspicion that is, lights upon the poor Secular Priests, which (God
knows) are farthest from such courses: if they have not drunk more, or
less, of the Ignatians cup; but there is no suspicion of the holy Fathers;
(God forbid,) no rather, let the acknowledgement of Garnet himself, with his
own letters, (evidences vnappeallable) and that which was done before the most
honorable, and most public Court of this Kingdom, be all inualid, and
counterfeit, rather, then that any Ignatian, should be found guilty of so
execrable a treason. O immortal God of heaven! how has the God of this world,
blinded their eyes! that they will post up and down, the strawie face of
that wretched man? they doubtless herein are delighted with counterfeits, and a
mask of straw provided for the fire with the worshippers thereof. Here, if I
may be so bold, I would ask of the President of Doway, (because he is a
special chieftaine amongst them) what spirit might be observed to have been
in him, when he, with more then ordinary contentment, entertained Guy Fawkes,
the Powder-matchman, some diverse whole days together, before his coming into
England, with much conference with him; not without admiration of diverse of the
College, (who knew not the mystery) considering the meannes of the man. Surely
if the D. N.
Vice President had been there then, who cried auengance on a certain
Sovereign, when he was for his clemency commended by a true hearted English
Priest: he had been a fit man to have been of the Council. But I marvel, not
at his cursing spirit, for he came from the Camp, to the Seminaries, and of a
soldier, quickly (which in ancient times would not have been so commendable)
was made a Priest. But alas to make an end of this matter, that the Ignatians,
and the Ignatianed, were too too well acquainted with some great matter to be
acted about the Powder time. For when I was last beyond the seas, a grave
person reported in my hearing, and in the hearing of a reverend Priest, that
the R. V.
meeter-maker of their English hymns spoke openly in Antwerpe, at a table
where diverse were drinking together, some five or six weeks before the
Powder-treaso^ time, that there was some great attempt in hand in England.
Perhaps the good man knew not the whole secret, if he did, then perchance for
very shame he concealed it, for I hardly think he would detest the fact, who
so eagerly commended the stinking Ignatian Queres, or Pruritanus; and the most
villainous Polonian Exetasis against his Majesty's most excellent state and
person: which books also, are most singularly esteemed by some beyond seas; of
which I think, if the most excellent Archduke knew, they should not be so
dearly esteemed of by him. But I surcease to write any more of this kind, I
have perpaps discovered so much of the Ignatian spirit, that some of them will
attempt by some means or other, to attenuat my spirit: but I weigh it not, for
nothing more welcome to me then death it self, so that I may be found provided,
and ready to meet him and to be with him, after whom my soul longs and
breaths so much, as this corruptible flesh of mine will permit me. My
redeemer has numbered my days, and m Psalm. 138.
has put my imperfections in his sight, and before he calls me, no man can
thrust me hence: his truth is witness to my soul, that in this writing, I
seek only his glory, in whom confiding, I fear no man. And I humbly wish the
English Recusants to beware of such seducers, as come under the garments of
sheep, but inwardly are ravening wolves, who plotting to bring to pass their
conversion of England, seek nothing but the subversion thereof, rather then
their desires should not take effect. And therefore, as themselves well know,
are ever inculcating matters, to the disgrace of the Church, and
state-gouernment of this Kingdom; and cannot well endure, that any Priest in
his Sermons, should so much as commend and inculcate obedience to temporal
magistrates. I my self was at my first coming sixteen years since into this
Kingdom, not a little reprehended by two Ignatian Priests, because upon that
text, Matthew. 22: Mark 12.
Give unto God that which is Gods, and to Caesar that which is Caesar's; I had
(said they) too much insisted upon the latter part thereof, in persuading of
obedience to the temporal magistrate, and yet in that sermon (which was not
above an hour and half long, I am assured) I discoursed not twenty lines of
that subject.

To proceed, I gather another trick of naughty Spirits, especially in the
elder and latter Pontifician Monks and Friars, who have set forth so many
counterfeit and comentitious treatises, in the ancient Fathers names, by that
means to establish and confirm their doctrines, of their transubstantiation,
their Popes supremacy, their confiding in merits of Saints, adoration of
Images, etc. Wherein, I do constantly affirm, that the most pregnant, and
clearest proofs, which they pretend for most of their Roman positions, are
taken out, either of such counterfeit books, as some of the learned
Pontificians call in question; or else out of such commentitious books, and
putatiue works, of ancient Fathers; which by very sufficient proof, may be
showed, to be not current. And when withal, I observe, what order they have
taken with their Indices expurgatorij, Romanus, Neapolitanus Hispanus, Belgicus
editia Povtificijs.
Expurgatory Indices; not only, to give annotations, but further to corrupt
the very texts of Authors; so that none, of later Pontifician Authors, in
short time (such as Caietane, Ferus, Stella, Ludouicus Granatensis, Polidore
Virgill, Claudius Espex. etc.) shall be found sound, and to speak like
themselves: yea, they stick not to corrupt, the very texts of ancient Fathers,
whose editions they daily innouate at Rome, Paris, Lions, etc. The industrious
His Treatise of corruption of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, by the
Pontificians.
M. Thomas James, has produced many of such corruptions, and promises much
more; one of them for a taste, which I also observed long ago, and proposed to
a learned man, but received no satisfaction, I will here give to the Reader:
it is a corruption, of a saying of S. Gregory Nissene, which is this, ( Illam
solummodo naturam, quae increata est, colere, ac venerari didicimus:) were have
learned, only to worship, and adore, that nature which is increate: but the
Spanish Expurgatorie Indices, say, the word (only) must be put out of the
text: a good cause why; the reader, cannot but observe the mystery; therefore
I pass it, with silence. Doubtless these men, who are so impudent, to set
forth their own late Authors otherwise, then themselves wrote; and are not
ashamed, to corrupt the texts of ancient Fathers works: it is no marvel, that
they do so shamefully, in their ranslations, pervert the sacred word, abhorring
nothing more, then in those places of controversies, in which they dissent,
from the reformed Churches, to have their translations reformed, according to
the originalls of sacred Scripture, in which the word of God was first written,
by the Authors thereof. Many shifts Bellarm. lib. 2. de ^erbo Dei.
Bellarmine, Stapleton, Harding, and others devise, to wash away this dastardly
tergiuersation of theirs, in refusing trial by the originals of Gods Scripture;
but, the imputation is just, and vnremooueable, and will help to bring their
Babell to her confusion, together with her Expurgatory Indices, of late, and
ancient Authors.

Further, the naughty spirits of many Pontificians, as Bellarmine, Stapleton,
etc. have seemed manifest to me, in that they do, most egregiously (to bring,
the reformed Churches in hate and contempt) calumniate them, to teach such
doctrines, as they utterly detest, and disclaim from. As first, they accuse
them, that they, give justification to faith only, (meaning ostentimes, such a
naked faith, as they teach void of charity, that is, faith informed, as they
speak) a mere calumniation. For, who knows not, that the resormed Churches
make justifying faith, that, which inseparably Galat. 5.
works by charity, as the Apostle speaks? again, they are accused, to
exclude, necessity of good works to salvation, and all reward also, of good
works at salvation: mere imputations. For, as they continually inculcate, and
commend necessity of good works in their pulpits, more effectually, then, in
many of the Pontifician Churches (whose Preachers, are much busied, with
extolling the merits of Saints, the worth of indulgences, etc.) So likewise,
they publikehe profess that God, will not be unmindful of the least good
work (done, as it ought for his sake,) to reward the same. They are generally
calumniated, (amongst the good English Pontificians, who mean well) that thy
make Gods he Author, and impeller of, and to sin: a mere calumniation.
There are indeed, some doubtful speeches, in Caluines Institutions, but if it
would please them, but to interpret favorably his speeches, in like for as
they interpret, the speeches of many later Dinines, yea and sentences of the
very scripture it self, which in some places, seems more directly to make
God the Author of sin, then ever Calvin did: their calumniating spirit would
be satisfied, and know, that he teaches nothing else then, what their own
Christian Philosophers do teach, therein: of Gods immediate, and positive
concurring, to the entitie, and nature of every sin, and to the entitie, and
nature of every moral, or natural occasion, of sin: and if he should say,
that God, as a universal Cause, does not only immediately, concur, and
intrinsecally coworke, with moral second Causes, in their moral evil
actions, as you all teach, or must teach, unless you be Heretics: but also,
that God, as the Prime universal, and supreme independent Cause, of all
things does in a kind, of priority of nature, also prevent, and move such
moral second causes; in their free moral actions, being either of vice, or
of virtue: tell me, is there none of your Pontifician Doctors, Friars, or
Monks, who teach the same, if not far worse? who can be ignorant of this? who
has understood, of the great I my self when I was some year ago in Doway,
saw this doctrine that God does move with a priority of nature, of causality,
and effectually, all moral agents in all their actions; printed in certain
Theses, which were to be defended publicly, under the moderation of one D.
Estius, who obstinately (as I was there informed) defended the same position.
controversy, betwixt the Ignatians, at Doway, and some other Professors of
that University? the noise of which scandalous controversy sounds even up to
Rome it self, there to be determined, etc. The English Liturgy is most
egregiously calumniated to be vain and irreligious: a most slanderous
imputation: for the form thereof, is conformable to all antiquity, and is very
religious; and if some private disorderly persons, sometimes minister not the
Sacrament according to the form there prescribed, what of that? But I have
often wondered, why the special absurdities and abuses (if there be so many in
the Book of English Common Prayer, as they pretend) have not been by any of
the adversaries in some special sort largely discovered and confuted,
considering how often, and in how special sort, the many turpitudes, abuses,
co^tradictions and fooleries of their Roman Masses have been learnedly
deciphered.

Commonly, and daily, is the Church of England calumniated, for giving unto the
Prince, the Title of Supreme head or governor of the Church of England; which
yet is given in no other sense, then to show that very power and Supreme
Jurisdiction which all Ancient Christian Emperors and Kings in the 1.
Paralipom. 28. and 2. Paralip. cap. 17. and 19. Reg. 4. cap. 18. and 3. Reg. 2.
old Testament, and since, have ever more or less had in their Kingdoms; to
wit, that for the public settling, establishing, execution and administration,
of all manner of justice, whether in matters of Religion, or other Temporal
causes; the Prince, has Supreme authority; and that without his command, or
permission no man may, so much as bear, or wagge any rod, of any public
Justice, or government. But touching the ministration of Sacraments, giving of
Orders, giving the power of the Keys, and in or touching defining of faith; it
is a mere foppery, to say, the Prince challenges any such matter in this
Kingdom, or that any such is given him. But in all such respects, he does most
religiously acknowledge himself to be one of the sacred sheep, of Christ's
sacred flock, under Christ his ministerial Shepherds of the English Church.
Remember, I pray you how Parsons his Catholic letter and answer to our Kings
Apology.
Parsons admits, that the Kings supreamacy (as his most excellent and pious
Majesty, most religiously, and excellently explaneth the same in his Apology
for the Oath of Allegiance) is allowable and such as may be received. The truth
is, you care not so much for what the Prince has, as, for that the Pope is
excluded from his gainful Supremacy, over this Kingdom; who was accustomed with
his Annats, Reseruations, Unions, Comendaes, Expectatiue graces, Provisions,
Presentations, Nominatio^s, and with infinite such like 1 ad Tim. 6.
novelties of names, and prophanations, to corrupt all Church discipline and
Religion of this Kingdom, as the Lincoln. Epise. apud Matthew. Paris. in
Henrico. 3.
famous and holy, Robert, Bishop of Lincoln, long ago objected, to your holy
Pope Innocent the 4. And here to note by the way, your vanities; you think
it, to be eternal blemish to the Church of England, for that King Henry for
love of Queen Anne Bolleyne, as you say, and to be divorced from Queen
Katharine, did exclude the Popes authority out of England, merely upon fancy
and passion. But alas, your devise is vain; for it was first given unto him by
the learned University of Oxford, then Pontifician: upon this occasion, which I
desire you to mark. There was earnest suite, made by some certain
Pontificians, to the Kings Majesty to condemn Martin Luthers opinions, as
being, the very same in many points, with those of John Wicleff; who had been
long before, often condemned, in that famous University of Oxford, and by many
of his former predecessors: whereupon the King being desirous to see a copy of
Wicleffs Articles; one was brought unto him, the which he seriously perusing,
found one of them, to be thus, (to wit) that the Bishop of Rome, had no power,
nor jurisdiction by right over the Church of England: Which, when, the King saw
having at that time, the weighty controversy, about his divorce, with the
Bishop of Rome, he seemed to like thereof; but willing to do nothing rashly
or against Faith, This stands recorded in Oxford, as M. Thomas James has
affirmed unto me very lately.
he presently, dispatched the same Article, to the University of Oxford; to
have it, by the learned anew examined; and their judgments freely to be given
upon it; the which was accordingly done, and the Article approved: whereupon
that Prince resolved, by Consent and Authority of Parliament, to exclude the
usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, over the Church of England: which under
his most tyrannical oppressions, had a long time groned: but by this means
came to be delivered from the Egyptian servitude, as the holy Bishop of
Lincoln long ago Prophesied it would. And if King Henry the 8. upon your
supposed motives did impugn, the Papacy, yet, I pray you, what greater,
disgrace is it to the Church of England, that King Henry should exclude the
Popes supremacy? then it is to the Church of Rome that he should establish the
Statute of six Articles, for your Mass auricular confession, etc? and what
disgrace to your doctrine of adoration of Images? because the usurping and
auaricious Empress Baron in Anall Platin. in Adrian.
Irene, caused the same by a Synod of Bishops to be decreed in Nice? And I
pray you, do you, think worse of your Iubilies, because Platina in Bonif. 8.
and Walsing. in Edward. 1. Polychron. lib. 7. cap. 40.
Boniface the 8. who entered most ambiciously like a Fox, lived like a Lion,
and died like a Dog, brought them in? beware of such mislikes, it will not be
for the profit of Romes purse?

Again, the Church of England is calumniated every day, by all the Ignatians,
as though she had no true orders or jurisdiction: I dare affirm, that in it
there is as certain, and as assured a succession of orders and spiritual
jurisdiction, as in the Church of Rome it self, which has so often tottered,
with so many schisms; and has bin pestered with so many Apostatical Popes; as
both Baronius, and Genebrard deliver. I my self very lately searched (for my
own satisfaction) the Records, and I find clearly, that Archbishop Parker, was
sufficiently, truly, and canonically ordered and consecrated, by such Bishops
as had received orders and consecration according to the Roman Church; he
swore not, thou will perhaps object; obedience to the Bishop of Rome a toy.
Where, in all antiquity, find you the use ofswearing subjection to the Bishop
of Rome? Roman Tyranny brought it in to the Church, and Christian liberty has
exploded it. It is indeed, the soul of your Religion, that subjection to the
Bishop of Rome, is a mean, necessary to saluauation, as necessary as Baptism
it self. O prodigious Doctrine, it is not enough, say these men to salvation,
to be united with Christ, and subjected to our immediate Pastors, who are in
union, with the whole Catholic Church, touching the Catholic faith; unless
we be also united, by immediate subjection unto the Pope of Rome; who may both
be an Heretic, and also, contaminate the Church, with his pernicious Laws: So
that if a Pope Nerolike, (as Boniface the 8.) would by pernicious Laws, draw
you from Christ; and like as a Heliogabalus (as John the 12.) would draw you to
all impurities, and teach you to divide the Church, by opposing, against the
true Pope, after his just deposition by the whole Roman Clergy, and most
Bishops of Italy assembled in a Synod: or Ottomanlike (as Paul the 5.) will
teach you, against Christ's institution, not to yield temporal obedience, to
your lawful Sovereign; if he out of his throne, take upon him, to dethrone
him: unless forsooth, you be subject to such Vicars of Christ, you cannot have
salvation in Christ. O prodigious and vain Doctrine! of these times the holy
Prophets (O ye Britains) have forewarned us, let us beware of them.

What vile calumniation is that by which the reformed Churches of England, are
charged, to deny the seeing of Gods face and glory, unto the Saints departed,
until the day of Judgment? What a slander, that she respects no Holy days of
Christ, or his Apostles? I dare say, that the memories of the Apostles, are in
many places, of this Kingdom as religiously observed, as the Sundaies are with
them: but in the observation of the Sabbath, our Lords day; the Church of
England does, so far surpass all Papistical Churches, yea of Rome it self,
that it were a sin to make any comparison therein betwixt them. Caluino
Turcismo.
William Rainolds calumniateth Calvin that he teaches, that Christ, by his
corporal death redeemed not mankind. A mere Calumnious imputation: his
doctrine is, that Christ by his mere Corporal death (had he not subjected
himself, to have undergone, his fathers displeasure against mankind, and to
have clothed himself, as it were, with the deserts, punishment and guilt of
man) he had not, fully made that satisfaction for mankind; of which the
Scripture so often speak: of which doctrine who can be ignorant, who is
acquainted with holy writ? Great is their spite against that man; but
notwithstanding all their malice against him, he lived peaceably, labored
faithfully, and died Christianly, leaving such a posterity of books behind
him, which checketh the daily and continual innouations of Rome.

Grievous, is the imputation, to the English Church for condemning, and
contemning the ancient Fathers whereas the most it strives for, is to support
that, of Tertull. lib. de prescriptio.
Tertullian: (Quod antiquissimum, verissimum) that, which is most Ancient (even
in the Fathers) is most true. At first when counterfeit Martials, Abdias,
Clements, Marks, Dionises, were produced, the Prelates of the reformed
Churches, were more afrighted then hurt; and to such Fathers, they might justly
give the Anatheme, because such fathers, had impugned and contradicted, that
Gospel of Christ, the which, whosoever, though an Angel from heaven shall
do, we are warranted by the ad Galat. 1.
Apostle to give him the Anatheme. But in, and for true Fathers, the Church of
England reverently, and constantly avouches, that of Vincent. Lirin. contra
Here Is. cap. 4. Tertull. de praescript.
Vincentius Lirinensis to take place, Quicquid, non unus, aut duo, etc.
Whatsoever, not one, or two but al together, with one and the same consent,
openly, frequently, and constantly, shall be known to have held, written, and
taught, that, she also without any doubt knows, must, by her be believed;
and this most justly, the English Church admits, it being as clear, as the
very no one days, that all Fathers of the Ancient Church, never taught,
held, nor wrote any thing, in this sort, which is not clearly, agreeing to
Gods word; which is the only Rule of Christian faith.

But justly to retort upon them: who knows, not that for most, of their Roman
nouel positions, the Adversaries have no Ancient Fathers? and therefore to
defend themselves being urged, they do not produce Fathers but stand to their
imagined Traditions, written no where, in Antiquity, but only reserved in the
Roman Bishops and Churches breasts, as they pretend: this is their City of
refuge: as for example; When a world of Fathers, concurring with sacred
Scripture is produced to show that the Virgin Mary (whose name be ever blessed
amongst, and above all women) was conceived in Original sin, yea, some of
them, with S. Anselme auouching, that she was borne in sin: (which I can
hardly believe) do they here, stick to the Fathers; nothing less? their
imagined traditions must take place.

Again, when whole centuries of Fathers, (and those assembled in Synods) be
produced, to affirm that Popes, have been, and may be Heretics; will they
hear admit of the Fathers? nothing less; all records must be cou^terfeit,
their own best Authors, deceived, rather then the Fathers authorities admitted,
against their Popes infallibilies. When irrefragable authorities, of most
ancient Fathers, are produced, to show that the holy Scriptures, are the only
inerrable rule of Christian, Catholic faith; and the square, by which the
writings and faith of all men, and all Churches must be examined, and tried:
will they here, allow the Fathers? No, alas, they fly the field, and seek
after some maimed sentences, for Traditions; of which Traditions, when it is
also showed, out of the Fathers that they must also, be tried by holy
Scriptures: will they herein receive the Fathers? even as before, renounce
all: and run to the present voice, of their Church; which Church is with
them, the Pope alone, or Pope and his Cardinals.

Again, when all the Fathers, that ever commented upon the 14. of the first to
the Corinthians, with the authorities of many others, be produced, to show
that the public Church Liturgy, ought to be in such a tongue as may be
understood, by the assembly, and for their edification: will they here, accept
of the Fathers? Good God, they fleet up and down, like men in mases, to find
some probable reasons, for their barbarous services.

Again, when innumerable authorities, of ancient Fathers, are clearly
produced, for justification by only faith ( Ad Gal. 5.
which works by charity) and against their Laterane Transubstantiation: will
they admit the Fathers? Good God, their subterfugies, are innumerable: either
they will skippe over them, and run only to the text of Scripture, (This is
my body (...) else, they will expound all their sayings: that (...) still
remains: the natures of the creatures are not changed: Christ's flesh, which
was crucified is not in the Sacrament: Christ's flesh is present as in a
Mystery, as in a Sacrament, as in a figure, etc. with infinite such like, most
express sentences: They will, I say, so figuratively expound them all, to
show; that as they detest any figurative exposisition, of the words of
Scripture, in this Sacrament, so they themselves delight in nothing more, then
in figurative expounding most plain sentences of the Fathers, discoursing of
this mystery.

Again, when authorities of all the ancient Fathers, that ever had occasion to
entreat of the obedience of Subjects toward their natural Princes, and
lawful Sovereigns, be produced, to show that Christians ought to obey them,
Ad Romans 13.
even for conscience sake, although they be persecutors of the Christian
Religion; and that they never understood of the Imperial Papal power over
Kings, and kingdoms, which the Roman Bishops, now assume to themselves:
will they here strike sail, and do homage to the Fathers? No, God wot, they
fly out of the field; and for the most part, either they pass over the
question with silence, or else if they be English, and Ignatians, or
Ignatianed, they fall to libelling, and with namelesle Pamphlets, labor
continually to traduce Magistrates, Government, Majesty; only striving by such
a novel Gospel (to the Apologies of which they are ashamed to put their
names) to set up the majesty of the Roman Papal monarchy, and after
destroying of the Roman Empire, to ruinate such Kingdoms, as were, according
to the predictions of holy Prophets, to rise out of the Roman Empire, until
the times of malice be (...). I justly touch them here for writing of (...),
in defense of this Gospel, to which books they are ashamed, or else afraid
to put their names: wherein, they show themselves, to be right Parsonians, and
Ignatians, or else deeply ignatianed. Those infamous libels of stinking and
profane Pruritanus; and the most blasphemous masked Polonian Exetasis, against
the majesty's, glories, and governments of these Kingdoms: and expressly the
most disloiall quipping in the Polonian Exetasis, of Englands title P. W. The
Corrector. W. Pater Gib.
to France; Who composed them? Ignatians: who diuulged them? Ignatians, and
Ignatianed. The unsavory Pruritanus (worthy to be retorted into the Popes
bosom, but that the Majesty of Gods Scripture may not be abused) who caused
them to be reprinted again, after that most of them were taken at the
Venetian Ambassadors? Ignatians. Who brought new store of them again, over
into England? Ignatians. Who were so well pursed as to give eight shillings
apcece, yea an angel for such a profane Pamphlet, comprised in a sheet or two
of paper? The Ignatianed, and Brethren of the society. Who composed the late
idle Pamphlet, of the Puritan and Protestant Sister, communing against the Oath
of Allegiance? A simple and silly Ignatian creature, God wot. Who was the
Author of the late bragging recapitulation, in the title of which, the
namelesse Composer, (who as it is reputed, resting in S. John's Mount, should
have put P. W. to the end of the Pamphlet, rather then H. I.) promises a
recapitulation, together with a declaration; but fails in the latter; for he
declares nothing; only he recapitulateth, a certain learned book, as it is
thought of Leonard Lessius, the demonstrating Divine; which book as yet
appears not. Some say, the cause is, that the Sorbone Doctors of Paris
hearing of it, have written to Rome against the publishing of it, to the Popes
Holiness, for that (say they) France is not in a fit temper for such
doctrines. Others say, the French Ignatians have written unto their General
Aquauiua, to have the work stopped, because in this time, when their credits
are so shaken every where, for like pernicious doctrine it would greatly That
doctrine must not be allowed in France, which poor English Recusants must
maintain with all utter extremity, and manifest perdition of their souls.
hurt their cause. This is done to save the Ignatians skins whole, and yet
the poor English Recusants, termed both in Italy and France, the Popes Asses,
must bear the brunt of the Popes quarrel, though it be to their utter ruins.
I rather think the book is kept in, out of diffidence of their cause, and
that the Louanian society of Ignatians, will not permit their Divine to enter
into such an unsound quarrel, leaving it, as they say, for the English to
defend and undertake. Alas, the good English like Asses must undertake all,
and undergo all; yet there was never people upon earth who have had worse
success with traitorous doctrines and conspiracies then they. Again, who was
the composer of the late Libel against me? the which I never read, to make my
self merry therewith. But I heartily also reioiced that I was found worthy to
suffer contumely and disgraceful slanders for truths sake, and for my
Countries and Princes sake. Some silly Saint-Omeristian boy, for his Fathers
the Ignatians: who as it is reported, made themselves oftentimes merry with the
same at their recreations, and after their full meals; whom I here leave to
the making of Libels still, if they hold that a fit course to support their
desperate cause: only give me leave (Courteous Reader) here with two or three
particulars, to show how the young Ignatians like Crabs, learn of the old,
like as to write namelesse books for their gospel, so also to blaspheme
majesty and sovereignty, and to commend and engender disloyal spirits, and to
discommend and check the natural and loyal. Some year ago, and as much as
since July last, my self, with diverse other Priests, arriving at S. Omers, we
heard there a certain Ignatian preach upon that Matt. 7.
text, Beware of false Prophets, etc. In which his Sermon, before the whole
English audience at S. Omers, he did most bitterly inueigh against all such
Priests, as in England did allow and commend the Oath of Allegiance to be taken:
and according to his Pat. Fea.
name, he did so feake them, that he doubted not to call them Wolves, yea
ravening Wolves: and although (said he) they say Mass, minister the
Sacraments, say their other prayers, live virtuously, and so appear with the
outward clothing of sheep, yet they are Wolves) their ravenous and woluish
sin, being because they did not teach forsooth according to the order Mark
the nature of the Popes Mission, as the Ignatians interpret it.
of their mission, (mark his words,) nor according to his commandment, from
whom they had their mission (can you conceive the mystery of those words, the
order of their mission?) in teaching the Oath of Allegiance to be lawful:
surely this order of mission is that policy, which Robert Parsons meant, when to
a certain Pope, seeming loath to send such proper men into England (as came
before him, to kiss his feet, and to take his Benediction) where it was
probable they should fall into danger of death, and saying that ere it were
long he would take some other course for the converting of England) that
politik man replied thus in the very hearing, and not without admiration of
those Priests. Holy Father it is meet that they stay not, but go, and that the
Parsous policy.
policy be still continued; which word policy stroke so deeply into one of
those M. Wors.
Priests minds, that he has politikely kept himself out of England; and lives
still a poor life beyond seas rather then he will come into a Plentiful Country
to uphold Robert Parsons policy with danger of his life.

When the Reporters of the late most detestable murder of Henry the fourth,
the French King was somewhat fresh, and news was brought how, that most
hateful villain Rauilliacke, did seem to make some show of repentance at his
end: in so villainous a sort, (as before God his repentance was as bad as the
deed it self to wit in these words, (as it was reported) that he was sorry,
for that he had committed murder, but not sorry that he had killed Henry the
fourth the king of France: which report when I heard, I both detested, and
reproved the repentance, as wicked, and as devilish: but against me therein;
(although diverse Priests and Recusants were at Table) only a certain Pat.
Freem. alias War.
Ignatian Priest opposed himself; desending Rauilliacke, that in such a kind
of repentance he might have true and Christian contrition: to which,
(seriously beholding the man and ashamed of his Spirit, and almost of my self
(who was then a fellow prisoner with him) I replied thus, A certain pedanucall
Ignatian in his confutation of Anticotton, subscribeth his Epistle Dedicat. to
the Queen of France thus: Seruus bumilimus, Cliens ob sequen sissimus, O rator
sidelissimus, unus Patrum de Societate Jesu.
Father, (for so they must be all called) you and your order, have little
reason, in any respect to defend that most wicked villain, considering what a
Patron, the late murdered King, was to your Order, but notwithstanding my
reply, he held on, to maintain his paradoxe. He is now recollecting his
spirit, at Louaine. God indue him, with better Divinity, and sounder
distinctions before he return into this Country; he was here reputed half a
Saint; and therefore, I doubt, he may return again somewhat sooner then
welcome to England.

Not many years since, there was a certain worthy, and very worshipful
Gentle woman (for whose loyal heart, to Prince and Country, and for all those,
who with her, have issued from the same stock, I dare undertake, I am so well
acquainted with their true English hearts and dutiful affections) who being at
S. Omers, had, and wore about her neck, a certain Jewel, which was once
belonging to a great Princess. The Jewel being very precious and of gold, had
set into it an Agnus Dei, and under a clear Crystal upon one side thereof,
it had the picture of our Saviors face, upon the otherside, the picture of our
most excellent Sovereign, when he was a child: but how, that good
Gentlewoman, was taken up by an Ignatian Priest in my hearing for wearing of
it, about her neck, and before her breast; because it had our Princes picture
upon it, (who, as the Ignatian said, was a persecutor, and an enemy to
Catholic religion) I can tell, because I heard his reprehensions of her; and
defended her, wishing her, and charging her, in what I could, to continue that
custom still. But since that time, (I being not long to stay at Saint Omers,
and returning into England) I know not how, they have been so busy with her,
that for one respect or other, she could not keep it, quietly, but has sent
it away to Loretto; when I saw the Gentlewoman at S. Omers, some tweluemonth,
and more ago, I was very earnest with her, to know upon what occasion, she had
put the Jewel away, but I could not possibly learn of her: (she respecting
doubtless the Ignatian Fathers credit, at S. Omers) only she told me,
because she could, never, be in rest about it, but that they would be still
urging to I do not well remember whether her word was to get, or beg it.
get, or beg it from her, she vowed it to Lorette, whither also, she
accordingly sent it, notwithstanding many oppositions against the same her
fact: where also, now it remains, hanging upon the blessed Virgin Mary's
Picture, which is there worshipped and adored.

These three particulars, with some like, which I partly have forgotten, partly
omit: I write not (God is witness) for any other end, but to discover their
Spirits; that they may be taken, as they are, for the very despisers of
authority of whom the Apostle Judas has so expressly foretold long ago:
admonishing us to beware of them. For, it is a thing which I have ever
specially observed, that those who are the children of God, are guided with
Gods Spirit, especially, when they are prosecuting of the works, which
apportaine to God: if therefore these men, do thus most egregiously abuse
themselves, in the deliberate prosecuting of their religious courses, what may
be thought of their Spirits? They do often impose as against the truth of the
Gospel of the reformed Churches, that I dare stand to the defense of it that
the lives of Calan, Beza, were more commen dable, then the life of Parsons,
Creswell, or Hoalt and Garnet, their famous Martyt, who was (as it is reported
by honorable persons) tipfie a very few days before his end.
Calvin was a wicked man, an incestuous man: that Bean also was voluptuous man,
before he fell from them. But let them not tell what manner of men, they were,
when they were with them, but when they left them, and when they were gone from
them: for if they lived virtuously, religiously, obaritably, justly, (being
gone from them) either it will be thought, that they were calumniated to have
been vicious, when they were with them, or else that it was their corrupt
religion, and the spirit thereof, which then led them to wickedness.

It is credibly reported that Robert Parsons, being desirous to have had John
Gerrards life, written, amongst many things, to have been put in the same: one
special matter should have been, that he had converted to the Roman
profession; some of the damned crew as they once called themselves; to wit, the
two Powder-wrights, and Catesby who was another of the damned crew, as is
reported, and who was converted (as they speak) by Gerrard: and perhaps some
others of them: by which it is clear, that Robert Parsons, thought it no
stain to the Roman religion, to have most I could nominate diverse St^u^pets,
turned to them, but not converted, some are living, some are dead. Newgate is
well acquainted with such persons, and do not such hau^t thither sometimes,
yea, and confess, and yet profess still?
wicked men, turned unto it; and I hope it is no stain to the Professors of
Ignatius society, that their Protoparent Ignatius had so little feeling of God,
or so little sense of a religious life, before his wonders, (which as the
thunderclaps, made Luther a monk, they say) so they made Ignatius, the Parent,
and Father of so many renowned Ignatians. Bolsec. in vita calvin.
Hierome Bolsecke, a professed enemy to Calvin, writes most calumniously
against him, that being a Papist, he was both accused, and convicted for
Sodomy, and marked therefore, upon his shoulders; the records whereof, says
that lying Priest, remained at Noioune; whereas yet no credible person could
ever see them: the which if it had been true, why, (tell me some Bolsekian)
was, he suffered, to preach up and down afterward, in diverse Parish
Churches, of the Pontificians? And were, those of Geneua, so prodigal of their
souls, and rechlesse of their honors to commit themselves to such a man, so
publicly defamed? and why did not Bolseke discover this imputation before he
fell out with Calvin? and was driven to Lions, where to purchase credit with
the Archbishop, he devised such lies against Calvin, as he thought good? I
doubt not, but this against Calvin is alike true, with that which is written
against Martin Luther by Cocleus in vita Lutheri.
Cocleus: upon a certain time forsooth, (says Cocleus) when the gospel of the
dumb Devil was read; Luther being then by, suddenly he fell down crying out,
I am not dumb, I am not dumb: by the same showing himself to be possessed
with a dumb Devil: a likely tale surely, that notwithstanding this, the
Augustine Friars who were not ignorant, what the Canons of the Church had
provided in such a case, should with the authority of the Bishop, to whom their
Monastery was subject, promote him to the degree of Priesthood, and afterward
honor him with the great dignity to be a Doctor, and professor of Divinity
amongst them. Surely either Cocleus is an impudent liar, or else those
Augustine Friars were impudent fellows, to promote their dumb Devil to such
honorable and divine dignities; as Priesthood, and Doctorshippe are. Away
with these fables, and the like, which Cocleus and Bolsek have devised touching
the ends and deaths of Luther and Calvin, the which were both religious and
pious, as diverse worthy persons who were present at their ends have testified:
but observe these men's humors, one Cocleus, or one Bolsek professed Platina,
Mantuan, Caranza. Crantius, Sabel. Nauel. Marian Martin Polon. and almost all
other historians from him till Onuphrius. Benno Cardin. in vita Grego. 7.
enemies must be believed against Calvin or Luther, and a whole centurie of
Authors and Pontificians, describing a papisse Joan and her most hateful end,
must not be believed: one Cocleus against Luther must be believed, and yet a
Cardinal and a learned man of the College of Cardinals with diverse other must
not be believed against Gregory the 7. deploring and declaring his wicked life:
nor Sigibert relating his miserable end. I might here add somewhat, touching
their spirits in giving credit to their lying Legends; but of that perhaps
more fully hereafter: and truly I hope that considering their Popes have so
often pared their breuiaries (though leaving yet, many corruptions both in
their feasts of Dedications and in their office of Katherine virgin and
Martyr, and elsewhere) that before it be long they will crack Surius his
credit also for his many fables, as they have already, more or less broken
the credit of Iacobus a Voragine. Archbishop of Genoa in his golden Legend: of
Vincentius Belluacensis, and Antonine of Florence, whom they call Saint
Anthonine: but I will here only with the Readers patience, relate one of their
miraculous fables: Jacob. a Worag.
which I Legend. aurea. Anton. hist. part. 2. ^it. 13. cap. 6. Vincent. Specul.
lib. 23. cap. 140.
these three mentioned do relate. When Charles surnamed the Bald, came to S.
Egidius his Monastery (say they,) he being perplexed with a most grievous sin,
which he was ashamed to confess, he signified the same his grief to Egidius,
desiring him to pray for remission that of; whereupon he praide and that so
heartily, that a cortaine Schedule, by the hand of an Angel was given to
Egidius, in which it was written, that pardon was granted to Charles; and
withal it was added in the same Singraphe, that whosoever should afterward
call upon Egidius for remission of any sins by him committed, he should (if
he did leave to continue and commit the same) not doubt to have remission
there of by the merits and intercessions of Saint Egidius. How great was Diana
of the Ephesians? but far greater is Egidius of the Romans. Fie upon such
horrible blasphemies against the blood of Christ, and to the great dishonor of
that name, in which Act. 4.
only we purchase salvation: this vile fable reported by three such
witnesses, whereof two were Archbishops, and one of them a Roman Saint: the
other a Bishop, was sometimes used to be read and sung in old Breuiaries; but
now it is scraped out by Cardinal Quignone: but yet notwithstanding, there is
as bad stuff in this kind, left behind for the dishonor of Christ and of his
Apostles ad Corinth. 4.
(who desired to be esteemed no other, then as the Ministers of God, and the
dispensers of his mysteries) for they have made them Coredeemers, and
Coaduocates with Christ. Hear courteous Reader what they sing to them, and
then do thou judge. First in latin thus.

Breui^ria Roman. co^mu^. Apostole.
Qui coelum verbo clanditis,
Serasque eins soluit is,
Nos apeccat is omnibus,
Soluite Iussu, que sumus,
Quorum, praecepto subditur;
Salus, and languor omnium,
Sanate, aegres moribus;
Nos reddentes virtutibus.
Thus Englished by Verstegane.
Ye, which by words, the heavens close,
And loose thereof the locks again,
Vouchsafe, us free, by your behests,
From all the sins, that us restrain.
To whose commanding subject are,
Infirmittes, and healthes of all:
Our ill disposed, customs, cure,
And unto virtue us recall.
Whose eyes, are not shut, if here he do not plainly observe, how they have
taken the glory of only Redeemershippe and Aduocacy from Christ, and have
transferred it upon his Creature? how plain is it, that they beg those things
from the Apostles, which Christ only does give, and from whose only hands, we
are to expect them, to wit, peace and salvation? Vouchsafe O Christ, to open
their eyes, that seeing, they may see; and be converted, and thou (O God) heal
them; thou (O God) restore them to all virtues. I should here, declare
somewhat, how the Roman Church, trauaileth to make her Religion, to seem and
appear magnificent, pompous, glorious by devised shows; a fit devise indeed
to draw the simple, but wiser trauailers and indicious persons observing such
artificial and stagelike representations, Diverse both noble and very worthy
Gentlemen have taken great offense at the Spanish Fopperies in their
processions and have been greatly confirmed to continue still in the single and
sincere integrity of the reformed Churches.
gather another conclusion thereout; to wit, that their Religion is, humane,
not divine, not agreeing to the true ancient Christian simplicity of Christ's
Church. Do they think, that their sumptuous carrying their God up and down
streets, their public incensing and adoring of it, their devising of many
rich representations, to set forth their solemnities will draw the wiser
people, of such countries as are auerted, from the Romance Church? no God wot,
there is nothing more, auerteth them, then such open and heathenishlike kind of
worshippes, which were never dreamed of in ancient Churches, nor commended by
any ancient institution of any Governors of the same.

The Conclusion.
But I will make haste toward the Conclusion of these my motives; yet before
I end, I am constrained for the satisfaction of others, to show, with what
conscience and reason, I dare adventure, to leave communion, with that Church,
which is so famous, and so conspicuous, and which has been ever visible, for
so much as concerns external succession, and an outward kind of profession,
of many points of Christian Doctrme, since Christ's time: (as like continuing
of succession can be showed in the Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, etc.) It
cannot be denied, but that the Roman Church in the Apostles time, was a pure
and sound part of the Christian Catholic Church, (although in her very
infancy, she was sliding, if you believe Onuphrius, which moved S. Peter to
hasten and return unto her, and although Onuphrius in annotatan Platmam in
vitam Petri.
Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. cap. 31.
Eusebius relates Egesippus, to affirm, that whilst the Apostles lived, the
Church was an immaculate Virgin, and pure from error; but they being dead,
there did presently arise those, who did impugn the Apostolical truth)
notwithstanding these things, I doubt not to say, that the Roman Church
continued long time found in all substantial matters of Christian doctrine,
until humane Traditions began to entermixe themselves, with religion
instituted by divine authority, which then most apparantlie began, when the
Church came to enjoy temporal peace, and prosperity, presently after the days
of Constantine the Emperor, in whose time, and by whose donation poison was
powered into the Church, as the Vita Silaestri approbata.
life of Siluester Pope delivers of a certain Angelical voice, pronouncing as
much: the operation of which poison showed it self, partly in effect, in the
time of Damasus, when by reason of the competency, and contention which was
betwixt him, and Ammian. Marcellia lib 27. cap. 2 Ra on in Annal.
Vrsisine for the Roman See; so much blood was shed, that I hope, (if I Cortil
2. Marcellin ibid. S^crates l. 2. ca. 11 affirms how the Bishop of Rome
exalting themselus above the limits of Priesthood into temporal dominion
contended for the Primcay over all other Churches.
Saint Paul's argument be true) the Roman Church was then very carnal,
oppressed with such grievous contentions, and not being in unity of spirit,
thinking the same thing, but having such horrible schisms amongst them; and I
doubt not to affirm, but that Damasus more or less as he was delighted
(according to the fashion of Roman Bishops) with sumptuous attendance in his
person, so also more or less brought in sumptuous service, and pompous
ceremonies into the Church: and this the Pontificians cannot deny, if diverse
things that be in Damasus his Pontifical be truly attributed to that Popes
institution and collection (which in sundry things I believe not,) but this
Bishop is made a Saint in the Roman calender: the Lord knows for what
virtue, or when he was first fainted: perhaps for his tumultuous entrance, or
pompuous conversation in the chair of Rome, in which respect he may be
reputed in some degree the Protoparent of many his Successors.

These beginnings and entrances of corruption and vanity into the Church of
Rome observed, which in succeeding times, and in ages after ages grew into most
horrible grievous prophanations by the subtlety of Satan, whilst the
Governors of the Churches Math. 13.
were a sleep, that is, were lulled with temporal peace, and prosperity. I
seriously first consider, those Prophetical words of our Luc. 13.
Savior, in which he has foretold, that when he should come, he should
hardly find faith upon earth: which defection from faith, as it was to be, and
generally to ouerwhelme the whole world before Christ's second coming; so, who
could long ago precisely say, when it was to begin: only after-experience
has demonstrated it, and does tell us, that according to another Prophetical
prediction of the most blessed 2 ad These. 2.
Apostle, who has expressly delivered, that this defection and Apostasy should
be, when that man should sit in the temple, that is the Church: at whose
coming the Roman Empire should be taken out of the way, and who should extol
himself, (sitting in the Temple) above all, that is called, or worshipped as
God, upon earth: who should also, in himself, and by his followers work
wonders and miraculous prodigies; bosting and bragging therein: who should also
Apostatat from the charity of truth, that is, from the justifying faith in
Christ Jesus only: that justifying faith in Christ Jesus only, which is so
much, and so often commended in sacred Scripture; and who also should
Apostatate from most Articles of Christian doctrine. For, vain is that
exposition of the Remists, who would feign interpret this Apostasy, of which
the Apostle speaks to be from the Pope, and from his Primacie, and
particular Roman Church; (vain I say,) for who will say that a man might not
justly have departed from the communion of such Popes, as Genehrard. lib. 4,
Chronol s^^ulo 10. Baron. ad aun. 900. and anno 908. Plaim. in vita sapissime,
in Bonifa. 7. and 8 in Silucst 2, Renedict. 9. in Ioh. 8.
they themselves account Apostaticall, and not Apostolical? who only are
related in histories, to make up the external number of succession? and I
pray you, what was the case of so many hundreds of Prelates, and your own
Cardinals, who at Pisa departed from the Roman true Bishop; true (I say) for
external succession? what of the Prelates of the Council of Basile, which
consisted of most Bishops of the West, who departed from the communion of
Eugenius, (with the Pontificians, the undoubted Bishop of Rome?) What of the
Clergy, and part of the Church of Rome it self, who departed from Liberius,
when Eusebius one of the Roman Church, with some others were grievously
persecuted? It is a vain narration of our Ignatians, and others to say that
this Apostasy, prophesied by the Apostle, and Christ, must be interpreted from
the Bishop of Rome: for it is most evident, that it must be from Jesus
Christ himself, and the true justifying belief in him only; and most vain it
is for them to say, that the infallibility of doctrine, was so tied to the
visible succession of Bishops in the Roman particular See: for if so, how
comes it to pass, that against John the 23. the true Pope for succession, it
was proved in a general Can constant. Sess.
Council, that he had pertinatiously thought, and often taught, that there
was no immortality of the soul, no resurrection of the body? what might not a
man have departed from the communion of this Pope? if not; then the whole
Roman Church, which in the council of Constance, apostated from him; made
that Apostasy, of which the Apostle foretold. Which if it be true, what will
become of Paul the fifth with his congregation?

The Remists fearing that the defection from the Roman Empire, and destruction
of the same, should be a step to prove that he who has ouerthrown the same,
and set another form of government in Rome, absolute, and sovereign; and yet
not, as of the Roman Emperor; do therefore most shamelesly, in their
Annotat. 17. Apocalypse. upon the word Babylon.
annotations upon the Apocalipse so separate the government of Rome, and of the
Church in Rome, as though they were not united together, but remained still, in
that sort in which they both were in the time, when the Apostle made this
prediction: for thus they write in express terms: whereby it is plain (say
they) that whether Babylon or the great Whore, do signify Rome, here or no,
yet it cannot signify the Church of Rome, which is now, and ever was distinct
from the terrene empire of the same. Thus they without all shame, or learning;
where they would feign put off from the Pope and his Cardinals, the reproach of
having the terrene Empire, or government of Rome in their hands: which I verily
suppose they do hold so fast, that they will not leave the same Apoc^l 7.
until the ten horns (which erst as Kings have received power after the
beast, that is, upon the decaying and desolation of the beast, and have also
joined for the appointed time, power with the beast, against the lamb, because
jointly concurring to uphold the impious superstitions, and abominations of
the Whore, of whose cup they have all drunk, even almost till they have
vomited it up again) God putting into the hearts, shall eat the Harlots
flesh, and make her naked and desolate, and consume her with fire. This harlot,
which shall be so eaten, and burned by those Kings, who had erst drunk of the
cup of her whoredoms, Whom can she design, but (as Ibidem.
Saint John says) that City which had command over the Kings of the earth, to
wit, erst in her Emperors, after in her Popes and Cardinals should, have
power, and command over the Kings of the Earth: the which who sees not, is
verified in the City of Rome it self? as not only certain Ancient Fathers,
but certain, Ribera in 14. Apocal. viega in 17. Re^ist. in Apocal. Bellarmin.
lib. de Rom Pont.
Ignatians themselves also expound it: (and if it signify not Rome, let the
Adversary produce some other City here described) so that, the Beast that was
and is not, to wit, the rule and command of the City of Rome, which was before
in the Consuls, Senators, and Commonwealth, buf now it is not, (because it is
in the Emperors) shall be again in the Pontif^x etc. The Pope and the
Purpured Fathers judge the world. Coquae contra Praemon.
Pope, and his purpured Cardinals.

To proceed, where should this defection, rather be, then in Babylon which S.
John has foretold? Now that by Babylon Rome (according to the exposition
Hieron. in prologo Didimi epist. 17. ad Marcel. Tertul. lib. aduer. Judaeos.
of the Ancient Fathers) is to to understood, Annot^m 17. Apocal.
the Remists themselves dare not stiffely deny it; now as clear as the Sumit
is, that therefore Rome is called Babylon, because she has made drunk, with
the cup of her whordomes, all Kings of the Earth, and all Nations, who have
pledged her: which by no means can be expounded, of Rome heathenish, both in
respect that she did not, infect with her whoredoms, the Countries and
provinces, which she conquered; but rather she obtained no Country nor
Province, of whose whordomes she drunk not her self, by bringing their gods
Images, into her Capitol to be worshipped and adored with the Images of their
Roman gods. And manifest it is, that the Prophet speaks of a cup of
fornication, which Kings, and Nations, were to drink of; somewhat after his
time: but Rome heathenish, and he^ Emperors, were in their ruff and most
triumphing, when S. John made this Prophecy: again, Tertull de resurrect
carais cap. 25 Bellar. understands, that the t^n Kings which shall hate the
Whore, shall divide the Roman Empire taking kingdom^ to themse^^es, and
afterw^rd destroy Rome it self. Bellar. lib. 3. de Pout. cap. 13.
the Kings of the Earth, who were to drink of the cup, were afterward, to
hate this Whore, and to make her desolate, therefore, and in respect, of her
abominations: now this can by no means, be understood of Heathenish Rome;
which was long ago converted to Christ, and her blemishes of Idolatry, washed
out by the blood of the Lamb, in the the time of Constantine. And to say, that
Rome Christian, should be punished, for the cup of Whordomes, which Rome
Heathenish, gave to the Kings of the Earth, to drink of, is a mere chimera;
unless they can show that the most just God, will punish Jacke (as is said)
for Gill, or else, they can prove unto us a Pithagarian transmigration of
souls, from Rome Heathenish, into Rome Christian.

Further, it is, most apparent, (as I have mentioned above) that the cupps of
whordomes, here spoken of, should be in the hands of one, who had been first
Hierom. epist. 17. ad Marcel. Rome was then in part the purpured Who^e, and
Babylon.
a Spouse, and had for her husband Jesus Christ, from whom she was to fornicate
and to commit Adultery, with her favorites, the Nations and Kings of the
Earth; to whom also, she was to send cupps of fornication, to wit of false
Doctrines, rites and impure superstitious: and the same Kings to drink
thereof, and to pledge her, by loving embracing of her doctrines: now, as
clear as the Sun it is, that Rome Heathenish, was never a spouse of Jesus
Christ; but Rome Christian was; and therefore egregiously commended by the Cap
1. ad Romans
holy Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans. Besides, to dispute probably, the
clothing of * Apo^alop. 7.
this Whore, with Purple and Searlet, in her Pope and Cardinals, the writing of
the name Mystery, (according to the like express Prophecy of S. John) in the
Popes Diadem; beset with many precious stones, * Ibidem
the Popes Diadem; beset with many precious stones, which I very credibly
heard (when I was student in Rome, not without a kind of astonishment) to have
been once placed there, and set in that part of the Diadem, which was for
the Popes forehead: but now it is removed. Her persecution, against such as
give testimony, to the name of Jesus: that in it only, without anyintermixio^
of humane helps, salvation is to be had. These things; with many such like
agreeing to sacred Scripture, testify that Rome is the Whore. And here, I
note by the way, how incredible, the cruelty of that City is, against such as
give testimony to the holy name of Jesus. For besides, their most close couping
up of such as they persecute, into their dark chambers, in their inquisition:
their merciless separation of them from all friends, whatsoever; the most
extreme penurious diet, wherewith they afflict them; the great injuries that
they offer unto them in dispoiling them, of all they have; whether it be gold,
silver, or precious stones; (by which they might relieve themselves) the
horrible torments, and torturings; the dreadful threats of imminent death, by
certain tragical representations etc. they are also sworn, as I have been
informed, (although I will not stand to justify it) at their entrance into the
inquisitions, never to discover, whatsoever shall be done to themselves, or
whatsoever they may perceive and see done to others in that place. O cruel!
the Pontifician Priests in England do think themselves extremely dealt
withal, to be kept together in common Prison, with free access to each other,
and with access also of friends unto them, (except upon some special
restraint, which as it never lasts but for a time, so it is never so great,
but that friends may come at least to the gates of such Prisons, to bring them
relief) And in some Prisons about this City, they are permitted with keepers,
or without keepers; to pass up and down the City freely, to their friends:
yea, and diverse of them of whom the State is not assecured, for their loiallty
by the taking of the Oath of Allegiance, have daily this liberty. Judge
Christian Reader, hereupon, what measure, the Pope, and his, measure to such,
as give testimony to the dreadful name of Jesus, in respect, of that clement
course, which is taken with such as he sends into this Kingdom, directly,
or indirectly, to bring the same to his subjection and command. God in his
mercies, may auert what he, and his intend, but give me leave to speak, I see
that of Luc. 16.
Christ, verified, The children of this world, are wiser in their generation,
then the children of light. God forbid, I should wish the blood of any to be
shed: yet God forbid, but I should pray for the preventing of al seducers of
souls, and the moderate and charitable restraining of them.

But to return, to my purpose, that the Church of Rome, may be this Whore and
fall into false doctrines; hear what Hieron. in epitaph. Marcel.
S. Hierome, writes of her pronesse to corruption in his time. ( Heretica,
etc.) An Heretical tempest being risen in these Provinces, brought a ship,
full of blasphemies, into the Roman Port. And feet bemired with dirt, did
mingle themselves, into the pure fountain of the Roman faith; then holy
Marcella, after she perceived that the faith, which was praised by the ad Romans
1.
Apostolical mouth, was violated in many things, so that Priests, many Monks,
and especially men of the World, were drawn in to assent, thereof, and the
simplicity of the Bishop also was deluded; she publikly resisted; thus he.
Consider Christian reader, a woman must make resistance against a ship of
blasphemies and heresies, infecting the Roman Church: A woman must awake the
simple Bishop, or else even then, Rome had committed whordome, from her spouse.
Alas, there wanted a Marcella in the Church of Rome, in the time of John the
22. when that Gerson. in 4. part sermon. de paschate Adrian. in 4. sent. de
Sacrament. Confirmat. Bellar. lib 1. de Pont. cap. 14. Ioh. Villan. bist. lib.
10. lege compeudium errorum johan. 22 apud occbam.
Pope with his Court, taught, that the Saints departed, see not God till the
day of judgment: Yea, he not only taught it in Rome, but also sent his
Preachers, abroad, amongst which John Creature, General of the Order of
Minor-Friers, came to Paris, where he preached the same Heresies, and would
have continued, had not fear of fire, which was threatened, by the King of
France, stopped him in his course.

In like sort, was the Roman Church, polluted, and deluded with her Bishop; as
Tertull. lib. ad. ucrsus Paxeam.
Tertullian records, when she sent letters of communion to the heretical
Churches of Asia, and Phrigia, who professed, and acknowledged, the impious,
and heretical doctrine of Montanus and his Prophetisses. And as she has
been often corrupted, in the fountain; so has her corruption spread it
self, throughout the whole Church; to fulfill the Apostasy, and defection
foretold by Christ, and his Apostles.

And I would demand, of these men, who rest upon the Successio sedis, etc.
Succession in See is only a matter of name, succession of faith has the thing
it self and truth. Greg. Narianzen. in orat. de laudibus Athanas.
visible succession, only of the Bishops in the Roman Church, (the like being
to be found in other Churches, which themselves condemn for heretical.)
First, what they would have done, if they had been with Aaron, and the whole
visible Church of the Jews, where, in the desert, in worshipping their Golden
Calfe, they Exodus 32.
pretended to keep a feast to their Jehovah, who had brought them out of
Egypt? would they have obeyed Aaron? and have followed the multitude?

Again, when Elias complained (and this after Psalm 86. 88. 110. 132. see
Iere^^. 33.
greater promises, had been made by God to Jerusalem and their Church, then
any can be showed made to Rome or the Church there) that he 3. Reg 19.
himself, was left alone in Israel; and that all but he with Achab and
Iezabel the Idolatrous Princes, worshipped Baal (though, even then, and in
Israel also, not only in Judah, as the Papists will have it) God had Ibidem
7000. who had never bowed to Baal) what would they have then done? would they
have publicly followed the face of that Church? and that visible Government?
and not rather, have been in society, and communion with the invisible
company? Or rather, I ask, would they at that very time, have followed the
visible multitude in Jury and Hierasalem, which at Reg 3. cap. 22. 3. Reg. cap.
9.
that season did sacrifice, and burn incense in the high places? by whose
Idolatries, it cannot be denied; but that the whole Church of Jury, was
contaminated, and polluted at lest with the communion of that Idolatrous
multitude, although the Priests of Jerusalem withal did offer Sacrifice, to
the true God of Israel.

Again, what would these men have done in the time of Achaz, and Manasses? in
the days of both which most sacrilegious Kings; the Priests with the whole
public visible Church, 4 Reg. 16. and 4. Reg. 21.
worshipped strange gods? would they then have joined with the visible Church?
and have obeyed the Idolatrous high Priest of that time? and I hope, they will
not say, that the Law of Deuteron. 17.
Deuteronomy decreeing that who should not obey the high Priests sentence for
the time, should die therefore, did not excuse, the whole Church of Jerusalem,
in obeying Vrias the high Reg. 16.
Priest, who according as King Achaz of Judah had commanded him, had erected an
impious Altar, according to that of Samaria; setting aside, that, which God
himself had appointed, until the King should determine thereof.

Again, what would these have done in the time of Annas, and Caiphas, the high
Priests? whose precepts and commandments, neither Christ nor his Apostles
would obey, although they sat upon the chair of Moses: yea, and although,
Christ had before taught the Jews, that they Math. 18.
should do, what the Phariseis and Scribes sitting upon the Chair of Moses,
should teach and command them to do? Belike, these men, if they had been, in
those times, regarding the Deuter. d7.
Law of Moses, which decreed, that whosoever, disobeied the sentence of the
high Priest, should die; would have associated themselves, with Annas, and
Caiphas against Christ, and his Apostles; rather then, with the poor
contemptible company of Christ disciples, which was so small, and so invisible,
at the time of Christ's passion, that some of the Adversaries, would seem to
have it, to have remained and consisted only in the most blessed Virgin Mary,
(though this most falsely.) For doubtless, there were, diverse then secretly
dispersed in the land of Iewry, who believed in Christ, and had heard nothing
of the scandal of the cross: And although Math. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
Peter, with mouth denied, and abiured Christ, yet I cannot think, but that
faith in his heart was still firm, and also, that some other of the Apostles,
and good devout women did still in their hearts constantly believe in him, and
were parts of his hidden Church there.

But the Adversary, will object, that visible Succession, and the Authority of
the High Priests in the Church of the old Testament, was not a sufficient
warrant, for such as should follow them, commanding any thing, against Gods Law?

Again, that their succession, was not to continue, but for a time, and in the
end to be abolished, and quite removed. Good God, as though the Law of
Deuteronomy, were not an everlasting Law, and most express for the high
Priests authority? so express, that your high Priest, now, and his Bellar.
lib. 4. de Ron. Pont. ^rp. 16. Baron. in Annal. Ca^etan. Tollet. Stapleton,
Allen, ally.
Cardinals, in his behalf, do challenge greatest prerogative of power, and
jurisdiction from the same. Good God, as though, visible succession had not
been promised, to be in that place, of which ^sal. 131.
God said, it was his resting place for ever? of which David speaking unto God,
said thus? Arise, O God, into thy rest, thou and the Arc of thy
sanctification? Of which place, King 3 R g 9.
Solomon, in his dedication of the Temple, spoke such magnificent promises? As
though Ierem. 33 Psalm. 8.
God, had not promised, visible succession in the 33. of Jeremy, in the lineage
of Leui, for ever? Protesting that his promise and pact should fail with the
day, and night, before it should fail with the Church of Jerusalem; with many,
yea, infinite such like promises in the holy Scriptures: and yet
notwithstanding, the same; we see that the succession of that Church is utterly
extirpated. How much rather, may the Church of Rome have her succession, either
extirpated, abolished, or corrupted, the which can show no special promise for
her self, and for her everlasting establishment? there are indeed, most firm
promises, for the Catholic Church of Christ; but for the Roman particular
Church, there are no promses at all, if there be any, let them be produced. And
if the Adversary reply, and say, the Roman Church, was once a Pure Church, and
a Virgin, therefore she must, be so taken still, unless, you can precisely
show the time, when, and by whom, corruptions were introduced into that Church.
Upon this reply, they triumph, they insult, but it is, God wot, very vain:
for, if Cockle and Darnell was to be sowed by the ^ Math. 13.
enemy, when the Pastors of the Church were a sleep? (not sleeping a natural
sleep, but a sleep of ease, security, prosperity, pleasure, ignorance:) What
marvel that the precise time when such cockle and darnell was sowed, cannot
be delivered? for tell me, O thou wirty adversary; who should have specified
the time? the Pastors? they were a sleep: yea, and by them sleeping, the Devil
sowed cockle and darnell of heresy, of idolatry of impurity: and therefore a
sleeping and a dreaming disputer, may I call thee who would bring out
sleeping witnesses: but yet to satisfy your triumphing reply; although the
precise times, places, and persons cannot be expressed, when your heresies
first began to take root, first to bud or to spring forth; yet we can specify
the very individual, personal, singular, and special persons, times, and
places, where and when your opinions were first received, as Articles of Faith
and belief.

And what? is it not an evident demonstration, to show any thing to be novel
and new, if it can be demonstrated, when the same was not received, although
the special time, and manner of the beginning of it cannot evidently be showed
and demonstrated; but only probably conceived by some probable conjectures?
And although the Roman Church do boast of a visible and a conspicuous
company, professing Christ (although most corruptly) continuing from Christ's
time, yet that is not enough, unless they can also show succession in
doctrine. For a man who would rely for his salvation upon the public and most
conspicuous Church professing Christ, what should he have done in the time of
Constantius the Arrian Emperor? when the whole visible conspicuous Church,
overwhelmed with Arrianisme, decreed in councels so greatly, and so
dangerously, that as Hierom. aduers. Luc^feria.
Saint Hierome reports, the whole world maruailed, how it was become an
Arian: yea and most lamentable, was the face of the visible Church, especially
in Rome, it self: when Liberius returning out of banishment, Hieron. lib. de
scriptoribus. in fortunat. and in Ch^on Libertus ipse in Epist. ad Episc.
Orient. apud Bellar. lib. 4. cap. 9. de Pont. and Bellar. ibid^m. Athanas. in
Ep^st ad So^^t. vitam agentes, Damasus Pope in Liberio. Hilar. lib. contra
Constant. ^ozom. lib. ^. cap. 14. Nicepb. lib. 9 cap. 37. and alij.
subscribed to the Arian faith (which had been, before decreed, in diverse
public, almost universal Councels, of the whole Church, as at Millaine, at
Ariminum, etc.) and by the same subscription, confirmed, and decreed as a point
of Catholic faith; what the Bishops before had resolved upon, and subscribed
unto: for in the subscription of Bishops, and confirmation of Popes consists
the robour and strength of Roman Articles of faith, so infallibly that the
whole Roman Church is bound to receive them and to profess them after such
decrees and subscriptions. And truly, the answer, which Liberius made before
his banishment, and whilst he was constant in the Catholic faith, unto
Constantius the Emperor, is for the same purpose very worthy reading: for,
whereas the Emperor thus objected unto him, what was he? and what thought he
of himself? who would oppose himself against all Bishops of the world: he
answered (not thinking as our men now do of the Popes sole inerrablenesse,
neither as daunted with the whole visible multitude against him,) most
resolutely Theodoret. lib 2. hist. cap 16.
thus; that although he and Athanasius were Vbi suut tandem, etc. Where are
they now, who exprobrate unto us poverty, and do insolently brag of their
wealth? where are they who define the Church by a multitude and despile the
little flock? Gregor. Nazianz in Arianos. Orat. 11.
alone, yet the cause of faith was nothing the worse; for long ago said he,
there were only three, who withstood the Kings (he means Nabuchodonozor)
commandment; but doubtless these men, who stood so much upon the visibility
of succession; and upon the greatest multitude, would upon the return of
Liberius back to Rome, (and his sitting in that chair also some good time,
before he again renounced the communion with the Arrians and their faith, to
which he had subscribed before) they would surely have communicated with
Liberius, and have despised the contemptible, and persecuted Church of
Athanasius and Felix, with some few Romans, who then rightly believed, and
professed Christ. Besides if it be necessary to join with the greatest
multitude professing Christ after the Roman fashion: doubtless, have was the
case of their Romanists in times of their very many, very great, and grievous
Certain Decades of most horrible schisms have been in the Roman Church
Platina Baron. per Anal.
schisms; when their whole Church has been overwhelmed with the power of
some Anti-Popes: besides, to argue ( ad hominem) in the time of the Council of
Franck ford, when the Bishops of France, Germany and England, with diverse of
Italy decreed against your second Nicene Council, commanding adoration and
worshipping of Images; what might a faithful Christian of the West have done?
was he to obey the decree of Franck ford or not: if you say yea, then your
Nicene Council is condemned: if not, then always the greatest multitude, and
the public visible Pastors, though assembled in Council, are not to be
obeyed; which was then very great and conspicuous: especially, if you had
adjoined their authorities, with all those Prelates of the East Church, who in
diverse and sundry councels under Constantine and the two Leos who had before
condemned the adoration of Images, you should have found the same far to have
surpassed that of your Tridentine Council in Germany, consisting for most part
of your Titulary Italian Bishops. In time of the Council. Ba^^. Sess. 34. See
the Epistle of the Fathers of the Council of Basile to the Electors of the
Empire, Tom. 3. Constitutio. Imperial. page 456.
Council of Basile, when Eugenius the 4. Pope, was deposed and accused by that
Council and Felix, elected in his room by the Bishops of France, Germany
and England; with diverse also of Italy, and some also of Spain, tell me were
the secret Eugenians in those Kingdoms (if there were any) bound to follow the
greatest multitude of Prelates? beware you grant it; for it will not stand
with the credit of your visible succession. Doubtless the state of the
Christian Church was such at that time, that a Chrrstian was bound only to
adhere to the everlasting, and indeffectible head of his Church, Christ Jesus;
and was no more bound to follow Felix then Eugenius with his council at
Florence: (the which Schismatic council (to note by the way) was the first
that publicly decreed the number of seven Sacraments, and Purgatory fire, as
soundly and as catholikly, as some few years after, the Tridentine fathers
assembled, of a few French or Spanish, but most Italian Bishops, (whereof also
many were Titular only, and were made to fill up the number) decreed many
heretical, and most pernicious positions against the ancient and apostolic
faith: and it is no marvel they did so egregiously err, for they were not to
determine any thing which might displease Rome, and therefore so soon as some
of them began to consult about reformation of the Court and Church of Rome,
with the Bishops thereof, presently by a peremptory Placet of Pius the
fourth, the whole Council was dissolved, and their good intentions wholly
frustrated, they only leaving behind them, their subscriptions to their
corrupt decrees; which subscriptions notwithstanding, were never made so full
and perfect, that the number of the Prelates subscribing, happened to be one
whole hundredth, at Concilium Trident. editum a ^innio.
any one of their sessions and general subscriptions.

But to return to my purpose, if Saint John in his Revelation, do so clearly
pronounce, that the woman (by whom the Church of Christ is described, according
to the exposition almost of all) is to flee into the desert, there to be
nourished, favored, and protected by God ( per tempora, tempus, and dimidium
temporis) for times, for a time, and for half a time; by Apoc. 12.
which flight is understood the secretnesse, hiddennesse, and inuisibility of
the true Church, not only for three years and a half, as all the Pontificians
for most part eagerly do contend, but for some longer time sufficient, for the
accomplishment of all such things, which have been foretold by the Prophets:
but because I would incline, to interpret this flight of the woman, to have
been about the time of Constantius, or else to signify some other particular
desolation, and destitution of the Church, when she was persecuted by the
Gentiles, I do not much insist upon it: and yet although this general
destitution of the Church, should last but for a short time (as they desire,)
yet it quite overthrows their ground of the Churches Almost all Pontificians
acknowledge that in Antichrists time the true Church shall be in conspicuous
without any public ^^uic^ so Bellarmine Dried. S^a^es. Val^nt. R^mists
clearly upon the 2. to the These. 2.
continual, and never intermitted, manifest, and universal conspicuity.

Further, without all question, if the Apocal. 13
whole world shall admire after the image of the beast, which image of the
beast, must of necessity be understood of some kind of Monarchical government,
Empire or rule; the which like an Image shall represent, and stand as it were,
in stead of the Roman Empire it self; then doubtless, the number of those,
which shall refuse to adore the Image of the beast, and to acknowledge the
Popes temporal and spiritual absolute Monarchy, will not be great, but small
at the very first, till God by the spirit of his mouth, shall vouchsafe, by
degrees to destroy the harlot, where the image of this beast resideth. To
confirm what I have said, I will annexe the prophecy of one Hildegard a
religious Virgin; whom the adversaries repute a Saint, and Theodoric. Niem. 2.
l^b. de priuilegijs Imperij cap. de O^b. 2. and 3.
whose books (in the which this prophecy is) Eugenius the third, in a Council
at Treuers, (at which Saint Bernard was present) received and approved. This
devout Virgin having prophesied of a defection that should be from the Roman
Empire, she foretells also of a general division that should be in the church
and withal, how by reason of the wickedness, pride and neglect of Religion,
which all would see in the (Popes) Apostolical (as she calls them) all
Kingdoms * This her prophecy is ag^^ing to the doctrine of l^a^ned (...) in
his book of the au^^^^ibility o^ the Pope, and in the time of Pope Juli^s all
the Prelates of France at Tou^es in a Council there, affi^med the same, as
John d^ S^^^s relates in Lewis the 12.
would thereupon choose unto themselves, Archbishops and Governors of other
names, under whom they might and would profess Christ and his pure Religion,
leaving (says she) unto the Pope, Rome alone, with a few territories adjoining
thereunto: and under such Governors and Archbishops (says she) Peoples and
Kingdoms, shall embrace justice, and observe the ancient customs and
disciplines, as the ancie^ts were accustomed to do; Thus she: by which
prophecy, it is evident, what this Saint, and all those, who approved her
books, thought of necessary subjection to the Bishop, and Church of Rome.

Not unlike is that which they write of their Prophetisse Lib. 4. reuelat. cap
57.
Brigit: she brings in the mother of Christ thus speaking to her son: Rome
is a plentiful field; to whom Christ answered, thou say true; but cockle
has ouergrowne this field, and therefore it must be cleansed with a sharp
iron, it must be purged with fire, and plowed with oxen; therefore I will
deal with it, as he who remoueth plants into another place: for The Bishop of
E^hesus was threatened by God to have his Candlestick ^emooued out of his ^lace
for leaving of his first charity, Apocal 2 What presumption therefore (...) the
Roman Pop^s to think these Candlestick canno^^^ removed, who have aband^ned
all the primitive cha^ity of the Apostles, and are whole* degene rated into a^
c^ta^i^^ of sin, b^t I wish the^ to ^ead the ^^* of S. Paul's epist to them.
such a punishment is provided for that City: as if the Judge would say, flea
off the whole skin, draw out of the flesh all the blood: cut all the flesh
into pieces, and break all the bones, that all the marrow may flow away; thus
there: and if the prophecy of the worthy virgin Meethildis be truly related
from her, the controversy with Rome is at an end; for she in express terms
foretells, that the Church of Rome, should wholly apostotate from the faith of
Christ; and that there should remain in Germany, a poor and persecuted Church,
which should serve and worship God, religiously and purely. This is clear, and
likewise that of John Capistran is as clear, that Rome in time would be so
purged, and the Popes and Cardinals brought so in order, that there would be
none found, who would make haste to be Pope; contrary to the fashion now Read
did. 79 cap si quis. and Baron Anno 912.
used, when no one almost enters canonically, but either by favor and
canuasing of some Cardinal, or procurement of some Prince, or by bargain, (as
Simon would have bought power to have given the holy Ghost.) This John
Capistrane, whom I mentioned, was reputed a Saint by them; as likewise was John
of Calabria, as Poss^^ine in a par. verbo C^^^llus.
Posseuine in his Apparate affirms of him of whom Roger Houeden reports,
that he should affirm, that one l Hou^d. in Ric. 1.
who should be Antichrist and a Pope was then born in Rome: vulgar is the like
prophecy of Ioakim Abbot by me mentioned above, of Antichrist then born in
Rome: sundry are the like prophesies, which them selves also admit, amongst
themselves, to their own confusion, and yet forsooth, they would tie all
(under pain of damnation) against all Scriptures, and all Antiquity, to embrace
their novelties, and in no case to forsake Rome: but against this their
paradoxe, I may most justly use the words of Tertul. Apolog. cap. 6.
Tertullian, unto them, used by him in like case: vbi religio; vbi veneratio,
etc. Where is Religion? where worship, and reverence due from you to your
Elders? in habit, living, discipline, sense: and last of all, even in speech,
you have renounced your Ancestors; you always praise Antiquity, but day by day
you live newly: thus he: so these men, in all their vanities of Pardons
grains, round wafers, merits of Saints, Purgatory fire, transubstantiation,
adoration of Images, etc. pretend Apostolical Tradition, but being urged to
show them to be ancient, and to carry them upward toward the Apostles, they
faint in the midway; and when forsooth they fail, they will then vow,
profess, pronounce, and protest; that although they know no mention made of
them, yet sure they were all used before that time, even from the Apostles
days: and here they stumble into that absurdity (which they vainly object
against others) to wit of invisible, inaudible, and vnlegible Traditions:
(one of their Rules of faith) the practice whereof, in ancient times they
cannot show: and although the pure Church of Christ, had been for many years
together so invisible, so inconspicuous, that there could no known, nor set
Congregation be defined, where Christ was publicly and conspicuously
professed, in the public face of any Kingdom: yet such are the impieties,
impurities, Idolatries, and most presumptuous and tyrannical usurpations of
the Bishop of Rome, and consequently, of the Church of Rome: that I could not
but think desperately of my souls salvation, if (after God my Savior, and
most dear Advocate, has vouchsafed to open mine eyes) I should otherwise
associate my self unto her, then by way of compassion, greatly lamenting her
abuses, bewayling the heavy judgments of God, which hang over her head: humbly
praying that her humiliation may be in that manner as their John Capistrane
foretold; or as their Prophetess Briget foretold it should be, by means of
the frankes: rather then so, as the Romulo regnan te Roma Trium phante, Sibilla
Delphica dixit, regnum Rome, rue^ ferro, Flam ma fam^, frigore.
Sybill Delphick foretold it, to wit, that Rome should be ruinated with the
sword, fire, famine, and cold.

I do with my very heart bewail her estate, and at this p^esent with the
words of the Religious and learned Arnulphus spoken in a Synod at Remes, (as
Barro: anno 992 numero. 22.
Baronius reports them) O Rome to be lamented, which to our Ancestors,
did yield bright lights of Fathers; and in our times sendest forth
monstrous darkness, which in the Ages to come, will be infamous; What? o ye
Reverend fathers? what? (I say) do you think, him to be? who sits thus, in
a lofty throne, in his purple Robes, and glittering Gold? certainly, if he be
without charity, lifted and puffed up with knowledge, he is a very Antichrist,
sitting in the the Temple of God; and showing himself, as if he were God: but
if he have neither charity, nor knowledge, then he is an Idol, and to seek
answer from him, is to seek it, from the very stones; thus he. But more justly
may a man, bewail the mysery of this time, when so monstrously, the Bishop of
Rome, Paul Breuia. duo P^uli. 5. cout. Iura Fidelitatis.
the 5. sitting in his purple Robes, has sent out Brief upon Brief, without
charity, without knowledge: so without knowledge, and consideration of the
times, that as I have credibly heard, many of the Italians themselves call him
therefore, Gross headed, and in scorn Tramontane: so without knowledge, that
(notwithstanding, the continual challenges, of learned Persons,
Ecclesiastical Prelates, and of the Kings most excellent Majesty) he will not
once vouchsafe to give 1. Pet. 3.
ratione fidei, an account of his faith in his Briefes, which is so earnestly
required at his hands: that according to the inference of learned Arnulphus,
he may be reputed a Purpured Idol. Void also and without charity; because not
giving his English followers any comfortable instructions, he exposes them by
his peremptory commands only, to utter ruin of themselves, and their
families: void of charity, because he depriueth such Priests as are in all other
erspects his, of their faculties: (so they are now called for the Priesthood
being changed, the law must be changed, and laws being changed, new names must
be devised:) a^^ yet he provides not for them any means to live, and his
charitable Disciples here in England, do every where proclaim and exclaim
most bitterly against them. Lastly, I greatly bewail her auaricious
impurities, for if the Archbishop of Canterbury, their S. Thomas Becket, duist
say, his mother Thomas Cantua epist. ad ^^ch. (...).
Rome was become a strumpet, and prostituted for reward, because Alexander the
third, his good father, did not suddenly satisfy his immoderate desire against
his Sovereign King and some Prelates of this kingdom: What? may not we now
more justly exclaim against her for her dailey prostitutions, by most corrupt
rewards and corruptions? and for the daily practices of her against this
Kingdom, to the utter ruin and subversion of the same, only aiming at profit
and Soueraignety?

But here giving a conclusion to my former discourse, I humbly beseech thee,
good God, to inspire the hearts of the Honorable Magistrates of this Kingdom,
that as they do, so they will continue; prouidently, and effectually, to
stop the Ignatians transcendency, aiming at nothing else, but the subversion
of Souls, and Popish thraldom of this Kingdom: and good God, vouchsafe to
hear the prayer of a sinful wretch, beseeching thee also, more fully * O
Rome, hear the voice once made to Pho^as, and do thou repent O King altho^gh
thou build above the clouds; thy Palace, may be taken: the sin ^i^hin w^^
m^rre Thy within thee, O Rome, will mar a^, and thy Palace will down
although thou down although thou build above the clouds.
to open the eyes, of such, which are already in part opened to see Romes
tyranny, but not as yet opened to see her filthy Idolatry, and to renounce
communion with her. That ambicious her (I say) who, as she did in the time of
Lotharius, the Emperor, (as Tom. 1. Constitut. Impe^ial. ^n ration fol. 50.
he complains, in a Synodicall Epistle, written out of a Council of Collein)
so now also, boasts that she has a kind of Divinity, that she shall be
eternal, that she shall see no widowhood; and that she shall never err: but
the day of her satall judgment, will shortly approach; when her Pharaonical
^^de will be Apo^al. 18.
drowned, and she like a Millstone be cast into the red Sea of Gods just
judgment. Vouchsafe dear Sauiout to come quickly; and in the mean, that by
her lying Prodigies, and false wonders, she may seduce no more, but rather
that all such as are already seduced by her, may return to thee, see her
manifest impurities, and Idolatries, and renounce them, and Return (I say) to
thee, the only Advocate, and Redeemer of mankind, and the only
Lifegiuing-Shepheard of our Souls, only, to be blessed, honored, and
followed, for ever. Amen.

Propitius sit mihi peccatori, Deus unus, Pater, Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus,
cui soli, Honor and Gloria. Amen.
Errata.
Page 21 ma^g. for Pulcer read pul^heriam. page 24. lin. 18. for he r. she page
38 l. 1. for number that rea, number (in sum this) that. same page l 9. for
in some, r. took some. page 44. marg. Stap^^^ princip. Doctriu. lib. 6. cip.
8. r. lib 6. cap. 7 page 6^. in some copies for maodzim r. maozim page 97. for
Haebr. 4. 1. r. Haebr 1.

Alphabet 2.
Page 7. may it please thee Courteous Reader, after the tenth verse in English
to insert these which through the Authors absence were left out.

Make haste, le^sire be brought with speed;
these cruel beasts to tame.
And in the same page in the third Latin verse for ne lanient, r. lanient ne,
page 19. lin. 3. for speak r. speaks, p^g 23. lin 6. for ^gnati^n ^.
Ign^tianed I doubt diverse more, like faults have escaped, the which it may
please the Courteous Reader to correct.


