A GLANCE OF HEAVEN. OR, A PRETIOVS TASTE of a glorious Feast.

Wherein thou may taste and see those things which God has prepared for them
that love him.

The secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, etc. Psalm 23.14 By R.
SIBS D. D. Master of Katherine Hall, and preacher of Grays Inn London.

LONDON Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell,at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1638

To the Christian Reader.
Beloved,
It Is grown a custom, that every book, whose soever, or of whatsoever
subject, must be presented to you in state, with some prescript purposely. Were
it not that Custom is a Tyrant, this labor might now be spared. Such matter,
from such an Elder as here follows, needs no epistle of recommendation. The
Reverend Au^hours* is well approved to be a man of God, a Seer in Israel, by
those things which without control, have already passed the press. Might I
have my with, it should be no more but a double portion of that Spirit of God
which was in him. The divine light, which radiated into his breast, displaies
it self in many other of his labors, but yet is no where more condensed than
in this following. It Is truly said of Moses, by faith he saw him that was
invisible, Heb. 11. 27.

And S. Paul prays for the Ephesians, that they might know the love of that
which passes knowledge, Ephesians 3. 19. These things imply a contradiction; yet in
like phrase I fear not to say of this Father and Brother, he saw those things
which eye has not seen, spoke those things which ear has not heard, and
uttered those things which have not entered into the heart of man to conceive.
This knot needs no cutting: he that rightly understands the text, will easily
look through this mystery, without the help of an Hyperbole. His scope was to
stir us up to love God: his motive to persuade, is taken from the excellency
of those things which God has prepared for them who love him. That excellency
is expressed in a strange manner. By intimating it cannot be expressed, no nor
so much as comprehended by any natural ability of the body or mind; yet it
is expressed in the doctrine of the Godpell sufficiently. So as herein, as in a
glass, we may behold the glory of God, and in beholding, be changed from
glory to glory. What duty more necessary than to love God? what motive more
effectual than the Gospel? for what is the Gospel but a revelation of such
things as natural men could never invent? Such things, that is, so precious,
so useful, so comfortable to us; so divine, admirable, and transcendent in
themselves. Many of us are like the Angel of Ephesue, We have lost our first
love. Rev. 2. 4. yea as our Savior prophesied, Matthew. 24. 12. The love of many
maxes cold. One reason may be, because to see to, we reap so little fruit of
our love. Were it so, that we had nothing in hand, no present pay, that we
served God altogether upon trust without so much as an earnest: yet there is
something prepared. Let us believe that, and our hearts cannot but be warmed,
we shall then be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Be we persuaded of
that, God is not unrighteous, to forget your work, and labor of love, which
you h^ve she^ed to wards his name, Heb. 6. 10. and then we may triumphantly
insult with Paul, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Romans 8. 38.
There is this difference between natural sight and spiritual. The one requires
some nearness of the object: the other perceives things at greatest distance
As Faith makes future things present, so it makes remote things near, and
things prepared to affect as if they were enjoyed. But what has God prepared?
If I could answer this, it might not only ^atisfie, but in^briate. Such as eye
has not seen, etc. It seems to be a proverbial form of speech, whereby the
rich plenty of the divine blessings and benefits which God intends to us in
and by Christ, according to the Gospel is shadowed forth. The words are to see
to, as a riddle; but here is one of a thousand an Interpreter, at hand to
unfold them: I could say much to invite you, but that the matter it self is as
a Loadstone. My testimony will add little weight; yet having some care
committed to me by Mr. P. N. whom this business chiefly concerned, I could do
no less then let you understand, here is one rich piece of Spiritual
Workmanship, wrought by a Master Builder, very useful for the building up, and
beautifying of Gods Temples. The blessing of God Almighty be with it, and
upon the whole Israel of God.

So prays L. SEAMAN.

A Table of the Contents of this Book.
THe Coherence. page 1 The best Ministers will not shun to be tried by the
best judgments. p. 3. The scope of the words and explication. p. 5. The
mystery of the Gospel hid from natural men. p. 6 The excellency of the
Gospel declared by way of negation. 7. What is meant by those things that eye
has not seen. p. 11. Doct. God has a company of beloved Children in the
world that he means a special good unto. p. 12. Doct. That God has prepared
great matters for them idem, obj. If these excellent things in the Gospel be
secret, how come we to know them? p. 14. Three degrees of revelation. p. 18.
The Gospel is hid without the Spirit, discover the mind of God. p. 21. Use. of
instruction to show there is no principle at all of the Gospel in nature. 23
Why so many heresies have sprung out of the Gospel. 24 2 Use. In Divine truths
above nature we are not too much to trust to Beason. p. 26. 3 Use. How to
study and read Divine truths. p. 28. Ths course that God takes to show his
children these mysteries. p. 32 Supernatural ^objects require Supernatur all
senses. p. 34 Knowledge joined with feeling p. 37. Of spiritual sight. p. 40
Nature cannot show divine mysteries. p. 41 Use. value things as they are in
another world. p. 42 It is the best wisdom to be wise to salvation. p. 47 A
ground of the Martyrs patience. p. 50 A godly man suffers those things in his
senses for those things that are above his senses. p. 51 What Popery is. 52
Merit has no proportion with Glory. 53 We cannot be too exact in holy duties.
54 Wisdom of God hid from wise men. 65 Wicked men talk of repentance, but do
not repent. p. 61. A holy man feels sin heavy. p 62. Carnal men have the
light. page 63. They know them but by a common light. p. 64. What true riches
and beauty is. p. 69. Gods people have a taste of heaven before they come there.
p. 71. What peace in heaven is. p. 72. How to come to know the things of
heaven, reason from the less to the greater. p. 74. Joys of heaven are pure.
p. 76. Heaven on earth. p. 77 Reasons why God has prepared such great things
in heaven. p. 80. We are not capable of the joys of heaven here. p. 87.
Meditation of heaven steeres a Christians life here. p. 88. Faith sets heaven
in our eye, by it conquers the world. p. 89. The nature of hope. id. What
inforceth to keep a good conscience. p. 91. Use. How to abase our selves. p.
93. Use. Of thankfulness. p. 94 Every petty cross will not cast down a
believer. p. 97. Use. Comfort our selves against the slightings of the world.
p. 98. Why men are drowned in the world. p. 100. How to get the conquest in any
temptation. p. 104. Religion not an empty thing. p. 106. What are the greatest
ils. 109. They that desire to growbetter, they shall grow to perfection. p.
113. Rejoice in beginnings of grace 112 Admire at those things that eye has
not, etc. 113 To know whether these things are prepared for us, or no. 116
Labor to know thine inheritance more and more. ibid. God prepares them for
great matters for whom they are prepared. 117 For whom all these things are
prepared. 120 Faith a hidden grace. 120 Obs. God does qualify all those in
this world, that he has prepared happiness for in an other wo^ld. 125 A
natural man cannot see heaven, nor desire it as holy. 126 Take heed of vain
hopes. 128 Look within thee for thy evidences. 131 Look to thy affection. 132
God prepared happiness before all eternity. 136 That happiness which the
world shows, is not the true happiness, because it can be seen. 141 It Is
base to be too much in love with the world 144 Try thy self by this love. 145
We may know heaven to be ours by the disposition of our hearts. 147 God has
not ordained heaven for his enemies. 149 Merit confuted. 151 There goes
somewhat of ours, and somewhat of Gods together, to witness to us what God does.
153 Love a commanding affection. 154 Our actions are but still-borne without
affection. 157 Begin not first with election, but see if God has taught thee
to love God. p. 159. What it is to love God. p. 160. Four things in this sweet
affection of Love observeable. p. 162. When a man puts God in stead of
himself. p. 166 How to know we have a sanctified judgment. p. 168 If we
esteem God we shall part with any thing besides. 172. where is true love,
there is a desire of union. p. 175 Try whether we have this branch of love. p.
178 Where we love we shall consult. p. 181. Where union, there is a desire of
death it self. p. 182 God able to fill our soul. p. 188 Whither to fly, if a
confusion of all things should come. p. 190 In losses and crosses thou will
fetch what thou loosest out of the love of God. p. 192. Provide that for God
that he loves. p. 194. Love will purge your heart. 196 Love from faith wounds
Christ 198 Men under the Gospel live unworthy of it 202 Those that love God
love his members. 204 If we love God we shall love whatever is divine. 205
Love will make us please God in all things. 207 Love to God studies how to
please God. 207 Study in thy place how to put out the best of thy endeavor 209
In heaven all promises are fulfilled indeed. p. 2. 3 God gives his a taste
aforehand. 2. 4 A Christians knowledge of his title to heaven, makes him work.
2. 5 Love the fittest grace to describe a Christian. 2. 7 What the affection,
passion, Grace of love is. 2. 8 Use of examination, how our affections are
biased. 2. 11 Ob. May we not love the creatures at all? 2. 12 Ob. How shall I
know I love God? 2. 14 Ob. My love to God is saint, how to be maintained and
cherished. 2. 17 Ob. Why mean poor Christians have more tender love to God
than great scholars. 2. 19 How to love God with all our might. 2. 25 God
expects more love in a Magistrate, than other^. 2. 26 The may to love God, is
to see our misery. 2. 27 Another way, consider Gods mercy* goodness. 2. 31
He feeds our souls with his own son. 2. 32 Benefits will work on a beast.
2. 35 Consider with what love those of old loved the law, when we have Gospel,
and yet love not. 2. 39 Converse much with those that love God. 2. 39 Get a new
nature, and then thou will love without provocation. 2. 40 Dwell on the
meditation of the love of God. 2. 43 Love will carry us through all duties and
difficulties 2. 48 Love increases by suffering. 2. 50 Consider the vanity of
our affections being set on any thing else. 2. 54 Be ashamed of the want of
love to God, when thou have such means to kindle it. 2. 57
HIDDEN SECRETS Revealed by the GOSPEL.
2 COR. 2. 9. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him.
THE holy Apostle St. Paul, The coherence.
(the Trumpet of the Gospel, the vessel of election) was ordained to be a
messenger of reconciliation, and to spread the sweet savor of the Gospel
every where: And answerably to his calling, he makes way for the excellency
of his Embassage into the hearts of those he had to deal with. This he does by
the commendation of his function. And that he might the better prevail, he
removes all objections to the contrary. There were some that would debase his
Office, saying, that the Gospel he taught (Christ crucified) was no such great
matter: Therefore in the 6. verse of this chapter, he shows, that the Gospel
is Wisdom, and that among them that are perfect; among the best and ablest to
judge. St. Paul did not build as the Papists do now, upon the blindness of
the people. But it were not Popery, if they did not infatuate the people. St.
Paul says to this effect: The best Ministers will not shun to be tried by the
best judgments
We dare appeal to those that are the best, and of the best judgment, let
them judge whether it be wisdom or no: the more perfect men are, the more
able they are to judge of our wisdom.

It might be objected again, You see who ^ares for your wisdom, neither
Herod, nor Pilate, nor the greatmen and Potentates, the Scribes, and Pharisees,
great, learned men, and withal, men of innocent lives, notable for carriage.
Therefore, says he, We speak not the wisdom of this world, or the Princes
of this world, that come to naught. Do not tell us of such men's wisdom, they
and their wisdom will come to naught too. We teach wisdom of things that
are eternal, to make men eternal. As for the Princes of the world, they and
all that they know, their thoughts, and all their plots and devises perish. But
we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, That is the wisdom of Gods
revealing, a deep wisdom, a mystery, that God or dained before the world.
Ancient wisdom, not a yesterdayes knowledge, tho lately discovered: the
preaching of the Gospel is the discovery of that wisdom that was hidden
before the world was.

And to invite you, and make you more in love with it, it is a wisdom To your
glory. God has a delight to show himself wise in devising a plot to glorify
poor wretched man.

As for the words themselves, Scope of the words, and explication.
they are a proof of what he had said before, why none of the Princes of the
world knew this great mystery. If so be that the eye of any man has not
seen, nor the ear of any man has heard, nor the heart of any man has
conceived, what do you tell us of the wise men, which were not all, nay what
should I speak of men? the very Angels (as we know by other places) are
excluded from a full knowledge of these mysteries. Therefore it is no mervaile,
The mysteries of the Gospel hidden from natural men.
though none of the Princes of this world knew them. They are universally
hidden from all natural men. This I take to be the sense of the words. They
are taken out of Isaiah: Isai. 64. 4*
S. Paul delights to prove things by the Prophets: but here it is not so much a
proof as an allusion; which we must observe to understand many such places.
For Isaiah there speaks of the great things God had done for his Church, such
as Eye had not seen, nor Ea e heard: And the Apostle alludes to it here, and
adds somewhat, This clause (nor has entered into the heart of man) is not in
that place: but it is necessarily understood: for if the eye do not see, and
the ear hear, it never enters into the heart of man. For whatsoever enters
into the heart of man, it must be by those passages and windows, the gates of
the soul, the senses.

And whereas St. Paul says, For them that love him, It is for them that expect
him, as in Isaiah. The sense is all one: Whosoever love God, they expect and
wait for him, where there is no expectation, there is no love.

This is the Apostles drift, If God did do such great matters for his Church,
as eye has not seen, nor ^are heard, according to the Prophet Isuiah, what
shall we think he will do in the kingdom of grace here, and of glory
hereafter.

The words then as we see, contain the excellency of the mysteries of the
Gospel, described first by the hiddennesse of it to men at first.

Secondly, by the goodness of the things revealed, such as neither eye has
seen, etc.

The hiddennesse and excellency of the Gospel in that respect, is set forth by
way of negation, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor Heart conceived. And
indeed this is the way to set forth excellent Divine things. The way to set
forth divine things.
God himself is set out by way of denial; by removing imperfections, he is
invisible, immortal, etc. And so heaven, that is near to God, as being
prepared by him, it is set out by way of denial, as S. Peter says, It is an
inheritance immortal, 1. Pet. 1.
undefiled, etc. 1. Pet. 1.

So here, positive words could not be found sufficient to set out the
excellency of the things that God has prepared.

As for the Knowledge of the mystery of salvation in Jesus Christ, we neither
can come to it by natural invention, nor by natural discipline. All the
things that we know naturally, we know by one of these two ways, but divine
things are known neither way.

Where could there have been any knowledge of Christ, if God had not opened his
breast in the Gospel, and come forth of his hidden light, and showed himself
in Christ, Godman, and in publishing the Gospel, established an ordinance of
preaching for this purpose, where had the knowledge of salvation in Christ been?

To prove this, we have here a gradation: the eye sees many things; but we
hear more things than we see, yet neither Eye has seen, nor ear hea^d: I but
the conceits of the heart, are larger than the sight of the eye, or the hearing
of the ear; yet neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has entered
into the heart of man to conceive, etc. The Philosopher says, there is nothing
in the understanding, but it came into the senses before: and therefore it
cannnot enter into the heart of man, if it enter not by the eye, or by the ear.

The things here spoken of, What is meant by those things the eye has not seen.
be especially the graces, and comforts, and privileges to be enjoyed in this
life, and the consummation, and perfection of them in heaven. Christ brings
peace, and joy, justification, and sanctification, etc. the like. And even in
this life; the perfection of these is in heaven, where the soul and the body
shall be both glorified, in a glorious place, together with glorious, company,
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost, innumerable Angels and justmen. These are
those things that eye has not seen, etc. The beginnings here, and the
perfection and consummation of them hereafter. Having thus far unfolded the
words, I come to the points considerable.

First, D^^trines
God has a company of beloved children in the world, that he means a special
good unto.

The second, God has prepared great matters for them.

If great persons prepare great things for those whom they greatly affect,
shall we not think that the great God will prepare great things for those that
he has affection to, and that have affection to him? If God be a friend to
the llect, and they be his friends, surely he will answer friendship to the
utmost: answerable to the great love he bears his children, he has provided
great things for them.

If that be excellent that is long in preparing, then those things which
belong to Gods children, must needs be excellent: for they were preparing even
before the world was. Salomons Temple was an excellent Fabric, it had long
preparation. Ahasueros made a feast to 127. Provinces, it was long in
preparing: great things have great preparation. Now these things that God
intends his children, have been preparing even from everlasting, and they are
from everlasting to everlasting: they must needs be excellent. But before I
dwell on any particular poyn^, here is a question to be answered.

If the things that God has prepared for his children, A question
be secret and excellent, how then come we to know them at all?

We come to know them 1. by Divine Revelation. God must reveal them first, as
it is in the next verse. God has revealed them by his spirit* God reveals
secret things that are excellent to his children.


The Spirit reveals them by way of negation, and indefinitely, as also by way
of eminence. Whatsoever is excellent in the world, God borrowes it, to set out
the excellency of the things that he has provided for his Children in grace,
and glory.

A feast is a comfortable things they are called a Feast. A Kingdom is a
glorious thing; they are called a Kingdom. Marriage is a sweet thing; they are
set forth by that, by an inheritance, and adoption of children, and such like:
So that all these things are taken to ^e shadows of those things. And indeed
they are but shadows, the realitie is the heavenly kingdom of grace and glory:
the heavenly riches, the heavenly inheritance, the heavenly sonship: when all
these things vanish, and come to nothing: then comes in the true Kingdom,
Sonship, and Inheritance.

by way of taste: for the things of the life to come, there are few of them,
but Gods children have some experimental taste of them in this world: God
reserves not all for the life to come, but he gives a grape of Canaan in this
wilderness.

Thirdly, by arguing from the less to the greater: If peace of conscience be
so sweet here; what is eternal peace? If a little joy here be so pleasant and
comfortable, that it makes us forget our selves, what will be that eternal
joy there? If the delights of a kingdom be such, that they fill men's hearts
so full of contentment, that ofttimes they know not themselves, what shall we
think of that excellent kingdom? So by way of taste and relish, we may rise
from these petty things, to those excellent things, which indeed are scarce a
beam, scarce a drop of those excellencies.

If Peter and John when they were in the mountain, were not their own men,
when they saw but a glimpse, but a little glory of Christ manifested in the
mount, what shall we think, when there is the fullness of that glorious
revelation, at the right hand of God, where there is fullness of pleasures for
ever? How shall our souls be filled at that time? Thus by way of rising from
the lesser to the greater, by tasting, feeling, and by divine revelation, we
may know in some measure the excellency of those things prepared for us.

Now to clear this thing more fully, Three degrees of revelation.
know that there are three degrees of revelation.

First there must be a revelation of the things themselves, by word, and
writing, or speech, and the like, as we know not the mind of a man, but either
by speech, or writing: so there must be a revelation of these things; or else
the wit of Angels could never have devised, how to reconcile Justice and
Mercy, by infinite wisdom; by sending a Mediator to procure peace, God-man,
to work our salvation. Therefore we could not know them without a revelation,
and discovery outward: this is the first degree that we may call Revelation
by scripture, or by the doctrine of the Gospel. Who could discover those things
that are merely supernatural, but God himself?

Then again 2. when they are revealed by the word of God, and by men that have
a function to unfold the unsearchable riches of Christ, by the ministry of
the Gospel, yet notwithstanding they are hidden riddles still, to a company of
carnal men. Put case the veil be taken off from the things themselves; yet if
the veil be over the soul, the understanding, will, and affections, there is
no apprehension of them: therefore there must be a second revelation, that is,
by the Spirit of God. Ofnecessitie this must be: for even as the Apostle says
in this Chapter, None knows the mind of Man, Verse. 11.
but the spirit that is in Man: so none knows the mind of God, but the Spirit
of God. What is the Gospel without the Spirit of Christ, to discover the mind
of God to us? We know not the good meaning of God to us in particular: The
Gospel is hid, without the Spirit to discover the mind of God.
we know in general that such things are revealed in scripture: but what is
that to us, if Christ be not our Savior, and God our Father? unless we can
say as S. Paul says, He loved me, and gave himself for me. Therefore you see
a necessity of revelation by the Spirit.

But this is not all that is here meant, there is 3ly a higher discovery, and
that is in heaven* that that is revealed here, is but in part. and thereupon if
we believe, we believe but in part, and we love but in part, If our
knowledge, which is the ground of all other graces and affections, be
imperfect, all that follows must needs be imperfect also. Therefore St. John
says, 1 John 3. 2.
We know that we are the Sons of God, but it appears not what we shall be.
What we shall be in heaven it does not appear now; there must be a further
revelation, and that will be hereafter, when our souls shall be united
together with our bodies: and then indeed our eyes shall see, our ears hear,
and hearts shall conceive those things that while we are here in the womb of
the Church, we neither can see nor hear, nor understand, more than the child
in the womb of the mother can conceive the excellencies in this civil life.
Thus we see these truths a little more unfolded. I will now add somewhat to
make use of what has been spoken.

First of all therefore for matter of instruction, 1. Use. Instruction
if it be so, that the things of the Gospel be such, as that without a
revelation from God, they could not be known, then we see, that there is no
principle at all of the Gospel in nature. There is not a spark of light, or
any inclination to the Gospel but it is merely above nature: for he removes
here, all natural ways of knowing the Gospel, eye, ear, and understanding:
therefore the knowledge of it is merely supernatural. For if God had not
revealed it, who could ever have devised it? And when he revealed it, to
discover it by his Spirit, it is supernatural: but in heaven much more, which
is the third degree I spoke of. Why so many heresies touching the Gospel.
Therefore (by the way) you may know the reason why so many heresies have sprung
out of the Gospel, more than out of he Law, and the misundersta^ding of it.
There are few or no heresies from that, because the principles of the Law are
written in the heart: men naturally know that whoredom, and adultery, and
filthy living, etc. are sins; men have not so quenched nature, but that they
know that those things are naught: therefore there have been excellent
Lawmakers among the heathens. But the Gospel is a mere mystery discoured out
of the breast of God, without all principles of nature: there are thousands of
errors that are not to be reckoned, about the nature, the person and the
benefits of Christ, about justification, and sanctification, and free will and
grace, and such things, what a world of heresies, have proud wits continually
started up? This would never have been but that the Gospel is a thing above
nature. Therefore when a proud wit, and supernatural knowledge revealed meet
together: the proud heart storms, and loves to struggle, and devises this
thing and that thing to commend it self, and hereupon comes heresies, the
mingling of natural wit with divine truths. If men had had passive wits to
submit to divine truths, and to work nothing out of themselves, as the spider
out of her own bowels, there had not been such heresies in the Church, but
their hearts meeting with supernatural truths, their proud hearts mingling
with it, they have devised these errors that I note in the first place.

Then again if the things that we have in the Gospel be such divine truths
above nature altogether: 2. Instruction. In divine truths above nature, we are
not to trust to reason too much.
Then we must not stand to look for reason too much, nor trust the reason or
wit of any man, but divine authority her^ especially. For if divine authority
cease in the Gospel, what were it? nothing; the law is written in men's hearts:
but we must trust divine authority in the Gospel above al other portions of
scripture, and not to the wit of any man whatsoever.

The Church of Rome that is possessed with a Spirit of pride, and Ignorance and
tyranny; they will force knowledge on them that be under them, from their sole
authority; the Church, says so; and we are the Church, and it is not for you
to know, etc. and scriptures are so and so; but is the Gospel a supernatural
mystery above the capacity of any man? and shall we build upon the authority
of the Church for these truths? oh no! there must be no forcing of
Evangelicall truths from the authority or parts of any man. But these are not
things that we stand in so much need of, therefore I hasten to that which is
more useful. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc.

Here then we have an use of direction how to carry our selves in reading, An
use of direction. How to study and read divine truths
and studying holy truths, especially the sacred mysteries of the Gospel, how
shall we study them? We think to break into them with the engine of our wit,
and to understand them, and never come to God for his spirit: God will curse
such proud attempts. Who ^nowes the things of man but the spirit of a man? and
who knows the things of God, but the spirit of God? Therefore in studying the
Gospel, let us come with a spirit of faith, and a spirit of humility, and
meekness there is no breaking into these things with the strength of parts;
That has been the ground of so many heresies as have been in the Church. Only
Christ (...) the key of David that shuts and no man opens, and opens and
no man shuts, he has the key of the Scripture, and the key to open the
understanding. And to press this point a little; if eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of man to conceive, the things of
the Gospel without the revelation of the spirit; then we must come with this
mind, when we come to hear the things of the Gospel: Lord, without thy holy
spirit they are all as a clasped book, they are hidden mysteries to me,
though they be revealed in the Gospel. If my heart be shut to them, they are
all hidden to me.

We see men of excellent parts are enemies to that they teach themselves,
opposing the power of the Gospel: whence is all this? because they think only
the opening of these things makes them divines, whereas without the holy Ghost
sanctifying, and altering the heart in some measure, to taste, and relish these
things, that as they are divine in themselves, so to have some what divine in
the heart to taste these things, it is impossible but that the heart should rise
against them; and so it does: for when it comes to particulars, you must deny
your self in this honor, in this pleasure, and commodity, now you must
venture the displeasure* of man for this, and that truth: the heart rises in
scorn, and loathing of divine truth: when it comes to particulars they know
nothing as they should. For when is truth known, but when in particulars we
stand for it, and will neither betray it, nor do any thing that does not
benefit a Christian? If we have not the spirit of God to relish truths in
particular, they will do us no good. And except the spirit sanctify the heart
of man first by these truths, the truth will never be understood by the proud,
natural heart of man.

Therefore the course that God takes with his children is this; GODS course
with his children to show them these mysteries.
those that he means to have; he first inspires into their hearts some desire
to come to hear, and attend upon the means of salvation, to understand the
Gospel, and then under the means of salvation, he shines into the
understanding by a heavenly light; and inspires into the will and affections
some heavenly inclination to this truth of the Gospel, to justification,
sanctification, selfe-denyall, and the like: and works a new life, and new
senses, and upon them wrought under the means comes the soul to relish, and to
understand these mysteries, and then the ears, and the eyes are open to see
these things, and never before. A holy man that has his heart subdued by the
spirit of God in the use of the means, oh, he relisheth the point of
forgiveness of sins, he relisheth the point of sanctification, he studies it
daily more, and more, and nearer communion with God, he relisheth peace of
conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, they are sweet things, and all the
duties of Christianity, because he makes it his maine business to adorn his
pro^ession: and to live here, so, as he may live for ever hereafter. And this
must be of necessity: for mark out of the text; If the natural eye, and
ear, and heart can never see nor hear, nor conceive the things of God, must
there not be a supernatural ear, and eye, and heart put into the soul? must
not the heart, Supernatural objects require supernatural senses.
and all be new molded again? If the former frame be not sufficient for these
things, of necessity it must be so.

From hence learn to arm your selves against all scandalls: when ye see men
of parts, and account, (and such there may be) men of deep apprehensions, and
understanding in the Scripture for matter of notion, and for the language of
the Scripture exquisite, and yet to be proud, malicious, haters of sanctity,
next to devils, none greater; consider what is the reason: either they have
proud spirits that despise, and neglect the means of salvation altogether; or
if they do come, they come as Judges, they will not submit their proud hearts
to the sweet motions of the Spirit: stumble not at it, if such men be both
enemies to that they teach themselves, and those that practice it, the reason
is, because their proud hearts were never subdued by the Spirit to understand
the things they speak of. For such a teacher understands supernatural things
by a natural light, and by humane reason; that is, to talk, and discourse,
etc. but he sees not Supernatural things by a supernatural light, divine
things by a divine light. Therefore a poor soul that hears the things
published by him, understands them better by the help of the Spirit, than he
that speaks them: better indeed for his use, and comfort. Simile.
As we see, there are some that can measure land exactly; but the man that
owes the land measured, he knows the use of the ground, and delights in it as
his own: the other can tell, here is so much ground, etc. So some Divines,
they can tell there are such points, and so they are raised; and they can be
exquisite in this: but what profit have they by it?

The poor soul that hears these things, by the help of the Spirit, he can
say, these are mine, as the man for whom the ground is measured. As it is with
those that come to a Feast, the Physician comes, and says, this is wholesome,
and good; and this is good for this and that, but eats nothing: others that
know not these things, they ear the meat, Of knowledge joined with feeling.
and are nourished in the mean time: so when such men discourse of this and
that, a poor man that has the Spirit, he relisheth these things, as his own;
the other goes away, only discourses as a Philosopher of the meat, and eats
nothing.

And therefore when you read and hear these things, content not your selves
with the first degree of revelation: no, that is not enough; when you have done
that, desire of God to join his Spirit, to give you spiritual eyes, and
hearts, that you may close with Divine truths, and be divine as the truths are;
that there may be a consent of the heart with the truth: then the word of God
will be sweet indeed.

Again, here we see this divine truth, That a man when he has the Spirit of
God, knows things otherwise than he did know them before, though he did not
know them by outward revelation of hearing and reading, etc. And he believes
them otherwise than he did before: he sees them by a new light. It is not the
same knowledge that an unregenerate man has, 1 Cor. ^. 14. 15.
with that he has after, when God works upon his heart: for then it is a
divine supernatural knowledge. And it is not the same faith, and belief: the
Spirit of God raises a man up in a degree of creatures above other men, as
other men are above beasts: he gives new eyes, new ears, and a new heart;
Concerning spiritual sight.
he moulds him anew every way. Therefore you have good men, sometimes wonder at
themselves (when God has touched their hearts) that they have had such shallow
conceits of this and that truth before. Now they see that they were in the
dark, that they were in a dampe before, that they conceived things to be so
and so, and thought themselves some body; but when God opens their eyes, and
takes away the skales, and lets them see things in their proper light, heavenly
things, by a heavenly light, and with a heavenly eye; they wonder at their
former foolishness in divinity, especially so far as concerns the Gospel:
for there is more in the Scripture then pure supernatural divinity, there are
many other arts in the Scripture.

The Gospel I say is a knowledge not of natural men, It is not in nature to
show us these divine mysteries.
or great wits, but of holy sanctified men. Therefore we must not think that
these things may be known by nature, etc. It is a sacred knowledge so much as
will bring us to heaven, it is a knowledge of holy men, that have their hearts
brought to love and taste, and relish that they know. Therefore it is no wonder
though a company of men of great parts live naughtily, they are no true
divines, because they have no true knowledge. The devil is no divine, nor a
wicked man properly; though he can discourse of such things, yet he is not
properly a divine: because he knows not things by a divine light, or heavenly
things by a heavenly light. The knowledge of the Gospel, it is a knowledge of
sanctified, holy men: but to come nearer to our practice.

If eye has not seen, nor ear heard, Another use of In^struction.
nor has entered into the heart of man, to conceive those things that God has
prepared for his: Then let us make this the rule of our esteem of any thing
that is good, or any thing that is ill, make it a rule of valuation. The
Apostle here you see, has a rank of things above the sight of the eye, or the
hearing of the ear, or the conceiving of the heart of man: if there be such a
rank of things above this; then the greatest ills are those that eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of man: and indeed they
are so. We grieve at the Ague, and at the Stone, and the Gout, they are
grievous things indeed; oh! but what be these things that we feel, and see,
to those in another world, that we cannot apprehend for the greatness of
them? The torments of hell we cannot conceive, and understand them here: for
it is indeed to be in hell it self, to conceive what hell is: and therefore
when God enlarges men's spirits to see them, they make away themselves. And so
for the greatest good; these goods here, this outward glory, we can see through
it. Christ could see through all the glory in the world, that the Devil showed
him. And these are things that we can hear of, and here the utmost that can
be spoken of them: therefore surely they are not the greatest good, there are
more excellent things than they, because the eye sees them, the ear hears of
them, and the understanding can conceive of them; but there be things that the
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, not the soul conceived; and those be the
joys of heaven. A rule to value things by.
And thereupon (to descend to practice) if this be a rule to value things,
that the best things are transcendent, beyond sense and comprehension: then
shall I for those things that I can see, and can hear, and feel, and
understand, shall I lose those excellent good things, tha^ neither eye has
seen, nor ear heard? etc. Is not this desperate folly, to venture the loss of
the best things, of the most transcendent things, that are above the capacity
of the greatest reaches of the world? shall I lose all for petty poor things,
that are within my own reach and compass?

How foolish therefore are those that are given to pleasures! they feel the
pleasure indeed; but the sting comes after. They delight in those ill things
that they can hear, and hear all that can be spoken of them, and never think
of the excellent things that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc.

Let this make us in love with divine truths in the Scripture, with the
Gospel, that part of the Scripture that promises salvation by Christ, and all
the graces, and privileges of Christianity, they are above our reach. We
study other things, we can reach them, we can reach the mysteries of the Law by
long study, and the mysteries of physic, and to the mysteries of trades by
understanding, and when men have done all, they may be fools in the maine;
Solomon's fools: they may do al these things, and be wise for particular
things, by particular reaches of that which eye has seen, and ear heard, etc.
and then for the best things that are above the capacity of men, they may die
empty of all, I^ is the best wisdom to be wise to salvation.
and go to the place o^ the damned. To be wise to Salvation is the best
wisdom.

What a pitiful case is this, that God should give us our understandings for
better things then we can see or hear in this world, yet we employ the^ in
things of the world wholly? Let us not do as some shallow, proud heads, that
regard not divine things; the holy Scriptures they will not vouchsafe to read
once a day, perhaps not once a week; nay, some scarce have a Bible in their
studies. For shame, shall we be so Atheistical? when God has provided such
excellent things contained in this book of God, the Testament, shall we
slight these excellent things for knowledge that shall perish with us? as St.
Paul says before the Text: the knowledge of all other things is perishing,
knowledge of perishing men. Learn on earth that that will abide in heaven,
Augustine.
says S. Austin. If we be wise, let us know those things on earth, that the
comfort of them may abide with us in heaven. Therefore let us be stirred up to
value the Scriptures, Value the Scriptures
the mysteries of salvation in the Gospel, they are things that Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard,etc. Nay, I say more, that little that we have here, by
hearing truths unfolded, whereby the Spirit of God slides into our hearts, and
works with them: there is that peace that a man has in his heart, in the
unfolding of the point of Justification, or Adoption, or any divine comfort,
that it breeds such inward peace and joy as is unspeakable and glorious. All
that we have in the world is not worth those little beginings that are wrought
by the hearing of the word of God here. If the first fruits here be joy oftimes
unspeakable, and glorious, if the first fruits be peace that passes
understanding; what will the consu^mation, and perfection of these things be at
that day?

Again here you see a ground of the wonderful patience of the Martyrs. Ground
of the Martyrs patience.
You wonder that they would suffer their bodies to be torn, and have their
souls severed so violently from their bodies: Alas; cease to wonder; when they
had a sense wrought in them by the spirit of God of the things that eye has
not seen, nor ear heard. If a man should have asked them why they would suffer
their bodies to be misused thus when they might have redeemed all this with a
little quiet? oh! they would have answered presently, as some of them have
done; we suffer these things in our bodies, A godly man suffers these things
in his senses for those that are above his senses.
and in our senses, for those that are above our senses, we know there are
things laid up for us that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. What do
you tell us of this torment, and that torment? we shall have more glory in
heaven then we can have misery here: for we can see this, and there is an end
of it* but we shall have joy that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. As
St. Paul most Divinely in diverse places in Romans 8. Romans 8.
the things that we suffer here are not Worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed. Therefore let us not wonder so much at their patience as to lay up
this ground of patience against an evil day when we may be drawn to seal the
truth with our blood. By the way learn what Popery is, What Popery is.
they think to merit by their doing, but especially by their sufferings,
though they be ill doers, and suffer for their demerits; this is their glory.
Shall those stained good works (put case they were good works, they be
defiled, and stained, and as menstruous clothes, as it is Isaiah 64.) Isai. 64.
shall they merit the glory to be revealed, that is so great that eye has not
seen, etc. What proportion is there? In merit there must be a proportion
between the deed done, Merit has no proportion with glory.
and the glory: what proportion is there between stained imperfect defiled
works, and the glory to be revealed? Should not our lives be almost angecall?
What manner of men should we be in all holy conversation, Considering what
things are laid up in heaven, and we have the first fruits of them here? Can
men be too holy and exact in their lives, that look for things, that eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, etc.

I wonder at the stupiditie, and hellish pride, and malice of men's hearts, that
think any man can be too exact in the maine duties of Christianity, We cannot
be too exact in holy duties.
in the expression of their love to God, in the obedience of their lives, in
abstinence from the filthiness of the world, and the like. Can a man that
looks for these excellent transcendent things, be too careful of his life? I
beseech you your selves be Judges.

The end of the first Sermon.
HIDDEN SECRETS Revealed by the GOSPEL.
The second Sermon.
I. COR. 2. 9. As it is written, Eye has not seen nor ear heard, etc.
THE Apostle sets out the Gospel here with all the commendations that any
skill in the world can be commended by. The scop^ coherence and division, more
cleared.
From the author of it, God. From the depth of it, it is Wisdom, in a
mystery, hidden wisdom. From the antiquity of it, it was ordained before the
world was. From the benefit and use of it, for our glory. God is content his
wisdom should be honored in glorifying us, such is his love. And then when
it was revealed, that none of the Princes of the world (he means not only
commanding Potentates, but he being a scholar himself, esteemed Philosophers,
Pharisees, and learned men to be Princes: because the excellency of a man is
in the refined part of man his soul) none of these Princes of the world, The
wisdom of God h^d from wise men.
for all their skill and knowledge, knew this.

In this verse he shows the reason why Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
etc. He removes knowledge, by removing the way and means of knowledge. The
means of knowledge in this world is by the passage and entrance of the senses:
Now this heavenly mystery of the Gospel, it is such a knowledge as does not
enter into the soul by the senses.

The points we propounded, 1 Point.
were these, I That God has a people in the world, whom he favors in a
special manner.

Then secondly, For these

Kings prepare great matters for those they mean to advance: what shall we
think then God will do for his friends?

Now these things prepared, indeed, for in the third place they are such as Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, etc.



Of the first, and second I spoke in the former, and I will not now stand to
speak of them, but enlarge my self in the two last.

The things that God has prepared for them that love him, Observation.
are such excellent things, as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, etc. He
means the natural eye, and ear, and understanding or heart of man.

There be 3. degrees of discovery of heavenly things.

First in the doctrine of

And then secondly, in

And then thirdly, in regard in the Gospel, especially as they are apprehended
by the Spirit, together with the consummation of them in heaven. For they
differ only in degree, the discovery of the heavenly things in the Gospel
here the privileges, and graces, and comforts of Gods children, and the
consummation of them in heaven. And we may reason from the lesser to the
greater, if so be that a natural man, (though he have natural eyes, and
ears, and wits about him) cannot conceive the hidden mysteries of the Gospel,
Natural wits conceive not the Gospel
spiritually with application: much more unable is he, and much less can he
conceive those things of a better life. Now the things of the Gospel, the
privileges, the graces and comforts which Christ the spring and head of them
all, in whom all are, and whence we have all, cannot be comprehended by a
natural man, he can discourse of them as far as his natural wit conceives
them; but not understand heavenly things in their own light as heavenly
things, as the things of the Gospel. Wicked men talk of repentance, but do not
rerepent.
They can talk of repentance (that we commonly speak of, which is a mystery)
but notwithstanding who knows repentance by the light proper to it, but he
that by the spirit of God has sin discovered to him in its own colors? H^
knows what it is to grieve for sin. The sick man knows what it is to be
sick: the Physician knows it by definition, by books, and so he can enlarge
it: but if he be not sick, the sick patient will speak to better purpose. So
there is a mysteryin the common things of the Gospel; repentance, and grief
for sin. A holy man feels it another matter because he feels sin
discovered by the Spirit of God: A holy man feels sin heavy.
and so in faith, in the love of God, and every grace of the Gospel is a
mystery. If one come to the schoolmen, they will tell you of faith, and
dispute learnedly of it, and deduce this from that: but when he comes to be in
extremity? when the terrors of the Lord are upon him, when he comes to use
it, he is a mere stranger to it: to cast himself being a sinful creature
into the arms of Gods mercy, he cannot do it without a further light of the
Spirit discovering the hidden love of GOD to him in particular; and so for
other graces. Therefore they do but speak of these things, (men that are
unsanctified) as a blind man does of colors, they inwardly scorn the truth
they speak of: and those to whom they speak, if by the power of Gods Spirit
they come to profit by the things they teach, if themselves be carnal, Carnal
men hate the light.
they hate them. A carnal man believes not a whit of what he says: he has
only a common light for the good of others: a common illumination to
understand and discover things, and a doctrinall gift to unfold things for
other, and not for themselves: for themselves they scorn them in their hearts,
and in their lives and conversations; and they will speak as much, when it
comes to self-denial in preferment, in pleasures, in anything that is
gainful: tush tell him what he has taught, or what he knows out of the
book of God, he cares not, he knows them only by a common light: They know
them but by a common light
but for a particular heavenly light with application, and taste to himself,
springing from an alteration by the Spirit, he never knows them so. Therefore
content not thy self with a common light: for together with our understanding,
God alters the taste of the whole soul: he gives a new eye, a new ear, to see
and hear to purpose, and a new heart to conceive things in another manner than
he did before.

But you will ask, How can a godly man know them at all, seeing eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, etc.

I answer: First, An objection answered for explication.
the things of another life (as we see here) are known by negation, as God
is, 1. Answ.
by way of removing imperfections. The natural eye sees them not, nor the
natural ear hears them not, etc. no, nor the spiritual eye, nor ear, in a
full measure: so things transcendent, that are above the reach of man, are
described in the Scriptures by the way of denial, which is one good way of
knowledge.

That ye may know the love of God that is above knowledge, says the Apostle,
Ephesians 3.
Ephesians. 3. that ye may know it more and more: but it is above all knowledge in
regard of the perfection of it. As a man may see the sea, but he cannot
comprehend the sea: he may be much delighted in seeing the sea, but he sees
neither the bottom nor the banks, he cannot comprehend such a vaste body: he
may see the heavens, but he cannot comprehend them. So a man may know the
things when they are revealed, but he cannot comprehend them: apprehension is
one thing, and comprehension is another; there may be apprehension in a poor
degree, suitable to the capacity of the soul here: but alas it is far from
the comprehension that we shall have in heaven. By way of negation.
That is one way of knowing them by way of negation, and denial of
imperfections to them.

And then secondly, By way of eminence.
they excellencies whatsoever; as we may see the sun in water by
resemblance: for God borrowes from nature terms to set out grace, and glory,
because God will speak in our language, for they are called a Kingdom and a
feast, and a crown by way of comparison. Shallow men think there is a great
deal in a kingdom; What tho we should have of the world?
and indeed so there is, if there were no other. There is great matters in a
crown, in the feasts of kings, and the like: but alas these be shadows, and
there is no Rhetoric or Amplification in this, to say they be shadows; a
shadow is as much in proportion to the body, as these are to eternal good
things; the true reality of things, are in the things of another world, for
eternity. If we talk of a Kingdom, let us talk of that in heaven. If of a
crown, of that wherewith the Saints are crowned in heaven. If we talk of
riches, they are those that make a man eternally rich, that he shall carry
with him when he goes out of the world, what riches are those, that a man shall
out live, and die a beggar, and not have a drop to comfort him, What true
r^ches are.
as we see Dives in hell had not? here are riches indeed. So if we talk of
beauty, it is the Image of God that sets a beauty on the soul, that makes a
man lovely in the eye of God. True beauty is to be like God. What true beauty
is.
And to be borne a new to that glorious condition, is the birth and
inheritance. All these poor things, are but acting a part upon a stage for a
while, as the proudest creature of all that is invested in them will judge ere
long; none better judges then they. This is one way of knowing the things of
the Gospel, by naming of them in our own language. As if a man go into a
foreign country, he must learn that language, or else hold his peace: so God
is forced to speak in our own language, to tell us of glory, and happiness
to come under the name of crowns, and kingdoms, and riches here. If God
should set them out in their own luster, we could not conceive of them.

But thirdly, the most comfortable way, whereby taste, for there is nothing in
heaven but Gods Children have a taste of it before they come there, in some
measure: they have a taste of the communion that is in heaven in the communion
they have on earth: they have a taste of that eternal Sabbath, Gods children
have a taste of heaven before they come there.
by some relish they have of holy exercises in these Christian Sabbaths. A
Christian is as much in heaven, as he can be, when he sanctifies the holy
Sabbath, speaking to God in the Congregation by prayer, and hearing God speak
to him in the preaching of the word. What peace in heaven is.
That peace that we shall have in heaven, which is a peace uninterrupted,
without any disturbance, it is understood by that sweet peace of conscience
here that passes all understanding. We may know therefore what the sight of
Christ face to face will be, by the sight we have of Christ now in the word
and promises: if it so transform and affect us, that sight that we have by
knowledge and faith here; what will those sights do? So that by a grape we
may know what Canaan is: as the spies, they brought of the grapes of Canaan
into the desert: we may know by this little taste, what those excellent things
are.

The fourth way is by authority, and discovery. St. Paul was wrapped up in
the third heaven, he says, they were such things that he saw, that could not
be spoken of, strange things. And Christ tells us of a kingdom. Christ knew
what they were, and the word tells us what they are: our faith looks to the
authority of the word. If we had not the first fruits, nor any other
discovery. God that has prepared them, he says so in his word, and we must
rest in his authority. And there are some that have been in heaven: Christ our
blessed Savior that has taken into a perpetual union, the manhood with the
second person, which he has knit unto it, he knows what is there, and by this
means we come to have some kind of knowledge of the things to come.

Again by a kind of reasoning likewise from the lesser to the greater, we may
come to know not only the things, but the greatness of them. As, is there not
comfort now in a little glimpse, when God shines upon a Christians soul, when
he is as it were in heaven? is there such contenment in holy company^here? what
shall there be in heaven? Is there such contentment in the delights of this
world, that are the delights of our pilgrimage? they are no better, our houses
are houses of our pilgrimage, our contentments are contentments of passengers,
if the way, the gallery that leads to heaven, be so spread with comforts, what
be those that are reserved in another world? A man may know by raising his
soul from the lesser to the greater. And if the things that God has provided
in common for his enemies as well as his friends: (as all the comforts of this
world; all the delicacies, and all the objects of the senses, they are comforts
that are common to the enemies of God, as well as his friends) if these things
be so excellent, that men venture their souls for them, and lose all to be
drowned in these things: oh! what peculiar things are they that God has
reserved for his own Children, for those that love him? when those that are
common with his enemies, are so glorious and excellent! These kind of ways we
may come to know them by the help of the spirit.

Those unmixed joys, those pure joys, that are full of themselves, and have
no tincture in heaven, are understood by those joys we feel on earth, the joy
of the holy Ghost, which is after conflict with temptations, or after
afflictions, or after hearing, and meditating on good things: the heavenly
joys that flow into the soul, they give us a taste of that full joy that we
shall have at the right hand of God for evermore. That comfort that we shall
have in heaven, in the presence of God, and of Christ, and his holy Angels, is
understood in some little way by the comfortable presence of God to the soul
of a Christian, when he finds the Spirit of God raising him, and chearing him
up, Heaven on earth.
and witnessing his presence: as oft-times to the comfort of Gods people, the
holy Ghost witnesses a presence, that now the soul can say, God is present
with me, he smiles on me, and strengthens me, and leads me along. This
comfortable way Gods children have to understand the things of heaven, by the
first fruits they have here: for God is so far in love with his children here
on earth, and so tender over them, that he purposes not to reserve all for
another world; but gives them some taste before hand, to make them better in
love with the things there; and better to bear the troubles of this world. But
alas, what is it to that that they shall know? as it is 1 Ioh. 3. Now we are
the sons of God, but it appears not what we shall be: 1 Ioh. 3.
That shall be so great in comparison of that we are, that it is said not to
appear at all: it appears in the first fruits in a little beginnings; but
alas, what is that to that glory that shall be? Our life is hid with Christ in
God. It is hid, there is no man knows it in regard of the full manifestation:
because here it is covered with so many infirmities, and afflictions, and so
many scorns of the world are cast upon the beauty of a Christian life: it is
hid in our head Christ. It is not altogether hid: for there is a life that
comes from the root, from the head Christ to the members, that quickens them;
but in regard of the glory that shall be, it is a hidden life.

Let us consider the reasons Reasons.
why God will have it thus (to make it clear) before I go further: We must be
modest in reasons when we speak of Gods counsels and courses. I will only
name them to open our understandings a little.

First, 1 Reason.
It is enough that God will have it so: a modest Christian will be satisfied
with that, that God will have a difference between heaven and earth, Gods
dispensation may satisfy them. 2. God will have a difference between the
warring Church, and the triumphing Church.

This life is a life of Faith, and not of sight. We walk and live by faith.
Why? partly to try the truth of our faith, and partly for the glory of God,
that he has such servants inn the world here, that will depend upon him, upon
terms of faith, upon his bare word, that can say, there are such things
reserved in heaven for me, I have enough: what a glory is it to God, that he
has those that will trust him upon his bare word? It were no commendation for
a Christian to live here in a beautiful glorious manner, if he should see
all, and live by sight. If he should see hell open, and the terrors there, for
him then to abstraine from sin, what glory were it? the sight would force
abstinence. If he should see heaven open, and the joys of it present, it were
no thanks to be a good man: for sight would force it.

The second Reason is this, 2 Reason.
that God will have a known difference, between hypocrites, and the true
Children of God. If heaven were upon earth, and nothing reserved in faith, and
in promise, every one would be a Christian: but now the greatest things being
laid up in promises, we must exercise our faith to wait for them; now there
are none that will honor God in his word, but the true Christian: that there
are such excellent things reserved in another world, in comparison of which all
these are base: there is none but a true Christian that will honor God upon
his word, that will venture the loss of these things here for them in heaven,
that will not lose those things that they have in reversion and promise for the
present delights of sin for a season? Whereas the common sort, they hear say
of a heaven, and happiness, and a day of judgment, etc. But in the mean time
they will not deny their base pleasures and their Rebellious dispositions, they
will cross themselves in nothing: do we think that God has prepared heaven
for such wretches as these? oh, let us never think of it. God therefore has
reserved the best excellencies for the time to come, in promises, and in his
word, if we have grace to depend upon his word: and in the mean time go on,
and cross our corruptions, it is an excellent condition to be so, it shows
the difference that God will have between us, and other men. 3 Reason.


Again thirdly, our vessels could not contain it: We are incapable, our
brain is not strong enough for these things: as weak brains cannot digest
hot liquors: so we cannot digest a large revelation of these things. As we
see St. Peter was not himself in the transfiguration, he forgot himself; and
was spiritually drunk with joy, with that he saw in the mount; he wot not
what he said as the Scripture says, when he said, Master let us make three
Tabernacles, etc. Nay Saint Paul himself, the great Apostle, when he saw
things in heaven, above expression, that could not, nor might not be uttered,
could not digest them. They were so great, that if he had not had somewhat to
weigh him down, to balance him, he had been overturned with pride: therefore
there was a prick in the flesh sent to Paul himself to humble him. Are we
greater than Paul and Peter, the great Apostles of the Jews and Gentiles? when
these grand Apostles could not contain themselves, when they see these
heavenly things, and but a glimpse of them, the one did not know what he said,
and the other was humbled by way of prevention, with a prick in the flesh; and
shall we think to conceive of these things? No, we cannot: for that is to be in
heaven before our time. These and the like reasons we may have to satisfy us
in this, why we cannot conceive of the things to come as they are in their
proper nature. God says to Moses, when Moses would have a fairer manifestation
of God, No man can see me and live. If we would see God as he is, we must die.
If we would see heaven, If we would see God as he is, we must die.
and the joys of it as it is, we must die first. No man can see the things
that the Apostle here speaks of, in their proper light and excellency, but he
must die first.

They are not proportionable to our condition here: for God has resolved that
this life shall be a life of imperfection, and that that shall be a perfect
estate of perfect glory. Alas, our capacities now are not capable, our
affections will not contain those excellent things; therefore God trains us up
by little, and little, to the full fruition, and enjoying of it. Thus we see
how we come to have some knowledge of them, and why we have not a full
knowledge of them here.

Well, to leave this, and go on; Use. I.
If this be so, then let us often think of these things.

The life of a Christian is wondrously ruled in this world, by the
consideration, and meditation of the life of another world, The meditation of
the life hereafter, steeres a Christians life here.
nothing more steeres the life of a Christian here, then the consideration of
the life hereafter: not only by way of comfort, that the consideration of
immortal life, and glory, is the comfort of this mortal base life: but
likewise by way of disposition, and framing a man to all courses that are good.
There is no grace of the spirit (in a manner) but it is set on work by the
consideration of the estate that is to come, no not one.

What is the work of faith? It is the evidence of things not seen. It sets
the things of another world present before the eye of the soul, and in that
respect it is victorious, it conquers the world; because it sets a better world
in the eye. Where were the exercise of faith, if it were not for hope of such
an estate which feeds faith? the excellency of faith is, that it is about
things not seen: it makes things that are not seen to be seen; it has a
kind of omnipotent power: it gives a being to things that have none, but in the
promise of the speaker.

And for hope, the very nature of hope is to expect those things that faith
believes. Were it not for the joys of heaven, where were hope? It is the
helmet of the soul, to keep it from blows, and temptations. It is the Anchor
of the soul, that being cast within the veil into heaven, stays the soul in
all the waves and troubles in this world: the consideration of the things to
come, exercises this grace of hope; we look within the veil, and cast anchor
there upward, and not downward, and there we stay our selves in all
combustions, and confusions by the exercise of hope.

And where were patience? If it were not for a better estate in another world,
a Christian of all men were most miserable. Who would endure any thing for
Christ, if it were not for a better estate afterward?

And so for sobriety; what forces a moderate use of all things here? the
consideration of future judgment, that made even Felix to tremble. The
consideration of the estate to come, causes that we surfeit not with the cares
of the world, and excess, but do all that may make way for such a glorious
condition.

What enforces the keeping of a good conscience in all things? St. Paul looked
to the resurrection of the just and of the unjust; and this made him exercise
himself to keep a good conscience.

And so purity and holiness, that we take heed of all defilements in the
world, that we be not led away with the error of the wicked: but keep our
selves unspotted. What forces this, but the consideration of a glorious
condition in another world? He that has this hope, purges himself. There is
a purgative power in hope, a cleansing efficacy, that a man cannot hope for
this excellent condition, but it will frame and fit the soul for that
condition. Can a man hope to appear before a great person, and not fit
himself in his deportment and attire before hand, to please the person before
whom he appears? So whosoever hopes to appear before Christ, and God, of
necessity that hope will force him to purge himself.

Let us not stand to search curiously into particulars, what the glory of the
soul or of the body shall be, (the Apostle discovers it in general, we shall
be conformed to Christ our head in soul and body) but rather study how to
make good use of them: for therefore they are revealed before hand in general.

And with all to humble our selves, 2 Use.
and to say with the Psalmist, Lord what is Man, that thon so far considerest
him? Sinful man, that has lost his first condition, and has betrayed
himself to thine, and his enemy, to advance him to that estate, that neither
eye has seen, nor ear heard, etc. This consideration will make us base in
our own eyes.

Shall not we presently disdain any proud conceits? shall we talk of merit?
what can come from a Creature that shall deserve things that eye has not seen
nor ear heard; that such proud conceits should enter into the heart of man?
surely grace never entered into that man's heart that has such a conceit to
entertain merit. Shall a man think by a penny to merit a thousand pound, by a
little performance to merit things that are above the conceit of men and
Angels? but a word is enough that way.

And with humiliation, 3 Use.
take that which always goes with humiliation, thankfulness, even before
hand. When the Apostle S. Peter thought of the inheritance immortal, and
undefiled, etc. he begins, Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
etc. He could not think of these things without thankfulness to God. For we
should begin the life of heaven, upon earth, as much as may be; and what is
that, but a blessing and praising of God? Now we cannot more effectually and
feelingly praise God, than by the consideration of what great things are
reserved for us: for faith sets them before the soul as present, as invested
into them. Now if we were in heaven already, we: should praise God, and do
nothing else; therefore faith making them sure to the soul, as if we had them,
sets the soul on work to praise God, as in Ephesians. 1. and in Pet. 1. Ephesians. 1.
1 Pet. 1.
Saint Peter and Paul, they could never have enough of this. Thus we should
do, and cheer and joy our hearts in the consideration of these things in all
conflicts, and desolations: we little think of these things, and that is our
fault: we are like little children that are born to great matters,
notwithstanding not knowing of them, they carry not themselves answerable to
their hopes: but the more the children grow into years, the more they grow in
spirit and conceits, and carriage sitting the estates they hope for.

So it is with Christians at the first, when they are weak, they are troubled
with this temptation, and with that, with this loss, and with that cross: but
when a Christian grows to a full stature in Christ, every petty cross does
not cast him down: he thinks, what shall I be dejected with this loss, that
have heaven reserved for me? shall I be cast down with this cross, that
have things that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. Prepared for me? He
will not; he makes use of his faith to fetch comfort from these things that are
reserved for him, Every petty cross will not cast down a believer.
that are unexpressible, and unconceiveable.

And let us comfort our selves in all the slightings of the World. 4 Use.
A man that has great hopes in his own country, if he be slighted abroad, he
thinks with himself, I have other matters reserved elsewhere, and I shall
have another manner of respect when I come home. The world it knows not God,
nor Christ, nor us: shall not we be content to go up and down as unknown men
here, when God the father, and Christ our Savior are unknown? He comforts
himself with his hopes of heaven, against the slightings of the world.
There are better things reserved at home for us: therefore let us digest all
the slightings and abusage of carnal men. And let us not envy them their
condition that is but for term of life, use it as well as they will; that has
a date that will be out we know not how soon? Alas all their happiness it
is but a measured happiness, it is within their understandings, their eyes can
see it, and their ears can hear it: and when they can neither see nor
conceive more in this world, then there is an end of all their sensible
happiness. Shall we envy when they shall shortly be turned naked out of this
world to the place of torment? Envy not wicked men, but pity them
We should present them to us as objects of pity, even the greatest men in the
world, if we see by their carriage they be void of grace; but not envy any
condition in this world. But what affection is due and suiting to the estate of
a Christian? If we would have the true affection, it is admiration, and
wonderment. What is wonderment? It is the state, and disposition of the soul
toward things that are new, and rare, and strange, that we can give no reason
of, that are beyond our reach. For wise men wonder not, because they see a
reason, they can compass things: But a Christian cannot but wonder: because the
things prepared, are above his reach: yea when he is in heaven, he shall not be
able to conceive the glory of it: he shall enter into it, it shall be above
him, he shall have more joy, and peace then he can comprehend, the joy that he
has there, it is beyond his ability, and capacity, beyond his power; he shall
not be able to compass all. It shall be a matter of wonder, even in heaven it
self; much more should it be here below. Therefore the holy Apostles when
they speak in the Scriptures of these things, it is with terms of admiration
and wonderment, joy unspe^
joy unspeakeable and glorious, and peace that passes understanding, and when
they speak of our deliverance, out of the state of darkness into the state of
grace, they call it a being brought out of darkness into his mervailous light.
And so God loved the world, 1 Ioh. 3.
he cannot express how, I Ioh. 3. Behold what love has the Father showed us,
that we should be called the sons of God? To be called, To be called a son
of God, is to be so.
and to be, is all one with God, both beyond expression.

Again, if this be so, Use.
that God has provided such things as neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, etc. Beg of God first, the Spirit of grace to conceive of them as the
Scripture reveals them: and then beg of God a further degree of revelation,
that he would more and more reveal to us by his Spirit those excellent
things. For the soul is never in a better frame, than when it is lift up above
earthly things. When shall a man use the world, as though he used it not? when
he goes about his business in a commanding manner, as seeing all things under
him, Why men are drowned in the world.
when he is raised up to conceive the things that are reserved for him above
the world: that keeps a man from being drowned in the world: what makes men
drowned in the world? to be earth-wormes: they think of no other heaven but
this, they have no other thing in their eye. Now by the Spirit discovering
these things to the^ that have weaned souls, it makes them go about the
things of the world in another manner, they will do them, and do them
exactly, with conscience, and care, considering that they must give an account
of all: but they will do them with reserved affections to better thing.
Therefore let us often think of this, and labor to have a spirit of faith to
believe them, that they are so, that there are such great things; and then upon
believing, the meditation of such excellent things will keep the soul in such
a frame, as it will be fit for any thing without defiling of it self. A man
that has first faith, that these things are so: and then that has faith
exercised to think, and meditate what these things are, How to get the
conquest of any temptation.
he may be turned loose to any temptation whatsoever: For first of all, if
there be any solicitation to any base sin, what will he think? shall I for the
pleasures of sin for a season, if not lose the joys of heaven and happiness,
that eye has not seen, etc. yet surely I shall lose the comfort and assurance
of them. A man cannot enjoy the comfort of heaven upon earth, without
self-denial, and mortification: shall I lose peace of conscience, and joy in
the holy Ghost for these things? When Satan comes with any bait, let us think
he comes to rob us of better than he can give: his bait is some present
pleasure, or preferment, or contentment here; but what does he take from us?
that which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. He gives Adam an Apple,
and takes away Paradise: therefore in all temptations consider not what he
offers, but what we shall lose; at least the comfort of what we shall lose; we
shall lose the comfort of heaven, and bring our selves to terrors of
conscience.

Religion is not so empty a thing, as that we need to be beholding to the
Devil for any preferment, or riches, or contentment, or pleasure. Has God set
up a profession of Religion, and do we think that we must be beholding to
his, and our enemy for any base contentments? No; it is a disparagment to our
religion, to our profession and calling, and to our Lord and Master we serve,
to think that he will not provide richly for his: you see here he has
prepared things that eye has not seen, etc.

And by this likewise we may judge of the difference of excellencies, the
difference of degrees of excellencies may be fetched from hence. The things
that the eye can see, they may be excellent good things; but if the eye can see
them, there is no great matters in them. The thing that the ear hears by
reports, are more than the eye sees; we may hear much that we never saw: yet
if we can hear them, and conceive of them upon the hearing, they are no great
matters: for the soul is larger than they. We conceive more than we can
hear; the conceit is beyond sight, and hearing, if we can conceive the
compass, and latitude of any thing it is no great matter: for it is within the
reach, and module, and apprehension of man's brain, it is no wondrous matter. I
but then the things that are most excellent of all, they are above sight, and
beholding, and hearing: and conceit, that the soul cannot wholly compass,
and reach them, those are the excellent things of a^l. The rule of excellency
is to know what we can conceive, and what is beyond our comprehension: The wit
of man can conceive all things under the heavens. All the knowledge we have
comes within the brain of man, the government of states, and the like. Oh! but
the things that God has provided for his, never came wholly within the brain
of man; and therefore they are the most excellent.

And so by way of contraries for ills, what are the greatest ills? those that
the eye can see, that we can feel, and hear of, and conceive? Oh! no, the
greatest ills are those torments that never eye saw, that ear never heard of,
it is to be in hell to know these things; they are beyond our conceit, the
worm that dies not, fire unquenchable, the things above our apprehension are
the most terrible things. It is not the gout, or the stone; men feel these
things, and yet suffer them with some patience: these are not the greatest
ills, but those of another world that are reserved for Gods enemies, as the
best things are those that are reserved for his friends.

Therefore let us make use of our understandings in laying things together, and
make use of Gods discovery of the state of Christianity, the excellencies of
religion. Why does God reveal these things in the word? that we should often
meditate of them, and study them, that we may be heavenly minded: for there
are none that come to heaven, but they must have a taste of these before hand;
there are none ever enjoy them in perfection; when the day of revelation shall
come (the Gospel now is the time of revelation, but) the day of revelation is
the time of judgment, then we shall we be revealed what we are. But in the
mean time there is a revelation by the spirit in some beginnings of these
things, or else we shall never come to have the perfection of them in heaven.
If we know not what peace, and joy, and comfort, and the communion of the
Saints, and the change of nature is here in sanctification, we shall never
know in heaven the fulfilling of it.

And those that have the first fruits here, if they be in a state of growth,
that they desire to grow better continually, they shall no question come to the
perfection: for God will not lose his beginnings: where he gives earnest, he
will make up the bargain.

Therefore let us all that know a little what these things are by the
revelation of the Spirit, let us be glad of our portion: for God that has
begun, he will surely make an end.

The affection, and bent, and frame of soul due to these things is admiration,
and not only simple hearing. If these things in their beginnings here, be set
out by words of admiration, peace that passes understanding, and joy
unspeakable, and glorious: what affection, and frame of Spirit is suitable to
the hearing of those things that are kept for us in another world? If the light
that we are brought into here be admirable, great, we are brought out of
darkness, into admirable wonderful light: If the light of grace be so
wonderful to a man that comes out of the state of Nature, as it is indeed; a
man comes out of a dampe into a wonderful clear light; what then is the light
of glory? Therefore let us often think of it. Those that are borne in a prison,
they hear great talk of the light, and of the Sun, of such a glorious
Creature; but being borne in prison they know not what it is in it self: so
those that are in the prison of Nature, they know not what the light of grace
is: they hear talk of glorious things, and have conceits of them. And those
that here know not the glory that shall be after, when they are revealed, that
affection that is due to them is admiration and wonderment. So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son; and behold what love the Father
has showed to us, that we should be called the sons of God! what love! he
could not tell what, it is so admirable, and to know the love of God that is
above all knowledge! Who can comprehend the love of God, that gave his son?
who can comprehend the excellency of Christ's gift? the joys of heaven by
Christ, and the misery of hell, from which we are delivered, and redeemed by
Christ? These things come from the Gospel, and the spring from whence they
come, is the large, and infinite, and incomprehensible love of God. And if it
be so, what affection is answerable but admiration? Behold what love! If God
have so loved flesh, and blood, poor dust and ashes; so as to be heirs of
heaven, and of such glory as eye seesnot, nor cannot in this world, nor ear
hears not, nor has entered into the heart of man, till we come fully to
possess them; let us labor to admire the love of God herein.

And labor to know more and more our inheritance, as we grow in years, as
children do, they search into the great matters their parents leave them, and
the nearer they come to enjoy them, the more skill they have to talk of them:
so should we, the more we grow in Christianity, and in knowledge, the more we
should be inquisitive after those great things that our father has provided
in another world: but to go on.

How shall we know whether these things be prepared for us or no? whether we
be capable of these things or no? God has prepared them, and he has prepared
them for those that love him; but how shall we know that God has prepared
them for us?

In a word, whom God has prepared great matters for, he prepares them for
great matters: we may know by Gods preparing of us, whether he has prepared
for us. God prepared Paradise before Adam was created: so God prepares
paradise, he prepares heaven before we come there; and we may know that we
shall come to possess that, if we be prepared for it. What preparation? If we
be prepared by a spirit of sanctification; and have holy desires, and longing
after those excellent things: for certainly there is preparation on both sides.
It is prepared for us, and us for it; it is kept for us, and we are kept for
it: whom God keeps heaven for, he keeps them for heaven in a course of piety
and obedience. We may know it by Gods preparing of us, by loosing us from the
world, and sanctifying us to himself. Thus a man may know whether those great
things be prepared for him, or no.

But the especial thing to know whether they be provided for us, or no, is
love. God has prepared them for them that love him: not for his enemies: he
has prepared another place, and other things for them, those torments that eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of man, for
those that are his enemies, that would not come under his government: but these
things are prepared for those that love him.

For those that love him: especially that love is all in all, in the
disposition of a holy man: all graces are one in the spring, which is love:
they are several in the branches, but they are one in the root.

Thus you have heard the use we are to make of this, that there is a
reservation of a glorious condition for the people of GOD, so great, that
neither eye has seen, etc.

But who be the parties, that God has prepared these things for?

For them that love him.

This is the fourth part, The fourth particular.
the disposition of the parties for whom, for them that love him.

Why not for those that God has elected? Why does he not go to the root of
all? Some questions answered for explication.
the great things that God has prepared for those that he has chosen to
salvation? No, that is out of our reach; he would not have us go to heaven,
but rather go to our own hearts; we must search f^r our election not above
our selves, but within our selves.

Why does he not say, 2 Quest.
to them that believe in him?

Because Faith is the radical grace from whence the rest spring. Answ.


But faith is a hidden grace many times, Faith a hidden grace.
and the Apostles scope is to point to such a disposition, that every one may
know, that is more familiar. Sometimes faith is hidden in the root, and it is
showed in the effect more th^n in it self, in Love. A poor Christian that is
in the state of grace, that says, Oh! I cannot b^lieve, ask him if he love
God; Oh, yes, he loves the preaching of the word, he loves good people, and
good books, and the like: when he cannot discover his faith, he can his
love; therefore the holy Ghost sets it out by the more familiar disposition, by
love, rather than faith.

Why does he not say, Quest.
For those that God loves? Gods love is the cause of our love.

Because Gods love is manifested more familiarly by our love to him: Answ.
for that is always supposed; wheresoever there is love to God, and good
things, there is Gods love first. For our love to God is but a reflection of
that love he bears to us: First, he shines on us, and then the beams of our
love reflect upon him; therefore he need not say, whom God loves (though that
be the cause of all) but who love God, and know thereby that he loves them.

But why for them that love him, 4 Quest.
more than for any other thing?

Because all can love, Answ.
therefore he sets down this affection: there is no man living, not the
poorest Lazar in the world, that has a heart, and affections, but he can love.
He does not say, that are prepared for this great Christian, and that learned
Rabbi; no, For whom these are prepared.
but for all that love him, be they poor or rich, great or small, all those
that love him. Therefore he sets down that to cut off all excuses: yea, and
all that love him, be they never so many, are sure to have these great things
prepared for them. God has prepared these things for those that love him.

To come therefore to some observations. The first general thing is this, that

God does qualify all those in this world, Observe.
that he has prepared heaven and happiness for in another world.

The cause of it is his free love: but if you ask me what qualification the
persons must have? They are such as love him. This is not the proper cause why,
but the qualification of the persons ^on whom these things are. There must be
an inward disposition and qualification, before we come to heaven: all those
that hope for heaven without presumption, must have this qualification, they
must be such as love him.

Why?

The Scripture is plain, R^asons.
1. No unclean thing shall enter into heaven: No whoremonger, or drunkard, or
filthy person: be not deceived says the Apostle, you think God is merciful,
and Christ died, etc. but neither such, nor such as you are, (and your
consciences tell you so) shall ever enter into heaven. We must not think to
come e coeno in coelum, out of the mire and dirt of sin, into heaven: there is
no such sudden getting into heaven; No gett^ng to heaven, without change of our
natures.
but there must be an alteration of our dispositions, wrought by the Spirit of
God, fitting us for heaven.

2. Another is that that I touched before, that heaven and earth differ but in
degrees: therefore what is there in perfection, must be begun here.

Then again thirdly, It is impossible for a man if he be not truly altered, to
desire or wish heaven as it is holy. He may wish for it under the notion of a
Kingdom, of pleasure, and the like: but as heaven contains a state of perfect
holiness, and freedom from sin, he cares not for it. A man that is out of
relish with heavenly things, and can taste only his base sins, whereon his
affections are set and exercised, cannot relish heaven it self. A common base
sinner, his desires are not there. There must be some proportion between the
thing desired, and the desire; but here is none, he is not fit for that place,
being an unholy wretch.

Therefore his own heart tells him, I had rather have this pleasure and honor
that my heart stands to, than to have heaven, while he is in that frame of
desire: therefore there is no man that can desire heaven, that is not disposed
aright to heaven before. Beetles love dunghils better than ointments, and swine
love mud better than a garden; they are in their element in these things: so
take a swinish base creature, A carnal man-wants eyes to see heaven.
he loves to wallow in this world: tell him of heaven, he has no eyes to see
it, no ears to hear it, except he may have that in heaven, that his heart
stands too (which he shall never have) he has no desire of heaven. Therefore
in these, and the like respects, of necessity there must be a disposition
wrought before we come there. These things are prepared for those that love
God.

If this be so, Use.
let us not feed our selves with vain hopes: there are none of us, but we
desire, at least we pretend that we desire heaven; but most men conceive it
only as a place free from trouble and annoyance, and there are goodly things
they hear of, kingdoms, crowns, and the like; but except thou have a holy,
gracious heart, and desir^st heaven that thou may be free from si^ne, and to
have communion with Christ, and his Saints, to have the image of God, Take heed
of vain hope.
the divine nature perfect in thee, thou art an hypocrite, thou carriest a
presumptuous conceit of these things, thy hope will delude thee, it is a false
hope. Every one that has this hope, purges himself: Every one, he excludes
none. Do thou defile thy self, and live in sinful courses, and have thou
this hope? Thou have a hope, but it is not this hope: for every one that has
this hope, purges himself. No, no, how ever in time of peace, and pleasure,
and contentment that God follows thee with in this world, thou have a vain
hope; yet in a little trouble, or sickness, etc. thy own conscience will tell
thee another place is provided for thee, a place of torment, that neither eye
has seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of man to conceive
the misery of it. There is not the greatest man living, when he is troubled,
if he be a sinful man, whose greatness can content him: all his honor, and
friends, cannot pacify that poor conscience of his; but Death, G^eatnesse nor
hono^s can pacify conscience
the King of Fears, will affright him: he thinks, I have some trouble in this
world, but there is worse that rem^ines, things that he is not able to conceive
of. Let us not therefore delude our selves, there is nothing will stand out but
the new creature, that we find a change wrought by the Spirit of God; then we
may without presumption, hope for the good things which neither eye has seen,
etc.

Again, we see in the second place, 2 Use. Look within thee for the evidences.
Gods mercy to us, the qualification is within us, that we need not go far
to know what our evidence is. Satan abuses many poor Christians; oh, I am
not elected, I am not the Child of God. Whither go thou man? do thou
break into heaven? when thou carriest a soul in thy breast, and in that soul
the affection of love, how is that set? whither is thy love carried, and thy
delight, and joy, those affections that spring from love? Thy evidence is in
thine own heart, our title is by faith in Christ; his righteousness gives us
title to heaven: but how know thou that thou pretendest a just title? Thou
have the evidence in thy heart. What is the bent of thy soul? whither is the
point of it set? which way goes that? Look to thy affections.
do thou love God, and divine things, and delight in them? then thou may
assure thy self that those things belong to thee, as verily as the Scriptures
are the word of God, and God a God of truth. When thou find the love of God
in thy heart, that thy heart is taught by his Spirit to love him, then surely
thou may say, Oh, blessed be God that has kindled this holy fire in my
heart. Now I know that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor has ent^ed
into the heart of man, those excellent things that are laid up for me.

The end of the second Sermon.
HIDDEN SECRETS Revealed by the GOSPEL.
The third Sermon.
1. COR. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, etc.
SAINT Paul as we heard before, A brief recapitulation of some former things
with addition.
gives a reason in these words, why the princes of this world, (not only the
great men, that oft-times are not the greatest Clerks, but the learned men of
the world, Princes for knowledge) why they were ignorant of the mysteries of
the Gospel.

Now the fourth is the disposition of those for whom he does all this, the
quality he infuseth into them; they are such as love him.

1. He has prepared them before all eternity, he prepared happiness for us
before we were; nay, before the world was. As he prepared for Adam a Paradise
before he was; he created him, and then brought him into Paradise: so he
prepared for us a kingdom with himself in heaven, God prepared happiness for
us before all eternity.
a blessed estate before we were: i. e. in election, before the heavens were.
And then in creation, he prepapared the blessed place of the happy souls of
happy persons hereafter, where he himself is; he prepared it for himself, and
for all those that he means to set his love upon from the beginning to the end.

And then secondly, he Eye has not seen, nor ear heard them, etc. In what
sense it is meant, we heard before. Now take the whole of the matter, the
meaning is, the matters of grace, the kingdom of grace, and the Kingdom of
Glory, they are but one. For (to add this by the way) the kingdom of heaven
in the Gospel, includes three thing.







So the mysteries of salvation, is first the doctrine it self, that is the
first degree of the kingdom. The doctrine it self is a mystery to all those
that never heard of it: for what creature could ever conceive how to reconcile
Iustiee and Mercy, by devising such a way, as for God to become Man, to
reconcile God and man together? that Emmanuel, he that is God with us, should
make God and us one in love: this could be no more thought of, than Adam could
think of himself to be made a man* when he was dust of the earth. Could man
when he was worse then dust, in a lost damned estate, think of redemption? It
is impossible for a man that cannot tell the form, and the quintessence, that
cannot enter into the depth of the flowers, or the grass that he tramples on
with his feet, that he should have the wit to enter into the deep things of
God, that have been concealed even from the Angels themselves, till God
discover them. I add this, to illustrate what I said before: therefore the
doctrine it self, till God discover it out of his own breast, was concealed
to the Angels themselves; and since the discovery, they are students in it, and
look and pry into it. But where the doctrine is no mystery, but is
discovered: there the application, and spiritual understanding, to those that
have not the light of the Spirit, is such a thing, as eye has not seen, nor
ear heard; and therefore we must have a new light, a new eye, a new ear, and a
new heart, before we can apprehend the Gospel, though we understand it for
the literal truth. As for the things of glory, we have no conceit of them
fully, but by a glimpse, and weak apprehension; as a child conceives of the
things of a man, by some poor, weak resemblances. As St. Paul says, When I
was a child, I spoke as a child, I thought as a child: so when we are now
children, in comparison of that perfect estate we shall attain in heaven, we
think and speak as children, of these holy and heavenly things that shall be
accomplished in another world.

And observe this too, that when we would understand any thing of heaven, and
see any thing, say, This is not that happiness I look for, I can see this, but
that is not to be seen. And when we hear of any thing that is excellent, I
can hear this, it is not my happiness: and when we comprehend any thing, I
can comprehend this, therefore it is not the happiness I look for: but those
things that are above my comprehension, that are unutterable, and unexpressible.

Moreover, Let us be stirred up to think it a base thing for a Christian to
lose the comfort and assurance he has of these thing: that eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, for any earthly thing whatsoever. We account it a poor
thing of Esau, to sell his Birthright for a mess of pottage. And we all smart
for Adams ill bargain that he made, to sell paradise for an Apple. And it was
a cursed sale that Judas made, that sold Christ himself for 30 pieces of
silver: surely it is that that every carnal man does, and howsoever we cannot
lose heaven, yet it should be our endeavor to enjoy heaven upon earth, to
enjoy the assurance of this condition. When we do any thing to weaken our
assurance, and to weaken our comfort, what do we but with Adam lose heaven for
an Apple, and with Esau, part with our birthright, as much as the assurance,
and comfort of it is, for a mess of pottage? Therefore let us account it a
base thing to be overmuch in love with any earthly thing, It is a base thing
to be too much in love with any earthly thing.
whereby we may weaken, though we could lose the comfort, and assurance of
this happy condition, which is so transcendent. All wicked men, and indeed all
men, whether good or bad, as far as they fall into sin, are fools; the
Scripture terms them so. There is none wise indeed but the true Christian, and
that Christian that preserves the sense and feeling, and assurance of his happy
condition.

For those that love him.

The disposition of the parties is, they are such as love God. He says not,
such as are elected, because that is a thing out of our reach to know; but by
going upward, by going backward, to go from our grace to our calling; and from
thence, to election. Nor such as believe, because that is less discernable
than love. Nor the love of God to us: for that is supposed when we love him;
our hearts being cold, they cannot be warm in love to him, but his love must
warm them first. Love is such an affection as commands all other things,
therefore he names that above all. And love is such a thing as every one may
try himself by: Try thy self by thy love.
if he had named either giving, or doing of this or that, men might have said,
I cannot do it, or I cannot part with it; but when he names love, there is
none but they may love. The point considered was, that

There must be a qualification of those that heaven is provided for.

They must be such as love God, such as are altered and changed, and
sanctified to love him; Because no unclean thing shall enter in thither;
Because we cannot so much as desire heaven without a change; we cannot have
communion there with Christ, and those blessed souls, without likeness to
them, which must be by a spirit of love: our natures must be altered:
Therefore it is a vain presumption for any man to think of heaven, unless he
find his disposition altered. For we may read our eternal condition in
heaven, We may know heaven to be ours by the disposition of our hearts. 1
Pet. 1.
by our disposition upon earth. The Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 1. Blessed be
God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that has begotten us to a lively
hope of an inheritance immortal, and undefiled* reserved in heaven. So that
the inheritance in heaven, we are begotten to it, we must be newborn, we
must have a new birth before we can inherit it, he has begotten us to an
inheritance immortal, etc. He that is not a child, may not think of an
inheritance. Put case there be never so many glorious things in heaven, that
eye has never seen, nor ear ever heard, etc. if our names be not in Christ's
will, that we are not his, and prove our selves to be his, by the alteration of
our dispositions, what are all those good things to us, when our names are not
contained there?

It is called a hope of life, a lively hope; because he that has this hope,
purges himself, it makes him vigorous and active in good: if his hope of life
make him not lively, he has no hope of life at all. Therefore those that will
look for heaven, that Satan abuse them not by false confidence, let them
look whether God have altered their hearts, that the work of grace be wrought
in some measure. For God has not ordained these great things for his enemies,
for blasphemers, that take Gods name in vain, God has not ordained heaven for
his enemies.
that run on in courses contrary to his will, and word, that live in sins
against the light of nature; do you think he has provided these great matters
for them? he has another place for them. Therefore let us not be abused by our
own false hearts, to think of such a happy condition: unless we find our
selves changed, unless we be newborn, we shall never enter into heaven.

Lord, Lord, say they, Christ brings them in pleading so, Lord, Lord; not that
they shall say so then, that is not the meaning: but now they cherish such a
confidence; Oh, we can speak well, and we can pray well, Lord, Lord. Oh, thou
vain confident person, thy confession, and profession, Lord, Lord, shall do
thee no good. I will not so much as own thee, Away hence thou worker of
iniquity, thy heart tells thee, thou live in sins against conscience; away,
avaunt, I will none of thee. God in mercy to us will have the trial of the
truth of our evidence in us. The ground of all our salvation is his grace, his
free favor, and mercy, in his own heart; but we cannot go thither, he would
have us to search within our selves, and there we shall find Love.

-- God has prepared for those that love him. Observe.


In particular therefore, Those that God has provided so excellent things for,
they are such as love him. They are such first of all that are beloved of him;
and show that they are beloved of him, by their love to him. Therefore when the
Papists meet with such phrases, they think of merit: Merit confuted.
he has provided heaven for them that love him, and show their love in good
works. But we must know, that this is not brought in as a cause why, but as a
qualification of the persons who; who shall inherit heaven, and who shall have
these great things? It is idle for them to think, that these things are
prepared for those, whom God foresees would do such and such good works: it
is as if we should think he has provided these happy things for those that
are his enemies. For how could he look for love from us in a state of
corruption, when the best thing in us was enmity to him? Is it not a vain
thing to look for light from darkness? to look for love from enmity and
hatred? therefore how could God foresee any thing in us, when he could see
nothing but enmity and darkness in our dispositions by nature?

And then (as we shall see afterward) this love in us, it must be with all our
heart, and soul, and might, it is required and commanded; and when we do all
this, we do but what we are bound to do. But they abuse such places upon so
shallow ground, that indeed it deserves not so much as to be mentioned.

To come then to the point it self, the disposition of those that shall come to
heaven then, is, they must be such as love God. Now he names this, because
these two go always together: there goes somewhat of ours together with
somewhat of Gods to witness to us what God does. There goes our choice of God,
with his choosing of us; our knowing of God, with his knowledge of us; our love
to him, with his love to us* therefore because these are so connexed, and knit
together, he takes the one for the other; and to make it familiar to us, he
takes that which is most familiar to us, our love to him.

Now he names this above all other affections; because love is the commanding
affection of the soul, Love a commanding affection.
it is that affection that rules all other affections, hatred, and anger, and
joy, and delight, and desire; they all spring from love: and because all duties
spring from love both to God and man, therefore both Tables are included in
love. And when the Apostle would set down the qualification of those that
shall enjoy these things, he says, they are for those that love him. Because
it stirs up to all duty, and adds a sweet qualification to every duty, and
makes it acceptable, and to relish with God; it stirs up to do, and
qualifies the actions that come from love, to be accepted.

All duties to man, spring from love to man; and love to man from love to God:
it is the affection that stirs up the duty, and stirs up the affection fit
for the duty: it stirs up to do the thing, and to do all in love.
Whatsoever we do to God, or man, it must be in love; all that God does to
us, it is in love, he chooses us in love, and does every thing in love; and
all that we do to God, it must be in love. Therefore he names no other
affection but this, because it is the ground, the first borne affection of the
soul: Therefore Christ says, it is the great commandment to love God; it is
the great commanding commandment, that commands all other duties whatsoever,
it is the first wheel that turns the whole soul about.

Again, it is such an affection as cannot be dissembled: a man may paint
fire, but he cannot paint heat; a man may dissemble actions in religion, but
he cannot affections: love is the very best affection of truth: a man may
counterterfeit actions; but there is none that can love but the child of God.
God has prepared these things for those that love him.

Then again, without this, all that we do is nothing, and we are nothing:
we are nothing but an empty Cymball: whatsoever we do is nothing; all is
empty without love. My son, give me thy heart, that is, if thou will give
me any thing, give me thy affections, or else they are stillborne actions,
Our actions are but stillborn with^out affections.
that have no life in them. If we do any thing to God, and do it not in
love, he regards it not; that is the reason why he mentions love in stead of
all: It is so sweet an affection, and so easy, what is more easy than to
love? It is comfortable to us to consider that God has made this a
qualification of those that he brings to heaven, they are such as love him.

But why does he set down any qualification at all, and not say, for Christians?

Because profession must have expression: when God sets down a professor of
religion, he sets him down by some character that shall discover him to be as
he is termed. How do tho^ know thou art good? Do thou love God? or call
upon God? as it is in other places, To all those that call upon his name. To
let us know that religion and holiness is a matter of power, Would thou know
what thou art in religion? Do thou love God? or call upon God?

It is not to be tolerated, to be Christians, to profess as Demas: oh no; but
they must be such, as from the heart root are good, such as love God.

Therefore dark disputes of election and predestination, at the first
especially, let them go: how stand thou affected to God, and to good things?
look to thy heart, whether God have taught it to love or no, and to relish
heavenly things: if he has, thy state is good; and then thou may ascend to
those great matters of predestination, and election: but begin not with those,
but go first to thine own heart, and then to those deep mysteries afterward.
If a man love God, he may look back to election, and forward to
glorification, to the things that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. But
see first what God has wrought in thy heart, what affection to heavenly
things; and thence from thy affections to go backward to election, and forward
to glorification, there is no danger in it.

To come therefore to express more particularly this affection of love, which
is the disposition that God requires and works in all those that he intends
heaven to. Let us search into the nature of this love to God. What it is to
love, we need not be taught, for all men know it well enough; it is better
known indeed by the affection, than by discourse; what it is to love, is
known by those that love, better than by any books or treatises whatsoever:
for it is the affection that is in all men. Natural love, it is in those that
have no grace at all; and civil love, in those that are evil men. They know
what it is to love, by reason of that wild fire, that carnal love that is in
them, that transports them. A man may see the nature of it in those, as well as
in any: for set aside the extravagant nature of it, in such kind of persons,
we may see the nature of it: therefore I will not meddle with that point, it is
needless. I come therefore to this love of God, to show how this stream of
affection should be carried in the right chanel to God the right object of it,
who only can make us happy by loving of him. Other things by loving of them,
they make us worse, if they be worse than our selves: for such as we love,
such we are. Indeed our understandings make us not good or ill, but our love
does. By loving God, and heavenly things, we become good: our affections show
what we are in religion.

There be four things in this sweet affection, in true natural love.

There is an estimation and valuing of some good thing, especially when the
love is to a better, when it is not between equals. Now there is a great
distance between God and us. There is a high esteem in common love, love will
not stoop to nothing: there cannot be love maintained, but upon sight of a
supposed excellency: love will not stoop, but where it sees somewhat worth
the valuing: therefore there is a high esteem of somewhat as the spring of it.
And that is the reason that we say a man cannot be wise, and love, in earthly
things: because love will make a man too much to value those things that he
that apprehends better would not.

In the second place, there is a desire to be joined to it, that we call the
desire of union

In the third place, upon union, and joining to it, there is a resting, a
complacencie, and contentment in the thing to which we are united: for what is
happiness it self, but fully to enjoy what we love? when we love upon
judgment, and a right esteem, to enjoy, that is happiness, and contentment
indeed.

In the fourth place, where this true affection is, there is a desire of
contentment to the party loved, to please him, to approve our selves to him, to
displease him in nothing. Every one knows that these things are in that
affection by nature.

Look to carnal self-love, a man may know what it is to love: the affection is
all one in both. Take a man when he makes himself his Idol, as till a man
love God, he loves himself above all, he is the Idol, and the Idolater: he
has a high esteem of himself; and those that do not highly esteem him, he
swells against them. Again self-love makes a man desire to enjoy himself, and
to enjoy his content, to procure all things that may serve for his contentment.

Now when the Spirit of God has purged our hearts of this carnal Idolatry of
self-love, and selfe-seeking, and sufficiency, and contentment; in himself;
then a man puts God in stead of himself, grace, and the Spirit does so; and in
stead of highly esteeming of himself, When a man puts God in stead of himself.
he esteems highly of GOD, and of CHRIST, and religion: then in stead of
placing a sufficiency in himself, and the things of this life, and resting in
them, there is a placing of sufficiency in GOD All-sufficient: And in stead of
seeking his own will, and content in all things. Men's mihi pro regno. My mind
is to me a Kingdom: then a man seeks to give contentment to GOD in all
things, and to be a fool, that he may be wise; and to have no will, and no
delight in any thing that cannot stand with the pleasure of, and obedience to
God. Thus a man by knowing what his own natural corruption is, he may know
what his affection is to better things.

First of all, there must be an estimation, an esteem of God, and Christ; for
to avoid misconceit, we take both these to be one, God our Father in Christ,
and Christ. Whatsoever Christ did for us in love, he did it from the love of
the Father, who gave him: And when we speak of the love of God, we speak of
the love of Christ to us. Therefore there must be a high esteeming, There must
be an esteem of God and Christ.
and valuing, and prizing of God above all things in the world, and of his love.

Now this must needs be so: for where grace is, it gives a sanctified judgment;
a sanctified judgment values and esteems things as they are. Now the
judgment apprehending God and his love to be the best thing to make us happy,
prizeth it above all, Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. Psalm 73.
and what have I in earth in comparison of thee ^ he prizeth God and his love
above all things in the world.

Now if we would know if we have this judgment, we may know it by our choice;
this valuing it is known by choice: for what a man esteems and values highly,
he makes choice of above all things in the world. What men make choice of, is
seen by their courses: we see it in holy Moses, Heb. 11. Heb. 11.
he had a high esteem of the estate of Gods people that afflicted people: as
afflicted as they were, yet he saw they were Gods people, in covenant with
him, and more regarded of him, than all the people in the world besides: and
upon his estimation he made a choice, he chose rather to suffer afflictions
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season His
choice followed his esteem: so if we value and esteem God, and religion, and
love God above all things, we will make choice of the Lord. As Saint Peter
says, John 6. Ioh. 6.
when Christ asked them, Will you also forsake me? says he, Lord, whither
shall we go? We have made choice of thee, whither shall we go? thou have
the words of eternal life. Let us do that in truth, that he for a time
failed to do, when he said, Though all forsake thee, yet will not I. If we
make this choice of Christ, from the truth of our hearts, this shows our
esteem.

What is thy choice? Is it Religious ways, and religious company? is it the
fear of God above all things? One thing have I desired, that I may dwell in
the house of GOD for ever, and visit his Temple. Psalm. 27.
Psalm. 27. Have thou with Mary, made choice of the better part? Do thou
value thy self as a member of Christ, and an heir of Heaven, as a Christian
above all conditions in this world? (for what a man esteems, he values
himself by) then thou art a true lover, thou have this love planted in thy
heart; because thou have a true esteem? You see Paul accounted all dung and
dross in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ. Oh! that we could
come to that excellent affection of Saint Paul, to undervalue all things to
Christ, and the good things by Christ, and Religion. Certainly it is
universally true, where Christ is loved, and God in Christ, the price of all
things else fall in the soul: For when we welcome Christ, then farewell all
that cannot stand with Christ.

Again, our esteem is known by our willing parting with any thing for that
that we esteem, as a wise Merchant does sell all for the Pearl. We may know
therefore that we esteem GOD, If we esteem God, we shall part with any
thing besides.
and his truth: for they go together, God, and his truth, and religion; we
must take God with all that he is clothed with, wherein he shows himself
unto us. If we sell all for the truth of God, and part with all, and deny all
for the love, and obedience of it, it is a sign we have an esteem answerable
to his worth, and that we love him.

Those therefore that will part with nothing for God, nor for Religion, and the
Truth, when they are called to it, do they talk of love to GOD? they have no
esteem, they value not GOD; if they did esteem him, they would sell all for
the pearl. Therefore those that halt in religion, that care not which way
religion and the truth goes, so they may have honor, and pleasures in this
world, where is their esteem of the Gospel, and of the truth of Christ, and
of God? they have no love, because they have no estimation.

Again, what we esteem highly of, we speak largely of. A man is always
eloquent in that he esteems: it will put him to the extent of his abilities,
to be as eloquent as possible he can be: you never knew a man want words for
that he prized, to set it out. Therefore when we want words to praise God,
and to set out the value of the best things, it is an argument we have poor
esteem of them. All go together, GOD, and the things of GOD: What do we
talk of loving GOD, and despise Christians, and Religion? they are never
severed. If a man esteem the best things, he will be often speaking of them.
If a man set his affections upon a thing, it will suggest words at will.
Therefore those that are clean out of their Theme, when they speak of good
things, are to seek. Alas, where is the affection of love? where is esteem?
esteem it makes a readiness to speak.

Esteem likewise carries our thoughts: Would thou know what thou esteemest
highly? What do thou think of most, and highest? thou may know it by
that. We see the first branch, how we may know we love GOD, if we have a
high esteem, and valuing of GOD, by these signs.

Secondly, 2 Where there is true love, there is a desire of union.
where there is true love, and affection, there is a desire of union, of
knitting and coupling with the thing loved, of necessi^tie it must be so: for
love is such a kind of affection, it draws the soul all it can to the thing
loved; it has a magneticall force, the force of a Lodestone. Every one knows
what this means.

This affection of love makes us one with that we love. If a man love the
world, he is a worldling; a man of the world; because affection breeds union:
though a man be never so base in choosing, whatsoever a man loves, he desires
union with it, and being so, he has his name from that he loves: he that
loves the world, is a worldling, an earth-worm. Now if there be the love of
God, as in covenant, as a father in Christ, for so we must conceive of GOD,
there will be a desire of fellowship and communion with him by all means, in
the Word and Sacrament, etc. If a man desire strangeness, that he cares not
how seldom he receive the Sacrament, or come into Gods presence, is here
love? how can love and strangeness stand together? thou art a strange person
from God, and the things of God, thou have no joy in his presence, where thou
may enjoy his presence here in holy things in this world, if thou delight
not in his presence, and in union with him, how can thou say, thou love him?

Can a man say he loves him, whose company he cares not for? Thou carest not
for Gods company, thou may meet him in the Word and Sacraments, and in good
company, Where two or three are gathered together, I will be in the midst.
Do thou pretend thou love GOD, if thou carest not for these? thou have no
fellowship in this business: all that relish not heavenly things, they do
not love.

Now to try whether we have this branch of love, that is, a desire of union.
Where therefore there is a desire of union with the party loved, of uniting to
that person (for we speak of persons) there will be a desire of communion* a
desire of Union will breed a desire of Communion; that is, there will be a
course taken to open our minds: if we have a desire of communion with GOD, we
will open our souls often to him in prayer; and we will desire that he will
open himself in speaking to our hearts by his Spirit: And we will desire that
he will open his mind to us in his Word: we will be careful to hear his
Word, and so maintain that sweet and heavenly Commerce between him and our
souls, by this intercourse of hearing him, and speaking to him. Where two or
three are gathered together, I will be in the midst. Therefore th^se that make
no conscience either of hearing the word, or of prayer public and private,
and of using the glorious liberty we have in Christ, of free access to the
Throne of Grace, that do not use this prerogative and privilege to cherish
that union and communion they may have with God, they love not God, and Christ*
Strangeness is opposite to love, Strangeness is opposite to lov^.
and it dissolves, and disunites affections; therefore when we are strange to
God, that we can go from one end of the week to the other, and from the
beginning of the day, to the end of it, and not be acquainted with God, and not
open our souls to him, it is a sign we have no love, because there is no
desire of union, and communion with him.

Again, where we love, we consult and advise, and rest in that advice, as
coming from a loving person; especially if he be as wise as loving: so in all
our consultations, we will go to God, and take his counsel; and when we
have it, we will account it the counsel of one that is wise and loving.

Those therefore that trust to their own wits, to policy, and such like, what
do they speak of love, when they make not use of that Covenant that is
between God and them? they consult not with him, they make not his word, the
man of their counsel; they go not to him by prayer for advice, they commit
not their ways to him, Psalm. ^7.
as the Psalmist speaks.

And this distinguishes a good Christian from another man. A good Christian
he is such a one as acquaints himself with his God, and will not loose that
intercourse he has with God, for all the world. As Daniel, he would not but
pray, they could not get him from it with the hazard of his life.

Again, where this desire of union, and joining is, Where thi^ u^ion is, there
is a desire of death it self.
there is a desire even of death it self, that there may be a fuller union,
and a desire of the consummation of all things. Therefore so far as we are
afraid of death, and tremble at it, so far we want love. When the contract is
once made between Christ and the soul of a Christian, for him to fear the
making up of the marriage, when we are now absent from the Lord, to fear the
sweet, eternal communion we shall have in heaven, where we shall have all
things in greater excellency, and abundance, it is from want of faith and
love. Therefore we should be ashamed of our selves, when we find such
thoughts rising in our hearts (as they will naturally) to be basely and
distrustfully afraid of death. Saint Paul says, I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ, that is good, nay it is much better for me; nay, it is
best of all to be with Christ: therefore you see it stirred up his desire, I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Revel. 22.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, says the Church, Revel. 22. and the spirit in
the Spouse, stirs up this desire likewise, Come, the Spirit and the Spouse
say, Come. And we should rejoice to think there are happier times to come,
wherein there will be an eternal meeting together that nothing shall
dissolve, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
as the Apostle says, 1 Thessal. 4. 17. when we shall be for ever with the
LORD. Oh! those times cheer up the heart of a Christian before hand.

Now where these things possess not the soul, how can we say, that we love
God? Cant. 1.
In Cant. 1. the Church begins, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth: she desires a familiar communion with Christ in his word and
ordinances, Let him kiss me, etc. Let him speak by his Spirit to my heart. In
this world Christ kisseth his Church with the kisses of his mouth. But in the
latter end of the Canticles, Make haste my beloved; she desires his second
coming: thinks it not enough to have the kisses of his mouth, Make haste my
beloved, and be as the young Roes upon the mountains of Spices, that is, come
hastily from heaven, the mountain of Spices, and let us meet together my
beloved. These things be somewhat strange to our carnal dispositions: but if
we hope ever to attain to the comfort of what I say, we must labor that our
hearts may be brought to this excellent condition, Desire the presence of
Christ.
to desire the presence of Christ; that is, the second property of love.

The third is to rest pleased and contented in the thing when we are joined
with it, so far as we are joined with it, to place our contentment in it,
and it is in the nature of that affection to place contentment in the thing we
desire to have, whenwe have it once.

Now we may know this our contentment, whether we rest in GOD, or no, by the
in ward quiet and peace of the soul in all conditions; when whatsoever our
condition be in this world, yet we know we have the light of GODS
countenance, and can rest, and be content in it, more than worldly men in
their corn, and wine, and oil, as David says, Psalm. 4. Psalm. 4.
I rejoice more in the light of thy countenance, than when they have their
corn, and wine, and oil. When we can joy, and solace our selves with the
assurance of Gods favor, and love in Jesus Christ. Being justified by faith,
we have peace with God, and rejoice in God, as it is Romans 5. Romans 5.
we rejoice in God as ours.

Therefore those that go to outward contentments, that run out to them, as if
there were not enough in God, and divine things, to content their souls, but
they must be beholding to the devil, and to the flesh, for contentments; this
is not to rest in God. He is overcovetous whom God cannot content. If we be in
covenant with him, he is able to fill our soul, and all the corners of it:
he is able to satisfy all the delights and desires of it: God can fill our
souls.
he is a gracious father in Christ. Whither should we go from him for
contentment? why should we go out of religion to content our selves in ^vain
recreations and pleasures of sin for a season, when we have abundance in God?

And where there is contentment, there will be trusting in him, and relying
upon him. A man will not rely upon riches, or friends, or any thing: for where
we place our contentment, we place our trust. So far as we love God, so far
we repose affiance and trust in him; he will be our rock, and castle and
strength* Would thou know whether, thou restest in him or no? In the time of
danger, whither does thy soul run? to thy purse, if thou be a rich man? or to
thy friends if thou be a worldly minded man? Every man has his Castle to fly
to. But the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower: he that is a child of God,
flies thither for refuge, and there he covers himself, and is safe. He
enters into those chambers of divine providence, and goodness, and there he
rests in all troubles.

Therefore ask thy affections whither thou would run, if there should
come a confusion of all things: when men are apt to say, Oh! what will become
of us? and they think of this and that: A good Christian has God to rest in;
he has God reconciled in Christ, and in his love he plants himself in life
and death. He makes God his habitation and his Castle, as it is Psalm. 18.
Psalm. 18.
I love the Lord dearly, my Rock and my Fortress. And Moses in Psalm. 90. for
his Psalm it is, Psalm. 90.
Thou have been our habitation from everlasting to everlasting. We dwell in
thee; though in the world we are tossed up and down, and live and die, yet we
always dwell with thee. So a Christian has his contentment, and his habitation
in God, he is his house he dwells in, his rock, his resting place, his center
in which he rests, Come unto me, and ye shall find rest to your souls. When
a man is beat out of all contentments he may know by this, whether he love God,
or no: As David when he was beat out of all, and they were ready to stone him;
but he trusted in the Lord his God. So in losses, and crosses, have thou
contentment in God, thou will fetch what thou losest out of the love of God;
and what thou art crossed in, thou will fetch out of Gods love: thou will say,
this and that is taken from me, but God is mine, I can fetch more good by
faith from him, than I can lose in the world. A soul that is acquainted with
God, when he loses any thing in the world, he can fetch it out of the
^cuntain and spring. He is taught to love God, he is skillful this way, to
pitch his hope and affiance in God, where he has enough for all crosses. Let
us labor to bring our souls more and more to this, and then we shall know what
it is to love God, by this placing of our contentment in him. Take all from me,
says holy A^stin, Augustine*
so thou leave me thy self: So a Christian can say, take all from me, so I
have God.

Indeed where shall a man have comfort in many passages of his life, if he
find it not in religion? What will become of a man in this uncertain world,
if he have not somewhat where he may place his content? Oh! he will find
before he die, that he is a wretched man, he knows not where to find rest,
and contentment before he die; he will be beat out of all his holds here,
either by sickness, or one thing or other.

The fourth and last is, where the true affection of love to God is, it stirs
up the soul to give all contentment to God, to do all things that may please
him. Se^ what God loves, delight in that, and provide it for him.
This is the nature of love, it stirs up to please the party loved. Isaacks
sons saw that their father loved Venison, therefore they provided venison for
him. Those that know what God loves, will provide what they can, that that God
may delight in. He loves a humble, and a believing heart. Thou have wounded me
with one of thine eyes. The eye of faith, when the soul can trust in the word,
and humbly go out of it self: his delight is in a broken yielding heart, that
hardness not it self against his instructions, but yields. A broken heart that
lies low, and hears all that God says, Oh, it is a sacrifice that God is much
delighted in: a humble spirit is such a spirit as God dwells in. He that dwells
in the highest heavens, Isai. 65.
dwells in a humble spirit. Does God delight in a meek, broken, humble spirit?
Oh, then it will be the desire of a Christian to have such a spirit as God may
delight in. A meek soul is much esteemed, the hidden man of the heart is much
prized; search in Gods word what he delights in, and let us labor to bring
our selves to such a condition as God may delight in us, and we in him, and
then it is a sign we love him, when we labor to procure all things that may
give him content. You know that love where it is, it stirs up the affections
of the party to remove all things that are distasteful to the party it loves.
Therefore it is a neat affection; for it will make those neat, that otherwise
are not so, because it will not offend: much more this divine heavenly
affection, when it is set on a right object, upon God, it is a neat, cleanly
affection, it will purge the soul, it will work upon the soul a desire to
be clean, Love^ will purge your heart.
as much as can be, because God is a pure, holy God, and it will have no
fellowship with the works of darkness. Therefore as much as humane frailty
will permit, the soul that loves God, it will study purity, to keep it self
unspotted of the world. It will not willingly cherish any sin that may offend
the Spirit. Those therefore that are careless of their ways, and carriage,
and affections, that make nothing of polluting, and defiling their
affectictions, and their ways, there is not the love of God in their hearts.
It stirs up shame to be offensive, in the eyes of such a one, especially if
they be great, there is both love and respect meet together, where it is a
reverentiall love with respect, there is a shame to be in a base, filthy,
displeasing condition. God hates pride and idolatry, etc. therefore a man that
loves God, will hate Idols, and all false doctrine, and worship that tends this
way: his heart will rise against them; because he knows God hates it, and all
that take that course; he observes what is most offensive to God, and he will
avoid it, and seek what is pleasing to him.

God and Christ are wondrously pleased with faith. Thou ha^t wounded me with
one of thine eyes. Love from faith wounds the breast of Christ.
Faith, and love from faith wounds the breast of Christ: therefore let us
labor for faith. Oh woman, great is thy faith. It it is such a grace, as
binds and overcomes God, it honors him so much. Let us therefore labor for
faith, and in believing for all graces: they are things that God loves,
therefore let us labor to be furnished with all things that he loves,
especially those graces that have some excellency set upon them in the
Scripture, we should most esteem. Isaac when he was to marry Rebecca, he
sends her jewels beforehand, that having them, she might be more lovely in
his eye. So Christ, the husband of his Church, that he might take more delight
and content in his Church, he sends her Jewels before hand, that is, he
enricheth his Church with the spirit of faith, meeknes, humility and love, and
all graces, that he may delight, and take content in his Spouse. Those that
have not somewhat that God may d^light in them, they have not the spirit of
love. Those therefore that rebel in stead of giving God content, that resist
the Spirit, and the motions of it, in the ministry, and in reprehension, and
the like: those that live in sins directly against Gods command, that are
common swearers, and filthy persons, neglecters of holy things, profane,
godless persons; do they talk of the love of God, and of heaven? you may see
the filthiness of their hearts, by the filthiness that issues from them. God
keeps not such excellencies for such persons: the love of God, and living in
sins against conscience, will not stand together. A demonstration of love is,
exhibitio operis, the exhibition of somewhat to pleas^ God. Show me in thy
course what thou do to please God. If thou live in courses that are condem
red, never talk of love. It is a pitiful thing, to see in the boso^e of the
Church, under the glorious revelation of divine Truth, that men should live
apparently, and impudently in sins against conscience, that glory in in
theirshame. It is a strange thing that they should glory in their
profaneness, and swaggering, that they should glory in a kind of Atheistical
carriage: as they have been bred, so they will be still. Many are marred in
that, they are either poisoned in their first breeding, or neglected in it.

To see under the glorious Gospel of Christ, that those that think they have
souls eternal, that they should live in impudent base courses, void of
religion and humanity, only to satisfy their own lu^ts, in stead of
satisfying and obeying GOD; men that live in the bosom of the Church, as
beasts, and yet hope to be saved as well as the best: Oh! but the hope of the
hypocrite, the hope of such persons will deceive them.

Oh! let us labor therefore to have this affection of love planted in our
hearts; that God by his spirit would teach us to love him, and to love one
another. This affection of love must be taught by God, it is not a matter of
the brain to teach that, but a matter of the heart. God only is the great
Schoolmast^r and teacher of the heart, he must not only command us to love,
but teach our affections by his holy Spirit, to enable our affections to love
him.

Where love is in this regard likewise to give content, there will be love of
all those whom the party we approve our selves to, loves. Is there any of
Ionathans posterity, says David, that I may do good to them for his sake. The
soul that loves God, and Christ, says, Is there any good people, any that
carry the image of God, and Christ? it will be sure to love them, it will do
good to Ionathans posterity. Those that hate them that carry the image of God,
and Christ, that their stomach rises against good men; how do they love him
that begets when they love not him that is begotten? There cannot be the love
of God in such a man: undoubtedly if we love God, we shall love his children,
and any thing that has Gods stamp upon it: we shall lov^ his truth, and his
cause, and religion, and, whatsoever is divine, If we love God, we shall love
whatever is divine, or touches on God.
and touches upon God, we shall love it, because it is his. It is such an
affection as sets the soul on work to think, wherein may I give content to
such a person? It is full of devices and inventions to please: therefore ^t
thinks, can I give consent in loving such, and such? as Christ says, he that
respects these little ones it is to me, it is accountable on my part, I will
see it answered. If the love of Christ be in us, we will regard this because
we will think, Christ will regard me for the good I do for his sake, and in
his name, to this and that party. Thus we see how we may try this sweet
affection, and not deceive our own souls.

And therefore where there is a desire of giving content, there will be a
zeal against all things, to remove all things in our places, and callings,
that may offend: it will carry us through all difficulties, to please him, it
will make us willing to suffer. I will please him, by suffering some indignity
for his cause. I will do it, that I may engage his affection to me. Therefore
the Disciples gloried in this, when they were thought worthy to suffer for
Christ's sake. Where there is a desire to please God, it is so far from being
ashamed, or afraid to suffer, that it joys in this: Oh! now there is, occasion
given to show that God respects me more, if I, for his sake, stand out in his
quarrel, and break through all difficulties.

It will make us please him in all things that we are capable, in all things
that we can do any way in our standings; as Christ describes it out of Moses,
to love God with all our mind, with all our soul, and with all our strength,
where love is, it sets all on work to please, and give content. It sets the
mind on work to study, wherein shall I please God? and it will study Gods
truth, and not serve him by our own inventions: Love to God, studies how to
please God.
we must serve and love GOD after his mind; that is, as he has commanded.
It will set the wits on work to understand how he will be served, and to love
him with all our soul, and with all our heart, that is with all our heart,
that is with the marrow and strength of our affections, with all my strength,
be a man what he will be; if he be a Magistrate, with the strength of his
magistracy, if he be a minister, with the strength of his ministerial calling:
in any ^^ndition I must love him, with all that that condition inableth me to.
For it is a commanding affection, and being so it commands all within and
without to give content to the person loved: it commands the wit to devise, and
the memory to retain good things; it commands joy, and delight, it commands
anger to remove hindrances: and so all outward actions, love commands the doing
of all things, it sets all on work. It is a most active affection, it is like
to fire, it is compared to it, it sets all on work and commands all that man
is able to do. Therefore those that study not in all their endeavors
according to their callings and places according to every thing that God has
entrusted them with, Study in thy place how to put forth the best of ^hy
indevours to please God.
to please God, and to honor him in their conditions, they love not God.

What a shame is it, that when God has given us such a sweet affection as
love, that he should not have our love again? when we make our selves happy
in loving him. He is happy in his own love, the father, Son, and holy Ghost,
but when he intends to make us happy, it is a shame that we should not bestow
our affections upon him.

Much might be said to this purpose for the trial of our selves whether we
love God, or no. Let us not then forget these things: for it is the command
both of the old and new Testament, they run both upon love. I give you a new
Command, says Christ, and yet it is no new command, but old and ordinary. But
it is commanded now in the Gospel; that is, it is renewed by new experiments
of Gods love in Christ, that we should love him, as he has loved us, which is
wonderfully; that we should love him, and love one another. And all this is in
this affection, as we see when the holy Ghost would set out the disposition and
qualification of such, as those great things are prepared for, that neither eye
has seen, nor care heard, nor has entered into the heart of man, he sets it
down by this, They are for those that love him.

FINIS.
SERMON the fourth.
1 COR. 2. 9. As it is written eye has not seen, nore care heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man, the things that God has prepared for them that
love him.
THat which has already been said should force us to beg the Spirit of God
to teach the heart, to teach us the things themselves the inside of them: for a
spiritual holy man has a spiritual knowledge of outward things, of the
creatures, he fees another manner of thing in the creature then other men do.
As another man has a natural knowledge of spiritual things, so a holy man
has a spiritual knowledge even of the ordinary Works of God, and rayseth,
and extracts a quintessence out of them, that a worldly man cannot see to
glorify God, and to buyld up his faith in the sense of Gods favor, etc. This
I add by the way to that.

But the highest performance of this that there are things provided for Gods
people, that neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, etc. It is reserved
for another World: for the promises of the Gospel have then their fulfilling
indeed. These words are true of the state of the Gospel here now: but they
have their accomplishment in Heaven, for whatsoever is begun here, is ended
there: peace, begun here, is ended there; joy that is begun here, it shall be
ended there; Communion of Saints that is begun here, it shall be ended there;
Sanctification that is begun here, it shall be ended there: so all graces shall
be perfect, and all promises performed then. That is the time indeed when God
shall discover things that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard etc. In the
mean time, let us learn to believe them, and to live by faith in them, that
the^e are such things.

And GOD resetves not all ^or another World, but gives his Children a taste of
those things before hand to comfort them in their distresses in this world; as
indeed there is nothing in this world of greater use, and comfort to raise
them, then the beginnings of Heaven upon earth: a little peace, and joy in the
holy ghost will make a man swallow all the discontents in the world. Now God is
so far good to us, as that he lets us have some drops of these things before.
hand to raise up our spirits, that by a taste we may know what great things he
has reserved for us: but of these things, and the use of them I spoke before.

We came then to speak of the qualificatio^ of the persons

For them that love him.

Not that we love God first, and then God prepares these things for us: but God
prepares them, and acquaints us what he means to do with us, and then we love
him. A christian knows before, what title he has in Christ to Heaven, and
then he works: he knows Christ has wrought salvation for him, and then he
works out his salvation in a course tending to salvation in a course tending
to salvation: for there must be working in a course tending to the possession
of salvation, that CHRIST has purchased, we must not work, and think by it
to merit Heaven: we know we have Heaven, and those great things in the Title
of Christ, and then we fall on loving, and working. There is a clean contrary
order, between us, and those mercinaries, they invert the order of God, for,
for whom God has prepared these things, he discovers them to the eye of
faith, and then faith works by love: this I add by the way.

Now he sets down this description of those persons for whom these excellent
things are prepared, by this affection of love, by this grace of love, as being
the fittest for that purpose to describe a Christian. Faith is not so fit,
because it is not so discernable; we may know our love, when we cannot know
our Faith. Often times those that are excellent Christians, they doubt whether
they believe or no: but ask them, whether they love God, and his truth, and
children or no? oh yes! they do. Now God intending to comfort us, sets out
such an affection, as, a Christian may best discern: for of all affections, we
can discern best of our love. But to come to the affection it self, there are
3. things in love.

There is the Affection, Passion, Grace,
of love we speak of the grace here.

The affection is natural.

The passion is the excess of the natural affection, when it over flows its
bound.

Grace is the rectifying of the natural affection, and the elevating, and
raising it up to a higher object then nature can pitch on. The Spirit of God
turns nature into grace, and works corruption, and passion out of nature, and
passion out of nature, and elevates, and rayseth that, which is naturally good,
the affection of love, to be a grace of love, he rayseth it up to love GOD
(which nature cannot discover) by spiritualizing of it, he makes it the most
excellent grace of all. So that while I speak of the love of God, think not
that I speak of the meet affection, but of the affection that has a stamp of
grace upon it: for affections are graces, when they are sanctified. And indeed
all graces (set illu^ination a side which is in the understanding) spring from
this. What is true grace, but joy, and love and delight in the best things, and
all others spring from love? What do we hate, but what is opposite to that we
love? and when are we angry, but when that we love is opposed, and wronged?
Then there is a ho^y zeal: so that indeed all grace is in the affections, and
all affections are in this one primitive affection, this first borne, and bred
affection, love. I speak of it then as a special grace. Now the way of
discerning of it we heard partly before. The way to discern of this
sanctified affection, this grace, is to know what we esteem: for love it is
from an estimation. And likewise in the second place esteem breeds a desire of
union. And desire of union breeds content in the thing, when we have it. And
contentment in the person breeds desire of contenting back again. These
things I stood on, and will not press further.

Let us examine, and try our selves often by our affections, how they stand
biassed, and poynted, whether to God, and heaven whether to God, and heaven
ward, or to the world: for we are, as we love. For what we love, we (as it
were) marry; and if we join our love to baser things, we marry baser things
and so debase our selves: if we join in our affections to things above our
selves, to God, and spiritual things, we become spiritual as they are. So
that a man stands in the World between two goods, somewhat that is better then
himself, and something that is meaner; and thereafter as he joins in his
affections, thereafter he is: for the affection of love to God, and to the
best things makes him exellent; and his affection to baser things make him
base. Let a man be never so great in the World, if his affections to base, he
is a base person: therefore we have the more need ^o try our affections.

But to answer some cases briefly.

It will be objected, may we not love any thing but God, and holy things? may
we not love the Creatures, because it is here specified as a note of those,
that these things are prepared for those that love God?

Yes; we may love them, as we see somewhat of God in them; as every creature
has somewhat of GOD in them; whereupon GOD has the style of every creature
that has good in it. He is called a Fountain, a Rock, a Shield, every thing
that is good: to show that the Creatures, every one has somewhat of GOD; he
would not have taken the style of the Creature else. We may love the Creature
as it has somewhat of GOD in it, a being, or comfortable being, or somewhat,
and as it conveyes the love of God to us, and leads us back again to God.
There is no Creature, but it convey^s, some love, and beams, and excellency of
God to us, in some kind, and leads us to God: so we may love other things. We
may love men and love GOD in them, and love them for God, to bring them to God,
to leave a holy impression in them, to be like God, there is no question of
this: but the love of God that is the spring of all.

But it will be said by some weak conscience, how shall I know I love God,
when I love the world, and worldly things? I love my children, and other things
(perhaps that are not ill) I fear I love them more then God.

We must know for this, that when two streams run in one channel, they run
stronger then one stream, when a man loves other good things; nature goes with
grace, so nature going with grace, the stream is strong: but when a man loves
God and Christ, and heavenly things, there is grace only, nature yields nothing
to that. When a man loves his children or his intimate friends, etc. Nature
going with grace, it is no wonder, if the stream be stronger when two
streams run in one. So corruption in ill actions often times carry the
affections strong. As in many of our loves there is somewhat natural, that is
good, yet there is some corruption, as to love a man for ill; here nature, and
corruption is strong: but in supernatural things grace goes alone.

Then again we must not judge by an indeliberate passion, by what our
affection is carried suddenly, and indeliberately to: for so we may joy more
in a sudden thing, then in the best things of all, as in the sight of a friend
there may be a sudden affection: but the love of GOD it is a constant stream,
it is not a Torrent but a Current, that runs all our lifetime: therefore
those affections to GOD, and heavenly things in a Christian they are
perpetual; they make no great noise perhaps, but they are perpetual in the
hear^ of a Christian: a sudden Torrent, and passion ^nay transport a man, but
yet he may have a holy and heavenly heart. I speak this for comfort.

I, but my love to God is faint and little.

Well, but it is a heavenly spark, and has divinity in it; it is from Heaven,
and is growing, and vigorous and efficacious: and a little heavenly love, will
wast all carnal love at length, it is of so vigorous, and constant a nature.
It is fed still by the spirit; and a little that is fed, and maintained, that
is growing, that has a blessing in it, (as the love of God in the hearts of
his has: for God continually cherrisheth his own beginning) that little shall
never be quenched, but shall overgrow nature at length; and eat out
corruption, and all contrary love whatsoever. Though for the present we see
corruption overpower, and oppress grace: yet the love of God being a divine
spark, and therefore being more powerful (though it be little) then the
contrary, it has a blessing in it to grow till at length it consume all. For
love is like fire; as in other properties so in this, it wastes, and consumes
the contrary; and rayseth up to Heaven, and quickens, and enlivens the persons,
as fire does: and it makes lightsome dead bodies, it transformes them all into
fire like it self. So the love of God by little and little transformes us all
to be fiery, it transformes us to be lovers. These cases needed a little
touching to satisfy some, that are good, and growing christians, and must have
some satisfaction.

But it may be asked again, (as indeed we see it is true,) what is the
reason that sometime meaner Christians have more loving souls, then great
Scholars, men of great parts? one would think that knowledge should increase
love, and affection.

So it does if it be a clear knowledge; but great wits and pates and great
Scholars busy themselves about questions, and intricacies, and so they are
not so much about the affections A poor Christian often times takes those things
for granted, that they study, and dispute, and canvasse, and question: there is
a heavenly light in his soul that God is my Father in Christ, and Christ God
and man is my Mediator he takes it for granted, and so his affections are not
troubled; whereas the other having corruption answerable to his parts, great
wit, and great corruption, he is tangled with doubts, and arguments; he studies
to inform his brain, the other to be heated in his affections. A poor
Christian, cares not for cold nicities that heat not the heart, and
affections; he takes these for granted if they be propounded in the Scripture;
instead of disputing, h^e beleives, and loves, and obeys; and that is the
reason that many a po^re soul goes to Heaven with a great deal of joy, when
others are tangled, and wrapped in their own doubts: so much for satisfying of
these things. To go on therefore to give a few directions how to have this
heavenly fire kindled in us, to love God, considering such great things are
provided for those that love God, It is a matter of consequence, as we desire
Heaven we must desire this holy fire to be kindled in us.

Let us know for a ground (as it were) that it is our duty to aim at the
highest pitch of love that we can, and not to rest in the lowest. The lowest
pitch of loving GOD, is to love GOD because he is good to us, that is good, the
Scriptures stoupes so low as to allow that, God would have us love him, and
holy things for the benefit we have by them: but that is mercinarie if we rest
there: but God stoupes to allure us by promises, and favors, though we must
not rest there But we must love God, not for our selves, but labor to rise to
this pitch, to love our selves in God; and to see that we have happiness in
God, and not in our selves; our being is in him, we must love our selves in
him, and be content to be lost in God: that is, so to love God, that if he
should cast us away (his kindness is better then life) do others what they
will we will love him, and our selves for his excellencies, and because we see
our selves in him, and are his children, we must labor to rise to that, and
that is the highest pitch that we can attain to, we must know that for a
ground.

And know this for another, that when we speak of the love of God, we speak
of love incorporate into our conversations, and actions, not of an abstracted
love and affection; but of love in our places, and callings, and standings,
love invested into action. Therefore the Scripture says we must love God,
with all our mind with all our heart, with all our power, and strength, that
is, in our particular places. To make it clear. When we speak of love to God,
we speak of love to him in our particular callings. He loves God that is a
Magistra^e, and executes justic^ for Gods Sake; and he that is a Minister, and
teaches the people conscionably for Gods Sake, and shows them the way to
Heaven. He loves God as a man in the common Wealth, a states man, etc. That in
that place seeks the glory of GOD, and the good of the Church, and Religion.
Shall men talk of love to GOD, and their affections are stirred up I know not
whereabout? No, it is an affection that is discovered in actions.

How can we love God with all our might, except as far as our might extends
our love extends? How far does thy activitie, thy power, thy sphere, that
thou can do any thing, stretch? so far must thy love, and thou must show
thy love in all the powers, and abilities that God has furnished thee with.

For a man that has great place, and opportunity to do good, and to think it
enough only to love God in his Closet, etc. This is not the love we speak
of. A man must love God with all his might, as he stands invested in relation
this way or that way.

The love of God in a private man, will not serve for a Magistrate, or a publik
man: he must show hi love in his place by standing in the gappe, to hinder all
the ill, and to do all the good he can, every man must do so, but such a one
more especially, because God has tru^^ed him with more; Well, these things
premised, to come to some directions how to come to love God?

First of all, the way to love God is to have a heavenly light, to discover
what we are in our selves, and our emptiness: for being as we are, we can
never love God till we see in what need we stand of his favor, and grace,
that we are damned Creatures else.

Now when we come to have our eyes opened to see our sinfulness, and
emptiness, we will make out to God, and make out to his mercy in CHRIST above
all things. Indeed the first love is the love of dependence before we come to a
love of friendship, and complacency with God: a love to go out to him, and to
depend upon him for mercy, and grace, and all. A love that rises from the
sense of our misery, and goes to him for supply.

There is a sweet concurrence of misery, and mercy; of emptiness, and
fullness; of beggary, and riches.

Now when we see our own misery, and beggary, and sinfulness, and then a
fullness in God to supply, of riches to enrich us every way, then this breeds a
love; this is the way to all other loves that follow. And where this is not
premised, and goes before, a man will never delight in God. In Luke 7. That
good woman she loved much, why? much was forgiven her, many sins were
forgiven her.

So when the soul shall see what need it has of forgiving mercy, of pardoning
mercy, and how many great debts GOD has forgiven us in CHRIST, there will be
a great deal of love because there is a great deal forgiven. And we must begin
indeed with seeing the infinite mercy of GOD before any other attribute of God,
and then we shall love him after. This is the first thing. There is no soul
that ever loves God so, as the poor soul that has been abased with the sense
of sin, and its emptiness ^^at it is empty of all goodness, and then sees a
supply in the mercy of GOD in Christ; those souls love GOD above all.

Another way to love God, is to consider of his wonderful goodness, to
meditate, and think of it, he is good, and does good, it is a Communicative
goodness. Let us think of his goodness, and the streaming of it our to the
Creature. The whole Earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. What are all
the Creatures, but Gods goodness? We can see nothing but the goodness of
God, what is all the Creatures but Deus explicatus, God unfolded to our senses?
he offers himself to our bodies, and souls, all is Gods goodness.

And then see this goodness fitted to us, it is a fit goodness that comes
from God, he is good, and does good, and so fitly, he proportions his
goodness: for he has fitted every part of us, soul, and body with
goodness, all the senses with goodness: what do we see but goodness in
colors? What do we hear but his good in those delights that come that way?
We taste, and feel his goodness, against the cold we have clothing in hunger,
we have food, in all necessities in all exigences we have fit considerations
of God for all necessities whatsoever outward.

But then for our souls, what food has he for that? the death of CHRIST his
own son to feed our souls. The soul is a spiritual substance, and he
thought nothing good enough to feed it but his own son; we feed on Gods love
in giving CHRIST to death, and on CHRIST'S love in giving himself to death.

The soul being continually troubled with the guilt of some sin or other, it
feeds on this, it is nourished with CHRIST every day more, and more, especially
at the Sacrament. Thus we see how GOD has fitted his goodness to us. And then
in particular dangers, how he fits us with several deliverances, so
seasonably, as we may see Gods love in it.

Then as GODS goodness is great, and fit, so it is near us; it is not a
goodness a far off, but GOD follows us with his goodness in whatsoever
condition we be: he applies himself to us, and he has taken upon him
near relations, that he might be near us in goodness, he is a Father, and
every where* to maintain us. He is a Husband, and every where to help; he
is a friend, and every where to comfort, and counsel: so his love it is a
near love: therefore he has taken upon him the nearest relations, that we
may never want God, and the testimonies of his love.

And then again this goodness of God which is the object of love, it is a
free goodness merely from himself, and an overflowing goodness, and an
everlasting goodness, it is never drawn dry, he loves us unto life
everlasting: he loves us in this World, and follows us with signs of his love
in all the parts of us, in body, and soul, till he has brought body, and
soul to Heaven to enjoy himself for ever there. These, and such like
considerations may serve to stir us up to love God, and direct us how to love
God.

Benefits will work upon a beast as it is Isaiah ^. Hear oh Heavens, and
hearken oh earth, (...) 1.
the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribbe: but my people have
forgotten me.

Proud men become ba^er, and more brute then the very brutes: benefits will
moove the very brute Creatures. So I say these favors to us in particular
should moove us, except we will be more brute, then the brutes themselves.

Especially to moove us all, consider some particularities of favors to us
more then to others: for specialties do much increase love, and respect.

Consider how God has followed thee with goodness outwardly, when others have
been neglected. Thou have a place in the World, and Riches, and Friends, when
many other excellent persons want all these. There are some common favors to
all Christians: as the favor we have in CHRIST, forgiveness of sins,
Sanctification, and such other favors. But there be some specialties of
Devine providence, whereby it appears that GODS providence has watched over
us in some particulars more then others, those be special engagements. And is
there any of us that cannot say that GOD has dealt specially in giveing them
some mercy more then to others? I add this therefore to the rest.

Again to help^ us to stir up this grace of love, consider those examples of
loveing, of those that have then lived in former times: take David, and Paul,
and other holy men. David wonders at his own love. Lord how do I love thy
Law? And have we not more cause comparing the grounds of our affection, when
we have more then they in those times? What, did he wonder at his love of
GODS Law, when the Canon was so short? they had only Moses, and some few
Books; and we have the Canon enlarged, we have both the old, and new
Testament: shall not we say much more, how do I love thy Law, thy Gospel,
and Divine truths? This should shame us, when they in dark times so loved the
truth of GOD, and we see all clear and open, and yet are cold?

Likewise it is good in this case to converse with those, that are
affectionate: as face answers face, so spirit answers spirit, as Iron
sharpneth Iron, so one sharpens another. Conversation with cold ones will make
one cold. For the abundance of iniquity, the love of many shall wax cold.
Conversing with sinful cold people casts a dampe upon us: but let us labor,
if we will be wise for our souls, when we find any coldness of affection,
to converse with those that have sweet, and heavenly affections, it will
mervaylously work upon our hearts.

I might say much this way to stir us up, and direct us how to love God.

But indeed nothing will so much enable us to love God, as a new nature: nature
will love without provocation: the fire will burn, because it is fire; and the
water will moysten, because it is water; and a holy man will love holy things,
because he is holy: a spiritual soul will love spiritual things, because
he is spiritual: therefore besides all, add this that our natures be
changed more, and more, that they be sanctified, and circumcised as God has
promised, I will circumcise your hearts, that ye may love me. There must be a
circumcised heart to love God, we must be sanctified to love God: for if
nature be not renewed, there cannot be this new Commandment of love; Why is
love called a new Commandment, and an old Commandment?

It is called old for the Letter, because it was a command in Moses time, thou
shall love the Lord with all thy soul. But now it is a new Commandment:
because there is abundance of spirit given by CHRIST, and the spirit sanctifies
us, and writes this affection in our hearts. It was written in stone before:
but now it is written in our hearts by the spirit. And now there are new
incentives, and motives to love, since CHRIST came, and gave himself for us,
new incouragments, and provocations to love, therefore it is a new
Commandment, from new grounds, and motions that are more a great deal then
before Christ. But there must be a new heart to obey this new command of love;
the old heart will never love.

Therefore we must with all the means that may be used, beg the spirit of
sanctification, especially, beg the discovery of Gods love to us: for our love
is but a reflection of Gods love: we cannot love God except he love us first:
now our love being a reflection of Gods love, we must desire that he would give
us his spirit, to reveal his love: that the spirit being a witness of Gods
love to us, may thereupon be a spirit of love, and sanctification in us.

And let us labor to grow more in the assurance of Gods love, and all the
evidences of it, let us dwell long in the meditation of these things, the
dwelling in the meditation of Gods love, it will make us to love him again: as
many beams in a burning glass, meeting together they cause a fire many
thoughts of the many fruits of Gods love in this World, and what he intends
us in the World to come, our hearts dwelling on them, these beams will kindle
a holy fire in our hearts.

Many are troubled with cold affections, and wish oh! that they could love!
they forget the way how to love, they will not meditate; and if they do
meditate they think to work love out of their own hearts, They may as well
work fire out of a Flint, and water out of a stone: our hearts are a barren
Wilderness. Therefore let us beg the spirit that God would alter our hearts,
with meditation and all other helps: that God would sanctify us, and discover
his love to us, and that he would give us his spirit (for he does the one
where he does the other,) when God does so, then we shall be enabled to love
him. We must not think to bring love to God, but we must fetch love from God,
we must light our Candle at his fire: think of his love to us, and beg the
spirit of love from him, love is a fruit of the spirit That is the course we
ought to take, for GOD will teach our hearts to love.

Now to stir us up the more, to add some motives, and incouragments to
labor more to get this affection. Let us consider seriously that without this
love or God we are dead, and whatsoever comes from us it is still-borne, it is
dead: without love we are nothing, without love all that comes from us is
nothing, without love I am as a tinkling Cymball says Paul. For a man to be
nothing in Religion, and all that comes from him to be dead, and still-borne,
to be abortive actions who would be in such a cafe? Therefore let us labor
before we do any thing that is good to have our hearts kindled with the love
of God, and then we shall be somebody, and that that we do will be acceptable,
for love sweetens all performances. It is not the action, but the love in the
action: as from God it is not the dead favor that comes from him that comforts
the soul of a Christian so much, as the love, and sweetness of God in the
favor, that is better then the thing it self, when we have favor from God in
outward favors; Consider the sweetness taste and see how gracious the Lord is
Psalm. 34. Psalm. 34.
The taste of the love and favor of God in the blessing is better then the
thing is self, for it is but a dead thing. And so from us back again to God,
what are the things we perform to him? they are dead: but when they are
sweetened with the affection of love, done to him as a father in Christ, he
tastes our performances as sweet; love makes all we do to have a relish, and
all that he does to us: therefore we should labor for this sweet affection.

And with all consider, that we may be called to do many things in this World;
surely there are none of us but we have many holy actions to perform, we
have many things to suffer, and endure in the World, many temptations to
resist; what shall, or will carry us through all? Nothing, but love; if we have
loving, and gracious hearts, this affection will carry us through all good
actions, through all oppositions and temptations: for love is strong as death.
Considering therefore that there are so many things that will require this
affection, this blessed wing, and wind of the soul, to carry us along in
spite of all that is contrary, through all opposition, let us labor for love,
and that affection will carry us through all. Indeed if we have that, it is no
matter what a man suffers: a man can never be miserable that has this
affection of love; if this heavenly fire be kindled in him, he cannot be
miserable, take him in what condition you will, take him upon the wrack. S.
Paul in the dungen sung at midnight in the dungeon, in the stocks, at an
uncomfortable time, and place, when he had been misused, his heart was enlarged
to sing to God out of love. Nay every thing increases it; the things we
suffer, increases this flame: let a man love God, whatsoever he suffers in a
good cause it increases his love, he shall find his love increased with it;
the more he loves the more he can suffer, and the more he suffers the more he
loves God, and the more he increases in a joyful expectation of the times to
come: and love is always with joy and hope, and other sweet affections; it
draws joy with it always, and hope of better things; and as joy increases,
and hope increases, so a man's happiness increases in this World. Therefore
it is no matter what a man suffers that has a gracious, and loving heart,
enlarged by the Spirit of God: let him never think of what he suffers of
pain, of losses, and crosses, if God discover his fatherly breast, and shine
on him in Christ, and he look on God reconciled, and taste of the joys of
Heaven before hand: if you tell him of sufferings, you tell him of that that
incourageth him. It is an argument I might be long in, and to great purpose:
for if we get this holy fire kindled once, we shall need little exhortation to
other duties, it would set us on work to all, and like the fire of the
Sanctuary that never went out: so it is such an affection, that if it be once
kindled in the heart it will never out. It is a kind of miracle in ill when we
love other things besides God, baser then our selves; it is as much as if a
River should turn backward. For man that is an excellent Creature, to be
carried with the stream of his affection to things worse then himself, it is
a kind of monster for a man to abuse his understanding so. What a base thing is
it for a man to suffer such a sweet stream as love a holy current to run into
a sink? who would turn a sweet stream into a sink, and not rather into a
garden? into a sweet place, to refresh that? Our love is the best thing in the
World, and who deserves it better then God, and Christ? we can never return
any thing, but this affection of love, we may again. And can we place it
better then upon devine things, whereby we are made better our selves? does God
require our affections for himself? No; it is to make us happy. It advances
our affection to love him, it is the turning of it into the right stream. It
is the making of us happy that God requires it. For consider all things that
may deserve this affection. It will keep us from all sin: what is any sin, but
the abuse of love? for the crookedness of this affection turns us to present
things that is the cause of all sin. For what is all sin, but pleasure, and
honors, and profits the 3. Idols of the World? all sin, is about them. And
what are all good actions but love well place^? the well ordering of this
affection is the well ordering of our lives, and the misplacing of this
affection is the cause of all sin.

And to make us the more careful this way, consider that when we place our
affections upon any thing else, consider the vanity of it; we loose our love,
and the thing, and our selves. For whatsoever else we love, if we love not God
in it, and love it for God; it will perish, and come to nothing ere long. The
affection perishes with the thing, we loose our affections, and the thing, and
loose our selves too misplaceing of it. These are forcible considerations with
understanding persons. And if we would use our understanding, and
consideration, and meditation, and our souls, as we should, to consider of
the grounds, and incouragments we have to love God, and the best things whereby
we may be dignified above our selves, it would not be as it is: we should not
be so devoyd of grace, and comfort. It was a miracle that the 3. young men
should be in the midst of the furnace, and be there as if they were in
another place, no hotter. And it is a miracle that men should be in the midst
of all encouragements that we have to love God: as there is not the like
reasons for any thing in the World to keep our souls in a perpetual heat, of
affection to love God; no motives, or arguments, or incentives, all are nothing
to the multitude of arguments, we have to inflame our affections: and yet to be
cold in the midst of the fire, it is a kind of a miracle, to have dark
understandings, and dead affections: that notwithstanding all the heavenly
means we have to keep a perpetual flame of love to God, yet to be cold, and
dark in our souls: let us bewail it, and be ashamed of it.

What do we profess our selves? Christians, heirs of Heaven, so beloved of
God as that he gave his own Son to deliver us, being rebels, and enemies,
in so cursed a state, as we are all in by nature: poor Creatures, inferior to
the Angels that fell, that he should love man; sinful dust, and ashes so much
as to give his own Son to free us from so great misery, and to advance us to
so great happiness, to set us in heavenly places with Christ, and to have
perpetual communion with him in Heaven, to have such encouragements, and to be
cold, and dead hear^ed: nay wilfully opposite in our affections, to be enemies
to the goodness of God and grace, having such arguments to love God. And yet
how many spirits edged by the Devil, oppose all that is good, and will not
give way to Gods Spirit? God would have them Temples, they will be styes, God
would marry them, nay, they will be harlots. GOD would have them happy here,
and here after: no, they will not, they will have their own lusts and
affections.

Let us be affrayd of these things, as we love our own souls, and ourselv^s:
and consider what incouragments we have to love God for which such great
things are reserved as, neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor has entered
into the heart of man to conceive.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Tho. Wykes.
Aug. 1638.

