THE GRATEFVLL SERVANT. A Comedy.

As it was lately presented with good applause at the private House in
Drury Lane, By her Majesty's Servants.

Written by JAMES SHIRLEY Gent.

-- -- -- Vsque ego postera
Crescam laud recens.


LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. F. for John Grene, and are to be sold at his
shop at Furnivals-Inne gate, 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, FRANCIS Earl of RVTLAND, etc.
My most Honored LORD:
WHen the Age declineth from her primitive virtue, and the Silken wits of the
Time, (that I may borrow from our acknowledged Master, learned IONSON)
disgracing Nature, and harmonious Poe^ie, are transported with many illiterate
and prodigious births, it is not safe to appear without Protection. Among all
the names of Honor, this Comedy owes most gratitude to your Lordship, whose
clear testimony was to me above a Theater, and I applaud the dexterity of my
fate, that has so well prepared a Dedication, whither my only ambition would
direct it. I am not pale, to think it is now exposed to your more deliberate
censure; For it is my security, that I have studied your Lordships Candor, and
know you imitate the Divine nature which is merciful above offense. Go on
great Lord and be the volume of our English Honor, in whom while others,
invited by their birth and quickened with ambitious emulation read and study
their principles, let me be made happy enough to admire, and devote my self,

Your Lordships, most humble creature: JAMES SHIRLEY.

To my learned friend James Shirley upon his Grateful servant.
PResent thy work unto the wiser few
That can discern and judge; it is good it is new
Thy style is modest, scenes high, and thy verse
So smooth, so sweet, Apollo might rehearse,
To his own Lute, be therefore boldly wise
And scorn malicious censures, like flies
They tickle but not wound, thy well got fame
Cannot be soild or can thou merit blame
Because thou do not swell with mighty rimes
Audacious metaphors, like verse like times
Let others bark, keep thou poeticke laws
Deserve their envy, and command applause.
John Fox.
To my known friend Mr Shirley upon his Comedy the Grateful servant.
Who would writ well for the abused stage
When only swelling word do please the age
And malice is thought wit, to make 't appear
They judge they mis-interpret what they hear.
Rough Poems now usurp the name of good
And are admired but never understood
Thee and thy strains I vindicate, whose pen
Wisely disdaines t^ iniuce lines, or men,
Thou have prepared dainties for each taste,
And art by all that know thy muse embr^c'd
Let purblind critticks still endure this curse
To see good plays and ever like the worse.
Jo. Hall.
Ingeniosissimo amico Ia. Sherleio.
Matter Daedala nil poliuit, hujus
Matris mimaque nil dolauit altum:
(Sitotum esynodis tulere sacris
Et musarum Hierarchia, and sororu^
Triga, and Castalius latexrigauit)
Quod non dilaniantque, lancinantque
Momi insulsatribus, nepo^ulique.
Ergo per charites, nouen silesque
Diuas, (...) nihil morare
Si qui te lacerentque verberentque
Quis Shirleie tuos jocos lepores,
Accentus thymeles sonos theatri,
Mellitos globulos, facetiasque,
Verborum veneres, Cupidinesque,
Acetum sesamum, sales, piperque,
Captus non veneratur osculatur
Est diuum ni^i stoicum assecutus.
Supra nos homines seueriores,
Laudent fulmina; vorticesque quales
Voluit gurgitetauri formis Ister,
Vocum monstraque pectinesque solis.
Velint cum Semele modos tonantes
Quos quum non capiant, stupent adusti
Sed tu macte animo, tibique plaude,
Ridefulminis actaflagra bruti,
Laurus te tua temporum corona,
Intactum dabit: intonent Theones,
Tush I will not believe, that judgments light
Is fixed but in one sphere, and that dull night,
Muffles the rest, the dimmest lamp of Sky
Has some vnborrowed luster, so may I
By which I may discern thy muse does tower,
Above common flight and make the clouds her bower
Then in the higher pitch see her anon
Reach Ariadnes Crown and put it on,
And there installed ravish with her shine
The God of Poets not the God of wine.
Thy Helicon is pure and is distild
Through as clear pipes, which run, when they are filled
Brisk Nectar. Phoebus hardly can divine
Which issues are his own and which are thine.
Cha. Aleyn.
Amicissimo suo Sherleio,
FOns occtuditur ille Pegaseius
Et Parnnssia transilice septa
Iucundos vetat optimosque vates
Custos Tartariae triformis Aula:
Te Crux postulet Hercules, feratque,
Quemraptum puto Cerberum Charonti
Musarum statuisse lanitorem:
Tu Sherleie Potes, fauente Musa
Letrantem triplici canem boatu
Tutus spernere: Terreat minores:
Olim Pyrithoum peremit ille,
Seruum non perimet tuum, fidelem
Gratum, Pycithooque chariorem
Dulcis fabula, dulciorque seruus
Et tu dulcior omnnibut Poeta
Quales, quas e put as uterque fundit?
Istis delicias parare fas est
Crudas mormoreasque saweasque
Et que molliculos (amice) dentes
Gaudent frangereducioce morsu:
Quiferrum chalybemque struthiones
Et nil pretecia coqulant maligni:
Tam forti stomacho placere noli^
Nec Sherleie places: Dapes ministras
Iucundas, facilesque, milleasque
Conditas sale, gratia, lepore.
I laurum pete, quam merere totam.
Nec te t^rreat iste qui Poctis
Iam Minos Rhadamanthus Aeacusq est
Et si quis numeratur inde quartus
Qua (...) dubia tremendus vrn^:
Sphinx Parnassia quem timemur omnes
Te viso velut oedipo tremis^at.
Sic tu solne Gryphos, vt illa Nectit.
Tho. Randolph.
I Cannot fulminate or tonitruate words
To puzz'le intellects my ninth less affords
No sycophronian buskins, nor can strain
Garagantuan lines to Gigantize thy vein,
Nor make a iusiurand, that thy great plays
Are terra del fo'gos or incognitaes
Thy Pegasus in his admird carreere
Curuets on Capreolls of nonsense here.
WOnder not friend that I do entertain
Such language that both think and speak so plain
Know I aplaud thy smooth and even strains
That will inform and not confound our brains
Thy Helicon like a smooth stream does flow
While others with disturbed channels go
And headlong like Nile Cataracts do fall
With a huge noise, and yet not heard at all.
When thy intelligence on the Cockpit stage
Gives it a soul from the immortal rage
I hear the muses birds with full delight
Sing where the birds of mars were wont to fight
Nor flatter I, thou know I do abhor it
Let others praise thy play, i will love thee for it,
That he that knows my friend shall say he has
A friend as grateful as his servant was
Tho. Randolph.
To my friend Mr Shirley upon his Comedy.
LEt others that before thy book take place
Write in thy praises, I will not disgrace
The time so much, our Critticks shall not say
But I will find some errors in thy play;
Thou art too little jealous of thy muse,
Her beauties seen to free, she does not use
To wear a mask or veil, which now a days
Is grown a fashion, for in many plays
Apollo scarce can to himself give light
To view the muse, or read the meaning right,
Thy fancies, are to pleasing Cupid fears
To loose his tribute paid in sighs and tears
Whilst lovers make their peace with thy conceit;
It Is heinous, and thy language is too neat,
Which even to me, that am thy friend, affords
Leave to report there is witchcraft in thy words,
Though to the stage it would be thought blessed harm
Might it be still bewitched which such a charm.
To. Stapylton.
To my Judicious and learned friend the Author upon his ingenious poem the
Grateful servant.
THough I well know, that my obscurer name
Listed which theirs, who here advance thy fame
Cannot add to it, give me leave to be
Among the rest a modest votarie
At the altar of thy muse, I dare not raise
Giant Hyperboles unto thy praise,
Or hope it can find credit in this age
Though I should swear in each triumphant page
Of this thy work, there is no line but of weight
And poesy it self shown at the height
Such common places friend will not agree
With thy own vote and my integrity
I Will steer a midde way, have clear truth my guide
And urge a praise which cannot be denyde
Here are no forced expressious, no racked phraze
No Babeil compositions to amaze
The tortured reader, no believed defense
To strengthen the bold at heists insolence,
No obscene syllable, that may compel
A blush from a chaste maid, but all so well
Expressed and orderd, as wise men must say
It is a grateful Poem a good play
And such as read, ingenuously shall find,
Few have out stripped thee, many halt behind.
Philip Massenger.
To his deserving friend Mr Ia. Shirley upon his Grateful servant.
I Do not praise thy strains, in hope to see
My verses read before thy Comedy
But for it self, that cunning I remit
To the new tribe, and mountibankes of wit
That martire ingenuity, I must
Be to my conscience and thy poem just,
Which graced with comely action, did appear
The full delight of every eye and ear,
And had that stage no other play, it might
Have made the critticke blush at cockpit flight
Who not discovering what pitch it flies
His wit came down in pity to his eyes
And lent him a discourse of cock and bull
To make his other comendations full,
But let such Momi pass and give applause
Among the brood of actors, in whose cause
As champion he has sweat let their stale pride
Find some excuse in being magnified,
Thy muse will live and no adulterate pen
shall wound her through the sides of common men
Let Them vnkennell malice, yet thy praise
Shall mount secure, hell cannot blast thy bays.
Tho. Craford.
To my friend the author.
MY name is free, and my rich clothes commend
No deformd bounty of alooser friend,
Nor am I warm in the Sunshine of great men
By gui^ding their dark sins, truth guides my pen,
Bright justice therefore bold by me, does say
Man's understanding feels no such decay
But it may judge, and while the soul of wit
Lives bodied in the stage, spectator sit:
Old nature's ever young, and 'twere a crime
Against reason, to auerre our aged time
Is sick with dotage: which does still impart
To 'th betterd world new miracles of art.
I must applaude thy scenes, and hope thy Style
Will make Arabia envious of our I Will
Confess us happy since thou have given a name
To the English Phoenix, which by thy great flame
Will live, in spite of malice to delight
Our Nation, doing art and nature right,
Go forward still, and when his muse expires
Whose English, stains the g^eeke and latin lires
Diuinest Ionson, live to make us see.
The glory of the stage revived in thee.
William Habington.
The author to the Reader.
THe reason Why my Play comes forth vsherd by so many lines, was the free
vote of my friends whom I could not with ciuility refuse. I dare not own their
character of my self, or play, but I must join with them that have written,
to do the Comedians justice, among whom, some are held comparable With the best
that are, and have been in the world, and the most of them deserving a name in
the file of those that are eminent for graceful and unaffected action. Thus
much Reader I thought meet to declare in this place, and if thou be
ingenuous, thou will accuse with me, their bold severity, who for the offense
of being mod est and not iustling others for the wall have most injuriously
thrust so many actors into the Kennell -- now --

^ Persons.
Duke of Sauoy, lover of Leonora, and in her supposed loss of Cleona.
Lodowicke, his brother wild and lascivious Foscari, a noble count, and lover of
Cleona. Grimundo, a Lord, and once governor to Lodowicke. noble men of Sauoy.
Sorauzo Gioto, Fabrichio,
Piero, Compa ion of Lodow. Iacomo, a foolish ambitious steward to Cleona.
Valentio, a relligious man, Abbot, Gent. Servants. Satyrs.
Leonora the princess of Millan but disguisd as a page to Foscari and called
Dulcino. Astella a virtuous lady, wife to Lodow: but neglected Belinda wife to
Grimundo Cleona Foscaries Mistress, Ladies. Nymphs-
The scene Sauoy.

THE GRATEFVLL SERVANT.
ACTVS, 1.
SCAENA, 1.
Enter Soranzo, Giotto. Giotto. THe Duke is moved.


Sor. The news displeased him much.


Giot. And yet I see no reason, why he should
Engage so great affection to th* Daughter
Of Millan, he nere saw her.

Sor. Fame does paint
Great beauties, and her picture (by which Princes
Court one another) may beget a flame
In him to raise this passion.

Giot. Trust a pencill,
I like not that State* woing, see his Brother Enter Lodwicke.
Has left him, pray my Lord how is it with
His Highness?

Lodw. Somewhat calmer, Love I think
Will kill neither of us, although I be
No Stoicke, yet I thank^ my ^tarres I have
A power over my a^fection, if he will not
Tame his, let it melt him into Sonnets
He will prove the more loving Prince to you,
Get in again; and make wise speeches to him,
There is Aristotle's Ghost still with him,
My Phylosophicall Governor that was,
He wants but you two, and a pair of Spectacles,
To see what folly it is, to love a woman
With that wicked resolution to marry her,
Though he be my elder Brother, and a Duke,
I ha more wit, when there is a dearth of women
I may turn fool, and place one of their Sex
N^erer my heart, farewell, commend me to
My Brother, and the Councell-Table.
Exit.
Sor. Still the same wild Prince, there needs no character
Where he is, to (...) him.

Giot. He said truth,
I doubt there is no room for one, whom he
Should place in's heart, and honor.

Sor. His own Lady
All pity her misfortune, both were too
Unripe for Hymen, 'twas the old Dukes act,
And in such marriages, hearts seldom meet
When they grow older.

Giot. Wherefore would the Duke
Marry his young Son first?

Sor. The walk of Princes,
To make provision beti^es for them:
They can bequeath small legacy, knowing th'heyre
Carries both state and fortune for himself,
His fate^ before him, here comes Grimundo ^

Enter Grimundo. Grim, The Duke is recollected, where is the Prince?


Sor. Gone.
I would he were returned once to himself.

Giot. He has to soon forgot your precepts.


Sor. Your example might still be a Lecture,


Grim. I did not deceive the old Dukes trust
While I had power to manage him,
He Is now past my tuition, but to th'Duke --
Is it not strange my Lord, that the Young Lady
Of Millan, should b^ forced to marry now, with
Her Uncle?

Giot. They Are unequal,


Sor. It Is unlawful.


Grim. It Is a trifle, reasons of State they vrg^
Against us, lea^t their Dnkedome by this match,
^e subject unto Sauoy, for the scrupl^
O^ Religion, they are in hope, that
A Dispensation may be procured
To quit exceptions, and by this means,
They shall preserve their Principality,
In The name and blood, so reports Fabrichio
Whom the Duke employed for Treaty, how now?
Enter Gentleman.
Gent. The Duke calls for you my Lords.


Giot. We attend,
Ha? he is coming forth.
Enter Duke, and Fabrichio*
Sor, His looks are cheerful.


Duke, Fabrichio?


Fabr, My Lord,


Duke We will to Tennis.


Fabr. What your Grace please.


Duke, Grimundo?
Because you take no pleasure in such pasti^es,
Your contemplation may busy it self, with that book.

Grim. Book my Lord, it is --


Duke. Leonora's picture a fair^ Table-booke.
You may without offense to your yonng Wife*
Look on a Picture.
I (...) (...) it, let (...) s^e't ^o m^re,
Millan and we are parted, our breast wears
Again his natural Temper, allow me pray
The excuse of common frailty, to be moved
At strangeness of this news.

Giot. Your Highness said,
You would to Tennis.

Duke, And'tis time enough,
We have the day before us: some Prince Grimundo
In such a cause as this would have been angry,
Angry indeed, throw'ne of cold language, and
Called it a high, and loud affront, whose stirring
Imagination would have wakened Death,
And by a miserable war, have taught
Repentance, to a pair of flourishing States,
Such things there have been?

Sor. But your Grace is wise --


Duke. Nay do not flatter now, I do^ not Court
Your praise so much, I speak but what our stories
Mention, if they abuse not soft posterity:
I was not come to tell you, what my thoughts,
With a strong murmr prompt me too.

Grim. We hope --


Duke, Ye fear, and do not know me yet, my actions
Shall clear your jealousy, I Am reconciled
At home, and while I cherisht a peace here,
Abroad I must continue it, there are
More Ladiesi'the world?

Fabr. Most true my Lord.


Duke, And as attractiue, great, and glorious women
Are there not, ha?

Sor. Plenty my Lord in the world.


Duke, Ithe world, within the confines of our Dukedom
In Sauoy, are there not?

Grim. In Sauoy too.
Many choice beauties, but your birth my Lord*

Duke, Was but an honor purchased by another,
It might have been thy chance.

Grim: My Father was
No Duke.

Duke, 'Twas not thy fault, nor is it my virtue,
That I was borne when the fresh Sun was rising,
So came with greater shadow into life,
Then thou, or he.

Grim: But royal Sir be pleased --


Duke, No more, we are not ignorant, you may
Take away this distinction, and allege
In your grave wisdoms, spacious arguments,
For our alliance with some foreign Prince,
But we have weighed their promising circumstance,
And find it only a device, that may
Serve time, and some dark ends, a mere state-tricke,
To disguise hatred, and is empty of
Those benefits, it seems to bring along:
Give me a Lady borne in my obedience,
Whose disposition, will not engage
A search into the nature of her Climate,
Or make a serutinie into the Stars:
Whose language is mine own, and will not need
A smooth Interpreter, whose virtue is
Above all titles, though her birth or fortune,
B^ a Degree beneath us, such a Wife
Were worth a thousand far fetched Brides, that have
More state, and less Devotion.

Fabr. If your Highness --


Duke, Come you shall know our purpose, in the last
We obeyed your directions, not without
Our free and firm allowance of the Lady
Whom we will forget, it will become your duties,
Follow us now, we have not been unthrifty
In our affections, and that Millan may
Know Sauoy can neglect a Millanoise,
And that we need not borrow a delight,
Here we are fixed to marry,

Grim. We are Subjects,
And shall solicit Heaven, you may find one
Worthy your great acceptance.

Duke: We are confident,
And to put off the cloud we walk in, know
We are resolved to place all Love and Honor
Upon Cleona
Nor is it a n^w affection, we but cherish
Some seeds, which heretofore, her virtue had
Scattered upon our heart.

Grim. We cannot be
Ambitious of a Lady, in your own
Dominion, to whom we shall more willingly
Prostrate our duties.

Soren. She Is a Lady of
A flowing sweetness, and the living virtue
Of many noble Ancestors.

Giot. In whom
Their fortunes meet, as their Propheticke Souls
Had taught them thrifty providence, for this
Great honor, you intend her.

Duke, We are pleased,
And thank your general vote,
You then shall straight prepare our visit, bear our
Princely respects, and say we shall take pleasure
To be her Guest to day, nay loose no time,
We shall the sooner quit the memory
Of Leonoraes Image.

Enter Lodwicke. Soren: The Prince your Brother Sir?


Duke: Withdraw, but be not at too much distance,
Lodwicke You Are welcome.

Lodw. I shall know that by my success, I want
A thousand Crowns, a thousand Crowns.

Duke. For what use?


Lodw. Why will these foolish questions never be left,
Is It not sufficient I would borrow em,
But you must still capitulate with me?
I would put 'em to that use they were ordained for,
You might as well have asked me, when I meant
To pay you again.

Duke, That to some other men,
Might ha been necessary.

Lodw, And you wo'not
Do that, I have another easy Suite to you.

Duke, What is it?


Lodw. A thing of nothing, I would entreat you
To part with this same transitory honor,
This trifle called a Dukedom, and retire,
Like a good Christian Brother, into some
Religious house, it would be a great ease to you,
And comfort to your friends, especially
To me, that would not trouble you, with the noise
Of money thus, and I could help it.

Du. It Is a kind, and honest motion, out of Charity,
Mere Charity, so I must needs accept it --
I Will only marry, and get a Boy, or two,
To govern this poor trifle for I Am bound
In duty, to provide for my Succession.

Lodw. What do you make of me, cannot I serve?


Duke. You, that propound a benefit for my Soul,
Woe not neglect your own I know, w^e'le both
Turn Friars together?

Lodw. And be low sie?


Duke, Any thing.


Lodw. I shall not have a thousand Crowns?


Duke, Thou shall.


Lodw. Then be a Duke still, come lets love, and be
Fine Princes, and thou had but two or three
Of my conditions, by this hand I wod not
Care and thou were immortal, so I might
Live with thee, and enjoy this worlds felicity.

Duke, Thast put me in tune, how shall's be very merry
Now in the instant?

Lodw. Merry?


Duke: Yes.


Lodw. Merry indeed?


Duke. Yes.


Lodw. Follow me,
I Will bring you to a Lady?

Duke, To a Whore?


Lodw. That is a little the courser name.


Duke, And can you play the Pander for me?


Lodw. A toy, a toy.
What can a man do less for any Brother,
Th'ordinary complement now a days, with great ones,
We prostitute our Sisters with less scruple
Then eating flesh on vigils, it is out of fashion
To trust a Servant with our private sins,
The greater tie of blood, the greater faith,
And therefore Parents have been held of late,
The safest wheels, on which the childrens lust,
Has hurried into act, with supple greatness,
Nature does wear a virtuous charm, and will
Do more in soft compassion to the sin,
Then gold or swelling promises.

Duke. O Lodwicke!
These things do carry Horror, he is lost
I fear, no I ha thought a something else,
You shall with me to a Lady?

Lodw. With all my heart.


Duke. Unto my Mistress.


Lodw. Your Mistress, who is that?


Duke, The fair Cleona.


Lodw. She is honest.


Du. Yes, were she otherwise, she were not worthy my visit,
Not to loose circumstance I love her.

Lodw. How?


Duke, Honestly.


Lodw. You do not mean to marry her?


Duke, It shall not be my fault if she refuse,
To be a Duchess.

Lodw. A'my Conscience,
You are in earnest.

Duke, As I hope to thrive in my desires, come
You shall bear me company, and witness
How I woe her.

Lodw. I commend
Your nimble resolution, then a Wife
Must be had somewhere, would y'ad mine, to ceole
Your appetite, take your own course, I can
But pray for you; the thousand Crowns --

Duke. Upon Condition, you will not refuse, to
Accompany.

Lodw, Your Caroach quickly -- stay --
Now I think better on it, my Wife lives with her,
They are Companions, I had forgot that?

Duke, She Will take it kindly.


Lodw. It were enough to put her
Into conceit, I come in love to her,
My Constitution will not bear it,

Duke, What?
Not see her?

Lodw. Yet a thousand Crowns -- God buy
Condemn me to my wife.
Exit*
Duke, Ye hear Gentlemen?


Grim: With grief my Lord, and wonder at your sufferance.


Duke, He is our Brother, we are confident
Though he be wild he loves us, twill become
Us t'pray and leave him to a miracle
But to our own affair.
Love and thy golden arrow, we shall try,
How you will decide our second Destiny.
Exeunt.
Ever Foscary with a Letter. Fosc: A kiss, and then it is scaled, this she
should know
Better then the impression, which I made,
With the rude signet, it is the same she left
Upon my lip* when I departed from her,
And I have kept it warm still, with my breath,
That in my prayers has mentioned her.

Enter Dulcino. Dulc. My Lord?


Fosc: Dulcino welcome. thou art soon returned,
How do thou like the City?

Dulc: It Is a heap of handsome building.


Fosc: And how the people?


Dulc: My conversation has not age enough
To speak of them, more then they promise well,
In their aspect, but I have argument
Enough in you my Lord, to fortify
Opinion, they are kind, and hospitable
To strangers.

Fosc: Thy indulgence to my wound,
Which owes a cure unto thy pretty Surgery,
Has made thee, too much Prisoner to my Chamber*
But we shall walk abroad.

Dulc: It was my duty?
Since you received it in my cause, and could
My blood have wrought it sooner, it had been
Your balmy Fountain*

Fosc: Noble youth, I thank thee. Enter Servant.
How now, did speak with him?

Ser. I had the happiness my Lord to meet him
Waiting upon the Duke abroad, he bad me,
Make have with the remembrance of his Service,
Heel bring his own joys with him, instantly,
To welcome your return.

Fosc. Did thou request
His secrecy?

Ser: I did, he promised silence.


Fosc. So, I Will expect him, thou art sad Dulcino,
I prophecy thou shall have cause, to bless
The minute, that first brought us to acquaintance.

Dulc. Do not suspect my Lord, I am so wicked,
Not to do that already, you have saved
My life, and therefore have deserved that duty.

Fosc: Name it no more, I mean another way.


Dulc. It is not in your power, to make me richer,
With any benefit, shall succeed it, though
I should live ever with you.

Fosc: I require,
Not so much gratitude.

Dulc, There is no way
Left for my hope, to do you any service,
Near my preserving, but by adding one
New favor, to a suit, which I would name,

Fosc. To me, I prithee speak, It must be something
I can deny thee.

Dulc, It Is an humble suite,
You license my departure.

Fosc. Whither?


Dulc. Any whether.


Fosc. Do you call this a way to do me service?


Dulc. It is the readiest I can study Sir.
To tarry were but to increase my debt,
And wast your favors, in my absence, I
May publish, how much virtue, I have found
In Sauoy, and make good unto your fame,
What I do owe you here, this shall suruine you,
For I will speak the story with that truth,
And strength of passion, it shall do you honor,
And dwell upon your name sweeter then mythe,
When we are both dead?

Fosc* Thou have art, to move
In all things, but in this, change thy desire,
And I Will deny thee nothing, do not urge
Thy unkind departure, thou have met perhaps,
With some that have deceived thee with a promise,
Won with thy pretty looks and presence, but
Trust not a great man, most of them dissemble,
Pride, and Court cunning has betrayed their faith,
To a secure Idolatry, their soul,
Is lighter then a complement, take heed,
They Will flatter thy to young ambition,
Feed thee with names, and then like subtle Chimists
Having extracted, drawn thy Spirit up,
Laugh, they have made thee miserable.

Dulc: Let
No jealousy my Lord, render me so
Unhappy, that preferment, or the flatteries
Of any great man, has seduced my will
To leave you, by my life, and your own honor,
No man has tempted me, not have I changed
A syllable with any.

Fose: Any man?
Still I suspect thy safety?
And thou may thus deceive me, it may be,
Some wanton Lady has beheld thy face,
And from her eyes, shot Cupids into thine,
To abuse that fight, or wrought upon thy frailty,
With their smooth language to undo thy self,
Trust not the innocenc^ of thy Soul too far,
For though their bosoms carry whiteness, think,
It is not snow, they dwell in a hot Clymate,
The Court, where men are but deceitful shadows,
The wom^n, walking flames; what if this Lady
Bestow a wealthy Carkanet upon thee,
Another give thee Wardrobes, a third promise
A chain of Diamonds, to deck thy youth,
*It Is but to buy thy virtue from thee, and when
Thy out^ide thriue^, upon their treacherous bounty
Th'out starve at heart, and lust will leave t^y body,
Many vnpittyed ruins, th ouart young --

Dulc. There is no fear my Lord, that I shall take
Such wicked courses, and I hope you see not,
Any propension in my youth, to sin
For Pride, or wantonness.

Fose: Indeed, I do not,
But being my boy so young, and beautiful,
Thou art apt to be sedue'd.

Dulc. Believe me Sir,
I will not serve the greatest Prince on earth,
When I leave you.

Fosc. Thou shall not serve me, I
Will make thee my companion.

Dulc: No reward,
Though just, should buy the freedom I was borne with
Much less base ends, i^ I but meet again
That good man, who in reverence to his habit,
The thieves let go before your happy valor
Came to my rescue.

Fosc: He that was your Conduct?
From Millan, for so -- if I remember
You named a Father, what could he advantage?
Your fortune, were he present, more, then with
Religious Council?

Dule: I did trust him Sir,
As being the sasest treasurer, with that,
Would make me welcome in Sauoy, and
I know he will be faithful, when we meet,
For his sake, let me beg you would discharge,
A worthless Servant, that inquest of him --

Fosc. No more to cut of all unwelcome motives,
I charge thee by thy Love, thy Gratitude,
Thy life preserved, which but to stay thee here,
I would not name again, urge no consent
From me, to thy departure, I have now
V^e of thy faith, thou wo't not run away
I have employment for thee, such a one
As shall not only pay my services,
But leave m^ in arrerage to thy love,
Receive this letter. Enter Grimund^.
Let me embrace thee, with a spreading arm,

Grim: I have dispensed with my attendance, on
The Duke, to bid you welcome Sir, from death,
Fame so, had co^z'ned our belief, but thus,
She has made you the more pr^cious.

Fosc. Then I prospered,
If I may call it so, for I procured
That rumor to be spread, excuse a min^te,
He tell thee all my Couns^ls, I need not,
Wast any instructions on thee, Dulcino,
For the con^yauce of this Paper, let me
Commend it to thy care, it is to my Mistress,
Conceal my lodgings, and do this for him
Will study noble recompense,

Dulc. You command me.

Exit.
Grim. What pretty youth is that? sure I have seen
That face before,

Fosc. Never, I brought him first
To Sav^y, having brought him from the
Bandetti, in my passage, ore the Confines,
Is It not a sweet fa^'d thing? there are some Ladies,
Might change their beauties with him.

Grim. And gain by it.


Fosc. N^y, ^o his shape he has as fine a Soul,
Which (...) that perfection.

Grim: You ha not
Been long acquainted with him.

Fosc. I have skill
(...) (...): (...) my Character,
(...) full ^xcellent excellent sweetness.

Grim: You express him
Passionately.

Fosc. H^s virtue will deserve
More praise, he suffers Sir for love, in that
He is a Gentleman, for never could
Narrow, and earthly minds, be capable
Of Loves imp^ession, or the injury --
He willingly forsook his friends, and Country,
Because unkindly for unworthy ends,
They would have forced him marry against his heart.
He told me so himself, and it were sin,
Not to believe him, but omitting these,
How fares the best of Ladies my Cleona?

Grim. Your Cleon^?


Fosc. Mine, she is in affection,
She is not married.

Grim: No?


Fosc. She is in health?


Grim, Yes.


Fosc. There is something in thy looks, I cannot
Read by thy own^ gloss, and make me know,
That doubtful text, to whom has she given up,
The hope of my felici^ie, her heart,
Since my too fatal absence?

Gi^t. Unto none,
Within the circle of my knowledge,

Fosc. Then
I am renewed again, may thy tongue never
Know sorrows (...).

Grim. Will you p^esently
Visit her?

Fosc. I have sent a letter, to
Certify, I am still her living Servant.

Grim. No matter, we will be there, before the boy,
There is necessity, if you knew all,
Come lets away.

Fosc. Again thou do aflict
My Soul with jealousy, if she have still
The (...) possession of her heart --

Grim: But you are
Dead Sir, remember that.

Fosc: I shall be living,
And soon enough present my self her fresh,
And active Lower.

Grim: If the Duke be not
Before you*

Fosc: How?


Grim: The Duke, it is so resolved,
Your rival, if you ^till affect Cleona,
Within this hour, he means his first solicit
And personal seige, loose not your self with wonder,
If you neglect this opportunity,
She having firm opinion of your death,
It will not be a miracle, if the Title
Of Duchess be a strong temptation,
To a weak woman.

Fosc: I must thank your love,
And Counsel, but for this time, disingage
Your further stay with me, the Duke may miss you,
Pr^serue his favor, and forget me in
Your conference, I would be still concealed,
Let me c^nsider on my fate, again
I thank you, and dismiss you,

Grim: Quiet thoughts,
Dwell in your breast, in all things I obey you,
You know you have my heart.

Fose: She Is but a wom^n.
Yet how shall I be able to accuse her,
With any Justice, when she thinks me dead,
The Duke, I must do something, I am full
Of discord, and my thoughts are fighting in me,
From our own army must arise ^ur fear,
When love it self is turned a Mutin^re. Exit.

ACTVS, 2.
SCAENA, 1.
Enter Iacomo the Steward, and Servants. Jac. So, so, yet more perfume, you are
sweet Seruingmen, make eu^ry corner of the house smoke, bestirre your selves,
^uery man know his Pr^uince, and be officious to pl^e my ^ady, according to
his Talent, have you furnish^ out the b^nquet?


Serve. Most M^thodically?


Jac. It Is well, here should have been a fresh suite of Arras, but no matter,
these (...) the ag^ well, let them hang.


Serve. And there were a Mask to entertain his Highness?


Iac. Hang Maskes, let every conceit show his own face, my Lady would not
diguise her entertainment, and now I talk of disguising, where is the Butler?


B^tl. Here Sir.


Iac: Where Sir? it is my Ladies pleasure, that you be drunk to day, you will
deal her wine abroad, the more liberally among ^he Dukes Servants, you two are
tall fellows, make good the credit of the Buttery, and when you are drunk, I
will send others to relee^e you, go to your stations, if his Grace come hither
a Suter to my Lady, as we have some cause to suspect, and after marry her, I
may be a great man, and ride upon a reverend Mov^e by Patent, t^ere is no end
of my preferment, I did once teach my Lady to dance, she must then help me to
rise; for indeed, it is just* that only those, who ger their living by their
legs, should rid^ upon a Footcloth.


Serve. Here Is a young Gentleman: desires to speak with my Lady.


Jac, More young Gentlemen? tell him I am busy.


S^r. With my Lady --


Jac. Busy with my Lady Sir?


Serve. Would speak with my Lady Sir?


Jacom, I ha not done with my Lady my self yet, he shall stay, it is for my
Ladies s^te, no time to interrupt my Lady, but now, I Will know his business, and
taste it for my Lady, if I like it, she shall hear more, but bid him come to
me, me thinks I talk, like a peremptory States man already, I shall
quickly learn to forget my self, when I am in great office, I will oppress
the Subject, flatter the Prince, take bribes a both sides, do right to
neither, serve Heaven as far as my profit will give me l^aue, and tremble,
only at the Summons of a Parliament.

Enter Dulci^. Hum? a Page, a very Page, one that would wriggle and prefer
himself to be a Wag, it is so, have you any Letter of commendations?


Dulc, I have a Letter Sir.


Jacom, Let me see the complex^on of the face, has it a handsome Title Page, is
it Stilo (...).


Dulc. I have command Sir, to deliver it,
To none, but to my Lady.

Iacomo: A forward youth, I like him, he is not modest, I will assist his
preferment, to engage him to my faction, a special Court policy, see my Lady.


Enter Cleona, Astella, Belinda. Cleon. Yet ^ay Belinda --


Bell. I beseech you Madam
Allow excuse to my abrupt departure,
There is a business of much consequence,
And which you will not mourn to see effected,
Besides the duty that I owe my Lord,
Compels me to it Madam.

Cleona. Well, but that
We are acquainted with your virtue, this
Would move suspicion you were not in
Charity with the Duke.

Belind: You are pleasant Madam,


Cleo. You are severe, to bind your self too strictly,
From Court and entertainements, sure your Lord
Should chide you for it.

Astel. If it please you stay
Your Ladyship and i will converse together,
My unkind fate has indisposed me,
To these state ceremonies too.

Bell. You will oblige me by your pardon?


Cle. Use your pleasure.


Ast. Nay you shall give me leave a little further.
Here I am vsele^e.
Exeunt Astella, Belinda.
Iac. May it please you Madam,
This pretty Gentleman, has a suite to you,
And I in his behalf, he will be serviceable,
And active in his place, a friend of mine.

Dulc. Your Steward Madam, is too full of zeal,
To do me a preferment, but I have
No other ambition, then to commend
This paper to your white hands,

Jac. Never doubt,
It Is done, be bold and call me fellow.

Cleon. Be
You circumspect I pray, that all things have
Their perfect shape and order, to receive
The Duke, you know our pleasure, not to spare
Or ^ost, or study, to delight his Highness.

Iac. I hope I have not been your S^eward so long,
But I know how to put your Ladyship
To cost enough without study.
She reads.
Cleon. Shall I credit
So great a bliss? the date is fresh, Foscari
Whom I thought dead? give him five hundred Crowns

Iac. We will divide em.


Cleo. Stay.


Iac. You need not bid,
I use to make 'em stay, and long enough,
Ere they receive such bounties.

Cleon. Treasure is
Too cheap a payment for so rich a message.

Iac, This is the right Court largess.


Cleon, I must call thee,
My better Genius, have you known this youth?

Iac. If your Ladyship like him, I have known him long
If otherwise, I nere saw him in my life.

Cl. The day breaks glorious to my darkened thoughts,
He lives, he lives yet, cease ye amorous fears,
More to perplexe me, prithee speak sweet youth,
How far^s my Lord? upon my Virgin heart,
I Will bui'd a flaming Altar, to offer up
A thank* full Sacrifice for his return,
To life* and me, speak and increase my comforts,
Is he in perfect health?

Dulc. Not perfect Madam, until you bless him with
The knowledge of your constancy.

Cleon. O get thee wings and fly then,
Tell him my love does burn like Vestall fire,
Which with his memory, richer then all spices,
Dispersed odours round about my Soul,
And did refre it^sh when it was dull, and sad,
With thinking of his absence.

Iac. This is strange,
My Lady is in Love with him.

Cleon. Yet stay
Thou go too soon away, where is he speak?

Dulc. He gave me no Commission for that Lady*
He will soon save that question, by his presence.

Cle: Time h'as no feathers, he walks now on crutches,
Relate his gesture when he gave thee this,
What other words, did mirth smile on his brow,
I would not for the wealth of this great world,
He should suspect my faith, what said he prithee,

Dulc. He said, what a warm lover, when desire
Makes elequent could speak, he said you were
Both star and Pilote.

Cleon. Not to fast, my joys
Will be too mighty for me.

Iac: I have found it,
That boy comes from the Duke, that letter love,
'Twill be a match, and please your Ladyship --

Cleo. Forbear your Ceremonies, what needs all this
Preparation, if the Duke vouchsafe
His person for my guest, duty will teach me,
To entertain him without half this trouble,
I Will have noryot for his Highness.

Iac. Hum?
How Is this.

Cleona, Be less officious, you forget --
Sweet youth, go forward with thy story.

Iac. Hum?
This is a Favrie, and the Devil sent him
To make my Lady mad, twere well to try
Whether he be flesh and blood, ha, I Will pinch him first.

Cleon: How now?

He pinches Dulcino.
Iac. My care shall see nothing be wanting, for
Your honor, and the Dukes.

Cleon. Your place I see,
Is better then your manners, go too, be
Less troublesome, his Highness brings intents
Of grace, not burden to us, know your duty.

Iac. So, I were best keep my self warm with my own office, while I may,
the Tide is turned I see within two Minutes, here was nothing but look to the
Gallery, perfume the Chambers, what Muficke for the Duke, a Banquet for the
Duke, now, be less officious, We Will have noryot for his Highness, it is this
Vrchin h'as undone all our preferment.


Cl. The Suns loved flower, that shuts his yellow curtain,
When he declineth, opens it again
At his fair rising, with my parting Lord,
I closed all my delights, till his approach,
It shall not spread it self.
Enter Gentleman.
Gent. Madam the Duke?


Cleon. Already.

Enter Astella and Ladies.
Ast. He is entered.


Cleon. Do not leave me,
I shall remember more.
Enter Duke, Fabrichio, Soranzo Giotto.
Duke. Excellent Cleona,


Cleon. The humble duty of a Subject to your Highness.


Duke, Rise high in out thoughts, and thus
Confirm we are welcome, to these eyes, our heart,
Shall pay a lower duty, then obedience
Has taught your knee.

Cleon, Your Grace much honors me,
Till this white hour, these walls were never proud,
T'inclose a guest, the genius of our house,
Is by so great a presence waked, and glories,
Te entertain you.

Duke. Every accent falls
Like a fresh lewell, to increase her value,
We can but thank Cleena.

Cleon. Royal Sir --


Duke, Let me revoke that hasty syllable,
But thank thee, yes, we can do more, and will,
We have a heart to do it, our much grieved sister
I know you do not wear this sadness, for
Our presence.

Ast* If I Have any skill in mine own eyes,
Since they beheld you, they have looked
More cheerfully, then they are wont.

Duke, And yet I see a tear is ready to break prison,


Ast. It is of joy to see you sit in health,
I hope the Prince is well?

Duke, He will be so


Astella, when he leaves to be unkind
To thee, but let us forget him,

Dulc. Fame has not
Injured him, in the Character of his person,
And his shape promises a richer Soul,
I feel a new, and fiery spirit dance,
Upon my amorous heart strings.

Duke, We are come
My fair Cleona.

Cleon. With your Highness pardon,
That name was never so attended, it
Becomes your bounty, but not me to wear
That Title.

Duke, What?


Cleon, Of, fair my Lord?


Duke, I said you were my fair Cleona --


Cleona. Sir?


Duke, I did apply,
I hope't does not offend to call you so,
You Are yet my Subject.

Cleon. When I leave that name, may Heaven --


Duke, Be pleased to change it for a better*


Cleona, It cannot.


Duke. Do not sin, it is in our power
With your consent, to work that wonder Lady.

Cleona* I want my understanding.


Duke, I Will explain,


Cleona, Do not believe it youth, by all the faith
Of Virgins* I Will not change my service, to
Thy Master for his Dukedom.

Dulc, You Are too noble.


Duke, What boy is that? Ha Giotto?


Dulc. Madam, the Duke observes us.


Dulc. I ha seen him,
It is no common face.

Soran. My Lord we know not,


Duke, Where is Grimundo?


Giot. Not yet come my Lord.


Duk. Send for him straight, and bid him bring the picture
We gave into his keeping, yet, forbear,
It is in vain.

Sor. My Lord, Cleona waits
Your farther Courtship.

Duke, Whither am I carried?


Cleon I hope dread Sir, my house affords no object,
To interrup your quiet.

Duke, None but Heavenly,
(...) this roof be capable of ill,
(...) only presence Lady would convert it.
(...) (...) rtuous Magic in your eye,
For where soere it calls a beam, it does
Create a goodness, you have a handsome boy.

Dulc. The Duke is troubled?


Cleona He Is a pretty youth.


Dulc. I hope he wo'not take me from my Lady,
I'e say I am her Servant.

Duke, Something binds
My speech, my heart is narrow of a sudden,
Giotto take some opportunity
To enquire that youth condition* name, and Country,
And give us private knowledge, to cut off
* Circumstance Lady, I am not your fresh,
And unacquainted Lover, that does wast Soranzo whispers with Iacomo
The tedious Moons with preparation
To his amo^ous suite, I have been Cleona,
A long admirer of your virtues, and
Do want the comfort or so sweet a Partner,
In our young state.

Cleon. You mock your humble handmaid.


Soran, A stranger say?


Iacom: He brought some welcome Letter
To my Lady.

Soranz. Not know his name nor whence?


Iacom. No my good Lord.
So so, I like this well,
My Lady does apply her to the Duke,
There is some hope again, things may succeed
This Lords discoursing with me, is an Omen
To my familiarity with Greatness.

Duke, Grimundo not come yet? I am not well.


Cle. Good Heaven defend, Angels protect your Highness.


Duke, Your holy prayers cannot but do me good.
Continue that Devotion, Charity
Will teach you a consent, to my departure,

Cleon. I am unhappy.


Duke, Make not me so Lady,
By the least trouble of your self, I am
Acquainted with these passions, let me breath
A heart upon thy lip farewell again
Your pardon.
Exit.
Soranz, It Is a very strange distemper,
And sudden, noble Lady we must wait
Upon the Duke.
Exeunt.
Iacom. My bud is niptagen,
Would all the Banquet were in his belly for it.

Dulc. Let not my eyes betray me.


Iac. I Am sick too,
Let not your Ladyship repent your cost,
I Will have a care the Sweet meats be not lost.
Exit.
Cleon. Acquaint him with these passages of the Duke.
Tell him I long to see him, and at last
To crown the story, say my heart shall know
No other Love but his.

Dulc, I fly with this
Good news.
Exit. D. Enter Iac.
Iac. Madam here is Prince Lodwicke,
Newly discoach'd.

Cleon: Attend him?


Iac: Most officiously.


Cleon: Stay it can do no harm.


Ast. Eene what you please.


Cleon. If he enquire for his Lady, answer
She is not very well, and keeps her Chamber.

Iac. I Will say she is dead if you please, it is my duty
I Will never speak truth while I live, that shall
Offend your Ladyship.

Cleon: You may hear all, Enter Lodwieke, and Piero.
And when you please appear.

Lodw: Sick? where is her Doctor,
I Will be acquainted with him, noble Lady.

Cleon: Your Grace is here most welcome,


Lodw: I am bold?


Piero: I Am happy that my duty to the Prince
Brought me to kiss your hand.

Cl. Beside the honor done to me, your person
Will add much comfort to Astella, your
Weak Lady,

Lodw, She is sick, mend let her mend, she will spend her time worse, yet she
knows my mind, and might do me the courtesy to die once, i would take it more
kindly, then to be at charge with a Physician.


Cleon: You would not poison her?


Lodw: I think I must be driven to it, what shall a man do with a woman that
wo'not be ruled, I ha given cause enough to break any reasonable woman's heart
in Savoy, and yet you see how I am troubled with her, but leave her to the
Destinies, where is my Brother all this while? I came to meet him, what is it a
match already? when shall we dance, and triumph in the Tilt-yard, for honor
of the high and mighty nuptials: where is he?


Cleon: My Lord he is gone.


Lodw: How?


Cleona* Distempered.


Lodw. Not with wine?


Cleon: Departed sick.


Lodw: She jeeres him, by this lip I Will love thee, and thou wot abuse him, I
knew he would but shame himself, and therefore durst not come with him, for
mine own credit, I warrant, he came fierce upon thee with some parcel of
Poetry, which he had con'd by heart out of Tasso Guarrini, or some other of the
same melting Tribe, and thought to have brought thy Maiden Town to his
obedience, at the first noise of his furious Artillery.


Cleon. My Lord, you understand me not, your Brother
Is not in health, some unkind pain within him
Compeld him to forsake us,

Lodw. Is it true?
That he is sick, my Brothers sick Piero.

Pier. I am very well here.


1. Lady? So am not I, pray Sir appear more civil
Or I shall leave you.

Lodw: True?


Cleona: It Is too true my Lord.


Lodw: No, no, truth is a virtuous thing, and we cannot have too much on it,
do you hear, if I may counsel you be wise, and stay for me, you may be my wife
within this Month, and the Durchesse too.


Cleon: Your Wife my Lord, why you are married,
What Shall become of her?

Lodw: Is she not sick?


Cleona: But are you sure she will dye?


Lodw; What a ridiculous question, do you make, if death wo'not take a fair
course with her, are there not reasons enough in state think you, to behead
her, or if that seem cruel, because I do not affect blood, but for very good
ends, I can be diuorc'd from her, and leave her rich in the Title of Lady
Dowager.


Cleona: Upon what offense can you pretend a Divorce?


Lodw: Because she is not fruitful, is not that a sin.


Cleon. Would your Lordship have her fruitful, and you
Never lie with her.

Lodw. Have not I known a Lady, whose husband is an Eunuch, upon Record,
mother to three or four children and no free conscience but commends her.


Cleon. But these things wo*not be easily perfect, unless
You were Duke to enforce em.

Lodw. Is not my brother in the way? sick already, and perhaps as fit for
Heaven, as an other, I know he cannot l^ue long* he is so well given, they
never thrive, and then d'^ think il^ keep such a Religious Court, in this
corner lodge a Couey of Capouchins, who shall zealously pray for me without
stockins, in that a nest of Carthusians, things which in fi^ turn to Otters,
appear flesh, but really are fish, for that they feed on: no* no* give me a
Court of flourishing pleasure where delight in all her shapes, and studied
varieties, every minute courts the Soul, to actuate her chief felicity.


Cleon. Do you never think of Hell?


Lodw. Faith I do, but it always makes me melancholy, and therefore as
seldom as I can, my contemplation shall point thither, I am now in the spring
of my life, winter will come on fast enough, when I am old, I will be as
methodicall an hypocrite, as any pair of lawne sleeves in Sauoy.


Cleon. I dare not hear him longer, Madam relea^e me.


Enter Astella. Lodw. How now, whence come you, were you sick?


Ast. At heart my Lord, to think of your unkindness.


Lodw. At heart? i will nere believe, without inspection, am I unkind, go to,
there is not a friend in the whole world can wi^h you better, would you were
Canonis'd a Saint, it is more then I wish my self yet, I do not trouble thee
much on earth, and thou were in Heaven, I would not pray to thee, for fear of
di^turbing thy Serap^icall deu^tion.


Ast. What sin have I committed Sir, deserves
This distance?

Cleon. In Christian charity salute her.


Lodw. I would not have your Ladyship too ve^trous,
The air is some what cold, and may endanger
A weak body.

Ast. There Is an other duty, my Lord required from husband*


Lodw. My Madam would to rutte, has your honor, no pretty dapper Monkey, each
morning to give you a heat in a dance, is not your Doctor gamesome.


Ast. If the suspicion that I am unchaste --


Lodw. Unchaste? by this hand I do not know one honest woman i^ the Dukedom.


Cleon. How my Lord, that do you think of me?


Lodw. ^ know not whether you be a woman or no, yet.


Cleon. Fie my Lord.


Lodw. What would you have me do, I have not seen her this six Months.


Cleon. Oh rather my Lord conclude my sufferings,
T^ thus with tortures lengthen out my death,
O^ kill me, and I beseech you I will kiss
The instrument, which guided by your hand,
Shall give my grief a period, and pronounce Enter Grimu^do.
With my last breath, your free for giuenesse.

Lodw. No kill your self, more good will come on'^, how now? nay then we are
like to have a precious time on it.


Cleon. The Duke my Lord inquired for you.


Grim. I met
His Highness in return, and he employed me
To bring back knowledge of his better health,
Which he says, shall enable him, but to
Exp^esse how much he honors fair Cleona.

Cleon. I am his studious Servant, and reioy^e
In this good news: your Brother is recovered.

Lodw. II, I knew he would do well enough, now Sir?


Grim: I have some business, with you my Lord,
Were you at opportunity.

Lodw. Some moral exhortations, they are fruitless, I shall never eat garlike
with Diogenes in a Tub, and specula^ the Stars without a shirt, prithee enjoy
thy Religion, and live at last most Philosophy call lousie.


Grim: My design is of an other nature.


Cleon: May I obtain so great a favor Sir,
You Would be my Gu^t in absence of the Duke,
I Am but ambitious, to remember
His health in Greeke-wine.

Lodw. So this Lady will be temperate, and use me but like a stranger, without
pressing me to inconveniences of kissing her, and other superstitious Courtship
of a Husband.


Cleona* I will engage she will not offend you*


Lodw. And yet it goes against my conscience to tarry so long in honest
company, but my (...) is I do not use it, come away Piero, you have had a fine
time on it.


Cleona: My Lord.


Grim: I follow Madam, yet have comfort,
Though reason and example (...) our fears,
Heaven will not let you loose so many tears.

Enter Foscari, and Dulcino. Fosc. Did she receive my Letter with such joy?


Dulc. I wont expres^on my Lord, to give you
The circumstance, with a flowing Love,
Or rather with what glad devotion
She entertained it, at your very name,
For so I guest, to which her covetous sight
Made the first has^e, one might have seen her heart
Dance in her eyes, and as the wonder strove
To make her pale, warm love did fortify
Her cheeks, with guilty blushes, she did read
And kiss the paper often, mingled questions,
Some half propounded, as her Soul had been
Too narrow, to receive what you had writ,
She quite forgot.

Fosc: This was before the Duke
Came thither?

Dulc: Yes my Lord.


Fosc: And did thou not
Observe her at his presence slack that fervor,
Her former passion had begot of me?
Was she not co^tly to him boy?

Dulc. So far
As her great birth, and breeding, might direct
A Lady to behave her self to him,
That was her Prince.

Fosc. She kissed him, did she not?


Dulc. She kissed.


Fosc. He did salute her?


Dulc. Yes my Lord.


Fosc: And did not see a flame hang on her lip,
A spirit busy to betray her love,
And in a sigh convey it to him? Oh,
Thou can not read a woman, did he not
Woe her to be his Duchess?

Dulc: Yes my Lord.


Fosc* Thou should ha watched her ch^eke then, there a blush
Had cene a guilt indeed, a feeble answer,
With half a smile, had been an argument
^ee had been lost, and the temptation
Above her strength, which h^d I known, I could
Ha slept, and never been disturbed, although
I had met her in a dream.

Dulc: My Lord, you wea^e
A causeless trouble to your self.

Fosc, Oh Jealousy.
I am ashamed --

Dulc. If ever woman loved
With faith, Cleona honors you above
Mankind, 'twere sin but to suspect so chaste,
So furnished with all virtue, your Cleona,

Fosc. It were indeed, I am too blame Dulcino,
Yet when thou come to beso ripe, for so
Much misery, as to love, thou wo't excuse me,

Dulc. My Lord if I might not offend with my
Opinion, it were safest that you loose
No time, your presence would confirm a joy
To either, and prevent the Duke, whose strong
Solicits, may in time. endanger much
The quiet of your thoug^ts.

Fosc. Why can there be
Su^pition she will vary, do not ch^ke
The confidence thou had, unsettle not,
The faith I have in thee, she c^n prove false.

Dulc. Mistake me no^, I do^ not doubt her truth,
But she is a woman, and if you d^lay
To in^erpose your self, his Greatness may
In time, without injustice to your Love,
Win upon her affection, you shall do
A great impiety to (...) her now.
With so much proof, and loyal^e of honor.

Fosc: On never, never, and I will (...)
Her lo^* beyond example, thus Dulc^
The (...) return.

Dulc: My Lord I had much rather
Wait on ^ou to her.

Fosc. Iush, ^hou vnderstandst not
What I have pu^pos'd, thou shall presently
Go back, and tell Cleona, I am dead.

Dulc: How dead?


Fosc. I boy, that I am dead, may mark
The i^sue.

Dulc: But my Lord, she has your Letter
To check that.

Fosc. Thou shall frame something, to take
That off, some fine invention may be made,
To say 'twas forged, wee'l^ study that anon,
In the assurance of my death, which must
Be so delivered, as she shall believe the^,
She may aff^ct the Duke.

Dulc: How Sir, the Duke?


Fosc: I, I, the Duke, for that is the plot,
I must advance.

Dulc: And will you thus reward
So great a love to you.

Fosc: Best, b^st of all,
Shall I be so ungrateful to ^ Lady,
Of such rare merit, when a Prince desires
To make her great, by my unworthy interest
Destroy her blessing^, hinder such a fortun^
From fair Cleona, let her love the Duke,
In this I will express the height, and glory
Of my best service.

Dulc. Are you sir in earnest?


Fosc. I love her, and can never see her more,
Posterity shall learn new piety
In love from me, it will become me look on,
Cleona a far off, and only mention
Her name, as I do Angels in my Prayer,
Thus she deserves I should converse with her*
Thus I most nobly love her.

Dulc. Does she languish
Expecting you, and shall I carry death
To comfort her? good Heaven forbid this Sir.

Fosc. Heaven d^ (...) me to it, she shall reign
Glorious in power, while I let fall my beads
That she might prosper, be not tho^ an enemy
To her and me, I see thouart unwilling
To this employment, if thou have any wish
To see me happy, to preserve my life,
And honor, which was never more engaged,
If I shall think thou art not very wicked,
A false, di^sembling boy, deny me not
This office, use what circumstance thou will,
To thrive in this report, and thy sad breath,
Shall give a fai^ed, save a real death.
Exit.
Dulc. I Am lost ith springing of my hope, shall I
Obey him to destroy my self? I must,
I dare not be my self, no need have they*
Of other force, that make themselves away.
Exit.
ACTVS, 3.
SCAENA, 1.
Enter Iacomo. Jac. I smell a match again, the Duke will fetch her about, here
was another Amba^adour at Dinner, and his Highness is again expected, in
confidence of my place that shall be, I will continue my state posture, use my
toothpicke with discretion, and cough distinctly, what can hinder my rising? I
am no Scholar, that exception is taken away, for most of our states men, do
hold it a saucy thing, for any of their Servants, to be ^ser then themselves,
observe the inventory of a great Nobl^ man's house, mark the number of the
learned, I Will begin with them. ^mprimis, Chaplains and School* masters one,
two Pag^s, 3. Gentlemen, 4. Footmen, 6. Horses, 8 Serving cr^ures, and 10.
couple of Dogs. a very Noble family.

Enter Dulcino.
Dull. Worthy Sir --


Jac. My Lady shall be at leisure for you presently --
It may be you would speak with me first?

Dulc. I only entreat my Lady may have knowledge that
I wa^te he^e.

Iac, I will enrich my Ladies understanding, I Will say nothing else but that you
are here shall I? that is enough if you have another Letter.


Dulc. What then?


Iac* I would wish you deliver it to her own hand, but under your favor, the
contents of the last Chapter, had like to undone us all, and Cupid had not bin
more merciful.


Dulc Fear nothing, the news I bring, will make you merry.


Jac. ^de laugh at that, howsoever you are heartily welcome and ever shall be,
you do hear no harm of the Duke?


Dulc. No harm?


Iac* You shall hear more shortly, I say no more, but heaven bless my Lady
and his Highness together, for my part though I speak a proud word -- I Will
tell my L^dy that you attend her.

Exit.
Dulc. I prithee do, and hasten the discharge
Of my sad Embassy, which when I have done,
And that it prospers in mine own misfortune,
I Will teach my breath to pray.

Enter Cleona, Fabri^, Iacomo. Fabr. A glorious fate
Co^rts your ac^eptance, and I hope your (...)
Will teach you how to meet it, you have received
His H^ghnesse bosom, now I Will take my leave,

Cleon: Will you not see the Prince again?


Fabr. I saw his Highness walking with Grimund*
Toward the Garden, and the Duke expects me* --
Think of a Duchess Madam.

Cle^na: I Am not worthy,
And needs must sink, under the weight of such
A title, my humblest Service to his Grace,
I am his beades-woman.
Exit Fabrichio.
Jac. Madam, here is the Youth.


Cl. Art thou returned already? why were you
So rude to make him wait.

Dulc. Since I arri^'d,
It Is but a pair of minutes.

Cleon. They are worth
As many days.

Iac. He shall be with your Ladyship,
Next time, before he come, when I but spy him
A mile off, I Will acquaint you, in my duty
To your self, and my honor unto him.

Cleon. Withdraw.


Jac. Here is no couch, I do not like
My Ladies familiarity with a boy,
Me thinks a man were fitter, and more able
To give her a refreshing, but this Lobby
Shall be my next remove.
Exit and ^ayes behind the hangings.
Dulc. You will repen^
This welcome Madam.

Cleon. What harsh sound is that?
Thy looks upon a sudden are become
Dismal, thy brow dull as Saturnes i^.
Thy lips are hung with black, as if thy tongue
Were to pronounce some Fun^rall.

Dulc. It is,
But let your virtue place a g^ard about
Your ^are, it is too weak a sense to trust
With a sad tale, that may disperse too soon.
The killing Syllables, and some one, or other
Find out your heart.

Cleon: The Mandrake has no voice
Like this, the Raven, and the night birds sing
More soft, nothing in Nature, to which fear
Has made us superstitious, but speaks gently
Compared with thee, discharge thy fatal burden,
I am prepared, or stay, but answer me,
I will and save thee breath, and quickly know
The total of my sorrow, is Fos^ari
Dead since I saw thee last? Or has some wound,
Or other dire misfortune sealed him for
The grave, that though he yet live, I may bid
My heart despair to see him?

Dulc. None of these,
Since last I saw you Madam.

Cleona. None of these?
Then I despise all sorrow boy, there is
Not left another mischief in my fate,
Call home thy beauty, why do look so pale?
See I am armed, and can with valiant blood,
Hear thee discourse of my terror row,
Me thinks I can in the assurance of
His safety, hear of Battles, Tempest, Death,
With all the horrid shapes that Poets fancy,
Tell me the tale of Troy, or Rome on fire,
Rich in the trophies of the conquered world,
I will not shed so many tears, to save
The temples, as my joy does sacrifice,
To hear my Lord is well.

Dulc. Turn them to grief,
Again, and here let me kneel, the accuser
Of him, that has deserved more punishment,
Then your wronged piety will inflict.

Cleon, Do kneel,
And call thy self accuser?

Dulc. Yes.


Cleon. Of whom?
Thy Lord, take heed, for if I be a Judge
I shall condemn thee ere thou speak.

Dulc. You may,
But I accuse my self, and of an injury
To you.

Cleona. To me?


Dulc, Too great to be forgiven.


Cleon: My love to him thou seru'st, has found a pardon
Already for it, be it an offense
Against my life.

Dulc. For his sake, you must punish,
Dear Madam, I have finn'd against his Ghost,
In my deceiving you.

Cleona. His Ghost?


Dulc. And if.
His Soul has not forgotten how he loved you,
I must expect him to aff^ight my dreams.
And prove my waking evil, the truth is,
My Lord is dead.

Cleon. How dead? when? where? did I
Not hear thee say, since I received his Letter,
He was alive?

Dulc. No Madam.


Cleon. Be not impious.


Dulc, I said that neither death, nor any black
Misfortune had befalne him, since I gave
The Letter to you.

Cleona. Grant this truth, I am
Secured again.

Dulc: Alas he was dead before,
I Am sure you could not choose but hear as much,
It was my wickedness arrived, to mock
Your credulous heart, with a devised Letter,
I know you are in wonder, what should move me,
To this imposture, sure it was no malice,
For you nere injured me, and that does make
My crime the more deformed, all my aim was,
Being a stranger here, and wanting means
After my Lords death, by this cunning, to
Procure some bounty from you, to sustain
My life, until by some good fortune, I
Might get another Master, for I knew
There was no hope to benefit my self,
By saying he was dead, good Heaven forgive me
And keep my eyes from weeping.

Cleon. Thou have undone me,
Like a most cruel boy.

Dulc. Madam, I hope
I shall repair the ruins of your eye,
When I declare the cause, that leads me to
This strange confession, I have observed
The Duke does love you, love you in that way,
You can deserve him, and though I have sinned,
I am not stubborn in my fault, to suffer you,
In the belief of my deceitful story,
To wrong your fortune, by neglect of him,
Can bring your merit such addition,
Of state and title.

Cleona: Do thou mock again?


Dulc: Heaven knows, I have no thought of such impiety,
If you will not believe, that for your sake
I have betrayed my self, yet be so charitable,
To think it something of my duty, to
The Duke, whose ends, while they are just, and noble,
All loyal Subjects, ought to serve, for him.
Whom I am bound to honor, and I love him,
Else may I never know one dayof comfort,
I durst not without guilt of treason, to
His chaste desires, deceive you any longer,
Collect your self dear Madam, in the grave,
There dwells no music, in the Dukes embrace
You meet a perfect happiness.

Cleona: Begone,
And never see me more, who ever knew
Falsehood so ripe at thy years?
Exit,
Dulc: Is not yet
My poor heart broke? has nature given it
So strong a temper, that no wound will kill me?
What charm was in my gratitude to make me
Undo so many comforts with one breath,
Or was it for some sin I had to satisfy?
I have not only widowed Cleona,
But made my self a misery beneath,
An Orphant, I nere came to have a friend,
I ha destroyed my hope, that little hope,
I had to be so happy.
Iacom^ comes forth.
Iacom. Is It e'ne so?

My friend, what make you here? who sent for you? begone dee hear, begone I say
the word too, there is a Porters lodge else, where you may have due
chastisement, you will begone.


Dulc. I'm^ sorry,

I have offended Sir.

Exit Dulc.
Iac. So am not I,

Let me see, somebody is dead, if I knew who, no matter it is one that my Lady
loved, and I am glad to hear it, for mine ownesake, now Uenus speed the Dukes
plough and turn me loose to a privy Conncellor.

Enter Sor^zo.
Sor. Signior Iacomo, where is your Lady?


Iac. She is within my good Lord, wilt please you Walk this way?


Sor. Prithee make have, the Duke is coming.

Exeunt.
Iac. I small him hither to,

Enter Iacomo presently. So so, I will take this opportunity, to present my
self to his Highness, that he may take particular notice, of my bulk and
personage, he may chance speak to me, I have common places to answer any
ordinary question, and for other, he shall find by my impudence, I come not
short of a perfect Courtier. Here he comes, I will dissemble some
contemplation, and with my hat on, give him cause to observe me the better.


Enter the Duke, and Lords. Duke, What fellows that?


Giot. A Servant of Cleona's.


Fabr. Signior?

The Duke extends his band, Iacomo kisses it.
Jacom, Your Highness humble creature, you have blessed my lips, and I will
wear them thredbare, with my prayers, for your Graces immortal prosperity.

Enter Soranzo.
Duke, Soranzo is returned,
How fares Cleona?

Sor. My Lord not well, I found her full of sadness, which is increast, she
cannot as becomes her duty, observe your Highness.


Iacom: One word with your Grace in private, she is as well, as either you, or
I.


Duke, Say thou so?


Jacom, There came indeed before you certain news, that a noble Gentleman, I
know not who, and therefore he shall be namelesse, but some dear friend of
hers, is dead, and that's all, and that has put her into a melancholy mood, with
your gracious pardon, if I were worthy to be one of your Counselors --


Duke, What then?


Iaco. I would advise you, as others do, to take your own course, your Grace
knows best, what is to be done.


Duke. So Sir; Did thou not see that pretty boy I told thee of?


Soranzo. No my good Lord.


Duke, We are resolved to comfort her, set forward.


Grim. You had simple grace?


Iac. A touch or so, abeame with which his Highness,
Does use to keep desert warm, good my Lord,
It is not come to that yet.
Exeunt.
Enter Foscari. and a Servant. Fosc: Go to the next religious house, and pray,
Some Holy Father come and speak with me,
But hasten thy return, I dare not look on Exit Serve.
My self, least I forget to do her honor,
And my heart prove a partial Advocate,
I must not entertain with the same thought,
Cleona and my Love, least my own passion
Betray the resolution, I ha made,
To make my service famous to all ages,
A legend that may startle wanton blood,
And strike a chillness through the active veins
Of noblest Lovers, when they hear, or read,
That to advance a Mistress, I have given her*
From mine own heart, if any shall be so
Impious at my memory, to say
I could not do this act, and love her too,
Some power divine, that knew how much I loved her,
Some Angel that has care to right the dead,
Punish that crime for me, and yet me thinks,
In such a cause my own enraged Spirit,
In pity of my ashes, so profaned,
Should nimbly lift my sweating marble up,
And leap into my dust, which new inlifen'd
Should walk to him, that questioned my honor,
And be its own revenger, he is come. Enter Valentio, a religious man.
Welcome good Father,
I sent to entreat your help, but first, pray tell me,
I have no perfect memory, what Saint
Gives title to your Order?

Val. We do wear
The Scapular of Saint Bennet Sir.

Fosc. Your Charity
Make you still worthy of that reverend habit,
I have a great Devotion, to be made
A Brother of your sacred institution,
What persons of great birth has it received?

Val. To fashion my reply to your demand,
Is not to boast, though I proclaim the honors
Of our profession; Four Emperors,
Forty six Kings, and one and fifty Queens,
Have changed their Royal Ermines for our sables,
These Cowles have clothed the heads of fourteen hundred,
And six Kings Sons, of Dukes, great Marquises,
And Earls, two thousand and above four hundred
Have turned their Princely Coronets, into
An humble Corronet of hair of hair* left by
The Razour thus.

Fosc. No, it is not.
There is a Sun ten times more glorious,
Then that which rises in the East, attracts me
To feed upon his sweet beams, and become
A Bird of Paradise, a religious man
To rise from earth, and no more to turn back,
But for a burial.

Val. Think what it is you do,
It is no thing to play the wanton with,
In the strong bended passion of an humor,
For a friends death, a Kings frown, or perhaps
Loss of a Mistress.

Fosc. O still bless the guide
What ever, that shall lead this happy way.

Val. My Lord, the truth is like your coat of arms,
Richest when plainest, I do fear the world
Has tired you, and you seek a cell to rest in,
As Birds that wing it over the Sea, seek ships,
Till they get breath, and then they sly away.

Fosc. Do not mistake a piety, I am prepared
And can endure your strict mortifications,
Good Father then prefer my humble Suite,
To your Superior for the habit, and
Let me not long expect you, say I am,
Noble, but humblest in my thoughts.

Val. I go,
Mean time examine well this new desire,
Whether't be a wild flash, or a Heavenly fire.
Exit.
Fosc. Now my good boy.

Enter Dulcino.
Dulc. Sir, your command is done,
And she believes?

Fosc: That I am dead Dulcino?


Dulc: That you are dead, and as she now scorned life*
Death lends her cheeks his palenesse, and her eyes
Tell down their drops of silver to the earth,
Wishing her tears might rain upon your grave*
To make the gentle earth produce some flower,
Should bear your names and memories.

Fosc. But thou see,
I live Dulcino.

Dulc: Sir I should be blessed,
If I did see you sought the means to live,
And to live happily, O noble Sir,
Let me vntread my steps, unsay my words,
And tell your love, you live.

Fosc. No my sweet Boy,
She thinks not much amiss, I am a man
But of an hour or two, my will is made,
And now I go, never more cheerfully,
To give eternal farewell to my friends.

Dulc. For Heavens sake Sir, what is this you mean to do?
There is a fear sits cold upon my heart,
And tells me --

Fosc: Let it not misinforme thee Boy,
I Will use no violence to my self, I am
Resolved a course, wherein I will not doubt,
But thou will bear me company? we will enter
Into Religion.

Dulc: Into Religion?


Fosc. O it is a Heavenly life, go with me boy,
We Will imitate the singing Angels there,
Learn how to keep a Quire in Heaven, and scorn
Earths transitory glory, wo't Dulcino?

Dulc. Alas my Lord, I am too young.


Fosc* Too young
To ferue Heaven? Never, never, O take heed.
Of such excuse.

Dulc: Alas, what shall I do?
And yet I Am weary of the world, but how
Can I do this? I am not yet discovered,
Sir, I shall still attend you.

Fosc: Thou Art my comfort,
I have propounded it already, to
A Benedictine, by whose means we may
Obtain the habit, stay thou and expect him,
I must be absent for a little time,
To finish something, will conduce, to my
Eternal quiet, if th'haft any scruple,
He will direct thee, having both made even
With earth, we will travail hand, in hand to heaven.
Exit.
Dulc. Fortune has lent me a prospectiue glass,
By which I have a look beyond all joys,
To a new world of misery, what is my best
Let it be so, for I am hopeless now,
And it were well, if when those weeds I have,
That I might go disguised to my grave.
Exit.
Enter Lodwicke, and Grimundo. Lodw, This is strange.


Grim. You know I have given you many precepts of honesty?


Lodw. And you know how I have followed em.


Grim. To mine own heart, I have made tedious discourses of Heaven to ye, and
the morrall virtues, numbered up the duties of a good Prince, urged examples of
virtues, for your imitation.


Lodw. To much purpose.


Grim. Seemed to sweat with agony and vexation, for your obstinate courses,
reproou'd you, nay sometimes made complaints of you, to the Duke.


Lodw, And I ha cursed you for it, I remember.


Grim. Alas my Lord, I durst do no otherwise, was not the Duke your Father an
honest man, and your Brother now foolishly takes after him, whose credulities,
when I had already coozened, I was bound to appear stoicall, to preserve the
opinion they had conceived of me.


Lodw. Possible.


Grim. It speaks discretion and abilities, in Statesmen, to apply themselves
to their Princes disposition, vary a thousand shapes, if he be honest, we put
on a form of gravity, if he be vicious, we are Parasites, indeed in a
politic Common wealth, if you observe well, there is nothing but the
appearance, and likeness of things that carries opinion, your great men will
appear odd, and fantastical, and fools are often taken for wise Officers,
your most active gallants, seem to carry their own hair, and your handsomest
Ladies their own faces, you cannot know a Secretary from a Scholar in black,
nor a Gentleman Usher in Scarlet, from a Captain, your Judge that is all
composed of Mercy, has still the face of a Philosopher, and to some is more
terrible and crabbed, then the Law it self. All things are but representation,
and my Lord, howsoever I have appeared to you, I am at heart one of your own
Sect, an Epicure, be but so subtle to seem honest, as I do, and we will
laugh at the foolish world in our Cells, declaime against intemperate livers,
and hug our own Licentiousness, while we surfeit our Souls in the dark with
Nectar and Ambrosia.


Lod. Can this be earnest, you did talk of Hell and Bugbeares.


Grim, I confess, and were you in public, I would urge many other empty
names to fright you, put on my Holyday countenance, and talk nothing but
divinity, and golden sentences, look like a superlicious Elder, with a
starched face, and a tunable nose, whilst he is edifying his Neighbors woman.


Lod. You were a Christian, how came you to be converted.


Grim. I think I had a name given me, and that's all I retain, I could never
endure really, their severe discipline, marry for my preferment, and other
politic ends, I have, and can still dispense, with fasting, prayer, and a
thousand fond austerities, though I do penance for em in private.


Lod. Let me ask you one question, were you never drunk?


Grim, A thousand times in my study, that is one of my recreations.


Lodw. How chance I could never see it in you, you know I would ha been drunk
for company.


Grim. But I durst not trust so young a sinner, for I always held it a maxim,
to do wickedness with circumspection.


Lodw. Wickedness?


Grim. I speak in the phrase of the foolish world, that holds voluptuousness
a crime, which you and I, and every wise man knows, to be the only happiness
of life, and the inheritance, we are borne to.


Lodw. But stay, how comes it to pass, that accounting me so young a sinner,
you now adventure to discover your self?


Grim. To you?


Loaw. To me.


Grim. Good my Lord conceive me, you were a young sinner, and in your Nonage,
does that infer that you have made no growth, that you are a child still, do
think that I ha not wit to distinguish a Principiant in vice, from a Graduate,
shall I be afraid to lay open my secretst impieties to you, that are almost as
perfect as my self in Epicurisme, I beseech you, do not think, I ha so
little manners to undervalue you.


Lodw. Very well, proceed.


Grim. And yet my Lord, with your princely license, you may learn too, and
indeed the first virtue that I would commend to your practice should be that,
by which I have attained to this height, and opinion, and that's Hypocrisy.


Lodw. Hypocrisy?


Grim. Yes, a delicate white devil, do but fashion your self to seem holy,
and study to be worse in private, worse, you will find your self more active in
your sensuality, and it will be an other titillation, to think what an ass
you make a'the believing world, that will be ready to dote, nay
superstitiously adore you, for abusing them.


Lodw. This is pretty wholesome doctrine, and hark you, ha you no wenches now
and then?


Grim. Wenches? would the Duke your Brother had so many for his own sake, or
you either.


Lodw. Have in faith?


Grim. Faith? why judge by your self, how dee think a man should subsist,
wenching? why it is the top-branch, the heart, the very Soul of pleasure, i will
not give a chip to be an Emperor, and I may not curuet as often as my
constitution requires, Lechery is the Monarch of Delight, whose Throne is in
the blood, to which all other sins do homage, and bow like serviceable
Vassailes, petty Subjects in the Dominion of flesh -- Wenches Why I have as
many -- yet now I think better on it, I Will keep that to my self, store makes a
good proverb.


Lodw. Nay nay, be free and open to me, you have my oath not to betray.


Grim. Well, I Will not be nice to you, you little imagine (though I be married,)
that I am the greatest whoremaster ^'th Dukedom.


Lodw. Not the greatest?


Grim: Have a strong faith and save my proofs, I? the Usurer do not hoard up
his gold, nor the Country oppressor his Corn more against a dear year, but
Caute si non Cast, my Nun at home knows nothing, like a Mole in the earth,
I work deeps, but invisible; I have my private Houses, my Granaries, my
Magasines bully, as many Concubines, as would collected, furnish the Great
Turks Seraglio.


Lodw. How do you conceal 'em, I should nere keep half so many* but't would
be known.


Grim: You are then a Nouice in the Art of Uenus, and will tell Tales out a'the
School, like your weak Gallants of the first chin, that will brag what Ladies
they have brought to their obedience, that think it a mighty honor, to
discourse how many Fortes they have beleaguerd, how many they have taken by
battery, how many by composition, and how many by Stratagem; that will
proclaim, how this Madam kisses, how like Iuie the the other bona Roba embraced
em, and with what actiuity, a third plays her amorous prize, a fine
commendation for such Whelps is it not?


Lodw: A fault, a fault, who can deny it? But what are those you practice with?
A touch, come, what Commodities?


Grim: Not Sale-ware, Mercenary stuff, that ye may have in the Suburbs, and now
maintain traffic with Ambassadors Servants, nor with Laundresses, like your
Students in Law, who teach her to argue the case so long, till she find a
Statute for it, nor with Mistress Silkeworme in the City, that longs for cream
and cakes, and loves to Cuckold her Husband in fresh air, nor with your
waiting Gentlewoman, that is in love with poetry, and will not part with her
honor, under a Copy of fine verses, or an Anagram, nor with your course Lady
her self, that keeps a Stallion and cozens the old Knight, and his two pair
of Spectacles, in the shape of a Seruingman, but with your rich, fair, high*
fed, glorious and springing Catamountaines, Ladies of blood, whose eyes will
make a Soldier melt, and he were composed of marble, whose every smile, has a
magneticke force to draw up Souls, whose voice will charm a Satyr, and turn
a man's prayers into ambition, make a Hermit run to Hell for a touch on her,
and there hug his own damnation.


Lodw. I have ^eard you, and now I think fit to discover my self to you, you
are a Rascal.


Grim. Sir, I think I am one.


Lodw. Let not your wisdom think, I can be so easily guide.


Grim. How Sir?


Lodw. Hou think you have talked very methodically, and cunningly all this
while, and that I am as they say, a credu^ous cox^combe, and cannot perceive,
that by your politic jeeres upon my pleasures, you labor to discredit, not
only my recreations, but my self to my own face, Do You hear? the time may
come you will no^ dare these things, and yet you shall see, I will not now so
much as seem angry, preserve your humor, 'twill appear fresh o'ch Stage my
learned Gymnosophist, very well, excellent well.


Grim. Why does not your Lo^dship believe me then?


Lodw. Do'^t thou think throughout the year, I will loose one minute of my
pastime, for this your tooth-lesse Satyr^* your mock* balled, go get some
pretty tune, 'twill do you a great deal of credit, the next Lent to be
presented by folly in an Anti* mask, i will to a wench presently.


Grim. I came to carry you to one.


Lodw. How? thou?


Grim. Do not deceive your self, come you shall believe and thank me, will
that serve turn, shall I be thought worthy to be trusted then, if I do the
office of a Bawd for you, and play the Pander wit^ dexterity, will that
convince you?


Lodw. Yes, yes, then I will believe thee.


Grim. T^en go with me, and I will demonstrate.


Lodw. Whither?


Grim. I will carry you to a Lady be not afraid she is hon^st, a ha^ome piece
of flesh, a Lady that will bound ye, and rebound, a Lady that will ravish you.


Lodw. Me?


Grim. Wi^h delight and admiration, one in whom does flouris^ all the
excellency of women, honesty only excepted, such a charming brow speaking eye,
springing cheek, tempting lip, swelling bosom.


Lodw. W^l you lead me to such a creature?


Grim. Yes.


Lodw. And shall I enjoy her in dalliance?


Grim. Yes, and think your self (...), then to be Lord of both the Indies,
here is my hand cut it off if I do not this feate for you, when you please, and
when you are satisfied with her, I Will help you to forty more, but we are
interrupted.


Enter Giotto, Soranzo. Giot. There he is with Grimundo.


Sor. His late Governor, he is giving him good counsel.


Giot. Pray heaven he have the grace to follow it.


Grim. Consider Sir, but what will be the end*
Of all these wicked courses.

Lodw. Precious villain.


Grim. We must be circumspect.


Lodw. No more, I have a cro^et new sprung,
Where shall I mere thee?

Grim. I Will expect you in the park -- be very secre^
My Lord I can but grieve for you.
Exit.
Lodw. How have we all been co^n'd?
What is my brother here?

Sor. This hour my Lord* he is now upon te^rne.


Lodw. I Will see him, and then prepare me for this L^dy.
I feel a boiling in my veins already,
This is the li^e of greatness, and of Court
They Are fools that will be frighted from their sport.
Exeunt
ACTVS* 4.
SCAENA, 1.
Enter Lodwicke, and Piero. Lodw. Do It and thou love me?


Pier. What do you mean my Lord?


Lodw. Nay ^ee must have such a deal of circumstance*
I say do it.

Pier. What, that?


Lodw. That? Is that such a piece of matter, does it appear so horrid in your
imagination, that you should look as if you were frighted now?


Pier. My Lord it is --


Lodw. A thing your lust will prompt you to, but that
You aff^ct Ceremony, and love to be entreated.

Piero. With your Lady?


Lodw. Yet again, must I voice it like the TowneCryer, and ram it into your
head with noise, you have not been observed so dull, in a business of this
supple Nature.


Pier. But think on it again, I pray you think a little bett^r, I ha no great
ambition to ha my throat cut.


Lodw, By whom?


Piero. By you, you cannot choose but kill me for it, when I have done, name any
other Lady, or half a score on 'em, as far as flesh will go, I ha but a
body, and that shall venture upon a disease to do you se^uice, but your Lady.


Lodw. Have I not told thee my end?


Piero: I Sir, but I am very loath to begin with her, I know she will not let
me do the feate, I had as good never attempt it.


Lodw. Is your mountanous promise come to this? Remember, if I do not turn
honest --


Piero. My Lord do but con sider -- well I will do^ what I can, and there be
no remedy -- but


Lodw. No butting.


Piero, Nay for butting, your Lordship is like to do that better, when I have
done with your Lady, upon one condition, I Will resolve.


Lodw. What Is that?


Piero. I must be a little plain w'ee my Lord, that you wonot ask me
blessing, I am like to be one of your Godfathers.


Lodw. How?


Piero. The ^ew name that I shall add to your other title^ will stick in your
head and I fear corrupt your brains too many wise men have run mad upon it
in the City.


Lodw, Never fear it, for if thou can but corrupt her.
I Will show a divorce presently.

Piero, And bring me in for a witness.

Enter Astella.
Lodw. She Is here fear nothing, I Will be thy protection, it were not amiss to
cast away some kindness upon her, nay I was coming to take my leave.


Ast. I know you never meant it*


Lodw. Thus my best intents are rewarded still, the more sin upon your
conscience, y'haue a hard heart, but heaven for give us all, Astella farewell,
Piero expect my return here -- pray entertain this Gentleman courteously in
my absence, you know not how kindly I may take it.


Ast. I would you would enjoin me any testimony,
So I might be in hope to win your love.

Lodw. It Is in the will of women to do much, do not despair, the proudest
heart is but flesh, think a that.


Ast. Of what?


Lodw. Of flesh, and so I leave you.


Pier. Wilt please you Madam, walk into your chamber*
I have something to impart, will require more pri^acie.

Ast. If it be grief, it is welcome.

Exeunt.
Enter Duke, and Lords. Duke. My Soul I have examined, and yet find
No reason for my foolish passion
Our hot Italian does affect these boys,
For sin, l'ue no such flame, and yet me thought
He did appear most lovely, nay in's absence
I cherish his Idea, but I must
Exclude him, while he has but soft impression,
Being removed already in his person,
I loose him with less trouble.
Enter Giotto.
Gitto. Please your Highness,
A stranger but some Gentleman of quality,
Intending to leave Sauoy, humbly prays
To kiss you hand.

Duke. A Gentl^man, admit him.

Enter Foscari disguised, and kisses the Dukes hand.
Fosc. You are a gracious prince, and this high favor
D^fernes my person, and my Sword, when you
Vouchsafe so much addition to this honor,
To call them to your Service.

Duke. You are noble.


Fo^cari. It is not complement my Lord alone
Made me thus bold, I have a private message,
Please you command their distance,

Duke. Wai^e without.


Fosc. Have you forgot this face?


Duke. Fo^caries shadow?


Fosc. The substance Sir, and once more at your feet,


Duke. Returned to lise. Rise, meet our arms* why i^
This Cloud?

Fosc. Your pardon royal Sir, it will
Concern your Highness to permit me walk
In some Eclipse.

Duke. How?


Fosc. Be but pleased to grant
A little freedom to my speech, I shall
Demonstrate the necessity of this
Action, I said I had a messuag^,
I come Sir from Cleona.

Duke. From Cleona?


Fosc. From her indeed, and in her name, I must
Propound a question, to which she prays,
You would be just and noble in your answer,

Duke. Without disputing your Commission,
Upon mine Honor --

Fosc. Princes cannot stain it, dee you love her?


Duke. Do I love her? Strange?


Frsc. Nay she would have you pause, and think welle're
You give her resolution, for she bad me tell you
She has been much aflicted since you left her,
About your love.

Duke. About my love? I prithee
Be more particular.

Fosc. I shall, so soon
As you were gone, being alone, and full
Of melancholy thoughts.

Duke. I left her so.


Fosc. Willing to ease her head upon her couch,
Through silence, and some friendship of the dark,
She fell asleep, and in a short dream thought,
Some Spirit told her softly in her ear,
You did but mock her with a smooth pretense
O^ Love.

Duke. Ha?


Fosc, More, that you are fallen from honor,
Have taken impious flames into your bosom,
That you are a Bird of prey* and while she has
No household Lar, to wait upon her three should
You would fl^e in, and (...) upon her honor.

Duke. I hope she has no faith in dreams*


Fosc. And yet
Divinity has oftentimes descended
Upon our sl mbers, and the blessed troops
Have in the calm, and quiet of the Soul,
Conuers'd with us, taug^t men and women happy
Ways to prevent a tyrants rage, and lust.

Duke. But this was some most false malicious Spirit,
That would insinuate with her white Soul,
There Is danger if she cherish the infusion.

Fosc* She cannot tell, she has some fears my Lord,
Great men have left examples of their vice,
And yet no jealousy of you, but what
A miracle does urge, if this be one;
If you but once more say you love Cleona,
And speak it unto me, and to the Angels,
Which in her prayers, she has inuok'd to hear you,
She will be confident, and tell her dream,
She cannot be illuded.

Duke. Though I need not
Give an account to any, but to Heaven
And her fair self, Foscari, thou fhalt tell her
With what alacrity I display my heart,
I love her with chaste and noble fire, my intents are
Fair as her brow, tell her I dare proclaim it,
In my devotions, at that minute, when
I know a million of adoring Spirits
Houer about the Altar, I do love her --

Fosc. Enough, enough, my Lord be pleased to hear,
What I have now to say, you have expressed
A brave and virtuous Soul, but I must not
Carry this message to her, therefore take
Your own words back again -- I love Cleona
With chaste, and noble sire, my intents are
Fair as her brow, I dare proclaim it Sir,
In my devotions, at that minute, when
I know a Million of adoring Spirits,
Houer about the Altar.

Duke, Do ye mock me?


Fosc* Pardon a truth my Lord, I have apparreld
My own sense with your language.

Duke. Do you come
To affront us, you had better ha been sleeping
In your cold vrne, and fame late gave you out,
And mingltd with the tude forgotten ashes,
Then live to move our anger.

Fisc, Spare your frowns.
This earth weighs not my Spirit down, a fear
Would die the palenesse of my Fathers dust,
Into a blush, Sir many are alive,
Will swear, I did not tremble at a Canon,
When it struck thunder in mine ear, and wrapped
My head in her blew mists, it is not breath
Can fright a noble truth, nor is there Magic
In The person of a King that plays the Tyrant,
But a good Sword can easily vncharme i^,

Duke. You threaten us.


Fosc. Heaven auert so black a thought,
Though in my honors cause I can be flame,
My blood is frost to treason make me not
Belly my heart, for I do love Cleona?
And my bold heart tells me, above all height,
You can affect her with, no birth or state
Can challenge a Prerogative in love;
Nay be nor partial, and you shall ascribe
To mine loves victory, for though I admit,
You value her above your Dukedom, health,
That you would sacrifice your blood, to auert
Any mishap should threaten that dear head,
All this is but above your self, but I
Love her above her self, and while you can
But give your life, and all you have, to do
Cleona service, I can give away
Her self, Cleona's self, in my love to her,
I see you are at loss, I Will reconcile
All, she is yours, this minute ends my claim,
Live, and enjoy her happily, may you
Be famous in that beauteous Empire, she
Blessed in so great a Lord.

Duke, I must not be
Overcome in honor, nor would do so great
A wrong, to enjoy the blessing, I knew not
You were engaged.

Fosc. Ere you proceed, I must
Beseech you hear me out, I am but fresh,
Returned from travail, in my absence, she
Heard I was sla^e, at my return, upon
The hearing of these honors you intend her,
And which I now believe from your own lip,
I found a means, and have wrought her already,
Into a firm belief that I am dead,
(For I have but pretended I came from her)
If for my sake you leave her now, I can
Make good her faith and dye, 't shall not be said,
I lived* and (...) C^eona's fort^ne.

Duke* Stay miracle of honor, and of love.


Fosc. If you proceed, as i^ concerns your happiness,
I can secure all fear of me, I am
R^solu'd ^ course wherein I will be dead
To he^, yet live to pray for her, and you,
Although I never see you more, will you
M^ R^yall Lord?

Duke. D^d ever Lover plead
Against himself before?

Fosc. I lou^ her still,
And in that study her advancement Sir,
In you. I cannot giu^ her.

Duke. Well, I will still love her, and solicit.


F^sc, And not open
That I am liu^ng.

Duke. Not a Syllable.


Fos^. I am confident, let me but kiss your hand.
Ag^n, may blessings dwell with you for ever.
Exit*
Dulc. He was a^wayes noble, but this passion
Has outgone History, it makes for me,
Hail to my courteous fate, Fosc^ri thanks,
Like the aged P^enix, thy old love expires,
And from ^uch Death, springs li^e to my d^fires.
Exit.
Enter Dul^ino. Dulc. The Father is not come yet, nor my Lord
(...), yet when they do, I have no way
T^ ^lpe my self, nor have I power to go
From hence, sure this is the Religious man.

Enter Valentio. Val. Ha it is the some.


Dulc. Father Valentio?


Val. Dear Leon^ra.


Dulc: Sir the same.


Wall. Oh let
My tears express my joys, what myracl^
Gave you this liberty?

Dulc. I was rescued,
By th'happy valor of a Gentleman,
To whom in gratitude, I pay this service,
He bad me here expect a holy man,
And is it you?

Val. The ci^cumstance confirms it.


Dulc. Are you the goodman whom my Lord expect^*
It Is so me refreshing in the midst of sorrow,
To meet again.

Val. And Heaven has heard my prayer.


Dulc. But I am miserable still unless
Your counsel do relieve me.

Val. Why my charge?


Dulc. This noble Gentleman, to whom I owe
My preservation, who appointed you
To meet him here, having resolved to enter,
Into Religion, has been very urgent,
For me to do so too, and overcome
With many importunities, I gave
Consent, not knowing what was best to do,
Some cure or I am lost, you know I cannot
Mix with religious men.

Val. Did you consent?


Dulc. I did, and he is now upon ^he point
Of his return.

Val. You Are in a straight* I must
Confess, no matter, hold your purpose, and
Leave all to me, he is returned.
Enter Foscari.
Fos. Good Father.
Now I am ready, have you disposed him
For such a life.

Val. He is constant to attend you,
I have prepared him, and made way to the Abbot,
For your reception,

Fos. I am b^est, Dulcimo,
Nay no distinction now, me thinks we move
Upon the wings of Cherubins already,
It Is but a step to heaven, come my sweet boy
We climb by a short ladder to our joy*
Exeunt.
Enter Lodowick^ and (...). Gri. This my Lord is her garden, into which you see
My key has given us private access,

Lod: It Is full of curiosity,


Gri: You see that g^oue.


Lod. I do.


Gri. There is her house of pleasure, let your eye entertain
Some delight here, while I give her happy
Knowledge you are entered*
Exit.
Lod. Do so, an honest knave I see that, how happy
Shall I be in hi^ conversation, I shall not need
To keep any in fee to procure, and he be
So well furnished, i^ ever I come to be Duke, I will
Erect a magnificent College, endow it
With reuen^w to m^intaine wenches, and
With great pensions inuit the faire^ Ladies
From all part^ of Christendom, into my Seraglio,
Then, will I have this fellow gelded, and make him
My chie^e Eunuch ranger, or ouers^er of all,
My precious tame foul
Enter 3. like Satyrs* and lydown^ How now? What Is this so me fury asleep,
I Will take another path, another? Into what wilderness has this firedrake
brought me? I dare not cry out for fear of waking 'em, would Grimundo were
come back.

Enter one like (...).
Silv. Rise you drowsy Satyrs rise,
What strong charm does bind your eyes?
See who comes into your grove,
To embrace the Queen of Love,
Leap for joy, and friske about,
Find you^ pretty Dryad^ out,
Hand in hand compose a ring,
Dance and circle you new King,
Him, Sil^anus must obey, Satyrs rise and run in.
Hence and cry a holy day.
Exit.
Lod. Some mask, a device, to entertain me, ha? And yet I see not how they
should prepare so much ceremony, unless they had expected me, a curse upon
their ill faces, they shook me at first, how now?

Enter Satyrs pursuing Nymphs they dance together, Exeunt Sat. 3. Nymphs
seem to entreat him to go with them. Have ye no tongues? yes I will venture
my self in your company, and you were my destinies, would there were no worse
in Hell, must I walk like a bride too, fortune set on before then, and thou
do not guide into a hansome place, would thy eyes were out, and so thou may
be taken for the blind Goddess indeed, forward to Venus Temple.

Exit. Recorders: Enter again where the Nimphs suddenly leave him, a banquet
brought in.
Lod. V^nished like Fayries? Ha what music this? the motion of the Spheres,
or am I in Elisium.

Enter Grimundo bare leading Belinda richly attired and attended by Nimphs.
Here is (...) ha? What glorious creatures this commit^ a rape upon my senses on
every side, but when I look on her, all other admirations are forgot, and
leslen in her glory.


Bell My Lord you are welcome, nay our lip is not too precious, for your salute,
most welcome,


Gri: I have kept my, word Sir,


Lod. Thou have obliged my soul,


Gri. Be high and frolike, she loves to see one
D^mineere, when you are thoroughly acquainted, you will
Give me thanks.

Lod. Let us be private with as much speed as may be.
Away with those gypsies, so so. Exeunt allbu^ (...) and Belinda.
I forgot to ^ske her name-Lady I am com^.

B^l. Wilt please you use that Chair*


Lodw. You are not ignorant
O^ the intents my blood has brought with me*
Grimundo, I hope, has told my coming Lady*
And you l'me confident, will justify his promise
O^ some pastime.

Belind. He Is a Servant,
Whose bo^ome I dare trust, the Son of night,
And yet more ^cret then his mother, he
Has power to engage m^e, and I shall
Tak^ p^de in my obedienc^, first be pleased
T^ taste, what in my duty I prepared
F^ your first (...), these but serve
To (...) appeti^e.

L^dw I like this well, Recorders.
I (...) use much cou^ship, where is this music?

(...)* Does it (...) your ear?


L^w. '^is rauishing
W^ence does it breath?

B^ind. If you command, we will change
A ^housand airs* till you find one is sweet,
And high enough, to rock your wanton Soul
In^o (...) s^mbers.

Lodw Spare them all,
I h^are '^m in thy accents.

Belinda. (...)
Call^opes famed Son, upon whose lute
Myr^ds of lou^rs Ghosts do wait, and hang
Upon the golden strings to have their own
G^iefes softn^d with his noble touch, shall come
Ag^ine from hell, with fresh, and happier strains,
Tomoue your fancy.

Lodw. That were very ^trange,
She is poetical, mo^e then half a Fury,
But we prate all this while, and loose the tim^
W^ should employ more pretiously, I need
No more prouocatiu^, my veins are rich
And swell with expectation, shall we to
This vaulting business?

Bell. I shall hope my Lord
You will be silent in mine honor, when
You have inioy'd me, and not boast my name,
To your disgrace, not mine.

Lodw. Your name, why Lady?
By my d^sires I know it not, I hope
You have received a better Character,
Then to suspect my bla^bing, I Will not trust
My Ghostly Father with my sins, much less
Your name.

Belind. O let me fly into your arms,
These words command my freedom, I shall love you
Above my self, and to confirm how much,
I dare repose upon your faith, I Will not
Be nice to tell you who I am.

Lodw. Pray do.


Bell. I am a Princess.


Lodw. How?


Bell, Believe me Sir.


Lodw, I Am glad a that, but of what Country Lady?


Bell. And my dominions are more spreading then
Your Brothers.

Lodw. H^? that's excellent, if the villain
D^e prosper with my wife, I Will marry her.

Bell. I was not borne to perch upon a Dukedom*
Or some such spot of earth, which the dull eyes
Examine by a multiplying glass,
And wonder at, the Roman Eagles never
Did spread their wings upon so many shores,
The Silver Moon of Ottoman looks pale
Upon my greater Empire, Kings of Spain,
That now may boast their ground, does stretch as wide
As day* are but poor Landlords of a Cell,
Compared to mine inheritance, the truth is*
I am the Devil.

Lodw. How a Devil?


Bell. Yes.
Be not a^righted Sir, you see I bring
No horror to distract you, if this presence,
Delight you not I Will weary a thousand shapes
To please my Lord.

Lod. Shapes quotha,


Bell. Do not tremble,


Lod. A Devil? I see her cloven foot, I have not,
The heart to pray, Grimundo has undone me,

Bell. I did command my spirits, to put on
Satyrs, and N^mphes to entertain you first
Whiles others in the air, maintained a quire
For your delight, why do you keep such distance,
With one that loves you? recollect your self,
You came for pleasure, what does fright my love,
See I am covetous to return delight,
And sa^isfie your lustful genius,
Come lets withdraw, and on the bed prepared
Beget a race of smooth and wanton Devils --

Lod. Hold, come not near me, ha? now I compare,
The circumstances, they induce me to
A sad belief, and I had breath enough,
I would ask a question.

Bell. Any thing, and be
Resolud.

Lod. How came Grimnndo, and your deuilship,
Acquainted*

Bell. He has been my agent long,
And has deserved for his hypocrisy,
And private sins, no common pl^ce in Hell,
H^es now my favorite, and we enjoy,
Each other daily, but he never did,
By any service more endeare my love,
Then by this bringing you to my acquaintance,
Which I desired of him long since* with many,
And fierce soll^cite, but ^e urged his fear,
You were not ripe enoug^ in sin, for his,
Disco^ery.

Lod. I feel^ my self dissolve*
In sweat,

Bell. My Lord I must acknowledge* I
Have ever had you in my first regard,
Of any mortal sinner, for you have
The same propention with me, though with
Less malice* spirits of the lower world
Have several offices assigned, some are
To advance pride, some avarice, some wrath,
I am for lust, a gay, voluptuous Devil,
Come lets embrace, for that I love my Lord,
Do, and command a regiment of hell,
They all are at your service.

Lodw. O my foul!


Bell. Be^ide my Lord, it is another moti^e
To honor you, and by my c^aines which now
I have l^ft behind, it makes me grow enamored,
Your wife, that says her prayers at home, and weeps
Away her sight, O^ let me hug you for it,
Despise her vowe^ still, spurn her tears again
Into her eyes thou shall be prince in hell
And have a Crown of flames* brighter then that,
Which Ariadue wears of fixed sta^res,
Come shall we dally now?

Lodw. My bones within
Are dust already, and I wear my flesh
Like a loose, upper garment,

Bell. You Are afraid*
Be not so pale at liver, for I see
Your blood turn Coward, how would you be frighted
To look upon me clothed with all my horror,
That shudder at me now? call up your spirit.

Lodw. There are too many spirits here already,
Would thou were coniur'd, what shall I do?

Bell. What other then to bath your soul in pleasure
And never heard of rauishings, we two,
Will progress through the air in Uenu^ charret*
And when her silver doves grow faint, and tir^,
Cupid and Mercury shall lend us wings,
And we will visit new worlds, when we are,
Weary of this, we both will back the wind^s.
And hunt the Phaenix through the Arabian D^serts
Her we will spoil of all her shining plumes.
To make a blazing Coronet for thy temples,
Which from the Earth beheld, shall draw up wonder
And puzzle learned Astronomy, to distinguish it
From some new Constellation, the Sea
Shall yield us pastime, when inuelop^d
With Clouds, blacker then night, we range about
And when with storms we overthrow whole Nauies,
We'll laugh to hear the Mariners exclaim
In many thousand shipwrackes, what do I
Urge these particu^ers? let us be one Soul,
Air, Earth and Hell, is yours.

Lodw. I have a suit,
But da^e ^ot speak.

Bell. Take courage, and from me
B^e confident to obtain.

Lodw. I am not well,
The name of Diu ll came to quick upon me,
I was not well prepared for ^uch a sound,
It turned my blood ^o ice, and I ha^ not
R^couered so much warmth yet, to desire
The sport I came for, would you please but to
D^misse me for a time, I would return,
When I have heat and strength enough, for such
A sprightfull action.

Belinda: I do^ find your cunni^g,
You pretend this excuse, but to gain time,
In hope you may repent.

Lodw. And please your Grace,
Not I.

Bell. You will acquaint some Priest, or other,
A tribe of all the world, I most abhor,
And they will ^oole you with their Ghostly council,
Pe pl^xe you with some fond divinity,
To make you loose the Glories I have promised.

Lod. I could never abide such mel ^neholly people.


Bell. In this I must betray, we spirits have
No perfect knowledge of men's thoughts, I see
Your bloods ^nfeebled, and although my love
Be infinite, and every minute I
Shall languish in your absence, yet your health
I must preserve, it is that that feeds my hopes,
Hereafter I shall perfectly enjoy thee,
You will be faithful, and return.

Lod. Suspect not,


Bell. One kiss shall seal consent,


Lod. Her breath smells of brimstone.


Bell. When next we meet, like to the Gemini
We Will twine our limbs in one another, till
We appear one creature in our active play,
For this time ^le dismiss you -- do not pray,
A spirit shall attend you.

Lod. Do not pray, when did I last? I know not, farewell horror.
He wants a wench, that goes to the D^uell for her.
Exeunt.
ACTVS 5.
SCAENA. 1.
Enter Astella and Piero. Astel: Touch me not villain^, piety defend me
Art thou a man, or have I all this while
Conuerst with some ill Ang^ll in the shape
Of my Lords friend,

Piero. What needs all this stir
I urge your benefit.

Astel. To undo my name
N^v Soul for ever with one act.

Piero. One act,
There be those Ladies that have acted it
A hundred times, yet think themselves as good
C^ristians as other women, and do carry
As much opinion too for virtue.

Astel. Heaven.


Piero. What harm can there be in it, can you neglect
Revenge so just, so easy and delightful?

Ast. T^y breath does scatter an infection.


Piero. Scatter a toy, be wise, and loose no time
You know not when-such opportunity,
May tempt you to it again, for my own part
I can but do you pleasure in it, your blood
Should need no other argument.

Astella: I Will sooner
Empty my veins, not to redeem thy Soul,
Should Sin betray mine honor to one loose
Embrace, hence traitor I do feel corruption
In The air already, it will kill me if
I stay, hereafter I Will not wonder how
My Lord became so wicked.

Piero. You will lead me
To some more private room, I Will follow Madam.
Exeunt.
Enter Iacomo. Jacom. More private room, said he? I smell a business I
thought this Gamester had been gone, is it e'ne so, have at your borough
Madam, he is a shrewd Fer^et I can tell you, and just in the nicke here comes
the Warrener.


Enter Lodwicke. Lodw. This devil does not follow me, nor any of her Cubs I
hope, I Am glad I came off so well, I never was so hot to engender with the
Nightmare, could Grimundo find no other creature for my coupling but a
Succubus, me thinks I smell the Fiend still.


Iac. He talks on her already.


Lodw. I am very jealous.


Jac. Not without a cause my Lord.


Lodw. Ha? there she is again.


Jac, No my Lord, she is new gone into the withdrawing Chamber.


Lodw. Ha? who? who is gone?


Iac. A Gentlewoman that you were late in company with.


Lodw. The Devil? look well about you then, a Spirit,
Of her constitution will set the house on fire
Instantly and make a yonghell on it when
Came she? I shall be everlastingly haunted
With goblings, are sure thou saw her?

Iac. Saw her, yes and him too.


Lod. Grimundo?


Iac. No not Grimundo, but I saw an other Gentleman
That has been held a notable spirit,
Familiar with her.

Lod. Spirit and familiar.


^ac. Piero my Lord


Lod, Piero?


Iac. I wonot say what I think, but I think somewhat,
And I know what I say, if she be a Devil* as she
Can be little less, if she be as bad as I imagine
Some bodies head will ache for it, for mine own
Part, I did but see and hear, that's all, and
Yet I ha not told you half.

Lod. Let me collect sure this fellow by th'circumstance
Means Astella, thou talkest all this while of my Lady
Do not?

Iac. Yes my Lord, she is all the Ladies in the house,
For my Lady and mistress was sent for
To the Abbey.

Lod. I had forgotten my self this is new horror,
Is my Lady and Piero so familiar say and
In private?

Iac. What I have said, I have said, and what they have
Done, they have done, by this time.

Lod. Done? and I Will be active too.


Iac. Show what feats of acti^ity you please but
I bel^eue he has vaulted into your sadle Exit Lod.
Already -- so so now I am alone which is as
The learned say, Solus cumsola I will entertain
Some honorable thoughts of my preferment, Enter Piero.
Hum the gamester is returned what melancholy, then
He has don't I lay my head to a fools cap on it
I was always so my self after my capring*
Did you not meet the Prince sir.

Pier. No, wh^re is he?


Iac. He was here but now, and inquired how his Lady did, and I told him you
could tell the ^ate of her body better then I, for I thought you were gone in
before him.


Piero. I did but see her.


Jac. That's not the right on it, it runs for I did but kiss her, for I did
but kiss her.


Piero. It was enough for me to kiss her hand.


Jac. And feel her pulse.


Piero. How Sir?


Iac. As a noble Gentleman should Sir?


Piero. I am suspected, I must turn this fools discourse,
Another way, the present theme is dangerous;
What I hear say (...), your Lady is like to rise?

Iac. My Lady does rise as early as other Ladies do that go to bed late.


Piero, And there will be notable preferment for you?


Iac. It Is very likely my Lady understands her self*


Piero. There is a whisper abroad*


Jac. It Is a good hearing.


Piero. What if she be married in this absence?


Jac. Very likel^, I say nothing but I think I know my Ladies secrets for the
triumph, as pageants, or running at tilt, you may hear more shortly, there may
be reasons of state to have things carried privately, they will break out in
Bells and bonefires hereafter; what their Graces have intended for me, I
conceal.


Piero, He is wound up already.


Iac. You are a Gentleman I shall take particular notice of.


Piero. I hope a man may get a place for himself or his friend for ready money.


Iac. Twere pity of my life else, you shall command the first that falls, but
you must swear you came in without chafering or buying, imagine it a plump
Parsonage, or other Church living, the oath will go down the more easily.
Divines make no scruple.


Piero. But what if after all this imagination of a marriage, fortune should
forbid the banes.


Jac. How? Fortune's a slut, and because she is a whore her self, would have
no Lady marry and live honest.


Enter Lodwicke. Lodw. Piero, where is Piero?


Piero: Ha, my Lord, I ha don't.


Lodw. Ha? what.


Piero. I have pleased thy Excellence, and you had made more have, you might ha
come to the falla'th Dear, delicate Venison.


Lodw. Thou Have not enjoyed her?


Piero. They talk of Jupiter and a golden shewer,
Give me a Mercury with wit and tongue
He shall charm more Ladies on their backs,
Then the whole bundle of Gods pshew.

Lodw. Shoot not so much compass, be brief and answer me, have thou enjoyed
her?


Piero. I have, shall I swear?


Lodw. No, thou will be damned sufficiently without an oath, in the mean
time, I do purpose to reward your nimble diligence, draw?


Piero. What dee mean.


Jac. And you be so sharp set, I do e mean to withdaw.


Lodw. I do mean to cut your throat, or perish^'th attempt you see your
destiny, my birth and spirit wo'not le^ me kill thee in the da^ke, draw and be
circum^pect.


Piero. Did not ^ou engage me to it, have I done any thing but by your
directions? my Lord.


Lodw. It Is all one, my mind is altered, I will see what complexion your heart
bears, do not negl^ct my fury, bu^ guard your self discreetly, if I hit upon
the right v^yne I may cure your diseasea'th blood.


Piero. Hold, and there be no remedy, I will dye better then I ha lived, you
shall see Sir that I dare fight with you, and if I tall by your Sword, my base
consent to act your will deserves it.


Lodw. Ha?


Piero. I find your policy, and by this storm,
You Would prove my resolution, how boldly I
Dare stand to it when this great
Dishonor comes to question prepare
To be displeased -- she is a miracle
Of chastity impenterable like.
A marble she returned my sinful arro^es
And they have wounded me, forgive me Lady.

Lod. I prithee tell me true, now thou shall swear
Have thou not don't.

Pior. Not by my hope of heaven
Which I had almost forfeited, had not she
Relieved me with her virtue, in this truth
I dare resig^e my breath.

Lod. I dare believe thee
What did I see in her to doubt her firmness.
Enter Jacomo and Astella.
Iac. Here they are Madam, you do not mean to
Run upon their naked weapons.

Lod. Piero thou shall wonder.


Ast. What means my Lord?


Lod. You shall know that a non
My Lady go with me.

Ast. Whither you please
You shall not need to force me si^, you man
Lead me with gossamere, or the least thread
The industrious spider weaues.

Iac. Whimseyes caribit soes.


Pier. What fury thu^ transports him at some distance
I Will follow him, he may intend some violence
She is too good to suffer I shall grow
In love with my conversion.
Exit.
Iac. Grow in love with a cockscomb his last words
Stick on my stomach still fortune forbid the banes
Quotha, slid if fortune should forbid the banes
And my Lady be not converted into a Duchess
Where are allmy offices?
Hum where are they quoth I, I do not know
But of all tunes I shall hate fortune my foe.
Exit.
Recorders. Chaires prepared. Enter Soranzo, Giotto. Sor. Know you not who they
are my Lord this day
Receive the habit.

Gio. I can meet with no intelligence.


Sor. They are persons of some quality.


Gio. The Duke does mean to grace their ceremony.


Sor. He was invited by the Abbot to their clothing.


Gio. Which must be in private too hear in his lodgings.


Sor. Well, we shall not long expect'em his grace enters.


Enter Duke, Grimundo. Gri. It helped much that he never saw my wife.


Du. Do think 'twill take.


Gri. Ther^'s some hope my Lord already
And heaven may prosper it.

Du. We cannot endeere thee to thy merit.


Sor. How the Duke embraces him.


Enter Cleona attended. Duk. Cleona you are welcom' it is a blessed
Occasion that makes us meet so happily.

Cle. It pleased my Lord Abbot to inuit me hither.


Duk. I appeared too upon his friendly sommons
We Will thank him for this presence,

Sor. The Abbot enters.


Enter the Abbot attended with Religious men having bowed to the Duke, he
takes a chair being sat, Valentio goes out and presently enters lea^ing
Foscarie and Dulcino in St. Bennets habit, he presents them they k^eele at the
Abbots feet. Abb. Speak your desire.


Fos. We kneel to be received into the number,
O^ those religious men that dedicate
Themselves to Heaven, in the habit of St. Bennet,
And humbly pray, that you would rectify
And teach our weak d^uotion, the way
To imitate his life, by giving us
The precepts of your order,

Abbot. Let me tell you,
You must take heed, the ground of your resolve
Be perfect, yet look back into the spring
Of your desires, religious men should be
Tapers, first lighted by a holy beam,
Meteors may shine like stars, but are not constant.

Fosc. We covet not the blaze, which a corrupt,
And flimy matter may advance, our thoughts
Are slam'd with Charity.

Abb. Yet ere you embarke
Think on your hard adventure, there is more
To be examined, beside your end,
And the reward of such an undertaking,
You look on Heaven a far off, like a Land* skip,
Whether wild thoughts, like yours imperfect eye,
Without examination of those ways,
Oblique, and narrow are transported, but
In The walk, and try all of the difficulties
That interpose, you tire like inconsiderate,
And weary Pilgrims.

Fosc. We desire to know
The rules of our obedience,

Abb. They will startle
Your resolutions, can your will, not used
To any Law beside it self, permit
The knowledge of severe, and positive limits?
Submit to be controlled, employed sometime,
In servile offices, against the greatness
Of your high birth, and sufferance of nature?
Can you, forgetting all youthful desires,
And memory of the worlds betraying pleasures,
Check wanton heat, and consecrate your blood
To Chastity, and holy solitude?

Sor. I woe not be religious Giotto?


Giot. Nor I, upon these tearm^s I pity em.


Abb, Can you quit all the glories of your state,
Resign your titles, and large wealth to live
Poor and neglected, change high food and surfets,
For a continual fasting, your down beds
For hard and humble lodging, your guilt roofes,
And galleries for a melancholy Cell
The pattern of a grave, where, stead of music
To charm you into slumbers, to be waked
With the sad chyming of the sacring bell;
Your robes, whose curiosity has tired
Invention, and the silke-worme to adorn you,
Your blaze of jewels, that your pride has worn
To burn out enuies eyes, must be no more
Your ornament, but course, and rugged clothing
Harrow your soft skins, these and many more
Unkind austerities will much offend
Your tender constitutions, yet consider.

Du. He does insist much on their flate and honor
May we not know'em yet;

Val. One of them sir
Does owe this character.
Gives him a paper.
Du. It is Foscary
I find his noble purpose, he is perfect
I honor thee young man, she must not see
This paper.
Gives another paper.
Val. This does speak the other Sir.


Du. It Is at large -- ha -- Grimundo I prithee read,
I dare not credit my own eyes Leonora
So it begins, Leonora.

Gri. Leonora daughter to the late Gonzaga Duke
Of Millan, fearing she should be compelled to marry
Her Uncle, in the habit of a Page and the conduct
Of Father Valentio, came to Sauoy, to try the
Love and honor of his Excellence, who once
Solicited by his Ambassador --

Du. No more, I am extasied
If so much blessing may be met at once
I Will do my heart that justice to proclaim
Thou had a deep impression, as a boy
I loved thee too, for it could be no other,
But with a Divine flame, fair Leonora
Like to a perfect Magnes, though inelos'd
Within an Iuory box, through the white wall
Shot forth embracing virtue, now, oh now
Our Destinies are kind.

Fos. This is a mystery, Dulcino?


Leo. No my Lord, I am discovered,
You see Le^nora now, a Millan Lady,
If I may hope your pardon --

Du. Love; and honor
Thou do enrich my heart, Cleona read
And entertain the happiness, to which
Thy fare predestined thee, whilst I obey
Mine here.
Cleonae reads.
Cleo. How, my Lord Foscary?
If he beliuing, I must dye before
This separation be confirmed, my joy
Does overcome my wonder, can you leave
The world while I am in it?

Fos. Decr'^ Leonora!
Then willingly I dispense with my intention
And if the Duke have found another Mistress,
It shall be my devotion to pray he^re,
And my religion to honor thee.

Ab. Many blessings crown
This vnlon.

Fos. Your pardon gracious Princess
I did impose too much.

Leo. I studied
To be your grateful servant, as your self
Unto the fair Cleona we are all happy.

Enter L^dowicke, Astella, and Piero. Lod. The'yr here; by your leave brother,
my Lord Abbot?
Witness enough.

Du. Why thus kneeles Lodowick?


Lod. To make confession brother, and beg heavens
And every good man's pardon, for the wrong
I (...)'done this excellent Lady, whom my soul
New marries, and may heaven -- ha do not hold
A Justice back, Grimunde is a traitor
Take heed on him and say your prayers, he is
The Deulls grand solliciter for souls,
He has not such another cunning engine
In The world, to ruin virtue.

Gri. I my Lord?


Lod. You are no hipocrite, he does every night
Lie with a Succubus, he brought me to one
Let him deny it, but heaven had pity on me.
Enter Bellinda. Ha? there she is, do you not see her? Devil!
I do defy thee, my Lord stand by me,
I will be honest, spite of him and thee,
And lie with mine own wife.

Gi. Sure the Prince is mad,


Duk. Oh rise most noble Lady, well deserning
A statue to record thy virtue.

Lod. Ha?


Duk. This is Grimundoes wife,


Lod. It Is so my Lord.


Bell. No Deuill^ but the servant of your virtue,
That shall rejoice, if we have thriu'd in your
Co^ersion.

Ast. I hope it.


Lod. Have I bin mocked into honesty? are not you a fury?
And you a ^lye and subtle Epicure?

Gri. I do abhor the thought of being so,
Pardon my seeming Sir.

Ab. Oh go not back,
Prevent thus seasonably your real ^orment.

Lod. I am fully wakened, be this kiss the pledge
Of my new heart.

Pi. True love stream in your bosoms
Lady forgive me too.

Ast. Most willingly.


Duk. Our joy is perfect, Lodowisk (...)
A (...) in this Lady, Leonora,
The object of our first love, take the story
As we (...) (...) Abbot we must thank
You (...) con^riuing this, and you good Father,
E^bassedors shall be dispatched to Millan,
(...) where and how their absent Princess
Leonora (...) disposed her self, mean while,
Poets shall stretch inn^ntion, to express
Triumphs for thee, and Sauoyes happiness.
Extunt Omnes.
FINIS.

