THE COVNTRYMAN WITH HIS HOVSHOLD.

Being A familiar Conference, concerning Faith toward God, and Good Works
before Men; fitted for the capacity of the meanest.

By R. S. Preacher of the word at ARLEY.

See the Contents more particularly before the Book.

IOSVA. 24.13. But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

1 PET. 2.17. Fear God,

and

NEHEM. 1.11. Desire to fear him.

Imprinted at London by Edward Griffin for Jonah Man at the Talbot in
Paternoster Row. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR WALTER ASTON, KNIGHT OF THE BATHE and BARONET, AT
THIS PRESENT LORD AMBASSADOR FOR HIS MAJESTY TO THE KING OF SPAIN.

AND TO THE LADY GERTRVDE, HIS MOST VIRTUOUS AND BELOVED WIFE.

R. S. CONSECRATETH THESE HIS MEDITATIONS, TOGETHER WITH HIS BEST WISHES AND
SERVICES.

An Admonition to the Reader.
I Presume thou know very well (good Reader) that as the gifts of Teachers
in delivering are diverse, so are those of the Hearers for conceiving and
profiting. For which cause the Christian Scribe must (as the great
Diuinitie-Reader teaches) Mat. 13.52,
bring forth out of his treasure things both new and old, that is, as I
understand it, fit his setting forth of saving truth after sundry good sorts to
the estate and capacity of the Learners; Phil. 3.1. (...). i. minime lubricum.
and for them it is safe to write the same things unto them. Think me not then
to tautologize overmuch in this Book, neither yet blame me for lack of exact
method therein. For, besides that a familiar Conference, especially of the
Countryman with his Household (for whose sake chiefly I publish these my
country-meditations) is not so absolutely freed from the one, nor so strictly
tied to the other; note (I pray thee) that my study and endeavor herein has
been purposely to convey the truth to the more ignorant and ruder sort in such
form and so many words as I supposed them able to receive it; Esai. 28.9, 10,
11. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. and 9.22. Heb. 5.11, 12, 13.
and if they should not rightly conceive and lay hold on the truth in one
place, speech or passage of the Book, yet in another they might attain to it,
if it shall please the Lord. To which end I have retained (chiefly in the
weightiest principles) some common phrases and kinds of speech used in
Catechismes, because I take them to be plainest and more generally known.
Namely, I have here and there used some answers out of Master William Perkins
(of worthy memory) his Catechism. And in some three or four places also I
have imitated others a little in some respects. The reasons against
Transubstantiation, and many of those Questions and Answers about fit and
worthy Receivers, and some few about Receiving worthily are the labors of that
judicious man and mine especial friend Mr A. N. All the rest (so far as I
remember) Neither yet has my pains been the lesser in those few things that
I have taken from others, as the discreet Reader may easily perceive by my
manner of using them.
are my poor endeavors, together with the frame of the whole, so shaped as I
thought fittest for my purpose. Indeed when I began with this Work, I intended
only some briefer thing, as a short Catechism, but afterward partly
considering the great and manifold necessities of the ignorant, and partly
following the advice of diverse godly persons whom I consulted withal, I have
enlarged my self to so many matters as you may see. The doctrine and substance
I assure my self is sound, and (I am privy) proceeds from a heart that is
willing to promote the common salvation, verse. 3.
as Jude calls it. Let it not want therefore (judicious Reader) thy Christian
good word, at least let it be free from thy blame, though (it may be) there
shall be found some show of Reason for such censure, considering not only my
defense premised, but also the cause and honor of Him who is too often pierced
through the sides of his poor servants, and fearing the offense of the weak,
who (God knows) are soon turned out of the way. Albeit, I take, it had bin
no great difficulty for me to have made it both shorter and more methodicall,
save that (if I do not mistake) I judge this often repeating the surest or
likeliest way to effect my intent and desire. And if God shall move any few of
those Householders (hearts) who have hitherto used little or no means in this
behalf, to use this, so that it be with conscience, I have enough. And why
should they always Psalm. 2.3.
break Christ's bands asunder and cast away his cords from them? Now the Lord
of his dear mercy conveyed unto us by the blood of of his only Son, by his
all-working Spirit, bless my simple labor, thy favorable allowance, and
every ones Christian use of it, unto his own praise in the building of his
Church. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, R. S.

The Table of the Contents.
THE drift of the Author in this Book, and concerning the instructing and
reforming of the Country-mans-houshould in general, and particularly some
directions and forms of teaching Children so soon as they can speak, and
such as having spent a great part of their time in ignorance and carelessness,
can repeat some things, as the Creed, the Lords Prayer, etc. but yet understand
little or nothing thereof, and therefore cannot put what they say to any good
use. page 1. to 59. I The First part, Concerning the Law of God contained in
the ten Commandments, which are summarily expounded, and the uses of the Law
in general, briefly set down. page 59. to 79. II The second part, Concerning
the Gospel, where the Creed is explaned. page 79. to 111. III The third part,
concerning the Means of Grace in general: And first of the Word of God, and
of the Exercises thereof, page 111. to 115. Secondly of Prayer, Where. 1: An
Exposition of the Lords prayer. page 115. to 126 2. Two forms of Prayer for
the use of the Country-mans-Household on worke-daies, the one for the Morning,
the other for the Evening. page 126. to 148. 3. Two forms of Thanksgiving, the
one before meat, the other after meat. page 148. to 149. 4. A form of Prayer
for one in private, for preparation to the Sabbath. page 150. to 161. 5.
Certain godly Hymns or Psalms for private use. page 167. to 174.

IIII The fourth part, Of the Sacraments of the New Testament p. 174. to 178 1.
Of Baptism. page 178. to 182. 2. Of the Lords Supper. page 188. to 194, where,
of fit and worthy Receivers, etc. p. 194. to 206.
V The last Part, where 1. Of the Practice of the Communion of Saints. page
206. to 110. 2. Of the Effects of the four means of Grace, both in good and
bad. p. 209, to 211. 3. Of the consideration of Gods works. page 211, to 212.
4. Of Christ's Protecting of his Church page 212, to 213. 5. Of Christ's
Disposing of all things to its greatest good, as of Sin, Afflictions, Death,
etc. page 214. to 221. 6. Of the last Resurrection and Judgment general. page
221. to 228 7. Of watching. page 228. to 235 8. And of Christ's full glorifying
of his Church in Heaven. page 235.
The Peroration, or Sum of the whole, composed in easy and plain meeter.
page 238. to 254.
THE COVNTRY-MAN WITH HIS HOVSHOLD; Being A familiar Conference, concerning
Faith toward God, and Good Works before Men, fitted for the capacity of the
meanest.
The Speakers conferring be these five,
The Pastor. Parent. Child. Servant. Scholar.


Pastor. GOd 2 Ioh. v. 10.
speed you.


Parent. And you also. Act. 16.15.
If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, verse. 9.
and help us, that we may learn and be stirred up to 1 Thessalonians. 2.11.
walk worthy of God, who has called us unto his kingdom and glory.


Pastor. Indeed I have often and long time marueiled of the generall-grosse
neglect and strangeness of your self and other householders, in that you have
contented your selves with a bare and fashionable use of your Ministers labors
in public, without seeking any fellowship (whiles you are in prosperity)
with them in private, as touching the matters of God. Wherein now, at the
length, it seems, you desire my help: For hitherto you and other Householders
have by your carelessnes this way, not only hindered and discouraged your
Ministers in the work of the Gospel, but also wronged your selves and your
own people (besides the evil example you have given to others) in such sort
that neither the judicious can well tell what to think of you, nor yet you
your selves (for the greater number I fear) know whether you profit or not by
the public preaching of the word, though it be both plentifully and fitly set
forth of the Ministers, and also ordinarily frequented by you. I say little of
the want, yea and of the alienating of the affections of Love and Delight, (yea
and of Zeal oftentimes) which as they are on the one side procured and
nourished by often society and familiarity, and thereupon do much further
the soul for the knowledge, belief, and practice of Godliness; not unlike to
good handmaides, who by their continual industry do set forward their
Mistress business, and therein promote her welfare: So on the other side,
these being wanting or estranged, many good things become unprofitable, and
usually very wholesome orders and directions are either refused, or little or
nothing used, and so the soul is never the nearer, and it may be the further
off from piety; as it comes to pass by such maids, as either do not mind
diligence, or addict themselves to other matters then their service, and
therefore are so far from profiting their Mistres, that contrarily, they do
rather incomber her and hindeer her good estate. And what dishonor the Lord
sustaineth by this profane course, I leave to be lamented of all those that
know what Gods glory means, and have any feeling of the greiuous and
intolerable loss of it. But I pray you what have you thought of Act. 20.20, 31.
S. Paul his three years diligence at Ephesus by night and day, in teaching
and warning every one of the Church of God with tears from house to house? And
what use have you made of his plain exhortation, to Heb. 13.17.
obey them that have the rule over you, and to submit your selves; and likewise
of his request, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord and admonish
you, and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake?


Parent. For my part I must confess, that albeit I have known such testimonies
of holy writ, yet I have not so seriously considered and applied them to my
self, as now of late time and every day more and more I do. And for others, I
beseech God to move their hearts likewise to Psalm. 30.1. 1 Cor. 16.15, 16
dedicate themselves and their houses to God, that every one may help and
labor with you for the entertainment and promoting of the Gospel of Christ.


Pastor. Verily you have caused me much grief, because through your
strangeness I have bin but slenderly able to follow the Lords will, Ezekiel. 34.
by seeking out his sheep, specially those that are lost, feeding them in fat
pastures, laying them in good folds, bringing them again that were driven
away, binding that which was broken, strengthening that which was sick, etc.
And for that I could not approve my self to be that good and careful John
10.3, 4.
Shepherd, who calls his own sheep by name, leads them out, and goes
before them that they may follow him. And withal you have made me much ashamed
that I am so ignorant and uncertain of the particular persons estate in my
flock, and the more, when I think of Cyrus the Persian King, of whom it is
recorded, Pliny. Solin. Val. Max. and others.
that he knew both the faces and names of all the soldiers in his army (which
was very great) so that he could salute and (as need required) exhort every
one by name to virtue and manhood, and yet his drift was but for earthly glory
and a temporal victory: But my office is ordained of Christ the Captain of
our Faith, to direct and encourage his Soldiers to get the greatest victory
that ever was or can be, even over the Devil, Sin, Death, and Damnation, and
to obtain everlasting glory, and that with Christ the Lord of glory. Howbeit
it is come to pass through the subtlety of Satan and Man's corruption, in the
lack of a religious and familiar society betwixt me and my charge, that I
have but little certain knowledge of their spiritual estate, and therefore am
forced to expect the lesser fruit of my public labors, eftsoons censuring my
self as doing my office but by the halues, only in preaching a Sermon or two
out of the pulpit each week upon the Lords day, which yet I cannot so
profitably perform in fitting my labor to their estate, as otherwise I might,
to wit, if I and they had such private fellowship, as the Lord commends unto
us in his holy word. For which and diverse other reasons, I do not only seek
and take some likely opportunities with them, to set on foot this holy
Ordinance of the Lord, but withal I cease not to pray the Almighty, the Author
of all good gifts and Father of lights, as well to enable and guide me with
necessary graces and godly wisdom, in some good and constant course, to
bestow some private pains this way, as to open the doors of my peoples hearts
and houses to make some good use thereof; and I wait for the mercy of God in
raising up some helpers to the same end, and in vouchsafing me some happy
entrance into so worthy a mean of his glory, and of our spiritual advantage,
so long as he continues the earnest desire of my heart in this behalf, and my
godly labors amongst them. For this course that I speak of, and you do now
begin to embrace, if it be well performed and accepted, will (by Gods blessing)
make men's houses, yea and the meanest cottages, honorable and reverend in the
account of all godly men, as we do read that sundry in the primitive Churches,
founded by the Apostles, were adorned by the name of Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19.
Col. 4.15. Philem. v. 2.
Churches, the worthiest societies of men in the world.


Parent. Nay rather, I and my Family, and such as we have been, have cause to
grieve and be ashamed for our strangeness to you, and to whomsoever else might
benefit us in grace, as you have showed; yea and to fear lest God in his
justice should cast us out of the number and reckoning of Christian houses, as
Genes. 21.10, 12, 14.
Abraham at Gods commandment cast out Hagar and Ishmael out of his house,
because we are so far from the 2 Timothy 3.5.
power of Godliness, that we want the form thereof in our houses, which ought
to be (as you have said) as so many Churches both for the form and power of
godliness, unless it shall please God to direct us to take a better course,
and that with speed, and to bless it unto our use. Wherefore, sir, I pray you
let me obtain your present counsel and furtherance to reform my Household,
and to plant good order therein for this great work of Gods Holy Gospel: And
even now, if your time and occasions will permit, come in, Act. 10.33.
that we may hear all the things that are commanded you of God.


Pastor. You speak in fit time, for I am not altogether unprovided at this
present, to confer my small gift unto you and your household. Luke 10.5.
Peace be to this house.


Parent. Psalm. 129.8.
The Blessing of the Lord be upon us. Will you that I call in my people, that
they may enjoy the benefit of our Conference at this time?


Pastor. It shall not need to do so now, till I have made a Preparatiue by a
course which I have in hand; and then hereafter by the grace of God we will
proceed altogether. My Preparatiue is by this Book, wherein I have set down
such informations and Helps, as I judge most needful and fit for such
Households as yours is. This therefore I will bestow on you, upon condition you
will promise me that you will not be slack, to use it in your house, according
to the directions thereof, so far forth as you shall find it upon just trial,
to be the truth according to Godliness, and convenient for your estate. For
this Book does not only touch the chiefest points of Faith toward God and
Good Works before Men, and that in the plainest manner I could devise for the
understanding of the weakest persons, and breifely expounds the Lords prayer,
the Ten Commandments, and the Confession of Faith, with the doctrine of the
Sacraments, and diverse See the Table of the Contents.
other necessary things, but also it prescribes certain forms of Prayer and
Thanksgiving, and some Psalms or Hymns, which you may use for prayer and
praise to God, your own edification and comfort, and the stirring up of others
to seek the Lord with you. All which things, I desire you, not only to read
once or twice over, (for novelties sake, as many are wont to do in these days
without any further use in a manner) but also to follow the directions and
course therein advised (unless you can meet with a fitter help) for your
better inabling and drawing on to call upon and magnify Gods name, and to
confess his saving truth of your selves, without the guidance of set forms,
and till you can with judgment make choice of such Psalms for private use, as
are suitable for any condition of mind or body you shall be in.


Parent. I most heartily thank you. But (I pray you) do you propose all that
you have written in this book to be learned by heart?


Pastor. No: But my meaning is: or some other of your house, whom you shall
appoint, till you or some other (I say) of your house shall be able either to
use them without the book, or otherwise to conceive prayer etc. of your
selves, which indeed is the thing that you must principally labor for.



Servant and the Scholar, (wheresoever they be throughout all the five parts
of the Book) I do commend unto the often and diligent reading and noting of
the well-disposed, unless it shall please them of their own accord to get by
heart any choice matter which they shall find in it to be most for their good.
For daily use and constant practice in reading good matter, (specially being
penned in form of Conference and pithily) shall by Gods blessing (in tract of
time) prevail much, even above expectation, (though one cannot attain to
learn every word in order by heart) at least it will be a Mean to increase
knowledge, and to make the Points of Doctrine much easier in hearing the
public Ministry. Now this part of the Conference (I mean betwixt the Servant
and the Scholar) contains sometimes Explanations, sometimes Reasons, and
sometimes Uses of the Points of Doctrine professed in the Conference betwixt
the Parent and the Child, and sometimes marks of saving grace to direct the
weaker sort to judge and discern the better of their spiritual estate, and
sometimes confutation of errors and taking away of doubts.

By Scholar I understand such a one as can write and read the English tongue
in any ready and competent sort, though he want other literature. And because
this kind of Scholars are better fitted to hear the preaching of the word,
and to look into the holy Scriptures with more likelihood of fruit, than others
who have not those gifts of writing and reading, I have therefore assigned him
to make answer to the Servant (who also by reason of his or her age and
experience for the most part, ought to have more judgment than the Child) in
points that tend unto greater perfection and growth. And withal I have also
brought you (the Parent) in, sometimes asking my help, and sometimes
conferring otherwise with me, and my self (the Pastor) answering your
Questions, replying, satisfying your demands, aduising or exhorting in sundry
matters and passages of the Book.


Parent. I thank the Lord for the care you have had of me and my people and
such as we are. And I do promise (by the grace of God) to observe your order
and directions both for my self and all my family, as also for other my
special friends, with whom I can prevail, until it shall please God to bring
us to some competent perfection, that we be as good or better than your Book.


Pastor. Well then, remember your promise, and consider that it is impossible
for you 1 Samuel 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 22, 23, 24, 25.
to seek and serve the Lord in the Congregation, and yet to to be negligent or
profane in the house. And look that you break not off a good course well
begun, but hold on with cheerful resolution and constancy against all
temptations and stumbling blocks. And evermore be careful to proceed with a
good and honest heart, never seeming before men to be more religious than
indeed you are before God, who is the searcher of the hearts. And have respect
to your conversation, that it be such as may Tit. 2.10.
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. And to this good work
of informing and reforming your Household, it shall be much helpful for you,
often and seriously to call to mind, Abraham, Joshua, and David, whom the Lord
made notable patterns for all Christian Householders to imitate.


Parent. I pray you give me some taste of Gods commandments and promises laid
forth to all Householders.


Pastor. The Commandment or rather Charge that the Lord gives you is most
plainly expressed in Deuteronomie. In one place he begins thus, Deuteronomy. 6.6.
These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart: And in
another, thus, Deuteronomy. 11.18.
Ye shall lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul; And then in
the former place he proceeds thus, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9.
And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of
them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a
sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. And
thou shall write them upon the posts of thy House and on thy Gates. His meaning
is, Householders must apply this work.
that because man's heart is scarcely by the greatest and most continual labor
brought into due order and obedience, that Teach them diligently; the Original
has it thus, (...) 1. Et exacues ea, vel, Et ea acute ingeres. Tremel.
Put them pearcingly, as warriors sharpen and whet their weapons to pierce and
cut their enemies with more easiness. Therefore Parents and Householders must
put Gods word so importunately and fitly upon their children and people, that
there be no failing on their part for lack of the best course and manner that
may be taken but that the other may receive it. So then you must carry your
selves toward them, as those that will have no nay, and that whatsoever else
they entertain or refuse, this holy doctrine they must needs embrace.

Thus the Lord requires you to be diligently and evermore bent and busy to
accept and promote his word to all your people, and specially to your children,
pressing it upon their consciences, whether you be in rest or motion, and in
what place soever you be, taking the likeliest opportunities, and using your
greatest wisdom to make it effectual in their hearts. To which ends he
admonishes you to have it in a readiness in your hearts, as a thing that you
always carry in your hands, to be put to present use upon each occasion, and as
a thing that is ever to be seen directly before your eyes, and therefore to be
always in mind, and never to be out of the way, Psalm. 18.21, 22.
but ready for a continual rule and constant practice in all your ways.

Then the Promise is added in these word, Deuteronomy. 11.21.
That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children in the Land
which the Lord swear unto your Fathers to give them, as the days of heaven
upon the earth: that is to say, Both you and yours who serve the Lord in his
word shall prosper and be blessed both here and ever. For the multiplying of
days notes the happiness of time and living upon earth; and the Land of Gods
promise or oath (which was Canaan) signified everlasting life.


Parent. Show me likewise the examples of piety in this behalf, with you have
named, and first of Abraham.


Pastor. Of Abraham the Lord said thus, Genes. 18.19.
I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the
Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. Lo here Gods own
report both of Abraham's course in glorifying God by his children and household,
and also of his own gracious blessing upon him and his progeny, according to
his free promise, besides the present favor God showed him, in acquainting him
with his secret purpose to proceed against Sodom and Gomorrhe: for which and
other causes Abraham is often graced in the holy Scriptures with that special
title, The Friend of God.


Parent. A digression, why Abraham is called, The friend of God.
Let me entreat you to declare unto me more largely and plainly, the meaning of
that title which God gave unto Abraham, The friend of God?


Pastor. For three Reasons. David and Jonathan did: But we read in the
Scriptures, of Gods singular favor and mercy on the one part toward Abraham in
calling him by his grace to be faithful, Romans 4.1, 13, 16.
the father of the faithful, and the Heir of the world, and in making him
great promises to the same and other purposes, and repeating them often unto
him, chiefly concerning the Messiah, who should proceed of Math. 1.1, 2, etc.
Gal. 3. and 4. with Genesis 12.15.17. and 22. chap. 2 Chronicles. 20.7.
him and of his posterity according to the flesh, concerning himself and his
seed both by nature and faith; and by faith (I say) both of Jew and Gentile
temporally and eternally; All which God has performed and will accomplish to
the full in Christ the blessed seed: And of Abraham's Faith and Thankfulness on
the other part; His Faith, in giving full trust and credit unto Gods love and
promises; His Thankfulness in behauing himself as the special friend of God
and of his glory throughout his whole drift and course, laboring to promote
and maintain Gods name and service unto the uttermost. For Abraham Genesis 12.1,
4, 5, etc. and 17.23, etc. and 18.19. and 22.1, 2. etc, 12. and 24. Ios. 24.14,
15. Esai. 41.8. John. 8. Heb. 11.8, 15. Jam. 2.23.
approved himself to be the worthy and trusty champion, propagator and
maintainer of Gods glory and honor, by his faithful cleaving unto God, his
uprightness, his careful shunning of defection, impugning of Idolatry, and
abhorring of all iniquity. This then was the special friendship betwixt God
and Abraham, which was sealed on both parts Genes. 17.
by the Sacrament of Circumcision given and received, as also by other divine
signs, amongst which that was not the least, that God gave Abraham Genesis 21.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
a Son in his old age, and Abraham Genesis 22.
would have offered him willingly in sacrifice to the Lord at his commandment.

Philem. v. 17. 1 Samuel 18.3. and 20.14, 15, 16, 17.
special and inward friends do count each others friends and enemies common, as
we see not only amongst those that are merely natural, but also with those
that have been the children of grace. Now this we find also betwixt God and
Abraham: For the Lord out of his special love made this promise to Abraham,
and to his true seed after him, Genes. 12.3.
I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee; and
evermore duly kept it both toward him and his wife, and toward his children,
Gal. 3.7.
of which sort are all they which are of faith. For God did manifestly reveal
what reckoning he made of Abraham and Sarah his wife their friends and enemies,
first Genes. 12.17, 19.
by his severe plaguing of Pharaoh the Egyptian King and his house for taking
Sarai into his house, though none of them abused her, for the Lord preserved
her (being his Friends wife) from their filthiness: And afterward by his
jealous and sharp Genesis 20.3, 7, 17, 18. Psalm. 105.15.
rebuking Abimelech King of Gerar for the like cause, telling him, that He and
all His should surely die, unless he restored unto Abraham his wife, yea and
striking his wife and maid-seruants with barrenness: but in conclusion Genesis
20.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
after that he had restored unto Abraham, his wife undefiled, and showed other
kindnesses both to him and her, the Lord at this his great Friends request,
healed Abimelechs wife and maid-seruants, so that they bare children: And as
for Abraham's children (the Faithful) the holy Scriptures and all experience
do evidently show the like dealing of God for them. Again, Abraham declared
his love to his best Friend the Lord, in hating Gods enemies as if they had bin
his own, and so in entertaining, reuerencing, and succouring the friends,
messengers, and servants of the Lord, as his own, or rather above his own;
all which things we read Genes. 14.
in the story of Abraham's slaying Chedarlaomer and the Kings that were with
him, who were not only his own enemies, but also of Melchizedec the Priest of
the most High God, of Lot and others of Gods Church, and consequently of God
himself; Genesis 24.3.
in the story of his avoiding the marriage of the daughters of Canaan with his
son Isaac, for the Canaanites being out of the Covenant of God were to be
reckoned amongst his enemies; and Genesis 14.
in the stories of his rescuing Lot, paying tithes to Melchizedec, Genes. 18.
entertaining the Angels, and praying for what righteous persons he supposed
were in Sodom and Gomorrhe.

together, and therein to confer familiarly of their most weighty and secret
matters and occasions. And I pray you how many apparitions did the Lord
vouchsafe to Abraham? How familiarly did the Lord confer with him at sundry
times? And how weighty and secret were the occasions which they did
communicate the one to the other? As namely concerning Abraham and his estate,
his wife and progeny, the blessed seed CHRIST JESUS, and all others of
Abraham's seed, the matter of Sodom and Gomorrhe, Abraham's prayers and
thanksgiuings, which undoubtedly were many and fervent, and finally his
meditations upon the will of God to him revealed, which in the secret of his
soul he spiritually talked of unto God. For seeing he had that zeal,
holiness and love, that he did pray so long and so earnestly for the wicked
and filthy Sodomites, we may easily judge how plentiful he was in his
consultations and supplications with the Lord for himself and the rest of Gods
Church; and to conclude, what a heavenly fellowship and holy commerce was
exercised between them?


Parent. But what use is there of all this to us?


Pastor. Very great, both for our instruction and comfort. For if we be
faithful as Abraham was, we ought to be certainly persuaded that the Lord is
the same God to us as he was to Abraham, though we have not the like
extraordinary signs and testimonies. The proofs whereof are chiefly two.

Act. 10.34, 35. Romans 2.10, 11. 1 Ioh. 1.3, 4. and 4.15, 16, 17. Ioh. 17.20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
Gods love is one and the same toward all his people and servants in Christ
Jesus, whom he gave unto the death, as well for every one and the least of them,
as for any one and the greatest of them.

Romans 15.4.
whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: yea and
specifieth this thing expressly, saying, Galat. 3.9.
they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham: and to put us out
of all doubt, he gives all true believers as friendly and gracious speeches,
as he did to Abraham, both in the Old and New Testaments: In the Old, thus he
utters his mind, Zechar. 2.8.
he that touches you, touches the apple of my eye: In the new, thus, Matthew.
18.6.
Who so shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the Sea. And how honorable are those titles, Tit. 1.1.
the elect of God, Revel. 1.6.
Kings, Priests, 2 Cor. 6.18.
Sons and Daughters of the Almighty, Heb. 2.11, 12.
the brethren of Christ, Rom 8.17.
fellow heirs with Christ, etc! And John. 15.13, 14, 15.
our Savior intituleth those for whom he laid down his life, who do
whatsoever he commands them, and to whom he makes known his Fathers will
(and those verily are all such as are effectually called) with this very name,
His friends. Wherefore this great title,
The friend of God, Ro^. 4.23, 24. Psalm, 105.6, to 16.
was not written for Abraham's sake alone, but for all the believers sakes also,
that they being endued with such grace as Abraham was, might assure themselves
that God is their special friend, and they his.


Parent. What was the example of Joshua?


Pastor. Iosuah his example is laid forth for our imitation in these words,
Joshua. 24.15.
But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. For he having made most
earnest exhortation to the Israelites to fear and serve the Lord in sincerity
and truth, he avoucheth, that though they should generally fall away from God
to Idols, yet he and his family would constantly cleave unto the Lord. Which
teaches those Householders who are enlightened, that they ought to reform
themselves and their houses, but yet think themselves excused or do defer
the work, either because other men, and specially their neighbors and friends
do not go about the same thing, or because they are afraid of the Reproach to
be counted too forward, to acknowledge their error, and to shake off all these
and other their wicked shifts and delays, learning and practicing with Joshua,
whatsoever other men do or not do, to promote the service of God in
themselves and in the people of their houses.


Parent. And what is the example we have from David?


Pastor. David (a King of gteat estate) did solemnly protest and vow unto the
Lord, Psalm. 101.2, 3, 6, 7.
that he would walk within his house with a perfect heart, that he would set
no wicked thing before him, that his eyes should be upon the faithful of the
Land that they might dwell with him, that he that walked in a perfect way
should serve him, that he that wrought deceit should not dwell within his
house, and that he who told lies should not tarry in his sight. By which his
course he gives a worthy pattern to Householders, though never so great of
place and worth in the world, to labor the practice of godliness in their
houshold-conuersation and government with uprightness and sincerity of heart,
and to see it likewise practiced of all others (abandoning the froward and
deceitful) so far as possibly they can procure.


Parent. But many of us that are poor men and simple persons, as Husbandmen,
Laborers, etc. do persuade our selves that the Examples of Abraham who was a
Prophet and great Lord or Noble man; of Joshua, a great Captain, or rather an
Emperor; and of David, a Prophet and King, do not belong to us (silly mean
men) for our imitation.


Pastor. I know it to be true which you say, for although the Gospel has
shone very clear amongst us, and that so long time, as I verily think that
scarcely any Nation has had the like, yet England (for the greatest number) is
not only simple but rude, and (for the most part) turns of all holy examples
from their use. Howbeit, I would these Objectors would consider, that the
Precept of God in this behalf is delivered generally and indefinitely to all
without exception of any, either great or small, noble or unnoble, rich or
poor, Magistrate or Subject, Landlord or Tenent, Minister or Hearer, as we may
easily perceive not only by the words in Deuteronomie above recited, but also
by Psalm. 78. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Give ear, O my people, to my Law,
incline your ears to the words of my mouth I will open my mouth in a parable,
I will utter dark sayings of old, which we have heard and known, and our
fathers have told us. We will not hide them from their children, showing to the
generations to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength and his
wonderful works that he has done. For he established a testimony in Jacob,
and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should
make them known to their children; That the generation to come might know
them, even the children which should be borne, who should arise and declare
them to their children; That they might set their hope in God, and not forget
the works of God, but keep his commandments, etc. and many Exodus 12.26, 27.
Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 4.0.
other places. And further, that there are examples of godly Householders
recorded for our imitation, who have bin of meaner note for their outward
estate in this life, as Genesis 29. and 30. chap.
Jacob when he was a servant, Ruth. 2.1, 2, etc.
Naomi a poor widow, who sent her daughter in law Ruth (that was one of
Christ's grand-mothers according to his manhood) to gleane come after the
reapers of Boaz, thereby to satisfy their present necessities, 2 Timothy 1.5. and
3.15.
Lois the grandmother, and Eunice the mother of Timothy, Act. 18.2, 3.
Aquila and Priscilla the tent-maker and his wife, Act. 16.31, 32, 33, 34.
the laylour at Philippi, and diverse others mentioned in the Holy Scriptures.


Parent. But many of our children are so young and raw, that they can learn
little or nothing, and though they could learn by heart, yet they cannot
understand.


Pastor. You are deceived. For if you will dispose your self to glorify the
Lord with a godly mind, call upon him for his blessing, and use diligence in
teaching your children, you shall find (by Gods grace) that they shall learn
even so soon as they shall be able to speak, and that to begin betime is the
surest way to make them understand the soonest, and to further those that do
understand already: And finally, that the fruit of it will continue even in old
age, as Solomon says, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not
depart from it.


Parent. What is meant by training up?


Pastor. An instructing or Catechizing Esai. 28.10.
by little and little, that is, easily and familiarly, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
as it were by some small drops, and not a pouring in of hard doctrine as by
showers, where you are directed Mark. 4.33. Heb. 5.12, 13, 2 Timothy 2. 15.24, 25.
to use discretion and meekness in teaching your children and every other
ignorant person according to their ability in hearing?


Parent. What do you understand by the way he should go?


Pastor. The way that a child should go, is the right manner of leading his
life in the service of God, righteously and honestly in his society with man,
and lawfully in the performance of all duty, whereof Godliness is the
principal. And this it the lesson I have even now laid before you, namely,
that The fittest time to learn the fear of the Lord is while we are young.
Wherefore those Parents and Householders are much to blame, Note what the
Prophet Esaias says. Esai. 55.1, 2, 3.
who carelessly neglect this first and chiefest care of teaching their people to
live unto God, who yet pass modesty in caring and urging them how they should
live unto the flesh and the world. And do not they, I pray you, confute
themselves for saying, it is too early to catechize them when they are young,
seeing they judge it the fittest time to invre them to do somewhat as soon as
they can, and do beat into their heads how to get or save somewhat, and to
forecast for a living in time to come? And do they not practice their usual
proverb, Early sharp will be a thorn? Except they be such foolish persons as
cocker their children with niceness, proud rags, dainty fare, etc, and make
them idle drones or worse, whereby they become unfruitful for Church or
Commonwealth, yea oftentimes wasters or rather destroyers of the good gifts of
God, which are none of theirs by right, whatsoever title they have to them by
humane laws and conueyance, but indeed belong to the children of God.


Parent. And what is taught, by not departing from it, when he is old?


Pastor. Not only that what thing is taught in youth, continues in old age,
as we may see on the one side in those, that taste in their age of the good
things which they learned in their childhood: as on the other side in them that
are brought up in wickedness, who cast forth the evil savor thereof in their
gray hairs, but also that early instructing profits both the understanding
and the memory. And therefore it is for the most part that the elder sort that
have not been informed in their youth, do learn loddly (as the common saying
is,) and remember badly.


Parent. Seeing then you have made it plain, that Parents must teach or
catechize their children in private, as also that it is best to begin with them
so soon as they are able to speak or learn any thing, I pray you show me at
what particular times and seasons and how often this labor must be bestowed,
and in what manner?


Pastor. For the particular times and oftennesse, Solomon's Rule (which is
general for all good duties and works of mercy) must be observed, namely,
Eccles. 11.6.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withold not thy hand, for
thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they
both shall be alike good. His meaning is, that we must exercise our goodness at
all times, without ceasing, so far as we can, and so often as conveniently we
may. For we must not think that God is tied to man, or that he will bless our
labor when we do it after a tempting manner once in a week, twice in a
quarter, or but now and then at our fair leisure, as who should say, God must
be at our beck, and that the most necessary grace of salvation is gotten with
little ado, where in the mean space earthly things (which are transitory and
sometimes do us no good) are not obtained but with great and continual pains
and forecast. But we must learn to serve and wait upon the Spirit of God for
his gracious blessing upon our diligent use of the means, trying when God will
please to work by our labor, and taking it for his singular favor and
goodness toward us, if he will prosper our endeavor at one time or other, or at
all times, when we have constantly done our best from time to time. And if I
may give my judgment, the fittest and likeliest seasons for your purpose, are,
every night and morning, at meals, and upon such motions of their minds
(whether proceeding of their own willingness, or arising of the manifestation
of any notable works of God) as your pains may seem in all reason most
likely to take the deeper impression in their hearts. And for the manner, which
as I have showed must be easy, plain and familiar for the benefit of the
capacity, so also it must be Eccles. 12.10.
cheerful and pleasant (though not without reverence and gravity) thereby to
win and hold the affections and to delight.


Parent. In what form of words do you think fit to teach children at the
first?


Pastor. In the shortest and pithiest Questions and Answers that can well be
devised, which must be strictly observed and often repeated. And for want of
better, you may use this following, namely,


Parent. The first A. B. C. of a Christian Child.
What is your Religion?


Child. Act. 11.26.
The Christian Religion.


Parent. In whom do you believe?


Child. John 14.1.
In God.


Parent. What is God?


Child. John 4.24.
God is a Spirit, Genesis 17.1.
Almighty, 1 Timothy 1.17. Psalm. 90.2.
without beginning and without ending.


Parent. How many Gods be there?


Child. 1 John 5.7.
Only one God, but three persons.


Parent. How be the Persons called?


Child. Math. 28.19.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.


Parent. Who made you?


Child. Heb. 1.1, 2.
God the Father.


Parent. Who redeemed you?


Child. 1 Cor. 1.30.
God the Son.


Parent. Who sanctifies and preserves you?


Child. 1 Cor. 16.11. and 12.11. Genesis 1.2.
God the Holy Ghost.


Parent. Wherefore did God make, redeem, sanctify and preserve you?


Child. Deuteronomy. 10.12. and 32.6.
To serve him.


Parent. How will God be served?


Child. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
After his will revealed in his word.


Parent. How many parts be there of the word of God?


Child. Two parts.


Parent. Which be they?


Child. Galat. 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18. Romans 10.5, 6.
The Law and the Gospel, otherwise called, the Covenant of works and the
Covenant of Grace.


Parent. And what is meet to teach them in the second place?


Pastor. The Lords prayer.


Parent. What next?


Pastor. The Confession of Faith, otherwise called, The Creed.


Parent. And what afterward?


Pastor. Then you may set upon the doctrine of the Law contained in the Ten
Commandments, which is the first part of this book of familiar conference
that I have given you, and so proceed according to the directions I have set
you down. 2 Timothy 2.7.
And the Lord give you understanding in all things.


Parent. But I pray you, how must I deal with them who have been neglected to
be taught in their youth, and are now come to Men's and Women's estate, who also
are wont (as you said) to learn loddly and remember badly?


Pastor. You must take the more pains with such to teach them the true meaning
and right use of the Lord prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, the
words whereof they can babble without understanding; as also you must use the
like diligence for the doctrine of the Sacraments, according to the Conference,
or some Catechism or Treatise made for that purpose.


Parent. It passes my skill to teach some of them any understanding or
profitable use of that which they confess in words, and specially such as put
a confidence in the saying and rehearsing of the words, A kind of Opus
operatum.
as though there were some secret virtue and efficacy in the words, that of
themselves and of the sounding or pronouncing of them do please God, and make
them that can and do utter them to be Christians, as they do superstitiously
suppose.


Pastor. Then I advise you to follow these two courses, which have bin sound
very profitable with such blind souls.






Parent. What is your course to convey the understanding and use of the Creed
unto an ignorant soul, that can say the words without sense in himself?


Pastor. Provided always that you humbly beseech God to bless your labor,
and likewise that you deal kindly and lovingly with such a one, you must use
to reason with him or her (suppose it be your servant or any other) in as
familiar and plain manner as you can, to this effect,


Householder. The form of instructing such ignorant souls as are of riper age.
In whom do you believe?


Servant. In God.


Householder. What is God?


Servant. The Father Almighty.


Householder. How do you know that God is almighty?


Servant. Because he is the maker of heaven and earth.


Householder. In whom do you believe besides the Father?


Servant. In Jesus Christ.


Householder. Who is Jesus Christ?


Servant. The Fathers only Son and our Lord.


Householder. What mean you by, Our Lord?


Servant. That he is our Redeemer and Governor.


Householder. How came Christ to be so?


Servant. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost and borne of the Virgin Marie.


Householder. What did he for us as he is our Lord?


Servant. He suffered for us under Ponce Pilate.


Householder. Who was Ponce Pilate?


Servant. He was a Judge that condemned Christ to death.


Householder. To what kind of death did Pilate condemn our Savior Christ?


Servant. To be crucified.


Householder. What is that?


Servant. He was lifted up to a Cross of wood, and nailed upon it with nails
This crucifying was in those times among the Jews a most shameful execution
of Male-factors, such as Hanging upon the Gallows is now amongst us.
.


Householder. How long was he crufied?


Servant. Till he was dead.


Householder. Wherefore was Christ willing to suffer so shameful a death?


Servant. For to save us from Hell, which we deserved for our sins.


Householder. What did they with Christ when he was dead?


Servant. They buried his body in a Tomb.


Householder. How long did it lie buried in the Tomb?


Servant. Until the third day.


Householder. What did Christ then?


Servant. He rose again from the dead, and so lived and walked upon the earth
again.


Householder. What did he afterward?


Servant. After forty days he ascended into Heaven, that is, He went up into
Heaven.


Householder. What does our Savior in Heaven?


Servant. He fitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.


Householder. What is the meaning of that?


Servant. He is the great King that reigns over us all.


Householder. How long shall Christ reign so?


Servant. Till the day of Judgment.


Householder. What shall he do then?


Servant. He shall come again to judge both the quick and the dead.


Householder. Who are the quick?


Servant. They that shall be then found alive upon the earth.


Householder. And what dead persons shall he then judge?


Servant. All that have been dead before that day.


Householder. In whom do you believe else, besides the Father and the Son?


Servant. In the Holy Ghost.


Householder. What? Are the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, three Gods?


Servant. No, Three persons, but one God.


Householder. Does no body believe thus, but only you?


Servant. Yes, the Holy Catholic Church.


Householder. Who are that Church?


Servant. The Saints that dwell upon earth.


Householder. Why do you call the Saints on earth, Holy?


Servant. Because they are made holy in Christ by Faith and a New life.


Householder. Why do you call the Saints or Church of God upon earth, Catholic?


Servant. Because they are universally scattered over all the world.


Householder. What have they among themselves?


Servant. A special Communion or Fellowship of Love one with another.


Householder. What benefits does God by his Holy Spirit bestow upon these his
believing and penitent people, for his Son Jesus Christ's sake.


Servant. Forgiveness of their sins, the resurrection of their bodies, and the
life everlasting.


Parent. And what is your other course for application of the Creed, the Lords
Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the Sacraments, unto the capacity and use
of such ignorant persons?


Pastor. Whatsoever you shall learn in the preaching of the word, or in the
daily reading thereof, that may inform such simple persons in any of those
things, you must acquaint them with it, fitting it for manner of speech and
words to their ability. And so for all the works of God, his benefits and
strokes, you must apply them to their estate, declare unto them their great and
manifold necessity of saving grace, and always have recourse unto such things
as they can say in the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments How ever
you do, you must labor to inform and settle them, on the one side, in the use
of the Law discovering sin and denouncing the curse of damnation, and on the
other side, in the comforts of the Gospel giving grace by Jesus Christ, and
assuring the believers and penitent of eternal salvation.
etc. And withal encourage them both to answer your questions, and to inquire
boldly, and cheerfully of you what they think good, or do make any doubt of.


Parent. I trust the Lord will make me mindful to use these good helps which
you have sought out, and fitted for such purposes, as need shall require. But
I have a great desire to look into the substance of the Book that you have
given me, where I hope to find directions and furtherances for my self and
those that are better able to learn and practice, than either children or such
ignorant persons as we have last spoken of.


Pastor. I doubt not but you shall gain somewhat by that which has passed
betwixt you and me already since we met together; albeit indeed the greatest
use be of the points of Religion, which are handled in the Book that I have
delivered unto you. But because 1 Cor. 3.7.
neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters, but God that
gives the increase, therefore you must not presume upon your own strength,
resolution and diligence in using this or any other Mean of Grace, neither can
you make a right conscience of your promise and duty to bestow your careful
endeavor in following any good directions, nor look for any blessing of God at
all upon your pains, unless you shall make special prayer unto him. For
which causes I have framed you one short form of prayer to be used by you,
during your infirmity at such times as you shall set your self in any
special manner, to learn or teach by heart any part of the book, when you
begin, and I have copied out on of S. Paul's prayers (with some small addition
thereto) for the conclusion of your labor. The former is placed in the
forefront of the conference, and the latter in the end of all.


Parent. How much am I and such weaklings as I, bound to praise God for your
Love and Pains, who have so carefully provided fit helps for our guidance in
our great weakness, Heb. 6.1.
that we may go on to perfection, if we be not very retchlesse!


Pastor. Beware then you be not retchlesse. Remember Gods promise, that Luke
11.9, 10.
if you will seek, you shall find; Psalm. 145.18.
and the Lord will be near unto you, if you will call upon him in truth; yea 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
with you, while you be with him, 2 Chr. 16.9.
for the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show
himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. Who
ever sought the Lord in holiness, and failed of saving grace, or of any
necessary comfort or succor? Luke 11.13.
Who has truly desired the Holy Spirit, and our heavenly Father has not given
him? Debate the matter with your self; Has God entrusted you with souls,
putting them under your hands; Genesis 33.5. and 35.2.
yea and made you instruments to beget souls (the noblest creatures in earth)
and will you be careless of their eternal salvation? Has God honored you
with them, and will you not honor God by them? Or, will you seem to teach
them to honor God, and will not your self honor God with and amongst them?
Do you look that they should learn the word of God at your mouth, and will
you not guide them by your own conversation? Will you not commend that unto
them by the lively and constant practice of your example, which they may
imitate unto eternal life? What delight, I pray you, has the Lord in you,
that content yourselues to receive honor and obedience at your peoples hands,
and John 5.44.
seek not the honor that comes from God only? And what Mat. 16.26.
can all your earthly means advantage them, when, they want the true treasure?
For, cast the eye of your mind, upon that base esteem, which the supreme God
(the Possessor of Heaven and Earth) has of that Householder and his people,
that are profane and careless of true piety, and upon that his most
fearful curse inflicted, and to be inflicted on the impenitent and obdurate
in their sin, though they seem for the present to be in never so great
safeguard and flourishing prosperity; which curse they cannot any ways escape,
but by timely repentance and conversion unto God. For as Zophar says, Job. 20
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike him
through. It is drawn and comes out of the body, yea the glistering sword
comes out of his gall, terrors are upon him. All darkness shall be hid in his
secret places: That is, The vengeance of God is apt and prone to seize upon him
as upon its proper and right subject. A metaphor taken from such matter as
towe, drystraw, etc. which being put into the fire, need no blowing as green
wood does, but takes fire and flame straight-waies.
a fire not blown shall consume him. It shall go ill with him that is left in
his tabernacle. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall
rise up against him. The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods
shall flow away in the day of his wrath. This is the portion of a wicked man
from God, and the Heritage appointed unto him by God. Yea and though (as Job
shows) Job. 21.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
their seed seems to be established in their sight with them, and their of
spring before their eyes. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod
of God upon them. Their Bull gendreth and fails not, their Cow calueth and
casts not her calfe. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and
their children dance. They take the timbrell and harp, and rtioyce at the
sound of the Organe. They spend their days in wealth, Yet in a moment go
down to the grave: Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him,
and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Lo, their good is not in
their hand. The counsel of the wicked is far from me. How often is the candle of
the wicked put out? and how often comes their destruction upon them? God
distributeth sorrows in his anger. They are as stubble before the wind, and
as chafe that the storm carries away. God lays up his iniquity for his
children: he rewards him and he shall know it, His eyes shall see his
destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty. What pleasure
then has he in his house after him, when the number of his months is out of
in the midst? Wherefore it is your wisdom to forecast what sufficient answer
you shall be able to make unto the Great Judge at that day, when he will
demand, Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer
steward, Luke 16.2.


Parent. But it is a lamentable thing to see how most folks do reject all this
counsel of God which you have stood upon, as needless, fantastical, new and
vpstart.


Pastor. The objection, (or rather blasphemous slander) that it is needless,
and fantastical, has bin sufficiently confuted by the Holy Scriptures, as you
have heard already. The same we may say for their shameless censure, that it
is new and vpstart. For besides that the Lord himself in his holy word does
call upon us to ask for the old ways or paths, where is the good way, and to
walk therein, assuring us that we shall find rest for our souls, Ier. 6.16.
the godly Fathers in all ages have cried unto the people for the same thing:
And amongst those that have labored in the Church of God since Christ, we may
read many worthy testimonies to this purpose, of which I will only acquaint
you with the grave and memorable speech of Chrysostom in his second Sermon
upon JOHN: Chrysostom. in Joan. Hom. 2. Illud vos admonendos hortandosque censeo
pernecessarium, vt quo nunc estis animo perseueretis, neque in hoc tantum
consessu, sed domi quoque vir cum vxore, pater cu^ filio, invitem de his
frequenter, and vltro citroque suam and ferant and inquirant sententiam,
velintque probatissimam hanc and pulcherrima^ inducere consuetudinem. Nec mihi
quispiam dicat, pueros in his occupari non oportere. Non enim tantum opus est,
vt his vacent admonitionibus, verum etiam solis. And afterward: Nonne ira^ Dei
in vos merito provocatis, cum caeteris rebus and certo tempore and diligenti
cura adhibita in diuinarum rerum dectrina pueros exerceri molestu^
intempestivu^que ducitis? No^ sic, non sic, inqua^, fratres dilectissimi. Haec
profecto atas his maxim admonitionibus indiget. Tenera est and cito qua ei
instillantur, imbibit, and audita accipit, tanqua^ sigillo auditus cera, hoc
est, pueroru^ animis, impresso. Praeterea and vita cius in auditu est, and in
ipsis fere inanis, vt vel ad virtutem vel ad vitiu^ facile possit deflectere.
Si quis igitur eos ab ipsis incunabulis and quaso vitiorum vestibulis ad viam
virtulis abstraheret, in habitu quoda^ and natura recte viuendi cos
confirmaret, neque sponte sua facile in deteriora prolaberentur, cum ciusmodi a
teneris ad virtutem eos alliceret. etc.
I judge it very necessary (says he) to admonish and exhort you, that you
would continue in the mind you are now in, and not only in this assembly, but
at home also you would oftentimes speak, reason, and inquire of these things
too and fro, one with another (bringing in this most commendable and excellent
custom) the husband with the wife and the father with the child. And let none
object to me, that children ought not to be busied herein. For they have need
not only to intend these admonitions, but also to give themselves to nothing
else. And afterward, Do you not deservedly provoke the wrath of God against
your selves, seeing you take certain times and use diligent care for other
matters, but count it troublesome and unseasonable to exercise your children in
the learning of Gods matters? These things ought not to be so, as you do, my
most beloved brethren. Verily this age (of childhood) stands in greatest
need of these admonitions. For it is tender and quickly sucketh in whatsoever
is instilled into it, and what it hears, it receives; and like as wax
takes the impression of a seal, so childrens minds do in hearing. Moreover
their manner of life consists much in hearing and they are of that quality
for the most part, that they may easily be bowed either to virtue or vice. If
any then would waine them from their cradles, as it were from the entry of
vices unto the way of virtue, he may settle them in a certain habit and nature
of living well, from whence they shall not easily fall back of their own accord
unto any very bad courses, since by such usage they are allured unto virtue
from their tender age. And upon Matthew in Sermon 5. he exhorts Householders
to call to remembrance and to repeat Sermons (newly heard upon the week day)
with their family at home, before they do busy themselves with other matters.
Now then, you must not be discouraged by any such reproachful terms, from
seeking and setting forth the sweet 2 Cor. 2.14.
savor of the knowledge of God in your place and calling; for Satan is ever
wont 1 Thessalonians. 2.18.
to labor the hindrance of Gods word by the Jude ver. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
ungodly speeches of foolish and malicious persons, as by all other means he
can use, whom 1 Pet. 5.9. Ephesians. 6.10, 11, etc. to 21. 2 Thessalonians 3.1, 2. 2 Cor.
2.11.
you must resist by Faith, Prayer, Wisdom and Diligence in all holy means
unto the uttermost of your power, and then surely the Lord will bruise him
under your feet shortly. Romans 16.20.


To conclude, I require you 2 Timothy 4.1. etc.
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at
his appearing and in his kingdom, that you neither neglect the public
preaching of his word, Act. 17.11
nor the trial of doctrine by the holy Scriptures, nor yet the private reading
of the same, under pretense of using this or any other good Books whatsoever.
For the holy Bible is the Book of Books, whereof I would wish you to read one
Chapter at the least every worke-day morning, and to cause your folks (every
one both great and small) severally to render you a sentence thereof in the
evening before you go to prayers with them, For their rawnesse sake, you may
appoint each of them by name some short and pithy sentence out of the Chapter as
soon as you have read it in the morning, and wish them to think of it in the
day time, that so they may give you an account of it the more easily in the
evening.
remembering that they are Psalm. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33.
blessed who exercise themselves in Gods Law both day and night, to do
thereafter. And Act. 20.32.
I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you
up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Philip.
1.9, 10, 11.
And I pray God that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in
all judgment, that you may approve things that are excellent, that you may be
sincere and without offense till the day of Christ, being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of
God.


Parent. Amen.


Pastor. So I leave you to your Book: 2 Cor. 13.11.
Farewell.


Parent. 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
The Lord be with you.


THE COVNTRYMAN WITH HIS HOVSHOLD.
A Form of Prayer before Conference.
Parent. TEach us, O Lord, by thy most holy Spirit, we heartily pray thee, that
we may know Thee, thy Law, thy Gospel, our selves, our sins, and duties
aright, and that we may put all to good use, namely to the glory of thy blessed
Name, to the further humiliation, sanctification and true comfort of our own
Souls and Bodies, and to the edification and profit of our Neighbors, through
thy only Son Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior.
Child. Amen.


Servant. Amen.


Scholar. Amen.


THE FIRST PART. Concerning the Law, or Covenant of Works.
Parent. WHat is the voice of the Law or Covenant of works?


Child. Romans 10.5. with Mat. 19.16, 17.
Do this and thou shall live for ever.


Parent. Which is the Sum of the Law?


Child. Exodus 20.1, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.1, 2, 3, etc.
The ten Commandments.


Parent. Say them.


Child. Exodus 20. v. 1.
God spoke all these words, saying:

verse. 2.
I. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage. Thou shall have no other Gods before me. verse. 3.


verse. 4.
II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor
serve them: verse. 5.
For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers
upon the children, verse. 6.
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy
unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.

III. verse. 7.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath day, verse. 8. verse. 9. verse. 10.
to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work, But the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; In it thou shall not do any
work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-seruant, nor thy
maid-seruant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: verse.
11.
For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them
is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and
hallowed it.

verse. 12.
V. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long, upon the Land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

verse. 13.
VI. Thou shall not kill.

verse. 14.
VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

verse. 15.
VIII. Thou shall not steal.

verse. 16.
IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

verse. 17.
X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his maid-seruant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.


Parent. But the Papists do not divide the Commandments thus; some of them
dashing the second quite out of the Text, and others adjoining it to the first,
and so making the first and second both one: and therefore both sorts of them
are forced to divide the tenth Commandment (as we reckon it) into two, thereby
to make up the number of ten, counting the first member of the tenth for the
ninth, and all the other members remaining, for the tenth.


Pastor. They do so indeed. But they are confuted by good and apparent reason.
For,

Ps. 119.126.
destroy that which God would have continued for the guidance of his people
unto the end of the world, seeing at his appointment, Moses wrote it in the
Tables of stone, as well as all the rest. And the reason of this their
sacrilege, is vile and abominable, even to hide their manifold Idolatry,
Imagerie, and other wretched inventions in the worship of God, which they see
clearly condemned in the second commandment.

the ten, in such sort, that every several commandment has one principal
verb, wherein the greatest force of the commandment does consist, as in a
word that bears the sway throughout all that precept, or prohibition where it
is placed, in the very forefront or near unto it, as in the Original tongue
is plain to the judicious and learned. For there are ten several verbes (for
each commandment one) whereupon the matter and drift of each commandment does
chiefly depend. Now the verb of the second, does manifestly differ from the
verb of the first, according to the diverse matter thereof: for the first
imposes upon our souls, that the true God only must be our God, and thereby
excludes all false Gods or Idols; but the second requires us, to take and use
such outward worship only of the true God, which he himself has prescribed,
and forbids to Make or use any other outward worship of himself, and all
outward worship or approbation of any false God or Idol at all. And as for the
verb of the ninth and tenth Commandments (as they divide) it is but one, as
the matter is but one, to wit, that we should not Covet, meaning with an evil
concupiscence, although the things forbidden to be coueted are diverse, as our
neighbors house, wife, servant, etc. and therefore it is but one Commandment.
And it is to be noted, that by their manner of dividing, they might make so
many several Commandments, as there be several things forbidden to be
coueted; which were absurd. The truth then is that the grosser and more
sensible breach of all the particular members mentioned in the tenth
Commandment, are forbidden in the five Commandments going next before, and
the Lord makes a Collection of them all together, as touching the first
hatching and breeding (of those grosser breaches) in our wretched
concupiscence, and condemns it wholly, and apart, by it self in this one
Commandment, which he has in most convenient sort put in the last place. All
which being indifferently weighed, we may not unfitly say, as our Savior in a
case not much unlike, Math. 19.6.
What God has joined together, let no man put asunder. And this that I have
said is confirmed by the Repetition that Moses makes of the Ten Commandments
in Deuteronomy. 5.21.
Deutronomie, where the neighbors wife is specified before his house, which at
the giving of the Law recorded in Exodus Exodus 20 17.
was otherwise. Undoubtedly, it was to teach us to refer them both, together
with the members that follow, unto one chief head or commandment: If it were
not so, there might be given an occasion of doubting, which were the ninth
commandment, and which the tenth, but now by our division all such occasion is
prevented.


Servant. What are those words, God spoke all these words, saying?


Scholar. They are a Preface to all the Commandments following.


Servant. What lesson do they teach?


Scholar. Deuteronomy. 5.28. etc.
Because God himself delivered all the commandments with his own holy mouth,
that therefore it concerns me to learn and keep them.


Parent. How are the Commandments divided?


Child, Deuteronomy. 10.1, 2, etc.
Into two Tables.


Parents. What does the first table contain?


Child. Math. 22.36, 37, 38, 39, 40.
My duty toward God in the four first commandments.


Servant. What is common to these four?


Scholar. Every one of them have several reasons added, which in the first
commandment goes before, and in the other three do come after.


Servant. Which is the Reason of the first commandment?


Scholar. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage.


Servant. What does it principally and generally teach?


Scholar. Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5, etc.
Because God is the Lord my God, the author of all good gifts and blessings,
and the only Savior and deliverer of his people, that therefore I am bound to
serve him with all my heart.


Parent. Which is the first commandment it self?


Child. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.


Parent. What does the first commandment injoyne?


Child. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Pro. 3.5.
The inward worship of the true God alone, which is both to know him, and also
to fear, love and trust in him, and in nothing else.


Parent. Which is the second commandment?


Child. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing, that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the earth: Thou shall not bow down thy self to them nor serve
them.


Parent. What does the second commandment enjoyne?


Child. Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31, 32. Math. 15.9.
The outward worship of the true God only, according to his appointment set
down in the holy Scriptures.


Servant. Which is the reason of the second commandment?


Scholar. For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation, of them
that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep
my commandments.


Servant. What does it teach?


Scholar. Psalm. 44.21. and 106.36, 37. 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
That God being jealous of his own worship, is greatly displeased with all
those that do worship him in a false manner, as the special haters of his
name; but that he vouchsafed singular mercy to all them that do maintain his
pure worship, accounting them his special lovers.


Parents. Why does the Lord speak so particularly, both of the transgressors
of this commandment, as though he had no other Haters but they, and also of
the followers of his true worship, as though he had no other Lovers but they,
seeing it is often and plainly showed in the Scriptures, that all the wicked
for their transgressing other commandments, as well as this, are censured to
be his Haters or Enemies, and all the righteous having respect to other
commandments as well as to this, are esteemed to be his Friends or Lovers.


Pastor. For two causes. First, the Lord would prevent man's erroneous conceit
concerning this commandment above all the rest, for man is not only Exo.
32.7.8. Number. 15.39. Deuteronomy. 31.16.29. Esai. 2.8, 9. Gal. 5.16.17, etc.
exceedingly prone to Idolatry, Will Worship and Superstition through the
corruption of his nature, but also his blind and deceitful heart, 2 King.
18.22.25.
peruersely judges the follower of Gods true worship to be Gods special
Enemy, and Iud. 17 4, 5.10.12, 13. Iere. 44.15, 16, 17, 18.
confidently bears himself and others in hand, that by his false worshipping
he does highly please God.

Secondly, Deuteronomy. 4.23, 24. with Exodus 32.19.
Idolatry is a notable breach of Gods covenant, Ezekiel. 16. *. Hos. 1.2. and
2.1, ^^, 4.5.
whence it is that God abhors both Idolaters and their Progeny continuing
in this sin, as a jealous husband lotheth his whorish wife, and her children,
Genesis 17.7. 1 Cor. 11.2, 3.
but he embraces with his love the true worshippers, and their seed keeping
covenant with God, as the husband does his chaste wife and her children.


Parent. Which is the third commandment?


Child. Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord thy God in vain.


Parent. What does the third commandment injoyne?


Child. 1 Timothy 6.^.
To avoid all dishonouring and abusing of Gods name, in his titles, words and
works.


Servant. Which is the reason of the third commandment?


Scholar. For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain.


Servant. What does it teach?


Scholar. Zach. 5.4. I^m. 5.12.
That God will certainly punish that person in fearful manner, who
dishonors his holy name either in word or deed.


Parent. Which is the fourth commandment?


Child. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy; Six days shall thou
labor and do all thy work; But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God, in it thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man-seruant, nor thy maid-seruant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates.


Parent. What does the fourth commandment injoyne?


Child. Genesis 2.2, 3. Act. 20.7. etc. 1 Cor. 16.1. Nehem. 13.21. Esai. 58.13.14.
Apoc. 1.10.
To separate our selves and our people upon the Lords day from all other
exercises, to the service and worship of God alone.


Servant. What is the reason of the fourth commandment?


Scholar. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the
sabbath day and hallowed it.


Servant. What does it teach?


Scholar. Gen 2.2, 3. Exodus 16.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.29.
Because God himself, having made all things in six days, both rested the
seventh from creating any more, Esai. 56.4.7. and 58.13, 14. with John
20.19.26.
and also sanctified the sabbath for the use of his worship, we are bound to
imitate his example in keeping of the Lords day, assuring our selves that it is
the way to true blessedness.


Parent. What does the second table contain?


Child. Math. 22.39, 40.
My duty to man in the six last commandments, Epbs. 6.2.
whereof the first is with promise.


Parent. Which is the fifth commandemenr, being the first of the second table?


Child. Honor thy Father and thy Mother.


Parent. What does the fifth commandment injoyne?


Child. 1 Timothy 6.1. 1 Pet. 3.7.
All special duties to man, in regard of his and our special calling and
degree, whether Superiors, Inferiors or Equals.


Parent. Which is the Promise?


Child. That thy days may be long upon the Land, which the Lord thy God
gives thee.


Parent. What does it teach?


Child. Iere. 35.19. with 1 King. 14.12.13.
That if I make conscience of this Commandment, my life shall be happy upon
the earth.


Parent. Which is the sixth commandment?


Child. Thou shall not kill.


Parent. What does the sixth commandment injoyne?


Child. Math. 5.22. Ez^k. 33.8.
All duties to man in respect of his person, and that both to body and soul.


Parent. Which is the seventh commandment?


Child. Thou shall not commit adultery.


Parent. What does the seventh commandment injoyne?


Child. Math. 5.27, 28. 1 These. 4.4.5.
All duties to man in respect of Chastity.


Parent. Which is the eight commandment?


Child. Thou shall not steal.


Parent. What does the eight commandment injoyne?


Child. Ephesians. 4.28.
All duties to man in respect of his goods and maintenance.


Parent. Psalm. 62.10, 11
Which is the ninth commandment?


Child. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.


Parent. What does the ninth Commandment injoyne?


Child. Matthew. 7.1. Esai. 5.20. 1 Pet. 2.23.
All duties to man in respect of his good name.


Parent. Which is the tenth Commandment?


Child. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox nor his
ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.


Parent. What does the tenth Commandment injoyne?


Child. Romans 7.7. Iam. 1 14.
To keep my heart pure from all sinful motions, yea though I do not consent
unto them.


Parent. What obedience does God require at your hands to all these his
Commandments?


Child. Deuteronomy. 26.16. and 27.26. Jam. 2.10. Romans 6.13, 16, 19.
Perfect and continual obedience both of soul and body wholly, and of all
the powers and members of the same.


Parent. Can you keep Gods Commandments perfectly and continually?


Child. Genes. 6.5. Psalm. 143.2. Romans 7.23.
No, not in the least point; yea and though I do my uttermost endeavor, yet I
break them every day in thought, word and deed.


Parent. What do you call every breach of Gods Law, yea if it be no more but
the least want of that which the Law requires?


Child. 1 John 3.4. and 5.17. Gal. 3.10. Romans 7.7.
Sin.


Parent. How comes it to pass that you are so disobedient to Gods Law?


Child. Romans 5.12, 14, etc.
By reason of the corruption of my nature, which came upon all mankind through
the fall of our first Parents.


Parent. Show me how every part of man is corrupted with sin.


Child. First, 1 Cor. 2.14.
the mind is blinded with ignorance.

Secondly, Tit. 1.15.
the conscience is defiled either with false excuses or grievous terrors.

Thirdly, Job 15.16. Gal. 5.24.
the will and affections do only lust after evil, but avoid good.

Fourthly, Romans 6.19.
the members of the body do outwardly execute the sin of the soul.


Parent. What punishment has God threatened in his Law, unto every sinner.


Child. Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, etc.
His curse, which is all misery both spiritual and corporal in this world,
and eternal condemnation in the world to come.


Parent. By what means are you taught how to escape the curse of God, which
you deserve for your sins?


Child. Ier. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. Act. 13.38, 39.
Only by the Gospel or Covenant of grace.


Parent. Wherefore then was the Law given?


Child. For two causes.


Parent. Which is the first?


Child. Gal. 3.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
To terrify us and make us seek Christ.


Parent. Which is the second?


Child. Math. 5.17, etc.
To be a continual rule and direction for a godly life, as soon as we believe
in Christ.


THE SECOND PART. Concerning the Gospel or Covenant of Grace.
Parent. WHat is the voice of the Gospel or Covenant of Grace?


Child. Act. 16.31.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.


Parent. How many things are to be considered in Christ?


Child. John 1.14. Luke 4.18, 19.
Two, his Person and his Office.


Parent. Whereof consists his Person?


Child. Romans 1.3, 4.
Of two natures, for he is both God and Man.


Parent. Why must he be God?


Child. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Heb. 9.12. 1 Samuel 2.25.
That he might be able to sustain Gods wrath, which was due to us for our
sins, and that he might merit for us.


Parent. Which person of the Trinity is Jesus Christ according to his Godhead?


Child. John 3.16, 34, 35.
The second person, namely, the Son of God.


Parent. Why must he be Man also?


Child. Heb. 2.16.
That he might be fit to satisfy for man that had sinned.


Parent. What is his Office?


Child. John 14.6. 1 Timothy 2.5.
He is the only Mediator between God and us, for our reconciliation unto him.


Parent. How many parts be there of his Mediation?


Child. Act. 3.22. Heb. 7.2, 3. Psalm. 110. 2, 3,
Three, for he is the Prophet, the Priest, and the King of his Church.


Parent. What is Christ's Church?


Child. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 13, 23. Revel. 17.14. John 17.6, 14, 15, 16.
All Gods chosen people called out of the sinful fellowship of the world and
believing in Christ.


Parent. How is Christ the Prophet of his Church?


Child. Hebr. 1.1. John 15.15. Luke 10.16. Math. 10.40. and 28.19, 20. Act.
20.20, 27.
In teaching us the whole will of God, both in his own person when he was upon
the earth, and also by his Ministers from the beginning of the world unto the
end thereof.


Parent. How is he the Priest of his Church?


Child. Romans 8.32, 33, 34.
By working the merit of our Redemption, and by making Intercession for us.


Parent. How has Christ wrought the merit of our Redemption?


Child. Phil. 2.8.
Both by his sufferings, especially his precious death, and also by his holy
life.


Parent. How was Christ our Priest by his sufferings, and especially by his
precious death?


Child. Math. 26. and 27. chapters.
He suffered in soul and body, yea unto separation, whatsoever we should have
suffered, so sacrificing himself for us.


Parent. What did he merit for us by such his sufferings?


Child. John 1.29. Esai. 53.5, 6. Coloss. 1.14. Gal. 3.13. Heb. 10.26.
The taking away of our sins, and of all punishment due to us for the same.


Parent. What was his holy life?


Child. Heb. 7.26. Psalm. 40.7, 8, Math. 3.15.
He perfectly obeyed and fulfilled the Law of God in all points.


Parent. What benefit have we by his holy life?


Child. 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 5.18, 19. and 8.3, 4. with Leuit. 18.5.
The assurance of perfect righteousness and of eternal life.


Servant. Why must our High Priest Christ Jesus, work the merit of our
Redemption in such sort?


Scholar. Act. 4.12. 2 Cor. 5.21.
Because it was the only way in Gods wisdom to satisfy his own justice,
and to show mercy, for the salvation of his chosen people.


Parent. Whereby do you know assuredly that Christ has satisfied the justice
of God, and obtained eternal Redemption for us?


Child. Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.14, 17, 18, 20. Heb. 9.11, 12.
Because he arose from death to life and ascended into Heaven.


Parent. How does Christ our Priest make Intercession for us?


Child. Mal. 3.2, 3, 4. Exodus 28.38. and 29.33, etc. Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. and
12.24.
He prevails with the Father by presenting the merit of his Passion unto him,
to receive and continue us in the Covenant of grace.


Parent. Whereby do you know this assuredly?


Child. Romans 8.34. Heb. 6.19, 20. and 9.24. Revel. 1.5.
Because he sits at the right hand of God his Father, and so is become our
continual Remembrancer.


Parent. How is Christ the King of his Church?


Child. Luke 1.32, 33. 1 Cor. 15.25, etc.
By ruling it in this world, and glorifying it in the world to come.


Parent. How does Christ rule his Church in this world?


Child. First, Phil. 2.13.
by working grace in the heart.

Secondly, Psalm. 121.
by protecting and defending it.

Thirdly, Romans 8.28.
by disposing all things to its greatest good.


Parent. What Graces does Christ the King of his Church, The first way of
Christ's ruling of his Church in this world.
work in the heart?


Child. Phil. 1.29. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Faith and Sanctification or Regeneration.


Parent. What is Faith?


Child. Ephesians. 3.12, 17. Romans 4.18, 21.
Faith is a true persuasion of my heart, grounded upon the Promises of God,
that whatsoever Christ has wrought for the salvation of Man, he has done it
as well for me, as for any others.


Parent. In what words is Faith in Christ taught?


Child. Gal. 2.20.
The Son of God has loved me, and given himself for me.


Servant. What is the least measure of true Faith that any one can have, who is
of years of discretion?


Scholar. Genesis 4.13. Romans 8.9, 23.24, 25. Ephesians. 3.17. Math. 5.6. Psalm. 51.8,
9. compared.
When one is persuaded that his sins may be forgiven, and withal prays
from the bottom of his heart, that whatsoever else God does for him, he would
forgive him.


Servant. But when Faith grows to some strength, how may you know then, that
you have a true and lively faith?


Scholar. First, Romans 5 1. Gal. 4.6.
by the inward peace of my conscience, feeling Gods love in Christ, and
assuring me of the forgiveness of all my sins.

Secondly, Act. 15.9. Romans 6.19. Iam. 2.14, 15, 16. etc.
by my good works, which are the fruits of a lively faith See more of Faith in
Part. 4. and in Part. 5.
.


Servant. Where are the chiefest points of Faith (as touching the things
themselves that are to be believed of a Christian) comprised and set all
together in one short sum, for the help of the more ignorant sort and of
weak memories?


Scholar. In the Confession of Faith, commonly called the Articles of our
Belief, and by some, The Apostles Creed.


Servant. Why is it called, The Creed?


Scholar. Of the Latin word Credo, which is the first word in this
Confession, and signifies in our English tongue, I believe.


Servant. And why bears it the name of the Apostles?


Scholar. Because it was taken out of the doctrine of the Apostles.


Servant. Unto whom was it prescribed?


Scholar. Unto every one to confess in his own person, as being indeed the
Sum of all Religion.


Parent. Rehearse the Creed.


Child. The form of Confession of Faith.
I believe in God, the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ, his only Son, our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne
of the Virgin Marie, suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried; He descended into Hell; The third day he rose again from the dead, He
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty:
From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the
forgiveness of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life
everlasting. Amen.


Parent. I pray you, Pastor, give us a short Explanation of the Creed, which
we may use to read deliberately in our house unto our ignorant people now and
than, and at the least upon the Lords day (where better means of edification
cannot be had) before or after we have been at the public Ministry of the
word. In which Explanation, we would have you to direct us, how to understand
and apply, every several point to each one of our selves particularly, and
withal set us down in the margent, some of the plainest testimonies of holy
Scripture, to prove that your exposition is grounded thereon.


Pastor. I will, so that you will not forget nor neglect to use it weekly,
till such time as you and your Families be better instructed and settled in the
truth.


Parent. I pray God make me and my company not only mindful and diligent to
use it, but also give us grace to profit by it.


Pastor. Amen. Now than, a Christian man or woman, should understand and apply
to his or her self, the Articles of Faith, as if he or she should say a little
more largely, thus:

The Explanation of the Creed. The Creed it self being the Sum of the holy
Gospel.
Forasmuch as Heb. 11.1, 2, 3, etc. Iam. 1, 12, 13. 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6,
7, 8, 9.
true Faith is the only Mother and groundwork of all saving graces, and
whereby also they become acceptable to God, and that every person who looks
to be saved, must attain salvation by his Hab. 2.4. John 3.15, 16, 18. Gal.
3.22, 26. Heb. 10.38. and 11.6.
own faith, and not by the faith that is in any others out of himself: And
forasmuch as the same true faith Romans 10.10. 2 Cor. 4.13. Matthew. 10 32, 33.
Act. 8.37.
will necessarily show it self by Confession, I do here make confession of it
with my mouth, as I have received and do steadfastly hold it in my heart, not
from the traditions or sayings of men, but as I see it warranted in Gods most
holy word, unto the praise and glory of God, my own comfort, and the good
example of others, in this form following: to wit,

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. I do
acknowledge and believe Deuteronomy. 4.39.1 John 5.7.
one only God distinguished into three persons, Math. 28.19.
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to be John 14.1. and 20.28.
my God, Ephesians. 1.11. Act. 15.18. and 27.20, 21, 22, etc.
who decreed before all worlds, Genesis 1. and 2. chapters.
made and fashioned in time, Act. 4.24, 28. Genesis 14.19. Romans 11.36.
disposes and possesses all things whatsoever with all their several actions
and circumstances in most holy manner according to his infinite power and
wisdom, unto his own glory, and specially Angels in heaven and Men on earth,
who is both willing and able to bless me, Romans 8.28. Psalm. 115.11, 13, 15.
and who I know makes all things work together for good unto me, whom he has
called to love, fear and obey him, maugre all enemies, John 20.17.
because he is Christ's father and my father, and almighty in strength. Which
Father, Genesis 3.1, 7. John 8.44. Romans 7.12, 23. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
when we wretches fell shamefully (because willingly) from God, upon the
inticement of the Devil, and inwrapped our selves with unspeakable guilt,
slavery and woe, rebelling against the Law of God, which is holy, just and
good, and lying open to Gods curse for evermore, John 3.16. Romans 5.12, 13, 14,
etc.
sent forth for the praise of his glorious grace, And in Jesus Christ his only
Son our Lord, the second Person of the Trinity, even his only begotten
Son to be Act. 2.36.
our Lord for our Redemption, and so to become our Savior, which is meant by
the name Matthew. 1.21.
Jesus, and therefore he Esai. 61.1, 2, etc. Heb. 1.9. John 3.34.
anointed him (for the name Christ signifies Anointed) with the Spirit above
measure, that he might be our holy Deuteronomy. 18.18, etc.
Prophet to teach us the way of salvation, Heb. 10.12, 14.
our merciful High Priest to offer himself a sacrifice for us, and our Luke
1.32, 33. Psalm. 72. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23.
powerful King to work in our hearts his saving grace, to govern us, to
protect us, and continually to minister unto us all blessings needful both for
soul and body. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Borne of the Virgin
Marie, Luke 1.35. and 2.6, 7.
Which Jesus Christ to the end he might be a fit Mediator for us, Romans 5.15,
18, 19. and 8.2, 3.
took the true nature of man upon him in all things, (sin only excepted)
and so was holily conceived by the extraordinary operation of ye Holy Ghost,
in the womb of a Virgin called Marie, thereby sanctifying our sinful
conceptions, and of her was he borne, and brought forth into the world, after
the common fashion of all men, Gal. 4.4, 5. Heb. 2.16, 17.
that we might be sure, that by the partaking of our nature he has
communicated himself and all his goodness to us. Romans 5.19.
Who in the same our nature led a holy life according to all Gods
commandments, that it might be imputed unto us, and Esai. 53. Luk 22.44. and
23.1. etc. John 18. and 19. chapter,
withal suffered unspeakable torments both in soul and body, sufficient to
have purged the sins of the whole world, though none but the faithful shall
receive any benefit thereby. Deuteronomy. 21.23. Galat. 3.13. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. 1 John
3.8.
Was crucified, Who being made a Curse for us, was bound as a guilty person,
that we might be loosed out of the spiritual chain and slavery of Satan and
sin. Matthew. 27. Coloss. 2 13, 14. Phil. 1.29. Gal. 6.14. Ps. 119. 67, 71. 2
Cor. 12.20. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
Who was condemned wrongfully by ye Judge Pilate, that we which are guilty of
innumerable transgressions, might be discharged before the Tribunal Seat of
Gods fearful justice, and who thereupon was most shamefully executed as a
most heinous Malefactor, notwithstanding he was most just and innocent, his
hands and feet being fastened with nails to a Cross, and thereon tormented
till he was slain, his side pierced with a spear, his blood shed both while
he was alive and dead, dead and buried, and so being truly dead, his body was
buried: All which was to satisfy Gods wrath, to wrath, to take the curse which
otherwise was our due desert (because Romans 5.6, 8, 10.
we were ungodly, sinners, and Gods enemies) to kill and bury all our sins
with him, Ephesians. 2.16.
to reconcile God and us, to slay the enmity, Philip. 3.10. 2 Cor. 4.17.
and to sanctify and make happy and comfortable all our afflictions and
persecutions. Act. 2.24, 27, 29, 30. Ps. 16.10. Math. 12.40. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55.
He descended into Hell; Yea he abased himself yet further, even to the lowest
degree of humiliation, continuing three days and three nights contemptibly in
the bands of death, that he might utterly abolish the sting of death, that he
might utterly abolish the sting of death, and teach us through humiliation for
our sins. Act. 2.24. 2 Cor. 13.4. John 10.18.
Notwithstanding, having paid the uttermost price for all our sins, and
conquered Satan, Romans 4.25. and 6.4, 5, 9, 10, 11. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. and 3.21.
Revel. 20.5, 6.
Sin, Hell and Damnation, the third day he rose again from the dead, he
triumphantly rose again from death to life upon the third day, both to assure
us that God will count us righteous that do believe in his name, and also to
quicken and restore us to a new and holy life, which is the first resurrection.
1 Cor. 15.4, 5, 6. Act. 1.2, 3, 4, etc.
And so his soul taking his body again and quickening it by his divine power,
he continued for a season upon the earth, He ascended into heaven, and Act.
1.9, 11. Mark. 16.19. Heb. 9 24. Ephesians 4.10, 11. John 14 2. and 17.24. Col. 3.2.
afterward did thence gloriously ascend into heaven, to take possession of it
in our name, to appear in the presence of God for us, and to fill all things
and specially his Church with his gifts and graces, thereby to lead it thither,
whence by sin and iniquity it was banished. And sits on the right hand of
God, ye Father Almighty; 1 Timothy 3.16. Heb. 7.25. 1 Cor. 15.25, 27.
There he sits at the Fathers right hand, making intercession for us, by
offering to his Father, Act. 2.33, 36. Psalm 110.1.
and applying to us, the merit of his passion: where he has all power and
authority committed unto him to be the only Lord and King for the government
of all things unto the salvation of his people and destruction of his enemies.
Act. 3.21. John 17.24.
And there he shall remain, as touching his manhood, until the latter day, to
the end we might have assured and constant comfort, because our flesh dwells
there in the person of our Redeemer. From thence he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead. Act. 17.30, 31. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. Math. 25.32. etc. Romans 2.6.
At that day he shall return to pronounce and execute just judgment upon all
mankind, both the good and bad, whether dead before, or found alive at his
coming, unto the praise of his glorious justice, rendering unto every one,
according as their works shall testify their faith or unbelief. This Jesus
Christ then I acknowledge and believe to be both my Savior, my Intercessor,
and my Judge, unto whom I earnestly cry, Rev. 22.20.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Act. 24.16. with 2 Cor. 5.6, 8, 9, 10, 11.
laboring always to have a clear conscience, that I may have boldness at that
day, and so I trust that he will pronounce for me, and make me partaker of his
glory. I believe in ye Holy Ghost, And withal I do 1 Cor. 6.11. John 14.26.
and 15.26.
acknowledge and believe the third Person of the Trinity, the Holy Ghost,
proceeding from the Father and the Son, to be the Sanctifier and comforter of
Gods Elect, making effectual unto them, whatsoever Jesus Christ has wrought
and suffered; who works and prevails in me, which I perceive not only by the
graces of Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. Romans 7.15, to the end.
true holiness and righteousness, begun and increasing in me, and by my
diligent striving against the remnants of my corruption and lusts, but also 2
Cor. 1.22. Rom 8.15, 16, 23, 26.
by the earnest of the same Spirit in my heart, inabling me to call God my
Father, and to pray with sighs and groans within any self for the perfect
adoption. The holy Catholic Church, And further I do acknowledge a John 10.16.
Act. 2.42. etc. and 14.22. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. 2 Timothy 3.12.
company of people called by Gods free grace in Christ through the power of
the Holy Spirit, few in number (in comparison of the rest) and ordinarily
consisting of the baser sort, and the same exercised with many affliction:
Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31, 32. and 29.29.
Serving God according to his word, Genesis 4.26. Romans 10.13.
invocating his name, Heb. 13.17.
submitting themselves unto the Ministry of the Gospel, and Act. 19.5. 1
Cor. 11.24, 25.
professing Jesus Christ in the use of the Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper
of the Lord. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. 1 These. 4.7.
Holy, because both Christ's holiness is imputed to them believing in him, and
also for that there does proceed from their holy faith, a holy life and
conversation. And Catholic, because this company of people is Ephesians. 4.12,
13, 16. John 11.52. Esai. 2.2, 3.
universally scattered over all the world, of whose number (without the which
there is no salvation) I do certainly know and profess my self to be one,
John 6.27. and 10.27. Act. 2.47. and 24.14.
because I feel in my self an hungring after the Word and Sacraments, with
all other the Ordinances of the Lord, as the means of my spiritual
nourishment, and do willingly submit my self to be guided by the spirit and
word of God. the Communion of Saints, In which Church I acknowledge 1 Ioh. 1.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 16.3. 1 Cor. 12.26.
that there is a partaking of gifts and graces from Christ to them, Esai. 11.6,
7, 8, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, etc. Col. 3.11.12, 13, 14.
and amongst themselves mutually unto the best good and salvation of every
member, which I for my part do profess and practice, both joining my self
unto them in all godly exercises and labors, and feeling my self unfeignedly
knit unto them in all holy affections and mercifulness. Act. 13.38, 39. Psalm.
103.^, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12. Esai. 38.17. Mic. 7.19. Zach. 12.10. Romans 7.19, 10.
Matthew. 5.44, 45. and 6.14. Ephesians. 4.32. L^^^. 23.34. Act. 7.60.
the forgiveness of sins, And forasmuch as this only true Church does apply
Jesus Christ's righteousness unto it self (every member particularly) and for
his sake (whom they have pierced by their sins) do heartily repent, I do
believe that God will forgive them their sins, and do assure my self that he
will forgive me all mine, for the which cause I cannot choose but be thankful
to the Lord in waging war against every sin, and in forgiving and praying
for all them that have unjustly and greatly offended thee, even my sorest
enemies. the resurrection of the body, Finally, I acknowledge and believe, that
at the last day Ioh. 5.28, 29. Job 19.25. 1 Cor. 15. Eccles. 12.14. 2 Cor.
5.10. Matthew. 25.
all the souls of the dead shall return and be put into the very same bodies
wherein they once lived, and so be raised up to live again, and the quick
changed, all in a moment, through the unspeakable power of God, to the end they
may all come to judgment wholly both bodies and souls together, and sentence
may be given upon them: When Phil. 3.21. Revel. ^0.6. and 21.4. Romans 6.11, 13.
and 1^.1, 2^
for my part I trust to have a joyful and glorious resurrection my self (as
all other the faithful shall have, whereof we have a plain earnest given us
already in the Resurrection of Christ our head) free from any more misery and
having all tears wiped away from mine eyes, because I feel my self rising
daily unto newness of life, and my body conformed and sitted in all the parts
and faculties of it more and more to serve the Lord, for I know I shall not be
condemned, because I verily believe Romans 8.1.3. 2 Cor. 7.11.
Jesus Christ has been in a sort condemned for me, and has made me condemn
my self in remorce of conscience for my sins, to such effect, that I walk
not after the flesh, that is, in following and satisfying the swindge of my
natural corruption, but after the Spirit, that is, in framing my ways
agreeable to the gift and state of regeneration wrought in my heart by the Holy
Spirit. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. etc. 1 Timothy 4.8. Revel. 21.22. and 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and the life everlasting, From that day the Godly shall possess the kingdom
of heaven in the presence of God for evermore, John 10.9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 28.
Phil. 3.20. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
the most happy and blessed life, which God has prepared for them, and whereof
I look to be partaker, forasmuch as Christ has both merited it for me, and
wrought so in me, that my conversation is in heaven, that is, such as tends
and drives toward the heavenly glory. Revel. 22.3. with Luke 2.14.
There shall he be praised of me, and of all other his elect for ever. Romans
10.10. 2 Cor. 1.20. Apoc. 22.20. Tit. 3.7. Romans 8.23.
Amen. All these things I do truly believe with my heart, and confess with my
mouth, that they are so indeed, and do desire and wait for the full
performance and accomplishment of them unto the praise and glory of God.

Parent. What is Regeneration or Sanctification?


Child. John 3.3. Luke 3.3, 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
A singular grace of God, whereby I am truly changed from my sins, and made
the obedient child of God.


Parent. What are the parts of Regeneration?


Child. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.
The mortifying of the old man, and the quickening of the new.


Parent. What is the mortifying of the old man?


Child. Romans 6.3, 6, etc. and 8.13. Col. 3.5. Gal. 5.24.
The abating and crucifying of sin and of the power thereof, through the
virtue of Christ's death and burial.


Servant. How must you use Christ's death that it may slay your sin?


Scholar. Zach. 12.10. Gal. 2.20. Heb. 6.6. 1 Cor. 2.8. with 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
Bethinking my self that my sins were the very cause of Christ's death, I
must abhor to commit new, least thereby I crucify again the Lord of life.


Parent. What is the quickening of the new man?


Child. Ephesians. 2.1. and 4.23, 24. Gal. 2.19, 20. Col. 2.12, 13, and 3.1, 2, 3,
4.
A raising up and strengthening unto newness of life, with a continual
increase, through the power of Christ's resurrection and life. Romans 5.10. and
6.4, 5, 9, 10, 11.



Servant. How must you use Christ's resurrection, that you may be quickened
thereby to lead a new life?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Romans 6.4, 5. with Heb. 6.6. and Pro. 14.31.
Bethinking my self that Christ triumphing over my sins in his resurrection,
made me righteous, I am stirred up unto a godly life, that I may glorify and
not shame his triumph See more of Regeneration in Part. 4.
.


Parent. Notwithstanding all this, do you not sin daily?


Child. Heb. 12.4. Psalm. 119.59. and 73.13, 14. Romans 6.12.
Yes, but yet I renew my repentance afresh every day, and earnestly strive with
a continual endeavor against sin, suffering it not to reign in me.


Parent. What is your continual endeavor?


Child. First, Psalm. 39.1. Gal. 5.24. Iam. 4.4. 1 Pet. 5, 8, 9. Romans 7.17, 18,
19.
I watch over all my ways, resisting the lusts of my own sinful heart and
flesh, the motions of the Devil, and the intisements and terrors of the world.

Secondly, Act. 9.36. 1 Cor. 15.58.
I study to abound in all good works, and to grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.17.



Servant. And what is your comfort in these your endeavors?


Scholar. First, Heb. 6.11. and 13.18. Ps. 19.13
that my conscience does not accuse me either of wilful negligence, or
presumption.

Secondly, 1 These. 5.24. 1 Cor. 1.8, 9.
my hope is confirmed that I shall conquer sin, and receive daily increase
for a new life.


Parent. What is repentance?


Child. Luke 3.3, 8. Acts 2.38. and 11.23.
Repentance is a settled purpose in my heart, joined with a careful endeavor
to leave all my sins, and to lead a new life according to all Gods
commandments.


Servant. By what notes may you know that you have Repentance and Newness of
life? And more particularly, how may you be sure that you have truly repented
of some sin which you have committed?


Scholar. First, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10 Psalm. 51.5. Nehem. 9.35.
when my heart is unfeignedly grieved with godly sorrow, even because I have
disobeyed the Lord my most loving and tender Father in Jesus Christ, though I
should never be punished at all for my sin.

Secondly, Psalm. 51. Job 42.6 Psalm. 19.12, 13
when I am heartily sorry for all my sins, as well as for any, especially
such as I have committed against my own knowledge, and do detest and abhor
them.

Thirdly, Psalm. 40.8. Luke 9.23. Acts 11.23. James 5.10. 2 Chronicles. 30.6, 7 8, 9.
when I do not only steadfastly purpose, but also diligently and constantly
endeavor to follow the will of God both in deeds and sufferings, and that
against all temptations.

And fourthly, Phil. 4, 13. Apoc. 1.6.
when I feel my self more able to forsake sin, and to embrace righteousness
through Christ which strengthens me. See part 5. page 176.177.



Servant. But how must you utter and testify your Repentance?


Scholar. First, Psalm. 32.5. and 51, 3, 4, 14. Prou 28.13. 1 John 1.9. Math.
5.23, 24 and 18, 15, 16, 17 Acts 19.18, 19 Ios. 7.19.20, 21 Iam. 5.16.
by a willing and free confession of all my sins unto God in secret, and of
those that be greater offenses and scandalous, both unto God and unto his
Church.

Secondly, Luc. 19.8.9.10 Number. 5.5, 6.7, etc.
in those that be injurious unto men, I must make restitution unto the
uttermost of my ability.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 7, 35. Hos. 14.8. Psalm. 34.14. Mat. 5.28, 29, 30.
I must thenceforth follow all the occasions of well-doing, and avoid the
evil, specially of that particular sin, whereinto I have already fallen, or
am most inclined unto.


Servant. What special help do you use for occasions?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 7.20.24. Psalm. 101.2. 2 Samuel 11, 2.
I have evermore a diligent respect to my particular calling.


Servant. By what rule may you know whether your particular calling be
warrantable or not?


Scholar. Ephesians. 6, 6. 1 Cor. 10, 31. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
Every calling, whereof the word of God does set down the special duties,
ordinarily serving to Gods glory, and the benefit of mankind is warrantable,
else not.


Servant. And how do you know whether God requires you to accept and continue
in such I speak now of private callings or vocations.
a calling or not?


Scholar. First, 2 Samuel 19.33, to 39.
by the strength and fitness of my mind and body to perform the duties and
works of my calling.

Secondly, Genesis 46, 34 Acts 18, 3.
by the place, time and use for it.

Thirdly, Mat. 10.10. 1 Cor. 9.14.
by the benefit it ordinarily yields to satisfy the laborers necessity, if
due pains be taken, and a good conscience used therein.


Servant. But what if your calling minister not sufficient to satisfy your
necessities, though you do wisely observe all these rules? May you not leave
your calling in such a case?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 7, 20.24. Hag. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, with 2, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19. Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.
No verily, if I may be suffered to follow it still, but rather look well that
I be truly reconciled unto God for my sins: And though I be so, yet must I
patiently endure the hand of God upon my labors, and put his most wise and
merciful corrections to a further good use: provided (I say) that my calling
be such (all circumstances considered) as through the usual blessing of God
may yield competent maintenance to the labourer.


Parent. And which are good works?


Child. Deuteronomy. 5.32. Ephesians 2.10. Romans 14.23. Psalm. 119.21. 1. Sam. 15.22. Esai.
29.13.
Only those which are truly grounded upon Gods word, and the grace and spirit
of God makes me able to do in conscience of my obedience unto him.


Parent. Do you merit or deserve forgiveness of your sins, or any other
favor at Gods hands, for your faith, repentance, and good works?


Child. No, Phil. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.8.9.
for it is God that works in me, both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, and I am saved by grace.


Parent. Why cannot you merit by your good works?


Child. Romans 7 13, 18 Luke 17.10.
Because the very best works of the godliest man in the world are imperfect.


Parent. How comes it then to pass that any of your works do please God?


Child. 1 Pet. 2.5. Exo. 28.36, 37 38. Mal. 3.17. Math. 3, 17.
God is graciously content to pass by the evil, and to accept the good (being
the fruit of his own spirit) for his Son Jesus Christ.


Parent. Is not your salvation obtained partly by Christ's grace, and partly by
your own works?


Child. No, Romans 11.6.
for then grace were no more grace.


Parent. Why then must you do good works?


Child. First and chiefly, Math. 5.16.
to glorify God thereby. Next, 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6.7, 8, 9, 10.
to get assurance of my own election: and withal 1 Pet. 2, 12, 15, etc.
for the edification and benefit of my neighbor.


Parent. And what does principally move your heart to do them?


Child. 2 Cor. 5, 14.
The love of Christ constrains me.


Parent. Shall not every man and woman in the visible Church be saved by
Christ?


Child. No, John 3, 3, 5.18, 36. Hebr. 12.14.
but those only who are true believers, and borne anew of the holy Ghost.


Servant. What principal reason is there that unbelievers and unregenerate
persons shall not be saved?


Scholar. John 3.18, 19, 32, 33. Romans 1.25, and 3 3, 4. 2 These. 1.8, 9, 10.
Jude. v. 4. Tit. 1.16. 2 Pet. 2, 20, 21.
Because by their unbelief they do either refuse as insufficient the only
blessed Mean of their salvation, changing that most undoubted and important
promise of God into a lie, or do otherwise through their unthankfulness,
carelessness or presumption shamefully abuse it.


THE THIRD PART. Concerning the Means of Grace in general, and first of the
Word of God.
Parent. WHat means does Christ the King use in working Faith and
Sanctification in the heart.


Child. Esai. 59, 21. Ierem. 10.23. Acts 20.32.
Partly inward, and partly outward.


Parent. What is the inward mean?


Child. Gal. 3.2, 3. Luke 11, 13. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Gal. 6.1.
The holy Spirit, which is given by the outward means.


Parent. What are the outward Means?


Child. Ibidem.
These four; First, the Word of God, whereby ordinarily Faith and
Sanctification are begun, and afterward continually increased.

Secondly, Prayer.

Thirdly, the Sacraments.

Fourthly, the Practice of the Communion of Saints, whereby the same graces are
likewise increased and confirmed.


The first outward mean of Grace.
Parent. What is the word of God?


Child. Ioh. 5.39. and 21.31. Iam. 3.17 2 Pet. 1.21. Ephesians. 2.20. Romans 1.2.
with Gal. 6.16.
The Doctrine of man's salvation written by divine inspiration, and contained in
the books of the old and new Testaments, called, The holy Canonical
Scriptures.


Servant. How do you certainly know that the Scriptures are the very
undoubted Word of God?


Scholar. Esai. 59.21. John 10.3, 4, 5, 27. and 16.13. 1 John 2.27. 1 These.
1.5.
Cheefely by the inward persuasion of the Holy Ghost.


Parent. How is the Word made profitable unto your Salvation?


Child. Romans 10.14. Acts 17.11.
Chiefly and first of all, by the attentive hearing and diligent meditating of
it being rightly preached, which serves to ye begetting of grace. 2 Timothy 4. i.
2.3 Luke 1.3, 4, and 24, 17, to 33. Heb. 5.12. and 6. 1, 2, etc. Psalm. 1.1, 2.
and 78.3 4, 5, 6.
And afterward, principally by preaching, and then, by Catechesing, Reading,
Conferring and Meditating, all for out strengthening and growth.


Servant. How is the Word of God rightly preached?


Scholar. Nehem. 8.8. Tit. 1.9. 2 Timothy 2, 15. and 3.16. 1 Cor. 12.8.
When the true meaning is plainly given, and the profitable use thereof is
made and applied to the hearers.


Servant. What is your attentive hearing of the Word?


Scholar. Acts 16.14. and 17.11. Luke 8.15. Eccles. 5.1
I reverently mark it with an honest and good heart, prepared to receive it
with zeal and readiness.


Servant. And what is your diligent meditating of it?


Scholar. Psa. 119.155 Prou. 8.34.
I do earnestly call it to mind, carefully search it, and think much upon it,
to the end I may draw it into conscionable practice.


Servant. What need has a Christian to use godly meditation?


Scholar. Psalm. 119.113. and 139.23, 24. Phil. 4.8.
Because they are the grounds of all good speech, and of all other holy
actions, and in very deed whosoever makes no conscience of his thoughts,
makes no right conscience of any thing at all.


Parent. Among the manifold meditations of a Christian, which do you think to
be of special use for his good?


Pastor. First, Psalm. 16.8. Prou 15.3.
always to remember that God is present every where.

Secondly, Psalm. 89.1. Phil. 1.23. Ioh. 14.1.2. etc.
to bear in mind Gods unspeakable mercies in Christ, and particularly the
promise and gift of eternal life.

Thirdly, Acts 28.26, 27. 2 These. 1.8, 9.
to meditate often on Gods judgments, especially those that are spiritual,
and upon eternal condemnation, the just reward of the ungodly.

Fourthly, Ps. 78.1.7.11 and 111.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Dan. 9 11, 12, 13. Act.
4.24, 25, 26, 27, etc.
it is good to consider diligently Gods works, both ordinary and
extraordinary, observing how they do seal the truth of his word.

Fifthly and lastly, 1 These. 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 32, 29. Eccles. 11.9. 1 Pet. 4.7.
Ephesians: 5.16. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11
to think often of affliction, and chiefly of death and of the last
judgment, studying how to redeem our time, that we may be prepared with
comfort for that great and terrible day.


Servant. What is Catechizing?


Scholar. Heb. 5.12. and 6, 1, 2. Gal. 6.6. Luke 1 4. Act. 18.25
A plain and easy instructing of the ignorant in the grounds of Religion,
chiefly by Questions and Answers.


Servant. Who are bound to Catechize?


Scholar. Gal. 9.6. Pro. 4.3, 4. and 31.1.
The Ministers in public, and * the Householders in private.


Secondly, concerning Prayer. The second outward mean of grace
Parent. What is Prayer?


Child. 1. Tim. 2, 1. Phil. 4.6.
Prayer is a religious calling upon the name of God, either by Petition (which
we commonly call Prayer) or by Thanksgiving.


Parent. What is Petition?


Child. Psalm. 6.8, 9, Dan. 9.17, 18. Romans 8.26.
It is our humble entreating of God for all things which we desire to enjoy.


Parent. What is thanksgiving?


Child. Ps. 16.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Math. 8, 2. 2. Sam. 15 25, 26.
It is our rendering praise to God for all the good things which we enjoy in
deed, or by promise.


Parent. What must you do that you may learn to pray well?


Child. First, Luke 11.1.
I must desire God to teach me to pray.

Secondly, Math. 6.9.10, 11, 12, 13.
I must diligently observe the directions of Gods Word, and particularly of the
Lords prayer.


Parent. What is the Lords prayer?


Child. That most perfect form and pattern of prayer which the Lord Jesus
taught his disciples.


Parent. Say the Lord prayer?


Child. Math. 6.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.


Parent. Are you bound to pray in the only words of this form always?


Child. See the examples of the Saints prayers in the holy Scriptures.
Not always, for Christ has left it to our liberty for the words so that we
do imitate the matter, and use the like affections. Exodus 14.15. 1 Samuel 1.15,
16 Psalm. 119.145. Esai. 37 14, 15, etc. Romans 8.26. Phil. 4.6. Iam. 5.16.
So whether I use this form or not, I must pray chiefly with my heart, being
touched with the feeling of my wants, and pouring forth my soul before the
Lord in every request.


Servant. God knows before we ask what we need, yea and has appointed in
his providence what he will bestow, how and when, therefore why should we pray
at all, at least wise so earnestly?


Scholar. Psalm. 14.4 and 50.15. and 145.18. Job. 21.15. Ierem. 10.25. Joel.
2.32. Acts 10.4. 1. Tim. 4.5. Luke. 23.42, 43.
Because he has sanctified it to be his Ordinance, thereby to bless and
prosper whom, and what he will, for he will save them that call upon him in
truth, and none other.


Parent. What do you learn out of this, that the Lord Jesus has set us
down what we should pray for?


Child. Math. 6.9. Psalm. 119.41. Exo. 32.11.13. 1 John 5.14.
I learn, that I must ground and frame all my desires upon the promises which
God has made in his Word.


Parent. How many principal parts be there of the Lords prayer?


Child. Four. First, the Preface. Secondly, the Petitions. Thirdly, the
Thanksgiving. Fourthly, the Conclusion.



Parent. Which is the Preface?


Child. Our Father which art in Heaven.


Parent. Who is that whom you call Father?


Child. Mat. 3.17. and 23.9. John 20.17.
God, who is become my merciful Father in Jesus Christ.


Parent. What do you learn out of that?


Child. Joh. 16.23. Math. 17.5. Romans 8.15, 16. Heb. 4.16.
I learn to call upon God only, in the only name and mediation of Jesus
Christ, in whom he is well pleased.


Servant. What do you learn out of that, that you call God, Our Father?


Scholar. Math. 5.23, 43, 44. Mar. 11.25.26. Luke 23.34. 1 Timothy 2, 8. 1 Ioh.
3.18, 22. Esai. 1.15 and 58.4, 6, 7.
I learn that all true Christians (especially) are my brethren, and therefore
that I must love them heartily, and pray for them as for my self, yea also for
my enemies.


Parent. What do you learn out of that which is added, which art in Heaven?


Child. First, Exodus 3.5. Eccles. 5.1, 2. 1 Timothy 2 8. Psalm 20.6.
I learn when I pray, to approach unto God with holy preparation, singular
fear and humble reverence.

Secondly, Ephesians. 3.20.
I learn that he is not only willing, but also able to help.


Parent. How many Petitions be therein the Lords prayer?


Child. Six whereof the first three do principally concern Gods glory, the
last three, our own necessities.


Parent. What do you learn out of that order?


Child. Prou. 16.4. Exodus 32.3^.
I learn that I must zealously desire the glorifying of Gods most holy name,
before I seek relief for any of my own necessities.


Parent. Which is the first Petition?


Child. Hallowed be thy name.


Parent. What do you pray for in the first Petition?


Child. 1 Cor. 10.31. Romans 11.36.
That God may be glorified in all things.


Parent. Which is the second Petition?


Child. Thy kingdom come.


Parent. What do you pray for in the second Petition?


Child. First, Mark. 1.13. and 15.43. Math. 28, 18. Psalm. 51.10. and 122.6. 2
These. 3, 1.
that the kingdom of Grace may be daily enlarged, both by the inward working
of the holy spirit, and also by the outward means, until it be perfected at
the coming of Christ to judgment.

Secondly, Revel. 22:20 2 Timothy 4, 8.
that God would finish these sinful days, and take us to his kingdom of
glory.


Parent. Which is the third Petition?


Child. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.


Parent. What do you pray for in the third Petition?


Child. First, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Psalm. 86.11. and 103.20. Acts 24.16.
that we may render dutiful obedience unto Gods revealed will, until we be
as the holy Angels.

Secondly, Mark. 8.34. Phil. 1.29. Iam. 5.7, 8, etc.
that we may submit our selves to suffer his will with patience in time of
afflictions.


Parent. Which is the fourth Petition?


Child. Give us this day our daily bread.


Parent. What do you pray for in the fourth Petition?


Child. Pro. 30.8. Psalm. 104.15. 1 Timothy 4.4. and 6.8. Genesis 28.20 Pro. 10 22.
Math. 8.2. Romans 1.10. Luke 12.16.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
That God would give us all things necessary and convenient for this present
life, with this exception, If it be his good pleasure.


Parent. Which is the fifth Petition?


Child. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasie
against us.


Parent. What do you pray for in the fifth Petition?


Child. Mat. 11.28. Esai. 55.1, etc. Psalm. 19.12. and 32.1. Dan. 9.24 Zach.
12.10.
That God would justify us by the forgiveness of our sins, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness.


Servant. Do we deserve forgiveness for our sins at Gods hands, because we
forgive them that trespass against us?


Scholar. No, Math 5.7. Luke 7.47. Mat. 18.22, 32
for first, God forgiueth us freely, and then that being felt by faith in our
hearts, causes us to forgive them that have offended us.


Servant. Wherefore then is that Reason added?


Scholar. Mark. 11.24 25.26.
Both to teach us that we ought to forgive others when we pray, and also that
by the same grace, we may get assurance that God will forgive us.


Parent. Which is the sixth Petition?


Child. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.


Parent. What do you pray for in the sixth Petition?


Child. Psalm. 51.12. Job 36.21. Genes. 39.12. 1 Samuel 25.13, 22. Math. 8.28,
etc. Ioh. 14.30. 1 Cor. 10 13. Iam. 1.13, 14.
That God would sanctify us by mortifying our corrupt nature, and quickening us
in newness of life.


Servant. Why does Christ teach us to pray for Sanctification in so many words?


Scholar. To assure us, First, Psalm. 66.18. and 145.19. Prove. 28.13. John
9.31. Iam 5.16. 1 Timothy 2.8.
that unless we truly forsake all our sins, and heartily embrace a godly life
unto the uttermost of our power, God will not hear us when we call upon him.

Secondly, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 8, 9, 10. Phil. 2.12.
that we cannot obtain Sanctification without great diligence.


Servant. What do you learn out of this, that, Christ has taught us two
petitions for spiritual things, and but one for temporal?


Scholar. Esai. 66.2. 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. Luk 8 13, 14. Matthew. 6.33.
That being unfeignedly cast down in the sense of our spiritual misery and
vileness, we do desire spiritual graces above all worldly benefits.


Parent. Which is the Thanksgiving of the Lords Prayer?


Child. For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever.


Parent. What do you learn out of the Thanksgiving?


Child. 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 1.20. Phil. 4.6. 1 Timothy 2.1. 1 Pet.
4.14.
Because God has full right and power over all, and does all things to his
own glory, and that for ever, I learn; First to ground my assurance of
obtaining my prayers only on God: And afterward to render him therefore all
praise and glory back again at all times.


Parent. Which is the Conclusion of the Lords Prayer?


Child. Amen.


Parent. What is the meaning of Amen?


Child. 1 Cor. 14.16. 2 Cor. 1.20. Revel. 22.20.
So be it, So it is, and So it shall be.


Parent. What do you learn out of Amen?


Child. Iam. 1.6, 7. and 5.16. Mark. 11.24.
I learn thereby that I must pray not only with seruent desire to obtain the
thing that I ask, but also with Faith and Assurance that I shall have my
desire accomplished.


Parent. But what if God hear not our prayers at the first?


Child. Mark. 9.24. Luke 18.1, etc. and 21.36. Psalm. 42.11. 1 Thessalonians 5.17. Esai.
62.7.
Yet we must strive against doubting and unbelief, and continue in prayer,
never waxing faint, nor for any cause ceasing to importune the Lord, till he
has granted our requests.


Servant. How is Prayer divided?


Scholar. Into Public and Private, and either of the same into Ordinary and
Extraordinary.


Servant. What do you call Public Prayer?


Scholar. Act 6.4 etc Psalm. 84.1. etc. 1. Cor. 14.40.
That which is made by the Church assembled for Gods worship and service sake.


Servant. What is private Prayer?


Scholar. 2 Samuel 6.20. Ester 4.15. Math. 6.6.
That which is made in private, either with others, as in the Family, or
solitarily and secretly by ones self alone.


Servant. Which are the fittest times for Prayer and Thanksgiving to God, to be
performed in and with the whole Family, ordinarily?


Scholar. Psalm. 55.17. Dan. 6.10.
The Morning and Evening; 1 Timothy 4.3.4.5. Mat. 14.19. Luke 24.30.
And before and after Meals.


Parent. I pray you (Pastor) give us some convenient forms of Prayer, which
during our infirmity we will use, till God enable us to conceive prayer of our
selves.




Pastor. You may use this plain and easy one, or some other that you think
fitter for your estate.


A Form of Morning Prayer on the worke-day, for the whole Family. Luke 11.1.
Lord teach us to pray.
A prayer for the family on work-day mornings.
O Gracious Lord, who have not only commanded us to make known our requests
unto thee only, See the proofs in the Conference concerning Prayer, supra.
in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, but also have
sanctified it to be thine ordinance, thereby to bless them whom thou will
bless, assuring us that thou will accept the prayers of all them that do
ground the same aright upon thy word and promise, we humbly beseech thee
prepare our hearts by thine own Spirit, that we may now approach unto thy most
sourraigne Majesty with holy fear and reverence, and in the feeling of our
wants may power forth our souls before thee, who wilt fulfill the desires of
all them that call upon thee zealously.

The Lords Prayer.
Our Father And herein, chiefly we entreat thee to give us a true and
comfortable feeling that thou art become our most merciful Father in Jesus
Christ thy dear Son, in whom thou art well pleased, that calling upon thy
most holy name with Faith and child-like boldness through him, we may verily
believe that we shall have the petitions which we desire of Thee, and thereupon
expect thy blessing with comfort for all our necessities. And forasmuch as thou
have commanded us to pray one for another, we pray thee to accept our cry also
in the name of thy holy Son Jesus, for the behoof of all other thy children
wheresoever living throughout the whole world, yea even also of their and our
enemies that belong unto thee according to the election of grace, though they
be not yet called. which art in Heaven, And because thou art in heaven, being
as able to help as thou art willing, we pray thee give us an assured trust in
thy All sufficient power, as well as in thy tender and free mercy, without the
which grace we cannot look to be heard of thee in any of our prayers
whatsoever. Hallowed be thy name. O God and Lord of all glory, we first and
chiefly desire thee to vouchsafe unto us the true zeal of thy glory, that we
may be willing and ready instruments truly to set forth thy name in our
thoughts, words, and all our carriage, according to thy holy will revealed in
thy word, and that before we seek relief for our selves in any of our own
necessities, and be thou pleased to be glorified of us, yea and let thy name be
magnified over all, for of thee, and through thee, and to thee, are all things,
to thee be glory for ever. Amen. Thy kingdom come. Next, we entreat thee to
enlarge the kingdom of thy grace in Jesus Christ by the inward working of thy
Spirit in our hearts and in all other thine elect: And to that end, let thy
Word, thy Sacraments, and all other thy holy Ordinances have free passage and
liberty in the world, and become effectual, until all thine elect shall be
gathered, and fitted for thy coming to judgment, which we pray thee hasten,
that these sinful days may be finished, and then take us to thy kingdom of
glory. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. And therefore also we
beseech thee to make us more and more thine obedient servants, striving to
keep thy commandments, till we come to perfection, and to be like thy holy
Angels, who hearken unto the voice of thy word and do thy pleasure: And withal
grant unto us, that we may neither despise thy chastenings, nor faint when we
are rebuked of thee, but may give thee reverence in our sufferings with
dutiful submission and joyful patience; and let thy chastenings yield us the
peaceable fruit of righteousness, when we are exercised thereby. Give us this
day our daily bread. And seeing thou (Lord) art the Author and Giver of all
temporal blessings as well as spiritual, we pray thee according to thy
heavenly will and divine wisdom (for thou only know our necessities and
what is good for us, yea and have made us to know that all things work
together for good to them that love thee) to bestow upon us all things needful
and convenient for this present life, so as we may be best fitted to live to
thy praise, our own souls eternal comfort, and to the spiritual profit and
advantage of others in thy Church, and especially to the better relief and
refreshing of thy poor and afflicted servants; unto the which ends also we
pray thee bless and prosper us in the right use of those thy good gifts which
we presently enjoy. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us. But (merciful Father) howsoever thou deal with us for
worldly benefits, we most heartily desire thee to forgive us all our sins that
are passed, justifying us in the righteousness of thy Son Jesus Christ; And
that we feeling the comfort of thy love in our hearts by faith, may for thy
sake unfeignedly forgive them that have offended us; and by the same grace get
stronger assurance to our own souls, that thou (Lord) wilt in thine infinite
mercies forgive us all that great and manifold debt of ours. And lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from evil. And for the time to come, we
entirely beseech thee, to let us see the deep deceitfulnes of our own fleshly
hearts, and our corrupt inclination, whereupon the Devil for the most part
works; and withal do thou stir us up to fight continually against the same,
even against our evil and wretched lusts (the vile fruits of our unbelief)
and to watch against the Devil, who walks about as a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour, and like a subtle Serpent, studying to deceive. O Lord,
grant he may neither bewitch us in prosperity, as that we should deny or
forget thee, nor make us froward in adversity. Mortify our corrupt nature
(the rotten and loathsome fountain of our manifold sins) and quicken us in
newness of life, and in the study of true godliness. Which grace of
Sanctification and a godly life, we do the more earnestly beg at thy merciful
hands, because thou have taught us plainly, that without the same, thou will
not hear us when we call upon thee; as also, for that thou will not vouchsafe
thine effectual grace unto any but upon their strongest endeavors. And so (O
gracious Lord) we do most instantly beseech thee to save us from our sins, to
cast us down unfeignedly in the feeling of our spiritual misery and vileness,
to lift us up in the assurance of thy Son Christ's merits, and to make us far
more laborious for grace for our souls, then for earthly favor for our
bodies. For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever.
Touching all which our requests, we do ground our Faith for obtaining them,
only upon thee, who have sole right, authority and power over all, and who
wilt do all things undoubtedly unto they own glory evermore, and wilt cause
the spirit of glory to rest upon us, that on our part do glorify thee: And
therefore we do promise to render unto thee most hearty thanks at all times for
all thy mercies and favors plentifully bestowed upon us in Jesus Christ, and
most of all for our Redemption in him, beseeching thee to enable us to praise
thee the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in doing those good works which thou
have ordained that we should walk in them, and specially the duties of our
callings and degrees wherein thou have set us. Amen. For these and all other
necessary graces and blessings, we do not only most fervently desire them,
but also do verily believe and desire to believe that thou hear us always:
Beseeching thee to give us grace to strive against doubting and unbelief, and
confirm our faith, that we may come often unto thee with all cheerful
willingness and sound delight, and may continue knocking for thy mercy without
weariness, until thy Son Jesus Christ shall come to dissolve us, and to
crown his own grace in us with eternal glory.
And here confessing thy free and gracious goodness in preserving and
protecting us this night past, we pray thee teach us to use well thy mercy all
this day, to love us still, to direct and bless us in our honest labors and
businesses, and so give us more and more cause to sing praise and give thanks
unto thee, and to live and die to thy glory. And make us always mindful of
that great gift of thine (Christ and his Gospel) to the end we may give up our
selves to walk with him in deeds and sufferings, and seek our own and others
salvation with holy fear and trembling. Finally, let not thy word depart out
of our minds, neither let us go astray from thy commandments. And though we
be thy most unworthy and unprofitable servants, yet be pleased to grant our
suite and accept our sacrifice, since we come unto thee in the only mediation
and intercession of thy blessed Son and our Savior Jesus Christ. And
therefore 2 Cor. 13.14.
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost be with us all. Amen.

Parent. in calling upon God, for we find our hearts dull and our flesh
unwilling oftentimes for this high service, but we have had experience by our
using those very words which the Holy Ghost has indicted in the Bible, that we
have been quickened, and made willing, cheerful and reverent in our
supplications and thanks-giuings unto the Lord.


Pastor. You may use this following, if you please.


A Form of Evening Prayer on the worke-day, for the whole Family.
A prayer for the Family, on worke-day evening.
Esai. 6.3.
HOly, holy, holy, Revel. 4.8.
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, In this form, I have strictly followed
the last translation of the Bible, done by his Majesty's special commandment,
and appointed to be read in Churches.
and is to come, the whole earth is full of thy glory, Psalm. 19.14.
Let the words of our mouth and the meditation of our hearts be acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord our strength and our Redeemer. Psalm. 32.5. and 51.3.
We acknowledge our sins unto thee, and our iniquities we will not hide,
for they are ever before us. Ro^. 5.12, 19.
For by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and by his
disobedience we are made sinners. Psalm. 51.5.
Thereupon we were shapen in iniquity, and in sin did our mothers conceive
us. Esai. 64.6.
So we be all of us as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses as
filthy rags. Thence it is that we have actually Dan. 9.5, 9.
sinned against thee, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly and
have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments,
neither have we obeyed thy voice (O Lord our God) to walk in thy Laws which
thou have set set before us by thy servants thy prophets. Romans 1.9.
Neither have we served thee with our spirits in the Gospel of thy son for
though Tit. 2.11, 12, 13.
thy grace that brings salvation has appeared unto us, teaching us that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberlie, righteouslie,
and godly in this present world, so looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.27.
yet our conversation has not been such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, 2
Cor. 6.1.
but we have (over much) received thy grace in vain, Ephesians. 4.27,
grieuing thy holy spirit, v. 30.
giving place to the Devil, Psalm 109.22.
wounding our own hearts within us, 1 Cor. 8.11.
and the weak consciences of our brethren, 2 Pet. 2.8.
vexing the righteous souls by our unlawful deeds, and 2 Samuel 12.14.
giving great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. Lam 3.22, 23
Wherefore it is of thy mercies (oh Lord) that we are not consumed, because
thy compassions fail not, they are new every morning. Besides, Psalm. 19.12.
we cannot understand our errors, cleanse thou us from secret faults, Psalm. 51.9.
hide thy face from our sins, pardon and blot out all our iniquities, Psalm.
25.11.
for they are great, wash us thoroughly Apoc. 1.5.
from them through him that loved us, Esai. 53.4, 5.10.
that bare our griefs, carried our sorrows, was wounded for our
transgressions, whose soul thou made an offering for sin, Mat. 26.38.
exceeding sorrowful even unto death, John 1.29.
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. And Heb. 12.14.
because without holiness no man shall see the Lord, and Ierem. 10.23
we know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks
to direct his steps, Lam. 5.21.
therefore turn thou us (O Lord) and we shall be turned, Psalm. 51.11.
Create in us clean hearts (O God) and renew right spirits within us. Psalm.
19.13.
Keep back thy servants also from presumptuous sins, let them not have
dominion over us, that so we may be upright and innocent from the great
transgression. 1 These. 5.23
Sanctify us throughout, and we pray God that our spirits and souls and
bodies may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. To
which end, Ephesians. 3.14, 16.17.18.19.
we bow our knees unto thee the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou
would grant us according to the riches of thy glory, to be strengthened with
might by thy spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by
faith, that we being rooted and grounded in Love, may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, length, hepth, and height, and to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge, that we may be filled with all
fullness of God. So let 2 Cor. 5.14.
the love of Christ constrain us 1 Pet. 2.9.
to show forth the praises of thee (Lord) who have called us out of darkness
into thy marvelous light Verse 12.
, having our conversation honest, that men may by our good works which they
shall behold, glorify thee in the day of visitation, 2. Pet. 1.10.
and giving diligence to make our calling and election sure, Philip. 2.12.
we may work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, yea and shining
as lights in the world, Luk 15.10. 2 Cor. 7.4.
we may rejoice both Angels and Men, Romans 15.1, 2.
edify our weak brethren, 1 Pet. 3.1.
win them that obey not the word; and verse. 16.
having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of us as of evil
doers, that they may be ashamed that falsely accuse our good conversation in in
Christ, 1 Pet. 2 15.
for so is thy will (O God) that with well doing we may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. 1 Cor. 15.58.
And forasmuch as we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord, make us
steadfast, immovable, and alwaie abou^ding in the work of ye Lord, Psalm. 119.15.
directing our ways in thy statutes, Gal. 6.10.
and as we have opportunity, doing good to all men, specially unto them who are
of the household of faith, 2 Cor. 9.7.
not forgetting, cheerfully to communicate with their afflictions, Mat. 25.40.
because the very least of them are the brethren of thy son Christ Jesus,
Heb. 13.16.
and with such sacrifices thou art well pleased. And because 1 Pet. 5.8.
our adversary Revel. 12.9, 12, 17.
the Devil is come down unto us, having great wrath, because he knows he
has but a short time, making war with them that keep the commandments of
God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, 1 These. 2.18.
hindering them also, Math. 4.3. Ephesians. 6.11.12.
and tempting them with his wiles and spiritual wickednesses, Revel. 12, 9.
being that old serpent which deceives the whole world, we pray thee Ephesians.
6, 10.
make us strong in the power of thy might, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9.
to resist him, steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are
accomplished in our brethren that are in the world, and to be sober and
vigilant, Ephesians. 6.13, 17, 181
taking unto us the whole armor of God, especially the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God, praying always with all prayer and supplication in
the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, that we may be able
to withstand him in the evil day, John 8, 44.
and not do his lusts.

And seeing 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, grant we may be armed likewise with
the same mind, no longer to live the rest of our time in the flesh, to the
lusts of men, but to thy will, O God; nor Romans 6^.
to suffer sin to reign in our mortal bodies, Luk 8.14.
that we should obey it in the lusts thereof, nor be choked with cares, and
riches, and pleasure of this life. And whereas the flesh Galat. 5.17.
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are
contrary the one to the other, so that we cannot do the things that we would:
we (wretched persons) do entreat thee Rom 7.24.
to deliver us from the body of this death through Jesus Christ our Lord, verse
22.
that we may not only delight in the law of God after the inward man, but also
Gal: 5.16.24.
walk in the spirit and crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts. And
seeing 1 John 5.19.
the whole world lies in wickedness, Ioh. 17.14.15.
and hates us because we are not of ye world, we pray not that thou would
take us out of this world, but yt thou would keep us from evil, Romans 12.2.
that we may not be conformed unto the children of this world, Luke 16.8.
who are in their generation wiser then the children of light. 1 Cor. 1.27,
28.29.
Thou have made foolish the wisdom of this world, for not many wise, not many
mighty, not many noble, are called, but thou have chosen the foolish things,
the weak, the base, the despised, and things that are not, that no flesh
should glory in thy presence. Oh then, give us grace (O Lord) Jam. 4.4.
not to affect the friendship of this world, which is enmity with God, nor 1
Ioh. 2.15, 16.17.
to love the world, nor the things that are in the world (which passes away
and the lust thereof, and is not of the father) but to do thy will (O God) and
so to abide for ever. And now Lord, Psalm. 139.2.3.4.
who know our down sitting, and our vprising, who understand our
thoughts a far off, who compassest our paths, and art acquainted with all our
ways; For there is not a word in our tongues, but lo (O Lord) thou know it
altogether, Esai. 26.9.
stir us up that with our spirits within us, we may seek thee early. 1
These. 5.6.
Suffer us not to sleep as others do, Ephesians. 5.11.14. 1 Cor. 15.34.
in the unfruitful works of darkness, but cause us to arise from ye dead, and to
awake to righteousness, ye thy son Christ may give us light, 1 These. 5.10.
who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with
him: Luke 2.37.
so let us serve thee night and day, Psalm. 3.5. and 4 8.
and lie down in peace, and not be afraid, and let our sleep be sweet.
Af-Afterwards, Psalm. 104.23
let us awake and go forth unto our works and to our labors until the
evening, Psalm. 31.15.
for our times are in thy hand, Psalm. 3, 5. and 4.8.
and thou Lord only sustainest us, and make us dwell in safety. Psalm. 127.2.
And because it is vain for us to rise up early, and to sit up late, to eat
the bread of sorrows, Psalm. 129 8.
the blessing of the Lord be upon us. If for these earthly things thou (Lord)
do say, 2. Sam. 15.26
I have no pleasure in you, behold, here are we, do thou to us as seems good
unto thee. 1 Cor. 10.31
And (Lord) whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, move our hearts to
do all to thy glory, Esai. 64.5.
and so let us rejoice, working righteousness and remembering thee in thy
ways. And for our selves, Psalm. 90.12.
teach us to number our days, and because Job 4.19.
our houses of clay (whose foundation is the dust) are crushed before the
moath, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
to consider our latter end. Eccles. 12.13
Make us mindful also (good Lord) that thou shall bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil;
and therefore Psalm. 119.37.60.
quicken us (we desire thee) in thy way, that we may make haste, and not delay
to keep thy commandments with our whole man. Psalm. 51.18.
Do good in thy pleasure unto Zion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. Acts
9.5. Luk 21 19.
Grant thy persecuted members may possess their souls in their patience.
Math. 11.28 29.
Give rest unto the souls of all that labor and are heavy laden. Psalm. 147.4.
Heal the broken in heart, and bind up their wounds. Psalm. 72.12.13, 14.
Deliver the poor and them that have no helpers, redeem their souls from
deceit and ^^olence, and precious let their blood be in thy sight: Psalm.
146.7.8, 9.
Execute judgment for the oppressed, give food to thy hungry ones, loose thy
prisoners, preserve the strangers, relieve the fatherless and widows. Psalm.
41.3.
Strengthen thy merciful ones upon their beds of languishing, and make their
beds in their sickness. Psalm. 3.8.
Let thy blessing be upon all thy people. 2 Samuel 15 31
O Lord we pray thee, turn the counsel of the ungodly into foolishnes; yea and
Psalm. 10.5.
break thou the arm of the wicked and evil men, notwithstanding let Psalm.
141.5.
our prayers be in their calamities. 1 Timothy 2.2.
Bless our noble King and the hopeful Prince, and all that are in authority
over us, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. 2 These. 3.1.
Let thy word have free course and be glorified. Ephesians. 6.19.20.
Give utterance unto thy Ministers in general, and particularly to ours, that
they may open their mouths boldly, and speak as they ought to speak, making
known the mystery of the gospel, 2 Cor. 6.4.
and in all things approve themselves as the Ministers of God. Act. 17.11.
Grant we may receive the Word with all readiness, and search the Scriptures
daily whether those things be so. Psalm. 67, 2, 6, 7.
And let thy way be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations, and
so let the earth yield her increase, and let God, even our own God bless us:
let God bless us, and let all the ends of the earth fear him. 2 Timothy 2.19.
Let every one of us that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. 1 Samuel 25.6.
Peace be to us, and peace be to our house, and peace be unto all that we
have. Psalm 145.15
Let our eyes wait on thee, O Lord, and give thou us our meat in due season.
Psalm. 108.12
Give us help from trouble, and 1 Cor. 10 13.
suffer us not to be tempted above that we are able, but with the temptation
make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it. Mark. 9.24.
We believe, Lord help our unbelief. Esai. 26.8.
The desire of our soul is thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. Dan.
9.18.19
O our God, incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold our
desolations, and the City which is called by thy name, for we do not present
our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great
mercies. Ephesians. 3.20.
Now unto thee that art able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask
or think, according to the power that works in us, Verse. 21.
unto thee be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout al ages world
without end. Amen.

Parent. Thirdly, I pray you give us two easy and plain forms of
thanksgiving for our daily use at every meal, the one before the receiving of
our food, and the other after, to be uttered by my self if I be present, or by
some other of my house in the name of all that partake of the same meal:


Pastor. I will.


A form of Thanksgiving to be used of an ignorant family before meals.
MOst gracious God, we acknowledge thee to be the author of all good gifts and
blessings, we humbly pray thee to forgive us all our sins. Grant us faith
and soberness in receiving these thy good creatures: bless them to our
nourishment, and stir us up thereupon to serve thy holy majesty with true
thanksgiving, through Jesus Christ thy Son and our Savior by thy holy
spirit, Amen.

After Meals.
TO thee, our most bountiful Father and gracious Lord, who have made, redeemed
and ever hitherto preserved us, and at this time fed and refreshed us with
thy good gifts and creatures, be all glory and obedience rendered of us and of
all other thy people, both now and evermore. God save the Church universal;
bless the kings Majesty; continue thy Gospel; make thy holy word effectual
in our hearts; comfort all thy poor and afflicted servants, and give us thy
peace and whole truth in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Parent.


Pastor. Nay: I would rather exhort you to use your best endeavors to conceive
prayers of your selves, according as the spirit of God shall enable you, and
your estate shall require; for on the Sabbath day you have most time to labor
in prayer, if you will make conscience to redeem your time: and verily if you
would set your selves unfeignedly to the study hereof by your humble and
constant craving Zach. 12.10.
of the Spirit of Prayer at the Lords hands and by a conscionable exercising of
your selves in the holy Scriptures, of a true purpose and holy desire to
wrestle with God Genesis 32.24, 25, etc. with Hos. 12.3, 4.
as Jacob did, in supplication to his glory, the Lord will bestow this ability
upon you. Howbeit, if you desire any further direction to train you up in this
duty of prayer, you may profitably employ your selves for some convenient space
on the Lords days in that singular help which the Lord has provided for you by
the pains of Master John Brinsley, in his second part of the True Watch,
containing The perfect Rule and Sum of Prayer; whereunto I refer you for
this your fourth request: Yet I will give you a form of prayer for solitary
use upon the Lords day morning, I mean, for each one by himself apart. For
although it be a Christians part, both to pray solitarilie every work day,
and also to ioyn with the whole family in private prayer on the Lords day (and
the same more largely and oftener then on other days) yet there seems to be
special reason and need for every particular person to call upon God by
himself alone (for preparation) toward the beginning of the Lords day:
Because,

I. God must be entreated by all manner prayer and means possible to enable us
unto the duties of this day. Reasons for solitary or secret prayer in the
entrance of the Lords day.


II. This solitary praying will occasion and further us to seek our nearer
reconciliation with God, which as at al other times, so chiefly on that day we
must give greatest diligence to be sure of.

III. It is a special mean to make us the more careful both to bestow the
more time and labor upon Gods service, and to profit the better thereby, on
that day.

IV. Every one knows best his own particular corruptions and wants in former
abuse of the Sabbath, whereof he ought to beg forgiveness at Gods hands in
secret, and to seek his own particular healing and comfort.

V. Lastly, consider I pray you how you know that your heart is sincere and
earnest in seeking the Lord on his day, and what sound comfort you can have in
your self against the accusation of hypocrisy or of vain glory, when Satan
shall by any means charge you therewith, if you be cold in your secret and
solitary prayers on that day, and specially if you neglect them thereon
altogether.

Furthermore, remember that the Sabbath is the Bond of all Religion, for which
cause the Lord does often style Esai. 56.2. Lam. 1.7. Ezekiel. 20.11, etc.
his whole Religion by the name of the Sabbath, and that therefore it is your
part (being a Christian Householder) as to have a care of your self and of all
your people for resorting unto the public worship of God with firm
constancy, and there to continue with reverence from the beginning to the end
of the whole, so to call your self to a secret reckoning with God for your
profiting that day, and your people all together before you, inquiring of them
one by one what they have gained by each Sermon, and to teach them diligently,
laboring to have conscience put upon them by the Lord, and to the same ends
employing your self and them (more that day than any other) in prayers and
thanksgiuings, singing of Psalms, and use of the word, in public and private,
and Psalm. 93. and 107. throughout, but specially v. 42, 43.
in a wise and holy observation and application of the works of God. For
(whosoever you be) unless you make conscience of all these things, how can you
expect Gods blessing upon any public exercise (though never so holy in it
self) which you shall have to do withal on that day? Therefore, if you judge
this form following fit for your estate, use it (each one severally by
himself) during your present ignorance and weakness.


A Form of Prayer for the Sabbath day morning (or, the evening before) to be
used of a weak Christian by himself alone tending to his better preparation
for the duties of the Sabbath.
A form of solitary prayer for the beginning of the Lords day.
Psalm. 21.1.
Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul, and Psalm. 5.3.
my voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord. Psalm. 43.3.
Oh send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me unto
thy holy hill and to thy tabernacles. Psalm. 85.7.
Show me thy mercy, O Lord, and grant me thy salvation. And howsoever Heb. 4.2.
Ierem. 7.8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 11.17.
I have often heard thy holy word, called upon thy great name, and had to do
with the seals of the righteousness of Faith; not for the better, but for the
worst, at least wise with small or no fruit, yet now, I humbly pray thee make
me like Luk 8.15.
good ground, that I may with an honest and good heart hear thy word, keep it
and bring forth fruit with patience. And although ( Psalm. 8.1, 3, 6, 9.
thy name being excellent in all the earth by reason of the works of thy
fingers, Psalm. 111.2, 3, 4, 5, 7.
which are great and wonderful, honorable and glorious, verity and judgment)
I have not sought out thy works, nor Esai. 5.12.
considered the operation of thy hands, because I have not had pleasure
therein: yea and though, Psalm. 40 5.
many are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which
are to me ward, they cannot be reckoned in order unto thee, Esai. 64.7.
and I have not stirred up my self to take hold of thee, Romans 1.21.
neither have bin thankful, Ps. 119.76.
nor praised thee for thy merciful kindness, 2 Chronicles. 32.35.
at least wise I have not rendered again according to the benefit done unto me,
Romans 2.4.
neither have I known that the goodness of God has led me to repentance; Yet
now (Lord) Esai. 26.10.
by the favor thou show unto me, let me learn righteousness, and 2 Chronicles.
32.26.
humble my self for my hardness of heart, that thy wrath come not upon me. And
Ierem. 31.18.
whereas thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a bullock unaccustomed
to the yoke, not Mica. 6.9.
hearing the rod and who has appointed it, yet (most gracious God) grant that
now at the last, Esai. 9.13.
I may turn unto thee that smitest me, and seek thee the Lord of Hosts. Heb.
3.7, 13, 15.
To day give me grace to hear thy voice, not hardened in my heart through the
deceitfulness of sin. Make me 1 Pet. 2.17.
to love brotherly fellowship, 1 Pet. 4.4.
not running with the profane to the excess of riot, but Coloss. 3.16.
teaching and admonishing my self and others in Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody with grace in my heart unto thee,
Act. 12.5.
praying earnestly and giving thanks always for all things unto thee in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 3.13.
exhorting and comforting my self and others with thy words, 1 Thessalonians 4.18.
and humbling my self unto them in thy fear, O God. Iam. 4.10.
Let thy word dwell richly in me in all wisdom, which grant I may Prove. 4.21.
keep in the midst of my heart, that I may not sin against thee, but observe
to do as thou have commanded me, Deuteronomy. 4.32.
neither turning aside to the right hand nor to the left. Evermore grant Iam.
4.8. Heb. 10.22. 1 King. 8.61. 1 Samuel 16.7.
that I may draw near unto thee with a true, upright and plain heart, Phil
3.9.
and studying to be found in Christ, 2 Timothy 3.5.
and to have the power of godliness in me, I may Phil. 3.14.
press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, that at the last Romans 9.23.
thou may make known the riches of thy glory upon me (a vessel of thy
mercy) and 1 Pet. 1.9.
I may receive the end of my faith, which is the salvation of my soul. Heb.
13.7.
Make thy servant the Minister of thy Gospel, which shall speak unto me and
others (this day) the word of God, Ezra 7.6.
a ready Scribe, Mat. 13.52.
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, like unto a man that is an Householder,
which brings forth out of his treasure things new and old. Stir him up 2 Timothy 2.15.
to study to show himself approved unto God, a workman that needs not to
be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. 2 Thessalonians. 3 2.
Deliver him from unreasonable and wicked men. Strengthen him that he may 2 Timothy 4 7, 8.
fight a good fight, finish his course, and keep the faith; and so give him
the crown of righteousness. Act. 16.14.
And open my heart, O Lord, that I may attend unto the things of thy word, Act.
17.11.
and receive the same with all readiness of mind, searching the Scriptures
daily whether those things be so. And (good Lord) 2 Timothy 2.7.
give me understanding in all things, not only for to try the spirits, whether
they are of God, but also that I may Deuteronomy. 33.3.
receive of thy words, even Luke 12.42.
my portion of meat in due season, Psalm. 141.5.
yea when I am reproved, let me take it as an excellent oil which shall not
break my head. Far be it from me that I should be Act. 7.54.
cut to the heart, and gnash at the Minister with my teeth, but let me be
pricked Act. 2.37, 38.
in my heart unto repentance, and receive of the Ministry how I ought to
walk and to please God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
and therein to abound more and more. Prepare me (O Lord) Iam. 1.21.
to lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of maliciousness, that I may
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save my soul.
Psalm. 119.39.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness, 1 Timothy 6.9.
lest falling into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts, they drown me in destruction and perdition. Always make me careful to
Ephesians. 4.15. 1 Timothy 1.5.
grow in faith and a good conscience. And let me never Iam. 1.22.
deceive my self in being a hearer only and not a doer of the word. And
because oftentimes Math. 13.21.
tribulation and persecution arises because of the word, whereat (I see) many
are by and by offended, I pray thee teach me, Math. 7.24.
to build my house upon a rock like a wise man, 2 Timothy 2.12.
and to suffer with Christ, that I may also reign with him. Finally, I humbly
pray thee to sanctify my heart, that I may Esai 58 13.
turn away my foot from doing my pleasure on this thy holy day, and that I
may call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and may
honor thee, not doing mine own ways, nor finding mine own pleasure, nor
speaking mine own words; but 2 Pet. 1.5.
giving all diligence Phil. 2.12.
to work out my own salvation with fear and trembling, specially in Lam.
3.40.
searching and trying my ways and turning again unto thee Lord, according to
thy blessed Gospel, through thine only Son Christ Jesus my Savior and
Redeemer, unto whom with thy holy Majesty and thy sanctifying and comforting
Spirit, be of me in my most willing and constant endeavors, and of all other
thy servants in thy Church likewise, ascribed and given, all honor, glory,
praise, might majesty and dominion, both on this thine own holiday, and for
ever world without end. Amen.

Parent. But what if any of us severally and alone (having no other to join
with us, but must pray solitarily, unless we altogether omit the duty, after
the manner of our profane and irreligious neighbors) would use those two
forms of prayer which you have composed for the whole Family on the
worke-daies? Or, what if my whole Family or any two or more of them would in
their private fellowship use that form of prayer which you have drawn for a
Christian in solitary toward the beginning of the Lords day? May we not so use
either the one or the other, as may be most for our comfort and edification?


Pastor. Yea, you may easily do so, if you will. And you are bound to do so
rather then omit the duty altogether. Provided, that in such a case when you
do use the two forms which are for the worke-daies (as also for the forms of
thanksgiving before and after Meals) you do heedfully put the singular number
for the plural, as I for We, Me for Us, My or Mine for Our, etc. And that,
when mo than one of you shall join together in the form which is for the
Lords day, you do use the plural number for the singular, as We for I, Us for
Me, Our for My or Mine, etc. The which course, if you be driven of necessity
to take, or do sometimes voluntarily perform, it will also prove one help to
enable you to conceive prayers of your selves without the help of these or any
other forms to be read upon a Book, much sooner. For as I told you at the
first, that is the end I shoot at in setting you down these forms, and which
you ought to labor for in using these or any other godly forms, unto the
uttermost of of your power. And assure your selves, that though you be very
ignorant and weak at this present, yea and seem to your selves that you can
do little or nothing this way, I mean, to conceive prayer of your selves, Note
these directio^s, you ignorant persons, and remember to follow them in the
fear of God; and have a special care to examine your selves on the Lords day
in secret, and to renew your peace with God in a more settled and comfortable
turning of your feet unto his testimonies, Psalm. 119.19. with 92.11, 12, 13.
yet if you will conscionably seek the Lord and your own salvation,
diligently frequent the Ministry that God has sanctified unto you, delight
in the often fellowship of the Godly, whom the Lord has endued with saving
knowledge already, desire their help in prayer, and therein join with them,
and in their absence (which to the greatest number of you must needs fall out
very often) attentively, constantly and carefully use these or any other godly
forms of prayer and thanksgiving, God will bless you with such understanding
of your spiritual estate, that you shall in far shorter time then you think,
attain to the end of your godly desires, which is to lay away your Books, and
out of your own feelings to make your petitions and thanksgiuings unto the
Lord, upon any occasion either ordinary or more special and rare. But if you
shall neglect this counsel of God, and profanely put off the holy duties of
prayer and thanksgiving from time to time, or perform them but coldly,
carelessly, irreverently, or vaine-gloriously, as the hypocrites do, then
verily be you afraid lest the Lord should in his wrath judge you spiritually,
and so you continue blind and ignorant or (after a sort) superstitious in using
a set form now and than, and lest you have always such need of a Book to
pray upon, that without it you shall be able to say little more then, Behold a
piece of the old wives their very best prayers.
Lord have mercy upon us, forgive us our sins, bless our house and our
harbor, and all that ever we would have good of, and send us heaven at our
last end; yea and lest you fall from praying upon a Book (as I have known
some) to mere nothing or worse than nothing. Note.
Beware then of an idle form and bare external devotion or ceremony of
Godliness, without seeking the power thereof: As also of such a manner of
learning, as never to be able to come to the knowledge of the truth: Which
fearful judgment God does therefore commonly inflict, because the heart is
not zealous, sincere, nor godly disposed to see, obey and continue in the whole
saving truth of God, but resolves to stand out against some part of it, or to
follow some sinful lusts still: 2 Timothy 3.5, 6, 7, 8.


Parent. David's Psalms) as breifely touches the most necessary graces, and
which we may sing to Gods glory and our own edification and comfort, in
following the labors of our vocations and callings, and at other times when we
think good.


Pastor. But you must consider Gods proceeding with you in all things, your
own necessities and estate, and accordingly seek out and sing such Psalms as
God has fitted for you in his Book, to use unto your better moving and
stirring up to live unto his glory, and your own spiritual growth in faith
and a good conscience.


Parent. We will not forget to bestow our labor that way every day once at
the least, in the choice of some Psalm or parcel of a Psalm (according to
our weak judgment) if God permit. Howbeit, because we have not any one Psalm
of convenient shortness, that sets forth the chiefest points and most
necessary graces of Christianity, fitted for our capacity, and because many
of my people are dull to learn many Psalms, prescribe us one which my
ignorant ones may learn by heart, and whereby we may have a taste of the
heavenly sweetness which the Godly do gather in their religious use of
divine and spiritual songs.


Pastor. Then take this for a taste, which if you will read and sing together
with all your Household, but once on every work day in the Evening, you shall
find, that those who can learn any thing, shall before the year go about,
perform it by heart of themselves, although they bestow no other time upon it.


A godly Hymn or Psalm collected out of the book of DAVID'S Psalms, and
composed of choice verses, which do breifely point at some of the chiefest
Lessons of Faith toward God, and of good Works toward Men; all for the most
part in form of prayer and praise to God.
Fit for the more ignorant sort to sing at their ordinary work, and at other
times convenient, to the glory of God and their own edification.

to praise the Highest Lord:
And to thy name, O thou most High,
to sing withone accord.

betime ere day be light:
And eke declare his truth abroad,
when it does draw to night.

to hear me when I pray:
And when to thee I call and cry,
hide not thy face away.

Lord, quite me out of hand:
And make me not a scorn to fools
that nothing understand.

our foul iniquity,
O Lord, who can before thee stand,
excused for to be?

O Lord, are still with thee,
That men may love and fear the name
of thy great Majesty.

his laws observe do they
That any understanding have,
his praise does last for aie.

that I thy will may know,
And never let iniquity
thy servant overthrow.

and covenants to embrace,
And from all filthy avarice,
Lord, shield me with thy grace.

turn back mine eyes and sight,
Give me the spirit of life and power
to walk thy ways aright.
The second part.

and pleasant for to see,
Brethren together fast to hold,
the bond of amity.

the needy to consider,
For in the season perilous
the Lord will him deliver.

whom thou do keep in awe,
And through correction do procure
to teach him in thy Law.

with aid, and make them strong,
And eke destroy for evermore
all those that do them wrong.

yet I was troubled sore:

for I have sought thy lore.

and fretst thus in my breast?
Still trust in God, for him to praise,
I hold it ever best.

that upright are in heart.
But those that unto crooked ways
shall choose to turn apart,

of all iniquity,
But peace upon his Israel
for evermore shall be.

convert us unto thee:
Behold us with a pleasant face,
and then full safe are we.

above the heavens bright,
Extol thy praise on earth abroad,
thy Majesty and might.
Parent. I pray you what Psalms of David do you judge most edifying and
comfortable for our ordinary use?


Pastor. Twelve select Psalms.
Me thinks, the first, the fourth, the eight, the twelfth, the fifteenth, the
ninteenth, the twenty fifth, the thirty second, the fifty first, the seventy
third, the one hundred and third, and the hundred and ninteenth are easiest and
fittest for an ignorant family: For the which I refer you to your Psalm
books; specially I recommend the fifteenth Psalm unto you, wherein a true
Christian is pithily and summarily described by his proper marks and fruits.
And if any of you can sing the tune of Psalm 136. and 148. you may sometimes
use the same fifteenth Psalm, which I have paraphrased in this form
following, and fitted to be sung in that tune also, by two, the one making the
question, and the other answering.


An Hymn made upon the fifteenth Psalm, Psalm 15. in another tune.
in manner of a Dialogue, and may be song by two, the one representing IEHOVA,
and the other DAVID.
To the tune of Psalm 136.
David. 1.
IEhoua omnipotent,
show forth what folk they are
Shall soiourne in thy tent,
As Pilgrims wont to fare,
The members here
Of Church fighting, but aye dwelling in heavens there.

Iehoua. 2.
The righteous soul, he walks
upright in constant wise,
Entire and Justice works,
his careful exercise;
Likewise the truth
in heart does speak, without deceit,
the simple sooth.
3.
This man, maliciously
depraueth not with tongue,
So neither frowardly
his neighbor does he wrong:
Ne knows slandour,
nor yet does broch a foul reproach
against his neighbor.
4.
Each vile one is abhorred
in his impartial eye;
Free fearers of the Lord
he much does magnify:
And if he swears,
though hurt there-fro^, to him do come,
himself not spares.
5.
On gain his heart's not bent,
as usurers for use,
Nor against the innocent,
reward at all does choose.

David. Good godly deed
why then does he?

Iehoua for charity,
and not for meede.

David. These marks, Lord, are they true?

Iehoua. These marks be verity.

David. O'rethrowne just shall, I rue!

Iehoua. O'rethrowne just shall not be,
Nor any ill
to him whose way goes not astray
from this my will.

Parent. What ordinances has the Lord appointed and left unto his Church in
his wisdom and mercy, to further special prayer and thankesgining in more
extraordinary occasions.


Pastor. Fasting for Prayer, feasting for thanksgiving, and Vows for both.
Which learn in the larger Catechismes, and specially in the book, entitled,
A Treatise of Christian Religion.


THE FOVRTH PART. Concerning the Sacraments of the New testament, The third
outward mean of Grace.
first in general.
Parent. WHat are the Sacraments of the Testament?


Child. Genesis 17.1, 7, 11. Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 11.25.
Public and holy signs and Actions ordained by the Lord Jesus, mystically
setting forth and sealing the Covenant of Grace.


Servant. Has God ordained the Sacraments to begin grace in any persons?


Scholar. Romans 4.11. and 10.14, 17.
No, but God by his spirit in Christ does by the Sacraments confirm and
strengthen grace, where it is already begun.


Servant. How then do you esteem the Sacraments in respect of Christ's mind
toward you?


Scholar. Acts 2.38. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Mat. 28.19
As the very pledges of his love, the assurances and instruments of his grace,
and honorable badges to profess his name by.


Servant. And how do you esteem them in respect of your mind toward Christ?


Scholar. Acts 8, 36, 37, 39. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17
As the testimonies of my Faith, receiving his grace, the tokens of my
thankefulnes, and the very bands of my duty both to him and his Church.


Parent. Who has authority from the Lord to administer the Sacraments?


Child. 1 Chronicles. 13.10 11. and 15.12, 13. 2 Chro^. 30.3 and 35.3, 6. John 4.1,
2. Exodus 4.16. Mat. 28 18, 19
They only who are sent to preach the Word.


Parent. To whom do they of right belong to be received?


Child. Act. 2 38, and 8.37. 1. Cor. 12 13.
To sound hearted Christians.


Parent. What then have the wicked to do with them?


Child. Act. 2.38. 1 Cor. 11.28.
Nothing at all, till they be purged from their sins by Faith and Repentance.


Servant. But what if they presume to receive them without faith and repentance?


Scholar. Deuteronomy. 23 21, 22. 1 Cor. 10.1 2, 3, etc. with Exo. 14.27 28, 29.
Eccl. 3.4. Mat. 7.7, to 13
Yet they shall reap no benefit by them, but rather increase their sin and
condemnation.


Servant. And what if they shall neglect or contemn them?


Scholar. Genesis 17.14. Number. 9.13. Luke 7.30.
They are then special enemies of Gods glory and of their own salvation,
cutting themselves off from Gods covenant and Church, and so they incur Gods
heavy wrath, unless they repent. Oh consider that the Lord Jesus himself was
baptized, ate the Lords supper, and commanded both.



Servant. How is that proved?


Scholar. Exodus 4.24, 25, etc. 1 Cor. 11.25, 26, etc.
Seeing God has sharply corrected his own children, sound hearted and
otherwise godly with sickness and weakness, yea even with death for some
negligence or irreuerence about the Sacraments, much more fearefullie will he
punish the wicked and ungodly for their gross abusing or refusing of them.


Parent. After what manner are the Sacraments to be celebrated?


Child. Number. 9.3, 4, 5, 12. 1 Cor. 11.23.
As is prescribed in the word of God.


Parent. How many Sacraments be there?


Child. Two; 1 Cor. 12.13
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.


Parent. Of what parts do they consist?


Child. Heb. 6.2. 1 Cor. 10.16.17
Both of outward and inward things.


Parent. What are the outward things?


Child. The earthly creatures and certain actions of Minister the and
Receivers about the same.


Parent. What are the inward things?


Child. Christ himself, his spiritual graces and works, and certain
spiritual actions of the Receivers.


Parent. What then is the benefit which the Faithful receive by the
Sacraments?


Child. Mat. 28.19. 1 Corin. 1^.20. etc. and 12.13 Genesis 17.7, 8. Ephesians. 5.26.
They are confirmed in the union that they have with Christ, yea and with God
the Father, and with with God the holy Ghost, through Christ.


Of Baptism, in particular.
Parent. What is Baptism?


Child. Mat. 28.19.
The Seal of our Entrance and first admission into the profession of
Christianity.


Parent. What is the outward thing in baptism?


Child. Math. 3.16. and 28.19.
Washing, or sprinkling with water.


Parent. What spiritual thing is meant thereby?


Child. Ephesians. 5.25.26. 1 John 1.7. Apoc. 1.5. Heb. 9.14. Math. 3.11.
The blood of Jesus Christ our Savior shed for us, yea whole Christ himself
purging our sins.


Parent. What is the work of the Minister, and the right form of Baptizing?


Child. First, Math. 28.19 1 Timothy 4.5.
to open the covenant of grace. Secondly, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Acts 22.16. Luke 1.59.
to sanctify the water to this holy use by prayer and thanksgiving. Thirdly,
Mat. 28.19.
with the water to baptize That is, into the Communion.
into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.


Parent. What is the inward work performed by Christ?


Child. 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. and 6.11. and 12.13 Mat. 3.11.12. John 17.21,
22, 23, 24, 26.
He puts away my sins and gives me a new life, thereby making me one with
himself and with his Church unto my certain assurance of eternal life.


Parent. How does Baptism represent the putting away of your sins by Christ?


Child. Act. 2.38. and 22.16. 1 Ioh. 1, 7. Romans 6.6. Col. 2.11, 12. Psalm. 32.5.
Even as the water sprinkled by the hand of the Minister, washes away the
filth of my body, so the blood shedding of Jesus Christ laid hold upon, by
the hand of faith, cleanses me from all my sins, and that not only by
forgiving me both the guilt and punishment, but also by mortifying sin in
me.


Parent. How does Baptism represent the giving of a new life unto you by
Christ?


Child. Mat. 3.11. Mark. 1.4. Acts 15.9. 1 Pet. 3.21, 22. Tit. 3.5, 6.
Even as water makes that fair which before was foul; so the holy Ghost
purifying my heart by Faith, both justifies me before God in the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, and sanctifies me to lead a holy life, who before was
unholy and unclean.


Parent. What is the outward work of those that are to be baptized?


Child. Math. 3.6. Act. 8, 36, 37, 38.
Confession of their sins, of their faith, and of their repentance, and readily
to receive baptism in form aforesaid.


Parent. And what is their inward action?


Child. Gal. 3.27. and 5.3. 1 Pet. 3.21, 22.
To put on Christ by faith unto newness of life.


Parent. Why then should infants be baptized which can do none of these
things?


Child. First, Genesis 17.7. Mark. 10.14. Act 16.15, 23 1 Cor. 7.14.
because they belong to the Covenant of Gods grace, and unto his kingdom, God
himself saying, I am God unto thee and to thy seed after thee.

Secondly, Genesis 17.11.12 13, 14. Exo. 12.48. Col 2.11, 12.13. compared.
they have as good right to Baptism, as the infants of the Jews had to
circumcision.


Parent. What is the duty of children after baptism?


Child. First, Heb. 8.11. Psalm. 110 27, 33
to learn the ways of the Lord, and to keep his statutes.

Secondly, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, ^, 4, 5, 6 Acts. 2.41, etc.
to keep a holy fellowship with Christ and his Church.


Parent. When may you have true comfort by your Baptism?


Child, C^^. 2.12, 13. Tu. 3.5. 2 Cor. 5.17.
When I feel my self to be regenerate or sanctified.


Parent. What? May you feel your self to be regenerate?


Child. Romans 7.14.15, etc. Ps. 119.93, 94.
Yes verily, if I be regenerate indeed?


Parent. How may you know that you are regenerate indeed?


Child. Ephesians. 5.26. 1 Pet 1.23. and 2.1, 2. 2 Timothy 3.5 Psalm. 119.40.
If I can find that the light and efficacy of Gods Word, shining and burning
in my hearts, has truly killed the strength of sin and wrought the power of
godliness in me.


Servant. I pray you declare more particularly, when you can perceive that?


Scholar. First, Romans 7.15, 16. etc. to the end. Phil. 3.10, 11, etc. Psalm. 51.
when I have an unfeigned hatred and striving against all sin, but specially
against mine own corruption, and contrariwise an earnest study and delight to
all virtue, but specially to do mine own duty.

Secondly, Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13 16. Mat. 5.48. Col. 2.6,
7.
when I do constantly labor both for sincerity and uprightness of heart in
all duties which I undertake, and also for perfection to keep all the
Commandments of God unto the uttermost.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20, and 10.31. Deuteronomy. 30.20. 1 These. 5.18. Col. 2.6, 7.
when I am moved with a holy zeal, to do all things to the glory of God, for
obedience to his supreme authority, and in way of thankfulness unto him for
all his benefits, but chiefelie for giving me Jesus Christ and his gospel.

Fourthly and lastly, Psalm. 15.4. and 16.3. 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. 1 John. 3.14. and
5.1. Ps. 139.21, 22.
when I bear a singular love toward godly persons, because they are godly, and
contrariwise a holy hatred against the ungodly, because of their ungodliness.*


Parent. But what if one shall always continue unregenerate (for unsanctified)
after his baptism?


Child. Deuteronomy. 10.16. Eccles. 5.4, 5. Ezekiel. 44.9. Ierem 9.26. John. 3.3, 5, 18,
19, etc. Romans 2.28, 29.
That is a plain token that such a one wants faith, and therefore is
unbaptized in heart, whose damnation must needs be the greater, because he
breaks his vow made unto God.


Of the Lords Supper, in particular.
Parent. WHat is the Lords Supper?


Child. Mat. 26.26, etc. 1 Cor. 11.23 etc.
The seal of our spiritual nourishment and growth in Christianity.


Parent. What are the outward parts in the Lords Supper?


Child. Mat. 26.26, 27, etc.
Bread and Wine.


Parent. What be the inward parts or graces?


Child. Mat. 26.26, 27, etc. John 6.35, 51.
The Body and Blood of Christ, yea whole Christ, God and Man, with all his
merits.


Parent. What is the work of the Minister, and the right form of administering
the Lords Supper?


Child. First, 1 Cor. 11.24.25, 26. 1 Timothy 4.5. 2 Chr. 30.16, 17, 21, 22, etc.
Exodus 12.6, 26, 27.
to consecrate the bread and wine to this holy use, by Prayer and Thanksgiving,
declaring the Institution and using them accordingly, together with a clear
opening of the Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.24. Acts 2.42.
to break the bread, and pour out the Wine.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.
to deliver them to the people in Christ's own words, or to that effect.


Parent. Which are Christ's own words?


Child. Of the Sacramental bread Christ said, Math. 26.26, 27, 28. Mark.
14.22, 23, 24. Luke 22.17, 19, 20.1 Cor. 11.24, 25. compared.
Take, eat, That is, an effectual Sacrament of my body that shall be broken,
and of my blood which shall be shed.
this is my body, which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me.

And of the sacramental wine, thus, Math. 26.26, 27, 28. Mark. 14.22, 23, 24.
Luke 22.17, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. compared.
Take this, divide it among you, for That is, an effectual Sacrament of my
body that shall be broken, and of my blood which shall be shed.
this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for you and for many for
the remission of sins, this do in remembrance of me.


Parent. And what is the outward work of the Receivers?


Child. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26, 28. with 10.16. and 14.40.
Reverently and decently to take with their hands the bread and wine so
consecrated and delivered, and to eat and drink them.


Parent. Which are then the principal outward actions in the use of the
creatures when we celebrate the Lords Supper?


Child. First, the Ministers breaking of the bread, and pouring out of the
wine.

Secondly, the Ministers giving and the Peoples taking of both the bread and
wine into their hands.

Thirdly, the eating of the bread and the drinking of the wine by all the
Receivers.


Parent. What grace of Christ is set forth by the Ministers breaking of the
bread and pouring out of the wine?


Child. Esai. 53. Math. 26.37, 38. and 27.46. Luke 22.44. Job. 19.17, 18, 33,
34. and 20.25, 27. 1 Cor. 5.7.
The most grievous and unspeakable torments that Jesus Christ suffered in soul
and body for his elect, yea even unto the death, and specially the breaking of
his body and the shedding of his blood upon the Cross.


Parent. What inward work of Christ is sealed by the Ministers giving, and the
peoples taking of both the bread and wine into their hands?


Child. John. 6.27, 29, 35, 47, etc. Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 3.17, etc. with 1 Cor.
11.24, 25. and 1. Job. 1.12.
That Christ offers to all, but truly gives himself and all his merits unto
every one of them particularly, that do receive him by the hand of faith.


Parent. And what graces do the eating of the bread and the drinking of the
wine assure unto us?


Child. First, Math. 26.26, 27. Ioh. 6.35, 40, 51, 56. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
that Jesus Christ with all his benefits is become wholly the true believers, to
the feeding up of their souls in the Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, John. 17.21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
that they are made one with him.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 10.16. and 12.13. Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
that they shall increase and grow in the feeling and enjoying of him and of
his grace.


Parent. What then is the chiefest inward action of the Receivers?


Child. 1 Cor. 10.16.
The Communion or partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ.


Parent. How do you communicate or partake the body and blood of Christ in
the Lords Supper?


Child. First, Act. 2.42. Romans 4.11. with 1 Cor. 10.16.
I feed spiritually by faith in my soul on Christ and his merits unto a more
comfortable assurance and feeling of the forgiveness of my sins and of my
further justification.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 12.13. with Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Deuteronomy. 16.6, 7, 12, 16, 17. Exodus
13.8, 9, 10. 2 Chr. 30.19. Ezra 6.21, 22. with Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17.
in remembering his Love with thankfulness, I gather more and more strength to
dye unto my sins, and to live unto God in new obedience, whereunto (by
receiving this Sacrament) I do vow my self in my best endeavors.


Parent. But what is represented by this, that you receive the same creatures
in the Lords Supper, which all other the faithful do throughout the whole
world, and that in the company of the faithful in the Congregation?


Child. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
The Communion, mutual love and unity, that I and all the rest of the
faithful have amongst our selves from and under Jesus Christ our Head.


Parent. How do you then communicate with the faithful in the Lords Supper?


Child. First, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 15, 16.
I am confirmed in all such graces as other the Faithful do receive from
Christ, that they do also belong to me.

Secondly, Col. 3.14. Act. 2.41, 42, etc. 1 Cor. 12. and 13.
I bind my self in a special bond of Love, to practice all the duties
thereof unto them in general (as to the joint members of the same mystical
body) and particularly to remember the poor.


Servant. Is there any change (as the Papists say) of the bread and wine, into
the natural body and blood of Christ?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28, 29.
There is a change of their use, but not of their substance.


Servant. What is their use at that time?


Scholar. Twofold. First, 1 Cor. 11.26.
a solemn showing forth of the Lords death.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. with 11.27, 29.
the nourishment of our souls and bodies unto everlasting life.


Servant. Whence have they that strength and use?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, etc.
From the ordinance and blessing of Christ, whereby they are consecrated to
that purpose.


Servant. How do you prove that bread and wine remain still in their own
nature after consecration?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28, 29.
First, the word of God calls them so after.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 11.26.
there must needs be true outward signs.

Thirdly, Experience.
this consecrated bread and wine will corrupt in time.

Fourthly, The Reason is good, unless we had a word of faith to build a matter
of faith upon.
we see, feel and taste nothing but bread and wine.


Servant. But seeing Christ says, This is my Body, and This is my Blood, why
should we not believe that they are changed into his body and blood?


Scholar. There are many reasons why we should not believe so.


Servant. Let us hear some of them.


Scholar. First, the natural sense of those words teaches no such change.

Secondly, Christ was never corporally present in any of the Jewish Sacraments.

Thirdly, Christ was not corporally present in this Supper, when he did first
administer it.

Fourthly, Act. 3.21.
Christ's body shall not come down from heaven till the last day.

Fifthly, it possesses but one place of a true natural body, wheresoever it
is.

Sixthly, it is absurd and wicked to hold that Christ has many bodies and in
many places at once, and that men (though Reprobates) yea Dogs, Cats, and Mice
may chew his flesh in their teeth.


Servant. Why are they then called his body and blood?


Scholar. First, because they are the Sacraments of his body and blood.

Secondly, for the great similitude between them.

And thirdly, to assure us more strongly of his spiritual presence.


Servant. Is it lawful to with hold either the bread or the wine from any of
the Communicants?


Scholar. No; for first, the Lord Jesus ordained both; and secondly, there is
necessary use of both.


Servant. What necessary use?


Scholar. John 6.35, 53, 54, 55, 56. Act. 4.12.
To show that he is our full and sufficient food.


Parent. You said that Christ gives himself and all his merits unto every
true believer in receiving the Lords Supper. Of fit and worthy Receivers.



Child. Yes, Luke 3.8. and 20.35. Col. 1.12. Revel. 3.4.
for the Lord in his free Grace and Mercy, esteems such to be worthy
Receivers.


Parent. Show me more at large whom the Lord esteems worthy Receivers?


Child. They that are furnished with such Graces, as are both necessary and
fit in this case, and that do use it as Christ has appointed, and as becomes
so heavenly mysteries.


Parent. Which are those Graces that are most necessary and fit?


Child. These five: First, Ioh. 17.3.
Knowledge.

Secondly, 2 Cor. 13.5.
a true and lively faith.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 11.31.
Repentance and newness of life.

Fourthly, Col. 3.14.
Charity toward men.

Fifthly, Luke 22.15. Act. 8.36.
an earnest desire to receive this Sacrament.


Parent. 1. Of Knowledge.
What knowledge is required (at the least) for the worthy receiving of the Lords
Supper?


Child. Some true knowledge of God, of his Law, of his Gospel, of our selves
or our own estate, and of the Sacraments.


Parent. What knowledge of God is required?


Child. That there is 1 Cor. 8.4.
but one God, Genesis 1.1.
the maker and Act. 17.28.
governor of all things, and 1 Ioh. 5.7.
distinguished into the persons of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.


Parent. What is God?


Pastor. Revel. 4.9.
God is a living, John 4.24.
spiritual, 1 Timothy 1.17.
eternal, Job 11.7, 8, 9.
infinite and Revel. 4.8.
most holy essence, Exodus 3.14.
existing only of himself in all perfection, Psalm. 135.6. Esai. 46.10, 11.
Iam. 1.17. Mal. 3.6.
as touching his will most absolute, free and unchangeable, Psalm. 147.5. Genesis
17.1.
in his working all-sufficient for wisdom and strength, Mica 7.18, 19, 20.
Ps. 99.8 and 145.17. Exodus 34.6, 7.
and to his creatures most merciful and just.


Parent. What is a Person?


Pastor. John 14.9, 16, 17, 18. and 17.21.
A distinct manner of subsisting in the Godhead.


Parent. Declare unto me more largely, how the one only God is distinguished
into three persons, and how the three persons subsist in the one God, which we
commonly call the Unity in Trinity and the Trinity in Unity.


Pastor. The three persons are so distinguished one from another, that they are
neither separated nor confounded, either in themselves or in their working. A
mystery to be reverently believed, not curiously searched Hypostases
inseratabiles. Diuinitas indiuidualis, personarum proprietates
incommunicabiles. Ioh 1.33. and 5.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. and 8.16, 17, 18, 19. and
10.30. and 14.9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 16.


In themselves, for

First, each person has the whole Godhead in it, in such sort as the Unity of
the essence or nature of God is neither divided into parts nor destroyed.

Secondly, each person is coeternall and coequall without difference of time or
greatness.

Thirdly, each person is in and with each other, and possesses each other, so
that yet the Father is not the same with the Son, or the Holy Ghost, or the
Son the same with the Father or the Holy Ghost, or the Holy Ghost the same
with the Father or the Son, as touching their persons.

And fourthly, each person enjoys equal glory with other, and each has
everlasting delight in other, yet not the same, but according to the distinct
manner of each persons subsistence in the Godhead.

In their working, for though each person does the same things that the other
do, in every thing that is done, without absence or weakness, yet not any one
of them works altogether after the same manner as another does, but each one
of them according to the distinct propriety of his Person in special.


Parent. How are the three Persons distinguished in their special Proprieties?


Pastor. Prove. 8.22, 23, 24, etc. Psalm. 2.7. John 15.26.
The Father is of himself, the Son is begotten of the Father from all
eternity, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son.


Parent. How in their working together?


Pastor. Heb. 1.1, 2. John. 5.17, 19.
The Father works of himself by the Son and the Holy Ghost, and therefore
the original and beginning of the action is ascribed to him. Romans 8.11. Heb.
1.2.
The Son works from the Father by the Holy Ghost, and so the disposing of
the action (as it were by a Steward) is attributed to him. Genesis 1.2. 1 Cor.
12.11.
The Holy Ghost works from the Father and the Son, and therefore the
efficacy and finishing of the action is in a special sort allotted unto him.


Parent. What knowledge of the Law is required for worthy Receiving?


Child. Deuteronomy. 6.25. Romans 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13.
That it requires true righteousness, and discovers our corrupt nature,
sin and condemnation.


Parent. What of the Gospel?


Child. Act. 4.12. Gal. 3.13.
That Christ is our sufficient Redeemer and only remedy against Gods curse.


Parent. What of our selves or of our own estate?


Child. Ephesians. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
That we do surely stand in grace, though borne in sin and wrath.


Parent. What of the Sacraments?


Child. Esai. 7.11. Romans 4.11. Luke 22.19, 20.
That they are fit and worthy helps to strengthen our weak faith.


Servant, How are they so?


Scholar. Iere. 19.10, 11. Act. 21.11. John. 3.12. Galat. 3.1. 1 Ioh. 1.1, 3.
Because the Lord does work upon other our senses and faculties, as our
seeing, feeling, being admitted, and cleansed, receiving, eating and drinking,
tasting, digesting, being nourished, refreshed, cheered and strengthened,
thereby to confirm unto our hearts his saving grace, which first by hearing
the word we have believed.


Parent. II. Of Faith.
What Faith is required for the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper?


Child. Faith, which takes hold of Christ and his benefits, and leads us to
true thankfulness. Of this grace we have conferred already in the second part.
and also more in Part. 5.



Parent. What Repentance and Newness of Life is required? III. Of Repentance
and Newness of life.



Child. See more of this grace in Part. 2. and in Part. 5.
That godly sorrow with causes to forsake sin, together with that effectual
grace which inableth to keep Gods Commandments, increasing with the increase
of God.


Parent. What Charity toward Men, is required, IV. Of Charity toward men.
before you receive the Lords Supper?


Child. 1 John. 5.1. Ioh. 13.34, 35. and 15.12, 13. 2 Cor. 8.8, 9. compared.
That which is wrought and grows in my heart toward them for Jesus Christ's
sake, who loved both them and me unto the death.


Servant. How do you further know that you have love or charity toward men?


Scholar. First, Psalm. 16.3 1 John 3.1^ and 4.1. 1 P^. 1.22. and 3.8. and 4.8,
9. etc.
because I do specially love and reverence godly persons.

Secondly, Math. 5.23.24.
I seek for conscience sake to be reconciled, after offenses committed.

Thirdly, Math. 5.44. Mark. 11.25, 26.
I wish well even in my heart unto my very enemies, being ready to pardon all
their wrongs and praying for them.

Fourthly, 1 Cor. 14.1. and 16.14. Galat. 6.10. Hebr. 12.14. 1 Pet. 3.11. 2 Timothy 3.3. Mal. 2.10, 14.
I bear a loving affection toward all men, following peace with them, and
endeavoring to do them good, but particularly those unto whom I am bound in
nature or by any other covenant of God. See more of this grace in part, supra.
and in part. 5. infra.



Parent. V. Of earnest desire to receive the Lords Supper.
Why must you earnestly desire to receive the Lords Supper?


Child. For two causes. First, 1 Cor. 11 20, 22, 23, 24, 25.
because the Lord has both ordained and commanded it for his own glory.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 11.17. Ephesians. 5.26. Act. 2.42. and 20.7.11.
God gives more grace by it, than by the word preached alone.


Parent. What more grace have you by it, than by the word preached alone?


Child. First, 1 Cor. 10.16.
Christ's death and merits are more particularly applied to me, and so I am more
fully assured to be kept still in grace, yea and sealed up unto everlasting
salvation.

Secondly, and 12.13.
I am more strongly bound (as by a solemn renewing of an oath) to continue in
Grace.

Thirdly, Act. 2.42, etc.
I am more effectually stirred up to make profession of Faith and obedience, as
often as I am called thereunto.


Servant. How often is every Christian bound to receive the Lords Supper?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. Act. 2.42. Of receiving worthily.
As often as he may, so that he be a worthy receiver.


Parent. But what is required of us about the time of celebrating the Lords
Supper, that we may use it as Christ has appointed, and as becomes so
heavenly mysteries?


Child. There are required these three things:


I. Of preparation before.

Parent. What preparation is required before?


Child. We must set our selves apart from all other business, that we may,

First, 1 Cor. 11.28.31.
search our selves thoroughly for the sanctified graces of Knowledge, Faith,
Repentance, Charity, and desire to the Lords Supper aforesaid.

Secondly, Psalm. 26.6. Number. 9.6.
stir them up and renew them unto better growth and practice.

Thirdly, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20. Mat. 5.23, 24. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.
humbly crave the assistance of Gods spirit, and reconciliation with God; yea
and with men also, where need is.


Servant. But what if you find the sanctified graces of Gods spirit to be
weak in your heart? must you not then abstain?


Scholar. No, 2 Chr. 30.18 19.20.
I must come, and that with hope and cheerfulness, upon some conditions.


Servant. Why with hope and cheerfulness?


Scholar. Esai. 7.11. Luke 4.18. Mat. 15.24. with Luke 22.19, 20.
Because the Lords Supper was ordained of purpose for the confirmation of the
weak.


Servant. Upon what conditions must you come?


Scholar. First, Acts 8.37.
if the graces aforesaid be sound in me, though very weak.

Secondly, John. 4.10.
if I feel my wants with grief.

Thirdly, Mark. 9.24.
if I labor against my weakness, hungring and thirsting after Gods grace in
Christ.


Servant. What special means has the Lord appointed for our better direction
to try and examine our selves?


Scholar. Math. 3.6. Acts 8.37. Iam. 5.16.
Conference with good men, and cheefely with the Minister.


Servant. May notorious offenders that are impenitent, fools, mad men, and
children be admitted to the Lords Supper?


Scholar: 1 Cor. 11.28. Exodus 12.15, 18, 19, 20, 43. Numb. 9.6.
No, for they either cannot or do not examine themselves aright before they
come, and therefore are not rightly prepared.


II. Disposition in the action.

Parent: What disposition is required in the whole action of celebrating the
Lords Supper?


Child. First, Number. 9.3, 5. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
a diligent observing of all the holy signs and actions, together with a wise
understanding of their right uses, and applying them accordingly by each
particular person unto himself for his own spiritual profit.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 11.20 etc. and 14.40. The reason of due preparation and
disposition.
such decent behavior and gesture of the body, as are agreeable unto every
holy action.


Parent. Why must we thus prepare and behave our selves?


Child. 1 Cor. 11.20. etc. to the end of the chapter.
Because otherwise we shall receive unworthily.


Parent. What danger is it to receive unworthily?


Child. Very great, Ibid. and 1. Sam. 4.3, 4, 10. and 5.6, 7, 9, 11 12.
for then we are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and so do eat and
drink our own damnation or temporary judgment at the least, because we
discern not the Lords body.


Servant. How is the unworthy Receiver guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord?


Scholar. 1 Samuel 2.29, 30.
Because the indignation or reproach which he offers to this holy Sacrament,
redoundeth to the things thereby signified and set forth, to wit, to the body
and blood of Christ, as the disgrace done to the Kings picture, Broad Seal, or
Ambassador turns to the disgrace of the King himself.


Servant. What indignity or reproach is that?


Scholar. Psalm. 50.21. Romans 2.24.
In that the unworthy Receiver himself esteems, and gives cause for others
also to think, that Christ is the Savior of evil men, or otherwise to
blaspheme.


Servant. How is it said that the unworthy Receiver discerns not the Lords
body?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 11.20, etc. to the end. Exo. 12.11, 14, 15, 16, 17, etc.
Because he comes to receive the Sacrament with no other preparation nor
devotion, then as if it were but common bread and wine.


III. Of duties afterward.

Parent. What duties are required after we have received the Lords Supper?


Child. First, Psalm. 26.7.
to bless God heartily for our redemption.

Secondly, Nehem. 8.10. 1 Cor. 16.2.
to give to the poor as God has prospered us.

Thirdly, Deuteronomy. 10.16.
to labor to feel in our selves the strength and comfort of this Sacrament.


Parent. What shall a true Receiver feel in himself after the partaking of the
Lords Supper?


Child. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 11.24. Acts 16.33.34
The increase of his faith and sanctification in Christ, and so a greater
measure of comfort in Christ's merits, and a greater care and power to dye unto
sin, and to walk in newness of life.


Parent. What if one after the receiving of the Sacrament, never find any such
thing in himself?


Child. Act. 8.13, 14, etc. 10 24. John. 12.4, 5, 6. and 13.21, 26, 27, etc.
and 18 2, 3, etc.
He may well suspect himself, whether he did ever repent or not, and
thereupon is to use means to come to sound faith and repentance.


THE FIFTH AND LAST PART. Concerning the Practice of the Communion of Saints.
The fourth outward mean of Grace.
Parent. WHat is the Practice of the Communion of Saints?


Child. Heb. 10 24.25. 1 These. 5.11 12. Act. 2.42.44
Such holy fellowship as the faithful do exercise among themselves, according
to the word of God.


Servant. What faithful do you mean?


Scholar. Psalm. 16.3. Gal. 4.15. Act. 18.3, 26. James 2.
All and every one of the godly, whether teacher or learner, governor or
governed, great or small.


Servant. When is this followship exercised?


Scholar. Ioh. 20.19, 26 Acts. 20.6, 7, etc. Psalm. 101.6 and 122. Acts. 18.3.
Not only in the public use of Gods worship, as upon the Sabbath days, but
also in private, and as much as may be throughout their daily conversation.


Servant. And how, and after what manner exercised?


Scholar. 1 Timothy 4.6. 2 Timothy 3.16. 1 These. 4.18. Iam. 5.1^. Romans 12.15. Gal.
6.1. Luk 22.31. 1 Samuel 15.24, etc. 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2.
By teaching, admonishing, remembering, exhorting, comforting, reproouing,
confessing, praying and giving thanks each with other, and for other, mutual
rejoicing and mourning, conferring, aduising, considering to stir up,
releeuing, correcting, accompanying, and otherwise as is taught in the holy
Scriptures.


Servant. But what says the Word concerning fellowship with the wicked?


Scholar. 1 Samuel 25.14, 17, 18, 19, 25. etc. Psalm. 120.5. and 101.6, 7. 1 Cor.
5.11. Luke 5.30, 31, 32. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, etc.
If your calling and estate will permit, we must carefully avoid all special
fellowship with them (unless it be to heal them) and chiefly those that are
hardened in their sins, and do contemn admonition.


Servant. What reasons be there why a Christian must make special conscience
of his company in his daily conversation?


Scholar. First, Mal. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
God notes it in his book of remembrance (as being specially delighted with
it) how they that fear the Lord, speak often one to another.

Secondly, Pro. 1.10. and 13.20. 1 King. 11.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 106.34, 35,
36.
Company, whether it good or ill, will intise men to be like unto themselves,
and the event is commonly answerable, that, Every man is like his companions.
So, he that makes little conscience of his company, usually makes little of
sin.

Thirdly, Psalm. 1 33.1, 2, 3. 1 These. 5.11.
not only the benefit that we receive, yea and yield to other the faithful by
keeping brotherly fellowship with them, Even Judas absteined from much evil in
his Masters and fellows company, Eccles. 4.9, 10, 11.12. 1 Pet. 4.9, 10, 11
is undoubted and oftentimes very great in ministering of grace, as saving
knowledge, wisdom, love, zeal, comfort, cheerfulness and such like, at
least restraint from the outward committing of sin, and that even in the
hypocrites, but also we enable one another thereby against the enmiful courses
of the wicked on the one side, and for the performance of many actual duties
on the other, and all to the glory of God.

Fourthly, Genesis 19.8. and 42, 16. Psalm. 119.115.
though we be not grossly corrupted and perverted by them, nor yet apparently
defiled with their pitch, yet our nigh and special fellowship with them, will
either diminish our zeal to goodness and our hatred of evil, and so Revel.
3.15, 16, etc.
luke warmenesse (which is an estate very odious in the sight of God) will
creep upon us, or at least Ezra. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Nehem. 6.9, 10, etc.
hinder the doing of many good things, and in those we do, we are endangered,
not to do them in so good a manner for freedom, cheerfulness, and
perfection, as otherwise we might have done them.

Fifthly, 1 King. 22.1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. Genesis 34.20, 21.22, 23.
ordinary fellowship with the ungodly (when they may be lawfully and
conveniently avoided) is the way to harden them in their sinful state,
especially if they be not often and thoroughly reproved and admonished, for they
will soon conceive, that if their case were so wretched and damnable (as
indeed it is) then the other would not so much converse with them: And then
chiefly will they think so, when the godly make special contracts with
them as marriages, or have great familiarity, or continual and joint labors
with them.

Sixthlie, 2 Cor. 6.14.15 16. Pro. 22.1.
it is an unequal yoke, and so not only uneasy for a Christian to bear, but
also against the credit of Religion, and our own good name, both which ought
to be dear unto us, because the glory of God does much depend thereon, as all
experience shows.

Lastly, 2 Chronicles. 18.31. and 19 1, 2, 3. and 20.35, 36, 37.
the Lord has sharply chastised his servants, though never so upright and
dear unto him, for their sin this behalf.


Of the effects of the 4 means of grace, both in good and bad.
Parent. We perceive then that Christ by his Spirit gives the benefit of his
Covenant of grace unto his Church or people, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.4, 12, 13, 14, 15
Luk 11.9, 10. Acts 2.
seeking him heartily and exercising it self religiously in these four
outward Means which we have conferred of.


Pastor. Yes verily; but yet after diverse manners, as has been showed.

For

First, Romans 10.14, 15, etc. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20.
he calls by his word and evermore inlighteneth and guides by it.

Secondly, Mark. 9.24. and 11.24. Iam. 1.6. and 5.16, 17
he stirs up and inableth to pray with the assurance of Faith, and with a
fervent and holy desire (which are the two chief properties and sinews of
Prayer) and hears and blesses the same.

Thirdly, 2 Chronicles. 30.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
he setleth and comfort the heart in Grace by the worthy receiving and
remembering of the two Sacraments.

Fourthly, Act. 9.10, 20
he further moves and strengthens to forsake the evil, and to choose the
good, training and assisting in duty, by the conscionable use of the Communion
of Saints.


Parent. Are all these four means effectual to the salvation of all those
who have the outward use of them?


Pastor. No; for first, 2 Cor. 2.16, 17
there are some that perish, unto whom the preaching of Christ's Gospel is not
the savor of life unto life, but the savor of death unto death.

Secondly, Zach. 7.13. Psalm. 109.7.
the Lord will not hear their cry who will not hear his cry, but their prayer
shall be turned into sin.

Thirdly, Judas, Magus, etc.
the wicked reap no benefit by the Sacraments, but rather increase their sin
and condemnation.

And fourthly, 2 Chronicles. 27.33. and 2 Samuel 16 23. Act. 1.17. and 8.13. John
17.12.
though some be numbered with the very chiefest, and continue in their
fellowship, and that very nigh and special, yet they may be the children of
perdition.


A note or two of the consideration of Gods works.
Parent. Is not the consideration of Gods works showed in his Creatures, and
continual Providence over all, a profitable mean to teach and move us to
believe, fear, love, and obey the Lord?


Pastor. Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and 8.3. Dan. 9.12, 13.
Yes, for the Lord does as it were second and seal the truth of his Word by
proceeding according thereunto, in his works: For the which cause, Psalm.
77.10, 11, 12 and 111.^
the godly are commended in the Scriptures for their meditating and
right-applying of the works of Gods hands, Psalm. 28.5.1 Esai. 5.11, 12.
and the wicked have a woe pronounced against them for their profane neglect
and abuse of them.


Parent. Why then have you omitted to put the Meditation of Gods works unto
the means of grace?


Pastor. Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, etc.
Because the blindness and hardness of man's heart is such by our Nature
corrupted, that though this book of the creatures, and of all other the works
of God, be both great and plain, yet of it self it helps us not to attain
to the grace of the Gospel, but only as we are directed and led by some one
or more of those 4. means of grace that we have even now handled, and
chiefly by Psalm. 138.2. and 19.17.
the light of the Word of God; Otherwise it serves to make man without excuse.


II. Of Christ his Protecting and Defending of his Church. The second way of
Christ's ruling of his Church in this world.
Parent. How does Christ protect and defend his Church?


Child. Ps. 86. Psalm. 48. Psalm. 82.
Both by ordinary and extraordinary means.


Parent. By what ordinary means?


Child. Romans 13.1:2 3, 4. Psalm. 106.46. Jerem. 38.7 Genesis 37.39.40. etc.
chapters. Exodus 3.4, 5, 6. etc. chapters.
By his Magistrates, by his friends, and by his foes, and that both with and
against their wills.


Seru. Who are Christ's Magistrates?


Scholar. 1 Timothy 2.2.
The King, and all in authority under him.


Servant. Who are his friends?


Scholar. John 15.14.
They that do whatsoever he commands them.


Servant. Who are his foes?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 1.23. Apoc. 13.11.
They that set themselves against his truth, either directly or in a mystery.


Servant. What does Christ say of those that are either careless or slauishly
afraid to maintain his truth, when it is slandered and traduced?


Scholar. Math. 12.30.
He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me,
scatters abroad.


Parent. How does Christ protect his Church extraordinarily?


Child. Believe the histories of the Bible, and open thine eyes and see the
like hand of God upon many persecutors in these latter times also.
By sending it miraculous and wonderful preseruations and succors, and by
executing fearful and strange judgments upon the obstinate enemies thereof.


III. Of Christ his disposing of all things to the greatest good of his Church
in this world, The third and last way of Christ's ruling of his Church in this
world, and of his beginning to glorify it in the world to come.
and of his beginning to glorify it in the world to come.
Parent. HOw does Christ dispose all things to the greatest good of his Church?


Child. Romans 8.28. Math. 28.20. Mark. 16.20. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55 Psalm. 18.1. and
94.12, 13. Hab. 3.16.
Both by pouring his blessing upon all his direct means so that they take good
effect; and also by turning the very sins and afflictions of his servants,
and finally their death, unto contrary and profitable ends.


Servant. How does he turn the sins of his people, unto a contrary and
profitable end?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Romans 7.8, 9 13, 22, 23, 24, 25. Deuteronomy. 8.2. 2 Cor.
7.11. and 12.7, 8. 2 Chronicles. 32.31:
Whereas the end of sin is further intangling in sin, and at the last
everlasting damnation by the rule of Gods justice, God is pleased in mercy to
let his people see their corruption and infirmities, and the deceits of Satan,
by suffering themto fall into some sin, to the end they may be watchful and
circumspect for the time to come, lest they fall again into the like or more
grievous sins, and walking humbly before him, may the more earnestly beg
his grace; So not only preventing their condemnation, but also drawing them
unto him, even by that which seemed to estrange them most from him.


Servant. How does Christ turn the afflictions of his servants unto contrary
and profitable ends?


Scholar. By comforting, sanctifying and delivering them.


Servant. How does Christ comfort his people in time of their afflictions?


Scholar. 2 Cor. 1.3. Romans 5.2, 3. and 8.35, 36, etc. and 14.17. 1 Cor. 10.13.
2 Timothy 4.17. Iam. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.8.
He makes them to rejoice in the holy Ghost (with a beginning of joy
unspeakable and glorious) through the feeling of his love even in the midst of
tribulation, through a steadfast perswassion that he will give a happy issue in
due time; and further helps them in the mean space to bear their burdens
with patience.


Servant. What principal encouragement have you to suffer afflictions with
patience and comfort?


Scholar. Romans 8.28, 29 Luke 24.26. Heb. 12.2. Philip. 3.10. 1 Pet. 4.13, 14.
Because I am conformable therein unto the Son of God, my Savior and my Head,
who thus entering into his glory, made the passage both assured and easy for
me, and causes his glorious Spirit to rest upon me.


Servant. Must then the Godly needs suffer afflictions and so enter into Heaven?


Scholar. Luke 9.23. 2 Timothy 3.12. Acts 14.22.
Yes, and by no other way.


Servant. After what manner are they afflicted?


Scholar. 1 Samuel 1.15. 1 Cor. 11.30.31.32. Job 1.2 etc. chapters. Psalm. 73 4,
5.
Both in mind and body, and that not only with such tribulations, whereunto
the wicked are subject in this life, but also oftentimes after an especial
manner: Besides, Gal. 4.29.
they that are borne after the flesh, do persecute them that are borne after
the Spirit.


Servant. But do not the persecutions which the Godly suffer for the Gospel,
turn to the destroying of the Gospel?


Scholar. Phil. 1.12, 13, etc.
No, but rather to the furtherance of it.


Servant. How so?


Scholar. First, Mat. 16.18. with Phil. 1.12, 13, etc. 1 Pet. 4.14. 2 Cor.
1.8, 9. 1 Cor. 1.25. and 3.18, 19.
because God will get himself praise in letting all men see, that he not only
maintains and preserves, but also propagateth and spreads his truth,
whatsoever opposition is made unto it. And to that end he strengthens the
faith of his children, and confounds the wisdom of the world.

Secondly, Act. 28.22, 23, 24. 2 Cor. 1.6, 7.
God will graciously bless the godly sufferings of his servants, as well as
other their obedience and endeavors, for the further clearing, and so for the
continuance of his truth.

Thirdly, Coloss. 1.24. 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18.
God will thereby encourage the Sufferers to persevere.

Fourthly, Philip. 1.13, 14. 2 Cor. 1 6. 2 Timothy 2 9, 10.
the weaker sort of the godly are usually emboldned through the sufferings of
the stronger, and so the Gospel gets ground.

And fifthly, Act. 4.13. and 21.33. and 25.13, 14, etc. and 26.1, etc.
the rest are moved to consider more seriously of the cause; whence it is, that
sometimes even the Persecutors do attain to build that which before time they
destroyed, or at least wise do cease pecsecuting, and are made more mild and
favorable: though I should say nothing, that other whiles they are driven Dan.
3. and 6. chapters. Matthew. 27.54.
to confess the truth, albeit they will not truly convert; And some also are
afterward afraid Act. 9 5. It is a proverb taken from oxen or horses, who when
they are pricked by the driuer, do themselus no good by kicking and meeting the
prick, but rather procure double harm unto themselves by receiving the prick
the deeper into their own sides.
to kick against pricks, that is, lest having been convicted by the shining
light of the truth, together with the Patience and Constance of the children of
the truth (that do profess it and suffer for it) they do aggrauate and hasten
Gods fearful judgment against themselves, since that they cannot choose but
know, that, will they, nill they, they must be subject to the authority and
lordship of Christ, who is the holy and strong challenger of his own saving
truth and of every part thereof.


Servant. How does God sanctify his people by afflictions?


Scholar. Psalm. 119.67, 71. Exodus 10.28. Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 1.9, 10,
11. Revel. 3.19. Heb. 5.8. and 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 28.
Whereas affliction is in the proper nature thereof, through Gods pure justice,
the due punishment of sin, and such a punishment as by reason of our
frowardness draws more sins out of us, it is now made in Christ Jesus,
Gods fatherly chastisement to reclaim us from our sins, and to make us loath
them the more; and on the other side, to nurture and train us in Faith,
Patience, Wisdom and child like awe and obedience to the Lord.


Servant. But what if your afflictions abound and be exceeding great and long?


Scholar. Romans 8 18. 2 Cor. 4.17.
Yet I do reckon that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in me, as also that my light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for me a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, and therefore in such a case Psalm. 42. and 73.26. and
138.3. 2 Cor. 1.5.
I pray and strive for great and long patience, assuring my self, that God,
who is the strength of my heart, will strengthen me with strength in my soul,
and make my consolation abound through Christ.


Servant. It seems then that affliction proceeds from the divine Providence
and Love of our most merciful Father, as no small benefit unto them that are
thereby exercised.


Scholar. 2 Samuel 16.10. Matthew. 5.10. Revel. 3.19.
It is very true; If first, Heb. 12.6, 7.
we submit our selves to God, not refusing to be chastened.

Secondly, Mat. 24.13. 1 Timothy 1.19. 2 Timothy 6.12. Romans 2.7. Job. 1.21.
If we endure to the end in the profession of Faith and a good Conscience,
blessing the name of the Lord.

And thirdly, Heb. 12.10, 11.
If we profit thereby, partaking of Gods holiness, and yielding the peaceable
fruit of Righteousness; for the Righteous (says Job. 17.9.
Job) shall hold on his way, and he that haeh clean hands shall be stronger
and stronger.


Servant. How does Christ deliver his people out of afflictions?


Scholar. Jona. 4.6. Esai. 38.14.
Sometimes he eases them by mitigating their tribulations for a time, often
Psalm. 34.19. 2 Timothy 4.18. Psalm. 74.12.
he sets them free from their special afflictions by some powerful and
merciful hand of his, but Esai. 57.1, 2.
at the last he surely takes them away from whatsouer is evil by Death it
self.


Parent. What is Death?


Child. Luke 16.22, etc. 2 Cor. 5.1. with Phil. 1.21. Ioh. 11.25, 26.
Death is the parting asunder of Soul and Body, which though it be unto the
souls of the wicked a present entrance into Hell, yet unto the Godly it is
become by Christ Jesus the assured passage unto eternal life, Luke 23.43.
where they are instantly with him in Paradise.


Parent. What shall follow Death at the last?


Child. Heb. 9.27. Dan. 12.2.
The resurrection of the Body and the last Judgment.


Parent. To what end?


Child. 2 Cor. 5.10.
That every one both elect and reprobate may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, the one sort
unto the manifestation and praise of Gods mercy, and the other of his justice.


Servant. When shall the Resurrection of the Body and the last Judgment be?


Scholar. Both shall be at Christ's second coming, Mat. 24.36.
which for the day and hour cannot be known, either of Men or Angels.


Servant. What and whose bodies shall rise again?


Scholar. Job 19.26, 27. Math. 25.32. Rev. 20.13.
The very same and none other of every one (without exception) both of Gods
Elect and of the Reprobate, which they have in this life.


Servant. How does the word of God distinguish the bodies both of Gods Elect
and of the Reprobate, at the latter day?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. 1 Thessalonians. 4.15, 16, 17. Romans 14.9. 2 Timothy 4.1.
Into two sorts, the one, of all those who have been dead from the beginning
of the world until that instant of Christ's coming to judgment, the number of
whom is the greater, and the other are those that then shall be found alive.


Servant. By what means shall the dead bodies of Gods elect be raised up?


Scholar. 1 Cor. 15.
By the unspeakable power and virtue of Christ declared in his own
resurrection, at the sound of a trumpet, they all and every part and member of
them throughout the whole body, shall be restored and made perfect (in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye) notwithstanding all confusion and
hindrances whatsoever to the contrary.


Servant. And what shall be done to the bodies of Gods elect that then shall be
found alive?


Scholar. Luke 24. John 20. and 21. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.
Through the same power of Christ, who was changed when he rose from death to
life in his own body, they shall be likewise suddenly changed from all
corruption, and so be made perfect also, which change shall be unto them in
steed of a resurrection.


Servant. What kind of bodies shall they all then be?


Scholar. Mat. 13.43. 1 Cor. 15.43, 44, 45, 53. Phil. 3.20, 21.
Supernatural, incorruptible and glorious, even like unto Christ's own
glorious body, though not so glorious.


Servant. What says the holy Scripture of their souls?


Scholar. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. compared with 1 Cor. 13.10, 12, 13. and Col. 2.2, 3,
4.
Their souls (being endued with perfect knowledge, holiness and love, and
descending from heaven) shall at the same instant of the Resurrection and
change be reunited and coupled unto their bodies again, never to be separated
any more.


Servant. What of soul and body together?


Scholar. Revel. 21.4, 11. 1 John 3.2.
They both shall be free from all infirmities and imperfections, yea and
passions that have any pain joined with them, and generally from all evil.


Servant. What says the Scripture of the Reprobate?


Scholar. Ioh. 5.29. compared with the analogy of faith: and Revel. 1.7. and
6.15, 16, 17
Their dead bodies indeed shall be raised up from ye grave (as Malefactors are
taken from the prison to the trial) by the power of Christ their most
fearful Judge, and so their souls being joined again to their bodies (full
of extreme vglines and horror) they shall be made able to endure the wrath of
God for evermore, and the unbelievers then living shall likewise be changed to
the same effect.


Servant. What shall be done next afterward?


Scholar. Mat. 25.32. Act. 10.42.
Christ will immediately bring all both good and bad unto judgment.


Servant. How will he bring his Elect unto judgment?


Scholar. Mat. 25.3^ 32, 33. and 24.31. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
After that he has gathered all together by the Ministry of the Angels, he
will sever the Elect from the Reprobate, and place the Elect at his right hand
by his judgment seat.


Servant. How will he use the Elect in his judgment?


Scholar. Math. 25.34, 35. etc. Heb. 8.12. and 10.17. Ezekiel 18.22.
First he will pronounce them to be righteous, not once mentioning any of their
sins against them, and thereupon allot them unto his own blessed kingdom
and eternal life.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Math. 19.28.
he will honorably employ them, as Judges, to approve his most just sentence,
upon the evil Angels and Reprobate men.


Servant. When shall the sentence of salvation be executed to the Elect?


Scholar. Mat. 25.34, 46. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
Presently and together with the giving of the sentence, they shall be
glorified, even in the fight of the Reprobate; and afterward they shall go
triumphantly with Christ and his Angels into heaven.


Servant. But how shall the Reprobate be brought to judgment?


Scholar. Math 25.34. and 24.30, 31. Revel. 1.7. and 6.15, 16, 17.
They shall be forcibly haled by the Angels before Christ's Tribunal, and there
set at his left hand.


Servant. And how shall they be used? And what sentence shall they receive?


Scholar. Matt 25.41, 42, etc.
They being vpbraided and convicted of all their sins, shall receive the
sentence of condemnation, whereby they shall be appointed unto hell for
evermore.


Servant. How and when shall that sentence be executed?


Scholar. Mat. 25.46. Dan. 12.2. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Psalm. 58.10. Matthew. 11.20,
21, 22, 23, 24. Luke 12.47, 48.
Even instantly in the sight of the Elect, they shall be thrust into Hell,
where they shall be punished with everlasting destruction, shame and contempt,
from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power, with the Devil
and his Angels, every one according to the diverse measures of the deserts of
their sins.


Servant. Why is the day of judgment concealed from all Angels and men?


Scholar. Mat. 24.36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, etc. Mark. 13.33, 37. Luke 21.
34, 35, 36.
Both to prevent all curious inquiring, and also to make us the more watchful.


Servant. Why? what need have we to watch, seeing some signs that must go
before that day, are not yet fulfilled, as besides others, there Math. 24.23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Mark. 13.21, 22, 23.
must be False-Christs, and False-Prophets, showing great signs and wonders?


Scholar. For two reasons chiefly. First, Job. 33.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
Eccles. 9 10. Ps. 89.10, 11, 12. and 90.12. and 115.17. Hebr. 3.15. 1 Thessalonians.
5.1. to 12. Rev. 14.13. compared.
because our death is to us, as the last judgment shall be to them that then
shall be found living, forasmuch as they are both alike uncertain and
unknown, and we may be (yea and are often) deceived for the time of death as
much as any shall be for the time of the last judgment: And seeing the last
judgment shall find us in that state (whether for grace or sin) wherein
death leaves us; wherefore we must necessarily watch and prepare for death as
for the last judgment.

Secondly, Mar. 13.32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Luke 21.34, 35, 36. 1 Thessalonians. 5.1, 2,
3, 4, etc.
although we should not be deceived for the time either of the one or the
other, yet the danger of security (whereby men are hardened to their own
destruction) can be by no other means prevented nor avoided, but by watching,
the only remedy against it.


Servant. Wherein consists this so needful a Grace of Watchfulnes?


Scholar. Both in shunning all the occasions of security, and in using all
the means of a special preparation or readiness.


Servant. What occasions of security do you mean must be shunned, if we will
watch?


Scholar. Luke 21.34, 35, 36.
Not only voluptuousnes, covetousness, worldly carfulness, ambitious
desires, and the like, which are gross sins; Luke 17.26, 27, 28, etc. and
14.18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 7.24, 35. Esai. 22.12, 13, 14.
But also all abuse and excess, yea and the unseasonable use of things that of
themselves are necessary and warrantable, as eating, drinking, buying,
selling, planting, building, marrying and giving to marriage, recreating, etc.
as when men do give themselves over to these things which are so much the more
pernicious to the soul, because they are not ordinarily condemned amongst men.


Servant. What means of special Preparation or Readiness must we use?


Scholar. First, 2 Cor. 13.5. Revel. 21.27.
we must diligently examine our selves, whether we have the Faith, Repentance
and Sanctification which lead unto salvation.

Secondly, we must be careful Mat. 25.14, 15, etc. to 31. Dan. 5.18, to 24.
with 4.24, 25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 10.31. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
of the talents, that is, of those gifts and graces both of mind and body,
which God has distributed to us, to use them to his glory and to the good of
his Church (yea and that others also may be stirred up to seek and serve the
Lord) which likewise turns to Gods advantage in the end.

Thirdly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17, 18, 19, 20, 23. Psalm. 16.1. Luke 21.36. Mark. 13.33,
34. Revel. 22.20.
we must set our selves in most serious manner, as to all the exercises of
Piety, so specially to Prayer, that God would preserve us from falling away,
that he would hasten his coming to Judgment, and fit us thereunto.


Servant. How shall one know whether he have the true grace of Faith that
leads to salvation?


Scholar. Besides other notes which I have declared Part. 2. and Part. 5.
above, one may try himself whether he has true saving Faith by these two.

First, Romans 5.2, 3, etc. Heb. 10.34, 35. 1 Cor. 3.21, 23.
when he can rightly rejoice and glory in God, comfortably depending upon him
in all necessities, fears and dangers, yea even in the midst of his greatest
tribulations and trials, upon this ground of assurance, that all things are
his, he Christ's, and Christ Gods.

Secondly, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. 1 Ioh. 5.4.
when his heart rejoices at the very remembrance and consideration of the day
of Judgment, because he is privy to himself that he has fought the good
fight of Faith against all his temptations, and has also kept the same in a
good conscience.


Servant. And how shall one perceive in himself true Repentance and
Sanctification?


Scholar. First, more generally, Math. 11.12. 1 John. 3.2, 3, 8, 10. Phil.
3.10, 11, 12, etc. Psalm. 119.6. Matthew. 16.23. Act. 5.3. Zach. 3.2. Ro^. 16.10.
1 Ioh. 2.13, 14. Ephesians. 4 26, 27. and 6.13.
when one fully purposes in his heart and applies his whole strength (pouring
forth his prayers incessantly unto the Lord) both to be thoroughly purged from
all his sins without exception, because where any one known sin reigns,
there Satan's throne is, and also to walk with God purely, in the obedience of
all his commandments all his days, and most of all in such duties as God does
specially require at his hands, for the magnifying of his power and grace over
Satan and Sin, and specially at what time he is most strongly tempted to
evil, or opposed in that which is good.

Secondly, more particularly by the graces of humility and mercy.


Servant. How may we perceive the soundness of our repentance and
sanctification by the grace of humility?


Scholar. Romans 11.20, 22. Pro. 15.33. Luke 17.10. 1 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7. Job.
31.13, 14, 34. 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, etc. 13. with Psalm. 51 and 141.5. and 144.3. 1 Timothy 1.15. Ephesians. 3.8. Esai. 40, 17.
When in all our ways, and even in our greatest earthly prosperity, we do
carry our selves with lowliness and fear both before God and Men, as being
ever in Gods sight, and only vpholden by his grace, having nothing but what we
have received, and that of his free goodness only, which he might have given
(if he had pleased) to any others (though never so unworthy) as well as to us,
and of sinners that shall be saved the chief, but less than the least of all
Saints in one respect or other, if not in many. And seeing all people and
nations of the whole world are counted to God less then nothing and vanity,
how little (judge you) is each particular person (if so he knew himself
aright) in his own eyes? To conclude, it is a good note that we have
humility (the ready way to glory) when we can patiently and thankfully in
the secret of our hearts hear our reproves, and holilie profit by them.


Servant. How by Mercy?


Scholar. Mark. 3.5. Luke 19.8, 41, 42, 43.44. Act. 9.36. and 10.1: etc. Gal.
6.10. Psalm. 16.2, 3. and 35, 13, 14. Heb. 6.10. and 13.3.16 Iam. 2.13. Mat.
24.34. etc. Act. 9 4. Esai. 63.9. 2 Cor. 8.2, 3. and 9.7.
When we feel our hearts continually moved with compassion toward all, for
their miseries both spiritual and corporal, striving to do them good, yea
though they be very wicked, and our intractable enemies; and specially when we
have a quick sense of the greeuances of the poor members of Jesus Christ his
mystical body, tendering them as if our selves (yea Christ himself in a sort)
were afflicted with them, stirring up our selves willingly and cheerfully
(though in deep poverty) to our power, See more of Repentance in Part 2.
and sometimes beyond our power to comfort and help them, and that the rather,
because we see this grace so generally neglected amongst men, yea of those
that profess godliness.


Servant. How may we know that we do use our talents to Gods glory, and the
good of his Church?


Scholar. Luke 17.10. Eccles. 1.1, 2, etc the whole book. Revel. 3.19. Genesis
22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Act. 21.13. Romans 9.3. 2 Timothy 2 9, 10. Ephesians. 1.12. 1
Pet 4.1, 2, 3, 10, 11.
When being inwardly ashamed and displeased at our selves for our former
follies and vanities in the abuse of our gifts, our unprofitableness,
coldness, and sloth, we learn to be more affected with Gods cause than our
own, and with the salvation of men's souls than the safeguard of our own
bodies, and thereupon do from time to time studiously employ our gifts,
whether great or small, unto the same ends in taking all the most likely
occasions and using them in the wisest and most gracious manner we possibly
can, that they may become effectual.


Servant. And how shall we know that our prayers which we make in respect of
the last judgment, are right before God?


Scholar. Romans 7.24. Philip. 1.21. 2 Cor. 5.2. 2 Pet. 3.12, 13.
If they proceed from an earnest desire and longing of the heart for the coming
of the Lord, not so much to be freed from worldly miseries, as of a holy love
to be discharged of sin, and to be clothed with righteousness.


Servant. Shall all they that are thus watchful find their death and the last
judgment truly comfortable to themselves?


Scholar. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. Luke. 21.28. 1 These. 5.1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11. Heb. 9.28. Reu. 21.2, 3, etc. and 22.20.
Yes undoubtedly, and therefore their consciences may and shall gather many
comfortable tokens and pledges of Gods love toward them for their eternal
salvation.


Of Christ's most full and absolute glorifying of his Church in heaven, the
place of the blessed.
Parent. HOw will Christ most fully and absolutely glorify his Church in
heaven, the place of the blessed?


Child. Psalm. 16.11. 1 These. 4 17. Luke 20.36.
He will make them dwell evermore in his own most happy presence, sight and
fellowship, together with all his blessed Angels; Esai. 64.4. Revel. 2.17.
Dan. 12.3. Luke 17.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19
and there he will fill every vessel of mercy with honor, and joy
unspeakable, according to the measure of his grace severally bestowed on them
in this present life, and as they have put the same to good use in seeking of
his glory, while they lived here.


Parent. Finally, I would entreat you (loving Pastor) to collect the sum of our
whole Conference, cheefely for the most necessary matter and points, and to
compose it in easy and ordinary meeter, which we will often read over or sing
as we follow our earthly labors, or at our leisure, sometimes one part, and
sometimes another, as we shall think needful, and fit for our edification.
For we assure our selves that you are studious to dress and order this food
of our souls after sundry sorts, as good Cooks do their meats, that so our
taste may be pleased, our appetite stirred up, Job 23.12.
and we may receive it rather then our necessary food fitted for us, if not in
one manner, yet in another.


Pastor. Lo then, your desire is satisfied, and that in as plain a manner as I
was able to attain unto, without affecting a lofty style, or using hard words,
because I would benefit you, poor simple countrie-people by speaking to your
understanding. O you ignorant souls, will you still loath the heavenly Manna,
though the Lord has tempered it for you after so many fashions? Consider at
length (if nothing else will move you) with what face you shall behold the Lord
(at that day) if you continue careless. Prou. 1.29.30. etc. with 2 These. 1.7,
8, 9.
And if you will bestow some time in singing it, or some part of it daily, you
shall find (by Gods grace) it will prove a good Mean, especially with some
wits and dispositions, both to inform and to delight in the ways of
Godliness. See my warrant in Ephesians. 5 19. and Col. 3.16.



The Peroration, or sum of the whole in Meeter.
The Peroration or Sum of the whole, in five parts.
First, of God and his Law.
ONe only God, yet persons three,
I evermore confess,
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
of like Almightinesse.
Without beginning or any end,
this living God I praise,
Most wise, most just, and merciful,
and infinite always.
God maker is, and governor
of Heaven, Earth, Seas and all,
Of Angels, Men, all Creatures,
all matters great and small.
God works all unto the best,
his own elect to save,
And will condemn the Reprobate,
themselves that mis behave.
God made man good, just, right, and pure,
and never to have died,
But shamelesly and wilfully
forbidden fruit man tried.
Through Satan's slight, so him and his
corrupt and bad he made,
In soul to hatch his secret sin,
and body it to trade.
Then God gave man his holy Law,
the ten Commandments,
And charged him to keep them all,
and thus with him indents.
If perfectly thou do these things,
without all sinful stain,
Thou shall my blessing plentiful
and heavens joys attain.
But if in any thing at all
thou fail or break my lore,
Then surely thou my curse shall feel
in hell for evermore.
Lo here the substance and the sum
of these ten Laws of his,
Which in most dreadful sort he gave us,
to all his folkeywis.
The ten Commandments.

Gods inward worshid hye,
As him to know, to fear and love
and trust in him only.

the ontward worship pure
Of God only, as he appoints
in Canon of Scripture.

of Gods most sacred name,
His titles, words and works, that I
dishonor not the same.

the Sabbath day to keep,
And set my heart and body both,
the Lord only to seek.

that special duties all,
I rightly yield to every one,
to high, low and equal,
Respecting special calling theirs
and mine. So happiness
I shall enjoy, whether I live
a longer space or less.

to others and my self,
Man's person eke, with due regard
of souls and bodies health.

the rule of Chastity,
In heart and tongue, and every part,
to lead my life thereby.

for goods and maintenance,
To yield the right to every one,
to pore his sustenance.
9. The ninth concerning man's good name,
all duties does command,
In public and in private both
God looks for at my hand.

from ill concupiscence,
And pleasing-sinfull thoughts, before
consent to such offense.
* Then, out alas, and welladay,
what shall of me become,
That every day do break Gods law,
even from my mothers womb?
I, wretched soul, have spent my time
each day and night in sin,
By thought, by word and deed, yet I
have seldom known wherein.
From sin therefore which I not feel,
I little care to flee;
Nor if I did, could I escape
by any means in me
Against Gods Law, a Rebel I
to God and self a foe:
And in that state fast held I am
by Satan's snares also.
Gods curse is mine by due desert,
even hellish condemnation:
Who then can work my liberty,
my peace and my salvation?
Secondly, Of Christ and his Gospel.
O Heavenly father thou sent'st forth
the second person hye,
Thine only Son, who was conceived
in womb of maid Marie
By holy ghost, and in due time
was borne our nature in,
In all respects a very Man,
excepting only sin.
Christ Jesus he both God and man
Gods holy Law obai'd,
And yet the endless curse thereof
for us on him was laid.
His soul was heavy to the death,
his body hanged on tree,
Till wrath of God was satisfied,
It Is finished then said he.
His blood he shed to save our souls,
he put to shameful death,
For to prevent our hellish pain,
our sins did stop his breath.
So in our stead himself he gave
an holy sacrifice;
Imputed to the faithful flock
that serve him in right wise.
For Faith believes, Christ loved me,
himself for me he gave,
Embracing firm Christ's righteousness,
which Gods Elect does save.
This Faith, if true, will comfort yield
to each repentant heart,
And certainly repentance shall
perform a happy part.
Thy mind full sore shall grieved be,
for all offenses past,
Because thereby thou piercedst Christ,
full bitter shall they taste:
And them to leave Repentance will
thee teach, and sanctify,
In holiness and righteousness
to lead thy self godly.
Such thankfulness will faith bring forth
from secret heart within,
That Christ his will to know and do,
forthwith thou shall begin.
And then thy conscience shall be built
upon his holy Word,
To serve him so, and for to wait
only upon the Lord.
Ye further eke his crossing cross
thy mind shall not abhor,
To take it up with Patience
and bear it less or more.
And finally to give thy self
entirely unto him,
Thy heart will melt for his great love
and pardoning thy sin.
But as for unbelieving souls,
converting not to God,
Unthankful and impatient they
to kiss his blessed Rod.
They work their own inventions,
Christ's word they do neglect,
They do but prate and make a show
sure Christ will them reject.
Therefore, dear Christian take good heed
and follow not their guise,
Their course is naught, their hope also
is vanity and lies.
And for to train thy silly soul,
to walk the way aright,
Behold Gods rich provision
to give thee true insight.
His Law does show thy foul great sin,
thy misery and curse,
And terrify thy heart that is
convict, but yet the worse.
But Christ's Gospel does show thee grace,
speaks peace and gives thee Faith,
And leads thee straight to obey the law
as holy Scripture says.
Thirdly, of the Word of God, and of Prayer.
Five Exercises Christ has framed,
for thee to labor in,
To purge thy heart from unbelief,
corruption and sin.
*The first and chiefest is his Word,
both truly preached and heard,
Next, often read and thought upon,
and soberly conferd.
*And Prayer is the second thing,
in Christ his name with Faith,
With purity and feruencie,
such shall be safe he says.
For God has sanctified this course
to be his Ordinance,
Thereby to bless whom ever he will,
with loving countenance.
The Lords Prayer.
To God therefore the gracious Lord,
to call be not thou dull,
He is become through Jesus Christ,
Our Father merciful.
And pray with reverence, and withal
believe that help he gives,
And say, which art in Heaven, still
thy power and mercy lives.

desire to glorify
Gods holy name, before all things
and each necessity.
For, Hallowed be thy name, Christ made
the first Petition;
Now Hallowed means magnified,
Gods name himself alone.

Thy kingdom come, apace,
Enlarge thy Kingdom here, O Lord,
by thy good means of grace.
Thy spirit let work effectually,
and holy word let run,
And quickly end these sinful days,
even so Lord Jesus come.
thy will be done
in earth, to wit, that we
May do his will, as it is in heaven,
where Angels perfect be:
And that withal we may submit
our selves his will to bide,
In time of our adversity,
when crossed on every side.
4. The fourth Petition Christ taught us
Give us this day, O Lord,
Our daily bread, each needful thing
convenient for this world.
Yet so, in case it be thy will,
none otherwise we pray,
These earthly things do sometimes help,
and sometimes turn away.
But saving grace, most absolute,
without an If or And,
We ask and seek without a Nay,
at thine Almighty hand.
And forgive us (Lord)
our debts and trespasses,
Remit our sins, us justify,
and give Christ's righteousness:
As we forgive them that trespass
against us, great and small,
For thy free grace does mollify
our hearts to debtors all.
For why? our brothers dreatest debt
is but an hundredth pence,
But ours to God, who knows how much?
ten thousand great talents.
And lead us not
into temptation,
But (Lord) deliver us from ill,
Satan's suggestion;
Oh mortify our nature vile,
and quicken us afresh:
Thy special aid we need each day
for weakness of our flesh.
And Lord I ground my heart, only
to have these things from thee,
For thine is (eke) the kingdom, and
the power and the Glory
For ever. So full right and power
sure thou have over all,
And al things do to thine own praise,
all times perpetual.
Amen, so be it, and so it is,
and so shall be for aye
Therefore till God shall grant my suite,
I will not cease to pray:
Fourthly, Of the Sacraments, the Communion of Saints, and the consideration of
Gods works.
THe third Mean is Christ's Sacraments,
Baptism and Supper (his)
The seals of Christ's righteousness
and pledges of his bliss.
Baptism.

For why? In Baptism sure there is
assured unto thee,
Thy sins are washed by his blood,
and thou renewed shall be.
And thou art entered once for all
into the fellowship
Of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
at no time thence to slip.
This holy Trinity is thy God,
and thou his Child become:
His grace is thine, thou not thine own,
through Christ these things are done.
And Faith is it that consecrates
thee to the Lord alone,
Yea Faith (I say) in Christ's death
and Resurrection.
Therefore unto the Lord see thou
thy self do dedicate,
To dye to sin and live to him,
in state regenerate.
As water skowreth filth away,
so makes it fair and clean;
Think not thy sin is washed, when yet
thou wicked do remain.
The Supper of the Lord.

* So in the Supper of the Lord,
this gracious Covenant
Is otherwise set forth to thee
that art the Lords servant.
The broken bread does signify
Christ's body put to death;
The powered wine his precious blood
does note unto thy Faith.
When Bread and Wine are ministered
by Minister to thee,
Think with thy self, Christ offers
himself and grace to me.
And when thou eatst and drinkst ye same
persuade thy self withal,
Christ's Merits now belong to me,
to set me free from thrall.
Thy Baptism once was ministered,
the Supper often ought;
The new birth needs often relief,
though once it was truly wrought.
Wherefore as bread and wine do fresh
our bodies oftentimes,
So comforts Christ the conscience
with guilt of sin that pines.
And as man's body gathers heart,
by bread and wine to live;
So by this sacred food, the Lord,
more spiritual strength will give,
To do his will with thankfulness,
more perfect for to be,
And better able sin to leave,
this is the verity.
And finally as thou do join,
and that in open place,
Amids Gods people that receive
before Christ Jesus face:
See then that peace and love in thee
unfeigned be to Men,
And specially to faithful folk,
else thou art none of them.
Stir up thy knowledge and thy faith,
repentance and thy love,
Be zealous of this holy food,
unworthy lest thou prove.
Examine well thy heart before,
to God thy prayer power,
And look and try how thou do thrive
in grace from that same hour.
*The fourth good Mean or Exercise
that Christ bids thee to use,
Is special fellowship with Saints,
the bad thou must refuse.
The Saints will teach and comfort thee,
and many ways thee aid,
The bad will badly teach and will
make thee of grace afraid.
* The fifth and last is noting well
Gods creatures, works and hand,
His judgments and his benefits
God cause thee to understand.
His patient long-sufferance,
and doings good always,
Repentance and Obedience
do teach thee every day.
Fifthly, Of the right use of the Means of Grace, and the Reward thereof.
DRaw near to God with upright heart,
and use these means of grace,
Then Christ will be thy King and Priest,
and Prophet in each case.
Thy King to work and rule thy heart
according to his will,
Most ready for to do thee good,
and save thee from all ill.
Thy Priest, for why? he offered up
himself to death for thee,
And will apply his precious merits
thy heart to purify.
And of this thing thou may be sure,
because he rose again
From death to life, ascended up,
and reigns now in heaven.
And thence it is, he works by
his scepter and his rod,
Making his Means effectual
to bring thee unto God.
And thence he is thy Prophet eke
by Ministers that teach
His holy word, which thou must hear
and diligently search.
Directing all thy ways thereto,
with good and honest heart;
Christ wholly thine, thou wholly his
by true endeavor art.
Then God will surely save thy soul
for Christ's sake his Son,
And prosper thee in all thy ways,
what ere is said or done.
He Will turn thy sufferings to the best,
and Satan eke confound:
His Promises he will fulfill,
if that thy heart be sound.
Believe then firmly in thy mind,
that God will count thee pure,
Full freely and full graciously,
Christ's Gospel is most sure.
Repent thee, turn and grow in grace,
be thankful and rejoice
In suffering with thy Savior,
obey his holy voice.
And keep thy self within thy lot,
thy calling and degree,
Take pains, be just, meek, merciful,
and God will hark to thee.
And always watch, for Christ shall come
to judge both quick and dead,
Thy Body shall be raisd from dust,
and to thy soul joined.
Thy sins he will not mention,
the just he will declare,
But judge he will the Reprobate,
their sins he will not spare;
Their damned state thou shall behold,
Christ's sentence to commend,
Yet thou the joys unspeakable
shall have without all end.

A Form of Prayer after Conference.
Parent. WE Coloss. 1.9.
pray thee, O God, to fill us with the knowledge of thy will in all wisdom
and spiritual understanding, even the forgiveness of our sins, Romans 9.5.
who is God over all, blessed for ever.


Child. Amen.


Servant. Amen.


Scholar. Amen.


HEB. 6.1. Let us go on to perfection.


FINIS.

