BEAMS OF DIVINE LIGHT, Breaking forth from several places of holy Scripture,
as they were learnedly opened, In XXI. Sermons.

The III. first being the foregoing Sermons to that Treatise called The
Bruised-Reed, Preached on the precedent words.

By the late Reverend and Judicious Divine, RICHARD SIBS, D.D. Mr. of Katharine
Hall in Camb: and sometimes Preacher at GRAYES INN.

Published according to the Doctor his own appointment subscribed with his
hand; to prevent imperfect Coppies.

ESAIAS. 60 3. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness
of thy rising.

PSALM. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and shield, the Lord will give grace
and glory; and no good thing will be withhold from them that walk uprightly.

LONDON. Printed by G.M. for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange, and R Harford,
at the guilt Bible in Queenes-head Alley in Pater Noster-Row. MDCXXXIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN, LORD ROBERTS, Baron of Truro: AND TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE THE LADY LVCE his pious Consort, Grace and Peace from Jesus Christ.
Right Honorable and truly Noble:
IT was not so much the Nobility of your blood, as that of Grace given unto you
from the divine hand, which did so much interest you in the love and esteem of
that worthy Servant of Christ, and Author of this work; in whom* Vrim and
Thummim met, whose whole course being a real, and vital sermon, sweetly
consonant to the tenor of his teaching, made him amiable living, and
honorable dead in the opinion of as many as well knew him: This was the thing
(I suppose) which wrought unto him from you (as well as from many others of
your Noble Stock and Rank) more then an ordinary esteem: and this is that
which makes me in nothing to doubt, but that his labors made public under
your names, shall be very welcome unto you: the work is answering unto the
man; and therefore worthy you, and your acceptance: only this is the
disadvantage; that though these Sermons had his own tongue to preach them; yet
they want his own pen to commend them unto your Honors: I well know that the
expressions of holy truths from a gracious heart by lively voice do breed
deeper impressions in thirsting and reverent hearers, then any publishing of
them in dead letters can do; yet this we find in experience, that holy and
necessary truths, this way coming abroad into the Churches of God, do get the
advantage to continue longer, and to become a more general good; they may
stir up the affections, and set on-wards in the course of holiness where the
comforts are sure, and the honors honoring everlasting.

In these ensuing Sermons you have variety the mother of delight; and such
notable descriptions of the person, offices, love, and life of Christ, that by
them you may not only be settled in divine assurances to your further comforts,
but also directed and encouraged (both in your inward and outward conversation)
to follow the example of Christ, the most blessed and unerring example unto all
Christians. This Champion I beseech you both to follow unto your lives end;
make it your work to set up Christ, and his Religion both in your hearts, and
in your houses. Acknowledge none but Christ in matter of salvation; and none to
Christ in point of affection: let Christ be Christ with you, and then if Christ
(and if not Christ nothing can) be worth any thing he will make you worthy
indeed, he will prove unto you in life and death a Sun, a shield, even a full
and an answerable good: with this Christ I leave you, and with you these
ensuing Sermons, to be read and observed for your spiritual furtherance in the
enjoyment of eternal life by Jesus Christ, desiring the great God of Heaven
and Earth to look upon both you and yours in much grace and mercy; giving
unto you all the comfort and crown of Religion here on earth; and hereafter in
Heaven. I rest,

Your honors to be commanded JOHN SEDOVVICK.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader:
THE Word of God is given us as a most precious treasure, and that not for our
selves only, but for our children after us, and therefore is called Jsraels
Jnheritance, Deuteronomy. 33.4. Moses commanded us a Law, even the Inheritance of the
Congregation of Jacob. All the wealth in the world is but as dirt and trash in
comparison of the Word to the people of God. (Thy testimonies have I taken as
an heritage for ever; for they are the rejoicing of mine heart, says David,
Psalm. 119.111.) And therefore as they rejoice in their own enjoying of it, so
they do what they may to assure it to their children when they are dead, that
it may be entailed upon them and their posterity after them, Yea so they do
also with the knowledge of divine truths which they have found in the Word,
(which is not indeed found out by men all at one time, but by degrees, as Gold
is found in Mines* as men come to search farther and farther and to dig deeper
and deeper for it) It was not (they know) imparted to them for their own use
only, but for the benefit of others, the manifestation of the Spirit is given
to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. and therefore as it comes to them from Heaven
they hand it to others, 1 Timothy 3.15.
that so it may be continued in the Church, the ground and pillar of truth, for
the good of those that shall live in future times.

This was, I hope, the chief aim of those that have published these Sermons
of that worthy Light of our Church, Dr. Sibs. And surely we have great cause in
this regard thankfully to acknowledge their care and pains, who both took
them so exactly from his mouth as he delivered them, and then kept them so
charity as (...) a precious thing committed to their trust, 2 Timothy 1.14
and have now published them for the common good of all that will make use of
them. For by this means what was delivered to a few may now build up many to
farther degrees of knowledge and grace even all the Land over, and they that
never saw his face may be made sharers in those his labors which only a few
were so happy as to hear.

Being my self one amongst others that have found the advantage hereof, I was
not so hardly won as otherwise I should have been, to commend these Beams
of divine Light to the respect of others. Diverse truths of greatest
consequence are exactly handled in the several Sermons here presented to you,
as concerning the misery of our natural estate and the bl^sse and happiness
of those that are quickened by Christ, concerning the necessity of the Word, our
spiritual Food and the Zealous Violence of the Faithful impressing after it,
concerning the diverse both joys and sorrows, complaints and Triumphs of Gods
children here, when they are black though comely, Cant. 1.5. and concerning
their happiness in death, and glory after it, and many other whereof these few
are only a taste,

The study of the Scriptures made the Author a man of God, perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works, and as became a faithful Steward of the
manifold grace of God, he endeavored to teach the whole counsel of God, and
to store men with the knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding. I desire that both thou and I and all Gods people may so read
these his labors that it may farther our growing in grace and in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whose grace I commend thee, being

Woodstreet, November 6. 1638. Thine in him ARTHVR. JACKSON.

A DESCRIPTION OF CHRIST, In His neerenesse to GOD, In His calling, In His
qualification, In His execution of his calling.


In three Sermons, Being the leading Sermons to that Treatise called the
Bruised Reed, preached upon the precedent words. By the late Reverend and
learned Divine RICHARD SIBS, Doctor in Divinity, Master of Katherine Hall in
Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at GRAYES INN.


ISA. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has
anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek.

LONDON. Printed by G M. for N Bourne, and R. Harford and are to be sold at the
south entrance of the Royal Exchange, and at the guilt Bible in
Queenes-head-Alley in Paternoster row. MDCXXXIX.

A DESCRIPTION OF CHRIST.
MAT. 12.18. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my Beloved in whom my soul
is well pleased, I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to
the Gentiles, he shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his
voice in the streets, etc.


THE words are the accomplishment of a prophecy taken out of Isaiah 42. as we
may see by the former verse, Scope of the words.
That it might be fullfilled. Now the occasion of bringing them in here in
this verse, it is a charge that Christ gives verse. 16. That they should not
discover and make him known for the miracles he did, he withdrawes himself,
he was desirous to be concealed, he would not live to the view overmuch: for he
knew the rebellious disposition of the Jews, that were willing to change their
government, and to make him King, therefore he labored to conceal himself
all kind of ways, now upon this charge that they should tell no body, he
brings in the Prophet Isaiah prophesying of him, Behold my servant, etc. he
shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets. Other Kings labor that their pomp and magnificence may be seen, but
he shall not mind ostentation, he shall not be contentious nor clamarous, for
these 3. things are meant when he says, he shall not strive, nor cry, neither
shall his voice be heard in the streets, he shall not yield to any
ostentation: for he came in an abased state to work our salvation, he shall
not be contentious, nor yet clamarous in matter of wrong, there shall be no
boasting any kind of way, as we shall see when we come to the words, you see
then the inference here.

The inference in the Prophet Isaiah is to comfort the people, and to direct
them how to come to worship the true God, after he had declaimed against their
Idolatry, as we see in the former chapter, Behold my servant, etc. Great
Princes have their Ambassadors, and the great God of Heaven has his Son, his
servant in whom he delights, through whom, and by whom, all intercourse
between God and man is.

It is usual in the Prophesies, especially of Isaiah that Evangelicall
Prophet, when he foretells any thing comfortable to the people, Christ promised
in the old testament.
in the promise of temporal things he rises to stablish their faith in better
things, To stablish faith in other promises.
by adding thereto a prophecy, and promise of Christ the Messiah, to insinuate
thus much, I will send you the Messiah that is a greater gift then this that I
have promised you, therefore you may be sure of the less, as the Apostle
reasons excellently, Romans 8. If he spared not his own son but delivered him
to death for us all, how shall he not with him give us all things? So here, I
have promised you deliverance out of Babylon, and this and that, do you doubt
of the performance? alas what is that in comparison of a greater favor I
intend you in Christ, that shall deliver you out of another manner of Babylon,
Behold my servant whom I have chosen, and in Isa. 7. Behold a Virgin shall
conceive, and bare a son, etc. I will send you the Messiah, God shall become
man, therefore I will not stand for any outward favor or deliverance
whatsoever. So he goes to the grand promise, that they might reason from the
greater to the less.

There is another end why in other promises, To comfort them against their own
unworthiness.
there is mention of the promise of the Messiah, to uphold their faith. Alas
we are unworthy of these promises, we are laden with sin and iniquity. It is
no matter, J will send you the Messiah, Behold my servant in whom my soul
delights, and for his sake I will delight in you, I am well pleased with you,
because I am well pleased in him, therefore be not discouraged, All the
Promises are yea and Amen in Jesus Christ: 2 Cor. 1.19.
For all the promises that be, (though they be for the things of this life)
they are made for Christ, they are yea in him, and they are performed for his
sake, they are Amen in him; So much for the occasion of the inference in the
Evangelist Saint Matthew, and likewise in the Prophet Isay.

To come more directly to the words.

Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my Beloved in whom my soul is well
pleased, etc.
In the words you have a description of Christ, his nearenesse to God, Behold
my servant whom I have chosen, my Beloved in whom my soul is well pleased.

And then his calling and qualification, I will put my Spirit upon him.

And the execution of that calling, He shall show judgment to the Gentiles.

Then the quiet and peaceable manner of the execution of his calling, He shall
not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets, etc.

Behold,
This word is as it were a Beacon lighted up to all the rest, in all the
Evangelists you have this word often repeated, and the Prophets likewise when
they speak of Christ, there is no Prophecy almost but there is this word
Behold,

Why? The word Behold used.

Not to spend time in the variety of acceptions, but to speak of it as may
serve for the present purpose. To show Christ as present.
The use of it in the Prophet, especially out of which these words are taken,
was to present Christ to the hearts of the people of God then, therefore he
says Behold; for Christ was present to the Believers then, he did profit
before he was, he did good before he was exhibited, because he was the Lamb
of God slain from the beginning of the world, he was yesterday as well as to
day, and to morrow as well as to day, yesterday, to day, and the same for ever:
he was present to their Faith, and present to them in Types and Sacrifices, and
present in Gods acceptance of him for them; therefore the Prophets mount up
with the wing of Prophecy, and in regard of the certainty of the things to
come, they speak as if they were present, as if they had looked on Christ
present, Behold my servant, and Behold a Virgin, etc.

But that is not all, To take their minds off from their miseries.
another use of this word Behold, was to call the peoples minds from their
miseries, and from other abasing objects that dejected them, and might force
despair; why do you dwell upon your unworthiness, and sin, raise up your
minds, Behold my servant whom I have chosen, etc. This is an object worth
beholding and admiration, especially of a distressed soul that may see in
Christ whatsoever may comfort it.

To raise their minds from earthly things.
A third end of it is to raise the mind from any vulgar, common, base contents,
you look on these things, and are carried away with common trivial objects,
as the poor Disciples when they came to the Temple, they stood wondering at
the stones, what wondrous stones? what goodly building is here? so shallow
minded men, they see any earthly excellency, they stand gazing; Alas says
Christ, do you wonder at these things? so the Prophet here raises up the
minds of men to look on an object fit to be looked on, Behold my servant,
etc. So that the Holy Ghost would have them from this saving object, Christ, to
raise satisfaction to their souls every way; are you dejected? here is
comfort; are you sinful? here is righteousness; are you led away with present
contentments? here you have honors, and pleasures, and all in Christ Jesus,
you have a right to common pleasures that others have, and besides them you
have interest to others that are everlasting pleasures that shall never fail;
so that there is nothing that is dejecting, and abasing in man, but there is
comfort for it in Christ Jesus, he is a salve for every sore, a remedy for
every malady, therefore, Behold my servant.

This word Behold, it is a word of wonderment, and indeed in Christ there are a
world of wonders, every thing is wonderful in him. Things new are wonderful,
and things rare, and things that are great, that transcend our capacity are
wonderful, that that stops our understanding that it cannot go through them,
vulgar things we see through them quickly, but when we see things that stay our
understandings, that raise our understandings higher, and that are more
capacious then our understandings, here is matter of admiration and wonder. Now
whatsoever may make wonderment is in Jesus Christ, whose name is Wonderful, as
it is Isaiah 9.7. therefore the Prophet says, Behold.

My servant.
Christ is called a servant, Christ a servant.
first in respect of his creation, because being man, as a creature he was a
servant, but that is not all.

He was a servant in respect of his condition; servant implies a base and low
condition, By Condition.
Philip. 2. Christ took upon him the form of a servant, he emptied himself,
he was the lowest of all servants in condition: for none was ever so abased as
our glorious Savior.

And then, By Office.
it it a name of office as well as of base condition. There are ordinary
servants and extraordinary, as great Kings have their servants of state. Christ
besides his abasement, he was a servant of state, he was an Ambassador sent
from the great God, a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, In respect o^ God.
as we shall see afterward, an extraordinary servant to do a piece of service
that all the Angels in Heaven, and all the men on the Earth joined together
could not perform, this great masterpiece of service was to bring God and man
together again that were at variance, as it is, 1 Pet. 3.18.
1. Pet. 3.18. to bring us to God, we were severed and scattered from God, his
office was to gather us together again, to bring us all to one head again, to
bring us to himself and so to God, to reconcile us, as the Scripture phrase
is. Now it being the greatest work and service that ever was, it required the
greatest servant, for no creature in the world could perform it, all the
Angels of Heaven would have sunk under this service to have undergone
satisfaction to divine justice: for the Angels themselves when they sinned,
they could not recover themselves but sunk under their own sin eternally;
thus we see how he is Gods servant, who set him a part and chose him to his
service.

In respect of us.
And then, he was a servant to us, for the Son of man came to minister, not to
be ministered unto, he washed his Disciples feet, he was a servant to us,
because he did our work and suffered our punishment, we made him serve by our
sins, as the Prophet says; he is a servant that bears an other man's
burden, there was a double burden, of obedience active, and obedience
passive, he bore them both, he came under the law for us, both doing what we
should have done, and indeed sarre more acceptably, and suffering that we
should have suffered and far more acceptably, he being our surety, being a
more excellent person, he did bear our burden, and did our work, therefore he
was Gods servant, and our servant, and Gods servant, because he was our
servant, be^^use he came to do a work behoovefull to us.

Herein appears the admirable love and care of God to us wretched creatures,
here is matter of wonderment.

If we look to him that was a servant.

If we look to that in God, and him, that made him stoop to be a servant.

If we look to the manner of the performance of this service.

If we look to to the fruit of that service, they are all matter of wonderment.
Gods love to us.


If we look to the person that was this servant, In the person thus abased.
Phil. 2.
the Apostle in Philip. 2. will tell you he thought it not robbery to be equal
with God, yet he took upon him the shape of a servant, was not this wonderful
for God to become man, the glorious God to abase himself to be a servant?
God-Man glorious God, and base servant: for the living God to dye, for the
incomprehensible God to be enclosed in the womb of a Virgin, for glory it
self to be abased, for riches to become poor, what matter of wonderment is
here? the very Angels stand at a gaze and wonder, they pry into these things,
his name may well be Wonderful.

There are four notable conjunctions that are especially wonderful, 4.
Conjunctions wonderful.
two in us and two above us.

One in us, is the conjunction of so excellent a thing as the soul breathed in
by God, the soul of man is an admirable thing, the world is not worth it in
the judgment of him that gave himself for it, that this should be joined to a
piece of earth, indeed I am wonderfully made says David, in regard of his
body, but the conjunction of the soul and body together, so excellent a
substance, to so base a thing as earth, to a piece of red well colored earth,
to a lump of flesh, it is a wondrous conjunction.

But there is a more supernatural conjunction of man, when all of us, sinners
as we are, are knit to Christ our head, and head and members make one Christ,
here is a wondrous conjunction, Saint Paul calls it a mystery, Ephesians. 5. these
conjunctions in us are wonderful.

But now (to go higher) in Christ there are more wonderful conjunctions, for
the greatest and the meanest to join together, for God and man to come
together, the Lord of all, and a servant, and such a servant as should be under
a curse, for the highest of all to come to the deepest abasement, for there was
no abasement ever so deep as Christ's was, in a double regard.

Christ's abaseme^t the grea^est.
First, none ever went so low as he, for he suffered the wrath of God, and bore
upon him the sins of us all, none ever was so low.

And then in another respect his abasement was greatest, because he descended
from the highest top of glory, and for him to be man, to be a servant, to be a
curse, to suffer the wrath of God, to be the lowest of all; Lord whether do
thou descend? here is a wonder in these conjunctions.

Next to Christ's abasement was Adams, because he was the most excellent, being
in the state of innocence, and carrying the image of God, and being familiar
with God, for him presently to come into that fearful condition, it was the
greatest abasement, because it was from the greatest dignity, that made the
abasement of Christ so great, for Lordship to submit to service, for God to be
man, the blessed God to become a curse, here is matter of wonder indeed.

In Christ again there was a conjunction of perfect body, perfect soul, and
perfect God, and all make one Christ; In the Trinity there is a conjunction of
three persons in one nature, that is a wondrous conjunction, but it belongs not
to our present purpose, here you see there is matter of wonder in the person,
that Christ should be a servant.

There is matter of wonder likewise in that from whence he is a servant; Whence
Christ was so abased.
whence comes it that Christ is a servant? It is from the wondrous love of God,
and the wondrous love of Christ, to be so abased, it was wondrous love in God
to give him to us to be so abased, and the wondrous misery we were in, that we
could not otherwise be freed from; for such was the pride of man, that he being
man would exalt himself to be like God, God became man, he became a servant
to expiate our pride in Adam, so that it is wondrous in the spring of it. There
was no such love as Christ's to become a servant, there was no such misery as we
were in out of which we were delivered by this abasement of Christ, becoming a
servant, so it is wondrous in that regard, springing from the infinite love and
mercy of God, Gods love in Redemption gre^ter then in Creation.
which is greater in the work of Redemption, and Reconciliation, then in the
Creation of the world, for the distance between nothing and something was
less then the distance between sin and happiness. For nothing adds no
opposition, but to be in a sinful state there is opposition, therefore it was
greater love and mercy for God when we were sinful, (and so obnoxious to
eternal destruction) to make us of sinners not only men, but to make us
happy, to make us heirs of heaven out of a sinful and cursed estate, then to
make us of nothing something, to make us men in Adam, for there God prevailed
over nothing, but here his mercy triumphed over that which is opposite to God,
over sinfullnesse and cursednesse. To show that the creature cannot be so low,
but there is somewhat in God above the misery of the creature, his mercy shall
triumph over the basest estate where he will show mercy, therefore there is
mercy above all mercy, and love above all love, in that Christ was a servant.

Thirdly, The fruit of Christ's aba^ement.
it is wondrous in regard of the fruit we have by this service of Christ, the
work of our Redemption, to be translated from the kingdom of Satan to the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, to be brought out of darkness into
marveilous light, it is marveilous matter of wonder, the good we have by this
abasement of Christ, Behold what love the Father has showed us that we should
be called the sons of God? Now all this comes from Christ's being a servant,
our liberty comes from his service and slavery, our life from his death, our
adoption and sonship and all comes from his abasement, therefore it is a matter
of wonderment for the great things we have by it, O the depth, O the depth
says Saint Paul, here are all dimensions in this excellent work that Christ
has wrought by his abasement, by his incarnation, and taking upon him the
form of a servant, and dying for us, here is the height, and breadth, and
length, and depth of the love of God in Christ, O the riches of Gods mercy,
the Apostles they stand in a wonder and admiration of this, and indeed if any
thing be to be admired, it is Christ, that wondrous conjunction, the wondrous
love that wrought it, and the wondrous fruit we have by it. Matter of
wond^rment in the work of Redemption.


It is the baseness of our nature we can wonder at shallow things, there
cannot be a foolery but there will be many about it presently, and stand
admiring every empty idle thing, that the nature of man is carried away with,
whereas indeed there is nothing worthy of admiration but the wonderful love of
God, O how wonderful are thy works? says David of the works of Creation,
Psalm. 8. the work of Creation and of providence whereby God guides the world
are wonderful, and the Psalmist cries out of the folly of men, that do not
regard the work of the Lord, Psalm. 107. Fools regard not this, The works of
the Lord are worthy to be considered, they are known of all that delight in
them, Psalm. 111. but if these things be so wonderful, and to be regarded and
delighted in, alas what is all the work of redemption? Great is the mystery
of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, etc. there are mysteries, matters
of admiration, but carnal men think these trivial matters, they can hear
matters of more rarity, and when they speak of these things, alas they are too
wise to wonder, tush, they know the Gospel well enough, whereas indeed, as we
see here, they are things that deserve the admiration of Angels, and as they
deserve it, so the Angels pry into these excellent secrets in Jesus Christ.

Christ a servant by way of excellency.
Christ was a servant by office and by condition, we must not rest in this base
condition: for he took upon him the form of a servant that he might be an
excellent servant, there is both baseness and excellency in the word servant:
for his humiliation was a degree of his exaltation, and a part of his
advancement; if we regard his humane nature, it was an advancement for man's
nature to be grafted into God by conception, and incarnation, b^t if we
regard his Godhead, for him to conceal himself, and lay aside the beams and
rays of Majesty, and cloth himself with man's flesh, this was the first
degree of humiliation, it was an advancement to his flesh, but it was a
concealing and hiding to his Godhead, for God to become a servant this was an
abasement: but then consider the excellency of the service how God* delighted
in it, and how useful it was to us, and we shall see that he was a servant by
way of excellency. There was first in Christ humane flesh, abased flesh, and
then glorious flesh, abasement was first necessary for Christ: for he could
not have performed the office of a servant, unless he had undertaken the
condition of a servant, he must first be abased and then glorious, our ill
must be his, before his good could be ours, and how could he undergo our ill,
our sin and misery, and the curse due to us, but he must be abased? our sins
must be imputed to him, and then his righteousness, and whatsoever is good is
ours, so here is both the abasement of his condition, and the excellency of
his office to be a King, Priest, and Prophet to his Church, as we shall see
afterward.

Is the Lord Christ a servant, this should teach us not to stand upon any
terms, Use.
if Christ had stood upon terms, Seeing Christ was a servant we should be
humble.
if he had refused to take upon him the shape of a servant, alas where had we
and our salvation been? And yet wretched creatures we think our selves too
good to do God and our Brethren any service. Christ stood not upon his
greatness, but being equal with God he became a servant. Oh we should
dismount from the tower of our conceited excellency. The heart of man is a
proud creature, a proud piece of flesh, men stand upon their distance, what;
shall I stoop to him? J am thus and thus, we should descend from the heaven of
our conceit, and take upon us the form of servants, and abase our selves to
do good to others, even to any, and account it an honor to do any good to
others in the places we are in. Christ did not think himself too good to
leave Heaven, to conceal and veil his Majesty under the veil of our flesh to
work our redemption, to bring us out of the cursed estate we were in; shall we
think our selves too good for any service? Who for shame can be proud when he
thinks of this that God was abased, shall God be abased, and man proud? shall
God become a servant, and shall we that are servants think much to serve our
fellow servants? Let us learn this lesson to abase our selves, we cannot have
a better pattern to look unto then our blessed Savior. A Christian is the
greatest freeman in the world, he is free from the wrath of God, free from
hell and damnation, from the curse of the Law, but then though he be free in
these respects, yet in regard of love he is the greatest servant, love abaseth
him to do all the good he can, and the more the Spirit of Christ is in us,
the more it will abase us to any thing wherein we can be serviceable.

Then again here is comfort for us, Use. 2.
that Christ in whatsoever he did in our redemption is Gods servant, Comfort
that Christ became a servant.
he is appointed by God to the work, so both God and Christ meet together in
the work; Christ is a voluntary in it, for he emptied himself, he took upon
him the form of a servant, he came from Heaven voluntary. And then withal the
Father joins with him, the Father appointed him and sent him, the Father laid
him as the corner stone, the Father sealed him, as it is, John. 6. The Father
set him out, as it is, Romans 3. he has set him out as the propitiatory.
Therefore when we think of reconciliation and redemption, and salvation
wrought by Christ, let us comfort our selves in the soliditie of the work,
that it is a service perfectly done, it was done by Christ, God Man, it is a
service accepted of God, therefore God cannot refuse the service of our
salvation wrought by Christ, Christ was his servant in the working of it, we
may present it to God, it is the obedience of thy servant, it is the
satisfaction of thy servant, here is that will give full content and
satisfaction to conscience in this that whatsoever Christ did, he was Gods
servant in it, but we shall better understand the intent of the Holy Ghost,
when we have g^ne over the rest of the words, Behold my s^rvant*

Whom I have chosen.
Christ chosen of God.
Christ was chosen before all worlds, to be the head of the elect, he was
predestinate and ordained by God. As we are ordained to salvation, so Christ
is ordained to be the head of all that shall be saved, he was chosen
eternally, and chosen in time, he was singled out to the work by God, and all
others that are chosen are chosen in him, there had been no choosing of men
but in him: for God saw us so defiled lying in our filth that he could not
look upon us but in his Son, he chose him, and us in him.

Christ chosen to his office.
Here is meant not only choosing by eternal election to happiness, but a
choosing to office, there is a choosing to grace and glory, and a choosing to
office. Here it is as well meant a choosing to office as to grace and glory.
God as he chose Christ to grace and glory, so he chose him to the office of
Mediatorship. Christ did not choose himself, he was no usurper, No man calls
himself to the office, as it is in Hebrews, but Christ was called and appointed
of God, he was willing indeed to the work, he took it voluntary upon him,
but as Mediator God chose him, God the Father and he joining together.

If we respect eternal salvation or grace or office, Christ as man chosen to
salvation.
Christ was chosen in respect of his Manhood: For as it is well observed by
Divines, Christ is the Head of all that are predestinate, and the humane Nature
of Christ could not merit its choice, it could not merit its incarnation, it
could not merit union with the Godhead, it was merely from grace. How could
Christ's Manhood deserve any thing of God before it was? Things must have a
subsistence before they can work: Our blessed Savior is the pattern of all
election, and his Manhood could not merit to be knit to the second person, as
how could it being a creature? Therefore the knitting of the humane nature of
Christ to his divine, it is called the grace of Union, the choosing of the
humane Nature of Christ to be so gracious and glorious, it was of grace.

Christ he was both a chosen servant and a choice servant, in calling him a
chosen servant, it implies his excellency, as a chosen vessel, a chosen arrow
in Gods quiver, so a chosen servant, every way excellent.

This adds to our comfort, that whatsoever Christ did for us, he did it as
chosen, he is a chosen stone, as Saint Peter says, 1. Peter 2.6. A precious
corner stone, though refused of the builders, yet precious in Gods sight.

Was Christ a chosen servant of God and shall not we take Gods choice? To re^t
in Gods choice.
Is not Gods choice the best, and the wisest? Has God chosen Christ to work
our salvation, and shall we choose any other? Shall we run to Saints mediation,
to the Virgin Mary and others for intercession, which is a part of Christ's
office? Who chose Mary, and Peter and Paul to this work, there is no mention
in Scripture of them for this purpose, But behold my servant whom I have chosen.

God in Paradise did choose a wife for Adam, so God has chosen a husband for
his Church, he has chosen Christ for us, therefore it is intolerable
sacrilegious rebellion, and impudency to refuse a Savior, and Mediator of Gods
choosing, and to set up others of our own, as if we were wiser to choose for
our selves then God is, we may content our selves well enough with Gods choice,
because he is the party offended.

Besides, it is folly to go out from Christ where there is all fullness and
content, to leave Gods chosen servant, and to go to any other servant, to any
broken vessel, God rests in this servant, as Pharaoh did in Joseph, the second
person in the Kingdom, therefore let Gods choice and ours agree.

To offer Christ to God in our services.
And this directs us also in our devotions to God, how to carry our selves in
our prayers and services, to offer Christ to God, Behold Lord thy chosen
servant, that thou have chosen to be my Mediator, my Savior, my all in all to
me, he is a Mediator and a Savior of thine own choosing, thou can not
refuse thy own choice, if thou look upon me, there is nothing but matter of
unworthiness, but look upon him whom thou have chose, my head and Savior.

Again, Take heed of neglecting Christ.
if Christ be a chosen servant, O let us take heed how we neglect Christ. When
God has chosen him for us shall not we think him worthy to be embraced, and
regarded, shall we not kiss the Son with the kiss of love, and faith, and
subjection? he is a Savior of Gods own choosing, refuse him not. What is the
reason that men refuse this chosen stone? They will not be laid low enough to
build upon this corner stone, this hidden stone; the excellency of Christ is
hidden, it appears not to men, men will not be squared to be built upon him,
stones for a building must be framed, and made even, and flat, men stick out
with this and that lust, they will not be pared and cut and fitted for Christ;
if they may have their lusts and wicked lives, they will admit of Christ, but
we must make choice of him, as a stone to build upon him, and to be built on
him, we must be made like him, we like not this laying low, and abasing,
therefore we refuse this Corner stone, though God has made him the corner of
building to all those that have the life of grace here, or shall have glory
hereafter.

The Papists admit him to be stone, but not the only stone to build on, but
they build upon him and Saints, upon him and works, upon him and traditions,
but he is the only corner stone, God has chosen him only, and we mu^^
choose him only, that we may be framed and laid upon him to make up one
building, so much for that. Behold my servant whom I have chosen.

My Beloved in whom my soul is well-pleased.
How do we know that these words in the Prophet Isaiah are fitly appliable to
Christ? By the greatest authority that ever was from the beginning of the
world, by the immediate voice of God the Father from Heaven, who applies these
words in Isaiah to Christ, Mat. 3. in his inauguration when he was baptized,
This is my Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, this is that my Son, that
beloved, (...), the beloved Son, so beloved that my soul delights in him, he
is capable of my whole love, I may power out my whole love upon him, in whom I
am well pleased, it is the same with that here, in whom my soul delights,
the one expresses the other.

How, and in what respect is Christ thus beloved of God? Christ beloved of God.


As God.
First as he is God, the Son of God, the engraven Image of his Father, so he
is primum amabile, the first lovely thing that ever was, when the Father loves
him, he loves himself in him, so he loves him as God, as the second person, as
his own image and character.

And as man he loves him, As Man.
for as man he was the most excellent creature in the world, he was conceived,
fashioned, and framed in his mothers womb by the Holy Ghost. It is said, Heb.
10.5. God gave him a body, God the Father by the Holy Ghost fashioned and
framed, and fitted him with a body, therefore God must needs love his own
workmanship.

Again, there was nothing in him displeasing to God, there was no sin found
in his life any way, therefore as man he was well-pleasing to God, he took the
manhood, and ingrafted it into the second person, and enriched it there,
therefore he must needs love the Manhood of Christ being taken into so near a
union with the Godhead.

As God and man Mediator especially he loves and delights in him, As Mediator.
in regard of his office, he must needs delight in his own Ordinance and
Decree, now he decreed and sealed him to that office, therefore he loves and
delights in him as a Mediator of his own appointing, and ordaining to be our
King, and Priest, and Prophet.

Again, In regard of the execution of his office.
he loved and delighted in him, in regard of the execution of his office both
in doing and suffering. In doing, the Evangelist says, he did all things
well, when he healed the sick, and raised the dead, and cured all diseases,
whatsoever he did was well done. And for his suffering God delighted in him for
that, as it is in John 10.17. My Father loves me, because I lay down my life,
and so in Isaiah 53. He shall divide him a portion with the great, because he
powered out his soul unto death, and in Philip. 2. Because he abased himself
to the death of the Cross, God gave him a name above all names, therefore God
loves and delights in him for his suffering and abasement.

It is said of Noah, Genesis 8.21. that he offered a sacrifice after the flood,
and the Lord smelled a sweet savor of his sacrifice, and thereupon he says,
I will not curse the earth again, so God loves and delights in Christ as he
offered himself a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor wherein God rests, he
felt such a sweet savor in the sacrifice of Christ, he is so delighted in it,
that he will never destroy mankind, he will never destroy any that believe in
Christ, the sacrifice of Noah was a Type of Christ's sacrifice.

Now that Christ's sacrifice was so acceptable to God, there is a direct place
for it in Ephesians. 5. Walk in love as Christ has loved us and has given
himself an offering and a sacrifice to God of a sweet smell. And indeed how
many sweet savours were there in the sacrifice of Christ offered on the Cross?
was there not the sweet savor of obedience? he was obedient to the death of
the Cross, there was the sweet savor of patience, and of love to mankind,
therefore God delighted in him, as God, as Man, as Mediator God-Man, in his
doings, in his sufferings, every way.

Does God delight thus in Christ, Quest.
in his person or considered mystically? Answ.
I answer both, God loves and delights in Christ mystical, God loves Christ
mystical.
that is, in Christ and his members, in whole Christ, This is my Beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased, not only with whom alone by himself, but in whom,
in him as God, in him in body and soul, in him as head of the Church, in him
mystically, in all that are under him any kind of way, God delights in him* and
all his.

Is it possible that he should delight in the head, and refuse the members?
That he should love the husband, and mislike the Spouse? O no; with the same
love that God loves Christ, he loves all his, he delights in Christ and all his
with the same delight, there is some difference in the degree, That Christ in
all things may have the pre-eminence, but it is the same love; therefore our
Savior sets it down excellently in his own prayer, he desires that the same
love wherewith his Father loved him may be in them that are his, that they may
feel the love wherewith his Father loves him: for he loves him and his
members, him and his Spouse with all one love.

This is our comfort and our confidence that God accepts us, Comfort, Gods love
to us grounded on Christ.
because he accepts his Beloved, and when he shall cease to love Christ, he
shall cease to love the members of Christ, they and Christ make one mystical
Christ. This is our comfort in dejection for sin, we are so and so indeed,
but Christ is the chosen servant of God, In whom he delights, and delights in
us in him, it is no matter what we are in our selves, but what we are in
Christ, when we are once in him and continue in him, God loves us with that
inseparable love wherewith he loves his own Son, therefore Saint Paul
triumphs, Romans 8. What shall separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus?
This love it is founded in Christ, therefore neither things present, nor things
to come, (as he goes on there gloriously) shall be able to separate us, you
see what a wondrous confidence and comfort we have hence, if we labor to be
in Christ, that then God loves and delights in us, because he loves, and
delights in Christ Jesus.

God loves the work of our redemption.
And here is a wondrous comfort that God must needs love our salvation and
redemption, when he loves Christ, because he powered out his soul to death to
save us, does not God delight that we should be saved, and our sins should
be forgiven, when he loves Christ because he abased himself for that
purpose? What a prop and foundation of comfort is this, when the Devil shall
present God to us in a terrible hideous manner, as an avenging God, and
consuming fire, etc. (indeed out of Christ he is so) let us present to our
selves thoughts of God, as the Scripture sets forth God to us, and as God set^
forth himself not only in that sweet relation as a Father to Christ, bu^ our
father, I go to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God, having both
one God, and love and care. There is none of us all but the Devil will have a
saying to us, either in the time of our life, in some terrible temptation,
especially when any outward abasement comes, or at the hour of death, and all
the cordials we have gathered out of the Word will then be little enough to
support the drooping soul, especially in the hour of temptation. Oh Beloved
what a wondrous stay, and satisfaction to a distressed conscience does this
yield, that Christ in all that he has wrought for us, is Gods chosen servant,
whom he loves and delights in, and delights in him for this very work that he
abased himself and gave himself for us, that he wrought Gods work, because
he wrought reconciliation for us? If we can believe in Christ, we see here
what ground of comfort we have, that God loves and delights in us, as he does
in his own Son.

And what a comfort is it now in our daily approach to God to minister
boldness to us in all our suites, Comfort in our daily approach to God.
that we go to God in the name of one that he loves, in whom his soul
delights, that we have a friend in Court, a friend in Heaven for us, that is at
the right hand of God, and interposeth himself there for us, in all our suites
that makes us acceptable, that perfumes our prayers and makes them acceptable,
his intercession is still by virtue of his service, dying for us, he interceeds
by virtue of his redemption, if God love him for the work of redemption, he
loves him for his intercession, therefore God must needs regard the prayers
made by him, by virtue of his dying for us, when he loves him for dying for us.
Be sure therefore in all our suites to God to take along our elder Brother, take
our beloved Brother, take Benjamin with us, offer al to God in him, our persons
to be accepted in him, our prayers, our hearing, our works, and all that we do,
and we shall be sure to speed: For he is one in whom the soul of God delights.
There must be this passage and repassage, as God looks upon us lovely in him
and delights in us, as we are members of him, all Gods love, and the fruits of
it come to us as we are in Christ, and are one with him, then in our passage to
God again, we must return all, and do all to God in Christ, be sure not to
go to a naked God: for so he is a consuming fire, but go to him in the
mediation of him whom he loves, and in whom his soul delights.

To stir us up to delig^t in Christ.
And shall God love him, and delight in him, and shall not our soul delight in
Christ? This therefore should stir up our affections to Christ, to be
faithful in our conjugall affection as the Spouse of Christ, to say, My
Beloved is mine and I am my Beloveds, Christ calls his Church, My Love and my
Dove. Does Christ delight in us, and God delight in Christ, and shall not we
delight in Christ, that delights in us, and in whom God delights? In the 1.
Cor. 16. ult. the Apostle is bold to pronounce a bitter curse, Anathema
Maranatha upon him that loves not the Lord Christ Jesus, a most bitter curse,
when Christ shall become a servant to do our work for us, to suffer for us, to
bear the burden of our sins upon the tree, to become our husband, to bestow
his riches upon us, to raise us to the same condition with himself, and
withal to be such a one as God has chosen out to love, and delight in as the
best object of his love, and most capable of it, and for us not to solace and
delight our selves in him that God delights in, when God delights in him for
our sake, God loves and delights in him for the work of salvation and
redemption by his blood, and shall not we love and embrace him for his love
which is for our good? What good has God by it but only the glory of his
mercy, in saving our souls through Christ? Therefore if God love him for the
good he does to us, much more should we love him for the fruit of it that we
receive our selves.

It should shame us therefore when we find dullness, and coldness upon us,
that we can hear of any thing better then of Christ, and arguments concerning
Christ are cold to us, alas, where is our love, and joy, and delight? and when
we can make no better but a carnal use of the incarnation and other benefits
by Christ, we should therefore desire God to shed the love of Christ into our
hearts more and more, that we may feel in our souls the love that he bears
to us, and may love God and Christ again, for that that he has done for us.

On what (...) to val^w Chr^stians.
Hence we have also a ground of estimation of Christians to be excellent
persons, does God value poor sinful souls so much as to give Christ for them
to become a Savior, does he delight in Christ for giving himself for them,
and shall not we love one another, whom God and Christ so loves?

We may know we are in (...)
But if God love and delight in those that are in Christ with the same love and
delight that he has in him, how shall I know that I am in Christ, and that God
thus delights in me?

I we have his Spirit.
Briefly, a man may know that he is in Christ, if he find the Spirit of Christ
in him, for the same Spirit (when Christ took our nature) that sanctified that
blessed mass whereof he was made, when there was an union between him and the
second person, the same Spirit sanctifies our souls and bodies, there is one
Spirit in the head and in the members, therefore if we find the Spirit of Christ
in us, we are in Christ and he in us. How to know we have the Spirit
Now this Spirit is renewing, Whosoever is in Christ is a new creature, all is
new, old things are done away, the old manner of language, the old disposition,
old affections, old company, all old things are past, all is new, and if a man
be a new creature, he has right and title to the new heaven and new earth,
let us examine the work of grace in us, if there be no change in us we have no
present interest in Christ, we have to do with him because he is still woing us
to be in him, but as yet we have no title to him.

The very beholding of Christ is a transforming sight, the Spirit that makes us
new creatures, and stirs us up to behold this servant, it is a transforming
beholding, if we look upon him with the eye of faith, it will make us like
Christ; for the Gospel is a mirror, and such a mirror, that when we look
into it, and see our selves interessed in it, we are changed from glory to
glory; a man cannot look upon the love of God and of Christ in the Gospel,
but it will change him to be like God, and Christ: for how can we see Christ,
and God in Christ, but we shall see how God hates sin, and this will transform
us to hate it as God does, who hated it so that it could not be expiated but
with the blood of Christ God-man, so seeing the holiness of God in it, it will
transform us to be holy, when we see the love of of God in the Gospel, and
the love of Christ giving himself for us, this will transform us to love God,
when we see the humility and obedience of Christ, when we look on Christ as
Gods chosen servant in all this, and as our surety and head, it transformes us
to the like humility and obedience, those that find not their dispositions in
some comfortable measure wrought to this blessed transformation, they have not
yet those eyes that the Holy Ghost requires here, Behold my servant whom I
have chosen, my Beloved in whom my soul delights.

I will put my Spirit upon him.
Now we come to the qualification of Christ for his calling, in these words, I
will put my Spirit upon him, that is, I will cloth him with my Spirit, I will
put it (as it were) upon him as a garment.

Degrees of Christ's receiving the Spirit.
Now there were diverse degrees of Christ's receiving the Spirit at several
times: for he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost did sanctify
that blessed mass whereof his body was framed in the womb of the Virgin, he
was quickened in the womb in his conception by the Holy Ghost, and he was
graced by the Holy Ghost, and led by the Spirit in all things before his
Baptism, but afterward when he came to set upon his office, to be the Prophet,
and Priest, and King of his Church, that great office of saving mankind, which
he did not solemly set upon till he was thirty years old, then God powered
upon him a special portion of the Spirit answerable to that great calling, then
the Spirit lighted upon him, Christ was ordained to his office by the greatest
authority that ever any was ordained from the beginning of the world: for at
his Baptism when he was ordained and set apart to his office, there was the
Father from heaven uttered an audible voice, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased, and there was Christ the party baptized and installed into
that great office, then there was the Holy Ghost in the form and shape of a
Dove, it being a matter of the greatest consequence that ever was in the world,
greater then the Creation, it was fit it should be done with the greatest
authority, and so it was, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost being present at the
admission of Christ into his office, this is especially here intended, though
the other be included, I will put my Spirit upon him, that is, I will anoint
him, as it is in Isaiah 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me (says Christ)
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, to
bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, to open the
prison for them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,
that is, the year of Iubile, for that was a Type of Christ, to preach the
Gospel, deliverance to all that are in captivity, servitude, and thraldom
under Satan and sin, this was accomplished when Christ at his Baptism entered
upon his office, God put his Spirit upon him, to set him apart, to ordain him,
and to qualify him with abundance of grace for the work, for there are these
three things especially meant by putting the Spirit upon him, What is meant by
putting the Spirit on Christ
separation, or setting apart, and ordaining and enriching with the gifts of
the Spirit.

When any one is called to great place, there is a setting apart from others,
and an ordaining to that particular, and a qualifying, if it be a calling of
God, he qualifies where he ordaines always.

But Christ had the Spirit before, what does he mean then when he says he
will put the Spirit upon him now?

I answer he had the Spirit before answerable to that condition he was in, now
he received the Spirit answerable to that condition he was to undertake, he
was perfect then for that condition, now he was to be made perfect for that
office he was to set upon, he was always perfect, he had abundance of Spirit
for that estate he was in, but now he was to enter upon another condition, to
preach the Gospel, to be a Prophet, and after to be a Priest, therefore he
says now especially, I will put my Spirit upon him.

Three sorts of persons anointed.
Now this putting of the Spirit it is expressed in Isaiah 61. and other places
by Anointing. There were three sorts of persons that were anointed before
Christ, Prophets, Priests, and Kings, now Christ was to be a Prophet, a
Priest, and a King, therefore he was to be anointed with the Spirit to enable
him to these three offices.

I might here take occasion to enlarge my self in the offices of Christ, but I
will only speak of them as the Text ministers just occasion.

Three maine defects in man.
There are three maine defects in man since the fall.

There is ignorance and blindness.

There is rebellion in the will and affections.

And in regard of his condition, by reason of the sins of nature and life, a
subjection to a cursed estate, to the wrath of God and eternal damnation.

Now answerable to these three grand ills, whosoever shall be ordained a
Savior must provide proportionable remedies for these; hereupon comes a
threefold office in Christ that is ordained to save man, to cure this threefold
mischief and malady.

As we are ignorant and blind, Supplied in Christ.
he is a Prophet to instruct us, to convince us of the ill state we are in, and
then to convince us of the good he intends us and has wrought for us, to
instruct us in all things concerning our everlasting comfort, he is such a
Prophet, as teaches not only the outward, but the inward man, he opens the
heart, he teaches to do the things he teaches; men teach what we should do,
but they teach not the doing of them, he is such a Prophet as teaches us the
very things, he teaches us to love and to obey, etc.

And answerable to the rebellion, and sinfulness of our dispositions, he is a
King to subdue whatsoever is ill in us, and likewise to subdue all opposite
power without us, by little and little he will trample all enemies under his
feet, and under our feet too ere long.

Now as we are cursed by reason of our sinful condition, so he is a Priest to
satisfy the wrath of God for us, he was made a curse for us, he became a
servant, that being so he might die, and undergo the cursed death of the
cross, not only death, but a cursed death, and so his blood might be an
atonement as a Priest, So answerable to the three fold ill in us, you see here
is a threefold office in Christ. In what order C^ri^t performs his offices.


Now Christ performs these three offices in this order.

First of all he is a Prophet, when he was baptized the Spirit was put upon
him, as in Isaiah 61. To preach deliverance to the captives. First he preached
wherefore he came into the world, why God sent him, and discovered to the world
the state they were in, and when he had preached as a Prophet, then as a Priest
he dyed, and offered himself a Sacrifice.

After death his Kingly office was most apparent. For then he rose again as a
triumphant King over death and all our enemies, and ascended in his triumphant
chariot to Heaven, and there he sits gloriously as a King in his throne at the
right hand of God, so that how ever at his Baptism, and before when he was
sanctified in his mothers womb, he was both King, Priest, and Prophet, yet in
regard of the order of manifestation, he manifested himself first to be a
Prophet, secondly a Priest, and thirdly to be a King: For his Kingly office
brake forth but seldom in the time of his abasement, sometimes it did, to
show that he was ruler, and commander of Earth, and Sea, and Devils, and all,
he wrought miracles, but the glorious manifestation of his kingly office it was
after his resurrection.

Now the fundamental, Chriests pri^stly office the principal.
the chief office to which he was anointed by the Spirit (upon which the rest
depends) it was his Priestly office: for wherefore was his teaching, but to
instruct us what he must do and suffer for us, and what benefit we have by his
Sacrifice reconciliation with God and freedom from the wrath of God, and right
unto life everlasting by his obedience to the cursed death of the cross. And
how comes he to be a King to rule over us by his holy Spirit, and to have a
right unto us? But because as a Priest he dyed for us first, He washed us with
his blood, he purged us with his blood, and then he made us Kings and Priests,
Rev 1. All other benefits came from this, he washed our souls in his blood
first, whatsoever we have from God, is especially from the great work of
Christ as a Priest abasing himself, and dying for us, and thereupon he comes
to be a Prophet and a King, thus we see the order of Christ's offices, how they
come to be fruitful to us, the rest especially by virtue of his priestly
office.

Note this by the way, Christ's priestly office includes two branches, his
sacrificing himself for us, a Priest was to offer Sacrifice, and to pray for
the people, our Savior Christ did both in the days of his humiliation; in his
prayer in Ioh. 17. there as a Priest, he commends his sacrifice to God before
he died, and now he is in Heaven making intercession for us to the end of the
world, he appears for us there. We see then to what purpose God put the Spirit
upon Christ, to enable him to be a Prophet, a Priest and a King, and thereupon
to take away those mischiefs and evils that we were subject and inthralled
too, so that we have a supply for all that may any way abase us and cast us
down, in the all sufficiency that is in Christ Jesus, who was annoynt^d with
the Spirit for this end.

Object.
It may be objected, Christ was God himself, he had the Spirit and gives the
Spirit, therefore how could the Spirit be put upon him?

Answ.
I answer, Christ is both God and Man, Christ as God gives the Spirit to his
humane nature, How Christ both gives and receives the Spirit.
so he communicates his Spirit, the Spirit is his Spirit as well as the
Fathers, the Spirit proceeds from them both. Christ as man receives the Spirit,
God the Father and the Son put the Spirit upon the manhood of Christ, so
Christ both gives and receives the Spirit in diverse respects, as God, he
gives and sends the Spirit, the spiration and breathing of the Spirit is from
him as well as from the Father, but as man he received the Spirit.

And this is the reason of it, next under the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Christ the mediator was to be the spring, and original of all comfort and
good, therefore Christ's nature must not only be sanctified and ordained by the
Spirit, but he must receive the Spirit to enrich it: for whatsoever is wrought
in the creature is by the Spirit, whatsoever Christ did as man he did by the
Spirit. Christ's humane nature therefore must be sanctified, and have the Spirit
put upon it. God the Father the first person in Trinity, and God the Son the
second, they work not immediately, but by the Holy Ghost, the third person,
therefore whatsoever is wrought upon the creat^re, it comes from the Holy Ghost
immediately, so Christ received the Holy Ghost as sent from the Father and the
Son. Now as the Holy Spirit is from the Father and the Son, so he works from
the Father and the Son, he sanctifies and purifieth, and does all from the
Father and the Son, and knits us to the Father and the Son; to the Son first,
and then to the Father, therefore it is said, The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the love of God the Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost;
because all the communion we have with God is by the Holy Ghost, all the
communion that Christ as man had with God was by the Holy Ghost, and all the
communion that God has with us and we with God is by the Holy Ghost: for the
Spirit is the bond of union between Christ and us, and between God and us,
God communicates himself to us by his Spirit, and we communicate with God by
his Spirit. God does all in us by his Spirit, and we do all back again to
^od by the Spirit, Because Christ as a Head, as the second Adam was to be the
root of all that are saved, (as the first Adam was the root of all that are
damned) he was therefore to receive the Spirit and to have it put upon him in a
more excellent and rich manner, for we must know that all things are first in
Christ, and then in us.

All (...) in Christ, then (...).
God chose him first, and then he chose us,

God singled him out to be the Savior, the second Adam, and he calls us in
Christ.

God justified Christ from our sins, being our Surety taking our sins upon
him, we are justified, because he by his resurrection quit himself from the
guilt of our sins, as having paid the debt.

Christ is the first fruits of them that rise again, we rise again, because
he is risen.

Christ first ascended, we ascend in Christ.

Christ is first loved, we are loved in the Beloved.

Christ is first blessed, we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in Jesus
Chrest. So whatsoever is in us, we have it at the second hand, we have the
Spirit in us, but he is first in Christ, God has put the Spirit in Christ, as
the spring, as the second Adam, as a public person, that should receive the
Spirit for us all, he is first in all things, Christ must have the
pre-eminence, he has the pre-eminence in all, both before time, in time, and
after time, in election, in whatsoever is done here in this world, and in
glorification, all is first in Christ, and then in us, he is the elder Brother.

We must understanding this, to give Christ his due honor, and respect, and to
know whence we have all we have. Therefore the Spirit is said here first, to be
put upon Christ. We have not the Holy Ghost immediately from God, but we have
him as sanctifying Christ first, and then us, and whatsoever the Holy Ghost
does in us, he does the same in Christ first, and he does it in us because in
Christ. Therefore in John 14. Christ says, He shall take of mine, whatsoever
the Holy Ghost works in us, he takes of Christ first.

How is that?
Thus; How the Spirit takes of Christ and gives to us.
The Holy Ghost comforts us with reasons from Christ, he dyed and has
reconciled us to God, therefore now God is at peace with thee. Here the Holy
Ghost takes a ground of comfort from the death of Christ. When the Holy Ghost
would raise a man up to holiness of life, he tells him, Christ thy Savior and
Head is quickened, and is now in Heaven, therefore we ought to rise to holiness
of life. If the Holy Ghost be to work either comfort or grace, or any thing,
he not only does the same thing that he did first in Christ, but he does it
in us by reasons from Christ, by grounds fetched from Christ, the Holy Ghost
tells our souls that God loves Christ first, and he loves us in Christ, and
that we are those that God gave Christ for, that we are those that Christ makes
intercession for in Heaven, the Holy Ghost witnesses to us the love of the
Father, and the Son, and so he fetches from Christ whatsoever he works.

And hence the work of the Holy Ghost is distinguished from illusions, and
delusions that are nothing but frantic conceits of comfort that are
groundless. The Holy Ghost fetches all from Christ in his working and
comfort, and he makes Christ the pattern of all, for whatsoever is in Christ,
the Holy Ghost (which is the Spirit of Christ) works in us, as it is in
Christ. Therefore in John 1.13. it is said of his fulness we receive grace
for grace, that is, grace answerable to his grace. There are three things that
we receive answerable to Christ by the Spirit. Three things we receive by the
Spirit.


We receive grace, that is, the favor of God answerable to the favor God
shows his Son, he loves his Son, he is graciously disposed to him, and he
loves us.

So grace habitual, we have grace in us answerable to the grace in Christ,
we have love answerable to his love, patience answerable to his Patience,
Obedience and Humility answerable to that in Christ, the Spirit works a
conformity to Christ in all things.

Likewise in the third place, the Spirit assures us of the same privileges
that issue from grace: Christ is a Son, the Spirit tells us we are sons,
Christ is an heir, the Spirit tells us we are heirs with Christ; Christ is
the King of Heaven, and Earth, the Spirit tells us that we are Kings, that his
riches are ours, thus we have grace for grace, both favor and grace in us,
and privileges issuing from grace, we have all as they are in Christ. Even as
in the first Adam we receive of his emptiness, curse for curse, ill for ill,
for his blindness and rebellion we are answerable, we are borne as he was
after his fall, so in the second Adam by his Spirit, we receive grace for grace.

Hence issues this, that our state now in Christ is far more excellent then
our state in Adam was.

How does it spring hence? Quest.


Thus, Answ.
Christ is God-Man, his nature was sanctified by the Spirit, Whence it is that
our state in Christ is better then it was in Adam.
he was a more excellent person, he gives and sends the Spirit, Adam was only
a mere man, and therefore his goodness could not be so derived to his
posterity: For how ever the Holy Ghost was in Adam, yet the Holy Ghost did not
so fill him, he was not so in him as in Christ, the Holy Ghost is in Christ in
a more excellent manner, for Christ being equal with God he gave the Holy
Ghost, the Holy Ghost comes from Christ as God, now the second Adam being a
more excellent person, we being in Christ the second Adam, we are in a more
excellent, and in a more safe estate, we have a better keeper of our happiness
then Adam he being a mere man, he could not keep his own happiness, but
lost himself and all his posterity, though he were created after the Image of
God, yet being but a mere man, he showed himself to be a man, that is, a
changeable creature: but Christ being God and man, having his nature sanctified
by the Spirit, now our happiness is in a better keeping, for our grace has a
better spring, the grace and sanctification we have it is not in our own
keeping, it distills into us answerable to our necessities, but the spring is
indeficient, it never fails, the spring is in Christ. So the favor that God
bears us, it is not first in us, but it is first in Christ, God loves him, and
then he loves us, he gives him the Spirit, and us in him. Now Christ is the
keeper both of the love of God toward us and the grace of God, and whatsoever
is good, he keeps all for us, he receives all for himself and for us, he
receives not only the Spirit for himself, but he receives it as Mediator, as
Head, for we all of his fulness receive grace for grace, he receives it as a
fountain to diffuse it (I say) this shows us our happy and blessed condition
in Jesus Christ, that ^ow the grace and love of God and our happiness, and the
grace whereby we are sanctified and fitted for it, it is not in our own
keeping originally, but in our head Christ Jesus.

These be comfortable considerations and indeed the life and soul of a
Christians life and comfort, if we conceive them aright, they will quicken us
to obedience, and we shall know what the Gospel is. To come to make some use
of it.

I might observe this, that none should take that office upon them to which
they are not called of God, nor qualified by his Spirit, especially Ministers,
because Christ did not set upon his office, till the Spirit was put upon him,
the Spirit must enable us, and fit us for every thing, but I leave that, and
come to that which concerns us all.

First then has God put the Spirit upon Christ, as the Evangelist says in
Ioh. 3.34. He whom God has sent, that is Christ, he speaks the word of
God: For God gives him not the Spirit by measure, God does not stand measuring
grace out to Christ, but he powers it out upon him full measure, running over,
because he receives it not for himself alone but for us, we receive the Spirit
by measure, Ephesians. 4.7. According to the measure of the gift of Christ, Christ
gives us all a measure of sanctifying knowledge and of every grace, till we
grow to be a perfect man in Christ. Therefore it is called the first fruits of
the Spirit, as much as shall fit us for Heaven, and grace sufficient, though it
be not that measure we shall have hereafter, or that we would have here.
Christ had a full measure, the fulness of a fountain, diffusive, not only
abundance for himself, but redundance, and overflowing for the good of others,
he being the head of the Church, not only a head of eminence, but of
influence to bestow, and convey all grace in him to all his members,
proportionable to the service of every member, therefore he received not the
Spirit according to measure, that is, sparingly, but it was showred upon him,
he was filled and clothed with the Holy Ghost. Is it so?

Use.
Let us labor then to see whereto have supply in all our wants, To see whence
our supply is.
we have a full treasury to go to, all treasure is hid in Christ for us, what
a comfort is this in any thing we want? If we want the favor of God, go to
his beloved Christ, desire God to love us in his Beloved, and to accept us in
his gracious Son, in him whom he has made his servant, and anointed with his
Spirit for that purpose.

In want of grace.
If we want particular graces, go to the wellhead Christ, consider of Christ
now filled for us as it was in Aaron, the oil that was powered on Aarons head
ran down to his beard, and to the skirts of his clothing, the meanest parts
of his garment was bedewed with that oil; so the graces of Gods Spirit powered
upon our head Christ, our Aaron, our high Priest run down upon us, upon all
ranckes of Christians, even upon the skirts, the weakest and the lowest
Christians, every one has grace for grace, we all partake of the oil, and
annoynting of our spiritual Aaron, our High Priest. If we want any thing
therefore, let us go to him, I can do all (says S. Paul) in Christ that
strengthens me, go to him for patience, for comfort, for every thing,
because God has put his Spirit upon him, to supply all our wants, he has the
oil of gladness above his fellows, but for his fellows, Psalm. 45. he has
the oil of grace more then any, but it is not only for him but for us all.
Therefore let us have comfortable meditations of the fulness of Christ, and
make use of it, all this is for me, in Col. 2. S. Paul sets it out, in him the
fullness of the Godhead dwells personally (for that is meant by (...)) and it
follows after, in him we are complete. Wherefore is all the fulness that
is in him? to show that in him we are complete, so in 1 John. 5.20. to show
how the spirits of the Apostles agree, in this says he, we know that the
Son of God is come in the flesh, and has given us an understanding to know
him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus
Christ, This is true God and eternal life, Christ is true God and eternal
life for us all, for our comfort, We know that the Son of God is come, and
has given us an understanding, etc. Little children keep your selves from
Idols. How does this depend upon the other? Thus, will you go to Idols, flocks
and stones, devises of men's brain for supply of grace and comfort? Christ whom
God has sent, he is come into the world, He is God and eternal life; God
has given eternal life, and this life is in his Son, therefore why should you
go to Idols.

What is the ground of Popish Idolatries and abominations, Ground of Idolatry.
they conceive not aright of the fullness of Christ, wherefore he was ordained,
and sent of God: for if they did, they would not go to Idols and Saints, and
leave Christ. Therefore let us make this use of it, go out of Christ for
nothing: If we want favor, go not to Saints, if we want instruction go not
to traditions of men, he is a Prophet wise enough, and a Priest full enough to
make us accepted of God, if we want any grace, he is a King able enough, rich
enough, and strong enough to subdue all our rebellions in us, and he will in
time by his Spirit overcome all, Stronger is he that is in us then he that is
in the world. The spirit in the world, the Devil and divellish minded men they
are not so strong as the Spirit of Christ: For by little and little the Spirit
of Christ will subdue all. Christ is a King, go not out of him therefore for
any thing. Babes keep your selves from Idols, you may well enough, you know
whom to go too.

To carry ourselves answerable to our riches.
Therefore let us shame our selves, is there such a storehouse of comfort and
grace every way in Christ? Why are we so weak and comfortless? Why are we so
dejected as if we had not such a rich husband? All our husbands riches are ours
for our good, we receive of it in our measure, why do we not go to the
Fountain, and make use of it? Why in the midst of abundance, are we poor
and beggarly? Here we may see the misery of the world, Christ is a Prophet to
teach us the way to Heaven, but how few be there that will be directed by him?
Christ is a King to subdue all our spiritual and worst enemies, to subdue
those enemies that Kings tremble at, to subdue death, to subdue the fear of
judgment, and the wrath of God, and yet how few will come under his
government? Christ is the light of the world, yet how few follow him? Christ is
the way, yet how few tread in his steps? Christ is our wisdom and our riches,
yet how few go to him to fetch any riches, but content themselves with the
transitory things of this life? Men live as if Christ were nothing, or did
nothing concern them, as if he were a person abstracted from them, as if he
were not a Head or Husband, as if he had received the Spirit only for himself
and not for them, whereas all that is in Christ is for us, I beseech you
therefore let us learn to know Christ better, and to make use of him.

Again, To make use of Christ in our sailings.
if Christ has the Spirit put upon him for us all, then in our daily slips and
errors make this use, to offer Christ to God with this argument, take an
argument from God himself to bind him, God will be bound with his own
arguments, we cannot bind him with ours, but let us go to him and say, Lord
though I be thus and thus sinful, yet for Christ Jesus sake thy servant,
whom thou love and have put thy Spirit upon him to be a Priest, and to make
intercession for me, for his sake pardon, for his sake accept. Make use of Gods
consecration of Christ by the Spirit to God himself, and bind him with his
own Mediator, and with his own Priest of his own ordaining, thou can not
Lord refuse a Savior and Mediator of thine own, sanctified by thine own
Spirit, whom thou have set apart, and ordained and qualified every way for this
purpose, let us go to God in the Name of this Mediator Jesus Christ every day,
and this is to make a good use of this, That God has put his Spirit upon him.
How to know the Spirit is put on Christ for us


But to make a use of Trial, how shall we know that this comfort belongs to
us, that Christ has the Spirit put upon him for us or no, whether he be
ordained a King, Priest and Prophet for us? That which I said before will give
light to this, we must partake of the same Spirit that Christ has, or else we
are none of his members, as we partake of his name, so we must also of his
annoynting, thereupon we are called Christians, because we partake of the
annoynting and Spirit of Christ, and if we have the Spirit of Christ, it will
work the same in us as it did in Christ, it will convince us of our own ill,
of our rebellions, and cursed estate, and it will convince us likewise of the
good we have in him. And then, he is a Spirit of union, to knit us to Christ,
and make us one with him, and thereupon to quicken us, to lead us, and guide
us, and to dwell in us continually, to stir up prayers and supplications in
us, to make us cry familiarly to God as to a Father, to comfort and support us
in all our wants and miseries, as he did Christ, to help our infirmities, as
the Apostle at large in Romans 8. sets down the excellent office of the Holy
Ghost, what he does in those that are Christ's. Let us therefore examine our
selves, what the Spirit does in us, if Christ be set apart to redeem us, as a
Priest? (Surely all his offices go together) he does by the same Spirit rule
us, Rev. 1. He has washed us in his blood, and made us Kings and Priests.
Whosoever he washes in his blood he makes him a King, and a Priest, he makes
him by the power of his Spirit able to rule over his base corruptions, we may
know then, whether we have benefit by Christ by his Spirit, not only by the
Spirit witnessing that we are the Sons of God, but by some arguments whereby
the Spirit may witness without delusion, for though the Spirit of Christ tells
us that we are Christ's, yet the proof must be from guiding and leading, and
comforting, and conforming us to Jesus Christ, in making us Kings, and
Prophets, enlightening our understandings to know his will, and conforming us to
be like him. The Spirit of Christ is a Spirit of power and strength, it will
enable us to perform duties above nature, to overcome our selves and injuries,
it will make us to want and to abound, it will make us able to live and to
dye, as it enabled Christ to do things that another man could not do. So a
Christian can do that, and suffer that that another man cannot do and suffer,
because he has the Spirit of Christ.

At the least whosoever has the Spirit of Christ, he shall find that Spirit
in him striving against that which is contrary, and by little and little
getting ground, where there is no conflict, there is no Spirit of Christ at
all, I will not be large in the point, only I speak this by way of trial to
know whether we have the Spirit of Christ in us or no, if not we have nothing
to do with Christ: For Christ saves us not as he is out of us only, Christ
was to do something of himself that we have no share in, only the good of
it is ours, he was to redeem us by his blood, to be a Sacrifice, the title
to Heaven and salvation was wrought by Christ out of us, but there is somewhat
that he does not only for us, but he works in us by his Spirit, that is, the
fitting of us for that he has given us title too, and the applying of that
that he has done for us. Whosoever therefore has any benefit by Christ, he
has the Spirit to apply that to himself and to fit and qualify him to be a
member of such a Head, and an heir of such a Kingdom, whosoever Christ works
any thing for, he does also work in them, there is a Spirit of application and
that spirit of application if it be true it is a Spirit of sanctification and
renovation fitting us every way for our condition,

Let us not abuse our selves, as the world commonly does, concerning Christ,
they think God is merciful and Christ is a Savior. It is true, but what has
he wrought in thee by his Spirit, have thou the Spirit of Christ? or else thou
art none of his, Romans 8. Where ever Christ is he goes with his Spirit, to
teach us to apply what Christ has done for us, and to fit us to be like him.
Therefore let those that live in any sins against conscience, think it a
diabollicall illusion to think God and Christ is merciful, I but where is the
work of the Spirit? All the hope thou have is only that thou art not in Hell
as yet for the time to come, but for the present I dare not say thou have any
thing to do with Christ, when there is nothing of the Spirit in thee, the
Spirit of Christ conformes the Spouse to be like the husband, and the members
to be like the Head, therefore beg of Christ that he would anoint himself
King in our hearts, and Prophet, and Priest in our hearts, to do that that he
did, to know his will as a Prophet, to rule in us as a King, and to stir up
prayers in us as a Priest, to do in some proportion that that he does, though
it be in never so little a measure, for we receive it in measure, but Christ
beyond measure, we must labor for so much as may manifest to us the truth of
our estate in Christ, that we are not dead but living branches. The Spirit
given more abundantly sinoe Christ's ascension.


Now Christ gives and conveyes his Spirit especially, and most of all since his
ascension, and sitting at the right hand of God, for after his resurrection he
declared his victory over all his enemies, and therefore was able to give the
Spirit without opposition, and upon his resurrection, death and hell, and the
anger of God were overcome, and our sins were satisfied for, now Christ was
Head indeed having trod all his enemies under his feet, now he was enabled to
give the Spirit, but upon his ascension into Heaven, and his sitting there, he
was more enabled, for even as the Sun, being so high above the Earth, does
convey his light and heat and influence upon the inferior bodies, So Christ
being so highly advanced is fitter to infuse his Spirit and grace here below
since his exaltation, therefore the Church is fuller of grace, and grace has
been more spread and diffused since the ascension of Christ then before, and
the Evangelist gives it as a reason, The Spirit was not yet given, because
Christ was not ascended, intimating that after his ascension, there was a more
full portion of the Spirit given, God being fully appeased by the death of
Christ, and Christ staying the advantage that was fittest to give the Spirit,
now God the Father gives the Spirit with the Son, so in both regards there
was a greater fulness of the Spirit. Therefore the Prophets speaking of the
times of Christ, especially of his exaltation, show that then they should be
filled with the Spirit, that the Spirit should be povvred out upon all flesh
more abundantly then before. And that is the reason that the Apostles so
differed from themselves, before and after Christ's ascension, what a wondrous
alteration was there? Peter before, he flies even at the voice of a maid, and
they were full of contention, and vain glory, but after we see when the
Spirit, the Holy Ghost came down after Christ's ascension into Heaven, how
courageous, and valarous they were that they accounted it a matter of glory to
suffer any thing, and indeed we have more or less valor and courage, the more
of less Spirit we have, now they having received more abundance of Spirit,
hereupon they were more courageous and undaunted at one time then another, and
this abundance of the Spirit comes especially since Christ's advancement.

But how or by what means does Christ give his Spirit to us? How Christ gives
the Spirit
This Spirit that is so necessary for us, In the ministry of the Word. Gal. 3.2.
it is given by the ministry of the Gospel, which is the ministry of the
Spirit, received ye the Holy Ghost by the works of the law, or by the hearing
of faith preached? when the love of God in Christ, and the benefits by Christ
are laid open in the preaching of the Gospel to us, God gives his holy
Spirit, the Spirit of Christ. Now God in Christ would save us by a triumphant
and abundant love and mercy, and the Spirit of God never goes but where there
is a magnifying of the love and mercy of God in Christ, therefore the ministry
of the Gospel, which only discovers the amity and love of God to mankind
being now reconciled in Christ, it is accompanied with the Spirit, to assure us
of our part and portion in those benefits: for the Spirit is the fruit of Gods
love as well as Christ, Christ is the first gift, and the Spirit is the second,
therefore that part of the word that discovers Gods exceeding love to
mankind, leaving Angels (when they were fallen) in their cursed estate: and
yet giving his Son to become man, and a curse for us, the discovery of this
love and mercy of God, and of his Son Christ to us, is joined with the Spirit:
for by the Spirit we see our cursed estate without the love and mercy of God in
Christ, and likewise we are convinced of the love of God in Christ, and
thereupon we love God again, and trust to his mercy, and out of love to him
perform all cheerful obedience, whatsoever we do else if it be not stirred
by the Spirit, apprehending the love of God in Christ, it is but morallity. A
man shall never go to Heaven but by such a disposition, and frame and temper
of soul as is wrought by the Holy Ghost, persuading the soul first of the
love and favor of God in Christ. What are all our performances if they be not
out of love to God? and how shall we love God except we be persuaded that he
loves us first? therefore the Gospel breeds love in us to God, and has the
Spirit together with it, working a blessed frame of sanctification, whereby we
are disposed to every good duty. Therefore if we would have the Spirit of God
let us attend upon the sweet promises of salvation, upon the doctrine of
Christ: for together with the knowledge of these things the Holy Ghost slides,
and insinuates, and infuseth himself into our souls.

Therefore the Ministers of the Gospel should be much in laying open the riches
of God in Christ; in unfolding Christ all other things will follow, as S. Paul
in 2 Tit. 12. The grace of God has shined, has appeared gloriously, teaching
us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live holily and soberly
in this present world, where the grace and love of God is persuaded and shed
into the soul all will follow.

What is the reason that former times were called dark times, and so they
were, the times of Popery, a dark age? Christ was veiled, the Gospel was
veiled, there was no preaching of salvation by Christ alone, people were sent
to stocks and stones, and to Saints, and instead of the word, they were sent to
legends and such things, Christ was obscured, thereupon they were dark ages,
those ages wherein the Spirit of God is most, is where Christ is most preached,
and people are best always where there is most Spirit, and they are most joyful
and comfortable, and holy, where Christ is truly laid open to the hearts of
people; the peaching of mere morallity, (if men be not careful to open
Christ, to know how salvation is wrought by Christ, and how all good comes by
Christ) it will never make a man perfectly good, and fit him for Heaven, it may
make a man reform many abuses, like a Philosopher, which has its reward, and
respect amongst men, but nothing to give comfort at the hour of death, and the
day of judgment, only that whereby the Spirit is conveyed is the knowledge
and preaching of Christ in his state and offices.

In obedience.
Again, the Spirit of Christ is given, in obedience to this Gospel, Acts*
5.32. He gives the Holy Ghost to them that obey him. Now there is the
obedience of faith, and the obedience of life, when the soul is wrought to
obedience, to believe, and to be directed by God, then the Holy Spirit is given
in a further measure still, the Holy Ghost is given to them that obey* to them
that do not resist the Spirit of God: for in the Ministry of the Gospel the
Spirit is given in some degree to reprobates, it is offered, it knockes at the
hearts of the vilest persons, that lives in filthy and false courses of life,
whose tongues, and bodies, are all instruments of an unsanctified soul to
offend God, they have gracious motions offered them, but then they do not obey
them, therefore the Spirit seizes not upon them to rule in them, they have the
Spirit knocking upon them, he does not dwell in them, and take up his lodging
in them. The Spirit is given to them that obey the sweet motions of it. Now who
is it that hears the blessed word of God, the blessed tidings of salvation,
but he has sweet motions of the Spirit to be in love with God and the mercy
of God, and to hate sin a little for a time, then presently upon it
corruption joins and and swells against those motions, and they only rest in
the bare motion, and never come to any perfection. This is the state of
reprobates in the Church, they have many motions by the Holy Ghost, but their
hearts are not subdued to obedience, not to constant obedience. Therefore if
we would have the Spirit of Christ, let us labor to subject our selves unto
it, when we have any good motion by the Ministry of the Word, or by
conference, or by reading of good things (as holy things have a savor in them,
the Spirit breathes in holy exercises) Oh give way to the motions of Gods
Spirit, we shall not have them again perhaps, turn not back those blessed
messengers, let us entertain them, let the Spirit dwell and rule in us, it is
the most blessed lodger that ever we entertained in all our lives, If we let
the Spirit guide and rule us, it will lead us and govern and support us in
life and death, and never leave us till it have raised our bodies, the Spirit
of Christ in us at length will quicken our dead bodies, Romans 8. it will never
leave us till it have brought us to Heaven. This is the state of those that
belong to God, that give way to the motions of Gods Spirit to rule and guide
them; therefore if we would have the Spirit of Christ, let us take heed of
rebelling against it.

This is the state of many of us (the Lord be merciful to us, and cure us)
that we do not only not receive the motions of the Spirit deeply into us,
but if they be such a cross us in our pleasures and profits, though the Word
and Spirit join together, there is a rising of the proud spirit of man against
so much of the Spirit and the motions of it, and against such parts of the Word
as crosses us, this will be laid heavy to our charge one day that we would
bring the Spirit of God to our corruptions, and not bring our hearts to Gods
Spirit, and hereupon be those phrases in the Scripture of tempting the Spirit,
Ananias and Saphira tempted the Spirit, that is, when men will do that which
is naught, and try whether God will forgive them, and put it off or no, how
many are there that tempt the Spirit? that put it off, perhaps I shall have the
like motions another time, I shall have better occasion when I can gain no
more, when I can have my pleasures no more, thus men resist the Spirit, as
Saint Stephen says, that is when the Spirit discovers to them what they should
believe, and what they should do, and they see it crosses their resolution to
be naught, hereupon they resist the work of the Spirit, that else would close
with their souls and sanctify them, and fit them for Heaven, if they would
give way to it. And there is a quenching of the Spirit, that is, when men have
sweet motions of the Spirit, and presently by some ill language or course of
life they defile their vessels and quench the sweet motions of the Spirit. Let
us take heed of all these, of tempting, of resisting, and quenching the Spirit:
For undoubtedly (living in the bosom of the Church) we have many heavenly
motions, especially those that have so much goodness in them as to attend upon
Gods ordinances, they have those motions at those times, that they never have
after perhaps, but they either resist them, or quench them, and wrong and
grieve the Spirit, as Saint Paul says, Greive not the Spirit of God, whereby
you are sealed to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 5. Men speak or do somewhat
that grieves the Spirit of God in them, their conscience being enlightened by
the Spirit tells them that they have done that which is naught, yet
notwithstanding for this or that advantage, to please this or that company,
they will speak or do that which is ill, and then the Spirit that was given
in some measure before is grieved at this carnal and sinful liberty.
Therefore if ye would be guided by the Spirit of Christ, take heed of all
these and of such like courses.

Another means whereby we may come to obtain the Spirit, Prayer.
is Prayer; to be guided by the Spirit of Christ, (next to Christ himself our
Savior) is the most excellent thing in the world, therefore it is worth the
begging and getting, Luke 11.13. How much more shall your heavenly Father give
his holy Spirit to them that ask him? Insinuating, that we can ask nothing
greater then the Spirit. A man that has a sanctified judgment next the
forgiveness of his sins through Christ, he begs nothing more then the Spirit
to witness the favor of God in Christ, and to fit him for other favors,
especially to fit us for the world to come. God can give nothing greater, nor
we can beg nothing greater, if we have sanctified judgments, then the Spirit
of God, therefore let us have a high esteem of the holy Spirit of the motions
of it, and out of an high esteem in our hearts beg of God the guidance of the
Spirit, that he would lead us by his Spirit, and subdue our corruptions, that
we may not be lead by our own lusts, and so consequently by Satan that leads
us by our own lusts in the way that leads to perdition. So much for that, I
will put my Spirit, etc.

And he shall show judgment to the Gentiles.
After Christ was fully furnished, as he was furnished with the Spirit of God,
and with a commission from Heaven, from Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, having
this high commission, and gifts for it by the Spirit, he falls upon his office
presently, we are never fit for any thing till we have the Spirit, and when we
have the Spirit it is active, and vigorous and working, He shall show judgment
to the Gentiles.

Object.
What is meant by judgment here?

By judgment is meant laws, Answ.
he shall declare his laws, What meant by judgment here.
his truth, and together with declaring the truth of the Gospel, which is his
Evangelicall law, he shall declare it in the soul, and bow the neck of the
inward man to the obedience of this his judgment. Christ then by himself and
his Apostles and Ministers, shall declare his truth (which is the scepter of
his government) to the Gentiles, and not only declare it, as Princes do
their laws by Proclamations and Statutes, etc. but he shall declare it to the
heart by his Spirit.

Now in the hebrew language, ordinarily, wise government is called judgment,
he shall declare judgment, that is, his manner of government, he shall
declare it by his Spirit, and cause our Spirits to submit to it.

And indeed grace is called judgment, in the phrase of Scripture, the grace of
sanctification, because it is agreeable to judgment, to Gods law, it is
agreeable to it, and wrought by it in the soul, and it is the best judgment,
for grace whereby the soul is subject to the judgment and law, and rule of
God, it must needs be the best judgment, because it is agreeable to Gods
judgment, grace judges aright of things, and subdues all things, the
affections and inward man to it self.

But why is the word of God called judgment? The word of God called judgment.


It is called so frequently in the Psalms, and in other places of Scripture,
because the truth of God shows what God does judge. Judgment is originally in
God who is the first truth, and the first good, the first truth judges best of
truths, what is light, and what is darkness, what is truth, and what is
error, what is good, and what is ill, what is safe, and what is dangerous; all
will grant that God is the first light, and the first truth, therefore he does
originally judge of the difference of things: for even as in the creation he
put an eternal difference between light and darkness, and severed things
that were in the confuse^ Chaos, and established an orderly world, that Heaven
should be above, and earth below, that one thing should be above another, and
all in judgment. So in the governing of mankind, he shows his judgment by
his word, and that word shows how God judges of things. Laws show, judgment
what is to be done, and what is not to be done. The Gospel shows Gods
judgment, what he will have us believe and hope for, and how we must carry
our selves in way of thankefullnesses if we do this, then the Gospel, the
word of God judges what shall become of us, we shall be saved, if we do the
contrary, the word again judges what our state shall be, we shall be damned,
so it is called judgment, because it judges what is good and what is ill, and
because it determines what shall become of us if we obey or disobey.

Hereupon it is that the word of God is a glass wherein we may see our own
condition infallibly, what will become of us, the Word of God judges thus, he
that lives in such and such sins shall come to this end, God will inflict
these and these judgments upon him. Judgment in the first place is, you shall
do this and this, because it is good. Judgment in the second place is,
because you have not done this, this shall befall you, so the Evangelicall
judgment of the Gospel is this, He that repents and believes shall not
perish, but have everlasting life: but he that arms and furnishes his heart
to rebellion, he shall perish in his sins, He that believes not is condemned
already, the wrath of God hangs over his head. So from this, that Gods truth
is called judgment, we may know how to judge of our selves, even as God
judges in his Word* we may see our own faces and conditions there, he that
is a man of death may see it in the Word, and he that is appointed for
happiness may there see his condition.

Again, Sanctification judgment.
not only the Word of God, the Gospel (which is out of us in the book of
God) is called judgment, but the work of God in the soul, Sanctification is
called judgment, hence we may observe, what is the most judicious course in
the world, the most judicious frame of soul, when it is framed to the
judgment and truth of God, being the first truth. When a man is sanctified and
set in a holy frame, it is from a sanctified judgment the flesh is subject to
the Spirit, here is all in a gracious order, the baser part does not rule the
higher, but the higher part of the soul, a sanctified judgment rules all,
because the whole is in right judgment, therefore sanctification is called
judgment, and other courses though they be never so fashionable are but
madness, and folly, and disorder in the censure of the Scripture, nothing is
judgment and true wisdom, but sanctification and obedience flowing from
sanctification, Therefore says Moses in Deuteronomie, Then shall you be known
to be a wise people when you obey the Laws that I have given you, only that
shows a wise judicious man, to be obedient to Gods truth by the Spirit
sanctifying him. Without the truth of God and the Spirit in us framing our
souls answerable to the truth, we are out of all good order: For then the
affections that should be ruled, rule us, then the body, and the lusts of the
body, rule the soul, and the Devil rules by both, what a shameful disorder
is this, when a man shall be ruled by the Devil and his own lusts that he
should tread under feet and trample upon? and this is the state of all that
have not this judgment in them, that have not the word of God written in their
hearts bowing and bending them by the Spirit of God to spiritual obedience, to
prove this J will name but one place among many, Titus. 3.^. he shows the
state of all men, that are not brought into subjection by this judgment, by
the Word and Spirit of truth. We our selves (says he) were sometimes foolish
and disobedient, till this judgment is set up in us, we are foolish in our
understandings, and disobedient in our wills and affections, deceived and
misled by the Devil, and our own lusts: for that follows upon folly, those
that are foolish and disobedient are deceived and led away to eternal
destruction, There is a way that seems good in a man's own eyes, but the
issues of it are death, says Solomon, this is the state of all men that are
not led with the judgment of Gods truth and Spirit, sanctifying and framing
their souls to obedience, they are foolish and disobedient and deceived, and
so it will prove with them in the end, Serving diverse lusts, and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hating one another. Now when God by his blessed
Truth and Spirit sets up his rule in the heart, it brings all into captivity,
as Saint Paul says, it brings all the inner man into subjection. The Word of
God is the weapon of God, these judgments are mighty in operation together
with the Spirit* to beat down all strong holds and to set up another
judgment there, it brings all into captivity to the truth and command of God,
and to the motions of the Spirit, the Word and Spirit beat down all the
strong holds that are raised up in the heart by Satan, and our corruptions, so
we see here what is meant by this phrase, He shall declare judgment to the
Gentiles. It is a militant word, therefore J have stood somewhat the longer in
unfolding of it.

Grace wrought by preaching
Now this is wrought by the preaching of the Gospel, He shall declare
judgment to the Gentiles, all grace comes by declaring, The Gospel is the
power of God to salvation. Let but the Gospel (which is Gods judgment how men
shall be saved, and how they shall walk in obedience by way of thankefullnesse
to God) be declared, and all that belong to God shall come in, and yield homage
to it, and be brought in subjection. The Devil in the Antichristian state
knows this well enough, therefore he labors to hinder the declaration of
judgment by all means, he will not have Gods judgments but men's traditions
declared, he knows the declaring of Gods judgments will breed an alteration
quickly in men's dispositions: For when he says, He shall declare judgment
to the Gentiles, he means the consequent as well as the thing, he shall so
declare judgment that they shall yield spiritual obedience and come in and be
saved.

Let the Devil do his worst, let all seducers of souls do their worst, if
they would but give way to the preaching of the Gospel, let but judgment be
declared, let Gods arm be stretched forth in delivering the truth, he would
soon gain souls out of the captivity and bondage of Satan, they know it well
enough, therefore by all the ways they can they stop the preaching of the
Gospel and disgrace and hinder it, and set up men's traditions instead of the
Gospel, but I will not enlarge my self farther upon these words, but go on
to the next.

He shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets.
These words set down the mild, Christ's mild carriage.
and sweet, and amiable manner of Christ's carriage upon earth here in his
first coming to work the great work of our redemption, he did not carry the
matter in an outward glorious manner, in pomp, but he would have his miracles
concealed often times, and himself hidden, his Godhead was hid under the veil
of his Manhood, he could not have wrought our salvation else, if the devil and
the world had known Christ to be as he was, they would never have made those
attempts against him, therefore considering he had such a dispensation to work
our salvation, as a King, Priest, and Prophet, he would not cry, and contend,
and strive, he would not come with any great noise.

Now here is an opposition to the giving of the law, Difference between the
giving of the law and Gospel.
and likewise to the coming and carriage of civil Princes. You know when the
Law was given all the mount was on fire, and the earth thereabout quaked, and
trembled, and the people fled, they could not endure to hear the voice of God
speaking in the mount, there was such a terrible smoke and fire, they were all
afraid, thus came Moses: now did Christ come as Moses? was the Gospel
delivered by Christ as the law was, in terrors and fears? Oh no; Christ came
not in such a terrible manner in thunder and lightning, but the Gospel it came
sweetly. A Dove, a mild creature lit upon the head of Christ when he was
Baptized, to show his mild manner of carriage, and he came with blessing in his
mouth in his first Sermon of all, Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are
they that mourn, blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness.
The Law came with curses, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
written in the law to do them. Christ came in another manner, the Gospel was
delivered in a mild sweet manner, Christ as an Ambassador came sweetly to
entreat and beseech, there is a crying indeed, but it is a crying out of love
and entreaty, not a shouting in a terrible manner as was at the giving of the
law, no nor as at the coming of other civil Princes into a city with
shouting and noise of trumpets, with pomp and state, and great attendants.
Christ came not into the world to execute his kingdom and office in such
pomp, and noise, as it is said of Agrippa, Acts. 25.23. he came with great
pomp, so worldly Princes carry things thus, and it is needful in some sort,
people must have shows and pomp, the outward man must have outward things to
astonish it withal, it is a policy in state so to do, but Christ came in
another manner, he came not to make men quake and tremble that came to speak
and deal with him, he came not with clamor and fierceness: for who would
have come to Christ then? But he came in a mild, and sweet, and amiable
manner; we see a little before the text, upon occasion of the inference of
these words, he commands and charge them that they should not discover him
and make him known, when he had done a good work he would not have it known.

Now there are three things especially insinuated in this description, he
shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the street.
That Christ should not be outwardly glorious to publish his own excellency,
nor contentious, he should not cry nor quarrel, nor he should not be
clamarous, if he had any wrong, to be all on fire presently, but he should be
as a meek Lamb, he should make no noise, he should not come in vain glory,
or clamor, etc.

But here we must know that Christ was a wise discerner of the fitness of
times: for sometimes he would have things published, sometimes he would not,
sometimes he would be known, sometimes he would not. Christ in his second
coming, shall come all in majesty and glory with his Angels, and all the
earth shall appear before him, but now his wisdom told him (now he came to
save the world as a Prophet, Priest and King, to work man's salvation) that he
must hide and conceal himself, and so he ordered all his courses by
discretion, every Sacrifice must be salted with salt, every thing should be
seasoned with the salt of discretion, this is the steward of all our actions,
to know what is fit, Christ knew it was fittest to conceal himself now at
this time.

To take heed of vain glory.
Now by Christ's example we should learn this, not to be vain glorious, not to
make a great noise, you have some if they do any thing that is good, presently
all the world must know it, this was not Christ's disposition; it is a
disposition that is hardly wrought out of man's heart without an exceeding great
measure of the Spirit of God: For we see good men have been given this way.
David would number the people that it might be known what a great Monarch he
was, what a great number of people he had, he was a good man, yet
vainglorious, he smarted for it. So good Hezekias, Ambassadors were sent to
him from the King of Babylon, and that they should know that Hezekiah was no
beggarly Prince, out must come the vessels of the Temple, and all his
treasures, to show what a rich King the King of Judah was. His vainglory cost
him all his riches, as the Prophet told him. So the Disciples before they
received a great measure of the Spirit, how vainglorious were they? They
contended for the higher place, therefore they advise Christ to go up to
Jerusalem, that he might be known, As Iehu said to Ionadab, come up and see
my zeal for the Lord of Hoasts, he accounts it nothing unless it be seen,
so flesh and blood, if there be any thing done that is good, all the world must
know it presently. Christ charge them that no noise should be made, but that
they would conceal him.

What should we learn hence?

To be of Christ's disposition, that is, to have no more care of the knowledge
of things then the light of the things themselves will discover, to do works
of light, and if the things themselves will break forth to men's eyes and they
must see our light shine, then let them, and imitate our good works, but for us
to blazon them abroad our selves, it is not the Spirit of Christ.

Let us labor to have humility of spirit, Labor for humility.
that that may grow up with us in all our performances, that all things that we
speak and do may savor of a spirit of humility, that we may seek the glory
of God in all things more then our own.

And let us commit the fame and credit of what we are or do to God, he will
take care of that, let us take care to be and to do as we should, and then
for noise and report, let it be good or ill as God will send it: We know often
times it falls out that that which is precious in man's eye is abominable in
Gods, if we seek to be in the mouths of men, to dwell in the talk and
speech of men, God will abhor us, and at the hour of death it will not
comfort us what men speak or know of us, but sound comfort must be from our
own conscience and the judgment of God: therefore let us labor to be good in
secret, Christians should be as minerals, rich in the depth of the earth, that
which is least seen is his riches, we should have our treasure deep: For the
discovery of it, we should be ready when we are called to it, and for all
other accidental things, let them fall out as God in his wisdom sees good.
So let us look through good report and bad report to Heaven, let us do the
duties that are pleasing to God and our own conscience, and God will be
careful enough to get us applause; Was it not sufficient for Abell, that
though there was no great notice taken what faith he had, and how good a man he
was, yet that God knew it, and discovered it? God sees our sincerity and the
truth of our hearts, and the graces of our inward man, he sees all these, and
he values us by these, as he did Abell; As for outward things, there may be a
great deal of deceit in them, and the more a man grows in grace, the less he
cares for them; as much reputation as is fit for a man will follow him in being
and doing what he should, God will look to that. Therefore we should not set
up sails to our own meditations, that unless we be carried with the wind
of applause, to be becalmed and not go a whit forward, but we should be
carried with the Spirit of God and with a holy desire to serve God, and our
brethren, and to do all the good we can, and never care for the speeches of
the world, as St. Paul says of himself, I care not what ye judge of me, I
care not what the world judges, I care not for man's judgment, this is man's
day; We should from the example of Christ, labor to subdue this infirmity
which we are sick of naturally. Christ concealed himself till he saw a
fitter time. We shall have glory enough, and be known enough to Devils, to
Angels and men ere long, therefore as Christ lived a hidden life, that is, he
was not known what he was, that so he might work our salvation, so let us
be content to be hidden men. A true Christian is hidden to the world till the
time of manifestation comes; when the time came, Christ then gloriously
discovered what he was; so we shall be discovered what we are, in the mean
time let us be careful to do our duty that may please the Spirit of God, and
satisfy our own conscience, and leave all the rest to God; Let us meditate,
in the fear of God, upon these directions for the guidance of our lives in
this particular.

FINIS.
GODS INQVISITION, In two Sermons By the late Reverend and Learned Divine
RICHARD SIBS, Doctor in Divinity, Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and
sometimes Preacher at GRAYES INN.

GEN 18.21. I will go down now and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.

PSALM. 14.3. They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there
is none that does good no not one.

LONDON. Printed by G.M. for Nicholas Bourne and Rapha Harford. MDCXXXIX.

GODS INQVISITION,
IERE. 8.6, 7. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? every one turn^d to
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

Yea the storke in the Heavens knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and
the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people
know not the judgment of the Lord.


UPON the sins of people it has been always Gods course to send his Prophets
to warn them before hand, and afterward upon that to observe how they profit
by that warning, and thereupon he takes occasion to proceed answerably: God
usually exercises a great deal of patience ere he strikes: he made the world
in six days: but he is six thousand years in destroying it.

Meaning of the words.
In this verse after the holy Prophet had menaced the judgment of God upon
them, there is set down what use they made of it. Alas! They spoke not aright,
no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? And least
they should object, how do you know this? He says here it is upon
inquisition, I hearkened and heard. So the words contain Gods inquisition or
enquiry, Parts of the words.
and then Gods evidence upon that inquiry, together with a complaint. His
enquiry, I hearkened and heard. For we must apply these words to God, there is
the same phrase, Mal. 3.16. The Lord hearkened and heard, and a Book of
remembrance was written before him, so here, I hearkened and heard* here is the
enquiry.

Then secondly, the evidence upon the enquiry, They spoke not aright.

And thirdly, the complaint upon that evidence; set down First positively,
They repented not of their wickedness, which is amplified, 1. From the
generality of this their impenitency, No man repented him, and 2. From the
cause of it, want of consideration, they did not say, what have I done? If they
had called themselves to account concerning what they had done, certainly they
would have repented. 2. Comparatively, They turned to their course as the horse
rusheth into the battle. Lastly, superlatively, preferring the skill of the
poor Storkes and Cranes, and the Turtle, and Swallow, before the judgment of
his senseless and stupid people. The Storke in the heavens knows her
appointed time, and the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow: But my people know
not the judgment of the Lord. This is the sum of the words.


First of Gods enquiry, Gods inquiry.
I hearkened and heard. Ere Sodom was destroyed, The Lord came down to see
whether there were such cause or no. God is most just, he will see cause for
his judgments: He has no delight in punishing. When he judges it is not out
of his Sovereignty; but out of his justice; he does it not as a Sovereign
Lord, but as a just judge. Now a judge must do all upon inquisition and
evidence, therefore says he, I hearkened and heard. Where by the way the gods
of the earth to whom he has communicated his name should learn hence, not to
be rash in their judgments, but to have sound evidence, before they pass
sentence. I hearkened and heard, To hearken is more then to hear, to apply
ones self with some affection to hear a thing.

God is all ear, as he is all eye, he has an ear every where, he has an
ear in our hearts, he hears what we think, what we desire, he sees all the
secret corners of our hearts, therefore when he says here, I hearkened and
heard, it is by way of condescending to our capacity.

We may learn hence briefly, That God has an ear, and an eye to our carriage
and dispositions, to our speeches and courses. If we had one always at our backs
that would inform such a man and such a man what we say; one that should book
our words and after lay them to our charge, it would make us careful of our
words. Now though we be nev^r so much alone, there are two always that hear
us, God hearkens and hears, and Gods deputy in us, conscience hearkens and
hears; God books it, and conscience books it. As God has a book wherein he
wrote us before all worlds, and the book of his providence for our bones, and
all things that concern us; So he has a book for our works and words. Mal.
3.16. They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him, etc.
So here I hearkened and heard, God, and conscience note and observe every thing.

To enforce car^ in our carriage
This does impose upon us the duty of careful and reverent walking with God:
Would we speak carelessly, or ill of any man, if he heard us? When we slight a
man, we say we care not if he heard us himself; But shall we slight God so?
Shall we swear and lie, and blaspheme, and say we care not though God hear us
that will lay every thing to our charge, not only words but thoughts? Mat.
12.36.
We shall give an account for every idle word, and for every idle thought, and
shall we not regard it? It is from the horrible profaneness of the poysonfull
rebellious heart of man that men do not consider these things, God hearkens
and hears, he is at our studies, he is at our windows, he hears us in our
chambers, when we are in company, when we meet together, when we take liberty
to censure and detract, when we swear and revile. What if men hear not, yet
conscience hears, and God hears? and when God shall lay open the book of
conscience, and lay before a man all his naughty speeches, and wicked works,
what will become of him then for not making use of this principle, that God
hearkens and hears? God sees now with what minds and affections we come about
this business, whether it be formally to put off God, to make it a cover for
our sinful courses after, as if God were beholding to us for what we do
now, and therefore might the better bear with us, though we make bold with him
hereafter, he not only hears what we say, but sees our minds and purposes,
nay he knows our thoughts long before they are* This is the cause why godly
men have always walked so carefully and circumspectly, Ground of circumspect
walking.
they knew that Gods eye and ear was over them; as of Enoch and Noah, it is
said in this regard that they walked with God, and Joseph when he was tempted,
Shall I do this (says he) and sin against God? and shall not God see if I
do this* Does not he see my ways and count all my steps, says Job. So
again, What makes wicked men so loose? The Prophet tells, Psalm, 94.7. they
say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Or as it
is, Job. 22.12. etc. Is not God in the height of Heaven? How does God know, can
he judge through the dark cloud, thick clouds are a covering to him that he
sees not, and he walks in the circuit of the Heavens. Tush he regards not,
he is immured and shut up there: but to such Atheists we see what the Prophet
answers, Psalm. 64.8. etc. Ye brutish foolish people, shall he that makes
others hear not hear himself? he that planted the ear, he that is all ear,
shall not he hear? As it makes good men walk holily and reverently, to
consider of this, that God is present, and present as an observer, and a judge,
so the want of taking this to heart makes wicked and carnal persons do as
they do. So much briefly for these words, I hearkened and heard.

No man spoke aright.
The evidence.
But what evidence does he give upon this inquisition? they spoke not aright,
which is amplified from the generality of this sin, No man spoke aright, the
meaning is especially that they spoke not aright concerning the judgments of
God threatened: when God had threatened judgments, he hearkened, and heard what
use they made of them, but they spoke not aright.

Quest.
In how many respects do we not speak aright in regard of the judgments of
God? Answ.


First in regard of God, men speak not aright, We speak amiss of Gods
judgments.
when they do not see him in the judgment, but look to the creature, to the
second causes: In regard of God.
as now in the time of the plague, to look to the air and weather, and this
and that, (which is a good providence,) and to forget him that is the chief,
to kill dogs and cats, and to let sin alone, to cry out; oh what air there
is this year, and what weather it is! to talk of the second causes
altogether, and to forget God, this is to talk amiss of Gods judgments
threatened, in regard of God.

Again we talk amiss in regard of others, In regard of others.
when we begin to flight them in our thoughts and speeches, oh they were
careless people, they adventured into company, and it was the carelessenesse
of the Magistrates, they were not well looked to, they were unmercifull
persons, etc. Is it not Gods hand? put case there might be some oversight; art
thou secure from Gods arrow? he that struck them may he not strike thee? this
is to talk amiss of the judgment of God in regard of others; when we think
that God has singled them out as sinners above the rest: as the Disciples
thought of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifice. No,
no, says he, think not they were greater sinners then the rest, do not add
your bitter censure of the judgment of God on them, and make it heavier,
(there is a woe to such persons, as add afflictions to the afflicted,) except
ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. Is not the ripest corn cut first?
God often times takes those away that are fittest for him, and leaves others to
the cruelty of men, therefore by this rash judgment there may be great wrong
to men, and to wrong men in our censures, it is to talk amiss of Gods
judgments in regard of others.

In regard of our selves.
Again we talk amiss of Gods judgments in regard of our selves, when we
murmur and fret any way against God, and do not submit our selves under his
mighty hand as we should. When we ^^rmure against God.


Again, we sin against the judgments of God abroad, when we take liberty to
inquire of the judg^ments of God abroad, When we make (...) use of his
^u^gements.
and never make use of them; as now to be asking what number die of the plague
weekly, and our hearts tremble not at it, we lift not up our hearts to God,
God be merc^full to us, Lord forgive our sins, what will become of us? we had
need to make our accounts even; this is to talk amiss of Gods judgments: It
is a vein that men have naturally, to enquire after news of all sorts; be it
the sharpest and bitterest that may be, though it be the destruction, and
ruin, and death of other men, whatsoever it be they desire to hear it, if
news: in the mean time there is no care to make use of it, which is directly
that for which these men here are said to have talked amiss, No man spoke
aright. Why? no man repented him of his wickedness, etc. as we shall see
afterward. We should talk of the judgments of God to be bettered by them,
Isa 26.9.
we should learn righteousness, when the judgments of God are abroad, and
the arrows that wound others we should make warning arrows to our selves: now
when we trifelingly only inquire of these things, and are not moved our
selves, we talk amiss of Gods judgments.

Let us labor to talk of the judgments of God (when they are abroad, Use.
) as we should. To talk aright of Gods judgments.
Jn regard of God, to raise our hearts above all second causes, to see him in
it: It is the hand of God, as the Scripture calls the plague, whatsoever the
second causes are, whether it be the air, and the devil mingling himself often
times to corrupt the air, all is by Gods permission and providence. We should
look to the first wheel that leads the rest, and sets them going, we should
see God in all, and therefore speak reverently of him. And in regard of our
brethren, to speak charitably of them, and think, it is the goodness of God
that he has not stricken us as he has them. And when we speak of our
selves, when the judgments of God are on us, let us humble our selves, and
justify God; we may complain: but it must be of our selves and of our
sins, that have brought judgments upon us, of our want of making use of the
judgment of God upon others, or upon our selves: lesser judgments would not
serve turn, therefore God is feign to follow us with greater; let us always
justify God, and complain of our selves, and then in regard of our selves, we
speak aright of the judgments of God. Let us never speak of the judgments
of God, but with affections fit for judgments, with awefull affections. Shall
the Lion roar, and shall not the beasts of the forest tremble? Shall we
hear God roar in his judgments, and hear the trumpet blown, and not be
affected? we see here how God complains, that when he harkened and heard they
spoke not aright. Let us therefore make conscience of all our words. We shall
if not now, yet at the day of judgment, give account for every idle word, for
every cruel word, as it is in the prophecy of Enoch, cited in the Epistle of
Jude: But especially let us take heed of our words when we speak of Gods
judgments; for it is the not speaking aright of them that is here especially
meant: I hearkened and heard but they spoke not aright. So much for the
evidence, come we now to the next clause, Gods complaint upon this evidence.

No man repented him of his wickedness.
They did not repent of their wickedness, and the fault was general, No man
repented, the first yields this instruction, Doct.


When jud^ements are threatened and we repent not, God is offended.
That it is a state much offending God, not to repent when his judgments are
threatened.

God will not suffer it long unpunished, to be impenitent when his judgments
are abroad, and threatened, much more when they have already ceazed upon our
brethren: For that is the end of all his judgments to draw us near to him, to
draw us out of the world, and out of our sinful courses; when therefore we
answer not, God must take another course, What is the plague and other
judgments, Simile.
but so many messengers sent to every one of us to knock, and our answer must
be, Lord I will repent of my evil ways, I will turn from my evil courses
and turn to thee: If we give this answer, God will take away his judgments,
(or sanctify them, and that is better) but when there is no answer, the
messenger will not be gone, God will add plagues upon plagues till we give our
answer, till we repent and turn from our wicked ways.

Now that we may do this, Conviction a help to repentanc^.
we must be convinced thorovvly that the courses we live in, are
unprofitable, dangerous, hateful courses, and that the contrary state is
better: For repentance is an after-vvit, and man being a reasonable creature,
will turn from his way except he see great reason why; therefore there must
be sound conviction that it is a bitter thing to offend God; Ier. 2.19.
we must indeed be convinced by the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of God
usually takes the benefit of affliction, affliction together with instruction,
instruction without affliction will do little good: stripes and the Word must
go together else we will not give God the hearing as we should. Therefore that
we may be soundly convinced of our sins, we should desire God especially in the
hour of affliction to help our souls by his Spirit, that we may be
convinced that our courses are na^ght, that they are courses dishonorable to
God, The hurt we have by sin.
and dangerous to our selves, that sin defiles our souls, that it hinders
our communion with God, which is the sweetest thing in the world, that sin puts
a sting into all our troubles; that sin makes us afraid of that that should
be comfortable to us, of death and judgment, and Gods presence; that sin
grieves the good Spirit of God that would take up his lodging in us; that it
quenches the motions of the Spirit that are sent as sweet messengers to us,
to allure and comfort us: that sin grieves the good Spirit of God in others,
that it grieves the good Angels that are about us, that it gratifies none but
the Devil, the enemy of our salvation, that it defiles and slaines our souls,
wherein the Image of God should shine, that it does us more harm then all the
things in the world besides (indeed nothing hurts us but sin, because nothing
but sin seperates us from God) that it shuts Heaven and opens Hell, and so
makes us afraid of death, least death should open the gate to let us into
Hell, in a word that it hinders all good, and is the cause of all ill; Let us
consider of this and work it on our hearts.

And consider withal our former courses, rip up our lives from our childhood,
consider the sins of our youth together with our present sins, that so we may
the better stir up and awaken our consciences: Let us consider whether we are
now in a state wherein we could be content that God should send his
judgments upon us: Consider how we have been scandalous to others, how we
have drawn others to sin, that the guilt of other men's sins will lie upon
us; it may be we have repented, but have they? Consider the repetition of our
sins, if we have not committed them again and again, and other
circumstances that may aggravate them. Let us labor to work these things on
our hearts, and desire the Spirit of God to convince our souls of the
foulness and dangerousnesse of sin. When we sin against conscience, what
do we, but set the Devil in the place of God, we make our selves wiser then
God, we leave Gods ways, as if we could find better, and more profitable,
and more gainefull courses then his; sound conviction of this will moove us to
repentance.

And let us be stirred up to repent presently; Not to delay repentance.
does not God now warn you? Is it not dangerous living one hour in a state
that we would not dye in? May not God justly strike us on the sudden? Do but
purpose to live in sin one quarter of an hour; may we not be taken away in
that quarter? Is not repentance the gift of God, and are not gifts given
according to the good pleasure of the giver? Wait therefore for the gales of
grace, and take them when they are offered. Grace is not like the tide that
ebbs and flows, that we know when it will come again, when we see it go: No,
God gives the gales of grace according to his good pleasure, therefore take the
advantage of the present motions of the blessed Spirit.

Danger of deferring.
The longer we live in any sin unrepented off, the more our hearts will be
hardened, the more Satan takes advantage against us, the more hardly he is
driven out of his old possession, the more just it may be with God to give us
up from one sin to another, the understanding will be more dark upon every
repetition of sin, and conscience will be more dulled and deaded. Those that
are young therefore, let them take the advantage of the youth and strength, and
freshness of their years to serve God. That which is blasted in the bud, what
fruit may we look for from it afterward? Alas, when we see the younger sort
given to blaspheme and swear, to looseness and licentiousness, what old age
may we look for there? Again what welcome shall we expect, when we have
sacrificed the best of our strength, and the marrow of our years to our lusts,
to bring our old age to God? Late repentance seldom true.
Can this be any other then self-love? Such late repentance is seldom sound,
it comes (I say) from self-love and not from any change of heart. As in the
the humility of wretched persons, a little before the judge comes, though they
have carried themselves as rebels before; yet then they will humble themselves:
not out of any hatred to their courses, but out of fear of the judge. So it
may be, now thou art arraigned by Gods judgments, thou forsakest thy sinful
courses, not out of the hatred of thy sins (for if thou could thou
would sin eternally, and that is the reason sinners are punished
eternally: Because they would sin everlastingly) but thou see thou art in
danger to be pulled away by Gods judgments. It is not out of love to grace, it
is not from any change of nature, that thou desire to be a new creature, that
thou admirest grace to be the best state: but it is to avoid danger; not that
thou carest for the face of God, to be reconciled to him: but to avoid the
present judgment.

And what a staggering will this be to conscience, when a man shall defer his
repentance till Gods judgments seize upon him? We see it is false for the most
part: Because such persons that are then humbled, when they recover, they are
as bad, or worse then ever they were. Therefore an Ancient says well. He that
is good only under the cross, it never good, it comes not from any change
that God works; but merely from self-love. Therefore presently let us repent
of those ways that God convinces our conscience to be evil ways: God may
strike us suddenly: Those that forget God, and care not for him now, it may be
just with God to make them forget themselves, to strike them with frenzy, to
take away the use of their memories then, and when sickness comes, we shall
have enough to do to conflict with sickness, we shall have enough to do to
answer the doubts of conscience, Oh it would upbraid then! We shall think it a
hard matter then to have favor from God, whose worship we have despised, the
motions of whose Spirit we have neglected and resisted. Conscience after long
hardening in sin will hardly admit of comfort, Conscience after long sinning
hardly admits comfort.
it is a harder matter then it is taken for: Therefore even to day, presently
you that are young, now in the days of your youth, now in the spring of your
years, repent you of your sins, before old age comes, which indeed as
Solomon describes it, is an ill time to repent in. Alas! then a man can hardly
perform civil duties, (as we see in Barzillai, he complains that in his
old age, he could not take the comfort of the creatures) Therefore put not off
this duty till then. And all, both young and old, now when the judgments of
God are abroad in the world, take the advantage, return to God, renew your
covenants, make your peace now, now this danger does warm our hearts a little,
let us strike the Iron now while it is hot, let us take the advantage of the
Spirit now avvakening us with this danger. Our hearts are so false and so dull
we have need to take all advantages of withdrawing our selves from our sinful
courses.

And to encourage us to do it, Benefits by timely repentance.
let us consider if we do this, and do it in time, we shall have the
sweetness of the love of God shed abroad in our hearts.

You will say, we shall loose the sweetness of sin. The favor of God.
I, but you shall have a most sweet communion with God. One day of a repentant
sinner, that is reconciled to God, is more comfortable then a thousand years
of an other man, that is in continual fear of death and judgment. Oh the
sweet life of a Christian that has made his peace with God! he is fit for all
conditions, for life, for death, for every thing: now by this we shall have
this grace and favor of God: the Lord will say unto us by his Spirit, I am
your salvation. And besides, you shall have his grace renewing, and altering,
and changing you, framing you to a better course of life. And he will be so
far from misliking any for their former sins, that he will give them cause
to love him the more, as we see Luke 7. She loved much: because she had much
forgiven her. Christ we see upbraided not any of his followers with their
former sins, he regarded nor what they had been formerly, Zaccheus the
extortioner, Mary Magdalen, Matthew the Publican, Peter that denied him, we
never hear that he upbraided any of them, he does not only vouchsafe mercy
to Peter repenting; but advances him to his former office Apostolical: so
sweet a God have we to deal with; let this encourage us.

Prevention of judgments.
Again it is the way to prevent Gods judgments, as we see in Nineveh and
others. Put case we repent not, we cannot go fafe in the city, nor any where,
but God may meet with us, and strike us with his arrow. The only way to
prevent his judgments, is to meet him speedily by repentance. This is the way
not only to turn away the wrath of God concerning eternal damnation, but
outward judgments, as we see Joel. 2, and many other places.

Turns all to good.
Then again, should we be stricken; if we have made our peace with God, if we
have repented, all shall be welcome, all shall be turned to our good, we know
the sting is pulled out. If the sting of death be pulled out, if the malignity
and poison of any sickness (be it the plague or whatsoever) be pulled out, why
should we fear it? It comes in love, and shall be turned to our good, and in
the mean time God sweetens it. Difference between god^y and others.
Here is a grand difference between the children of God and others, If the
judgment of God light upon a repentant person, it comes from favor and love,
to correct him for his former sins, it is turned to good, and in the mean
time, it is sweetened with love, and mixed with comfort, and moderated, as it is
Isa. 27.7. has he afflicted thee as I afflicted others? No, he moderates his
judgments to his children, and not only moderates them, but sweetens them
with comfort. Jf God do correct a repentant person he is no looser by it, nay
he is a gainer, It is good for me that I have* been afflicted, Oh the blessed
estate of that person that repents and turns from his evil ways! Prayer of
impenitent not heard.
But if a man do not repent, but live still in sin, what a state is he in?
God cares not for his prayers, If I regard iniquity in my heart, Psalm. 66.18.
God will not hear my prayers: and what a state is a man in, when his prayers
that should beg for blessings, and avoid judgments, and procure deliverance,
are not heard, but shall be turned into sin? When God that is a God hearing
prayer* shall not regard his prayer? What a case is this? Yet if we regard
iniquity in our hearts, if we repent not of our sins, God will not regard our
prayers.

Then besides that, Fear in wicked men.
there is a noise of fear in the unrepentant persons heart; wheresoever he
goes, he is afraid of the plague, afraid of sickness, afraid of death,
afraid of every body: he knows he has his heaven here, he has not the
sting of evils pulled out, therefore he is afraid he shall go from the
terrors of conscience to the torments of hell, his conscience speaks terrible
things to him, what a cursed state is this? How can he look with comfort any
way? Jf he look to Heaven, God is ready to power the violls of his wrath, to
execute his vengeance on him. If he look to the Earth, he knows not how
soon he shall be laid there, or that the earth may swallow him up. If he
think of death it strikes terror to him, every thing is uncomfortable to an
unrepentant sinner. Let all this stir us up to this duty of repentance, it is
the end why God sends his judgments: First, he warnes us by his Word, and if
we neglect that, he sends judgments, and they ^eaze on us, that is a second
warning, and if lesser j^dgements will not warn us, then he sends greater, and
all to make us repent, if we repent we give the judgments their answer, and he
will either remove them or sanctify them, so much for that. A word of the
generality.

No man.
No man repented of his evil ways, we see then,

Doct.

Generality is no plea.


That Generality is no plea.

We must not follow a multitude to do evil, we must not follow the stream to
do as the world does, will any man reason thus; Now there dye so many weekly
of the plague, it is no matter whether I go: I will go now into any place
without any respect to my company, etc? Will he not reason on the contrary:
Therefore I will take heed, J will carry preservatives about me, and look to
my company. Self-love will teach a man to reason so, The Infection is great,
therefore I will take the more heed. And will not spiritual wisdom teach us,
the more spreading and infectious sin is, the more heed to take? When all
flesh had corrupted their way, then came the flood. Generality of sin makes
way for sweeping judgments that takes all away. Therefore we have more reason
to tremble, when the infection of sin has ceazed upon all, when no man
repents of his wickedness; a man should resolve, surely I will come out of
such company, as we see Lot departed out of Sodom, and David in his time, was
as a Pelican in the wilderness. I will rather go to Heaven alone then go to
hell and be damned with a multitude. Multitude is no plea to a wise man. Shall
we think it a means to increase danger in worldly things, and shall we think
it a plea in spiritual things. It has been the commendation of Gods children
that they have striven against the stream and been good in evil times,
Redeem the time: because the days are evil, says the Apostle. A carnal
Christian says, does as the rest do: but says David, Mine eyes gush out with
rivers of waters, because men keep not thy Law. Do not fear that you shall
pass unrespected if you be careful to look to your selves this way; If there
be but one Lot in Sodom, one Noah and his family in the old world, he shall be
looked to as a Jewel among much dross, God will single him out as a man does
his Jewels, when the rubbish is burnt. God will have a special care to gather
his Jewels. When a man makes conscience of his ways in ill times and ill
company, God regards him the more for witnessing to his truth and standing for,
and owning his cause in ill times, it shows sincerity and strength of grace,
when a man is not tainted with the common corruptions. No man repented.

What was the cause of all this, that they were thus unrepentant, and that
generallly No man said

What have I done?
The did not say in their hearts and tongues, What have I done? they were
inconsiderate, they did not examine and search and try their ways. Here we see

Man can reflect upon his actions
First, that a man can return upon himself, he can search and try his own
ways, and cite and arrest, and arraigne himself, What have I done? This is a
prerogative that God has given to the understanding creature, the reasonable
soul, it can reflect upon it self, which is an act of judgment. The bruit
creatures look forward to present objects, they are carried to present things,
and cannot reflect: But man has judgment to know what he has done and
spoken, to sit upon his own doings, to judge of his own actions. God has
erected a tribunal in every man; he has set up conscience for a register,
and witness, and judge, etc. there are all the parts of judicial proceeding
in the soul of man. This shows the dignity of man, and considering that God
has set up a throne and seat of judgment in the heart, we should labor to
exercise this judgment.

Secondly, Neglect of self jud^ing cause o^ misery.
God having given man this excellent prerogative to cite himself, and to judge
his own courses, when man does not this, it is the cause of all mischief, of
all sin and misery. Alas! the vile heart of man is prone to think, it may be
God has decreed my damnation, and he might make me better if he would. But
why do thou speak thus? O wicked man, the fault is in thy self, because
thou do not what thou might do, has not God set up a judgment seat in
thy heart to deliberate of thine own courses whether thou do well or ill?
and thy own conscience (if thou be not an Athiest and besotted) tells thee
thou do ill, and accuses thee for it. An ordinary swearer, that by
Athiesticall acquaintance, and poysonfull breeding is accustomed to that sin,
if he did consider, what good shall I get by this, by provoking God, who has
threatened that I shall not go guiltless, and that I shall give an account for
every idle word, much more o^ every idle oath, the consideration of this would
make him judge, and condemn himself, and repent and amend his ways.

The exercising of this judgment, it makes a man's life lightsome, he knows
who he is, and whether he goes, it makes him able to answer for what he does
at the judgment seat of God, it makes him do what he does in cofidence, it
perfects the soul every way.

Again, whatsoever we do without this consideration, it is not put upon our
account for comfort, when we do things upon judgment, it is with examination
whether it be according to the rule or no. Our service of God is especially in
our affections, when we joy and fear, and delight aright. Now how can a man
do this without consideration? For the affections, wheresoever* they are
ordinate and good, they are raised up by judgment; they are never good but
when they are regular and according to judgment, when judgment raises up the
affections, and we see cause why we should delight in God, and love him, and
fear him more then any thing in the world, they are then an effectual part of
divine worship: But else they are flat and dead, and dull, if we waken them not
with consideration. The heart follows the judgment, the brain and the heart
simpathize, when we see cause and reason to love and fear, and worship God, we
must love God with all our mind, that is, with our best understanding, we must
see reason why we do so.

How to use our understanding.
Therefore let us labor to use our understanding more this way. Is our
understanding and judgment given us to plot for the world, to be judicious for
the things of this life only? No, but to be wise for the maine end, to
glorify God, to save our souls, to get out of the corruption of nature, to
maintain our communion with God every day more and more. The end of our living
in the world is to begin Heaven upon earth: So to live here, as that we may
live for ever in Heaven, whatsoever is done in order to this end is good, but
nothing can be done to this end but upon due consideration. Let us improove our
judgments for that end they are principally given us, not for particular ends,
to get this or that man's favor, to get wealth, etc. but to use all as they may
serve the maine: we know not how short a time we shall enjoy these things, and
further then they serve for the maine, we shall have no comfort of them ere
long. Our projects should be to gain glory to God, and to bring our selves and
others to Heaven, there is excellent use of this consideration, this way it is
one maine way to repentance, we see here, No man repented, because no man said,
What have I done?

Now if we would practice this duty, Hindrances of consideration.
we must labor to avoid the hindrances. The maine hindrances of this
consideration are

1. The ra^e of lusts, Rage of lusts.
that will not give the judgment leave to consider of a man's ways, but they
are impetuous, commanding, and tyranous, carrying men (as we shall see in the
next clause) As the horse rusheth into the battle: We see many carried to Hell
that never enjoyed themselves: but are always under some base pleasure, when the
Devil has filled them with one pleasure, then they project for another, and
never take time to say, What have I done? Oh the tyran^y of original
corruption! Jf we had in our eye, the vile picture of out nature, that carries
us to things present, to profits, and pleasures, and gives us not liberty and
leisure to bethink our selves, would we do as we do? Alas we see some men
so haunted with their lusts, that they cannot be alone, they cannot sleep, and
when they are awake they must have music, as that King when he had massacred
a world of men, he could not be quiet a whit, conscience raged so. When men
follow their pleasures, they rob them of themselves. Therefore they are said in
Scripture to be mad men, and fools without wit, they are so taken up with the
rage of their lusts that they have not liberty to enjoy themselves, they have
no time for consideration.

Too much worldly business
And then another hinderance is too much business; when men are distracted with
the things of this life: they are overloaded with cares, with Martha's part,
and so neglect Mary's part, this makes men toil, and droile for the world,
and never consider where they are, nor whether they go, how it shall be with
them when they go hence, how the case stands with them before God, whether
they be gotten out of the cursed state of nature that we are all borne in*
they never think of this: but all the marrow, and strength of their souls is
eaten out with the world. Those that in their youth followed their lusts, when
they come to years, are taken up with the world and slight religion: their
minds are employed, how to get the favor of this man, and that, and so have
not leisure to consider what will become of their souls: Therefore too much
distraction with the things of the world is joined with drunkenness. Be not
overcome with the cares of this life, with surfeiting and drunkenness says
Christ.

Then, It is a hard thing.
it is a secret and hard action, because it is to work upon a man's self. It
is an easy matter to talk of others, to consider other men's ways; You shall
have men's tongues ready to speak of other men, they do so and so, and thus
they feed themselves with talking of other men, and in the mean time neglect
the consideration of their own state. And again, it is a plausible thing; he
that talks of other men's faults, gives an intimation that he is innocent, (and
he had need be so) It is easy, and plausible, men glory in it, it feeds
corrupt nature to talk of other men's faults: But to come home to a man's self,
that is a hard thing, it is without ostentation or applause, the world does not
applaud a man for speaking of his own faults. Men are not given to retired
actions, they care not for them, unless they have sound hearts, and this being
a retired action that has no glory nor credit with it, men are loath to come
to it.

It presents an unwelco^e spectacle.
Then again it is not only hard and secret, but this returning upon a man's
self, it presents to a man a spectacle that is unwelcome. If a man consider
his own ways, it will present to him a terrible object. Therefore as the
Elephant troubles the waters that he may not see his own visage: so men
trouble their souls that they may not see what they are, they shall see such
a deal of malice and self-love, and fear, and distrust that they would not
have others in the world to see for any thing: but it is good to see it: For
repentance and consideration it is physic, it is sharp but wholesome: It is
better to have the physic a day, then to have the sickness and disease all
the year; so this consideration and repentance though it be sharp, yet take
it down: for it will prevent Gods eternal judgment, as the Apostle says, If
we would judge and condemn our selves, we should not be condemned with the
world. What an excellent thing is this that we may keep sessions in our own
souls, and so need not be called to Gods assizes? Men are called to that,
because they slubber over, and neglect this: Men will not keep this sessions
in their own hearts (which they might do, not only quarterly, but daily)
and thereby they make work for God; is it not better now to unrip our
consciences by consideration and repentance, then to have all ripped up then
when the Devil shall stand by to accuse us, who will say this was done by my
instigation, and it is so, and our own consciences shall take part with the
Devil and accuse us also? It will be little for our ease to make God our
judge, we might save the labor by putting conscience to its office now, to
examine our ways every day, especially now when God calls for it by his
judgments, repentance is the covenant of the Gospel, and repentance depends
upon this consideration, so much for that, No man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? But did they stay here? No; it follows,

Every one turns to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.
Every one has his course, Every man has his course.
his way, whether good or evil, the course of a wicked man, it is a smooth way
perhaps, but it is a going from God, it leads from him, and where does it end?
(for every way has its end) It is a going from God to hell, there all the
courses of wicked men end. Examine then where thy course begins, and where it
ends, from what thou walk, and to what, whether thy course aim. Consider
where thy speeches, and actions are like to end. The specification and
denomination of our ways to be good or evil, is especially from the end. The
wicked they take their courses, smooth wide courses, the broad beaten way,
where they may have elbow-roome enough, though it end in Hell, and destruction:
but the wicked and their ways are both hated of God; otherwise it is with Gods
children, they may sometimes step into ill ways, but they have not an ill
course, and God does not judge a man by a step, God judges by the course not
by a step.
but by his course and way: Therefore consider what is the tenor of thy life,
is thy way good? Oh it is an excellent thing to be in a good way! For a man
every day to repent of his sins, to make his peace with God, to practice the
duties of Christianity in his general calling, and in his particular calling
to call upon God for a blessing. Such a man's way is good, it has a good end.
Perhaps he may step out of his way by the temptations of Satan, but that is
not his course. The best man in the world for, a passion on the sudden may step
into an ill way, as David, when he determined to kill Naball but it was not
David's way, therefore we see how soon he was put off with a little counsel,
and how thankful he was. Blessed be the Lord, and blessed be thou, and
blessed be thy counsel, etc. his way, and course was another way. And so on
the other side the wickedest man in the world may set a step in a good way for
a fit, a very Saul may be amongst the Prophets and speak excellently and
divinely; but all this while he is out of his way, his way is a course of
wickedness, to which therefore he will soon betake himself again, as it is
here said of these men, They turned to their own courses,

As the Horse rusheth into the battle.
Here it is comparatively set down, If you would see how the horse rusheth
into the battle, it is lively and divinely expressed, Job. 39.19. by God
himself. Have thou given the horse strength? have thou clothed his neck with
thunder? Can thou make him afraid as a Grasshopper, the glory of his nostrils
is terrible, he pa^eth in the valley and rejoices in his strength, he goes
on to meet the armed men. He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted: neither
turns he back from the sword. The quiver ratleth against him, the
glittering spear and the shield. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and
rage: neither believes he that it is the sound of the trumpet. He says among
the trumpets ha ha; and he smells the battle a far off, the thunder of the
captains and the shouting. There you have an excellent description of this
creatures fierceness (the wit of man has not such expressions) and how he
rusheth into the battle, God to abase wicked men, compares them here to the
horse, not for that which is good in him, but for their violence in ill
courses; they rush into them, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Now the
horse rusheth into the battle, 1. Eagerly, (as you see him described in the
place of Job) and 2. Desperately, he will not be pulled away by any means, and
then 3. Dangerously: For he rusheth upon the pikes, and oft-times falls down
suddenly dead, he regards not the pikes nor guns nor nothing, but rusheth on in
the danger. Herein wicked men are like unto the horse, going on in their
course eagerly, They are eager.
desperately, dangerously, 1. They go on eagerly, it is meat and drink unto
them, They cannot sleep until they have done wickedness. They plot and study
it, it is their delight, they are not in their element, but when they are
talking wickedly, and corruptly, or deceiving, or satisfying their desires, the
ambition and lusts of their corrupt nature. They can no more live out of these
courses, then the fish can live out of the water: therefore they go eagerly
upon them.

Desperate.
And as they go eagerly, so desperately, and irreclaimably too, nothing will
restrain them, no thorns, nor troubles that can lie in their way; though God
hedge in their ways with thorns they break through all: Even as Balaam, he
would go on though there were a sword drawn before him, he was more brutish
and unreasonable then his poor beast, the very sword of the Angel could not
moove that covetous wretch to go back. So it is with every wicked man, he
goes on desperately, nothing will keep him back, and reclaim him: though God
take many courses to do it, by his Ministers, Magistrates, by the motions of
his Spirit, by his judgments threatened, by judgments executed upon others,
and upon themselves sometimes, yet they are so eager upon their sins, all this
will not beat them off: they love their sins better then their souls: nor
is it only open riotous persons that thus rush into sins, but civil
rebellious persons also, that bless themselves in their ways, and it may be,
live as irreligiously as the other. Take a covetous or an ambitious man, he
sacrifices all to get such a place, etc. Such a man mockes Christ, (as the
Pharisees mocked him, notwithstanding all his good Sermons and miracles) he
goes on desperately, nothing will hold him, he breaks through all bars and
oppositions, he cracks his conscience, grieves the good motions of the Spirit,
despises good counsel, and will venture upon the outward breach of laws
sometimes, rather then he will be defeated of his designs.

And as they go eagerly and desperately, Dangerously.
so dangerously too, for is it not dangerous to provoke God? to rush upon the
pikes? to run against thorns? Do you provoke me to jealousy (says God)
and not your selves to destruction? No; they go both together, if you provoke
me to anger, it will be to your own ruin. In Levit. 26. God will walk
stubbornely to them as they have done to him; and he will be froward with the
froward, Psalm. 18. Those that are rebellious sinners, whom no bonds will hold,
no counsel, that break all laws, as the man possessed with the Devil brake
his chains, the time will come that when God executes his wrath he will be
too good for them, the Devil will be too good for them, hell will be too good
for them, conscience will tear them in pieces, and the judgment of God will
seize on them. The way of wicked men is a wretched, a desperate, and dangerous
course: thou art stubborn against God, and he is so against thee: he will do
to thee as thou do to him. Who are we, are we stronger then God? Careless
atheistical persons think they are: tush, they can wind out well enough: but
they will find it otherwise: Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, 1 Cor. 10
23.
are we stronger then he, says the Apostle? let us lay this to heart.

Sin has defaced the Image of God in man
We see here again how sin has clean defaced the Image of God in man. Man
being in honor, he would become like God; he was weary of his subordination,
he would be absolute, and because he would be like God, God made him like the
beast, and it is worse to be like the beast then to be a beast: for the beast
in his own condition follows the instinct of nature: but to be like a beast,
is for a man to unman himself, to degrade himself to a baser condition then
God made him in, and when a man does this, he is either in malice like the
Devil, or in licentiousness as the beast is, he is always like the Devil or a
beast till he be a new creature. And that our nature is come to this, we are
beholding to our own yielding to Satan and his counsel, we rush as the
horse into the battle; therefore let us beware of this. Be ye not as the
horse and mule, etc. says David, Psalm. 32.9. Who would not labor to be in a
better condition? to be a new creature, to be changed by the powerful
ordinances, and Spirit of God? so much for that briefly; come we now to the
last clause,

Yea the Storke in the Heavens knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and
the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people
know not the judgment of the Lord.
Here is another expression comparative, or rather superlative; he compares
them to the Storke, and Turtle, the Crane, and Swallow, and prefers these poor
creatures, in wisdom and providence, as going before men: But my people know
not the judgment of the Lord: There needs no great explication of the words,
[ Iudgement] is directive, or corrective.

The directive is the Law of God; What meant by judgment.
setting down Gods judicious course, This you shall do, or if you do not
this you shall be punished. When we obey not Gods directive course, we meet
with his corrective: for judgment is the stablishing of judgment: judgment
of correction is the stablishing of judgment of direction. Gods Laws must be
performed, they are not skare-crowes; if we avoid the one, we shall run
into the other: if we do not meet him in the judgment of his directive law,
we must be met with in his law corrective, (if we be good men,) or destructive
if we be bad men. Wha^ meant by it here.
Now here (J take it) he means especially the judgment of correction, the
time of visitation, it was a dangerous time (as it is now among us,) they were
already under several heavy judgments, as famine, etc. (we see in the next
verse, there was no vines, no grapes, etc. all failed.) And besides, a far
heavier judgment was ready to come upon them, they were ready to be carried
into Babylon, and they knew not the judgment of the Lord.

What meant by (not knowing.)
[ They knew not] that is, they did not make use of it: for in divinity,
things are not known when they are not affected. God knows all things, but
when he does not affect and delight in us, he is said not to know us: so we
are said not to know, when we do not affect and make use of things. They know
not the judgment of the Lord. They were not ignorant, he had told them of
vengeance, he had told them that they should be carried into captivity: but
they made not that use they should of it, therefore they are said not to know
it. So the old world; it is said they did not know of the flood: certainly
Noah had told them of it: but when they made not a right use of it, but went
on brutishly, they knevv it not. It is all one not to know it at all, and not
to make use of it. Wicked men think they know God, and they know religion
well enough: I, but what use do they make of it in their particular course?
that which we do not use, we do not know in religion. Jf ill be
discovered, and be not avoided by thee, thou art a brutish senseless creature,
(thou do not know it) and so thou shall be dealt with. They know not the
judgment of the Lord, that is, They will not know it, it was affected
ignorance. The words being thus unfolded, here first we see,

That God confounds the proud disposition of wicked men by poor silly
creatures, God shames the pride of men by the creatures.
the Crane, the Turtle, the Swallow and the like.

What their wisdom is we see by experience: in winter to fly from hard and
cold parts to those where there is a Spring, They are here in the moderate
season, and when the Summer is gone, they go to a more moderate air, where
they may live better. For the life is the chief good of such poor creatures,
and their happiness being determined in their life, they labor to keep that:
they have an instinct put in them by God to preserve their being by remooving
from place to place, and to use that that may keep life.

Now man is made for a better life, and there be dangers concerning the soul
in another world, yet he is not so wise for his soul and his best being, as
the poor creatures are to preserve their being by the instinct of nature. When
sharp weather comes they avoid it and go where a better season is, and a
better temper of the air: but man when Gods judgments are threatened and sent
on him, and God would have him part with his sinful courses, and is ready to
fire him, and to force him out of them: yet he is not so careful as the
creatures; He will rather perish and die, and rot in his sins, and settle
upon his dregs, then alter his course: so he is more sottish then the silly
creatures, he will not go into a better estate, to the heat, to the
Sunne-beames to warm him, he will not seek for the favor of God to be
cherished with the assurance of his love, as the poor creature goes to the
Sun to warm it till it be over hot for it. Man should know what is good and
what is evil: the new creature does so: for with the change of nature, there
is a divine wisdom put into the soul of a Christian, that teaches him what
is good and what is evil, that he may be careful to avoid the evil: that he
may discern of things that differ: that he may say this is good for my soul,
and all the world shall not scoff me out of that that I know to be good with
their profane jesting, they shall not drive me from that is good, and for
courses that are ill, they shall not draw me with all their allurements, I know
what belongs to the good of my soul better then so. It should be thus with
Christians, to be wise for their spiritual being, as the poor creatures, the
Storke and the Crane, and the Turtle are to preserve their poor life here with
as much comfort as they can.

God takes instruction out of the book of nature into his book.
God takes out of the book of nature things useful to insert them into his
divine book: because now no man shall be ashamed to learn of the creatures.
Now since the fall man must learn of the poor creatures, and such a dunce is
man, it is well for him, if he can learn of the Ant, and Crane and Turtle, and
therefore does God take lessons out of the book of nature, and put them into
his book, to teach us to furnish our selves with divine mysteries, and
instructions from the creatures. And indeed a gracious heart will make use of
every thing, and have his thoughts raised with them: As the Prophet Jeremy
here, he shames them by the example of the creatures. But of this by the way.

The thing most material (with which I will end) is this.

That God after long patience has judgments to come on people, Doct.
and it should be the part of people to know when the judgment is coming.
After long patience God sends judgments.


There is a season when God will forbear no longer in this world. They know
not the judgment of the Lord, the meaning is not in hell; though that may come
in, that is employed in all, but they know not the judgment of the Lord, that
is, they know not the judgments that are coming. Quest.
When judgments are coming God opens the hearts and understandings of his
people to know them: Answ.
as there is an instinct in the creatures to know when there will be hard
weather. Judgments coming may be known.


But how shall we know when a judgment is near hand? By comparing the sins
with the judgment


By comparing the sins with the judgments: if there be such sins that such
judgments are threatened for; then as the thread follows the needle, and the
shadow the body, so those judgments follow such and such courses. For God has
knit and linked these together, all the power in the world and hell cannot
unlinke them, sin and judgment: judgment either correcting us to amendment or
confounding us to perdition God therefore having threatened in the Scriptures
such judgments to such sins, if we live in such and such sins, we may look
for such judgments. Thus a wise man by laying things together, the sins with
the judgments, though he cannot tell the particular, yet he may know that some
heavy judgment is at hand.

When it has ceazed on us in part.
Again, there is a nearer way to know a judgment, when it has ceazed on us in
part already: he that is not brutish and sottish, and drunk with cares and
sensuality, must needs know a judgment when it is already inflicted, when part
of the house is on fire: We see judgment has ceazed now on the places where
we live, and therefore we cannot be ignorant of it.

By example o^ others.

Mat. 24.38, 39.


Again, we may know it by the example of others, God keeps his old walks:
Therefore it is said, As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be when the
Son of man comes: they were eating and drinking and marrying, and knew not
till the stood came and took them away. God will be like himself, if sinners
be like themselves, he will not change, if they change not, but will deal
alike with them in his judgments as he has dealt with others. What ground
have we to hope for immunity more then others? We may rather expect it less;
because we have their examples, and so they wanted those examples to teach them
which we have. In Jeremy 7.12. (says God) Consider, look to Shilo, and see
what I did there, so will I do to you. So likewise the judgments on
Jerusalem are a fearful spectacle for us. These and other examples may help
us to judge of our condition in regard of approaching judgments.

Again, General security.
general security is a great sign of some judgment coming. Jn the days of
Noah there was a general sensual security, notwithstanding the Prophet
foretold them of the deluge, they were eating, etc. and knew not till the
flood came and took them away. So likewise if we eat and drink and marry and
build and be negligent and careless of making our peace with God, especially
when warning is given us, it is a sign that some judgment either personal on
our selves, or generally on the place we live in will come upon us: there is
never more cause of fear then when there is least fear. Want of fear the
root of it.
The reason is, want of fear springs from infidelity (for Faith stirrs up
Fearefullnesse and care to please GOD, By Faith Noah moved with fear, or
reverence, builded the Arc) it proceeds from infidelity not to be afraid when
there is cause. Again where there is no fear, there is no care: So the root
of the want of fear is infidelity, and the spring that comes from it is
carelessness, which always goes before destruction; When men care not what
becomes of them, if God be pleased so it is, if judgment come, so it is, the
care is taken, When men thus say, peace peace, then comes destruction. It is
a terrible thing for a State or a City, or a particular person to be
careless: for the life of a Christian it is a watching as well as a warring
condition, he must be always on his guard; therefore he must not be careless,
and say peace, where God speaks no peace.

The generality of sin.
Again we may know that some judgment is coming by the universality and
generality of sin, when it spreads over all. When there is a general
infection of sin, we may well fear the infection of the air: sin has
infected the souls of men, therefore no vvonder if God in the plague have a
hand in infecting their bodies. We see here before the Prophet threatened this
destruction, there was a generality of sin. In the 10. verse of this Chapter,
he cries out against the covetousness and false-dealing of the Priests and
Prophets and men of all estates: And so also Chap. 5. verse 4. The poor they
were naught, they were poor in grace and goodness as well as in condition,
Then says he, I will see if there be any goodness in the great ones, I will
get me to the great men, verse 5. they have known the way of the Lord, and the
judgment of their God: but they have broken the yoke and burst the bonds. When
poor and rich, great and small, when all are sottish and brutish, when all
flesh had corrupted their ways, as it was before the flood, then judgment
must needs come: surely generality of sin makes way for generality of
judgment; as the deluge of sin made way for the deluge of water. So the
overflow of sin will make way for a flood of fire, God will one day purge
the world with fire. Particular sins fore-showing judgment.


But now for particular sins whereby we may know when judgment is coming,
Injustice.
these they are, first Injustice and formality in Religion; when men are
generally unjust, destruction is near, and indeed how can a Christian soul
look upon men's courses abroad; in these regards, but he shall weep in secret;
Is there not a general injustice? Will not men get any cause so they have a
good purse? Is not innocence trodden down oft-times? Formality in Religion.


And so for Religion, it is generally neglected; indifferency and formality
they are the sins of the times. Here is a sweet progress! In Queen
Elizabeth's time we began with zeal and earnestness; but now we begin to
stagger whither Religion is the better, we will join and put them together
that God has put an eternal difference betvveene, Light and darkness, Is
this our progress after so much teaching to put off God with formality and
deny the power?

Persecution.
Again, another particular sin foreshewing judgment, is persecution of
Religion and religious men. When God is worshipped with conscience as he should
be, what imputations are laid on it. I need not speak, the world knows well
enough; Can God endure this, when conscience of his service shall go under the
brand of opposition? God is much beholding to the times, when there is nothing
so heartily hated as that. There are many things loathsome, as deboishnesse,
etc. But what is so eagerly, and heartily hated as the power of godliness?
that which they have been known to do for conscience, has been matter of
reproach, and ruin almost to many men. If a man will not prostitute his
conscience to a creature, to make an Idol of him, to set him highest, if he
will not be buxome, and crack his conscience for a creature, he is scarce
thought fit to live in the world; will God suffer this, if these things be not
amended? If any thing be good in Religion, the more the better, the more exact
Christian the better. Exactness in other things is best: Is to be best in the
best naught, when to be best in that which is not so good carries away the
commendations? In 1. Thessa. 2. The wrath of God is come on them to the utmost;
God they hate and they are contrary to all men. This is a forerunner of
destruction, the spiteful opposing of goodness: God will not endure it long.

And so when men will go on incorrigibly in sin (as these here, They rush as
the horse into the battle) when they will not be reclaimed, it is a
forerunner of destruction. Alas! the Ministers of God strive with men, but
they break off the cords, and cry, tush they are silly men shall we yield to
them? We know what is for our gain and profit and credit in the world better
then so; Let us look to that, and not be hampered in these religious bonds;
No, we are wiser then so. Thus when men are incorrigible and account the
wisdom of God stark folly, it is a sign of destruction. There is an
excellent place for this, Ezekiell 24.12, 13, 14. She has wearied her self
with lies, and her great scum went not out of her, she would not have her
filthiness taken from her. In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I would
have purged thee, with the Word and the preaching of judgments, and thou
would not be purged; therefore thou shall not be purged til thou die, until
I cause my fury to rest upon thee, I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to
pass, I will do it. When God goes about to purge us by his word, and we will
not amend our ways, we will not stoop, but strengthen an Iron sinnew, and a
whores forehead. We will not be purged, nay (says God) thou shall not be
purged til J purge thee out of the world to hell, till my fury rest on thee,
Ithe Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass. There is another notable
place, Prove. 29.1. He that is a man of reproof, that is, a man that is sermon
proof, that is often reprooved and yet carries himself impudently and hardens
his heart, and stiffens his neck, he shall suddenly be destroyed, he does not
mean but that he had warning enough: but because after long warning he hardens
his neck, he shall suddenly be destroyed, when he looks not for it, and that
without remedy. There is the same phrase in 2. Chron. ult. 16. There was no
remedy, when they did not regard Gods Ministers, that directed them the way to
Heaven, but would live in rebellion against the means of salvation, then says
God, there was no remedy. God sent his messengers betimes, and had compassion
on his people, he would not have had them perish: They trifled with him and
mocked his messengers, accounted them weak men, they despised his Word, and
misused his Prophets, and then the Lords wrath rose against his people, and
there was no remedy. So when people are as those here in the text, that they
rush as the horse into the battle, that they are Sermon-proofe, that when
every Sermon they hear, as the hammer on the Smiths anvile, makes them harder
and harder (as Moses speaking to Pharaoh increased the hardness of his heart)
it is a sign of destruction.

Now whether it be so or no, I leave it to your particular consciences, we that
are Ministers tell you of your filthiness, of your profaning the Name of God,
and contempt of Gods Word; Whether have we gained upon you or no? Who has left
an oath? Who has left his wicked courses and entered into a nearer communion
with God for all our teaching? Blessed is that man; It is a sign God will not
destroy him; it is a sign that in the general visitation God will regard that
man. But alas we may almost complain with Jeremy in this Prophecy, Iere. 5.1.
Where he runs up and down to seek a man. Alas! They are very few, they are
thick sown but come thin up that obey the ordinance of God. It is some
comfort that men will submit to the ordinance, that they will come to hear,
some good may be learned, it is better then to keep out of the compass of
Gods law (as those men do that pretend they can read Sermons at home, and so
will teach God a course to bring men to Heaven) there is hope of men when they
submit to Gods ordinance: But I beseech you, how are you affected now for the
present? How do you come now into the presence of God? If you will not amend,
and resolve to enter into a new course; He that is often reprooved and will not
come in, judgment will come suddenly on him, without all remedy: And it is
good it should be without remedy: Because it is without excuse, you cannot
plead, and say that there were not Prophets among you. If the Heathens were
hardened and given up to destruction, The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against them, because they lived in a course of rebellion against the light of
nature, shall you that have the light of nature, and the word of God, and the
motions of his Spirit too, think to live in rebellion, and not be accomptable
for it? It shall be easier for them that never heard of the word of God; where
God has magnified his mercy, he will exalt judgment, those that are l^ft up
to Heaven in privileges, shall be cast down to hell. Woe unto thee Capernaum,
etc. The more in privileges, the more in judgment, if they be abused.

Unfruitfulness
Again, another particular sin whereby we may discern a judgment coming is,
unfruitfulnesse under the means; as the fig tree when it was dug and
dunged, and yet was unfruitful, then it was ^eare a curse. Jn Heb. 6. the
ground that is tilled, and manured, and has the rain falling on it, it is then
near unto cursing if it bring not forth. Perhaps a Heathen, a Pagan, if he
were under the means, would be fruitful, therefore there might be hope of
him: but those that are under the means* under the Sunshine of the Gospel,
under the influence of it, the Spirit working on their hearts, and yet they
live in the sin of unfruitfullnesse* it makes way for judgment. The axe is
laid to the root; when men are taught, then the instrument of vengeance is
laid to the root, and down they go if they bring not forth good fruit.

Sins of omission (when that all has been taught) are sufficient to bring a
man to judgment. At the last judgment, you have not visited me in prison, you
have not releeved the poor, etc. will be evidence enough to cast a man into
hell. And the like may be said of the omission of other duties: when a man is
called to place, when he has opportunity to do good, he has a price in his
hand, and yet has no heart to lay it out to his power. God has made him a
steward, and yet he is unfruitful, and labors to undermine and ruin the
state of others? What can such a man look for, but the judgment of God to
light on him first or last? if not present judgment on his body, yet to be
given up to hardness of heart, and so to hell, which is worst of all.

Nay more, Decay in our first love.
decay in our first love is a forerunner of judgment; when we love not God as
we were wont, In Rev. 3. I will take away thy Candlestick, because thou have
left thy first love. Is there not such a plenty, and depth in good things,
especially of the Gospel, whereby our sins are pardoned, and grace is given?
is there not that sweetness in them, whereby to gain our love more and more?
Is there not a necessity to renew our peace? Why should we decay in our love?
The things of the Gospel are so excellent, and so necessary, that when God
sees them undervalued, it is a forerunner of judgment, let us take heed of
decay in our affections. When there is no zeal for the truth, it is an ill
sign.

It is a good sign for the present that God has some blessing for us, that
now in our public meetings, there is regard to Religion, and that in the
first place, there is some zeal for the cause of God against those that would
wrong the cause of Religion, we have some cause to hope in respect of that.
And let every one labo^r to stir up the Spirit of God, and study how he may
do, and receive good, and be fruitful, and warm in his affections,
considering what excellent blessings we enjoy in the ^ospell. What is the glory
of the kingdom we live in above Pop^ry? our religion that we have, the
sunshine of the Gospel; now the riches of Christ are unfolded, we have the
key of Heaven, Heaven opened, what glorious times are those? The glory of the
times is the manifestation of the Gospel, and shall we grow in the decay of
our love? ^s there ^ot cause to grow in love to the Gospel, when God has
taken it from others, and has given ^^ to us? Now Jdolat^y is where true
Religion was, and the Mass is said, where God was religiously worshipped in
other places, and countries; Shall God deal so with us, and shall we not be in
love with that truth? Since we have had the truth, what peace, and plenty have
we had? And if ever we loose it, it will go with other things: if God take
away the truth, away goes our peace and prosperity; he will not take it away
alone; it came not alone, and he will not take it away alone. Doubtless it
must needs make way for judgment, when our love to so precious a jewel as
the Gospel, shall begin to die and decay, when we shall begin to slight and
disregard it. And so for any particular man that has had good things in him,
if they now begin to decay it is an ill sign that God is fiting him for
judgment.

Well, but what shall we do when judgments are coming? We see judgments
are like to come, nay are in part come, the Plague of pestilence has ceazed on
us already; and then war is threatened, and that by enemies that have been
foiled before: Foiled enemies are dangerous enemies if they be proud; Now we
have proud enemies that have been foiled, and Idolatrous withal, and what
mercy can we look for from them? God fought against them for us from Heaven
in some measure, and they being cruel provoked enemies are the less likely to
show any mercy. God is indeed so merciful to us yet, that he has taken us
into his own hands, rather then to give us up to the malice and fury of
Idolatrous enemies. But yet those that can lay things together and consider the
times; they shall see there is more cause of fear then is taken to heart.

Well and in this case what shall we do? What to do in dangerous times


First in the interim between the threatening and the execution (there are some
judgments in the cloud, Improove the time.
and the storm seems to hang o^ver us, and the sword of the pestilence is
drawn over our heads by the destroying Angel, though he has not yet stricken
us in our particular, now in the time between the threatening and the
execution) Oh improove it, make use of this little time; get into Covenant with
God, hide your selves in the providence and promises of God, make your peace,
defer it no longer.

M^urne for the ^ins of the land.
And secondly, mourn for the sins of the time, that when any judgment shall
come you may be marked with those that mourn. Take heed of the errors and
sins of the times, least when a judgment comes you be swept away in the
general judgment: but let us rather have our part with those that mourn,
that God may give us our lives for a prey.

Be watchful.
And thirdly, be watchful, practice that duty; we have the plague to put us in
mind of it, besides the threatening of dangers by enemies abroad: if we will
not watch now and stand upon our guard, when will we? Let us be watchful to
do all the good we can, to be fruitful, to be good stewards, to have large
hearts. The time may come that we may be stripped of all, and we know not how
soon, having but a little time, let us do good in it, study all opportunities
in these times, roufe up our sluggish souls. Fear it is awaking affection.
Iaakob, when his brother Esau was ready to ceaze on him, he could not sleep
that night: We know not how soon the hand and arrow of God may strike us
(besides other judgments) let us shake off Security, and do every thing we
do sincerely to God. We may come to God to make our account, we know not how
soon, let us do every thing as in his presence and to him: in our particular
callings, let us be conscionable, and careful and fruitful, let us do all
in our places to God, and not to the world or to our own particular gain: but
do it as those that must give account ere long to God. Now God threatens us
to come, and give our account, who can be secure, he shall have life for a
week or for one day? We cannot, our times are in Gods hands: we came into the
world in his time, and we must go out in his time: but now we have less cause
to hope for long life. This is to make a right use of the judgment of God to
be watchful in this kind.

And withal let us be good husbands now in the interim, Store up comforts.
between the threatening and the execution of the judgment let us store up
comforts from the promises of God, and store up the comforts of a good life, we
shall have more comfort of the means we have bestowed wisely then of that we
shall leave behind us. Thus if we do, come what will, we are prepared. Many
holy and heavenly men have been visited with pestilentiall sickness.
Hezekias was a King, and his was a pestilentiall sickness; and many holy
Divines of late, and other Christians have been swept away by the sickness.
Iunius and other rare men of excellent use in the Church. Therefore let us
labor to get into the favor of God, make use of our renewing our covenant for
the time to come (that is one end of fasting now, to renew our covenants, to
remake them for the time to come) and then come what will and welcome, life or
death: for there is a blessing hid in the most loathsome sickness and death.
If we come to Heaven, it is no matter by what way: Though the body be sown in
dishonor (we may die of a noisome disease, that we cannot have our friends
near us, yet) the body shall rise again in honor. What matter (says Saint
Paul) If by any means I may come to the resurrection of the dead, by fair
death, or foul death, it is no matter. And if so be that God make not good
his promise of particular protection of our bodies from contagion, etc. it is
no matter: we have a general promise, that he will be our God, he is the God
of Abraham; the God of the dead as well as of the living. He is a God that is
everlasting in the Covenant of grace, in life and death and for ever, if we
be entered into the covenant of grace, it holds for ever. And when all other
promises fail, and all things in the world fail, stick to the maine promise
of forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting: When all things in the world
will fail; we must leave them sho^tly wealth and whatsoever, what a comfort
is in that grand promise, that God will forgive us our sins, and give us life
everlasting for Christ! Therefore when all things else are gone, let us wrap
our selves in the gracious promises of Christ, and then we shall live and dye
with comfort.

FINIS
THE DEAD-MAN, OR, THE STATE OF EVERY Man by nature.

In one Sermon. By the late Reverend and Learned Divine RICHARD SIBS, Doctor in
Divinity, Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at
GRAYES INN.

JOHN. 5.25. Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming and now is
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live.

LONDON. Printed by G.M. for Nicholas Bourne and Rapha Harford. MDCXXXIX.

THE DEAD-MAN.
EPHESIANS. 2.1. And you has ^ee quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins.


THE matter of this excellent Epistle is, The matter of the Epistle.
partly doctrinall, and partly exhortatory: as it was S. Paul's course in all
his Epistles, to lay the foundation of practice in doctrine. The heart must be
moved, but the brain must be instructed first: there is a simpathy between
those two parts, as in nature, so in grace. The doctrinall part of the Epistle
sets out the riches of Christ, (chiefly in the first Chapter) in regard of the
spring of them, Gods eternal election. Then in this Chapter by way of
comparison; by comparing the state of grace to the state of nature. You has
he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins.

Dependence of the words.
The dependence of this Verse, I take it to be from the 19. Verse of the first
Chapter. The Apostle there prays that the Ephesians might have the eye of
their understandings opened and enlightened, that they might know (among other
things,) what the exceeding great power of God is toward us that believe,
According to the working of his mighty power that he wrought in Christ, when
he raised him from the dead: that they might have experience of that mighty
power that raised Christ from the dead. Now here in this Chapter he says, They
were raised together with Christ, and set together with him in heavenly places.
His reason is in this manner. Those that are raised up and quickened with Christ
to sit in heavenly places with him, have experience of a mighty power: But you
are raised up and quickened with Christ to sit in heavenly places with him:
therefore you have experience of a mighty power that raised Christ: for those
that are raised and quickened with Christ have experience of that power that
Christ had when he was raised up.

The second thing that he intends especially in this Chapter, is to show that
being raised with Christ, they are brought nearer to God, both Jews and
Gentiles, that of themselves were far off. Now he shows that they were
raised and quickened with Christ, and brought near to God in Christ, that they
might magnify the free grace of God in Christ; (all is by grace) and thereupon
to be stirred up to a suitable, comfortable and gracious life. To come to the
words, And you has he quickened, etc. They are an application of the former
comfortable truths to them, you has he quickened, etc. These words, has he
quickened, are not in the original in this place: they are after in verse 5.
When we were dead in sins, he quickened us: but they are put in, in the
translation; because they must be understood to make the full sense.

In the words consider these things

First of all, here the Apostle puts them in mind of their former condition.

And then he sets down in particular what it was, They were dead in trespasses
and sins.

Then he tells them wherein they were dead, what was the cause of their death,
and the element wherein they were dead, in trespasses and sins.

Lastly, not in one trespass and in one sin; but in trespasses and sins.

And then to speak a little of quickening, to take it out of the 5. verse. You
has he quickened. There is the benefit with the condition. That which Jaime at
is especially to show our estate by nature, and how we are raised out of that.
I shall touch the points briefly as I have propounded them.

He minds them of their former condition.
Saint Paul here first minds them of their former condition, you were dead in
trespasses and sins: For contraries give luster one to another, and it
magnifies grace mervailously to consider the opposite condition. He that never
knew the height and breadth and depth of his natural corruption, will never be
able to conceive the height and breadth and depth of Gods infinite love in
Jesus Christ. Saint Paul had deep thoughts of both as ever man had; therefore
he could never enter into the argument, of abasing man, and extolling the love
of God in Christ, that he could satisfy himself: but his spirit carries him
from one thing to another, till he set it out to the full. And every one of us
should be skillful in this double mystery, the mystery of the corruption of
nature that is unsearchable, there is corruption in the heart that none knows
but God only: and we must plow with his heifer that carries a light into the
hidden parts of the soul, and discovers corruption: there is a mystery of that
as well as of the Gospel, of our deliverance out of that cursed estate from
the guilt and thraldom of it. I do but touch it only, to show the scope of
the Apostle.

Why we should consider our ^ormer condition.
Now besides the consideration of it for this end; to magnify the grace of God,
and to understand what our former estate was the better: there are many other
ends. As to stir up our thankefullnesse, when we consider from what we are
delivered, to glorify God the more. There is no soul so enlarged to glorify
God as that soul that has large thoughts of its estate by nature, and that
estate by nature made worse by custom, our second ill nature and bondage
voluntary: considering Gods mercy in delivering and freeing us from all sins
and trespasses, this will make us thankful indeed. And it is a spring of love
to God, when we consider what great sins we have forgiven us^ it will make us
humble all the days of our lives, and pitiful to others: but this may be
handled fitter from another portion of Scripture. To come therefore to the
words.

Who were dead in trespasses and sins.
Their condition is, Man natura^y dead.
they were dead; the specification of their death, in sins and trespasses,
and not in one, but in sins and trespasses. Here I might digress and tell
you a discourse of life and death at large: Death what?
every man knows by experience what they are. In a word death is a privation
of life. Life what?
What is life? and whence arises it? Not to speak of the life of God, (God is
life and Christ is life) but of l^fe in us. It arises from the soul: first
there is a soul; and then a life from the union with that soul; and then
there is a secret kindled motion and operation outward, wheresoever life is.
Life in man (I say) spring^ from the soul: The soul h^th a double life, a
life in it self, and a life it communicates to the body. The life in it self,
it lives when it is out of the body, it has an essential life of its own:
but the life of the body is derived from its union with the soul, and from
that union comes lively motion and operation. Spiritual life whence?
The spiritual life of the soul is by the Spirit of Christ, when our soul
has union with the quickening Spirit of Christ, and by Christ's Spirit is joined
to Christ, and by Christ to God, who is life it self and the first fountain
of all life: then we have a spiritual life. The Spirit is the soul of our
souls, and this spiritual soul, this Spirit in us is not idle wherever life
is there is motion and operation inward and outward suitable and proportionable
to the fountain of life, the Spirit of God himself.

So on the contrary it is with death; what is death? Death is nothing else but
a separation from the cause of life, from that from whence life springs. The
body having a communicated life from the soul, when the soul is departed it
must needs be dead. Spiritual death
Now death (take it in a spiritual sense) it is either the death of law our
sentence: as we say of a man when he is condemned, he is a dead man. Or death
in regard of disposition; and then the execution of that death of sentence in
bodily death, and in eternal death afterward. Now naturally we are dead in all
these senses.

In disposition.
First by the sin of Adam, in whose loins we were, we were all damned; there
was a sentence of death upon all Adams rotten race, as we say damnati antequam
nati, we were damned before we were borne, as soon as we had a being in our
mothers womb, by reason of our communion with Adam in that first sin.

And then there is corruption of nature as a punishment of that first sin,
that is a death (as we shall see afterward) a death of all the powers, we cannot
act and moove according to that life that we had at the first; we cannot
think, we cannot will, we cannot affect, we cannot do any thing that savours
of spiritual life.

Hereupon comes a death of sentence upon us, Sentence.
being damned both in Adams loins and in original sin, and likewise adding
actual sins of our own: if we had no actual sin it were enough for the
sentence of death to pass upon us, but this aggravates the sentence. We are
dead in law as well as in disposition. Execution.
This death in law is called guilt, a binding over to eternal death: it breeds
horror and terrors in the soul for the present, which are the flashes of
Hellfire, and expectation of worse (even of the second death) for the time to
come, which is an eternal separation from God for ever, an eternal lying
under the wrath and curse of God in body and soul (after they are united at
the resurrection) because we would sin eternally if we did live eternally
here: and no satisfaction being made for man after death, there must be an
eternal sentence and punishment upon him, a terrible condition: if we were not
afraid of the first death we should be afraid of the second death that
follows, we are all dead in trespasses and sins.

Now what is the reason of it why we are dead?

First of all, the ground of it is; by sin we are separated from the fountain
of life, therefore we are all dead.

Secondly, by sin we lost that first original righteousness which was
comproduced with Adams soul: when Adams soul was infused, it was clothed
with all graces, with original righteousness: the stamp of God was on his
soul, it was connaturall to that estate and condition, to have that excellent
gracious disposition that he had. Now because we all lost that primative Image
and glory of our souls we are dead.

We are dead likewise not only in regard of the time past, but for the time to
come: No man by nature has fellowship with the second Adam, till he be grafted
into him by Faith, which is a mere supernatural thing. In these regards every
man naturally is dead.

Sin it self a death.
Nay sin it self, it is not only a cause of death, of temporal death, as it
is a curse; and so of eternal death: of that bitter sentence, and adjudging of
us to, both that we feel in terrors of conscience, and expect after. But
sin it self is an intrinsicall death: Why? Because it is nothing but a
separation of the soul from the chief good, (which is God) and a cleaving to
some creature. For there is no sin but it carries the soul to the changeable
creature, in delight, and affection to its pride, and vanity, one thing or
other. Sin is a turning from God to the creature, and that very turning of
the soul is death, every sinful soul is dead. In these and the like
considerations, you may conceave we are all dead.

And you has he quickened, who were dead, etc.
Let us consider a little what a condition this is, to be dead in trespasses
and sins. Not to speak of the danger of the death of sentence, when a man by
the state of nature lies under the wrath of God, that hanges over his head, and
is ready to crush him every moment. Signs of spiritual death.
But to speak of that death that seizes upon our dispositions, we are dead
by nature. Coldness.
And what does death work upon the body? unactivenesse, stiffnesse; so when
the Spirit of God is severed from the soul, it is cold, and unactive, and
stiff. Therefore those that find no life to that that is good, no nor no
power nor strength; it is a sign that they have not yet felt the power of the
quickening Spirit, when they hear coldly, and receive the Sacrament coldly, as
if it were a dead piece of work and business; when they do anything that is
spiritually good coldly, and forced; not from an inward principle of love to
God (that might heat and warm their hearts:) but they go about it as a thing
that must be done, and think to satisfy God with an outward dead action.

Vnlovelinesse.
Again, death makes the body unlovely, Abraham would buy a piece of ground that
he might bury his dead out of his sight, he could not endure the sight of his
own beloved wife when she was dead. Death takes away the beauty and the
honor that God has put upon the body, so that it is not honorable to those
that behold it after death. The Image of God stamped upon the soul of man by
the Spirit, it is the glory of a man: after sin it is an unlovely soul. We are
all deprived of the glory of God, as S. Paul says.

Loathsomenes.
And not only so; but there is a loathsomenesse contrary to that honor that
was in it before. Though all art and skill be used that may be to set out a
dead body, (with flowers, or whatsoever you will) to please the fancy of the
living: yet it is but a dead body, and the stench will be above all other
sweet smells. So let any natural man be as witty, and as learned, and as
great, and as rich as you will; or as he can be set out with all these
ornaments and flowers: yet he is but a carrion, a loathsome creature to God,
if his soul be separated from God, and inwardly cleave to the creature. If he
have not a new heart, he is abominable and loathsome to God, and to all that
have the Spirit of God. A dead soul is abominable to all Gods senses, (the
Scripture thus familiarly condescends unto us,) he will not behold him, he
looks upon the proud afar off. And he smells no savor from their
performances, the very sacrifice of the wicked is abominable, he looks upon
them as we do upon a dunghill, as a loathsome thing. The prayers of the
wicked are an abomination to God, he turns away his face from them, he
cannot endure them. And for his ears, he will not hear the prayers of the
wicked. And for feeling, he is wearied with their sins, as a cart is with
sheaves. Nay, he is wearied with their very good actions, as it is Isa. 1.8.
Whatsoever wicked men perform it is abominable to God, he cannot behold
them, he cannot endure them, he is burdened with their sins; and those also
that have the Spirit of God in them, as far as they see the foulness of
their sins they loath them.

But herein a wicked man agrees with a dead body, a dead body is not loathsome
to its self. So take a carnal man, he pranks up himself, he thinks
himself a jolly man, especially when he is set out in his flowers, those
things that he beggs of the creatures, he sees not his loathsomenesse; he
thinks himself a brave man in the world, in the place he lives in: and he
has base conceits of others, of God, and all things of God. Dead men are not
loathsome to themselves, because they want senses. As in a prison, the noisome
savor is not offensive to them, because they are all acquainted with it; it
has ceazed upon and possessed their senses: So wicked men they smell no ill
savor and sent one from another: because they are all dead persons, one dead
man is not loathsome to another: as a company of prisoners they are not
offended with the noisomeness of one another.

They are separate from God and Gods people.
Again, we sever dead persons from the rest: so indeed a dead soul as he is
severed from God, so ae jure, he should be severed from the company of others:
there should be a separation, and as soon as the life of grace is begun, there
will be a separation between the living and the dead. Let the dead follow the
dead, and bury the dead, says our Savior in the Gospel.

Sencelesnesse.
Where bodily death is, it deprives of all senses, there is no use of any,
either of the eye or tongue, Without speech
etc. it makes them speechless: So he that is spiritually a dead man, he can
speak nothing that is savoury and good of spiritual things, if he does he is
out of his element, if he speak of good things he speaks with the spirit of
another man; if he speak of the writings of other men, it is with the spirit
of the writer. He cannot speak to God in praise, or to others in experience of
the work of grace, because he has a dead soul. Put him to his own
arguments, to talk of vanity, to swear or to talk of the times, you shall
have him in his theme: but to talk of God and divine things (unless it be to
swear by them and to scorn good things) he cannot; he is speechless there,
it is not his theme. Without sight.
And as he is speechless so he has no spiritual eyes to see God in his
works. There is nothing that we see with our bodily eyes* but our souls should
have an eye to see somewhat of God in it, his mercy and goodness and power,
etc. Without taste.
And so he has no relish to taste of God in his creatures and mercies: when a
man tastes of the creatures he should have a spiritual taste of God and of the
mercy in him, Oh how sweet is God! A wicked man has no taste of God. Without
bearing.
And he cannot hear what the Spirit says in the Word, he hears the voice of
man, but not of the Spirit when the trumpet of the Word sounds never so loud in
his ears. These things ought not to be overmuch pressed, much curiosity must
not be used in them, but because the Holy Ghost raises the proportion from
these things, some thing must be said of them.

As there is no sense nor mooving to outward things, Immooveable.
so no outward thing can moove a dead body: offer him colors to the eye, food
to the taste, or any thing to the feeling, nothing mooves him: So a dead soul,
as it cannot moove to good, so it is moved with nothing, that that affects a
child of God, and makes him tremble and quake, it affects not a carnal man at
all.

And as in bodily death, Grows worse.
the longer it is dead, the more noisome and offensive it is every day more
then other: So sin it makes the soul more loathsome and noisome daily, till
they have filled up the measure of their sins, till the earth can bear them
no longer. We say of a dead body it is heavy: so dead souls I am sure they are
heavy, heavy to God and to Christ that dyed for sin, and heavy in themselves,
they sink to earthly things in their affections, and thereby they sink lower
and lower to Hell, and never leave sinking till they be there. As the life of
grace is like the Sun when it rises, it grows still till it come to full
perfection, till it come to the life of glory: So on the contrary this death is
a death that is more and more increased in the loathsomenesse and noisomeness
of it every way: so that the longer a carnal man lives the more guilt he
contracts, A child of a hundred years old (as the Prophet says) the longer he
lives the more vengeance is stored for him; he treasures vengeance up against
the day of vengeance, and it is a curse for a man in his natural estate to
live long, for he grows more and more abominable every way. These things
help to understand the Scripture, and therefore so far we may well think of
them.

To know what we are by nature.
If this be so, I beseech you let us learn to know what we are by nature; not
to make our selves in our own conceits better then indeed we are. We judge of
our selves as we are to civil things. A man that has natural parts, that can
discourse and understand the mysteries of law and of the state, we value men by
these. Alas poor soul thou may be dead for all this; what are all these
abilities for? Are they not for the spiritual life? What is this to the life
of grace? They only blow thee up with pride and set thee further off, and make
thee incapable of grace. If thou talk of learning; the Devil is a better
scholar then any man, he knows matters of state and other things better then
thou do, and yet he is a Devil for all that, therefore never stand upon
these things. But there is a company that are more to blame then these; one
would think that these have something to be proud off, that they might set
themselves against God and goodness: but there is a generation that have little
in them, that yet think themselves the only men in loose licentious life,
despising all, caring for none, and think it the only life to live as they
list, to go where they list, in what companies they list, to have bounds of
their own: these think themselves the only men, when indeed they are no body;
they are dead loathsome creatures; (it is the mercy of God that the ground does
not sink underthem;) and yet they carry themselves, as if they only were alive.

Again if we be all dead by nature, To avoid intimate society with carnal men.
and there ought to be a separation of the living from the dead; let us take
heed in our amity and society that we converse not with natural men too much,
that have not spiritual goodness in them; that we converse not with them with
delight and complacency. It is a tyrannical thing to knit dead and living
bodies together, and he was accounted a tyrant that did so: surely in choosing
our society, conjugall or friendly, any intimate society to join living and
dead souls together, we are tyrants to our own souls. We wrong our souls
to join with dead persons, who would converse with dead courses, and corpse?
The very creatures startle at the sight of a dead body; nature startles at that
that is dead. If we had the life of grace (further then the necessity of
civil conversation, and the hope of bettering them forces it upon us) we
would have no society with those that we see are in the state of nature. What
issues from them but stench? eyes full of adultery, nothing that is pleasing
can come from them; nothing can come from all their senses but rottenness, and
stench; what comfort can a man (that loves his own soul, and has any desire
to be saved) have by intimate converse with such persons? let them have never
so good parts, they hurt more one way then they do good another: you see we
are all dead by nature, and what this death is.

Object.
But you will say there is a difference between natural death, and spiritual
death: for in natural bodily death, there is no mooving; but in this
spiritual death of the soul, men have senses, and motion, etc.

Answ.
It is true, thus far they differ; though a man be spiritually dead,
Difference in natural and spiritual death.
yet notwithstanding he has feet to carry him to the house of God; he has
ears to hear the Word of God; he has abilities of nature upon which grace is
founded. God works grace upon nature. Now a man living in the Church of God,
that is a grace when a man has grace to live within the compass of the
means: he can by common grace, without any inward change of nature, come and
hear the Word of God, and when he is there he may yield an ear to listen, and
he has common discourse and understanding to know what is said and upon what
ground, he can offer himself to the work of the Spirit; he can come to the
poole (though he be not thrust in this day, or that day) when God stirrs the
waters: this by common grace, any man living in the Church may do.

Therefore though we be all dead, To use the natural parts God has given us.
even the best of us by nature: yet let us use the parts of nature that we
have, that God has given us, to offer our selves to the gracions and blessed
means wherein the Spirit of God may work. Let us come to hear the Word of
God, John 5.25. The time is come and now is that the dead shall hear the voice
of God, where the voice of God is in the Ministry, and so they shall live. As
in the latter day the noise of the trumpet shall raise the dead bodies: So the
trumpet of the Word of God sounding in the ears of men (together with the
Spirit) shall raise the dead souls out of the grave of sin. Therefore J
beseech you as you would be raised up out of this death, hear the noise of
Gods trumpet come within the compass of the means. As God is the God of life,
and Christ calls himself the life and the Spirit, the Spirit of life: So the
Word is the Word of life, because together with the Word God conveyes
spiritual life. The Word of God in the Ordinance is an operative working Word.
As it was in the creation, God said, Let there be light and there was light:
So in the Ministry it exhorts and stirs up to duty, and there is a clothing
of the ministerial word with an almighty power, it is a working word. As when
Christ spoke to Lazarus, when he stanke in his grave, he said Lazarus come
forth, it was an operative working word, there went an almighty power to raise
Lazarus. Therefore though we find our selves dead and have no work of grace:
yet let us present our selves more and more to the Ordinance of God. God will
be mighty in his own Ordinance: the blessed time may come, let us wait when
the waters are stirred, and take heed that we despise not the counsel of God,
which is to bring man to spiritual life this way.

God can raise old sinners.
And object not I am dead and rotten in sin many years, I am an old man.

You know many were raised in the Gospel, some that had been dead few days:
Lazarus was rotten and stanke. It shows us that though a man be dead and
rotten in sin, yet he may be raised first or last, the blessed time may come,
therefore wait; never pretend long custom, and long living in sin, All
things are in obedience to God, though they have a resistance in themselves,
yet God can take away that resistance and bring all to obey him. All things in
the world though they be never so opposite to Gods grace, they are in obedience
to his command. Therefore though there be nothing but actual present
resistance in the soul to that that is good and a slavery to the bondage of
sin: yet attend meekly upon the Ordinance, God can make of Lions Lambs, he can
take away that actual resistance. As Christ when he was raised, the stone that
lay upon the grave was remooved: So when God will quicken a man, he will
remoove the stone of long custom that is upon him; though he have been dead
so many years, yet God can roll away the stone and bid him rise up. Therefore
let none despair, God is more merciful to save those that belong to him, then
Satan can be malicious to hinder any way.

The best of us all, The best men have some remainders of death.
though we be not wholly dead, yet there are some relics of spiritual death
hanging upon us, there be corruptions which in themselves are noisome.
Therefore let all attend upon the means, that the Spirit of God by little and
little may work out the remainders of death; the remainders of darkness in
our understandings, and of rebellion in our wills and affections. For there be
usually three degrees of persons in the Church of God. Three degrees of men in
the Church.
Some open rotten persons that are as graves, open sepulchers, that their
stincke comes forth and they are profane ones. There are some that have a
form of godliness that are merely ghosts, that act things outwardly but they
have not a spirit of their own; they have an evil spirit and yet do good
works: they walk up and down and do things with no spirit of their own.
The second are more tolerable then the first in humane society; because the
other stink and smell to common society: common swearers and profane persons
that stink to any except it be to themselves. But the godly have this death in
part; the life of sentence is perfect, the life of justification: but
spiritual life in us is by little and little wrought in the means, the Spirit
of life joins with the Word of life and quickens us daily more and more. A
word of these words

And you has he quickened.
Suitable to the Easter Day.
occasion. This being our estate, let us know how much we are beholding to God
who has quickened us. God quickens us with Christ and in Christ. It is a
comfortable consideration. In that God has quickened Christ and raised him from
the grave, it shows that his Fathers wrath is pacified, or else he would not
have quickened him, he gave him to death, and quickened him again, therefore we
may know that he has paid the price for us. And he quickens us with Christ and
in Christ, whatsoever we have that is good it is in Christ first, That Christ
in all things might have the pre-eminence. Christ first rose and ascended and
sits in Heaven, and then we rise and ascend and sit in heavenly places with
Christ, See the Sermons upon Romans 8.2.
Therefore as St. Peter says well, in 1. Peter 1.20. God has raised Christ,
that our faith might be in God. If Christ had not been raised up, our Faith
and Hope could not have been in God, that he would raise us up, we are
quickened and raised in Christ, all is in Christ first, and then in us. The
ground of this is, that Christ was a public person in all that he did, in his
death, therefore we are crucified and buried with him; in his resurrection and
ascension, therefore we are quickened with him and sit in heavenly places with
him. He is the second Adam; And if the first Adam could convey death to so many
thousands, so many thousand years after; and if the world should continue
millions of years, he would convey death to all: shall not Christ the second
Adam convey life to all that are in him. So think of all things both
comfortable and uncomfortable in Christ first, when we think of sin, think
of it in him our Surety and when we think of freedom from death and
damnation; think of his death, when we think of our resurrection, think of
his, when he rose again; in his resurrection the acquittance from our sins
was sealed: thereby we know that the debt is paid, because he rose again, let
us see an acquittance of all in the resurrection. And if we think of the glory
that God has reserved for us, think of it in Christ, see Christ glorious
first, and we in him. See Christ at the right hand of God, and we in him,
carry Christ along with us in our contemplations. We are quickened with Christ,
Christ takes away all the deaths J spoke of before. Christ by his resurrection
took away the death of sentence, he rose again for our justification, so that
now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. So again in regard of
that deadly disposition that is in us, Christ quickens us in regard of that, by
infusing grace by his Spirit: for Christ is an universal principle of all
life: Now Christ by his death pacifying his Father obtained the Spirit, and by
that Spirit which he infuseth as a principle of life, he more and more quickens
our nature and makes it better and better till it be perfect in Heaven. As Adam
was a principle of death, and the more we live in the state of nature, the
worse we are, til we come to hell: So when we are in Christ, the Spirit
sanctifies us more and more till he have brought us to perfection. And as we
are quickened from the death of sentence and of dispos^tion, so we are quickened
in regard of that hope of glory that we have: For now in Christ we are in
Heaven already, and though there come bodily death between, yet
notwithstanding that is but a fitting us for glory, the body is but fitted and
molded in the grave for glory. This very consideration will quicken a man in
death, my head is in Heaven above water, therefore the body shall not be long
under water. And Faith makes that that is to come present, and affects the
soul comfortably. Christ is in Heaven already, and J am there in Christ, and J
shall be there as verily as he is there; I am there de jure, and de facto I
shall be there; in these considerations Christ quickens us: Therefore says St.
Peter, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who has begotten us
again through the resurrection of Christ from the dead, to a lively hope of an
inheritance immortal, etc. We are begotten again to this inheritance by the
resurrection of Christ, who is risen again to quicken himself and all his.
The consideration of this should affect us as it did Saint Peter, to bless God.

Now all this quickening power arises from our union with Christ, we must have
a being in Christ before we can have comfort by death with him, or by rising
with him. Our union with Christ springs from faith: faith is cherished by the
Sacrament: the Word and Sacrament beget faith: faith unites us to Christ: union
with Christ makes us partake of his death, and the benefits of it, and of his
resurrection and ascension to glory: therefore the more we attend upon this
ordinance of the Word, and the seal of the Word, the Sacrament, the more our
faith is increased: for God invites us to communion and fellowship with Christ,
and all his benefits and favors: and the more we find faith assured of
Christ, the more union and fellowship we have with Christ, and the more we
seele that, the more Christ is a quickening Spirit: quickening us with the life
of grace here, and the hope of Glory afterward. Therefore let us comfortably
attend upon the ordinance of God sanctified for this purpose, to strengthen
this our union with Christ.

FINIS.
THE FRVITFVLL LABOUR FOR Eternal Food.

In two Sermons, By the late Reverend and Learned Divine RICHARD SIDS, Doctor
in Divinity, Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at
Grayes-Inne.

ESAIAS. 55.2. Why do you spend money for that which is not Bread? and your
labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye
that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness.

JOHN 6.55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for Nicholas Bourne and Rapha Harford, 1639.

THE FRVITFVLL LABOUR FOR Eternal Food.
JOHN 6.27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that
indureth to everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give you, for him
has God the Father Sealed.


OUr blessed Savior was mighty in word and deed, witness what he did, what he
taught, and both in this Chapter.

What he did, he fed many with a few loaves, he came over the water without
any help.

What he taught, witness from this part of the Chapter to the end.

The words are part of an Answer of our blessed Savior to his hypocritical
followers, that followed him for the Loaves, and not for any confirmation of
their faith by his miracles: for upon occasion of those two miracles (mentioned
in the former part of the Chapter) they followed him, and perceiving that he
was miraculously come over the water, they began to ask him, Rabbi, how came
thou here? Our Savior perceives that they meant to complement with him, he
sees with what hearts they came after him, therefore as most befitting the
Exigence of their state, because they were hypocrites, he answers, not to their
question, but to their persons, Verily, verily, ye seek me not because of
the miracles, but because ye eat of the loaves and were filled. Labor not
for the meat that perishes, etc.

The Verses together contain a Conviction, and an Injunction, or direction.

A Conviction, and that is serious and loving. Serious, Verily, verily I say
unto you, you seek me not because of the miracles, but because ye eat of
the loaves, etc. He convinces them of their fault, of their hypocrisy, of
their wicked and carnal aims in holy business, they come flattering of
Christ, but as he was too holy to flatter, so he was too wise to be flattered,
he deals therefore directly with them, thoroughly convinces them of their
hypocrisy and corrupt aims in following after him. We are all naturally prone
to these carnal ends in holy actions; we must take heed with what minds, with
what hearts we come before God, whose eyes are brighter then the Sun, who
regards not so much what we do, as with what minds we do it.

As his conviction is Serious, so it is Loving, for with the conviction or
reproof follows the injunction or direction, Labor not for the meat that
perishes.

In the Injunction there are two things. First, he shows them what they should
not follow, he takes them off from laboring after the meat that perishes.
And then secondly, he instructs them in what they should follow, what they
should seek after, But labor for the meat that indureth to everlasting life,
etc.


There are Arguments in both. In the first, there is an Argument disswasive,
and that is infolded, Labor not for the meat that perishes, because it is
meat that perishes.

In the second, there are Arguments prerswasive, or enforcing to the duty, and
they are three, The necessity. The excellency. The possibility of attaining.


The necessity, it is meat, and what so necessary as meat?

The excellency, and that is set forth, first by the continuance, it is meat
that endures. Secondly, by the fruit or effect of it, it is meat that endures
to everlasting life, it is meat to life, and it is meat that tends to an
everlasting, to a glorious life.

The possibility of attaining it, The Son of man shall give it you, for him
has the Father Sealed.

There are three things that must concur to make a thing attaineable, and to
be had, A willingness in the giver. Power and strength to give it. And then
Authority with power.


Here are all these; here is will to bestow it, he will give it, what freer
then a gift? the Son of God became the Son of man upon purpose to give it,
he will give it, and he will give it freely.

Here is power and strength to give it, for he is the Son of God as well as
the Son of man.

And then here is Authority joined with that power, for the Father has Sealed
him. The Father that created Heaven and Earth, that has all power in his
hands, that is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, He has Sealed him, He has
given him full Commission to be the Savior of all that trust in him, Christ
came not without Authority from God the Father, he came out with Gods broad
Seal as his Commission.

So you see the Arguments, both disswasive, Labor not for the meat that
perishes, and persuasive, But for the meat that endures to everlasting life.
I shall but touch the former, and principally insist upon the latter Branch.

To speak a little for the explication of the words. What is here meant by
the meat that perishes?

We must enlarge the sense according to our Saviors meaning; By the meat that
perishes, he does not intend only outward food, but all outward things
whatsoever, they are the meat that perishes, all earthly and outward things
are the food that the soul of a natural man feeds upon. The soul of a
Covetous man feeds upon his money, applauding himself that he is worth so much
and so much. The Ambitious man Camelion like feeds upon the air, upon the
ayrie applause of the people. The Sensual man feeds upon base and sensual
pleasures, in a word, all carnal men, natural men are condemned to that
sentence of the Serpent, to eat dust, to feed upon outward, earthly,
perishing things. So that every thing that is not grace and glory or the means
that lead to it, is a perishing thing.

Nay (to raise it a little higher) Learning and Knowledge, if it be only of
perishing things, is food that perishes, for as the frame of nature and the
civil frame of the world must have an end and perish, so the knowledge of
natural and civil things must needs be perishing also.

And to say no more, the very knowledge, the speculative and contemplative
knowledge of religious things, if we have only the knowledge of the things in
us and are not turned into the things we know, is a perishing thing. The
truths of God indeed are the food of the soul, but unless the goodness of
those truths be the food of the will and affections, unless we are molded and
fashioned into the very form of those truths, unless we are framed to a love
and liking of that which we know, that those truths be rooted and planted in
us, it is food that perishes.

In a religious discourse, in preaching, all your ornaments, besides that which
quickneth and strengthens the soul to holy duties, is food that perishes.
And your hearing, if it be only to hear witty sentences and turnings of
speech without regard to the truth it self, is food that perishes. Thus you
see what a great latitude this food that perishes has in Christ's meaning.

Now our blessed Savior takes them off from laboring for this by a strong
Argument: Would you have a greater argument? It is food that perishes, we do
not regard the luster of things, but their continuance. Why do we esteem of
Crystal more then glass? Because it continues: Flowers have a goodly gloss,
but we regard them little, because they are fresh in the morning and cast away
at evening. And so it is with all excellencies, unless it be grace or glory.
All flesh is grass, and the excellentest things of nature, wit and honor and
learning and all, though they be not as grass so common, yet they are as the
flower of the grass, they are all fading and withering, but the Word of God
endures for ever, that is, the grace and comfort that we get by the blessed
truths of God, that endures for ever, and it makes us endure for ever, but all
other things are food that perishes, and we perish in the use of them, The
world passes away and the concupisence of it, the world, the things lusted
after perish, and in lusting after the world the lust perishes, and we perish
to in the pursuit of them, nay which is worse, the immoderate seeking after
these things destroy us, we eternally perish, for by placing our affections on
earthly things we turn earthly. Therefore in Divinity we have our
denomination from our affections, we are called good or ill not from our
knowledge but from our affections. The Devil knows good, but he is not good,
it is loving and joying and delighting in good or ill that makes us good or
ill, we have our form and being in religion from our affections.

Now by seeking after and placing our affections that are ordained to close
with better things, which shall make us happy in another world, by planting
them on earthly things we become like the things earthly, by placing them on
the world we become the world, we become earthly, therefore they are not only
perishing in themselves, but we perish in the pursuit of them. It is a strong
argument that is here used, all earthly things are food that perishes; for
alas he that is rich to day may be poor to morrow, he may be as rich as Job
in the morning, and as poor as Job at night, he may be in credit now with
Haman, and be in discredit ere soon, he may be in health now, and sick ere
long; we need not Scripture for this, experience reads us this lecture enough,
but we are so desperately set on earthly things, that neither Faith, nor
experience, nor the strength of discourse, nor reason is sufficient to take us
off till God by his Spirit convince us thoroughly of this, therefore Moses
prays that God would teach them to number their days, so though there is a
sufficient argument in the discovery of these earthly things to be perishing
things to enforce a disswasion, yet we cannot loosen our affections to them,
nor know the uncertainty of them till God teach us.

To make some use of this, in a word, and so to go on to that which J more
intend. If all things here below be grass and as the flower of the grass,
perishing and fading things, why then we should take heed that we do not
redeem any perishing thing with the loss of that which does not perish, with
the loss of this soul of ours, which is an eternal spiritual substance,
breathed in by God in the creation, and redeemed by Christ, which is capable of
immortality, capable of happiness, capable of the blessed impression of the
Image of God, What if one should gain the whole world (says Christ that
knows the price of a soul best) and should loose his own soul. It is an
argument sufficient even to a man that is led but with the strength of natural
reason, not to labor for that which will perish, when he has a soul that
will not perish; to labor after that thing as his maine chief good, that is
of shorter continuance then himself is extremity of folly: therefore no
carnal man that seeks after these perishing things can ever be a wise man,
because he has an end inferior to himself, he may be wise for particular
ends, to be rich, to have great places, to get his pleasure, this is to be wise
for particular ends; but he cannot be wise for the chief and last and best
end, for his soul, for eternity, he cannot direct his course that way, that
labors for the food that perishes.

And again, we should not pass to neglect any earthly thing to gain
advantage to our souls, because they are perishing things, we should force
our selves to contentment in the loss of earthly things for the gain of
spiritual; the loss of things perishing is an easy matter, we loose things
that will perish whether we loose them or no; All earthly things perish either
in our time or after us; we should not therefore be over eager in getting of
these earthly things, let us leave things that perish to men that perish: you
see therefore how strong a reason our Savior Christ alleges here, Labor
not for the meat that perish^th, because it perishes.

And learn here from our blessed Savior a point of heavenly wisdom, you
see when he would take us off and dissuade us from the pursuit of earthly
things, he takes an argument from the nature of them, they are perishing
things, and therefore when we look upon the outward luster of earthly things,
we should withal consider the perishing nature of them; when we are tempted
to too much delight in the creature, we should present to our selves the
perishing and fading nature of outward things; when we are tempted to sin
either to commit, or to leave that which is good for any thing that is outward,
we should consider, what do I now, I stain my soul, I crack my conscience, I
contract guilt and grounds of terror for the time to come, for that which is
perishing: it is always good to have present to our souls and to our fancies
the nature of earthly things, that they may be as present as the temptation,
that Satan from them urges and forces upon the soul; it is good always to
remember that they are perishing things, and that as they are perishing in
themselves, so they will destroy us, cause us to perish in the pursuit of
them. But my meaning is not to dwell long upon this.

Labor not for the meat that perishes.
What? does Christ mean that we should not labor at all for earthly things?
does he read a Lecture of ill husbandry and unthriftinesse and negligence?

No, he does as we do, when we would set a crooked thing straight we bend it
as much the contrary way, our Savior saw that they were desperately addicted
to earthly things, that they followed him for their bellies, sought him for the
loaves, therefore he bends the stick the contrary way, Labor not for the
meat that perishes, that is, labor not for it in comparison of better
things, labor not so inordinately, so immoderately, labor not so
unseasonably. It is said of the Israelites that they brought Egypt into the
Wilderness, because they brought the love of the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt
with them: we have many come to the Church, to these holy exercises, to this
holy place, but they bring the world with them, they come with carnal
affections: labor not so unseasonably; it should be our heavenly wisdom to
lay aside importunate earthly thoughts of earthly things, to drive them away as
Abraham did the Birds from the Sacrifice, we should leave them as he did the
Beasts and his Servants at the bottom of the Mount when he went up to
sacrifice unto God: thus labor not, labor not immoderately, labor not
inordinately, labor not unseasonably.

But how shall we know when our labor is immoderate, unseasonable, and
inordinate after earthly things?

I answer (in a word) when they either hinder us from, or hinder us in holy
things, when they keep us from holy duties, as from the santifying of the
Lords day, or from any other service of God, or when they hinder us in them,
when they fill us full of distractions, when they turn the soul from the
business in hand, etc. thus when they do either hinder us from or hinder us
in better things, we may know we offend against this disswasion of Christ,
Labor not for the meat that perishes.

But why does our Savior begin first with his disswasion, Labor not for the
meat that perishes, and then injoyne what they should seek after, but for
the meat that endures to everlasting life?

Because he saw that their souls were corrupted and desperately set upon the
seeking after earthly things, and when the soul is invested to any thing,
there must first be a remoovall of that; as in ground, the thorns must first
be rooted out, before there be any sowing of seeds, and in bodily distempers,
there must first be a purge of the malignant humor, before there be any
Cordialls given; so Christ, he first takes them off from an immoderate and
inordinate seeking after the world and earthly things, and then he directs them
what they should do, what they should seek after, seek the food that endures
to everlasting life.

Here is the prerogative of Christianity, a Heathen man out of the strength of
morrall discourse and outward experience can teach the negative part, can tell
you that all earthly things are vain and perishing. A Stoic will declaime
wittily and gravely from morrall principels and daily experience upon these
things, that these earthly things of themselves are all vain and fading, and
that it is our conceit of them only that bewitcheth us to them, it is that
only that renders them to us green and fresh: But now for the affirmative
part, what we should seek after, here Paganism is blind, that is only to
be learned in the Church of Christ, it is proper to Christianity to direct us
here, as I shall discover better to you when I come to speak of the duty
enjoined, which is that I especially aim at.

But before I come to enforce the act or duty which our Savior here exhorts
unto, I must unfold the object of that act, what is meant here by the meat
that endures to everlasting life.

The meat that endures to everlasting life is our blessed Savior Christ
Jesus, as he is contained and wrapped up in the means of salvation, with all
the blessed liberties, privileges, and prerogatives, graces and comforts that
we have by him and in him: for our blessed Savior never goes alone, he is
never embraced naked, but with him goes his graces, comforts, prerogatives and
liberties; we have him not now as we shall see him face to face hereafter in
Heaven, but he is to be considered as wrapped up in the Word and Sacraments, so
is Christ the food that lasts to everlasting life, and in this latitude we
must take it, or else we mistake and straiten the Holy Ghost.

But why is our blessed Savior so considered, and the comforts, and
prerogatives, and good things we have by him termed food?

In diverse respects. To instance in a few: but first, you must know that as the
soul has a life as well as the body, so it has a taste as well as the body,
and as God (least the body should pine away) has planted in it an appetite,
which is the bodies longing after that which refreshes it, for if it were not
for appetite, if it were not for hunger and thirst who would care for meat and
drink; so God has planted in the soul, (least it should pine away) a
spiritual appetite, an earnest longing and desiring after that which is the
most necessary good of the soul; for the soul has that which the body has,
taste, and smell, etc. though in a more sublime and divine sense, but as really
and truly, as we shall see afterward. Now our blessed Savior is this
spiritual food of the soul, He is the bread of life that came down from
Heaven, He is the true Manna, He is the true Tree of life in Paradise, in the
Church of God the true Paradise, He is the true Shewbread, He is the true Lamb
of God, He, considered with all the blessed prerogatives and privileges and
comforts we have by him, is called meat or food for diverse respects.

First, whatsoever sweetness, or comfort, or strength there is in meat, it is
for the comfort and strength and good of the body; so whatsoever is comfortable
and cherishing in Christ (as indeed all comfort and cherishing is in him) it is
for our good; to us He is given, for us He was borne, to us a Child is borne,
to us a Son is given, all is for us, for us men, for us sinners; there is
nothing in his natures, in his state and condition both of abasement and
exaltation, nothing in his Offices but it is all for our good. Consider him in
his humane nature, and join with his nature, his abasement, that he was man,
that he took upon him our nature, that he was abased in it, that he humbled
himself to death, even to the death of the Cross, to be a sacrifice for our
sins, how does the soul feed on this, on the wonderful love of God in
giving Christ to be incarnate, and then to die for us, how does the soul feed
upon the death of Christ, because by that Gods wrath is appeased and he
reconciled, where the dead body is there the Eagles resort, so does the soul
prey and feed upon the dead body of Christ, Christ crucified is the special
food of the soul.

Consider him in his Exaltation, in his glorious Resurrection and Ascension
into Heaven, how does the soul feed upon that, Christ our Surety is risen
again, therefore our debt is discharged, the justice of God is satisfied to the
full; so for his Ascension, when the soul is basely minded on earthly things,
it ascends to Christ who is taken up to Heaven for us: so his sitting at the
right hand of God, the soul feeds on that, because he sits there till he
have triumphed over all his enemies, till he have trod them all under foot.

Consider him in his Offices. In ignorance the soul feeds on him as a Prophet
to instruct it; in the sense of wrath and anger the soul feeds on him as a
Priest to make peace and reconciliation: in want of righteousness, the soul
feeds on his righteousness, he is our righteousness: In the sense of
corruption, the soul feeds on him as a King, that by his Spirit will ere long
work out all corruption, that as he will tread down all our enemies without,
so he will tread down all corruption within* he will never leave the soul
till he have made it a glorious house fit for himself.

So the prerogatives we have by him, the soul feeds on them, feeds on his
Redemption, that by his Redemption we are freed from our enemies and all that
hate us, and all that we feared, that we are set at liberty from the Law, from
sin and from death, and notwithstanding all the debasements of this world,
we are the sons of God and heirs of Heaven.

In a word, whatsoever is in Christ is for our good, He is all mine, his Life
is mine, his Death is mine, his Resurrection is mine, his Ascension is mine,
all is mine, he is expended and laid open for my good, that is the first.

Again, as in the bodily life, there is a stomach, a power to work out of the
meat that which is for strength and nourishment: so in the soul, there is
faith the spiritual mouth and stomach of the soul to work and draw out of
Christ whatsoever is for the comfort and nourishment of it; as there is comfort
in Christ, so the Spirit of God gives a man a hand, a mouth as it were, gives a
man faith to work out of Christ somewhat for comfort; what were food if there
were not a stomach to digest it, to make it a man's own? so what were Christ if
we had not faith to lay hold on him?

Again thirdly, as our life is nourished and maintained with that which is
dead, with dead things, so the chief dish that maintains and nourishes the
life of the soul (as I said before) is Christ crucified, God forbid (says the
Apostle) that I should rejoice in any thing but in Christ crucified, when the
soul of a poor sinner is pursued with accusations from Satan and his own
conscience, when they take part with God against him, whether runs it? to the
city of refuge, it runs to Christ, to Christ crucified, thither the soul flies
being pursued with the guilt of sin, to the horns of the Altar, as Ioab did
when he was pursued, but with better success, for he was pulled from thence,
but the soul that flies to Christ crucified, to the death of Christ, to Christ
abased, to his satisfying the wrath of God by his death, and making of us
friends with God, there it holds, there it lives, and there it will continue
for ever; this keeps the soul alive.

And then again, as in meat, before it can nourish us, there must be an
union, an assimulation, a turning of it into us; so Christ, except he be made
one with us by faith, unless there be an union between him and us, he can
never nourish and comfort us savingly.

Again, as we often eat, and after we have received food once, yet we eat
again every day, because there is a decay of strength, and there are still new
businesses, new occasions that require new strength, and therefore there is
need of a continual repairing of our strength by food: Even so there is a
perpetual exigence, a continual need that the soul has to feed upon Christ,
upon the promises of Christ, and the prerogatives by Christ, because every day
we have fresh impediments, f^esh assaults, and therefore we have need to fetch
fresh supplies and refreshment from Christ, to have meat from Christ every
day, to live on Christ not only at the first, but continually, that as our
corruptions, and temptations, and infirmities return every day, so every day
to feed on Christ for the repairing of our spiritual strength; especially we
are to make daily use of the death of Christ, for howsoever the death of Christ
be transient in respect of the act of it (as one of the Ancients says) yet the
fruit of it remains for our daily comfort and refreshment, his blood runs
every day in the Church afresh, like a fountain always powered out for Judah
and Jerusalem to wash in, it always runs, that is, in regard of Gods
imputation, in regard of the fruit that comes to the soul, and therefore we
should make daily use of it for the comfort and strength of our souls upon all
occasions, We have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and
he is the propitiation for our sins, he is now an Intercessour in Heaven,
he continually applies the fruit of his death now by his intercession in
Heaven.

Again, as after meat received and eaten, there is strength and comfort
gotten for the affairs of this life; so likewise after the soul has digested
and relished Christ, and the benefits and prerogatives that come by him, after
we have made the heavenly truths of Christ our own, the soul is strengthened
to holy duties, it is fit to do, it is fit to suffer, it is fit to resist
temptations, it is fit to perform all the services of Christianity.

In these and diverse other respects Christ is the blessed meat here
mentioned, not himself alone, but considered with all the blessed good things
which we have by him: for Christ (as I said before) is never alone, if we have
him, we are sons in him, we are heirs in him, we are free in him, we are
redeemed in him, we are Kings in him, Priests in him, Prophets in him, we are
all in him, we have with him all the good things that he has, for as we have
not them without him, so we have not him without them, those that have the
field, have the pearl in the field, and they that have the pearl in the
field, have the field, they that have Christ, have Christ clothed with all his
blessed prerogatives, and privileges, and comforts.

But wherein lies the difference between this meat, this food of the soul
and other meat?

In these things. First of all, Christ as he is from Heaven, so all the graces
and comforts that we have by him are all from Heaven, and they carry us to
Heaven, all the other things are earthly.

Secondly, all earthly food does not give but maintain life where it is, but
Christ he is such a food as gives life, he is as well life as food, I am the
life.

Again thirdly, the nourishment we have from this outward food, we turn to
our selves, but Christ this spiritual meat, turns us into himself,
transformes us into his own likeness, for Christ offered to us in the Gospel
being digested by Faith, does by his Spirit change us every way into his own
likeness.

Lastly, all other meats are consumed in the spending, and there will a time
come when we shall not be able to relish any worldly thing, our mouth will be
out of taste with these outward things; But Christ the food of the soul is
never consumed, but grows more and more, and when we can relish no other, we
may relish this food that indures to everlasting life, it always satisfies the
soul: all earthly things are as salt water that increase the appetite but
satisfy not, only Christ and grace and the comforts we have by him satisfy
and that everlastingly, they are as a spring that never dies: As he himself in
his own person endures to everlasting life, so all that we have by him is
everlasting, grace is everlasting, grace ends in glory: Christ always
satisfies, though not wholly here, because there must be a continual recourse
to him, yet he will satisfy hereafter, Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

Thus you see what is meant by the food that endures to everlasting life, and
the reason of the resemblance, and the difference that is between this and
other meat.

Here are arguments enough then to enforce us to a laboring after this meat
that endures to everlasting life, that is so agreeable to the best part of us,
that is able to make us happy, to labor by Faith to get them to be our own.

Now the labor required is especially to get a stomach to this meat, God
requires nothing of us when we come to his delicacies but that we bring a good
stomach with us, J will therefore speak a little of that, what we must do to
get an appetite to this spiritual meat.

A good stomach we know is procured by sharp things, the Paschall Lamb was to
be eaten with sour herbs, if we would have an appetite after Christ, labor
daily to consider what a cursed estate we are in without Christ: God has left
the Law as for other purposes so for this, that we should feed upon the
threatenings of it, that it should drive us to Christ; A legal faith is the way
to evangelicall. Labor therefore thoroughly to be convinced of the need thou
stand in of Christ, and then I need not bid thee to labor for the food that
endures to everlasting life, that will sharpen thy appetite after it: And beg
of God illumination to see the ill that is in thee, and the ill that belongs to
thee: God has left infirmities and corruptions in us on purpose for this end,
and likewise we have tentations without us, we carry not only a Hell within us
(which if God should not keep in would carry us to despair) but there is a
hell without us, the tentations of Satan, the accusations of the Law, the anger
and wrath of God; thus we should labor to be convinced of our wretched estate
without Christ, the danger we are in if God should take us hence on a sudden,
this will force every day a fresh appetite and stomach in the soul to feed on
Christ.

Secondly if we would sharpen our appetites to this food, we must purge our
stomachs which naturally surfeit of earthly things, purge the soul by a
consideration of the vanity of all other things that draw us from Christ: the
reason why we have no better relish of Christ and heavenly things is, because
we cleave in our affections so much to earthly things, we set up Idols in our
hearts instead of Christ, and we cleave in an adulterous and false affection
unto them. Let us set before us arguments of the vanity of all things but
Christ, and there can be no better argument then here is set down, they are
all perishing things: that which the soul neglects Christ and Heaven and
happiness for, and is so madly set upon, alas they are all base in respect of
the soul, the whole world is not worth a soul, they are all perishing things,
of less continuance then the soul is; we should purge our souls by such
considerations as these.

Then again thirdly: Exercise gets a stomach, let us every day spend our
spiritual strength in spiritual exercises, in resisting tentations, in
withstanding the snares of Satan, in bearing those daily crosses that God lays
upon us, live as Christians should live, and the exercise of a Christian life
will enforce us to go unto Christ to feed on him, to fetch from him spiritual
strength; when in our daily exercise we shall see the continual need we have
of pardon for daily sins, of comfort and strength against daily corruptions
and infirmities, this will make us feed on Christ and on the promises made in
him, not only on the promise of forgiveness, but on the promise of a supply
of necessary grace, on that sweet promise, that he will not quench the smoking
flax nor break the bruised reed, feed on him as a King to subdue our
corruptions, etc. the daily exercise of a Christian life will force us unto
Christ.

Again, to whet our appetite after Christ, consider the necessity we have of
spiritual strength and comfort: when a man considers that he has a journey to
take, he will eat to enable him to his journey, as Elias was bid to rise up
and eat because he had a journey to go, we are all to take a journey as far
as Heaven, and we are to travel through the wilderness of this world, and we
shall be daily assaulted (besides our inward corruptions) with diverse
tentations, and therefore we had need every day to fetch strength from Christ:
and consider that sickness will come, and death will surprise us, and if we
have not Christ we are wretched creatures without him: and though we have
applied Christ to our selves and made him our own, yet a time of deseition, a
time of trial will come: Thus the necessity of spiritual strength will force
us to feed upon Christ.

Again to get us a stomach to these things, let us converse with those that
are spiritual, with those that are heavenly minded, that have tasted of
heavenly things, when we see them delight in reading, delight in hearing, when
we see them contemplate of Heaven and heavenly things, on Christ and the
benefits we have by Christ, on the blessed condition of a better life and of
the world to come, when we see these persons that are better then our selves,
that have less cause then we, take such pains for their souls, we will be
ashamed of our own neglect, and it will be the discourse of a soul presently
with it self, surely there is some excellent streng^h and comfort in these
things, some extraordinary sweetness and refreshment that these men find, that
they so fall to them: it is a great advantage to converse with those that are
spir^tuall.

And lastly, to put an edge to our dull appetites after this food, consider we
know not how soon this table that Christ has spread, these dainties that
wisdom has provided for us in the Ministry of the Word may be taken from
us, therefore let us fall too while we have them; We should do as those do
that being at a feast and have neglected feeding, at the latter end when they
see all ready to be taken away fall too a fresh: we know not how long we may
enjoy these blessed opportunities, therefore now with Joseph, let us lay up
against a time of scarcity, there will a hard winter come, therefore let us
imitate the wisdom of that poor creature the Ant, to provide against winter:
Now while the Iubile is let us take out a pardon: there is a time of spending
to come, now let us get oil in our Lamps: Now is the seed time, now are the
waters stirred in the poole of Bethesda: Now is the acceptable time of grace,
we know not how long it shall continue, therefore now let us labor for the
food that endures to everlasting life. I never knew any repent of the pains
they had taken for their souls, but many that have lamented and bewailed the
precious time they have spent, and that they have not been good husbands for
their souls: It is one special point of heavenly wisdom to take advantage
of our precious time, to fill it up with holy exercises; let us often offer
this consideration to our souls, wherefore was I sent hither into this world,
what is the end why I live here? is it to scrape together perishing things and
so to perish with them, or am I not rather sent hither to get out of the state
of corruption wherein we all are by nature? to get into Christ, to make him
mine own, to be turned into him, to feed on him, to get joy and comfort, and
strength from him? is not this the end why I live here?

But to go on, and to make an use of trial, whether we have as we should do
relished and tasted Christ, whether we have fed on this meat or no. How shall
we know that?

I answer, we may easily know it: For first of all, if we have relished Christ
and the good things by him, we disrelish all other things, we begin to have a
baser esteem of all earthly things. It is with the soul as it is with a
Balance, when Christ is high in the soul, other things are low, and when
other things are high, Christ is low in the soul: Christ was high in Paul's
soul, therefore he esteemed all as dung in comparison of the excellent
knowledge of Christ. The poor Woman of Samaria when she had heard Christ, and
tasted the sweetness that was in him, down goes her water-pot, and she runs
to the City and tells them, I have seen a man that has told me all things,
is not this the Messiah? Zaccheus, when he had tasted of grace, and had the
pardon of his sins by Christ, half my goods I give to the poor, etc. when
grace is planted in the soul, when the soul has tasted once of better
things, there will be a mean and base esteem of earthly things: the more the
soul feeds on heavenly things, the less respect it has to temporal things.
The soul is a finite Essence, and it cannot spend it self on all things, the
more it runs into severalls, the more shallow it is to others; as in a stream,
when it is cut into many channels it runs weakly in the several, whereas it
runs strongly in the maine; so it is with the soul, when it is scattered, as
the poor Israelites were about the land of Egypt to gather straw, to gather
these perishing earthly things, it is weak to heavenly things, it has little
strength to those, but when the course of it is wholly bent to those, there are
but weak or no desires running to these earthly things, when once the soul of
a Christian has had a true taste and relish of the things of Heaven, it looks
with a despising eye upon whatsoever is here below; when once it has tasted
of Christ, then especially it grows out of relish with poison, then away with
Popery, away with false doctrine, away with hypocrisy, and formality in
religion.

Again secondly, we may know that we have tasted Christ and fed on him, and
on the good things that are by him, when we are strengthened by our feeding,
when we are strengthened to duties, strengthened against tentations and
against corruptions. Thou say thou beleevest on Christ and have made him
thine own, what comfort and strength feel thou by Christ? art thou able to
encounter a tentation? art thou able to resist a lust? art thou able to
perform holy services? If there be no strength in thee, but every tentation
turns thee over, and thou yeeldest to every base lust, where is Christ? can
thou believe Christ to be thy King, and yet suffer thy lusts to bear sway in
thee? can thou believe that Christ is a Priest that died forthy sins, and
yet cherishest and love sin? can thou believe that Christ is in Heaven
and that thou art in heavenly places with Christ, and yet have no mind of
heavenly things, but art carried away with every earthly thing? No, thou have
not yet tasted how good and gracious the Lord is, thou have not yet relished
the heavenly Manna: the soul that feeds on Christ is strengthened from
spiritual reasons and supernatural grounds and divine principles drawn from
Christ to duty, so that it is enabled even with a holy violence to do any
thing for Christ's sake; for the soul reasons thus, Christ gave himself to
death for me, I will therefore (if need be) give my self to death for him,
Christ thought nothing too dear for me, I will think nothing too dear for
him, this pride, this vanity that I am tempted to, these were the spears that
were the death of my Savior; thus the soul fetches reasons from the death of
Christ to strengthen it against temptations, to strengthen it to duty: and so
for the matter of comfort, after meat has been received we are refreshed,
if the soul be sweetly refreshed with the comforts that are to be had in
Christ, and in the Word of Christ, it is a sign we have tasted Christ: those
that have trembling and discouraging hearts and souls, that cannot rest nor
receive comfort, it is a sign they have not rightly tasted Christ, Come unto
me (says Christ) all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and ye shall find
rest to your souls; in Christ there is rest, out of Christ there is no rest;
and so likewise those that have corruptions bearing sway in them, it is a sign
they have not so much as touched Christ, for if they had but touched Christ he
would stop the issue of their corruptions; the poor woman in the Gospel as
soon as she had touched Christ, her bloody issue was stayed, so upon the least
touch of Christ by faith, there will be an abating of corruption.

Thirdly, in the bodily life we know, after a good meal, the desire and
appetite is satisfied; so the soul that tastes of Christ, it has sweet
satisfaction and contentment: O the sweet satisfaction that a Christian soul
has above a Heathen. A Christian that has Christ need not go out of him for
any thing, it has fulness and satisfaction in him in all estates, both in
life and in death; do thou find Christ, and the privileges and prerogatives
we have by him, do thou find the Word of Christ and the promises of the Word
fully and sufficiently satisfy thee, then it argues that thou have fed on
Christ, for Christ being received by faith into the soul, gives it fulness
and contentment.

Lastly, to name no more, as men (if they have the grace of God in their
hearts) will give thanks for their bodily food; so it is an evidence that we
have fed on Christ when our hearts and tongues are enlarged to praise God for
Christ, for the comforts and contentment and satisfaction that we find in him
and in religion; therefore Saint Paul begins his Epistle to the Ephesians, with
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly place; in Christ. And Sa^nt Peter being
led by the same blessed Spirit, his heart being full, his mouth is full of
thanks, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten
us again to an inheritance immortal, that fades not away, reserved for you
in the heavens (for you that are reserved by faith to salvation) so undoubtedly
the soul that tastes the sweet comforts of Religion in Christ will be much in
sweet inlargements of heart in thanksgiving, it cannot be otherwaise, it is an
universal reason, the more believing a soul is, the more thankful a soul
is, where there is no praise, there is no faith.

Thus you see how we may try whether we have tasted and relished, whether we
have fed upon the food that endures to everlasting life or no.

Taste is the most necessary sense of all (says a wise searcher of the
mysteries of Nature) our life is maintained by taste: Every creature sees not,
every creature hears not, but every creature has taste: you may judge of your
selves by your taste and relish, and if once you have tasted and relished
Christ, all the world cannot persuade you to fall from him, if all should say
there were no sweetness in Religion, that it were better to be a worldling,
etc. you would defy it, you would never believe it, there is no disputing
against what a man tastes, if all men should say sugar were sharp, if J once
tasted it I would say otherwise.

Labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life.
The Arguments enforcing this act upon the object, to labor for Christ, are,
that he is food, and food that endures, and food that endures to everlasting
life.

Let me from these arguments here in the text (for J will draw no other)
enforce what I have said before, J have showed you what this labor is, and
rules how you may know whether you rightly labor for this food or no: Now to
enforce this act, consider first the necessity of that our Savior here
injoynes us too, it is food.

It is a strange thing that persons should persuade themselves that they are
Christians, and yet go from day to day without refreshing themselves with
Christ, and with the meditation of the blessed estate they are in by him, both
in respect of this world and that which is to come, without getting strength
from Christ against tentations and against corruptions: Christ is food, and
the promises and prerogatives we have by him are food, we should labor after
it every day, feed on it every day: If a man should ask a man in his calling,
why do you take such pains Morning and Evening, rising early and going to bed
late? He would answer it is to get bread, it is to get food to maintain my
family: So should it be our answer to any that wonder why we take such pains
for our souls, why we labor so after Christ, Oh remember we take pains for
life, to get and mainetaine life, and what is so necessary as life? And if life
be so necessary, food which preserves it must be necessary: we see the
Patriarks for food left their country, and the poor Egyptians sold themselves
and their cattle and all to get food to keep life. We famish eternally except
we feed on Christ, except we have so much Faith as makes us one with him,
except by Faith we digest him and get nourishment and strength from him: it
will appear to be so when it is too late, ere long nothing in the world will
relish us, and then if we have not Christ and the things of another life to
relish us what will become of us? J beseech you consider what opinion and
judgment we shall have ere long of these earthly things and of the better
things of another world, at the hour of death our judgments will be convinced
that the things of Heaven are the best things: and if it be true that they
will be so then, why is it not true that they are so now? Labor to have the
same judgment now.

With the necessity our blessed Savior joyneth the excellency of this food, It
is food that endures to everlasting life: Christ and the good things we have
by him are of equal extent and of equal time with our souls, if we labor
for earthly things, we labor after that which is of shorter continuance then
our souls, we may outlive our happiness, and what a miserable state is that?
But if we labor for the food that endures to everlasting life, our happiness
is of the same continuance with our souls, and that is only true happiness.

If there were such a Tree upon the Earth now as there was in Paradise, a Tree
of life, that whosoever should taste of the fruit of it should live, though but
on the Earth here to enjoy his sensual pleasures. Oh what would not men give
for a little fruit of that Tree, though it were to redeem a little time and to
lengthen out a fading base life on earth, but much more to live for ever: Here
is food that endures to everlasting life, to such a life as is heavenly and
glorious. Now blessed be God that since we are cast out of the first Paradise
by sin, that now in our relapsed estate God is so merciful to us as to
provide another manner of Tree of life, that in Paradise was but a typical
Tree, the true Tree of life is Christ, and whosoever feeds on him shall not
perish but have everlasting life; certainly if we believed this, it could not
be, but it would wondrously see us on to labor after this meat, because it is
not only food that tends to the preservation of life, but to life everlasting,
to a life that endures as long as our souls.

And let us know that if we do not labor for this meat that brings to this
life, look what degree of excellency we have had in the rank of the creatures
the same degree we shall have in misery, for as the Angels in the degree of
excellency were the most excellent creatures, but being fallen they are in the
same degree of misery that they were in happiness and are now the most
accursed creatures of all others: So man as he is a most excellent creature, if
he feed on the food that endures to everlasting life, so if like Nebuchadnezar
he f^red as a beast on earthly things and forget his soul and affections which
are made to close and feed on Christ and better things, he shall have the same
degree of misery that he has in happiness, even next to the Devils the most
wretched creature that can be: What if a man were clad as Aaron was in all his
pontificality, in his Priestly robes? What if he should feed deliciously every
day as Dives? what and if he had the wisdom of Solomon, the strength of
Samson? what and if he had all the kingdoms of the world? if he have not the
food that endures to everlasting life, he should be stripped of all these ere
long, it is only Christ and the good things that are to be had in him and by
him that continue everlastingly.

This should enforce us to labor after this food in the use of all good
means: and before J leave the point, consider the reality, the truth of these
heavenly things, of these things we have by Christ the second Adam, all things
else are shadows: The food that nourishes the body it is not food in
comparison of that, earthly kingdoms are not kingdoms in respect of that,
earthly sonneship is not sonneship to that, earthly riches they are nothing,
they are vanity in comparison of that, earthly inheritance is no inheritance in
comparison of the inheritance we have by Christ, all other things are but
titles of things, they are but empty things, there is a reality in Christ, a
truth in the kingdom of grace. Alas what is riches, what are pleasures, what
are honors, what is sonneship, what are all earthly things in comparison of
the soul which is an immortal, a spiritual, an eternal substance, they are
but shadows, those things that are of equal extent and continuance with the
soul, and not only of equal extent, but that raise the soul to have
communion with God in Heaven, with the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, there is
the reality, there is the truth, if we will have the truth of things: I am that
bread (says Christ afterward in this Chapter) and my flesh is meat indeed and
my blood is drink indeed, as if other meat and other drink refreshed not
indeed, but were only shadows of things.

Labor therefore for this meat, and certainly if so be the Spirit of God
once convince your judgments that these things which I say are true, both for
the necessity and excellency of this food, they will be effectual to stir
you up to labor more after this food that endures to everlasting life. So
much for that.

Which the Son of man shall give you, for him has God the Father Sealed.
To come now to the possibility of attaining this food, which is the third
argument our blessed Savior uses to enforce upon us this injunction, to
labor for the food that endures to everlasting life. Hope stirs up
endeavor, as we see in marchandizing, though when we venture beyond the seas
we commit all to wind and water (as they say) and it is doubtful what the
issue may be, yet we hope, and that sets us on work: So the poor Husbandman,
but that he hopes to have a comfortable issue, to have a harvest, he would
never set himself to work. Now here is hope, and hope on a better ground a
great deal, for he that makes other things successful, he has given Christ
for this purpose, and Christ (you see here) he gives himself, which the
Son of man shall give you.

Here is all that we may ground and found our hope upon, here is will, here
is power, and here is authority to give it.

Here is will, Christ will give it, why? because he is the Son of man. What
use is there of these words in this place? why does he not say which the Son
of God shall give you?

O the Son of God without the Son of man is indeed a Fountain of good
things, but he is a sealed Fountain, alas of no comfort, our comfort is in
Emanuell God-Man, all our comfort is to be brought back to God from whom we
fell in Paradise, and we must be brought back again to God by God, but
unless God had become man, man had never come back again to God, therefore
all the union and communion we have with God it depends on this first union of
Christ with our nature, that the Son of God became the Son of man (as Saint
Austine says) for now the next union that we become the Sons of God it comes
from this, that God became man: and therefore he says here, the Son of man
shall give it you, you need not climb up to Heaven to fetch this food that
endures to everlasting life, for the Son of God is come down from Heaven to
Earth, to take the nature of man, and in that to die, in that to satisfy Gods
wrath, and so to become this blessed and everlasting food. The Son of man,
the second Adam, as by one man we all come to misery, so by the second Adam (by
man) we are restored to a blessed condition again: therefore he says here
the Son of man, because in the humane nature all our salvation was wrought:
indeed the worth and efficacy of our salvation comes from the divine nature,
but it was wrought in man's nature, the divine nature could not work it alone.
But I will not dwell on this.

The Son of man shall give it you, you need not fear it, God is become man
on purpose to give it you, we may now boldly go to a Mediator which is made
bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, we should have feared and trembled
if he had only been God, but now all grace and comfort is hid in this nature
of ours in Christ: if Christ had not took this poor wretched nature of ours
upon him, it had been a hateful nature to God, God hated the nature of man,
but now because the Son of God is become the Son of man, our nature is
become lovely in the eyes of God, and not only lovely, but it is filled in him
with all grace, and of his fulness we receive grace for grace. He will give
it therefore, because he is the Son of man.

Here is will, I but what power and strength has he to give it?

He is so the Son of man as that he is also the Son of God, therefore we
are said ( Acts 20.) to be redeemed with the blood of God, Christ by his
eternal Spirit, by his Godhead offered himself a Sacrifice for sin; so
that he can give it because he is God.

But what authority has he?

He is Sealed to do it, that is the third, that is, he has authority, for
authority is here expressed by Sealing. Now Christ is said to be Sealed, first,
because there is the impression of God upon him, even as the seal imprints in
the wax the likeness of that which is in it, so God has imprinted in Christ
his own likeness, he is the Image of God, for Christ as he is God, is the
character of his Father, and his humane nature is likewise as like God as
nature can express, we saw (says the Apostle) his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten Son of God, we saw a kind of divinity in him as much as
humane nature could receive, the likeness of God sparkeled in him; therefore
he is said to be Sealed, but that is not all nor the principal here meant.

Again secondly, the use of a seal is to appropriate and distinguish from
other things, so Christ is Sealed, that is, God has appropriated him to be his
own Son, and to be a Mediator of his own appointing, and has distinguished
him from all others by a blessed anointing and qualification of him above all,
he is as Saul amongst the rest, higher then all, he is as Aaron, anointed with
the oil of gladness, but above his fellows, and yet for his fellows, from
him distills the blessed ointment of grace, it is powered on his head first, and
descends from him down to all the skirts of his garment, to all his members.
So here is in this Sealing, likeness, distinction, and appropriation.

But especially by Sealing here is meant authority, for a thing sealed is not
only to distinguish and appropriate to a man's use, but to authorize also, as a
Magistrate that has the Kings broad Seal, he is authorized: so Christ he has
Gods Seal, God has authorized him to be a Mediator, and as he was
foreordained before all worlds (as the Apostle Peter says) to be the head of
them that should be saved, 1 Pet. 1.
and to be their Mediator, so when the fulness of time was come, when he came
in the flesh, he was authorized by the greatest testimony that ever was, by
the blessed Trinity, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost at his Baptism,
This is my beloved Son, hear him, says a voice from Heaven, there was the
Father, the Son in the voice, the Holy Ghost in the Dove, there was the whole
Trinity, so he was authorized from Heaven.

And then he was authorized by his miracles, God gave him power to work those
works which none could do but a Mediator, therefore he says, if you believe
not me, yet believe me for my works sake.

He was authorized also by his Resurrection, as the Apostle says, in Romans 1.4.
He mightily declared himself to be the Son of God by the resurrection from
the dead: the Angels from Heaven brought witness of him, he was witnessed by
all kind of persons on earth, yea by the devils themselves: so he is Sealed
and authorized every way by all kind of witnesses to be a Mediator.

This is set out in other phrases in the Scripture. In Psalm. 2. This my Son
have I set upon my holy hill of Sion, and Romans 3. toward the latter end, Whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation, God has set him forth as the
Shewbread was set out under the Law. And then again in another place, Whom
he has sent, and in 1. Cor. 1.30. He is made of God unto us Wisdom, etc.
He is made of God, that is, he is Sealed, appointed, authorized by God for
that purpose.

So you see, why Christ is said to be Sealed, especially because he is
authorized by God the Father, made, sent, set forth, whom the Father has
Sealed, that is, the party offended by our sins, he has Sealed and
authorized Christ to be a Mediator.

If this be so, let us learn this use of it, to bless God the Father as well
as Christ, Blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Blessed be
Christ, for him has the Father Sealed by the Spirit. The blessed Trinity have
all a hand in our salvation.

And then again consider, if we despise Christ, whom we despise, we despise
the Father that has Sealed him, it is a weighty matter, Read the second
Psalm and you shall see there what it is to despise Christ, not to kiss the
Son, that is, when God has anointed and set forth a Savior, and Sealed him
and authorized him by all the testimonies that can be to be a Mediator, not to
receive him for our King, for our Priest and Prophet, it is a rebellion, not
against Christ only, but against the Father who has Sealed him.

And likewise it serves wonderfully to strengthen our faith when we go to God
for forgiveness of sins: offer him his own broad Seal, offer to him Christ
a Mediator authorized by himself: Lord I am thus and thus a sinner, but
notwithstanding thou have sent thy blessed Son and set him forth to be a
Savior for me, and him I offer to thee, thou can not deny or refuse thy
own Sealed Mediator and Redeemer, if he had been a Mediator of my own
appointing and of my own sealing it were another matter, but I offer thy own
Mediator, look on the death of him whom thou have Sealed to be my
intercessour. It is a wondrous prevailing argument with God, he cannot deny
that which he has devised himself, him whom he chose before all worlds for
this great office.

But how shall I know whether he be Sealed for my good or no? says the soul
that hears this, we hear much of an authorized Savior, of an authorized
Mediator to be All-sufficient, but what is that to me?

Why? for whom is he Sealed? is he Sealed for Angels or for men? and amongst
men, is he Sealed for holy men or sinners? I come not to seek or to save whole
men, or men that never were lost, no, he came to seek and to save men, but
they are lost men, sick men: and it is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
means to be embraced, that Christ came into the world to save sinners, says
blessed Paul, therefore he is Sealed to save thee if thou art a sinner, to save
thee if thou will receive him, and thou art bound to receive him under pain of
the punishment of rebellion. Is it not rebellion not to receive a Magistrate
whom the Prince has authorized under his broad Seal? it is another manner of
matter not to receive Christ, it is a greater sin, then to sin against the
Law, for if a man sin against the Law there is the Gospel to help him, but
if a man sin against the Gospel there is not another Gospel to help him,
now to refuse Christ offered in the Gospel is a sin against the Gospel,
where then can there be hope of salvation? salvation it self cannot save him
that will not be saved, that refuses the remedy Sealed by God the Father the
party offended, who can heal him that casts down the Potion that is brought
to heal him, that refuses the Physician that comes to cure him? I say he is
Sealed to save thee if thou will be saved, if thou will receive him, receive
him not only to be thy Savior, but to be thy King to rule thee, and thy
Prophet to teach and instruct thee, as we shall see afterward.

But to clear this a little better, we must know that there are three distinct
sealings.

There is God sealing of Christ, which I have unfolded to you.

And there is our sealing of God, that is, our sealing of Gods truth.

And then again, there is Gods sealing of us by his Spirit: And these follow
one the other.

Why has God sealed Christ; but that we hereupon should be stirred up to
believe, and to receive Christ, and so by consequence to seal that God is true
in sending such a blessed Mediator, as St. John says, John 3.33.
He that believes in the Son has set to his seal that God is true. God has
sealed him that we by receiving him should seal Gods truth.

Beloved, God comes to us for our testimonialls, for our hands and seals, Oh
how wondrously does God condescend to weak man* He has sealed Christ for the
office of a Mediator, and he offers him unto us, and he comes to us likewise
that we would set to our seals too, that Christ is the Son of God, he counts
it not sufficient that he has sealed him himself, but he will have us seal
too, and we seal him when we receive him, he that receives him has set to his
seal that God is true, he that does not receive him, he makes God a liar,
says Saint John.

And what comes of this when we receive Christ and set to our seal that God
in the promise of salvation by Christ is true? Then we having honored him, he
honors us by sealing us by his Spirit, as the Apostle says: Ephesians. 1. In whom
after ye believed ye were sealed, So when we believe and set to our seal that
God is true, God seals us by his Spirit, after ye believed you were sealed.

But what is this seal of the Spirit whereby God seals us after we believe?

I answer, God seals us when he sets the stamp of his Spirit upon us, when
the work and witness of his Spirit is wrought in us: For as in a seal, the
wax has all in it, ^he whole likeness of the Jmage that is in the seal: So
the soul that is sealed by the Spirit has the likeness of the Spirit of
Christ stamped on it, God imprints in their spirits the likeness of his Son,
that is to say, he makes them loving souls, humble souls, obedient as Christ
was in all things, patient, meek, etc. you may see in the spirit of a
believing man an expression of the Spirit of Christ, so that if you would see
Christ in his excellencies, look on the spirit of a true Christian, there you
shall see a resemblance of Christ Jesus, not perfectly but in some comfortable
measure, you shall see the very Image of Christ, you shall see how full of love
he is, how patient in crosses, how humble, how meek, how obedient to God in
all things both in a passive and active obedience. This is the stamp of the
Spirit, when a man believes God honors him by setting his Image on him.

And yet this is not all, besides this we are sealed with the witness and
comfort of the Spirit as well as with the work of the Spirit, the Spirit of
God sweetly witnessing that we are the sons of God: and this sweet witness of
the Spirit especially comes after we have honored God by believing in
temptation, when we are able to hold out and say as Job said, Though he kill me
yet will I trust in him, so when we can after conflicts of doubting and
despair, say, though he kill me yet will I trust in him, I will set to my
seal that he is true, well will you so? God to honor such a soul seals him
to the day of redemption, that is, he gives to the soul of such a one a sweet
evidence and testimony that he is the Son of God.

And this seal of the Spirit is double, not only done by the witness and
work of the Spirit inwardly (which I have showed) but likewise the Spirit does
seal them outwardly, inabling them to make an outward confession of Christ and
his Truth, and therefore in Reve. 14. Christians are said to be Sealed in the
forehead, that is, as they are marked and singled out in ill times to be such
as God has set his special favor upon, so they are Sealed with a spirit of
boldness willingly and with forwardness to confess the truth of Christ in
ill times.

Now (to apply it to our purpose) would thou know whether thou be such a one
for the present as for whom Christ is Sealed a Mediator? Examine first of all
whether thou have put to thy Seal that God is true by receiving and believing
Christ and the promise of Salvation through him, if thou have done so then thou will find another Seal from God, even the work of the Spirit in sanctifying
of thee and conforming of thee to the Image and likeness of Christ, and thou will find the witness and comfortable testimony of the Spirit in telling thee
that thou art the Son of God: and withal thou will have a spirit of
boldness and readiness and forwardness to confess Christ, thou will not
care for all that the world says, but wilt if (need be) stand to the
profession of Religion to the death.

If thou can find this in thy self, undoubtedly thou art not only such a
one as Christ came to Seal, but for the present, thou may be assured that
thou have interest in this Mediator Sealed by God for that purpose.

Thus you see that here is food that endures to everlasting life, which is
Christ and the benefits we have by him, you see that that blessed meat is
attaineable, because he is willing to give it, for he is become Man for that
purpose, he is able to give it, for he is God as well as Man, and he has
aurhority to give it, for God the Father has Sealed him and fitted him for
that office. If we receive him he will Seal us with his blessed Spirit, that
is, the same Spirit that furnished Christ with grace, that sanctified him in
the womb, will sanctify all those that are his members, will work a
likeness and conformity in them to his blessed Image, for the same Spirit that
was in the natural Son is in all the adopted Sons of God. And he will
likewise give us the comfortable evidence and assurance that we are the Sons of
God, furnish us with boldness and resolution to profess Christ in all times.

Let me then I beseech you come again to reenforce this exhortation: Take heed
you refuse not Christ, consider with what authority he comes, he is Sealed, it
is no presumption therefore to receive him, though you be never such sinners,
to receive him (I mean) not only to be a Priest to reconcile you to God, but
to be a King to rule you, and a Prophet to instruct you by his Spirit, to
receive him on this manner is no presumption; to receive him indeed as a
Savior, but to neglect him as King, to refuse to come under his government is
great presumption, but to receive whole Christ is obedience and faith and no
presumption, nay if you do not receive him you sin damnably, you commit the
greatest sin that can be: He came to save all that will come under his
blessed government, that will kiss the Son, Reve. ^2.
Whosoever will, let him come and drink of the waters of l^fe, all the good
promised by Christ is promised upon our receiving of him, upon the obedience of
our Faith, there is nothing required but a will to embrace him and to be under
his government, there is no exception made of sins or persons or times. At
what time soever a sinner repents, whatsoever sinner, whatsoever time or
whatsoever the sins be, if he repents Christ is ready to receive him.

If you pretend your unworthiness and want of excellencies, he takes away
that objection, Come unto me all that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11 28.
Isa. 55.1.
Come buy without money, and here in the text, the Son of man shall give it,
and what so free as gift?

If you pretend you have sinned since your calling, and that you have sinned
against conscience, and knowledge, and therefore now you have no further hope
of Christ: remember that Paul 2. Cor. 5. speaks to the Corinthians that were
in the state of grace, I beseech you to be reconciled to God, and in Jeremy 3.
Return again you Backesliding Israel, and I will heal your Backeslidings,
and again, will a man receive a wife that has played the harlot and broken
the band of marriage? Yet return O house of Israel and I will receive you,
Therefore run not away from God, though thou have sinned after thou art in
the state of grace, come again J beseech you still Christ is to be received,
the door of grace is always held open, and the golden scepter continually
held out as long as we live in this world.

But yet it is not good to neglect the time of grace, receive Christ presently,
defer not to come under his government, and receive him wholly, or else there
is no receiving of him at all.

And (to press this a little further) I beseech you consider, that if you
leave not your sinful courses and come under the blessed government of
Christ, if you receive not this Sealed King, this Sealed Priest and Prophet,
this Sealed Mediator whom God has Sealed and sent unto you for salvation,
there is not any thing in the world that will one day more torment you then
your refusal of him; O that we should ever live to hear of salvation so
freely offered and of a Savior so authorized, yet notwithstanding that we
should respect our sins more then our souls, and because we could not have
him to be our Savior except we came under his government, and be ruled by
him as a King, we refused him wholly altogether: Indeed if we might have had
salvation by him and the forgiveness of sins, and withal have remained
under the rule and sway of our own lusts and been led by them, we would have
beeene contented to have had him, but rather then we would leave our
blasphemous, our unclean, inujurious and covetous courses of life, we were
content to let Christ go if he would; O that we should reject this Sealed
Savior, O that we should refuse salvation offered on such loving terms, when
God was so loving as to Seal and authorize his Son, when the Son was so
loving as to give himself when he was Sealed, to refuse this and that for such
base respects, will certainly one day when the conscience is wakened, prove
the greatest torment that can be.

See how the Apostle notably enforces this in the second of the Hebrews, if
so be they did not escape that despised Moses Law, How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation? he does not say how shall we escape if we oppose
Christ, if we rail on him, if we despise his Image in his children, as many
cursed wretches do, but how shall we escape if we do but neglect so great
salvation, so witnessed and authorized with all the signs, so offered and
tendered with all the terms of love that may be.

And therefore if there be any here that have lived in sinful courses, and
have a purpose to break them off, that are weary of the government of their
lusts and of Satan that rules them by their lusts (for all are under one
government or other, either under the Sealed government of Christ, or under
the base government of Satan that tends to damnation) O leave it, and come
under this Governor Sealed by God the Father, authorized from Heaven by the
blessed Trinity, by miracles, and by all the arguments that can be, come under
his blessed government, and you shall do well, God the Father, the party
offended with your sins, he has Sealed him, and he cannot refuse a Mediator
of his own Sealing.

And do not say your sins have been thus and thus, for consider what were
these parties that he offers himself to here, that he says to, Labor for
the meat that endures to everlasting life, were they not cursed Hypocrites
that followed him for the loaves, and yet he says to them, Labor for the
meat that endures, etc. I am Sealed even for your salvation, if you will come
out of your hypocrisy and be ruled by me; therefore let none stand out from
coming under the government of Christ, for he offers mercy (you see here)
to the worst of men, even to cursed hypocrites.

And (to conclude with a word of comfort) if there be any poor distressed
soul frighted in conscience with the sight of his sins and Satan's
temptations, O let such consider the love of God in Christ: Satan pictures out
God as a terrible Judge, and so he is indeed to men that go on in their
sins, a consuming fire: but art thou weary of thy courses, art thou willing
to come under a better covenant, let not Satan abuse thee by setting God before
thee as a terrible Judge, and Christ as one that would not save thee; no, come
in, kiss the Son, for him has the Father Sealed, Sealed for thee if thou be
weary of thy sins, enforce not upon thy soul any unwillingnesse to be in
God, wherefore does God stoop so low, and labor by all these arguments here,
as that Christ is the Son of man, and that he shall give it you, and that
the Father has Sealed him for that end, wherefore is all this, but to show his
willingness to receive thee? wherefore has the Father Sealed Christ but in
love to thee? Come in therefore, and then if you will seal to this truth, if
you will believe, and cast your selves on Gods gracious promise even against
doubting and distrust, you shall find God sealing you by his Spirit, you shall
find his Spirit witnessing to your spirits that you are the sons of God.

Here then you see is sure footing for poor doubting souls to fasten upon,
God the Father, the party offended, has Sealed his Son, has authorized him
to save thee, if thou repent and come in; what are all thy sins and
unworthiness to Christ, God-man, Sealed and authorized by the Father who is
the party offended? if thou art willing to come in, bring all thy sins and
oppose them to Christ God-man Sealed by the Father and they will vanish as a
cloud. But (as I said before) if thou will not come in and accept of this
Savior, if thou will not submit thy self to his government, thou sealest thy
damnation.

Thus you see I have unfolded this blessed portion of Scripture, Christ Jesus
and all the prerogatives and benefits that come by him, is the food that
endures to everlasting life: you see the arguments our blessed Savior uses
to enforce us to Labor after this food, it is food, it is food that endures,
and it is food that endures to everlasting life, and he will give it, for him
the Father has Sealed and authorized so to do, he is both the gift and the
giver, both the food and the inviter to the food, both the Priest and the
Sacrifice. Labor therefore after this food.

There is an objection which I will briefly answer and so end.

Labor after it, why? Christ will give it, if he will give it why must we
labor after it? and if we must labor for it, how does he give it? how can
these two, gift, and labor stand together?

I answer, very well, Christ will give himself and forgiveness of sins, and
life everlasting, and yet we must labor too: But we must know for what we
must labor, we must not labor for any merit to the title unto Heaven and
happiness, Christ indeed gives that; But labor in the use of all good means
to get knowledge and faith to receive this gift, to get the knowledge of
Christ, what he is in his natures and offices, what he has promised, what he
has done and what he has suffered, what the intent of the Gospel is, what
the Giver is, and what the authority is that his Father has given him, this
requires labor, it is a labor to crack the shell, to understand the letter of
the Scripture, to know what the gift and what the giver is. And it is likewise
a labor to get faith to receive this gift, to get the soul emptied of all
selfe-confidence, of all worth in it self and in the creature, for Christ must
be received with a beggars hand, and it will ask much labor to deny a man's
self, for proud flesh will always have somewhat to trust to either in it
self or in the creature.

So that these two may well stand together, labor and gift: we are taught to
pray, Give us this day our daily bread, God will give us our daily bread, we
must not therefore stand still and do nothing, but though God will give it,
yet he will give it in the use of means, in the use of our lawful callings,
so here, God will give us this spiritual food, yet he will give it in labor,
it is his ordinance, and whatsoever he gives, he gives not in idleness but in
obedience to his ordinance, he will have us to labor in the use of the means,
in reading, hearing, receiving the Sacrament, praying, meditating and the like,
to have a part in Christ this blessed gift Nay, because he will give Christ,
therefore la^our, the one enforces the other, the like reason Moses gives the
Israelites, Fight (says he) for the Lord has given them into your hand, ^hey
might say, if our enemies be given into our hand why should we fight? yes,
fight the rather, be encouraged to fight, because you shall be sure to conquer,
so here, Labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life, for the Son
of man will give it, therefore labor, because he will give it, in laboring we
shall be sure to have it, do that which belongs to thee and thou shall be sure
to have that which belongs to God, thou shall find Christ, and Heaven, and
glory, and all in the use of the means: But he gives nothing without labor;
there can be no good done in earthly things without labor, and do you think
to have Heaven without labor? No, spiritual things are against the stream,
Heaven is up the hill, there must be labor, there must be striving against
corruptions within and against temptations without, and our labor it is a
happy labor, it is not a barren labor, 1 Cor. 15.58
our labor is not in vain in the Lord, as the Apostle says, we that labor
for the food that endures to everlasting life, we labor for somewhat, but
worldlings that beat their brains, and tire their spirits, and rack their
consciences, and wear out their bodies, it is all for nothing, it is for that
which is vanity and vexation of spirit, for that which they must leave behind
them. A true Christian (to encourage him to take all the pains that may be)
he labors for something, it is a hopeful and not a barren labor: And
(beloved) blessed are we that we can have this food for our labor, that since
the fall we can recover by the second Adam a better estate then we had by the
first.

And our blessed Savior to the end he might distinguish true Christians from
Hypocrites, enjoynes this duty of laboring so much the more, for we have many
in the Church that think to have Christ and his benefits without labor, as if
Heaven would drop into their mouths, they can say that God is merciful, and
Christ died for us, but you shall in the mean time find them careless of
reading, of hearing, of praying, of the Communion of Saints, etc. are idle in
working out their salvation with fear and trembling, negligent in selling all
that they have for the Pearl, will part with nothing for Christ, I say to
distinguish these Hypocrites from true Christians, therefore he says, Labor,
to show to us that only they that labor for Christ in the use of all good
means, that labor for the true knowledge of him and for faith to receive him,
that sell all for him, that take pains to grow in grace and in union with
Christ, that make him their best portion in the world, and delight in him, it
is they only that have interest in Christ, only the painful Christian is
the true Christian.

Therefore I beseech you, as you would have it discerned that you are not
Hypocrites in the Church, be stirred up to use all sanctified means to know
Christ, to believe in him, to know that you are in a communion with him, that
you belong unto him. Be not discouraged, you shall have rest ere long, There is
a rest for the people of God, Heb. 4.
as the Apostle says to the Hebrews. Indeed so long as we are here below
there is labor joined with weariness, for we have great conflicts with
corruptions and temptations, with enemies within, and enemies without, but be
of good comfort we shall at last come to a rest, to a rest perpetual and
everlasting: It is true, in Heaven there shall be labor, for we shall be always
praising God, but it shall be labor without weariness, labor without
conflict, there shall be no corruption within, nor no devil without, Satan
could enter into Paradise below, but he shall never enter into that heavenly
Paradise, therefore be encouraged to labor for a while, though it be tedious,
because of corruptions and temptations, yet there is a rest for the people of
God, an eternal Rest.

FINIS.
VIOLENCE VICTORIOVS: In two Sermons, By the late Reverend and Learned Divine
RICHARD SIBS, Doctor in Divinity, Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and
sometimes Preacher at Grayes-Inne.

GENESIS 32.26. I will not let thee go except thou bless me.

1 COR. 15.57. Thanks be unto God which gives us the victory through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for Nicholas Bourne and Rapha Harford, 1639.

VIOLENCE VICTORIOVS.
MAT. 11.12. From the days of John Baptist until now the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence and the violent take it by force.


JOHN Baptist and our blessed Savior gave mutual testimonies one of another,
he witnessed of Christ before he came, and our Savior Christ gives witness
of him here. The occasion of this you have in the second verse: Occasion of the
words.
John being in prison sends two of his Disciples to Christ, to know whether he
were the Christ or no; not that John did doubt, but to confirm his Disciples.
Christ returns a real and a verbal answer, Tell John (says he) what ye have
seen and heard, etc. and then he closes up all, Blessed is he that is not
offended with me. Upon this occasion Christ enters into a commendation of
blessed St. John Baptist, even unto a comparative commendation, amongst them
that were borne of women there had not yet risen a greater then John the
Baptist, From the excellency of his ministry.
not so much in eminency of grace (though that may have a truth) as in regard
of the dispensation of his Ministry, John living in more glorious times: For
the excellency of the Church is from Christ: he does ennoble and advance times
and places and persons, Bethlehem, a little City, yet not a little City in
regard that Christ was borne there, and says Christ, Luke 10 23.
Happy are the eyes that see that which your eyes see, every thing is advanced
by Christ. So John Baptist in regard of his office, being the immediate
forerunner of Christ, was greater then all that were before him: yet he says
the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then be* not in grace, but in
prerogative, in regard of the revelation and manifestation of more things. For
John Baptist died before he saw the death and resurrection and ascension of
Christ accomplished, before he was glorified. Therefore in regard of these
prerogatives, the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, in the Church of
the New Testament is greater then he. It is a rule that the least of the
greater, is greater then the greatest of the less. John was greater then the
greatest of them that were before him; but lesser then the least of those that
were after him.

Then Christ commends John from the efficacy of his Ministry, From the
efficacy of his Ministry.
From the days of John Baptist until now the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force; so you see how the words depend
upon the former. For the points we are to consider in them.

First, here you have the state of the Church in the New Testament, (It is a
Kingdom, and the Kingdom of Heaven) together with the quality of the means
whereby it comes to be a Kingdom, the means of grace, the Gospel. The
Gospel and the people that are wrought on by the Gospel in the New Testament,
they are both called the Kingdom of Heaven.

Then secondly, here is set down the affection of those people that seek this
Kingdom at that time, and so forward to the end of the world; the disposition
of the persons is, they are violent.

The third is, the issue or success of this eagerness and violence; though
the manner be violent, yet the success is good, the violent take it by force.

The fourth is, the date or time when it begins, and how long it continues; it
bears date from the preaching of Saint John Baptist to the end of the world;
until now, that is, to the end of the world, as it was said, till now, in the
Evangelists time, so posterity may say until now, from the first coming of
Christ, till his second coming, while there is a Gospel preached, which is
the Ministry of the Spirit, the Spirit will be working, and there are such
glorious things in the Gospel, that there will be violence offered, so while
there is a people to be gathered, and a Gospel to be preached to gather them,
and a Spirit that works by that Gospel, there will be violence in the Church
offered to the means of salvation.

Doct. 1.
First, The state of the Church, together with the means, The Church the
Kingdom of Heaven.
the Gospel preached, it is called The Kingdom of Heaven.

Besides others, there are three maine significations of these words, The
Kingdom of Heaven.

Threefold signification of the Kingdom of Heaven.
First, the famous, leading, proper signification is the state, and place where
God himself, and his people are most glorious, The Kingdom of Heaven; Heaven.
all the other significations end in that. But secondly, because all that shall
come into that glorious Kingdom, they must be Kings here first in the state
of the kingdom of grace, State of grace.
which consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, in the
graces and comforts of the Spirit, therefore the state of grace comes to have
the name too of The Kingdom of Heaven* And thirdly, Means of grace
because grace in this world cannot be attained without an order, and means,
and dispensation from God; hereupon, the dispensation of the means whereby we
come to have grace is also called The Kingdom. The unfolding the mysteries of
salvation in the Gospel, is called the Kingdom of God. As Christ says, The
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, that is, the preaching of the
Gospel, therefore the Gospel is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, and the
Word of the Kingdom, because by this Word we come to have grace, and by
grace, glory; there is no glory without grace, and no grace without the Word,
one makes way for another. The preaching of the Gospel does cause a Church
(which is the Kingdom of Christ) wherein he rules by the Scepter of his Word,
by which Word, Christ and all his riches, and glory, and prerogatives are
unfolded, and thereby grace is wrought, and grace leads to glory. This
connection and subordination is to be observed.

First, A ground of conviction.
for the conviction of those who do not indeed belong to the Kingdom of
Heaven; every man is ready to talk of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the glory
there; I but there is a subordination of grace, and of the means of grace; how
stand thou affected to the means of salvation, to the Word of the Kingdom,
the Word of life, The Word of reconciliation? for it has the name from all the
excellencies to which it brings us, to show, that as we value life, a Kingdom,
reconciliation, and all that is good, so we must value this Gospel, or else it
is a presumptuous confidence; if the privileges of grace and glory belong to
us, we must come to them by these steps; those that regard not the Gospel and
means of salvation, they have nothing to do with grace nor glory, they are
hereby convinced of arrogant folly.

Of comfort.
Again, it is a ground to comfort weak Christians that regard the means of
salvation, and yet fear their falling away; be of good comfort whosoever thou
art, God has knit and linked these together, all the power of earth and hell
cannot break one link of this chain; conscionable attending upon the means
and grace and glory will go together. Therefore hold on, attend upon the means
of salvation, and wait with comfort; The Gospel of the Kingdom will bring
thee to grace, and grace (though it be but an earnest, but a little measure)
will bring thee to glory. Where God has begun a good work he will finish it,
he will second one benefit with another, diligent attending on the means with
grace, and grace with glory.

In Scripture, works have their denomination from that they aim at, as the
Apostle says, Ye have crucified the old man, and ye are crucified with
Christ, because ye are in doing it, and ye shall do it perfectly; so we are
Saints, because we shall be so; we are Kings now, because we are in part so,
and we shall be so fully hereafter; so grace is called the Kingdom of Heaven,
because it is the undoubted way to the Kingdom of Heaven and glory. God would
help our faith by the very title, for we are not elected to the beginnings
only of glory, but to the perfection, as it is excellently set down, Ephesians.
1. We are elected to glory by means and beginnings; therefore undoubtedly we
may hope for the accomplishment when we see the beginnings.

Why is the state of grace and the means of grace and glory it self called
the Kingdom of Heaven? Quest.


Answ. Answ.
Because they are all of and from Heaven, Why grace and the means of it are
called the Kingdom of Heaven
the one is in Heaven the Kingdom of glory, and the other the Kingdom of the
Word here, and truth and grace which are by it are from Heaven, the truth we
have and grace from the truth come from Heaven, yea and Christ the Author of
all is from Heaven and they all lead to Heaven.

Which should teach us with what minds to converse in the hearing and reading
of these things, Why the things of the Gospel are slighted.
with heavenly affections. And it shows likewise why worldlings and base
people are no more affected with the things of the Gospel, because it is the
Kingdom of Heaven. If it were of the world we should have it sought with
eagerness enough, though it were a less matter then a Kingdom: but it is a
Kingdom of Heaven remote from flesh and blood, there must be a new Spirit to
work a new sight and a new taste, to work a change in the heart of man, and
then he shall know the things of the Kingdom of Heaven. He must come out of
the world that will see this Kingdom, as in Reve. 18. Come out of Babylon. A
man must come out of Antichrists Kingdom, to see the baseness of it, he
cannot see it in the midst of it, so we must come out of the world if we
would see the glorious Kingdom of Christ, it is a heavenly Kingdom. Therefore
the greatest potentates of the world must abase themselves, there is no
greatness in the world can help them to this heavenly Kingdom.

Quest.
But why should the Gospel and the state of the Church in the New Testament be
called the Kingdom of Heaven and receive the date now; was it not the Kingdom
of Heaven before?

Answ.
J answer, it is the manner of the Scripture to give titles to things from the
glorious manifestation of them, things are said to be when they are gloriously
manifested. The Mystery of Christ is said to be revealed now in the time of the
Gospel, it was known before to Adam and Abraham and the rest: but now there
was a more apparent glorious manifestation of it, therefore now the
manifestation of Christ and the good things by him, they are called a Kingdom;
before it was kept enclosed in the pale of the Jewish Church, it was veiled
under Types, it was hid in promises that were dark and obscure, but when
Christ came, all was taken off and Christ was unvailed. It is said in the
Gospel, The Holy Ghost was not given yet, John 7.39.
because Jesus was not yet glorified. The Holy Ghost was given before, but not
so fully and plentifully: So there was a state of Heaven before men were saved,
before the coming of Christ: But it was not called the Kingdom of Heaven, it
was not a state of liberty and freedom from the bondage of ceremonies, etc.

And there is reason that there should be violence offered to this state and
means, and grace wrought by it, it is a Kingdom: it is no great wonder that a
Kingdom should suffer violence, especially such a Kingdom as the Kingdom of
Heaven. In a Kingdom there is
What is in a Kingdom?

There is first of all freedom from slavery and danger, Freedom.
a Kingdom is an independent state, there is none above it, he that is a King
is free, independent and supreme.

Then again a Kingdom is a full state, Plenty.
there is abundance and plenty of people and good things in a Kingdom.

Again, Glory.
in a Kingdom there is glory and excellency: (where is it to be had else?) all
the glory and sufficiency and contentment that Earth can afford.

Now in that the state of the Church by reason of the glorious Gospel is
called a Kingdom. First it is a free state: as indeed the Word does make us
free from former bondage. In particular the Gospel of Christ it frees us from
Jewish bondage, and from all kind of bondage spiritual. John 8.36.
If the Son make you free ye are free indeed. A Christian is above all, he
is over sin and Satan and the Law, he is free and supreme and independent all
are under him. A Christian as a Christian, he is under none but Christ, under
no creature. 1 Cor. 2.15.
The spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. I
speak not of civil differences: But as a Christian is a member of Christ, and
a citizen of the Kingdom of Heaven, he has a kind of independent state, his
conscience is only subject to God and Christ; but all earthly things he
commands, they are under him.

Christiaenity a full state.
And 2. the sta^e of a Christian is a full state: 1 Cor 3.21.
God is his, Christ is his, All things are his, so much as shall serve to bring
him to Heaven, that which is truly good is directly his, and indirectly all
other things are made his by Christ, who has the authority and power and
strength of a King to command all things to work together for his good: death
and sin and all that befalls him are thus his. And then he has a spirit of
contentment in the want of good and of patience in the suffering of ill, Phil.
4.13.
that he can do all things (as St. Paul says) through Christ that
strengthens him. What he wants in outward things, he can fetch supply from
the promises of the Gospel, he can fetch supply from Christ, and from the
state to come, and what he wants in other things he has in grace which is
better.

A state of glory
3. It is a state likewise of glory and excellency: but it is a spiritual
glory, and therefore it consists together with outward baseness and
meandness, it is a glorious state to be the Son of God, to be heirs of
Heaven, heirs of all things in Christ, by the Spirit of Christ in him he rules
over all. How glorious is the Spirit of God in a Christian in the time of
temptation and affliction, when he has a Spirit ruling in him, that is
stronger then the world and all oppositions whatsoever? 1 John 4.4.
The state of a Christian is glorious even in this world in the beginnings of
it. What then is the glory that is to be revealed on the Sons of God in the
day of revelation? Romans 2.5.
It cannot enter into our thoughts, it is above our expression, nay it is above
our imagination and conceit; Thus you see there is great cause why the Kingdom
of Heaven should suffer violence. When Crowns and Kingdoms are laid open to
people with hope of getting them, especially such a one as the Kingdom of
Heaven is, it is no wonder if there be violence offered to get them.

The next thing is the affection of those that seek after this Kingdom, it is
violent.

The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence.
How does the Kingdom of Heaven, the Gospel and means of grace suffer
violence.

First, because when these good things were revealed by John Baptist and then
by Christ, In regard of the multitude.
and after by the Disciples and Apostles, many thronged into the Church, which
is the gate of the Kingdom of Heaven: they all pressed to be of the Church, to
hear the Word of God. They hung as it were upon the word of Christ; upon his
mouth; Luke 12.1. Mat. 3.5.
they pressed so, that they trod one upon another; and it is said they all came
out to hear John Baptist, Jerusalem and all Judea and all the region round
about Jordan, so that in regard of the multitude there was violence.

In regard of the affection.
And then in regard of their affections, their zeal to the good things of the
Gospel was eager, and earnest: To be Citizens of a Kingdom, to partake of the
means of salvation, to come to grace, and so to glory, it made them wondrous
violent.

The persons which were
In regard likewise of the persons, the Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence,
the persons being such as might be judged to have no right unto it. Sinners.
Alas for poor wretched sinful men and women, that had been notorious
sinners to come to receive a Kingdom, to become Kings, this was strange. What
had sinners to do with grace? This doctrine was not heard of in the Law, that
there should be hope for such wretched persons as these, if such might be
admitted surely there must needs be great violence.

Poor. Luke 7.12.
Then again, they were poor and mean people, The poor receive the Gospel;
for beggars to become Kings, poor men, that were advantaged by their outward
abasement to come to spiritual poverty.

Stran^ers. Mat. 8.12.
Again, they were Gentiles, Alients from the commonwealth of Israel and
strangers from the Covenant of promise, Heathen people. The Jews were the
children of the Kingdom, the Gentiles were forreiners and strangers; now for
these to come in, and the children of the kingdom to be shut out, it must
needs suppose violence; where there is no apparent right, there is force. Now
what right had the Gentiles (that were little better then dogs) could they have
any thing to do with the kingdom? I says Christ, they take it by violence,
and the Jews, and the proud Scribes and Pharisees that seem to be the
apparent children of the kingdom shall at length be shut out. Mat. 20.16.
They that were first (in outward prerogatives) shall be last, and they that
were last (the Gentiles, sinners, mean people that take the advantage of their
baseness, and sinnefullnesse, to see their unworthiness, and to magnify the
grace of God in Christ) shall be first. In these respects the Kingdom of
Heaven is said to suffer violence. People will to Heaven what ever come of it,
when these good things are discovered they will have no nay. Hence we may
learn this,

That it is the disposition of those that are the true members of the Church of
God to be eager and violent. Doct. The disposition of Christians eager and
violent.


Those that intend to enter into the Kingdom, they must throng, and strive to
enter; and when they are in, they must keep the fort, and keep it with
violence.

There is indeed a violence of iniquity and injustice, Ob.
and so the people of God of all others ought not to be a violent people; Do
violence to no man, says the Baptist to the soldiers, Luke 3.14. violence
rather debars out of the kingdom of Heaven, then is any qualification for it:
But this is another manner of violence which our Savior here speaks of,
necessary for all that desire to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Answ.
and that for these reasons.

Grounds of this violence.
First, betwixt us and the blessed state we aim at there is much opposition,
and therefore there must be violence. Opposition.
The state of the Church here, the state of grace, and the enjoying of the
means of grace it is a state of opposition. Good persons, and good things,
they are opposed in the world. Christ rules in this world in the midst of his
enemies, Psalm. 110.^.
he must have enemies therefore to rule in the midst of, he must be
opposed, and where there is opposition between us and the good things that we
must of necessity have, we must break thorough the opposition, which cannot
be done without violence. Now the means, and graces of salvation they are
opposed every way, within us, and without us.

From the flesh.
1. They are opposed from within us, and that is the worst opposition: for Satan
has a party within us that holds correspondencie with him, our own
traitorous flesh; in all the degrees of salvation there is violence hence; in
effectual calling, when we are called out of the kingdom of Satan, he is not
willing to let us go, he would keep us there still, and when we come to have
our sins forgiven in justification, there is opposition, proud flesh and
blood will not yield to the righteousness of the Gospel; it will not rest in
Christ, it will seek somewhat in it self. In Sanctification there is
opposition between the flesh and the Spirit: every good work we do, it is
gotten out of the fire (as it were) it is gotten by violence, in every good
action, whether it be to get grace, or to give thanks to God, how many carnal
reasonings are there? If a man be to give to others, the flesh suggests, I may
want my self. If he be to reform abuses in others, he is ready to think,
others will have somewhat to say to me, and I shall be offencive to such and
such men. And then the affection to earthly things chains us to the things
below, and self-love prompts a man to sleep in a whole skin; we love our
wealth, and peace, and favor with men, so that a man cannot come to the state
of grace without breaking through these, and hereupon comes the necessity of
violence from the opposition from within us, we must offer violence to our
selves, to our own reason, to our own wills and affections, You have not yet
resisted unto blood, Heb. 12.4.
says the Apostle; we do not resist by killing others, but we ourselves
resist to death, when rather then we will miss of Heaven, and happiness, and
rather then we will not stand for the truth we will suffer death.

2. Again there is opposition from the world, From the world
on the right hand, by the snares and delights of the world, to quench the
delight in the good things of the Spirit, and on the left hand, by fears, and
terrors, and scandalls to scare us from doing what we ought to do.

From Satan.
3. And then there is opposition from Satan in every good action, he besets us
in prayer with distracted thoughts, and in every duty, for he knows they tend
to the ruin of him and of his Kingdom. There is no good action but it is
opposed from within us, and without us; the means of salvation, and the
attending on them, they are not without slander and disgrace in the world. God
will have this violence therefore, because there is opposition to the means,
to the attendance on them, to grace, to every good action, to every thing that
is spiritually good.

God seems an enemy.
Nay, sometimes God himself becomes a personated enemy, in spiritual
desertions he seems to forsake and leave us, and not only to forsake us, but
to be an enemy, to write bitter things against us, Job. 13.26.
and that is a heavy temptation.

To difference true Christians from others.
Again, God will have this violence, and striving, as a character of
difference, to show who are bastard professors, and who are not, who will go
to the price of Christianity, and who will not. If men will go to Heaven they
must be violent, they must be at the cost and charges, sometimes to venture
life it self and whatsoever is dear and precious in the world. A man must be
so violent, that he must go thorough all, even death it self, (though it be
a bloody death) to Christ; this discards all lukewarm, carnal professors,
who shake off this violence; in all estates of the Church it is almost equally
difficult to be a sound Christian; for God requires this violence even in the
most peaceable times. Now the truth and religion are countenanced by the laws,
yet the power of it is by many much opposed. Therefore he now that in spite
of reproach, in spite of slander will bear the scorns cast upon the Gospel,
that will go with Christ without the gate, Heb. 13.13.
bearing his reproach, such a man may be said to be thus violent; it is an
easy thing to have so much Christianity as will stand with our commodity, or
with pleasure, etc. but to have so much as will bring us to Heaven (I say) it
is equally hard in all times of the Church, it requires violence to carry us
thorough these lesser oppositions.

Again, To set a higher price on this Kingdom.
God will have us get these things with violence, that we may set a greater
price on them when we have them; when we have things that are gotten by
violence, that are gotten hardly, O we value them much, Heaven is Heaven then,
things that are hardly gotten, and hardly kept, are highly prized.

Again, The excellency of the things.
the excellency of the thing inforceth violence; it is fit that excellent
things should have answerable affections. Now it being a Kingdom, and the
Kingdom of Heaven, what affection is answerable but a violent strong affection?

The necessity.
Again, together with the excellency, the necessity requires it; for the
Kingdom of Heaven, it is a place of refuge, as well as a Kingdom to enrich
us. There were Cities of refuge among the Jews, when a man was followed by the
avenger of blood, he would run as fast as he could to the City of refuge and
there he was safe, so when a guilty conscience pursues us, when there is a
noise of fear in the heart, when Gods judgments awaken us, and hell is open,
when a man apprehends his estate, and is convinced what a one he is, and what
he deserves, of necessity he will fly to the City of refuge, and where is
that, but in the Kingdom of Heaven, in the Church? happy is he that can but
get in at the gate of this Kingdom, there is no doubt of his going in further;
but there must be a striving to enter in at the gate, Luke 13.24.
and then there he shall be hid in his Sanctuary; as the pursued Doves, get
into their nests, and the Connies hide them in the rock, when they get that
over their heads then they are safe: so a Christian, when he is pursued with
conscience, and with the temptations of Satan, he flies to his Sanctuary, do
you wonder that a guilty man should flee to his sanctuary, and the pursued
creatures to their hold and refuge? In this respect the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence.

Herein it is compared to some great rich City that has some great treasure
and riches in it, and it must be besieged, and beleagured a long time, and
those that can enter into it they are made for ever. Or it is like the entrance
or gate of a City where there is striving and thronging, and where besides
enemies are, that if men strive not, they are cut, and mangled, and killed, so
it is in the state of this Kingdom, when a man's eyes be opened, he sees the
devil, and hell behind him, and either he must enteror be damned, and being
entered, it makes him rich, and advances him for ever; so he is strongly
moved to offer violence on both sides: if he look behind him there is the
kingdom of Satan, darkness, and misery, and damnation, (for as Pharaoh
pursued the Israelites when they were got out of his kingdom, so the devil
pursues a man when he is broken out of his dominion) And then before him there
is the kingdom of happiness and glory, the fear of that that follows them,
and the hope of that that is set before them, both make them strive to enter
into the gate of that City.

What should this teach us?

First, Use To judge of our estates by our violence.
let it be a rule of trial to know, and judge of our estate, whether we be
entered into this gate of Heaven or no? our lives are very short, very
uncertain; let us consider if we be in the way to Heaven; what striving, what
struggling, what violence have we ever offered? There are a company that regard
not the means of salvation at all, either in private or public. Some come to
the Word, and hear, but they do not hear it as the Word of God, to be ruled
by it, but as a discourse to delight themselves for the time, to have matter to
speak of, and to censure, not with a spirit of obedience to be guided by it as
the Scepter of the Kingdom. What violence is this, now and then to hear a
Sermon, now and then to read a Chapter, now and then to utter a yawning prayer
between sleeping and waking, perhaps when thou know not what thy self
say? how then would thou have God to regard it? What violence is in the
lives of most Christians, what strength to enforce good actions, how do they
improove the means of salvation? many means are wholly neglected: some perhaps
they use that may stand with their convenience now and then, whereas there must
be an universal care of all the means, there cannot one be neglected without
the loss of grace; and there must be attendance on them with violence. There
is none of the means can profit us without rouzing, and stirring up our
spirits; we cannot hear, nor pray, without drawing up, and raising up our
souls; the flesh will stop the comfortable performance of any action else, and
Satan will kill them in the very birth if he can.

Men violent for outward things.
To search a little deeper, do but compare your courses toward these good
things of Heaven, with your courses toward the world. If there be hope of
preferment, the doors of great men are sure to suffer violence with
favorites. The Courts of justice suffer violence, to have our right in earthly
things. The stages, and such places are thronged, and suffer violence. If a man
could but over-looke the courses of men abroad in the City, he should see one
violent for his pleasures running to the house of the Harlot as a fool to the
stocks. Pro. 7.22.
Another to the exchange to increase his estate. Another to the place of
justice, to detract his neighbor, or to get his own right, perhaps neglecting
his title to Heaven in the mean time. Another to the Court to get favor to
rise to some place of preferment. These places suffer violence: but what
violence does the poor Gospel endure? Alas, it is slighted, and men will
regard that when they can spare time, etc. It is not regarded according to the
worth and value of it; if ever we look to have good by the Gospel, our
dispositions must be violent in some proportion answerable to the excellency of
it.

Alas we may justly turn the complaint on our selves, Heavenly things offer
violence to us
that whilst we spend our strength in violence about the base and mean things
of this life, the Kingdom of Heaven it offers violence to us, and yet we
will none of it. How does God beseech us in the Ministry, We beseech you to
be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. Ezekiel. 18.31.
and Why will ye die O house of Israel? As if the Gospel and grace were
commodities that God were weary off, he comes and puts them upon us whether we
will or no, and yet we refuse them, we are so far from offering violence to
the Gospel and to grace, that God offers violence to us, as if we should do
him a favor to receive the Gospel and to do good to our own souls, and yet
the vile, proud, base heart of man will not regard and receive these heavenly
things. How will it justify Gods sentence at the day of judgment, when he
shall allege there was a discovery of such things unto you, and instead of
violence in seeking them, you slighted and neglected them? Nay; there is a
worse sort of men then these, those that oppose the Kingdom of Heaven in the
means of it, in the persons of it, what kind of men are these, think you?

What violence may stand with wisdom.
Again, we see here that there is a blessed violence that may stand with
judgment. A man cannot be violent and wise in the things of this world,
because the things are mean, and eagerness is above the proportion of them. A
man cannot be violent after honor, or riches, and be as he should be; these
are things that he must leave behind him and they are worse then himself: much
less after filthy pleasures can a man be violent and wise, a man must become a
fool in this respect, 1 Cor 3.18.
as the Scripture says. But in respect of heavenly things a man may be violent
and wise: for there is such a degree of excellency in the things, that no
violence can be too much. Men talk of being too strict and too holy: Can there
be too much of that which we can never have enough of in this world? I speak
it the rather to confound the base judgment that the world has of a holy
disposition, which is carried with a sweet, eager violence to t^ese things.
They are thought to be frantic, to be out of their wits, as they thought St.
Paul was; 2 Cor. 5.13.
but he answers, If we be out of our wits, besides our selves, it is to God.
Christ himself was sometimes laid hands on, as if he had been out of
himself, and as Festus told blessed St. Paul, That much learning had made him
mad, when he saw him eager in the cause of Christ. So many, when they see a man
earnest in the matters of God, they think surely these men have lost their
discretion: No it is the highest discretion in the world to be eager and
violent for things that are invaluable, and if men be not eager for these, they
are fools, they know not how to prize things, the most judicious men here are
most violent, so that it be violence that has eyes in its head, violence
guided with judgment from the knowledge of the excellency of the good things
in the Gospel, I speak of such a violence as that.

Away then with base reproaches, Not to heed idle reproaches.
let us not, be affrighted with the ill reports of idle brains and rotten
hearts of people, that know not the things that belong to the Kingdom of
Heaven. Alas they know not what they say, they are to be pitied and not
censured. Is there any thing that a man should be earnest for, if not for these
things? Were our fowls made to pursue things that are earthly and base, worse
then our selves? Were our wits made only to plod in our temporal, and to
neglect our heavenly calling? If any thing may challenge the best of our
endeavors, the marrow of our labors, the utmost of our spirits and wits,
certainly it is these, grace and glory, that will stand by us, when all things
will fail us. Therefore let not your own hearts besot you, nor the vain
speeches of others affright you. It will be acknowledged by every one ere long,
that there is nothing worth a man's eagerness but these things. The worldling
is violent and eager, he troubles himself and his house about a vain shadow,
for pleasures and profit, etc. and what comes of all his violence? He is turned
naked into his grave and thence into Hell, and there is an end of all the
violence about all other things besides these.

The disposition of true professors
We see then the disposition of true professors, they are violent in respect of
heavenly things. Those therefore that are not earnest in the cause of Religion
when the state of things requires it; they have no Religion in them, they are
not in the state of grace. We must be earnest first of all against our own
sins: Violence must begin there, to subdue all to the Spirit of Christ, to
suffer nothing else to rule there; and after that violence to maintain the
cause of Christ. To contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, to contend with both hands, not to suffer it to be wrested from us or
to be betrayed, and if it be opposed to vindicate it: we must be violent both
to propagate the truth of God, and in case of opposition to vindicate it, Mat.
12.30.
He that is not with me (says Christ) is against me. If a man be not with
Christ, he is against him: it may seem a strange speech, but Christ cannot
abide lukewarm neuters, he cannot abide nullifidians, he cannot endure cold
persons, his stomach cannot brook them, he will cast them up, as he says,
Reve. 3.15, 16. I would thou were hot or cold. A man had better be nothing in
Religion then be lukewarm. The reason is, if a man will have good by any
Religion he must be earnest in it. 1 King. 18.21.
If Baal be God stand for him, if you would have good by him, if the Lord be
God stand for him, be earnest in his cause: if Popery be good then stand for
that, if you hope for good by it, and if our Religion be good, then stand for
that, if you hope for good by it. There is no good received by Religion, if we
be not earnest for it, Religion is not a matter to be dallied in.

Therefore they are bitter, Newters hateful to Christ.
sour, profane scoffing Atheists that trifle with Religion, as if it were no
great matter what it be. They will be earnest in all things else, earnest to
scrape riches to satisfy their base lusts: but for Religion i^ is no matter
what it be, it is a thing not worthy the seeking after, the old Religion or the
new or both or none. These are persons to be taken heed off, breeding a temper
opposite to Religion more then any other, Christ can least brook them: there
is great reason for it; who can brook any favor to be neglected and
slighted? Especially for these excellent things to be under-valued and
slighted, it cannon be that God can endure it. There will be a faction in the
world while the world stands, Christ and Antichrist, Good and evil, light and
darkness, but a man cannot be of both, he must show himself of one side or
other in case of opposition. Therefore the temper of the true pofessor is to be
earnest in case of opposition of Religion, and in case of opportuninity to
advance his Religion; in civil conversation and dealing with men that are
subject to infirmities, he must be gentle and meek. Mat. 3.16. Act. 2.3.
The Spirit of God descended in the shape of a Dove upon Christ, as well as in
fiery tongues upon the Apostles. But in the cause of Christ, in the cause of
Religion, he must be fiery and fervent. No man more mild in his own cause then
Moses, Exo. 32.19.
he was a meek man: but when occasion served, when God was offended, down he
throws the Tables of stone, he forgate himself, though he were the meekest
man in the world otherwise in his own matters: So I say the Spirit is both
meek and gentle as a Dove, and earnest and zealous and hot as fire. In Acts.
2, The Spirit of God comes down as a mighty wind. The wind is a powerful
thing, if it be in a man's body. There is no torment like to windy sicknesses,
as their complaints witness well enough that feel them: and if a little wind
be enclosed in the earth it shakes the whole vast body of the earth. The Spirit
is like wind, it makes men bold, it fills them with a great deal of
eagerness in the cause of God. Again, the Spirit appeared to the Apostles in
the likeness of fire, it inflamed their zeal and made them fervent that were
cold before; Mat. ^6.69, 70
as we see in Peter, the voice of a damsel terrified and affrighted him, but
when the Spirit came upon him, it so fiered him that he accounted it his glory
( Act. 5.41.) to suffer any thing for the cause of Christ. Therefore those that
hope for any thing by religion, let them labor to be for that Religion in good
earnest, they shall find God in good earnest with them else.

Again, Religion takes not away, but orders the affections.
hence we see that Religion takes not away the earnestness of the affections,
it does direct them to better things, it changes them in regard of the object,
It takes not away any thing in us, but turns the stream another way; Violence
requires the height and strength of the affections: Religion takes them not
away, but turns them that way that they should go. If a stream run
violently one way, if it be derived by skill and cunning another way, it will
run as fast that way when it is turned as it did before. So it is with the
heart of man: Religion takes nothing away that is good, but lifts it up, it
elevateth and advances it to better objects. There are riches and honors and
pleasures when a man is in Christ: but they are in a higher kind, therefore
they draw affections and greater affections then other things: but these
affections are purified, they run in a better, in a cleaner channel: whereas
before they ran amain to earthly, dirty things below, the same affections (of
love, of desire and zeal) do remain still, he that was violent before is as
violent still, only the stream is turned: For example take St. Paul for an
instance, he was as earnest when he was a Christian as before, he was never
more eager after the shedding of the blood of Christians and breathing out
slaughter against them, as he was afterward in breathing after the Salvation
of Gods people and a desire to enlarge the Gospel. Zaccheus was never so
covetous of the world before, as he was covetous of Heaven when he became a
Christian. I say Religion takes not away any thing, only it turns the
stream: But it is a miracle for the stream to be turned, it was God that
turned Jordan: so it is a greater work then man can do to turn the streams
of man's affections that run amain to earthly things, to make them run
upward, it is only Gods work. This is the excellency of Religion, it ennobles
our nature, that which is natural it makes it heavenly and spiritual, that a
man shall be as earnest for God and good things as ever he was before after the
things of this life. So much for that point.

The third thing is the success. The success of this violence


The violent take it by force.
The earnestness of affection, and violence, it is successful, they take it.
The good things of God, they are here compared to a Fort, or to a well fenced
and well armed City strengthened with bulwarks and munition, that is a long
time besieged, and at length is taken; for this clause, The violent take it by
force, it does as well show the issue of these violent ones striving for the
Kingdom of Heaven, to wit, that they do at length take it, as the manner how
it is taken, Doct.
namely, by force. The violent, and only the violent, and all the violent, do
at length certainly obtain what they strive for, the Kingdom of Heaven.

Why? The violent have promises. Mat. 7.7. Rev. 3.19, 21.
1. Because it is promised to the violent, Knock and it shall be opened unto
you, Be zealous, and repent, (that is the means to cure all former
transgressions, repent, and be zealous, and do the former works) and To him
that overcommeth, (that is, he that is earnest, that will never leave off till
he has overcome) to him will I grant to sit with me on the throne, Rev. 2.7.
and To him that overcommeth will I give to eat of the tree of life; all the
promises are to him that overcomes, to him that is zealous and earnest.

They have a victorious spirit.
Then again, the spirit whereby a man is earnest, is a victorious spirit, as
Christians have the Word and promise to build on, that leads them on, and
incourageth them: so they are led by a mighty Spirit, that has the force of
wind and fire, that beats down all before it, that breaks thorough all
oppositions, and difficulties, being lead with a divine Spirit, what earthly
thing can oppose that which is divine? it brings under, and subdues all;
therefore the violent take it, the Spirit of God seizing upon, and possessing
the heart, and carrying it with strength after these things.

God has set Heaven at this rate.
And then only the violent take it, because God has set it at this rate, he
that hears, and does, he that perseveres to the end, he that sells all for
the pearl, for the treasure in the field, there must be nothing retained, all
must be parted with, we must be at any cost, and charge, and peril, and all
little enough; it is offered to us upon these terms of parting with all, of
enduring any thing, of breaking thorough all difficulties; only such, and all
such shall obtain it by force.

The violent only can prize it.
And again, only the violent, because only they can prize it when they have
it. They only can prize grace, and Heaven, they know how they come by it, it
cost them their pleasures, and profits, it cost them labor, and danger, and
loss of favor with men, and this pains, and cost, and loss, it indeares the
state of grace, and glory to them: for God will never bring any man to Heaven,
till he have raised his affections to that pitch to value grace and glory above
all things in the world. Therefore only those shall take it by violence; for
only those show that they set a right price on the best things, they weigh
them in the balance of the Sanctuary, they value things as God would have them
valued.

But, is not the Kingdom of Heaven, Ob.
and grace free? therefore what needs violence to a thing that is free, and
freely offered?

I answer, Answ.
because it is free, therefore it is violently taken: Freedom of grace
inforceth violence.
for alas, if it were offered to us upon condition of our exact performing of
the Law, it might dampe the spirits of men, as indeed usually such if they be
not better informed, they end their days in despair: but being freely
offered, The Publicans and Harlots (says Christ) go into the Kingdom of God
before the proud Pharisees; because it is free, it is free to sinners that
feel the burden of their sins: Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, etc. Mat. 11.28.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat.
5.3, 6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, they shall be
satisfied. Thereupon he that has a guilty conscience, he makes haste, and
offers violence, when he hears of free pardon. What makes the condition of the
devils so desperate? There is no hope of free pardon to them, what makes men so
eagerly to embrace the Gospel notwithstanding their sins? Because it is
freely offered. Thereupon it was that the Gentiles were so glad of it, that had
been sinners and under Satan's Kingdom before, and that makes miserable
persons (that are humbled with afflictions and abasement in the world) glad of
it; it being so great a thing, the Kingdom of Heaven, the favor of God, and
freedom from misery, and so freely offered. It is so far from hindering
violence because it is free, that therefore the humble afflicted souls that
desire grace are the more eager after it. The proud Pharisees thought the
Kingdom of Heaven belonged only to them; and therefore they despised Christ,
and despised the Gospel, because it was propounded to sinners, and to such
mean persons that they thought were viler then themselves: but now when the
meaner sort of people, and others that were abased with crosses in the world
saw what a kind of Gospel it was; what great matters were offered, and that
it was offered freely; they justified wisdom, Mat 11.19. Luke 7.29, 30
and the counsel of God which others despised, and pressed for it with
violence. Holy violence hopeful.


It is little comfort to hear of the excellency, and the necessity of these
heavenly things, if there were not hope of them. Hope stirs up diligence.
Hope stirs up diligence and endeavor in the things of this world; what
makes men adventure to the Indies, east and west? They hope for a voyage that
shall enrich them all their life; hope in doubtful things stirs up
industry. What makes the poor husbandman diligent to plow and to sow? ^he
hope that he shall have a harvest; yet this is under a providence that may
guide it another way. But spiritual things are more certain, therefore hope in
spiritual things must needs stir up endeavor, we need not call them into
question. To use means constantly.
And as it stirs up to diligence, so it stirs up in the use of the means,
not to give over till we see our hopes accomplished. Then in the third place
hope of success, To wait.
that we shall not loose our labor, it inables and strengthens us to bear
the tediousness of the time, and the incombrance of afflictions, and
whatsoever is between us and the thing we expect, though we have not that
comfort from God that we would have, yet it makes us wait upon God.

Therefore when he says, Christians endeavors successful.
the violent take it by force, it is to encourage us, the violent, eager,
strong endeavors of a Christian in the ways of God, in the means of
salvation, they are no successelesse endeavors.

He labors for that he knows he shall have, his violence is not in vain; he
that is violent in good things has a promise, he that wrastleth with God
shall overcome, and he that overcommeth shall have a crown, here is a promise
to build on: therefore here is encouragement to be earnest and violent, he
shall overcome, he shall enter the Castle at the last, if he continue striving
and give not over. Hence there is a difference to be observed between the
endeavors of a Christian and of three sorts of other men. Difference between
the endeavors of a Christian, and


Enemies of the Gospel.
First of all, if those only that offer violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, that
set on it with encouragement, shall get it and that by force, what a great
difference then is between them, and those that in a contrary way offer
violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, those that wrong Christ in his
members, and hinder the means of salvation, what promise have they to speed?
Surely they have no promise nor hope at all, only their malice carries them
amain in spite; because the Gospel reveals their hollownesse, and
hypocrisy to all men, and forces upon them a necessity to be other men then
they list to be for the present, therefore they are eager in hating the
Gospel. There are threatenings enough against such as are violent against the
Gospel, they are violent in vain, Acts 9 5.
for they kick against the pricks; they run themselves against a stone wall,
and they shall dash themselves against it. Those that have ill will to Sion
shall perish, Psalm. 2.
there is one sits in Heaven that laughs all their attempts to scorn. A
Christian has comfort in his endeavors; there is hope of good success though
there be inward and outward opposition, he shall prevail. Those that are
enemies have nothing but discouragement, they shall be as grass on the house
top, Psalm. 129.6, etc
that no man blesses but is cursed of every one, no man bestows a good word
on them, it is a fruitless endeavor, they are under a curse.

Again, it shows us how to judge of the courses of other men, Worldly men.
that are violent in other courses about the world. A Christian he takes his
Kingdom at the last and injoyes it for ever: but those that are violent for
the world after pleasures, after baser things then themselves, alas when they
have it, they have but a shadow and they become shadows in embracing it:
Vanity imbraceth vanity and how soon are they stripped of all. If a man by
violence scrape a great estate, he must leave it shortly; here he found it, and
here he must leave it in spite of his heart ere long; and all is but vanity in
the censure of him that knew all things the best of any man; even Solomon, that
had gone through the variety of all things. And often times they miss of that
they labor for, They do not rest that they get in hunting; Pro. 12.27.
they hunt after preferment and after riches, but often times they do not enjoy
them, and if they do, they get the curse of God with them and ere long they
are stripped of all; but here is that that may strengthen our endeavors, The
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it, it is not an
endeavor that is lost.

Sluggish Christians.
Then again, this shows that the state of true Christians is different from
the state of persons that are carried to good things, but not violently; The
violent take it, he surprizeth the city at the last, he lays his siege and
will not remoove till death* he will not give over till he have it, he will
have it or he will dye in the business, and so at last he obtaines his desire.
The sluggish careless man he goes a little way. As Agrippa said to Paul, he
was almost persuaded to be a Christian, Act 26.28.
so it is with such men, in some things they will be Christians, but there they
are at a stand, they will go no farther, and so all they have done is to no
purpose, Pro. 13 4.
The sluggard desires and wishes, but his soul has nothing. A sluggish,
cold, lazy Christian he loses all his pains. If a man be to go ten miles,
and go but nine, and there sit down, he shall never come to his journies end.
If a man will give but 7 or 8. shillings for that which is worth 10. he shall
go without it. Grace and Glory are set at this price, there is required such
strength of labor and endeavor and violence: therefore without this a man
shall never attain it, unless he stretch himself to such a pitch, 1 Pet. 1.9.
He shall never come to the end of his Faith, the salvation of his soul, to
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. The sluggard wishes and gets nothing,
the reason is, because he is a sluggard, because he will not strive, but the
striver gets the fort and has all in it, and is a man made for ever.

Pro. 26.26.
The sluggard thinks himself wiser then many men that can give a reason. The
sluggish discreet Christian, I warrant you he has reasons for what he does.
It is not good to be too earnest, it will incur the disfavour of such a man
or such a man, J shall be accounted so and so for my pains: But a wise man he
sees the excellency of the things, and he knows that his courses and his
conscience will justify him at the last, and therefore he goes on what ever
comes of it.

God is not so weary of these precious things, The preciousnes of the things
require violence.
these precious jewels of grace and glory, as to force them upon us. Is the
Kingdom of Heaven such a slight thing, that it should be obtruded to us
whether we will or no? Shall we think to have it when our hearts tell us we
esteem other things better? No; there are none ever come to Heaven but their
hearts are wrought to such an admiration of grace and glory, that they
undervalue all things to it: therefore there is no hope for any to obtain it,
but he that takes it by violence. We see Moses esteemed the basest thing in the
Church better then the greatest excellencies in the world that men are so
violent after, he esteemed the very afflictions of Gods people better then the
treasures and pleasures of sin for a season, nay then the pleasures of a
Court. When men shall esteem the base things of the world, above all the
treasures of Heaven, above the state of Christianity, they have no hope of
coming there: they may pretend God is merciful and Christ dyed, etc. I but
whosoever he brings to salvation; he works such a sense of misery in them and
such an apprehension of grace and of the means of grace that there is an
undervaluing of all other things. God will not bring them to Heaven that shall
not glorify him when they come there, and how shall they glorify him here, or
there when they value the world and these base things that they must leave
behind them more then the things of Heaven? This is the reason that few are
saved, because they content themselves with easy, dull and drowsy
performances, and never consider with what proportion they are carried to
things: when they had rather loose the advantage of that which will bring
everlasting good to their souls, then loose the petty commodities of this
world and yet think themselves good Christians, what a delusion is this? It is
the violent only that are successful, they take it by force.

Ob.
I but what if the opposition grow more and more.

Answ.
Then the grace of God and courage will grow and increase more and more; Grace
increases with opposition.
As Luther said well, the more violent the adversaries were the more free and
bold was he. So the more the enemies rage the more the spirit of grace grows
in Gods people, it inceraseth by opposition. As Noah's Arc, the higher the
waters were, the nearer still it was carried to Heaven. So we are nearer to God
and nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven, the more opposition swells and rages,
True courage grows with opposition. As the Palm Tree rises up against the
burden that presses it down: so the divine spirit being a heavenly thing, and
all opposition below of the Devil and divellish minded men being but earthly,
what are they to the divine Spirit which sets us on and encourages us? They
cannot quell it, but the Spirit grows more and more in opposition. The
Apostles they ran all from Christ when he was to be crucified, they had but a
little measure of the Spirit, but when the Holy Ghost was shed more plentifully
on them, they began to stand courageously for the cause of Christ when there
was more opposition; the Spirit grew more and more, till they sealed the Truth
with their blood. Exhortation to holy violence.
Therefore though opposition of enemies and their fury and rage grow: let us
know whose cause we manage and with what assurance of success, the violent at
length shall take it by force, Let us meditate upon this that success is tied
to violence: therefore when you pray to God, if he seem to deny your request,
offer violence, wrestle with him, let him not go without a blessing, when he
seems to be an enemy, as sometimes he does, to try our strength, we must use
an holy violence; when we are dull and not fit to pray, nor fit for holy
things, Let us stir up the Spirit of God in us, and labor to get our of that
estate, let us use violence and violence will overcome at the last. A man that
has the Spirit of God gets the victory of whatsoever opposes him. If there be
snares offered from the world he withstands them, if Satan come with his
temptations he resists him, he has a promise for it, Jam. 4.7.
resist the Devil and he will flee. Let us hold out and we shall get the
victory and overcome even God himself, how much more all other things?
Therefore when either opposition without or indisposition within sets upon us
in the course of Religion and Piety, let us think here now is time and place
for violence. I know if I set my self about it J shall have the victory and
the Crown. A Christian is always in a hopeful state and condition, he has
somewhat to encourage him, he has arguments to prevail over the state of
opposition, he knows he shall win all at last if he go on, and that makes
him courageous in what estate soever he is. Let us not be discouraged to hear
of opposition. And let us be encouraged when we hear of good things, when we
hear that the Kingdom of Heaven and grace is offered in the preaching of the
Gospel. Pro. 8.34. Romans 14.17.
Let us attend upon the posts of wisdoms doors, and not give over till we
come to pea^^ of conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost. If we hear of comfort
in the Word of God against distress of conscience, let us never give over till
we find it. If we hear that God is a God hearing Prayer, let us never leave
knocking at Heaven Gate, never leave wrestling till our prayers be heard, when
we hear what ill is to be avoided, and what good is offered; let us not cease
till we avoid the one, and obtain the other, The violent take it by force.

The last point is, The time when this violence began.
the date of time from whence this Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence.

From the days of John Baptist until now.
Was there not a Kingdom of Heaven that suffered violence before John Baptists
time, Quest.
did the Kingdom of God begin then, was Christ a King, and was Heaven opened
only then?

I answer no, Answ.
but now the things of God were more gloriously discovered; therefore John
1.51. Henceforth you shall see Heaven opened. The Kingdom of Heaven was opened
now by the preaching of the Gospel more gloriously then before. Therefore the
state of the Gospel is called the Kingdom of Heaven, partly in regard of the
times before, and partly in regard of the times after.

The Law was full of servile bondage to Ceremonies, Bondage of Ceremonies in
the Law.
it was a heavy dark state, they were laden with a multitude of Ceremonies,
which were but cold things to the spirit of a man that desires peace, though
they were Ceremonies of Gods appointing, yet they were but outward empty things
in comparison, weak and beggarly elements, as the Apostle says, Gal. 4.9.
They were costly, and painful, and cold things, that had not the efficacy of
spirit in them.

John's preaching and living powerful.
And secondly, then it was entayled to the Jews only. Now since Christ's time,
it is enlarged, and being more large and free, this blessed estate is called a
Kingdom, John Baptist now opening Christ clearly, and a better state then the
Church had yet enjoyed, when people saw an end of the Ceremonies, and the
beginning of the glorious liberty in Christ, this made them violently set on
them.

Again, John Baptist made way for Christ, levelling the souls of men by his
powerful preaching, and his holy life; he taught them in what need they stood
of Christ; he was the messenger sent before Christ for that end, he was as the
morning Star to the Sun, he was powerful in his preaching, and holy in his
life, he told every man his own: he told the Pharisees that they were a
generation of vipers; he showed men their state by nature, and told them of a
better state, that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand; Mat. 3.2.
and although he wrought no miracles, yet himself was a miracle; to teach such
holy doctrine, and to live an austere holy life in those evil days, it was no
less then a miracle; therefore this violence to the Kingdom of Heaven it has
the date from John Baptists time, from his preaching, not from his birth, he
being so excellent a preacher, no wonder there should be violence.

This shows the reason why the Gospel in later times was embraced so
greedily, Why the Gospel in Luthers time was embraced with violence.
when Luther began to preach, alas people had been in a worse condition then
Jewish in respect of Ceremonies, and otherwise foolish idle men they will set
God to schole, they will have some fooleries always that they will make as much
of as of the worship of God, and so it had been in the times before Luther. In
Saint Austins time, he was pestered with many vain ceremonies, and good man he
yielded to the stream and custom in many things, though he could hardly
endure the slavery of those things. Now when the times grew better, it was no
wonder that the world embraced the Gospel with violence; as in Luthers time,
when there was a freedom proclaimed from those beggarly rudiments and
traditions. Antichrist had hampered the consciences of men with an intolerable
mass of foolish groundless ceremonies, making them equal with the Word of
God, as we see in the Counsel of Trent; and this vexed the consciences of
people like scorpions, as it is Rev. 9.5. they oppressed the people with a
multitude of weights and burdens, which when people could not assent unto, it
stung their consciences. No wonder then if people thronged after Luther when he
opened the doctrine of free justification by faith, that the consciences of men
were not to be hampered with these things; He taught that Gods people were only
to have a few ceremonies for present order, but for the rest, to trouble men's
consciences, and to make them of equal value with the Word of God, he showed
it was an abominable doctrine and wrote against it learnedly and sweetly: and
therefore it is no marvel though the truths he taught were soon and
chearefully by multitudes embraced.

Why the Gospel now is disesteemed.
And the reason why now the Gospel begins to be so little embraced and
esteemed, is because, by reason of the long continuance of it, we are weary of
this heavenly Manna. As the people in Saint John Baptists time, as eager as
they were after John's preaching, John 5.35.
yet it was but for a time that they rejoiced in his light, they grew weary of
him; we never felt the burden of those Romish Ceremonies, and therefore now
grow weary of our liberty, whereas in the beginning of Luthers time, because
they were eased from many beggarly, and which is worse, tyrannical ceremonies
of Rome, therefore with much joy and eagerness they embraced the truth when it
came to be preached amongst them.

To be thankful for liberty from Popish thraldom.
Therefore we are to praise God for the liberty of the Church at this time, that
we have the Word of God to rule our consciences, and that other matters are not
pressed on us but as matters of decency and order. Alas if we were in bondage
to those proud Popish wretches, our consciences would be inthralled to a world
of snares.

Last of all, From the days of the Baptist and so forward the Kingodme of
Heaven did suffer violence, because from that time forward the Spirit began to
be more plentifully given. Christ comes with his Spirit, which is the soul of
our soul, and the life of our life, the Spirit it is like a mighty wind that
mooves the ship in the water. The ship is becalmed it cannot moove unless
there be a wind, so the soul cannot moove to that which is good without the
Spirit. Now there is more abundance of the Spirit since the coming of Christ.
Christ who is the King of his Church, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, he reserved
the abundance of the Spirit till his own coming, especially till he entered
into Heaven, then the Spirit came in abundance. Joel 2.28.
It was powered upon al flesh, it was but (as it were) dropped before, but then
it was powered out. Then the Gentiles came in, and the Apostles received the
Spirit in abundance, therefore no wonder that there was violence offered to the
Kingdom of Heaven, then hence we may observe,

That the more clearly Christ, The Spirit effectual in the Ministry of the
Gospel
and the blessed mysteries of Christ are opened, the more effectual the Spirit
is, and the more heavenly men are, and more eagerly disposed to spiritual
things.

The reason and ground of it is in nature, the affections follow the discovery
of the excellency of things. When first the necessity of being in Christ is
laid open; that there are but two Kingdoms, the Kingdom of Christ, and the
kingdom of the devil, and that a man must either enter into the Kingdom of
Christ or be of the Devils kingdom still.

The excellency of Christ's Kingdom.
And when secondly together with the necessity, the excellency of Christ's
Kingdom is discovered; that it is a state that will make us all Kings, a state
wherein we shall at length overcome all opposition of hell, sin, death, the
wrath of God, that whereas earthly Kingdoms are opposed and inthralled, and
one dash against another, the Kingdom of Heaven is a state that subdues all
that is against it by little and little: (as Christ overcame death, and the
wrath of his Father, and now rules in Heaven in his person, so all his members
shall overcome all in time) when the excellency of this Kingdom is laid open
to the understandings of men, is it a wonder that their affections are set on
fire, will any thing do it more then such a Kingdom?

Hope of obtaining it.
Then in the third place, when it is hopeful too, when together with the
necessity and excellency of it, there is assurance given us that we shall
obtain it if we strive for it, when it is offered freely, even grace and
glory, and we are entreated to receive grace, Come unto me ye that are
weary, etc. nay we are threatened if we do not come, and we have example of the
worst sort of people; of Zaccheus, and the poor woman out of whom the devils
were cast, of Peter that denied Christ, of Paul that persecuted him, such as
had been wretched persons, that have come out of Satan's kingdom, when these
things are propounded, and understood, and apprehended, men that are in their
wits, that are not besotted by the devil, men that are not in love with
damnation, and hate their own souls, they will embrace them. When they see a
state discovered in Christ wherein they are above Angels (in some sort) above
death, and hell, that they triumph over all in Christ, that because it is as
sure that they shall be crowned Conquerors with Christ in Heaven as if they
were there already. When it is propounded thus hopefully, who would not offer
violence to this Kingdom? When John Baptist laid it open so clearly to them,
this is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29.
it made them offer violence to it.

And this is another reason why in the latter, the second spring of the
Gospel, (for there was a Winter in the time of Popery, it being a Kingdom of
darkness, keeping people in ignorance) so many nations so suddenly embraced
the truth; Luther was a man that was wondrously exercised and afflicted in
conscience, this made him relish the doctrine of justification by grace in
Christ, and thereupon to lay open the mysteries of Christ, and the bondage of
Popery; and this being once a foot, the peoples minds being prepared out of
the sense of their former bondage, whole kingdoms came in presently. As in the
Spring time when there comes a fine Sunshine day, the prisoners are let
loose out of the earth after a cold winter: So after the winter of affliction
and persecution inward and outward came the Sunshine of the Gospel and made
all come forth and flourish presently. Wheresoever Christ is taught powerfully
and plainly and the excellency, and necessity of the sta^e we have by him, and
that men may partake of it, if they be not false to their own souls, there is
always violence offered to these things, because where the riches of Christ
are opened, the Spirit goes with it, and goes with violence that it carries all
before it.

Why Papist soppose preaching.
Hence again, we may see that Popish spirits are witty in opposing the
unfolding of the Gospel in the Ministry, especially where there is conscience
and skill to unfold Christ plainly, they know when Christ is opened all their
fopperies and inventions will grow base, the more Christ is unfolded, the more
people will grow in hatred of Antichrist, the more they s^e the light, the more
they will hate darkness, for this cause they oppose the unfolding of the
Gospel to the understanding of the people, they would keep people in
ignorance that they may make them dote upon them. It argues a disposition
dangerous, that shall never taste of the good things of God, to be in a bitter
temper against the unfolding of the Gospel of Christ: For we see here the
discovery of it makes it wondrous effectual, John Baptist laying open Christ
clearer then he was discovered before, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence.

Here we are instructed, How to get thi^ holy violence.
what way we should take if we would bring our selves or others into a temper
fit for Heaven, to an earnest temper after holy things, not to begin with
dead outward actions; but to begin as becomes the condition of reasonable
men, as God deals with man, befitting the nature of man; begin with the
understanding. Let us meditate seriously of the truth of Christ's coming in the
flesh, of the end of his coming, To dissolve the works of the Devil, to bring
us out of the state of nature to a better condition, meditate of the excellency
of the state of grace, of the eternity and excellency of the state of glory.
Let us warm our hearts with these things, when a man has once these things
and believes them, let him be cold and dull if he can; And so if we would gain
others to a fit disposition for Heaven, let us labor to instruct them what
their state by nature is, what Kingdom they are borne in, that they are liable
to Hell and damnation, that they are under the possession of the strong man,
the Devil, if the stronger man bring them not out and dispossess him; and let
them know withal the infinite love and mercy of God in Christ, offering a
better state, giving the Gospel and promising his Spirit with his truth, and
if they belong to God this will work upon them or else nothing will. Other
courses to punish men in their purse, or imprison them, or the like, may subdue
them to outward conformity, but if we would bring their souls to Heaven, le^
us endeavor to enlighten their understandings to see the danger they are in,
and to see the riches of grace and salvation that is proffered in Christ, and
this will compel them to come in, Luke 14.23. there will be no need of any
other compulsion, no more then there can be need to bid a man escape away that
sees wild beasts about him, or to bid a guilty person to flee to the City of
refuge and take hold of the Horns of the Altar. Let John Baptist come before
Christ to make way for him, and presently the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and after Christ's time when the Spirit was more abundantly given and
the Gospel more clearly opened, the world stooped to the Gospel, ^he Gospel
at length overcame the proud Scepter of the Roman Empire, they laid their
Crowns down before Christ's Gospel: the Cross of Christ gat above the Crown
in the preaching of the Gospel it was so powerful. Thus if we would have the
number of Heaven enlarged, let us desire that Gods truth may be opened plainly
and powerfully. John Baptist was a plain and powerful preacher, a man of a
holy life, they al reverenced John as a holy man, thereupon his doctrine came
to be so effectual: This is the way whereby God will do good to those he
delights in, For others that are bitter Atheists whom God has appointed to
damnation, the Gospel hardens them and makes them worse. The Pharisees were
the worse by the preaching of Christ, when the Gospel is preached, some are
made worse by it and malign and persecute it as far as they dare, as the
Apostle says, God is glorified in the damnation of such bitter opposers. We
are not to look to gain all by preaching: those that withstand it are sent by
it with the more just damnation to Hell, but those that do belong to him are
gained this way.

Let us labor therefore for a clear manifestation of Christ, there is the
treasure of all goodness in Christ, whatsoever is necessary to bring us to
Heaven, and the more he is discovered and applied the more we are enriched with
grace and comfort. Times of change may come, and if times of opposition and
persecution come not, yet temptations will come, and the hour of death will
come, when we shall have occasion to use all the strength and comfort we have,
and the more dangerous the times are, the more sound and clear knowledge of
Christ we should labor for, and that will breed this holy violence that shall
break through all oppositions whatsoever.

FINIS.
THE CHVRCHES Complaint and Confidence.

In three Sermons, By the late Reverend and Learned Divine RICHARD SIBS, Doctor
in Divinity, Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at
Grayes-Inne.

LAM. 1.20. Behold O Lord for I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, mine
heart is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled, abroad the sword
bereaveth, at home there is as death.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for Nicholas Bourne and Rapha Harford, 1639.

THE CHVRCHES COMPLAINT AND Confidence.
ISAIAH 64.6, 7, 8. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousn^sse are as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our
iniquities like the wind have taken us away.

And there is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to
take hold of thee: for thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us,
because of our iniquities.

But now O Lord thou art our Father, we are the clay, and thou our potter, and
we are all the work of thine hands.


THE words are part of a blessed form of prayer, prescribed to the Church long
before they were in captivity. It begins at the 15. verse of the former
Chapter, Look down from Heaven, behold from the habitation of thy holiness,
etc. The blessed Prophet Isa^ah, was carried with the wings of Prophetical
spirit over many years, and sees the time to come, the time of the Captivity;
and God by his Spirit does direct them a Prayer, and this is part of the form.
For God in mercy to his people, as he foresaw before what would become of them;
so he vouchsafes them comfort before hand, and likewise he prescribes a form
of prayer before hand. Forms of prayer use^ull.
It is very useful to use forms; the 102. Psalm, it is a form of pouring
out the soul to God, when any man is in misery, as you see in the Preface (but
that by the way) These verses are a part of a form prescribed for the pouring
forth an afflicted soul, We are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousness, etc. The words they are,

Division of the words.
First, an humble confession of sin.

And first of the sins of their nature, of their persons themselves, We are
all as an unclean thing.

And then of the sins of actions, all our righteousness is as filthy rags.

And then in the third place, a confession of the sin of non-proficiencie, of
obduration, and sencelessenesse, that notwithstanding the corrections of God,
they were little the better, There is none that calls upon thy Name, or that
stirs up himself to take hold of thee.

In the second place there is an humble complaint of the miserable estate they
were in by their sins, We all fade as a leaf, ^ur iniquiti^s like the wind
have taken us away, them have hid thy face from us, and consumed us, because of
our iniquities. The complaint is set forth in these four clauses.

And then an humble supplication, and deprecation to God, in verse 8. and so
forward. Now Lord thou art our Father, we are the clay, thou art the potter, we
are all the work of thy hands, etc. These be the parcells of this portion of
Scripture.

But we are all as an unclean thing, etc.
Here is first an humble confession. Benefit of afflictions.
And first observe in general, what afflictions will do, especially
afflictions sanctified; that which all the Prophetical Sermons could not do,
that which all the threatenings could not do, affliction now does. Now when
they were in captivity and base estate, they fall a humbling themselves. So the
Prodigal, nothing could humble him but afflictions. By the waters of Babylon
we sat down and wept; all the denuntiations of judgments before they came to
the waters of Babylon could not make them weep. One affliction will do more
then twenty Sermons, when God teaches and chastizeth too, when together with
teaching there is correction, then it is effectual. And this is the reason of
Gods course, why when nothing else will do, he humbles his people with
afflictions; because he cannot otherwise teach them.

Affliction remooves the fuel of sin.
Affliction withdrawes that which is the fuel of sin: for what does our
sinful disposition feed on? upon pleasures, and vanities, upon the honors
of this life, and riches, etc. Now when affliction either takes these things
away, or imbitters them if we have them: then that which sin carried us to,
and that we fed our own base earthly lusts with, being gone, when a man is
stripped of these, he begins to know himself what he is; he was drunk before.
I deem a man in prosperity little better then drunk, he knows neither God,
nor himself, nor the world, he knows it not to be as a vain world: he knows
not himself to be vanity, to be an empty creature, except he consist in God,
and make his peace with him; he knows not God to be ^uch a holy God, and such
an angry God for sin: but when affliction comes, and withdrawes, and strips
him of those things that made him fierce against God, then he begins to know
God, and to tremble at the judgments of God when he begins to smart: he begins
to know himself to be a mad man, and a fool, and a sot; he did not know
himself before in his jollity: and then he knows the world indeed as a vain
world. Blessed be that affliction that makes us know a gracious and good God,
and the creature to be a vain creature, and our selves out of the favor of
God to be nothing. You see what afflictions will do.

God does use to break men, as men use to break horses, they ride them over
hedge and ditch, and over plowed lands, uneven grounds, and gall them with the
spur, and with the bit, and all to make them tractable: and then afterward
they ride them gently, and meekely, and rather so then otherwise. So God is
feign to carry his children over plowed lands, he is feign to break them in
their wickedness, to bring their ways upon their heads, he is feign to gall
them, and humble them every kind of way that they may carry him; that he may
bring their spirits under him, that he may lead them in the ways that lead
to their own comfort. Use


Let us never murmr therefore at Gods hand, Not to murmr at Gods hand.
but willingly yield at the first: what does a stubborn horse get, but the
spur, and stripes? and what does a man get that stands out, when God comes to
humble him by affliction, and intends his good? nothing but more stripes. To
come to the parts.

We are all as an unclean thing, etc.
Here first you see there is an humble confession. I will not enlarge my self
in the point of humiliation; but speak a little because this is the day of
humiliation, the occasion is for humiliation, Humiliation necessary.
all this is to bring us low, to humble (...), to make us know our selves.
Without humiliation Christ will never be sweet unto us, and the benefit of
health, etc. will never be precious to us. I mean by humiliation when God
humbles us, and we humble our selves, when we join with God, when Gods
humbling of us, and our humbling of our selves go together, then mercy is
sweet, and favor and protection is sweet; when God powers his judgments on
others, and spares us.

Kinds of humiliation.
Now humiliation, it is either real, or inward, or verbal.

Real humiliation indeed, that is, our humbling our selves by fasting,
especially when it is joined with reformation of our wicked ways, or else it
is a mockery of God, as it is in Isaiah 58. to hang down the head for a while,
and in the mean time to have a hard heart, to shut up our bowels to our
brethren: but that is a real kind of humiliation when we think our selves
unworthy of the creatures of meat or drink, of any refreshing: for this
humiliation of fasting is a kind of profession (though we speak not so) that
we are unworthy of these things. But all is nothing, without inward humiliation
of the soul; verbal humiliation is in words (as we shall see after in
confession) and it must come from inward humiliation of spirit. Use.


To labor for humiliation.
Therefore (considering it is here the first disposition of Gods people) let us
labor to work upon our selves those considerations that may make us humble, I
will h^^^e a few.

First to bring our selves to the glass of the Law, Helps to humili^ation.
examine our selves how short we have been of every Commandment. Consider our
obedience to the Law.


But especially bring our selves to the Gospel; we hope to be saved by Christ:
and have we mourned for our sins as one mourns for his first borne? To the
Gospel
Our sins have wounded Christ. Have we preferred Christ in our thoughts above
all the things in the world, have they all been dung to us? Have we had that
blessed esteem of the gracious promises of the Gospel and the prerogatives
therein set forth, that they have been so precious to us, that we have
undervalued all to them, as S. Paul did? A base esteem of the Gospel is a
great sin, How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? Put case we
be not enemies to the Ministry and to holiness of life expressed in the
Gospel, as many cursed creatures are: yet a base esteem and undervaluing in
our thoughts is a thing punisheable; How shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation? Have we walked worthy of the dignity we are called to by the
Gospel? Have we carried our selves so in spiritual things, as to rule our
base lusts? Have we been careful of private Prayer, to offer our selves to God
as Priests? Are we not pressed in S. Paul's Epistles, To carry our selves worthy
of our profession, and have we done so? Let us bring our carriage and see how
proportionable it is to Gods advancing of us in these glorious times of the
Gospel and this will bring us on our knees.

We are ashamed of a little unkindnesse to men; But when we consider how unkind
we have been to God, that thought not his dear Son and Heaven and happiness
too much for us; besides other favors that he protects and clothes and feeds
us every day, and yet we have not been answerable: these considerations would
humble us proportionable to our carriage to men: Can we be ashamed to offer an
unkindnesse to men, and are we not ashamed, cannot we be abased with this that
we have carried our selves so toward God? It comes from Atheism and
infidelity of heart, that either we believe not these things to be good, or
else that we have not our part and portion in them, could we ever be so dead
and dull hearted else?

Call to mind our especial sins.
Again, that we may be humbled, let us call to mind, now in this day of
Humiliation, our special sins, we may soon know them, our consciences and
our enemies will upbraid us for them, and we are loath to hear of them above
all, either by the ministry or by our friends, we wish above all that the
preacher would not speak of them and fret it he do, and our hearts run upon
them above all. So let us search our false hearts which way they run: and now
in the day of our abasement, let us think what would lie heaviest on our
conscience, if God should take us now with sickness or sudden death; let us
think with our selves what is the sin that would afflict me most? that would
stagger me most, that would shake my Faith most? whether it be filthiness, or
profaneness, or swearing, or injustice, and whether have I made satisfaction
or no? Let me examine, if God should strike me with his Arrow now, what sin
would rob me of my comfort and make me afraid to yield my soul to God. Now
think of it, his is the way to be humbled: you may now bring your selves to
consider of that that at other times you will not give your selves leisure to
do. What are days of fasting for, but to give our selves leisure, that we may
not think of meat and drink and business? These days should be days of
rest, that we may think of that that concerns our souls: take the advantage
when thou rests from thinking of other business, think with thine own soul
what will lie heaviest upon thy soul. This is required to Humiliation; this
real Humiliation that is outward, it is a protestation of the inward, and
verbal Humiliation is but an expression of what we do inwardly.

There are two things wondrous necessary before the soul can be in the right
frame it should be in.

First the soul must apprehend deeply what distance it has from God, what
alienates it from God before it can be wise: and it must be estranged from that
before ever it can come to couple and join with God; when the soul apprehends
what seperates it from God and conceives as it should do of that, then it will
be the readier to apprehend God and then all duties will come off easily.
Therefore let us first of all work upon our own souls to be humbled and by
all the helps that can be.

The uncertainty of life.
And to help it, consider now at this time, how uncertain our life is, we know
not who may be stricken next; and consider what the dangerous issue is, if we
humble not our selves here before God humble us in our graves. Let us help
Humiliation by all that may be: For where this is all will follow easily: a man
will go out of himself to God, when he is abased in himself, and sees no
comfort in Heaven or Earth but in God; that there is nothing to be stuck to in
the world, but all is vanity and he may be stripped of life and of all these
comforts ere long; when a man is abased Faith and Obedience will come off
easily. What is the reason that Christ is not relished more? and that many fall
off? They were never deeply humbled: according to the depth of Humiliation is
the growth of holiness of life and the height of Faith. All graces rise higher
as the soul is more deeply humbled: The more we descend deeply in digging and
rending up our hearts, the more the Word of God sinks into the good ground that
suffers the plow to rend it up and to cut off the weeds. The more deeply we are
humbled, the more the fruits of Gods Word appear in our hearts and lives, the
more fruitful is our conversation: all comes indeed upon the truth of our
Humiliation, and when that is not deep and true all the rest is shallow and
counterfit: there we should work it upon our own hearts.

And labor to be humble and low in all the powers of our souls; To be
humbled in all the powers of the soul.
to have humble judgments, to think of our selves as God thinks of us. God
thinks of us as sinners, God and Christ think of us that we are such as must
deny all in us before we be fit for Heaven. Let us judge of our selves as he
that must be our judge does and will judge of us ere long, labor to have low
judgments of our selves, what we are in our selves, empty of all good, defiled
with all ill.

And this will breed poverty of spirit in our judgments. Then let us labor
for Humility in our affections, to bring our selves more to God, to stoop to
him in fear and reverence. And Humility in our obedience and conversations to
God and to men every way, let Humility spread it self over all the parts and
powers of the soul and body, and over our whole lives, I cannot stand further
upon that.

Now here is verbal humillation, Verbal humiliation.
that is by confession, expressing our humiliation by our words, as the people
of God do here by confession, laying open our sins that God may cover them:
what we hide God will never cure: Necessity of confession of sins.
therefore we should take heed that now we are to deal with God, we lay open
the bottom of our souls to him: let not the Iron be in the wound. You know a
Chyrurgeon can heal nothing if the Iron or poisoned arrow stick there. If
there be corruption in the stomach it must up, if it be ill gotten goods, it
will not digest, up it must all to God: For men except there be scruples that a
man cannot free his conscience, there is no necessity, though great
convenience: but between God and thy soul open all by confession, and give
not over till thou have brought pardon to thy heart of that sin thou have
confessed. Every slight confession is not enough, but it must be a resolved
down right confession without guile of spirit, as it is in Psalm. 32. this is
the course that David takes there; until he dealt roundly with his soul
without guile, His moisture was as the drought of Summer: he was in some
dangerous disease that could not be cured. And do we look to be preserved
from falling into sickness, or if we be sick, to be cured? We must begin
the cure in our souls, lay open the wound to God, I said I will confess my
sin, and thou forgavest me, he begins with confession. So all persons that
either fear or are under any judgment, let them begin with laying open
their souls to God: when the soul is healed he will heal the body presently
after: for he lays sickness upon the body for the soul, and when the wound
is healed, the plaster will fall off of it self; therefore let us lay open
our sins by confession and shame our souls all that we can.

This is the way to give glory to God, Confession of sin gives glory to God.
let us join both together, our own ease and glory to God. When we have laid
open our souls to God, and laid as much against our selves as the Devil could
do that way: for let us think what the Devil would lay to our charge at the
hour of death, and the day of judgment; he would lay hard to our charge this
and that, let us accuse our selves as he would, and as he will ere long: The
more we accuse and judge our selves and set up a tribunal in our hearts,
certainly there will follow an incredible ease. Jonah was cast into the Sea,
and there was ease in the Ship, Achan was stoned, and the Plague was stayed:
out with Jonah, out with Achan and there will follow ease and quiet in the
soul presently; conscience will receive wonderful ease. It must needs be so,
for when God is honored conscience is purified. God is honored by confession
of sin every way. It honors his omniscience, that he is al-seeing, that he
sees our sins and searches the hearts, our secrets are not hid from him. It
honors his power, what makes us confess our sins, but that we are afraid of
his power least he should execute it? And what makes us confess our sins?
But that we know there is mercy with him that he may be feared? And that there
is pardon for sin, we would not confess our sins else, with men it is
confess and have execution, but with God confess and have mercy, it is his
own protestation; we would never lay open our sins but for mercy. So it
honors God, and when he is honored, he honors the soul with inward peace
and tranquillity. We can never have peace in our souls, till we have dealt
roundly with our sins and favor them not a whit; till we have ripened our
confession to be a through confession. What is the difference between a
Christian and another man? Another person slubbers over his sins, God is
merciful, etc. and he thinks if he come to the Congregation and follow the
Minister, it will serve the turn. But a Christian knows that Religion is
another manner of matter, another kind of work then so: he must deal
thoroughly and seriously, and lay open his sin as the chief enemy in the
world, and labor to raise all the hatred he can against it, and make it the
object of his bitter displeasure, as being that that has done him more hurt
then all the world besides, and so he confesses it with all the aggravations
of hatred and envy that he can.

But to come more particularly to the confession here spoken off, We all are as
an unclean thing, etc.

We all.
We see here holy men themselves confess their sins and rank themselves among
sinners in their confessions, so we learn hence this,

That we in our confessions (in our Fastings especially) ought to rank our
selves amongst the rest of sinners, Holy men in their confessions rank
themselve with others.
and not to exempt our selves from other sinners. Perhaps we are not guilty of
some sins that they have been guilty off: God has been merciful to us and
kept us in obedience in some things: but alas there is none of us all but we
have had a hand in the sins of the times, the best of all conditions are
guilty of them; therefore we have cause to rank our selves among others, as
he says here. We are all as an unclean thing, and as Daniell, he makes a
confession of the sins of all, we are all of us guilty.

How are we all guilty? The best men guilty of the sins of the times.


We are all guilty in this respect, we receive some taint and soil from the
times we live in, In not sorrowing for them.
either our zeal is weakened, we do not grieve so much for the sins of the
times, and who is not guilty in this respect? We do not grieve and lament as
we should: as S. Paul tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.
they should have been sorry and humbled; they were guilty of the sin of the
incestuous person, because they were not humbled for it. We are thus far
guilty at least the best of us, that we do not sorrow for the common sins.
Alas how many sins are there that every body may see in the times in all
rancks? In Pastors, what unfaithfullnesse and (...) Governors and in places of
justice; what crying of the poor and men oppressed; and in all rancks of
people we see a general security, we see filthiness, and hear oaths, for
which the Land mournes, as Jeremy says, Ier. 23. These and such like sins
provoke God and solicit the vengeance of God, and will have no nay till they
have pulled down vengeance; Who has been so much humbled for these sins as
he ought? Perhaps our selves are not personally guilty of them: but are they
not our sins so far as we are not abased for them and oppose them, and
repress them as we should in our places and standings, whether we be Ministers
or Magistrates? Thus far we are guilty all, therefore the Prophet might well
say, We all are as an unclean thing, etc.

By Simpathie.
Then again, there is a great Simpathy in the hearts of good men; they are full
of pity and compassion, and therefore they join themselves with others,
partly knowing that they are guilty in some degree with others; and partly
because they are members of the same body politic and ecclesiastical, they
live in the same Church and common wealth, therefore all join their confession
together, we all are as an unclean thing, etc.

Use.
Let us make this use of it, every one of us to be humbled; To labor every one
to be humbled.
do not every one of us bring sticks to the common fire? Do we not add
something to the common judgment? If there be two malefactors that have
committed a trespass, one of them is taken, and used in his kind, he is
executed, will it not greeve the other? he will think, was it not my case, I
was a wretched sinner as well as he. If there be diverse Traitors, and the King
is merciful to one, and the other he executes, will it not grieve him that is
spared, if he have any bowels or good nature? (besides goodness in other
kinds) will he not think, it was my own case, there was no difference
between me and them, only the mercy of the King? So the best of us may think,
have I not a corrupt nature, and for the sins of the times, am not I soyled
with them? others have been stricken, might not the same arrow have stricken
me? certainly this consideration that we bring something to the public
sins, it will make us humbled for the public, as the Church here
confesses, We are all as an unclean thing, etc.

To come to the particulars of the Confession.

We are all as an unclean thing.
Here is a confession of their persons, We are all tainted by nature.
their persons were tainted; we are all a tainted seed and generation in
nature, what the wickedest is wholly, the best are in part; therefore it is no
error that we should say so and so of our selves in our confessions, as Saint
Paul says of himself, I am sold under sin, Romans 7. one would wonder that he
should confess so. Alas blessed man, he felt that in part, that others in the
state of nature are wholly: so we are all filthy, the best (as far as they are
not renewed) are as other men are.

Unclean.
It is a comparison taken from the Leprosy, or some other contagious disease:
those that were tainted of them were separated from the Congregation seven
days, Sin a leprosy.
or some set time. So it is with sin, especially the sins of this people, they
had sinned grievously, and were severed from their land, not seven days, but
seventy years, the leprosy and filthiness of their sins and lives was such.

Indeed sin, especially the sin of nature, it is a leprosy, contagious,
pestilentiall, and as a leprosy it spreads over all the parts and powers of
body and soul. Take a man that is not changed, he has a leprous eye, full of
adultery, he has a leprous uncircumcised ^are, ask him how he judges of
discourses, and Sermons, he relisheth nothing but that which is frothy, and
vain; plain substantial solid discourses either in hearing, or reading, will
not down with him, he has a leprous judgment, his eyes, and ears. and
tongue are defiled, and corrupt, he is vile, and abominable in his speeches,
he is uncircumcised in all, all are unclean, all his powers are defiled by
nature.

All the washings in the Law did signify this, Washings in the Law what they
signified.
the corruption and defilement of our natures, which needs another washing
which they tipified, a washing by the blood and Spirit of Christ. Christ came
by water and blood, both in Justification and Sanctification. There is a
Fountain opened for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in. All those washings showed
a defilement spiritual, that needed a spiritual washing. This sin is a
leprous contagious sin, therefore by nature we may all cry as the Leper,
unclean, unclean, the best of us may take up that complaint as far as we
are not renewed. Sin like a leprosy defiles all.
A leprous man defiled the things that he touched; so it is with sin, till it
be forgiven, we defile every thing. A proud man especially when he is set out
in his bravery, he thinks himself a jolly man, a brave creature; alas he is a
filthy creature, not only in himself, but in every thing he puts his hand
unto; he taints, and defiles every thing, even civil actions, he sins in
eating and drinking: not that they in the substance of them are sins, but he
stains every thing; for he forgets God in them, he forgets himself
exceedingly, and he returns not thanks to God: so in moral civil actions,
much more in religious, he defiles himself in every thing, he is defiled to
all things, and all things are defiled to him, this is our state by nature, We
are all as an unclean thing.

Use.
This should enforce a necessity of cleansing our selves in the blood of Christ,
To labor to be cleansed by the blood of Christ.
that is, in the death of Christ who has satisfied the justice of God. Our
natures are so foul in regard of the guilt, and stain, that the blood of
God-man that is, the satisfactory death of God-man was necessary to breed
reconciliation and atonement between God and us. And the blood of Christ
which by the eternal Spirit offered himself, Heb. 9 14.
must purge our consciences, etc. our consciences will not otherwise be
pacified and cleansed in regard of guilt, but will clamor and cry still; much
less will God be appeased, neither God nor conscience will be pacified, but by
the blood of him who by the eternal Spirit offered up himself, and then it
will in regard of the guilt and stain, then God and conscience will both be
appeased. Therefore in Zach. 13. There is a Fountain opened for Judah and
Jerusalem to wash in. And The blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin.
Blood is of a defiling nature; but the blood of Christ cleanses, because it is
a satisfactory blood, he died, and was a sacrifice as a public person for us
all.

By the Spirit of Christ.
Then again, considering that we are all defiled, besides this cleansing from
the guilt of sin, let us get our natures cleansed by the Spirit of Christ
more and more, we are all defiled. Use 2.


Take heed of society with sinners.
And take heed of those that are defiled, take heed of sinners; who would
willingly lie with a leprous person? yet notwithstanding for matter of
marriage, and intimate society, there is a little conscience made, men converse
with leprous company, they join in the most intimate society with those that
are leprous in their judgments. The life of nature we know, and are careful
to avoid what may impair it: but it is a sign we have not the life of grace
begun in us, because we do not value it, if we had, we would be more careful
to preserve it, and to take heeed of contagious company. Who would go to the
Pesthouse, or to one that has Lord have mercy upon us on the door? none but
a mad man, he might do so: and surely those that join with swearers, and
drunkards, and filthy persons, and go to filthy places, and houses (as many
do, the more shame for them) they think they have no souls nor no account to
make, (...) go to these places, and infect themselves. It is a sign they have
no life of grace, all companies are alike to them. Is this strength of grace?
No, they have no life of grace, they have nothing to loose; for if they had the
life of grace they would preserve it better.

Sin is a filthy thing, Sin worse then the plague.
more filthy then the leprosy, nay then the plague it self: for the plague,
or leprosy, makes but the body loathsome; but the sin that we cherish, and
are loath to hear of makes the soul loathsome. The one makes unfit for the
company of men; but the other, sin, and corruption, and lusts, unfit us for
the Kingdom of God, for Heaven, for life or death, therefore it is worse. The
leprosy of the body makes a man not a whit odious to God; but the leprosy of
the soul makes us hateful to him. We may have more intimate communion with
God in the plague, then out of the plague; because God supplies the want of
outward comforts: but in sin we can have no comfortable communion and society
with God; therefore this plague of the soul is many ways worse then the
pestilence. But we want faith, God has not opened our eyes to see that that we
shall see and know ere long, and it is happy if we consider it in time.

In actual sins to have recourse to the corruption of nature.
To conclude this point, concerning the corruption of nature, take David's
course, Psalm. 51. when sinful actions come from us, or unsavourie words, or
beastly thoughts, or unchaste and noisome desires that grieve the Spirit of God,
let us go to the Fountain, alas my nature is leprous, as far as it is not
purged, I was conceived in sin, my mother brought me forth in iniquity. The
more we take occasion every day to see, and observe the corruption of our
nature, the less it is; and we cannot better take occasion, then upon every
actual sin to run to the fountain, the filthy puddle from whence all comes,
and be more humbled for that, then for particular sins. It is a mistake in
men, they are ashamed of an action of injustice, etc, but they should go to
their nature and think I have a false unclean nature, whereby I am ready to
commit a thousand such if God should let me alone, I have the spawne of all
sin as far as the Spirit has not subdued it. It is a defect of judgment
to be more humbled for particular sins, nature is more tainted then any
action, that sowing, breeding sin (as the Apostle says) it is worse then the
action, it breeds the rest. So much for that, they confess here, We are all
as an unclean thing, in our selves.

But what comes from us?

That that aggravates to the utmost a sinful state.

All our righteousness is as filthy rags.
He does not say we have filthy actions, but our best actions are stained, and
not one, but all. Mark how strong the place is, We all, the people of God, he
includes all, as Daniel says, I confess my sins, and the sins of my
people; and there is no man in the Church but he might have this confession in
his mouth, We the people of God, All the best actions of the best men defiled
and all We, in all our actions, All our righteousness, etc. so all the
actions of all the righteous, the best actions of the best men, and all the
best actions of the best men are defiled, and stained, it is as great an
aggravation as may be.

Some would have it to intend the Legal righteousness, yet notwithstanding it
is true of all; and when we now humble our selves it is good to think of all;
so we may say, all our righteousness, whatsoever comes from us it is stained,
and defiled. As for their Legal performances there is no question of them: for
alas they trusted too much to them, in Isaiah 1. and Isaiah last, they thought
God was beholding to them for them, Away with them, away with your new Moons,
etc. they were abominable to God as the cutting off a dogs neck, as it is
Isaiah the last: so all their righteousness, their ceremonial performances
were abominable.

But I say we may raise it high ^^, it is not only true of them, but in
greater matters, in our best morrall performances, they are all as tainted rags.

Object.
How can this be? It is strange it should be so, the Papists cry out here that
we discourage men from good works; if all our righteousness be as filthy rags,
why should we perform good works?

Answ.
Put case a man be sick, all the meat he eats it strengthens his sickness,
Though our best actions be defiled, yet there is some good in them.
shall he therefore not eat at all? Yes, he must eat somewhat, there is
nature in him to strengthen as well as his disease. Thy best performances are
stained, will thou do none therefore? yes, though they be stained, yet there
is some goodness in them; thou may honor God, and do good to others;
besides the ill there is good; there is gold in the Ore; there is some good in
every good action; nay there is so much good as that God pardons the ill, and
accepts the good. So though our good actions be ill: yet for their kind and
matter and stuff they are good, they are commanded of God: For their original
and spring they are wrought by the Spirit of God: for the person the worke-man
it is one in the state of grace, and for acceptance God rewards them: But it is
another thing when we come before God to humble our selves, then we must see
what stains and sins are in them. There is no good action so good, but there
are wants and weaknesses and stains and blemishes in it as it comes from us.
The Spirit of God indeed is effectual to stir us up to good actions: but we
hinder the work of the Holy Ghost and do not do them so thoroughly as we
should: therefore besides our wants and weaknesses, there is a tainture of
them, either we have false aims, they are not so direct, or our resolutions
are not so strong; false aims creep in for a while, though we do not allow
them: and then there are some coolers of our devotion; our love is cold, our
hatred of sin is not so strong; our prayers are not so fervent, our actions
are not so carried without interruption, but are hindered with many bie
thoughts; who cannot complain of these things? Who is not brought upon his
knees for the weakness of his best actions? Nay I say more a Christian is
more humbled for the imperfections and stains of his best actions then a
civil carnal person is for his outward enormities: for he turns over all his
outward delinquences and makes the matter but a trick of youth, when a poor
Christian is abased for his dullness and deadness and coldness; for false
aims that creep into his actions; for interruptions in his duties, that his
thoughts will not suffer him to serve God with that intention that he would,
but puts him off with motions and suggestions and temptations in his best
performances: this abaseth him more, then outward gross sins does a carnal
person. When we deal with God, Our righteousness it is as menstruous
clothes.

Know this for a ground, that there is a double principle in a Christian in all
things that he does, A double principle in a Christian
there is flesh and Spirit, and these two issue out in whatsoever comes from
him. In his good words there is flesh as well as Spirit, in his thoughts and
desires, in his prayer, his prayer it self stands in contraries: So every
thing that comes from him it is tainted with that that is contrary, the flesh
opposes and hinders the work of the Spirit, and so it stains our good works.
Co^traries agree in a Christian
Therefore contraries are true of a Christian, which seem strange to another
man. A Christian at the same time is deformed and well-favoured, He is black
and comely. I am black but yet well-favoured, says the Spouse, black in
regard of sin, but well-favoured in regard of the Spirit of God and the
acceptance of Christ. He is a Saint and a Sinner: a Sinner in respect that
sin has spread over all parts, and a Saint in respect of Christ's acceptance,
My Love and my Dove, Christ makes love to his Church as if she had no
defilement: but he looks on her better part, he looks on her as she is in his
love, and as he means to bring her after. But the Church looking upon her
self as she is in her self, she is much abased: the ground of it is the
imperfection of sanctification in this world. The best of our works are as
menstruous clothes, when we think of the corruption of the best things as
they come from us, when we come to humble our selves before God, we must down
with proud styles and Pharisaicall thoughts, although there be somewhat that is
good: yet let us think of all the ill that may abase us.

There is a season for every thing, In what case to (...) and upon our
innocen^y.
when we are tempted to be overcome by Satan; then think of the good, as Job
when he was tempted, I have done this and this, you cannot take away mine
innocence. In false temptations from the world and Satan, then stand upon our
innocence. But when we humble our selves before God, Alas I am dust and ashes,
I abhor my self, as Job and Abraham said, lay all proud apprehensions of our
selves aside, and all good works, especially in one kind, in matter of
justification, all is dung in comparison of Christ. All must be sold for the
pearl, the Righteousness of Christ. There is no reckning must be had of good
works by way of merit in justification and our title to Heaven. What gives us
title to Heaven and frees us from Hell? The death of Christ, the obedience and
satisfaction of Christ. God by it has redeemed us perfectly without any thing
in ourselves, and accepts us to life everlasting only by the Righteousness of
Christ: therefore it is called Gods Righteousness, because it was done by
Christ, it was wrought by God. Our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, it
is spotted and stained and defiled, it will not do the deed, it will not
satisfy conscience, much less the exact piercing judgment of God: that is
the righteousness that must stay our souls in life and death, and we must
oppose it to all temptations, as a satisfying thing that will set down
conscience to be quiet, it must be the Righteousness of God-Man, nothing else
will do it. All our righteousness is as filthy rags, that is the confession
of their sinful actions.

The next thing he confesses is sencelesnesse. There is none that calls upon
thy Name; that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. There be other words
between concerning the complaint of their miserable estate, but I will handle
them that concern their sins first.

There is none that calls upon thy name.
Prayer put for the whole worship of God.
In a word, he means that none worshipped him: because prayer is put for the
whole worship of God, as indeed it may well be put for the whole: for it
exercises all the graces of the Spirit. What one grace is not set on work in
prayer? (it is put for all the inward worship of God) Jf it be faith, prayer is
the flame of faith; when there is faith in the heart there will be prayer in
the mouth. The knowledge of God, prayer is grounded upon a Promise; so it comes
from that part of spiritual worship. Hope, hope makes a man pray, no man would
power out his supplications but to him that he has hope in. And for Love, Gods
love and mercy draws us into his presence, and joy and delight in the presence
of God draws us to pray. We give God the honor of all his attributes in
prayer; of his truth, of his goodness, of his mercy, of his presence every
where, etc. So it sets all graces on work and gives God the honor of all, It
is the worship of God every way, for though it be an outward verbal worship of
it self, yet it expresses the worship of God inward: it gives God the honor
of all.

Therefore those that pray not what kind of persons are they? Danger of
neglecting prayer.
Wretched persons. The sickness is now among us: Jf a man should ask now what
Family is likeliest to have the vengeance of God on it? though I speak not to
censure those that have it, but I speak in Gods ordin^ry course; surely those
that do not exercise the du^y of prayer. Power out thy wrath upon those that
call not upon thy name. Those families that call not upon God humbly morning
and evening, or that person that does not morning and evening reverently call
upon God, they are fit objects for the vengeance of God, for the plague or the
like: Power out thy wrath upon the families and persons that call not upon thy
name, insinuating that the Lord will spare us if we do call upon his name and
humble our selves: If thou will needs power out thy vengeance, let it be on
them that have not grace humbly to call upon thy name. Let us make conscience
of this du^y, except we will prove athiests and lie open to all the vengeance
of God.

There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of thee.
He represents God to us as a great person, that would bestow some benefit, and
is ready to turn away himself, yet none lays hold of him or desires him to
stay: so (says he) there is none that lays hold on God to keep him that he
should not go away: Therefore when he says, None calls upon thy name, or stirs
up himself to take hold of thee, he means there are none that pray earnestly.
Incense was to be burnt, or else it cast no sweet smell, our prayers must have
fire and zeal in them, our prayers must be cries that must pierce Heaven. Out
of the deep have I cried unto thee, Lord. We must stir up our selves, we
must waken our selves, to waken God: indeed before we can waken God we must
waken our selves.

There is none stirs up himself to take hold of thee.
Insinuating that if we would lay hold of God, Prayer lays hold on God.
he will be stayed. To speak a little more particularly of this. God is so
gracious that he will be stayed even by prayer, the way to stay God in his
judgments and to lay hold of him and to keep him among us, it is prayer. Let
us take notice now of the hand of God upon us; what is the means to stop his
hand that he come not among us with his public judgments? It is prayer. The
way to stop God and the Angel that has his sword now drawn over our heads, it
is prayer. God so condiscends that he will be stopped by prayer; as we see in
Exo. 13. he says to Moses, let me alone, Moses prayed and alleged arguments
to God that he should not confound his people, Let me alone says he,
insinuating that prayer binds Gods hands. So powerful is prayer that it binds
the Almighty, it makes the omnipotent in some sort impotent, he cannot do
that he would, he cannot execute his wrath, prayer binds him, when a company of
Christians lay hold on him by prayer, he cannot do that he threatens: the
only way to lay hold of God is by prayer. In Ezekiel. 22. there is a complaint
that none stood in the gap, insinuating that if any had stood in the gap when
the vengeance of God was coming abroad they might have prevented the wrath;
the way to stand in the gap and to keep God is to pray and to p^ay hear^ily.

Now that God may be held by our prayers, they must be strong prayers, every
prayer will not hold God, they must be strong prayers that must bind such a
Sampson that has his strength: therefore there must be a stirring up of our
selves; he says here, There is none that stirs up him self to take hold of
thee. So it is the duty of Christians to stir up themselves in these times.

Quest.
How shall we stir up our selves?

Answ.
First, by considering the danger we are in: danger felt or feared, We must stir
up our selves to lay hold of God.
it will make a man lay hold. When a child feels the smart of the rod, By
considering our danger.
he lays hold upon his father or his mothers hand, strike no more, when the
children of God feel the smart of his judgments then they cry, O no more. The
cry of the child prevails with the mother, though it cannot speak oft-times:
So when in the sense of sin and misery we cry to God, we move his bowels with
crying. There is no question but the serious apprehension of danger felt, does
awaken the soul and stir it up. It is so also in danger feared, a danger
feared with belief will work as if it were present: for a man that has a
spirit of faith to ^ee that unless God be appeased with good courses, he will
punish as surely as if the judgment were upon him. Faith makes things present,
both good and ill, and it makes a man sensible of things that are not yet upon
him. This is the difference between a Christian and another man, another man
puts the evil day far off from him: but a believing Christian by a spirit of
faith sees God (except he be turned away by hearty and humble repentance) ready
to ceaze upon him, and so he walks humbly in all his courses. So that danger
felt or feared by a spirit of faith awakens and stirrs up the soul to lay hold
on God.

Therefore in spiritual dangers we should especially waken our souls to see
in what need we stand of Christ, and the pardoning mercy of God in Christ, that
we may waken him, and give him no rest till we find peace in our consciences.

Then again, Meditation of the exce^e^y and ^ece^sity of that we beg.
that that we may stir up our selves withal is the meditation of the
necessity and excellency of grace, and of the good things we beg: the serious
consideration of that will make us stir up our selves to lay hold on God and
give him no rest till we have it. When a man thinks the loving kindness of
God is better then life, and if J have not that, my life is nothing to me. It
is not only better then corn and wine and oil, but then life it self.
Pardon of sin, and a heart to do good is better then life it self, then any
thing in the world. If one should offer such a man this, a heart patiently to
bear ill, and large to do good, and strength against temptations; he would
rather have this gracious disposition then any thing in the world, he had
rather have the pardon of sin with the sense of Gods favor then any thing in
the world. This will stir up a man, as we see in David, Psalm. 51. Mercy,
mercy, it binds God, and lays hold on him, together with pardoning mercy to
have a heart enlarged with spiritual joy. There is nothing spiritual, but it
is so excellent, that if we had the eyes of our spirits awakened to see them,
we would bind God, and lay hold of him, he should not go further till he had
shined on us.

Importunity with God.
Therefore let us offer violence to God this way, never give him rest till we
obtain. You see when the two Disciples were going to Emmaus, Christ made as
though he would have gone further, but they compelled him. Now there is a
semblance as if God threatened war, and would take away the Gospel, there are
dangers toward. When God makes such a semblance, let us lay hold on him, let
him go no further. Lord, night approaches, and affliction approaches, Lord
stay thou shall go no further, let us stop God with importunity. The
consideration of danger, and the necessity and excellency of the things we beg
will make us lay hold on God.

Outward service alone not accepted.
There is an hyprocrisie among men, among a company of Formalists, that are the
bane of the times, that God will spue out, they are as ill as profane persons
in his nostrils: they think that all devotion is in prostrating themselves
(which is good, and more then profane men will do) and yield a dead sacrifice
to God, they will come, and hear, and yield the outward act, in outward
humiliation. Is this to rouse thy self? outward things are never current but
when they express outwardly the inward truth; therefore take another course
man, God cares not for the dead empty carcass thou bring him; work upon
thine own heart by meditation of the danger thou art in, and of the excellency
of the things thou art to beg, and meditate of the Majesty of God whom thou
appearest before, of his goodness and truth, etc affect thy heart deeply with
these apprehensions, let these serious thoughts draw outward expressions of
humiliation; and then it is excellent, when the outward expression follows the
inward impression, when there is somewhat inward that shows it self outward,
when we stir up our selves, and not to think that all devotion consists in a
comely outward carriage (which is commendable of it self,) but because men
usually rest in it, it is prejudicial to their souls good. We must offer a
reasonable sacrifice to God, we must love him in our hearts, we must work
upon our hearts, and carry our selves so in our inward man, as that we may
stir up our whole man, and awaken our souls, Praise the Lord O my soul, and
all that is within me praise his holy name, we should stir up our selves by
speaking to our own souls, that we may waken and take hold of God.

To look for an answer of our prayers.
This again will help it, a man should never come to pray, but he should have
an answer before he has done, either at that time or another; never give over
till thou have an answer, this will make us stir up our selves indeed. How
do you know a prayer from a formal lip-labor? A man that prays conscionably
marks what he does, and expects a return, as a man that sows his seed. He
that does a thing with hope of issue will do it thoroughly, therefore never
pray to perform an empty duty to God; but mark what you pray for, if it be
forgiveness of sins, or for grace, or protection, etc. and do it with that
earnestness that you may hope for an issue answerable, and this going about it
will make us do it to purpose; do we think to serve God with the deed done?
God has appointed prayer for our good, and to convey blessings to us: Let us
pray so as we may expect a blessing by it. Now that prayer that expects a
blessing to be conveied, it will be a prayer to purpose, it will make a man
stir up himself.

There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of thee.
The complaint applied to the present times.
The complaint of this holy man of God may be taken up at this time of many of
us now; how few are those that rouse and stir up themselves, but put off God
with an empty complement? Nay, in these times of danger, have ye not a company
of idle persons that will not vouchsafe to hear the Word, nor to come and
humble themselves; but walk and talk offensively, as if they would dare God,
or if they come here, they come not with a resolution to hear the issue of
their prayers, to rouse up themselves to lay hold on God. Because, as there is
a great deal of Atheism in regard of God, so there is much dead flesh in
regard of men. Who is so pitiful of our brethren round about as he ought? We
had need to stir up our selves, the danger is present, we are beset round
about, yet who is stirred up to earnest prayer? we want bowels of compassion.
Those that have hearts compassionate, it is a sign that God intends good to
them; but of the most we may take up this complaint, we are dead-hearted in
regard of our sins against God, and in regard of the contagion among us. A
man may see it by men's discourses, there is inquiry how the sickness spreads,
how many dies? but men do not labor with God to make their accounts even with
him; nor we are not compassionate to men, for that would be a means to stir
and to rouse us up to lay hold of God, to stay his hand out of love, and pity,
and compassion to our brethren which are our flesh, though it should never
seize on us: I say I fear this complaint is too justly on many of us. I
beseech you let us labor to amend it as we tender our own salvation (perhaps
that we do not regard so much, we shall ere long, but then) as we tender the
health of our bodies which we prefer before our souls, let us humble our
selves more then ordinary now.

Extraordinary humiliation required sometimes.
Some devils are not driven out but by prayer and fasting; so some judgments
they will not away without prayer and fasting, not only public but private
fasting and prayer. Sometimes there must be more then ordinary humiliation for
some sins; for some kind of temptations there must be prayer and fasting;
for some maladies prayer and fasting, and more then ordinary stirring and
rouzing up of our selves to lay hold upon God. God will not be held with
ordinary humiliation, that will not do it: but there must be a resolution
against, and a hatred of all sin, and to please God in all things. We must
do it with extraordinary humiliation now, because the judgment is
extraordinary. There is ordinary humiliation, and extraordinary; as there are
ordinary feasts, and extraordinary, so there is ordinary humiliation for daily
trespasses; but in extraordinary judgments extraordinary fasting and
humiliation. As there is ordinary washing daily, but there is washing and
scouring at good times; God calls for extraordinary humiliation now, not only
prayers, but stirring and rouzing up of our selves. We should apprehend the
danger as seizing on our selves; this night it may seize upon us for ought we
know: It should affect us, and make us stir up our selves. This is the way to
hold God by prayer; and if we hold him, he will hold the destroying Angel, he
has all creatures at his command. Thus you see how we should confess the sins
of our persons, the sins of our good actions, our want of calling upon God.
There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold
of thee. Thus far proceed the branches of their sinful disposition in those
times.

Now he complains likewise of the judgments of God.

We all fade as a leaf, Our iniquities as the wind have taken us away. Thou
have hid thy face, And we are consumed because of our iniquities.

The complaint has these four branches, a little of each.

We all fade as a leaf.
Wicked men are as leaves, Men fading as leaves.
and worse, they are as chafe. Godly men, because they have a consistence, and
are rooted in Christ, and set in a good soil, they are trees of
righteousness. But godly men in the state of their nature, and in regard of
this life they are as leaves: wicked men are as leaves every way, and as chafe
which the wind blows away, as we shall see afterward.

We all fade as a leaf.
For performances.
He means, first, in regard of ceremonial performances that were without
vigor and spirit of true devotion. There was no spirit in their Legal
performances, they were dead empty things; therefore when judgment came, they
were as leaves. So an idle careless hearer when judgment comes all is as
leaves; when conscience nips him (as his atheistical heart will do ere long)
then he is as a leaf, all fades away. The Jews when they were in trouble, all
their Legal performances faded, they were all as a leaf. So is it true in
regard of mortality, Mortality.
the vanity of health, and strength, we all as a leaf fade away when Gods
judgments come to nip us. Men are as leaves, as the leaves now in autumn
fall, and there is a new generation in the spring; and then they fall away, and
a new generation comes again; so it is with men, some are blown off, and some
come on again. We all fade as a leaf, not to be large in the point. At this
time we are all as leaves, in this City now there is a kind of wind that nips
a world of men, many hundreds in the head. It is an autumn wind that nips the
leaves, our autumn wind with us is before the time; a kind of autumn wind
in the spring, in summer, that nips the leaves and takes away the vigor of
health.

And so (as I said) for all idle performances, that have not a foundation in
substantial piety, they are all as leaves, when trouble of conscience comes,
they are as Adams figleaves; when God comes to search, and examine, they all
fall off, both in respect of our performances, and in respect of our lives, we
are all as leaves when God comes in judgment, this is one part of the
complaint. We are all as leaves, the like we have of Moses the man of God,
Psalm. 90. when God blows upon us with the wind of his displeasure we fall off
as leaves.

Then another expression is,

Our iniquities as the wind have taken us away.
As chafe, Men out of Christ blown away as with a wind.
or things that have no solidity in them are blown away with a puff of wind:
so it is with a man, if he be not a Christian set into, and gathered unto
Christ. By the fall we all fell from God, and were scattered from him; sin
blew the Angels out of Heaven, it blew Adam out of Paradise, and now Christ the
second Adam gathers us to him again by his Word and Spirit, and so we have a
solid and eternal being in him. But out of Christ our iniquities as a wind,
and Gods judgments blow us all away first or last. Wicked men settle on their
dregs a great while; but when Gods judgment comes, it blows them in this
world to this part, and that part oft-times when it pleases him to exercise
his outward judgments, but if he do not blow them away here, he will give
them a blast that shall send them to hell their center. Out of Christ there is
no solidity, no consistence or being for any man: therefore when Gods judgment
comes it blows them away in this world, and at the hour of death sends them
to hell, this is the state of all. Our iniquities like the wind take us away:
he means here, they were blown out of Jury to Babylon. It was a strong blast
that blew them out of their own Country.

May not we say, Our iniquities have blown us away? What has blown us from
our callings and employments? Is it not the Pestilence? and what brings that?
Is it not our iniquities? So that we may all complain of this, Our iniquities
have blown us away.

A child of God looks to his sins in all judgments
We see here, he lays the blame upon their iniquities; did not the Babylonians
carry them away? Alas they were but Gods instruments, God was displeased by
their sins, his wrath blew them away. So you may see here the child of God in
all judgments looks to his sins, he justifies God, he murmurs not and says
this and that, no, but it was my sins, We have sinned against the Lord, Micah
7. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, and
Lament. 3. Man suffers for his sins, and every one of us may say, it is our
iniquities have taken us away. A gracious heart justifies God and condemns it
self. The children of God may complain sometimes of Gods hand, but they will
never censure Gods hand: they justify God always, though they may complain of
the bitterness of his hand. Here they complain of the bitterness of the
judgment, they were blown into another country, into cap^ivity, they do not
complain of God. God will have us complain, but as he will have us complain;
so we must justify him and condemn our selves, just are thy judgments.

An Hypocrite thinks God is beholding to him for his outward performances, and
when judgments befall him, he ^rets and censures God: either he thinks there
is no God, or he frets and fumes against God, he is discontented: but a
Christian justifies God and condemns himself. Our iniquities have blown us
away, our sins keep good things from us.

Therefore let us now lay the blame where it is, Use. To lay the blame upon our
sins.
search out our sins personal and particular, and complain of them, they
have a hand in this plague. God is no tyrant, he delights not to confound his
creatures, but sin makes him out of love with his creatures, the workmanship
of his own hands, it is our sins. Therefore let us lament the sins of the
times: so far we may without Hypocrisy and ought to take to heart and mourn
for the sins of the times that we hear by others and see our selves, and
mourn for our own hearts that we cannot mourn, we must mourn for the sins
of the times, as Daniel and Nehemiah, and all the blessed men of God have done.
It is not the plague that hurts us, that is but Gods messenger; sin does us
more harm then all the Devils in Hell and all the plagues in the world; it is
not outward evils we need to fea^e, let us fear sin and lay hold on God, he
is the Lord of Hoasts, he has all the creatures at his command: let us get sin
away that does us all the mischief, it is that that makes bate between God
and us, and then God makes a controversy between us and the creatures: it is
our sins.

Ground of humiliation for sin
And that is the reason of the necessity of humiliation for our sins, because
sin breeds a separation between God and us, and between the creatures and
us. When God is offended, the creatures are infected: let us see our sins, by
them we infect the air, by our vain specches and oaths and our filthiness.
Our sins infect the air, and that breeds infection in our bodies. Our sins
cry, they have a voice to cry to God, if our prayers do not outcry them.
Therefore let us cry to God to hear the cry of our prayers and not of our
sins. How many voices have crying sins! There is the voice of the people
oppressed, the voice of filthiness, etc. sins clamor in Gods ears, they
clamor for wages due, and the wages of sin is death, sin cries though it
say nothing in words, it cries in Gods ears and it will not rest till he has
powered out his vengeance. The filthiness and oaths and athiesme and
profaneness, the suffering of the dishonor of his name: these sins of the
times are those that pull miseries upon us, Our iniquities have taken us away
as the wind. So much for that.

For thou have hid thy face from us, and we are consumed because of our
iniquities.
Sin makes God hide his face from us, and then we are consumed, because of
our iniquities. We melt away in the hand of our iniquities, as the word is.
Indeed sin is a cruel tyrant, when God leaves us in the hand of our sins,
he leaves us in a cruel hand. Christ came to redeem us from our sins, our
sins are they that torment us, it is very significant in the Original.

We are melted, Nations and kingdoms melt before sin.
we melt away as wax before the fire, as snow before the Sun, because of our
iniquities, when God gives up men to be handled as their own sins will
handle them. Nations melt before the hands of sin, and Kings and Kingdoms
and all. Let God give up men to delight in sin, Kingdoms, or persons, they
melt and molder away in the hand of their sins.

But to speak a little more of the next words.

Thou have hid thy face from us.
That is, thou have hid thy comfort from us. God has a double face, Gods face
what
a face that shines on our souls in peace and joy and comfort, when he says
to the soul, I am thy Salvation: And his face that shines on the outward
estate, that keeps misery and sickness and danger from us, and bestows good
things on us. And God takes away his face from us in regard of the inward man,
when he gives us no peace: but leaves us to spiritual desertion. In regard of
the outward man, God hides his face, when he gives us up to Pestilence and
war and sickness and miseries in this life, when he gives us up to outward
desertion.

Sometimes God shines on wicked men in outward things, but he hides his face
for peace of conscience: and sometimes Gods children have his face shining on
their conscience, but he hides his face in respect of outward things, sometimes
he shines in neither of both: as at this time he neither shined on these
blessed men in outward favors, for they were in captivity, nor in the sense of
his love and favor, for they were in desolation, and ecclipsed every way.

The face of God, it is as the Sun to the creatures: when the Sun hides his
face, what is there but darkness and night? What makes the night, but the
absence of the Sun? What makes Winter, but the absence of the Sun? when he
grows low and cannot heat the earth: So what makes winter in the soul,
deadness and darkness and dullness in Gods service? The absence of the face
of God, God shines not on the soul. What makes night in the soul, when the
soul is benighted with ignorance that it cannot see it self nor see the
judgments of God? God sh^nes not, the Sunn of righteousness shines not on
that soul.

God is the Sun of the creature, he gives life to the creature, what will
become of the creature when God neither shines outwardly nor inwardly on it? As
at the day of judgment, he shall take away outward comfor^s, there shall be no
outward shining, and all inward comforts, they shall have no hope, he shall
altogether hide his face: when God the Fountain of all good shall hide his
face altogether from the creature, that is Hell: The place where God shines not
outwardly with comforts nor inwardly, nor there shall be no hope of neither,
but a place of ho^rour and despair, that is hell, as the hell of this life is
when God shines not on our souls.

Now these holy men they complain, The conflict of faith when God hides his
face.
yet they pray, Thou have hid thy face. Here is the conflict of Faith that
sees God hide his face and yet will follow God; it sees God ready to turn away
himself, and yet it will lay hold of him, and have a glaunce of him, it will
wrestle with him and not let him go without a blessing. So there be degrees of
Gods hiding of his face: though God seem to hide his face and to withdraw
outward comforts and perhaps in some to withdraw his favor from their hearts
inwardly: What shall they do, droupe? No, wrestle with God as Jacob: see
through the cloud that is between God and thy soul; break through by faith,
and with Job say, Though he kill me yet will I trust in him. Let us stir up
our selves to lay hold on God when he seems to turn away his face: and
imitate good Jacob, never give over seeking the face of God.

We must seek Gods face.
How shall we seek the face of God?

By prayer.
By prayer, for that brings us to the face of God though he seem to hide his
face, as Jeremy complains, Jeremy 14. Why art thou as a stranger? and yet he
prays: seek him by prayer.

In his ordinances
Seek him in his Ordinances; hear the Word of God, thy face Lord will I seek.
God invites you ^o seek his face now by fasting and humiliation, seek his
face in this ordinance: here is the blessed Trinity, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost. Though outwardly God hide his face in some regards; yet when he offers
outward liberties, refuse them not: he offers his face to us now in Christ,
seek by prayer and other means holy communion with him still; and never leave
seeking till you have got a glance of him: and stir up your selves to lay hold
on him, that he would show his loving countenance upon you.

Those that turn their backs on Gods ordinances and in rebellion to his
commandments live in sins against conscience, can they wonder that he hides
his face from them, when they turn their backs on him? Rebellious persons that
will not yield meekely to Gods Ordinances and submit to his Commandments, do
they wonder that God takes good things from them? When we sin we turn our
backs upon God and our face to the Devil and the world and pleasures: when
men turn their faces to sin, to pleasures and vanity, and their backs on
God, do they wonder that he suffers them to melt and pine away? Let us do as
the Flowers do, the Marigold, etc. they turn themselves to the Sun: let our
souls do so, let us turn our selves to God in meditation and prayers,
striving and wrestling with him, look to him, eye him in his Ordinances and
promises, and have communion with him all the ways we can. Let our souls
open and shut with him, when he hides his face let us droupe, as the Flowers
do till the Sun come again. When the waters fall the Flowers droope and
hold down their heads, when the Sun rises the next morning up they go
again, as if there had been never a shower: So when we have not daily
comfort of Spirit in peace of conscience, let us never rest seeking Gods face
in his Ordinances and by Prayer, and that will cheer a drooping soul, as the
Sun beams do the flagging flowers. Then you may know that Gods face shines
upon you in some measure when he gives you means and gives you hearts to use
those means and comfort in your consciences, that whether you live or die you
are Gods: this is a beam of that Sunshine on the soul, when God vouchsafes
joy and comfort. A little of this will banish all fears: if you have one
glimpse of his countenance, you shall not need to fear the plague, or war,
or death, if he shine on you, one glance will take away all fear. Paul when he
was in the stocks, one beam of Gods coun^enance made him sing at midnight; Let
thy countenance shine on us and we shall be safe, let what will become of us
outwardly. If God shine not on us for ou^ward favors, if he shine on our
souls and release them from fears and guilt, and speak peace to them, and
say unto them, he is the^r salvation (and as he says in the Gospel, thy
sins are forgiven thee) all will be well whatsoever become of us. Let us
seek the Lord while he may be found, hold him before he go, let him not
depart: attend upon the means, never miss good means of seeking his face
till we have got a sweet answer from Heaven that he is our God.

Now follows the supplication.

But now O Lord thou art our Father, etc.
Here is a prayer which is a kind of holding God, The consideration that God
is our Father should stir us up to seek to ^i^
by the relation of a Father; this is one way of stirring up our souls, to
consider the relation of a Father. It stirs up bowels, when a child is
beaten by his Father, O stay Father, spare, it works upon the bowels. There is
a world of Rhetoric in this one word Father, why Lord, thou art my Father,
shall I be destroyed? let us lay hold on God by this relation that he puts
upon himself; and he will not lay it aside though we be unworthy to be sons.
He does not say, thou art our Father, and we are thy sons; because he
thought they were unworthy, (as the Prodigal says, I am unworthy to be called
thy son) but instead of saying we are thy sons, he says, we are the clay,
thou art the potter. Yet he is a Father continually; and though in Christ you
cannot call him Father, yet you may by Creation, and initiation, being brought
up in the Church. Go to him with the encouragements you have, and cast your
selves upon him. There is a bond for you by Creation, and there is his command,
he bids you call him Father, he is a Father by Creation; look not upon this
or that sin, but go to him, and call him Father, as you may call him; say
thou art my Father, thou have given me a being in the Church, wrestle with him
as you may, though as found Christians you cannot call him Father. Be weary of
your courses, are you willing to come under Gods hand to be sons; you are
sons by Creation already, offer thy self to be of his family for the time to
come, and God will give a sweet report to thy soul. Stand not out at the
staves end, Thou art our Father, Lord. If you have a purpose to live in firm,
the Devil is your father, and not God, you are of your father the Devil, but
if we be willing to submit, we may say, Doubtless thou art our Father.

We are the clay, thou art the potter.
Here is a resignation of themselves to God, in this term, Resignation of
our selves in prayer requisite
thou art the potter, we are the clay. Indeed we are but earthen vessels the
best of us, in regard of the bodily life we have; and we are at the liberty of
God to dispose of as he pleases. So, before he comes to put forth this prayer
to God, he uses this resignation of themselves into the hand of God: we are as
clay in thy hands, Lord dispose of us as thou will: Let us remember this when
we come to pray to God, use all means of abasement that can be; To abase our
selves in prayer
lay aside all terms other then abasing terms, we are the clay, and as Job
says, I abhor my self in dust and ashes. So the Saints have done in all
times, I am not worthy to be called thy son, and I am less then the least
of thy mercies. Let us lay aside proud and lofty terms, and cast down our
crowns at the foot of Christ, as the Saints in Revel. 4. cast down all our
excellencies, let us have no thought of outward excellencies, of beauty, or
strength, or riches, or high dignity, when we come to God, we must come with
low thoughts to the high God, can the creature be too low in his presence?

And then come with resignation, we are the clay, thou art the potter, do
with us as thou will; if thou dash us in pieces as a potters vessel, thou
may do it; that is the way to escape. That is well committed that is
committed into Gods hand; some men shift by their wits, and will not trust God
with their health, and strength, they be double minded, as Saint James says,
they will have two strings to their bow, if lawful means will not serve,
unlawful shall: No, but we must commit our selves to God as to a faithful
Creator, and then see what he will do; then it stands with his honor, he
will look to the lowly, I am the clay, thou art the potter, here I am, do
as thou will, as David says, it is a blessed estate thus to resign our selves
into Gods hands. If the Devil and Reprobates could be brought to this, they
should never come there where they are in terrors of conscience. Let us labor
to practice this duty, Lord I commit to thy hands my body and soul, I cast my
self into thy bosom, do with me as thou will. Some that have stood out at
the staves end with temptations many years, have gotten comfort by this
resignation. We are the clay, thou art the potter, thou may mold and break
us as thou will. The way now to escape the plague is not altogether to use
tricks of wit, and policy (though lawful means must be used) but labor to
get into Christ, and resign our selves into Gods hand absolutely, and say
thus, We are the clay, etc. Lord, thou may dash us if thou will, as thou
do now many hundreds weekly, thou may dash us in that fashion if thou will: Only we may have a desire that God would make our lives and health
precious to him, that we may serve him as if we were now in Heaven, and that we
may have grace to make good use of all. But if God have determined and decreed
to take us away, let us resign our selves into his hands. It is no matter
though the body be sown in dishonor, they shall be raised in honor, we are
the clay, he is the potter, let him do what he will with our carcasses and
bodies, so he be merciful to our souls. These vessels of clay when they are
turned to earth, they shall be renewed of better stuff, like the glorious body
of Christ; then our souls and bodies shall be glorious by him that took a
piece of flesh and clay for us: O the humility of Christ! we wonder that the
soul should animate a piece of clay, so excellent a thing as the soul is;
much more may we wonder that the Son of God should take a piece of flesh and
clay upon him, to take our nature of base earth, to make us eternally glorious
as himself. Let it comfort us though God dash our clay in pieces as a Potter:
yet Christ that took our clay to the unity of his Person, our nature being
ingrafted into him, he will make our bodies eternal and everlasting as his
own glorious body. Let us resign our selves into Gods hands, as the Church
here, Thou art the Potter, and we are the clay, and then we shall never
miscarry.

FINIS.
THE SPIRITVALL IUBILE.

In two Sermons.

By The late learned and reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr.
of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at GRAYES-INNE.

JOHN 8.36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed.

GAL: 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us
free.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne, and Rapha Harford, and are to be
sold at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange, and in Queens head Alley, in
Paternoster Row, at the gilt Bible. 1638.

THE SPIRITVALL IVBILE.
ROMANS 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the Law of sin and of death.


THERE be four things especially, Four things that trouble a Christians peace.
that trouble the peace of a Christian (and indeed of any man) in this world.

The first, is sin, with the guilt of it, binding them over to the wrath of
God, and the expectation of misery; a heavy bondage.

The second, is (besides the guilt of sin) the remainders of corruption, with
the conflict that accompanies them while we live in this world; and that
conflict must needs be tedious.

The third, is the miseries of this life, that accompany always both the guilt
and remainders of sin in this world; we are condemned to a great deal of
trouble here: and this does much exercise and perplex Gods children*

And then the shutting up of all; death, and damnation: the thought of these
things does much disquiet and disturb the peace of a Christians soul.

Now in this Epistle we have comfort against all these: First, for the guilt of
sin, that binds us over to eternal judgment, and the wrath of God; we are
freed by the obedience of Christ, the second Adam: as is excellently she well
in the fifth Chapter.

And for the remainders of corruption, that we conflict with in this world; we
are assisted against that, by the Spirit of Christ: for, as by the obedience of
Christ, we are freed from the guilt; so by the Spirit of Christ, we are helped
and assisted against the remainders of our corruptions.

For the third, the miseries of this life; we have victori^ in Christ; In him
we are more they conquerours, as you have it in this Chapter: They can do us
no harm, Nothing can separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. We have
(...) singular comforts in this Chapter against all the troubles than can be
fall us; and this is one, that triumphs over all: All things shall work for
the best, to them that love God. What should I speak of hurt, from any thing
that befalls us, when all shall work for the best, by the overruling of him
that commands all, Verse. 28?

And for death it self, Neither life nor death shall be able to separate us
from the love of God. And for damnation, which accompanies death, It is God
that justifies, who shall condemn? There is opposite comforts in Gods Book,
nay, in this Epistle, and in this Chapter, against all that may any way trouble
our peace. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, says the
Apostle; and then he goes on after, to show how by the help of the Spirit, all
things work for the best, etc. In this very Verse likewise, you have this
comfort set down, of our freedom by Christ from any thing that may hurt us.
For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the
Law of sin and of death.

The words are dependant, Dependence of the words^
as we see in the particle, for, For the Law of the Spirit of Life, etc. They
depend upon the first Verse thus, as a reason why, how ever there be sin in
Gods children, yet there is no damnation to them. There is no condemnation to
those that are in Christ Jesus, he prooves it thus; Those that are free from
the Law of sin, and of death, which brings in condemnation; those undoubtedly
are free from damnation: but those that are in Christ Jesus, they are freed
from the Law of sin, and of death; therefore there is no condemnation to
such. But how shall we know, that we are in Christ Jesus? Those that have the
Spirit, and are led by the Spirit of Christ, they are in Christ; The Law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the Law of sin, and of
death. So I say, the words are especially a reason of the former, There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: because, by the Spirit of Christ
they are freed from the Law of sin, and of death; and by consequent, they are
freed from damnation: for, what brings in damnation, but sin?

In the words then, there is an opposition; there is Law against Law; The Law
of the Spirit of life, in Christ; and, the Law of sin, and of death. Now,
where there are contrary Laws, if there be contrary Lords (as there must be)
New Lords will have new Laws; especially, if they be Lords by conquest: they
will alter the very fundamental Laws that were before; as you know the old
Conquerours have done in this Kingdom. Here is Law against Law, and Lord
against Lord; Christ against sin, and death. Here is a Lord by conquest over
all other Lords, and Laws: therefore, here must needs be an alteration of
Laws upon it, the very fundamental Laws must be altered. But to come more
particularly to the words;

For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the Law
of sin, and of death.
The words are much vexed by Expositors. I will rather speak my own judgment
of them, and reconcile them, then dash one man's judgment against another: for
that tends not to edification. The Law of the Spirit of life, etc. The meaning
of the words is plain, if we compare it with other Scriptures.

[ The Law. Law, what.
] It is nothing but a commanding power: for so the word written, the Law (in
the Apostles meaning) is but a power forcing and commanding. So the Law of the
Spirit of life, is the commanding and forcing power of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus: and so the Law of sin, it is either the tyrannical command and
forcing power of sin, or else the condemning for sin afterward, as we
shall see hereafter; for we shall unfold the words better in the particulars.

First then, Parts of the Text.
here we have set down what estate we are in by nature; we are under the Law
of sin, and of death.

And then, here is our freedom and deliverance from that; we are made free
from the Law of sin, and of death.

And then the Author of it, Christ Jesus; The Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus has freed me from the Law of sin, and of death.

In the words, and those that go a little before, there are these three maine
fundamental points of Religion: The misery and bondage of man. The
deliverance of man. And his duty.


Here you have his misery; he is under sin and death.

Here is his deliverance; he is free from this by Christ.

And for his duty, you have it in the last Verse of the former Chapter,
speaking of his deliverance: Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? then it follows; Thanks be to God through Jesus
Christ our Lord: Thankfulness is due, not verbal thankfulness only. Indeed,
the whole life of a Christian, after his deliverance, is a real thanksgiving:
but that is not in my Text.

To speak therefore of our estate by nature, and of our deliverance; our
estate is, that we are under the Law of sin, and death.

We are under the Law of sin.
Observe.
We are under sin: what sin? We are under a threefold sin. Naturally we
are under the Law of sin.


We are under the first sin of our first father: for as Levi paid Tithes in
Abraham to Melchisedech, Sin three-^old.
so we all sinned in the Loins of Adam our first Parent, Adams sin.
and the guilt of that first sin lies upon us.

Original sin.
Secondly, there is another sin that is derived and springs from that first
sin; which is the deprivation of the Image of God, the pravation of our
nature, we call it original sin; whereby we are stripped of that good we had
in our first creation, and have the contrary image, the image of Satan stamped
upon us: so we are under the first sin, the guilt of it; and we are under the
sin of nature, which we call original sin, because it is derived to us
even from our birth and first original we had in Adam.

And then we are under actual sins, Actual sins.
which are so many bonds to tie us fast under sin. We are dead by nature, but
we are dead and rotten by actual sins; we super add to the guilt of our
sin, by our daily conversation. We are blind by nature, but we are blinded
indeed much more, by our custom of life. Every sin does, as it were, tie us
faster to damnation, and keeps us faster under the bondage of sin. Every new
sin takes away some part of the light of the understanding, and takes away
some freedom of the will; it darkens the judgment more and more, and enthralls
the will and affections, and binds a man more and more to the just sentence of
God: That as it is, Prove. 5. Prove. 5.
the sinner is tied with the bonds of his own sins: he is under the chains
of an habituated wicked course of life, as well as of the sin of nature,
which is the spring of all.

This is the miserable state of man, Sins as chains.
and these chains of his sins reserve him to further chains: Even as the
Devil is reserved in chains, that is, in terrors of his conscience, which as
chains bind him till he be in Hell, the place he is destinated to; so we being
in the chains, and bondage, vexed with our sins, we are at the same time in
the chains of terrors of conscience, the beginnings of Hell, and reserved to
chains of damnation, and death, world without end. It is another manner of
matter, our estate by nature, then it is usually taken for. If men had but a
little supernatural light, to see what condition they are in, till they get
out into Christ Jesus, they would not continue a minute in that cursed estate.

Justice in God, to give up men to their sins.
And we have deserved to be cast into this estate, by reason that we left our
subordination and dependence upon God; which being creatures, we should have
had. Therefore we turning from God to the creature, God punishes our rebellion
to him, with rebellion in our selves; because we withdrew our subjection from
him, that therefore there should be in us a withdrawing of the subjection of
sin, and of the whole soul to God. So this captivity to, and giving up to
sin in us, it is penal, and sinful; but as it comes from God, it is merely
judicial. Therefore we have it often in the New Testament, in Romans 1. and 2 Thessalonians. Romans 1. 2 Thessalonians.
The Gentiles, because they would not entertain the Truth that they might have
had by the light of Nature, God gave them up to their sins. And then the
Christians, after the Apostles times, they set slight by the good Word of God,
the Gospel, therefore God gave them up to believe lies. It was sin in them;
but as God gave them up, it was justice. So this captivity, and giving men up
to their own lusts, it is justice, as it comes from God, it is a horrible
judgment; it is worse, then to be given up to the Devil himself: for by
being given up to our lusts, we increase our damnation. To be given up to be
tormented of the Devil, it is not such a mischief, as this spiritual
captivity under sin: we are guilty our selves, of our own thraldom. And
this will increase both the shame, and the punishment: The shame, that a man
shall say in Hell afterward; I have brought my self hither, I had means enough,
prohibitions enough; I had sometimes chastisements of God, sometimes motions of
his Spirit, sometimes one help from God, sometimes another: yet
notwithstanding I brake through all oppositions that God set between me, and
the execution of my lusts, and to Hell-ward I would; and hither I have brought
my self. So that indeed, the greatest part of Hell torment, the shame of them
especially it will be, that men have brought themselves by their own wits and
carnal lusts, thither. And indeed, all the wit a carnal man has that is not
sanctified by Gods Spirit, it is to work himself to misery, to be a drudge
to his lusts; that sets all the parts he has on work, not how he may serve
God, and be happy in another world; but how he may proule and provide for his
own carnal lusts. The misery of being under sin.
This is the estate of all men by nature, they are under sin, under the power
of sin, the blind judgment leads the blind affections, and both fall into
the ditch, into Hell.

We are under Satan.
The fearfulness and odiousness of this condition, to be in prison, and
thraldom, and bondage to all kind of sin, natural and actual, it will
appear further by this; That being in subjection to our base lusts, by
consequence we are under the bondage of Satan: for, he has power over death,
by sin; because he draws us to sin, and then accuses us, and torments us
for sin. By sin, we come to be under his bondage; so that we are under the
fearful captivity of the Devil, while we are under the captivity of sin:
for, all the power that he has over us, it is by sin; he is but Gods
executioner for sin. First, God gives him power to draw us to sin, to
punish one sin with another, and then he suffers him to accuse, and to
torment us afterward. What a fearful bondage is this, that being under sin,
we are under Satan? We are servants to our enemy; as God threatened his people,
that they should serve their enemies: but this is a greater judgment, to be
slaves to this enemy. This is the condition of every sinner. To be a slave to
a man's enemy, it is a judgment of judgments: yet nothwithstanding, this is
the case of every man by nature, he is a servant to his enemy, to Satan, and
his own lusts. He is a right Cham, a servant of servants: for Satan uses him
as the Philistims did Samson, he puts out his eyes, he puts out his judgment,
his wits, he besots him; and so he goes blind in Satan's blind work, and
business: he is in a Maze all his life long, till at length he sink into
Hell. So this is the aggravation of a man's estate by nature he is a slave to
his enemy. You know blessed Zachary says, Luke. 1. Luke 1.
That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him
without fear in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life. There
is no wicked man, but he is acted by the Devil (oh, Wicked men acted by the
Devil.
that we would consider of it:) we think we are led only by our own lusts
and sins as men; but until a man be in Christ, Ephesians. 2.
he is ruled by the command of the Prince of the Air, and in 2 Timothy 2, 2 Timothy
2.
he is ruled by Satan, according to his will. Even as a Bird in a snare it may
move up and down, but it is still in the snare and he that has it there cares
not, he knows he has it, safe and he goes about to catch other birds: So when
we are in our lusts, and follow them the Devil has us in his snare, he is
secure of us, and goes about getting more and more still; the Devil acts, and
moves, and leads all carnal men.

But how chances it, that they do not know and perceive it?

It is because he goes with the stream of their own corruptions. Carnal men
better then the Devil would have them.
Indeed we must make some limitation of this. In some cases, the Devil does
not move carnal men, they are better then the Devil would have them be for
the good of the Commonwealth, and State; but yet take them as they stand in
relation to Religion, they may be devilish, secret, bitter, dark enemies to
that. Though they may have strong heads for the good of the State, yet it is
not from any intrinsecall good in themselves; but God uses them, and makes
them do that. For the Devil would have all naught; he is an enemy to the
very Swine, therefore much more to the good of a State. Therefore there are
many politic civil Virtues, as we fee in Achitophel, and Judas, which no
question, is more then the Devil would have; he would not have civil men so
good, he would not have them do that they do for the common good often times:
yet the Devil will be sure to be at one end of the good they do, to taint
them, that their aim shall not be good, it shall not be to the glory of God,
it shall not be in reference to salvation.

And so as the good is temporal, they have a reward suitable to their desire,
they care for no more: for they believe not Heaven, but in a general notion;
It may be there is such things, it may be not: therefore the good they do, is
some little petty obedience; and what do they desire? To be well esteemed,
and respected; to be venerable, and to have honorable opinions in the hearts
of men, that men may stoop in their conceits to them as men of respect. This
they deserve indeed, and this they have; God gives them that they would have.
But as Christ tells the Pharisees, who did excellent good things, but it was to
be seen of men, he tells them, they had their reward: they had all they looked
for; for they were Atheists, they looked not for Heaven. So a man may say of
all men that are out of the state of grace: though they do more then the
Devil would have them, and for diverse degrees of that they do, they are not
subject to the Devil; yet he taints their actions one way or other in the end,
he joins himself in the action first or last, he has a hand in all their
actions. So that notwithstanding there be many good things, yet this hinders
not a whit, but that they may be under the power of the Devil: for it is but
in reference to civil Government and State, which is but for a time: The
fashion of this world passes away; here will be no Magistrates to govern, nor
no people to be governed, ere long.

I speak it, because many men are ready to propound such and such, to imitate
them in their courses; and to say, I will be no more religious then he: when,
perhaps, all may be but formalitie, and common graces for this world. God will
honor some so much, to be instruments for common good here: but what is that
to eternal salvation? He may be a slave to his lusts, and an enemy to the
power of grace, for all that. Therefore, unless we see men wrought upon
thoroughly, to be of the mind of Christ, to have the Spirit of Christ, to judge
of things as Christ judges, to judge the service of God, and doing his will,
to be the best things, and to go about doing good, and that with reference and
obedience to God; all is nothing, else: A man may be under the bondage of his
corruptions, and so by them to Satan.

To worse thing: then our selves.
Again, when we are under our lusts, and sins, it is about earthly things; we
are in slaverie to that which is worse then our selves. Sin is the vilest
thing in the world, and the things whereabout sin is occupied, are the
profits, and pleasures, and trifles of this world, mean petty things; it is a
base slaverie, to consider whom we serve.

So excellent a thing as the soul.
And to consider what it is that is in bondage, the immortal soul of man, that
had the image of God stamped upon it; and in the soul of man, the most
excellent part, the will, that is most free, yet being under sin, it is most
bound. Our will was given us, to cleave to God, and the best things; to make
choice of the best things, and to cleave to them undivided in life, and death,
and for ever; and so by cleaving to things better then our selves, to advance
our selves to a higher condition. For when the soul of man that is under
better things, that is under God, and Christ, and does cleave to God, and
Christ, in his affections, and to the things of a better life; these be things
bettering a man's condition, even raising the soul from its own present
estate, to a glorious condition. For we are as we affect, our wills and our
affections do transform us; therefore wicked men are called the World,
because they love it; and holy men are called heavenly, because they are
carried in their affections and wills, to heavenly things. Our affections and
wills do denominate us, they give us the name; nay, that is too little; they
do give us the realitie, the state. When God so alters and changes our
dispositions, that out of a sanctified judgment, we make a right choice of
things, and then cleave to them in our wills and affections constantly; this
raises our nature to be higher then it self. He that cleaves to the Lord,
is one Spirit, as the Apostle says. Indeed, our affections tran^forme us anew.
Simile.
As it is with the fire, it transformes cold and gross bodies to be all
fiery: so God, and heavenly things, work upon our hearts, they transform us
to be like themselves.

Now for this inward soul of man, which is so excellent a thing, fitted by God
to cleave to better things, for communion with himself, and everlasting
happiness; for this, to be a drudge to base pleasures, and profits, to the
windy empty things of this world, to vain titles, and such like empty things,
and to place its happiness in these things; it is a pitiful degeneration,
that so excellent a thing as the immortal soul of man, that shall never die,
should join with those things that shall make him miserable; that it shall be
better for a man that he had never been, as it is said of Judas; It had been
better for that man that he had never been borne.

The fruit of it.
In the next place, consider that that follows this thraldom and baseness to
our lusts: Uncertain pleasure.
there is a double fruit of it. The one, is uncertain: I mean, for our
yielding to our base affections, what get we? The pleasures of sin for a
season, a little pleasure, or profit, perhaps not that neither: but if we have
it, it is a fading commodity, that goes away quickly; when they are gotten,
what are they? vanity; they promise more before we get them, then they perform
when we have them. But then, there is another wages, that God in justice has
appointed for it, that is damnation; The wages of sin is death: it cries for
wages. When we are under sin we can look for nothing but death; and
therefore he joins them together here; the law of sin, and of death; an
expectation of eternal misery. This a man has that is wedded to himself,
that has not learned the first lesson in the Gospel, to deny himself; he is a
wretched slave to the Devil, in his best part, and power; his lusts imprison
his will and affections; his wit, that should devise how he should be happy
for for eternity, it is only a drudge to his base lusts. There are a company
of men, that are the shame, and blemish of the Gospel, that set their wits a
work only how to devise to satisfy their base lusts; and then the issue and
conclusion of all this, is eternal misery; and in the mean time, the
expectation of misery in terrors of conscience. This is the estate of every
man, till he be translated by the Spirit of God to a better condition in
Christ, that he spends out his time in a base and miserable thraldom, worse
then the thraldom of the Israelites in Egypt, or in Babylon.

And it is so much the more fearful, Men are insensible of their bondage.
because men are insensible of it, like Bedlams, that make nothing of their
chains, that laugh in their chains. A frantic man, when he is bound in
chains, he laughs; when they that are about him weep at his misery: so you
have men frolicking in sin, they will swear at liberty, and besot themselves
at liberty, and corrupt their consciences, even for base trifles: they think
they are in no bondage, they do all wondrous chearefully, and well; when as,
indeed, the more chearefully and readily any man performs the base service of
sin, Freedom in sin is a bondage.
the more he is in bondage. Freedom is opposite to bondage; notwithstanding,
such is the nature of sin, that the more freely we do it, the more we are
bound; because the more freedom we have, the more we are entangled; we run
into guilt upon guilt, till after guilt comes execution, an eternal separation
from the presence of God, and an adjudging to eternal torments for ever.

The false judgment of the world, who are happy.
So that it is a false judgment that the world has: they think great men
happy men, why? They do as they list. I, they may do so, and often times they
take the liberty to do so; they will be under no Laws, they are so far from
obeying the Law of God, that they are loath to be hampred with the Laws of the
State, or with any Laws, but they will be above all. A miserable condition,
why? the more will a man has in evil, the more miserable; for the more
freely, and with less opposition he tangleth himself, (let his place be
never so great) the deeper he sinks in rebellion, and the deeper he sinks into
guilt upon guilt; which will all come to a reckoning, at the hour of death,
and day of Judgment. So the men that we admire, and envy most (out of
simpleness, and want of judgment) they are the most miserable creatures in
the world; if they be out of Christ; and have not grace: for they have nature
let loose in them, without restraint, and nature being under the captivity of
sin, becomes out of measure sinful, in such: The less a man is curbed
either from Laws above him, or the Law within him, to check him, the more
wretched man he is: for the deeper he goes in rebellion and sin, the deeper
his torment shall be afterward.

Great persons have a great privilege; what is that? they shall be greatly
tormented; that is all the privilege that I know, if they be naught. Those
that shake off all bonds, any earthly privilege and prerogative, is so far
from exempting them from misery, that it makes them more miserable: for unless
they have grace to use those things that might be an advantage to better
things, they sink deeper and deeper into sin, and so into terrors of
conscience, first or last; and by consequence, to damnation: Oh, it is a
fearful condition, to be the greatest Monarch in the world, and not to be in
Christ, and under the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ! they are the objects
of pity above all kind of men, to truly judicious souls, that know out of
Gods truth, and by the light of the Spirit, what is to be judged of the state
of men. You see then what kind of misery it is that natural men are under,
being under the Law of sin.

To declare it a little further; for men will hardly think it is such a
bondage, The tyranny of sin.
to be under sin. Therefore, I beseech you, do but consider how sin
tyrannizeth, where it gets strength; Covetousness.
see it in some instances. The covetous worldly man that is under the Law of
that lust (he has the law of other lusts, but that is predominant) see how it
tyrannizeth; it takes away his rest, the use of Gods blessings, the good things
he has given him to enjoy, it makes him in thrall to the creature. Carnal
pleasure.
We see it in carnal pleasure; Amnon, when he lusted after his sister Thamar,
it took away his rest. And how does this base affection tyrannize in some men?
it makes them forget their bodies so, that they overthrow their health, and
hasten death temporal; it hurts the natural man, it makes them forget their
credit, it makes them forget their souls, it makes them stink, by living in
that carnal noisome sin. The judicious Heathen were sensible of it, by the
strength of natural judgment: yet sin where it is in any strength uncurbed,
it so tyrannizeth, that it makes men forget both health, and life, and credit
and estate in this world, that they come to nothing. What should I speak of
forgetting life eternal, and damnation? (they have no faith to believe that,
but) such is the tyranny of sin, that it makes them forget things sensible;
that by experience after, they see how dearly they have bought their base
pleasures, with the loss of credit, and health, and comfort; with the loss
of the estate that God has trusted them withal, in this world.

Ambition.
Take a man that is under the base Law of ambition, a proud person, see how it
tyrannizeth over him; it makes him forget blood, and kindred, all the bonds of
nature, he will kill his brethren to make his way; as you know in our own
Stories, such Tyrants, if there were not Stories enough in this kind, daily
experience shows it. Where the Law of ambition and pride reigns, it makes the
heart wherein this Tyrant sets up his Throne, to forget all bonds whatsoever,
of nature, and justice. You know whose speech it was; If the Law must be
violated, it must be for a Kingdom: but men will do it for far less; we
see what men will do for a base place to command others in this world, (when
they are conscious of their own ill courses, and commanding corruptions) and
all to give way to the base affection of ambition. A touch is enough of these
things, for experience witnesses, and goes along with me. All men that are not
in Christ, they have some predominant sin, either some base sin, or some
more refined sin, and lust, that keeps them from Christ and salvation, and
this tyrannizeth over them.

And this is the nature of this Tyrant sin, Sin takes away the sight of it
self.
it has such possession of a man till he be got out of it, and be in Christ,
that it takes away the sight of it self, it hinders the knowledge of it self,
it puts out a man's eyes. For that whereby a man should judge of corruption, it
is corrupt it self. Wisdom in man corrupted.
The wisdom of a man is death, it is enmity to God. The wit that he has
that should discern of his base courses, it tangles him more and more to his
own lusts: so that wit, and wisdom, the highest part of the soul, it is
imprisoned by base affections, and that power that should discern corruption,
it is set on work to satisfy corruption. What is the wit of a man that is not
in Christ, occupied about all his life time? it is nothing but a drudge, and a
slave, to devise means to satisfy his base lusts. Take a worldly man, he is
exceeding witty to contrive wordly plots, and business (though he be a dunce,
and a sot, in matters that are spiritual) in his own tract and course, he
has a shrewd wit, why? because his lusts to the world, they whet his wit. So
we see the best thing in man now, is inthralled to sin, his very wisdom it
self; therefore it is enmity to God.

Men not given up to all sins alike.
Every man has some Herodias, some sin or other that he is in bondage to,
till he be in Christ. He cannot in a like measure, be given and inthralled to
all sins, it is unnecessary: because one sin serves another; many sins
serve one great one. Corruption does not run in all streams in one equality:
but it runs amain one way unchecked, and uncontrolled, and unmortified, (in
all men that are not in Christ) and subdues the soul to it self, that it can
devise, and plot for nothing, but to satisfy that base lust. This is the state
of man by nature.

Object.
But some will say, it is not our state and condition; we are baptized, and
receive the Sacrament, and hear Sermons, and read good books, and therefore
we are not under sin.

Answer.
But says the Apostle, His servants ye are to whom ye obey; you may know the
state of your service, and subjection by the course of your life. And as Christ
says to the Jews, John 8. they bragged that they were free: alas, proud
people, they were neither free for soul, nor state: for they were under the
Romans. They thought they were free because they were Abraham's children: were
they not in captivity to the Egyptians, and under the Babylonians, and in
present captivity under the Romans? yet they forget themselves out of pride:
If the Son make you free, ye are free indeed: but because they were in a
sinful course, they were slaves of sin. So it is no matter what privileges
men are under, that they receive the Sacrament, and are baptized, and live in
the Church, etc. His servants year, whom ye obey. If there be prevayling
lusts that sit up their throne, and tyrannize in our hearts, and set our wits
on work, to devise how to satisfy them, more then to please God; it is no
matter what privileges we have, it is no matter whose livery we wear, but
whom we serve. We may wear Gods Livery, that shall be pulled over our heads
afterward, and we be uncased, that it shall appear that we are the Devils
servants under the profession of Christ.

There is no man that is not in Christ, that denies his corrupt nature any
thing: if revenge bid him take revenge, he will if he can; if he do not, it is
no thanks to him, but to the Laws. If any sin rise in the heart, all the
parts of the body, and powers of the soul, are ready weapons to this tyrant,
to keep a man in slavery. As if anger and wrath, keep a man in bondage, you
shall have it in his countenance, his hand will be ready to execute it, his
feet will be ready to carry him to revenge. If it be a proud heart that a man
is kept under, you shall have it in his looks, and expressions outward. If it
be the base affection of lust, you shall have adultery in the eye, an unchaste
and uncircumcised ear, and filthy rotten language. Men you see upon all
occasions are ready to execute the commands of these tyrannical lusts, in some
kind or other. Therefore never talk of thy freedom, when lusts are raised up
within thee, either ascending from thine own corruption, or cast in by Satan,
and so joining with thy heart, presently thy tongue will speak wickedly, and
thine eyes, and looks, and countenance, show that there is a naughty heart
within, and the whole man is ready to execute it, further then a man is curbed
by Law, or respect to his reputation or the like, which is no thanks to him.
Yet a man cannot act the part of a civil man so well, but the corruption of
his vile heart, will betray it self in his looks or language, one time or
other this tyrant will break forth. Therefore let us look to our hearts and
courses, for if we be not in Christ, we are under the Law of sin,

And of Death.
We are not only under the law of sin, We are under the law of death.
but also of death. Now, there is a death in this world; the separation of the
soul from the body; Natural.
but that is not so much meant here: for when we are in Christ, we are not free
from this death.

But there a is worse death, Spiritual.
which is a separation of the soul, from the favor and love of God, and from
the sanctifying, and comforting Spirit of God: when the Spirit of God does not
comfort, and sanctify the soul, it is a death. In this world.
For as the soul is the life of the body; the body has but a communicated
life from the union it has with the soul. The soul has a life of its own,
when it is out of the body, but the body has its life from the soul; so it is
with the soul, when there is an estrangement of the soul from the Spirit of
God, and Christ, sanctifying and comforting and chearing it, then there is a
death of the soul: the soul can no more act any thing that is savingly, and
holily good, then the body can be without the soul. And as the body without
the soul, is a noisome odious carcass, offensive in the eyes of its dearest
friends: so the soul without the Spirit of Christ, quickening and seasoning
it, and putting a comeliness and beauty upon it, it is odious. All the
clothes, and flowers you put upon a dead body, cannot make it but a stinking
carcass: so all the moral virtues, and all the honors in this world put upon
a man out of Christ, it makes him not a spiritual living soul: he is but a
loathsome carrion a dead carcass in the sight of God, and of all that have the
Spirit of God: for he is under death, he is stark, and stiff, unable to
stir or moove to any duty whatsoever, he has no sense, nor motion. Though
such men live a common, natural civil life, and walk up and down, yet they
are dead men to God, and to a better life. The world is full of dead men, that
are dead while they are alive, as S. Paul speaks of the Widow that lives in
pleasures. A fearful estate, if we had Spiritual eyes to see it, and think
of it.

At the hour of death.
But then after the death of the soul in this world, there is another degree of
spiritual death; which is, when the soul leaves the body, then the soul
dies: for then it goes to hell, it is severed for ever from the comfortable and
gracious presence of God, and likewise it wants the comforts it had in this
world.

At the day of Indgment.
And the third degree of it is, when body and soul shall be joined together;
then there is an eternal separation of both, from the presence of God, and an
adjudging of them to eternal torments in hell. This is the state of all men
that are not in Christ, they are dead in soul while they live; dead after the
separation of the soul and body; and after to be adjudged to eternal
damnation, world without end. Life is a sweet thing, and we know death it is
terrible; when we would set out our hatefulness to any thing, we use to say,
I hate it as death: do we love life, and do we hate death? we should labor
then to be out of that condition, that we are all in by nature, wherein we are
under sin and death, in regard of spiritual life (I mean) for, for civil
life, and government, and policy, men may have life and vigor enough, that are
hypocrites: but I speak of a better life, an eternal life, that is not
subject to death.

Now, A man under sin is under death.
mark the joining of both these together, we are under sin and death by
nature; where a man is under sin, he is under death: for as the Apostle
says, Romans 5. Romans 5.
Sin entered into the world, and by sin death. They were neither of both
Gods creatures, neither sin nor death: but sin entered into the world by
Satan, and death by sin. Oh, ye shall not die, says Satan; he was a liar
always from the beginning: so now he says to men, you shall not die; you may
do this, and do well enough, but he is a liar, and a murderer; when he
solicites to sin, he is a murderer. Let us take heed of solicitations to
sin, from our own nature, or from Satan; mark how God has linked sin,
and death, The wages of sin is death. When we are tempted to sin, we
think, I shall have this credit, or profit, or contentment, or preferment,
and advancement in the world. I, but that that you get by sin, it is not so
great as you look for, when you have it, if you get it at all: Sin and death
go together.
but afterward comes death, the beginnings of eternal death, terrors of
conscience universally follow, if a man be himself, if he be not besotted. The
more a man is a man, and enjoyes the liberty of his judgment to judge of
things; the more he sees the misery that is due after sin, with a fearful
expectation of worse things to come. Sin, and death are an adamantine chain,
and link that none can sever; who shall separate that which God in his Justice
has put together? If sin go before, death will follow; if the conception
go before, the birth will follow after: if the smoke go before, the fire
will follow. There is not a more constant order in nature, then this in Gods
appointment, first sin, and then death, and damnation after.

Use.
Therefore when we are tempted to sin, let us reason with our selves, To see
death in sin.
there is death in the pot, let us discern death in it, it will follow. And if
a man after repent of it, it will be more sharp repentance and grievous, then
the sin was pleasant; that a man shall have little joy of his sin, if he
do repent; if he do not repent, what a fearful estate is a man in, after he
has sinned? Sin, and death go together, no humane power can sever them: for
take the greatest Monarch in the world, when he has sinned, conscience is
above him as great as he is; for conscience is next under God; it awes, and
terrifies him, and keeps his sleep from him: as we see of late in our bloody
neighbor Country* after that great Massacre, he could not sleep without
Music, and the like. All that they have and enjoy in the world, all their
greatness, it will not satisfy and stop the mouth of conscience: but when
they sin, they feel the wrath of God arresting, and they a^e as i^ were,
shut up in prison, under the terrors of an accusing conscience, till they come
to eternal imprisoment, in the chain of hell, and damnation. This is the
estate of the greatest man in the world, that is not in Christ. They are not so
happy as we think they are, they are imprisoned in their own hearts: though
they walk at never so much liberty abroad, and do what they list: for sin
and death goes together; and before eternal death comes, the expectation, and
terrors of it seize on them for the present. So that whatsoever our first
birth be, though it be noble, and great, yet by it we are bondslaves under
sin and death, unless our second birth, our new birth, make amends for
fl^^e, for the baseness of our first birth. This prerogative, our spiritual
nobleness, is such an estate wherein we are not borne; but are borne again
to it, to an inheritance immortal, etc. But by nature we are all bond men,
though we be be borne never so nobly. Therefore let us never brag of our
birth, as the Jews did, that they were the children of Abraham. No, says
Christ, you are of your father the Devil. Let none stand upon the Gentry, and
Nobility of their birth, unless they be taken out of the condition they are in
by nature, to be in a better condition in Christ: for we see all men naturally,
are under the law of sin and death.

These things are slighted, because we enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; men think to be inthralled to sin, it is pleasant thraldom, they
are golden fetters: for I shall have the pleasures of sin all my life time,
etc. and for death, I will set a Roman spirit against death. Says a Roman;
what, is it such a matter to die? It is nothing to die; they set a good face on
the matter. And this is the conceit of many men, till they come to it: but
alas, to be inthralled to death, it is another matter, Eternity of misery
should deter from sin.
for behind death, there is a gulphe. A man may break the hedgewell enough
with a strong resolution to die; it is nothing to die, if there were an end.
But there is a gulphe, there is damnation, and destruction behind, there is
eternal torment behind, to be adjudged from the presence of God for ever; to
be separated from all good, and all comfort, and to have society with the
Devil and his Angels in hell, and that forever, and for ever. Thou may
perhaps make ^light of the service of sin, because thou have the present
baits to delight thee; but thou should regard death. Thou may neglect
death; but then regard eternal death. This word Eternal, it is a heavy word,
Eternal separation from all good, and eternal communion with the Devil, and
his Angels, and for the wrath of God to seize on thy soul eternally, world
without end, me thinks men should not set light by that. Therefore considering
that this is our estate by nature, we are all slaves to sin, and death, let
us labor to get out of this cursed estate by all means, which is by

The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus.
Now, I come to speak of our freedom, The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has freed me from the Law of sin and death. Freedom acceptable.
This is good news indeed, to hear of freedom: good news to the Israelites
to hear of freedom out of Egypt, and for the Jews to hear of Cyrus
Proclamation for their freedom out of Babylon. Freedom out of bondage is a
sweet message. Here we have such a message, of spiritual freedom, from other
manner of enemies, then those were. The year of Jubilee, it was a comfortable
year to servants that were kept in, and were much vexed with their bondage:
when the year of Jubilee came, they were all freed; therefore there was great
expectation of the year of Jubilee. Here we have a spiritual Jubilee, a
manumission and freedom, from the bondage we are in by nature. The Spirit of
life in Christ, makes us free from the Law of sin, and death. There is life
in Christ, We are freed from all ill by Christ.
opposite to death in us: there is a Spirit of life in Christ, and a Law of the
Spirit of life in Christ, opposite to the law of sin, and of death in us. So
that this is our happiness, while we live here (oh it is the blessedness of
men to make use of it while they have time, and space and grace to repent, and
to cleave to Christ) that whatsoever ill we are under by nature, we may have
full supply in Christ; for all the breaches that came by the first Adam; There
came the wrath of God, the corruption of our nature, terrors of conscience,
death and damnation, all these followed the sin, and breach of the first
Adam; all these are made up in the second. He has freed us from all the ill
we received from the first Adam, and that we have added our selves: for we
make our selves worse then we come from Adam, by our voluntary and daily
transgressions: but we are freed from all by the Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus.

How comes this freedom?
By satisfaction.
There can no freedom be without satisfaction to divine Justice. For why are we
under sin? God gives us up to sin, why are we under death? God gives us up
to death. Why, are we under Satan's government? he is Gods executioner, Gods
sergeant, he gives us up to him here, because we offend him. Why are we under
damnation and wrath? because God is offended. All our slavery comes originally
from God; however it be sinful in regard of Satan that keeps us; yet the
power whereby he keeps us is good: for he does it from God. His will is
always naught, but his power is always lawful: therefore the power whereby
the Devil keeps us (if we look up to God, under whom the power is) it is a
lawful power: for God has a hand in giving us up to finne, it is a judicial
giving up; and then by lusts, and ^inne, to Satan and death, and damnation. So
if we speak of freedom, we must not begin with the executioner: the wrath of
God must be satisfied; God must be one with us, so as his Justice must have
contentment. Satisfaction must be with the glory of his Justice, as well as of
his Mercy: his Attributes must have full content, one must not be destroyed to
satisfy another; he must so be merciful in freeing us, as that content must
be given to his Justice, that it complain not of any loss. Now,
reconciliation always supposes satisfaction, it is founded upon it.

And satisfaction for sin, By taking our nature.
it must be in that nature, that has sinned: now man of himself could not
satisfy divine Justice, being a finite person; therefore God the second Person
became man, that in our nature he might satisfy Gods wrath for us, and so
free us, by giving payment to his divine Justice. The death of Christ God-man,
is the price of our liberty, and freedom.

But why does the Apostle speak here, of a Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ, which frees us; but here is no mention of satisfaction by death?

Oh, but death is the foundation of all, as we shall see afterward. To unfold
the point therefore, because it is a special point; and the words need
unfolding; Here it is said, there is life in Christ. A Spirit of life in
Christ. and a Law of a Spirit of life in Christ.


Life in Christ.
There is life in Christ, not only as God for so indeed he is life. As God.
God, his life is himself: for life is the being of a thing, and the actions,
and moving, and vigor, and operations of a thing answerable to that being. So
the life of God is his being. As I live says the Lord, that is, as I am God, I
will not the death of a sinner. Now, Christ has life in him as God, as the
Father has: but that is not especially here meant.

As Mediator.
There is life in Christ as God-man, as Mediator. Now, this life is that life,
which is originally from the Godhead: indeed it is but the God-heads
quickening, and giving life to the manhood in Christ; the Spirit quickening,
and sanctifying the manhood. And we have no comfort by the life of God, as it
is in Gods life alone severed: for alas, what communion have we with God
without a Mediator? but our comfort is this, that God, who is the fountain of
life, he became man, and having satisfied Gods Justice, he conveyes life to us,
he is our head, he has life in himself as God, to impart spiritual life to
all his members; so there is life in Christ, as Mediator.

And there is a Spirit of life; that life it is a working life: for spirit is
an emphaticall word; spirit added to a thing, increased the thing. Again, he
says, the Law of the Spirit of life. Law, is a commanding thing; to show that
the life in Christ, it is a commanding life, it countermands all opposite lives
whatsoever, of sin, and death; and this Law is a countermand to all other
Laws; the Law of the Spirit of life frees us from all other Laws. So here is
life, the Spirit of life, and the Law of the Spirit of life; all words of
strong signification.

But for the clear understanding of this sweet and comfortable point: First,
consider how the Law of the Spirit of life is in Christ, what it does in him;
and then how it is derivatively in us.

First of all, All in Christ first.
we must know this for a ground, whatsoever is done to us, is done to Christ
first, and whatsoever we have, Christ has it first. Therefore life is first
in Christ, and then in us; Resurrection, first in Christ, and then in us;
Sonne-ship, first in Christ, and then in us; Justification from our sins, first
in Christ, (he is freed from our sins) and then in us: Ascension first in
Christ, and then in us: Glory in heaven first in Christ, and then in us. We
have nothing in us, but it is derived from Christ: therefore this being laid as
a ground, we must consider how the Spirit of life works in Christ, what it does
in Christ; and then what it does as it is in us: for whatsoever Christ has, it
is not only for himself, but for us.

The Spirit in Christ.
What does it in Christ?
Sanctified his humane nature.
The Spirit of life in Christ, first of all it did quicken, and sanctify his
humane nature; that nature that Christ pleased to take upon him, it stopped
sin, it made a stop of original sin, in sanctifying that blessed mass,
out of which his body was made, for the foundation of his obedience actual,
that it was so holy, it was hence, that his nature was purified by the
Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin: the foundation, that his death, and
sufferings was satisfactory, and acceptable, it was that his holy nature was
sanctified by the Spirit of God. So the first work of the Spirit of life, in
the Son of God, it was to sanctify, and quicken that blessed mass, that he
took upon him.

And the Spirit of life that quickened, Ennobled it.
and sanctified our nature in Christ, did likewise ennoble our nature: for even
as a base woman is ennobled, when she is taken in marriage with a great man,
she has his dignity accounted hers: so our nature by the Spirit being
sanctified, is knit into the union of person with Christ; that our nature and
the second Person, make one Christ, so our nature by the Spirit, Enriched it.
is ennobled by this union. And also enriched it with all grace, that our
nature is capable of: for the nature of Christ had this double prerogative
above ours: First of all, that blessed mass of flesh it was knit to be one
person with God, and then that nature was enriched, and ennobled with all
graces above ours. And this the Spirit of life did to Christ himself, to his
humane nature that he took upon him, that he might be a public Person. For
God the second Person, took not upon him any man's particular person, of Peter,
or Paul, or John: for then there should have been distinct persons, one person
should have dyed, and another rise: but he took our nature into his Person*
so that the same Person that did dye was God, though he dyed in our nature;
that he might be a public Person. So we must consider Christ sanctifying our
nature, that he might sit and sanctify all our persons.

But did the Spirit of life do nothing else, but sanctify and enrich the
humane nature of Christ with grace?

Fitted him for his Sacrifice.
Yes; for the Spirit of life in Christ, did sanctify him for his Sacrifice, as
he says John 17. in that blessed prayer, John 17.
I sanctify my self for them: it prepared him for his death, and made him a
fit Sacrifice. When he entered upon his calling, he had more of the Spirit: the
Spirit of life, as it were was increased. For it is no heresy to think, that
the gifts of Christ (for the manifestation of them) were increased. For in
every state he was in he was perfect; and when he set upon his Office, and was
baptized, he was fuller of the Holy Ghost: (as it were) there was a fuller
manifestation then before, when he did not set upon his Office openly.

Supported him in death.
In his death, what did the Spirit of life then? It supported him in his very
death: for there was an union of the Spirit; when there was a separation of his
soul and body, there was not a separation of the union. That which gave
dignity, and strength, and value, and worth to his death, it was the Spirit;
though there was a suspending of the comfort a while, yet there was no
separation of the union, but I speak no more of that, being not especially
meant here.

In raising him.
But especially in his Resurrection, (which we are now to think of by reason of
the day, and it is not amiss to take all occasions) especially then, the
Spirit of life that had sanctified Christ, and quickened him, and enriched his
nature, and supported him, and done all; that Spirit of life quickened the dead
body of Christ, And he was mightily declared to be the Son of God, by the
Spirit of sanctification, Romans 1.4. Romans 1.4.
by his Resurrection from the dead. The Spirit of life raised him from the
dead, and put an end to all that misery that he had undergone before for our
sakes. For until his resurrection, there was (as it were) some conflict, with
some enemies of Christ, either with Satan, or the world, or with death it
self: he lay under death three days, until Christ's body was raised, our
enemies were not overcome, Gods wrath was not fully satisfied, (it was not
declared to be satisfied at least:) for he being our surety, till he came out
of the grave, we could not know that our sins were satisfied for. But now,
when the Spirit of life in Christ comes, and quickens that body of his in the
grave, Romans 4.
and so does justify us, as it is, To. 4. He dyed for our sins, and rose
again for our justification; that is, by the Spirit of life in Christ,
quickening his dead body, he declared that we are fully discharged from our
sins, because he was fully discharged from our sins; being our surety, he
showed by his Resurrection, that he was fully discharged from all that he took
upon him. When a man comes out of prison, that is a surety, his very coming
out of prison shows, that he has a full discharge of all the debt he
undertook to pay: so the Spirit of life, raising Christ's body the third day;
manifestly declared, that the debt he took on him, was fully discharged: and
so as he dyed for sin, to satisfy Gods Justice for them; so he rose again
for our justification, to show that he had a full discharge for all.

Now, since the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has quickened his body; the
soul may make a bold demand to God, 1 Pet. 3.
as it is in 1 Pet. 8. It may make that demand, Romans 8. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods Elect? it is Christ that dyed, nay rather, that is risen
again, and ascended into heaven, and makes intercession for us. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods people? it is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? our sins? Christ has taken our sins upon him, and satisfied
divine Justice for them; and by the Spirit of life, has quickened that dead
body of his, that was surety for us himself; we may well say, Who shall lay
any thing to our charge? he that is our surety is dead; dead? nay risen again,
nay, ascended, and sits at the right hand of God. Therefore now the conscience
of any Christian, may make that interrogation, and bold demand there; it may
stand out any, that dares to oppose the peace of his conscience now; that he
may say, who is it? it is God-man that dyed, it is Christ that dyed in our
nature, and has raised that nature of ours again, and is at the right hand of
God, who shall lay any thing to our charge? The Spirit of life in Christ,
quickening him, has quickened us together with him; so that now we may boldly
demand, we are freed from our sins, because our surety is free from all.

All this was for our good; What Christ did, was for us.
what Christ did, it was not for himself, but for us: and in his birth, and
life, and death, and resurrection, we must consider him as a public person,
and so go along with all that he did as a public person. To see our ill in
Christ.
Whatsoever may be terrible to us, we must look upon it, first in Christ. If
we look upon the corruption, and defilement in our nature; look upon the pure
nature of Christ, his nature was sanctified in his birth, and he is a public
person; therefore this is for me; and though I be defiled in my own nature,
and carry the remainders of corruption about me; yet the Spirit of life in
Christ sanctified his nature, and there is more sanctity in him, then there can
be sin in me. When we look upon our sins, let us not so much look upon
them in our consciences, as in our surety Christ. When we look upon death,
look not upon it in our selves, in its own visage; but as it is in Christ
undergone, and conquered; for the power of the Spirit of life in Christ,
overcame death in himself first, and for us; and will overcome in us in time.
When the wrath of God is on our consciences, look not upon it, as it is in our
selves, but as undergone by Christ; and as Christ by the Spirit of life, now in
him is raised up, not from death alone, but from all terrors. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? See Christ by the Spirit of life quickened from all,
not only bare natural death, but from all enemies thou need to fear: from
the Law, it is nailed to his Cross, he now triumphs over it; and from sin;
he was a Sacrifice for it: and from the wrath of God, he has satisfied it, or
else he had not come out of his grave. So whatsoever is terrible, look on it in
Christ first, and see a full discharge of all that may affright thy conscience,
and trouble thy peace any way. To see Christ's good for us.
See him in his death, dying for every man, that will believe. Consider him in
his resurrection as a public person, not rising himself alone, but for all
us; therefore is 1 Pet. 1. 1 Pet. 1.
There is an excellent place, Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has begotten us again, to a lively hope by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ; to an inheritance immortal, undefiled, etc. and so go along
with him to his Ascension, and see our selves sitting with him in heavenly
places, as Saint Paul speaks, oh, this is a sweet meditation of Christ! to see
our selves in him, in all the passages of his birth, and life, and death, and
resurrection, and ascension, to glory in heaven: for all that he did, was as a
public person, as the second Adam. But now, before the Spirit of life in
Christ come to free me; I, and Christ must be one, there must be an union
between me and Christ, I must be a member of Christ mystical. For as Christ
quickened his own body, every joint when it was dead, because it was his body:
so he quickens his mystical body, every member of it: but I must be a member
first, I must not be my self, severed from Christ. The Spirit works
application.
Therefore the Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ, the first thing
it does, (next to impetration, and obtaining of happiness) it works
application; for these two go together, impetration and application. Christ by
his death obtained all good, and by his resurrection he declared it: but there
must be an application to me. Now this Spirit of life which is in Christ, which
quickened him, and raised him up; (and all for my good) must apply this to me.

The grace of application it is faith, Faith the grace of application.
therefore this must be wrought in the next place. How does the Law of the
Spirit of life free me? because first it freed Christ, therefore me: but that
is not enough, except there be application. Therefore the Law of the Spirit of
life works faith in me, to knit me to Christ, to make me believe, that all
that he has done is mine: and the same power that raised Christ from the
dead, works the power of faith, and application: For we must not think, that
it is an easy thing for a carnal man to believe, to go out of himself, that
it is salvation enough to have salvation, by the obedience of another man: No;
both in the Ephesians, and Colossians, in diverse places, it is S. Paul's phrase,
that the same power that raised Christ from the dead, must raise our hearts,
and work faith in them. For as the good things that faith lays hold on, are
wondrous good things, even above admiration almost: that poor flesh and blood,
a piece of earth, should be an heir of heaven, a member of Christ, that it
should be above Angels in dignity; as the things are superexcellent things,
even above admiration (in a manner:) so the grace that believes these things,
it is a strange and excellent, and admirable grace, that is faith. Therefore
faith must be wrought by the Law of the Spirit of Christ; by the ministry of
the Gospel. This is the grace of application, when a man goes out of himself;
when he sees himself first in bondage to his corruptions, to Satan, and to
death: and then sees the excellent way that God has wrought in Christ, to
bring him out of that cursed estate: then he has by the Spirit of life faith
wrought in him. And indeed the same power, and Spirit that quickened Christ
from the dead, must quicken our hearts to believe in Christ. It is a miracle to
bring the heart of man to believe. We think it an easy matter to believe:
(indeed it is an easy matter to presume, to have a conceit) but for the soul
in the time of temptation, and in the hour of death, for the guilty soul, to
go out of it self, and cast it self upon the mercy of God, who is justly
offended, and to believe that the obedience of Christ is mine, as verily as if
I had obeyed my self: here must be a strong sanctified judgment, and a mighty
power to raise the soul, to cast it self so upon Gods mercy in Christ. So
that besides the obtaining salvation by Christ, there must be a grace to apply
it, and this faith does.

Faith is said to do that that Christ does, How faith is said to do that that
Christ does.
because faith lays hold upon Christ, what faith does, Christ does, and what
Christ does, faith does: therefore it has the same actions applied, and given
to it, that Christ has. Faith is said to save us: you know it is Christ that
saves us: but faith lays hold on Christ, that saves us: faith purges the
heart, and overcomes the world: Christ by his Spirit does all this: but because
faith wrought by the Spirit, is such a grace, as lays hold on the power of
Christ, it goes out of it self to Christ: therefore what Christ does, faith is
said to do. So then the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, not only freed
Christ himself, by his Resurrection: but likewise by the same power, whereby
he raised himself, he rayseth our hearts to believe what he has done, both
in his state of humiliation, and exaltation, and makes all that Christ did ours.

The Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, working faith in us, and by faith other
graces, does free us from the Law of sin, and death, Christ does it, and
faith does it, and grace which issues from faith does it, subordinately. Christ
does it by way of merit: and by his Spirit, working faith in us, to lay hold
upon whatsoever Christ has done or suffered, as if we had done it our selves,
so it frees us from the law of sin, and death; because it lays hold of the
freedom wrought by Christ for us. But besides, and next to faith, there is a
Spirit of sanctification, by which we are free from the commanding law of
sin, and death* But to clear all this, consider there is a freedom in this
life, Freedom double.
and in the life to come from sin and from death. In this life.
A freedom in this life, in calling, in justification, in sanctification: and
in the life to come a freedom of glory.

In effectual calling.
There is a freedom in effectual calling, by the min^sterie of the Gospel: the
Gospel being preached, and unfolded, faith is wrought whereby we know what
Christ has done for us, and we see a better condition in Christ, then we are
in by nature; seeing by the Spirit of God, the cursed estate we are in, we are
convinced of sin in our selves, and of the good that is in Christ, and
hereupon we are called out of the thraldom we are in by nature, by the
Spirit of Christ, and the Word of God, unfolding what our condition is: for man
by nature having self-love in him, and that self-love being turned the right
way, he begins to think; I, does the Word of God say, I am a slave to sin
and damnation? the Word of God can judge better then my self, and then the
Spirit of God sets it on with conviction, that undoubtedly this is true. And
together, with the cursed kingdom and slavery that I am under, there is
discovered a better state in Christ: for the Gospel tells us what we are in
Christ; freed from hell, and death, and heirs of heaven: oh the happy estate
of a Christian to be in Christ! The Gospel, with the Spirit discovering this, a
man is called out of the cursed estate he is in by nature, to the fellow-ship
of Christ, by faith, which is wrought in this calling: so that now he comes to
be a member of Christ by faith, so that whatsoever Christ has, or is, or has
done or suffered, it is mine by reason of this union with him by faith, which
is the grace of union that knits us to Christ, and the first grace of
application. So there is the first degree of liberty, and freedom wrought by
the Spirit of God, together with the Gospel in effectual calling.

The second is in justification, In justification.
that faith and belief in Christ, that was wrought in effectual calling, it
frees me from the guilt of my sins. For when the Gospel (in effectual
calling) discovers, that Christ is such a one, and that there is such an estate
in Christ; and there is faith wrought in me: then that faith lays hold upon
the obedience of Christ to be mine. For Christ in the Gospel offers his
obedience to be mine, as if I had done it in mine own person; whatsoever Christ
did or suffered is mine: for he is made of God, to be Wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, to be all in all; the Gospel sets him forth to
be so. Now faith laying hold of Christ, to be made of God all in all,
obedience, righteousness, etc. whatsoever is needful, hereupon this faith
justifies me, hereupon I come to be free from the guilt of my sins, because
my sins were laid upon Christ, Christ's death, was the death of a surety; it
was as if I had dyed my self, and more firm; thus I come to be free in
justification: for what my surety has done, I have done.

In sanctification.
Again, there is a freedom in sanctification, that is, when a man believes
that Christ is his, and that his sufferings are his, then the same Spirit that
discovers this to be mine, it works a change and alteration in my nature, and
frees me from the dominion of sin. The obedience of Christ, frees me from the
condemnation of sin, and the Spirit of sanctification frees me from the
dominion of sin. This is the freedom of sanctification, which faith lays
hold on, Whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. Christ as a
head, derives to me the holy Spirit, to sanctify my nature, and of his
fullness, we receive grace for grace; so the Spirit of sanctification in Christ
frees me from the dominion of sin and death.

It is said here, To be free from the law of sin and death, what?
that by Christ we have spiritual liberty and freedom, not from sin, and
death, but from the law of sin, and of death. It is one thing to be freed
from sin, and death, and another thing to be freed from the law of them: for
we are not indeed freed from sin, and death, but from the law of sin, and
death; that is, from the condemning power of sin; that though sin be in us;
yet it does not condemn us: and though we die, yet the sting is pulled out,
death is but a passage to a better life. So I say in Justification, we are
freed from the condemning power of sin, and in sanctification, from the
commanding power of sin. When we are knit once to Christ, we have the
obedience of Christ, ours in justification: and the holiness of Christ is
derived to us, as from the head to the members in sanctification, and so we are
freed from the law of sin. To understand this a little better, the same Spirit
that sanctified the natural body, the humane nature of Christ, whereby he
became bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh: the same Spirit does sanctify
the mystical body of Christ, that it may be bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh. For before we come to heaven, Christ must not only be bone of our
bone, etc. that is, in his Incarnation, but we must be bone of his bone, etc.
that is, we must have natures like Christ, not only flesh and blood; for (so
a reprobate has flesh and blood, as Christ has) but we must have his Spirit
altering and changing our nature, that instead of a proud, disobedient,
rebellious nature, now it must be a holy and humble, and meek nature;
(together with humane frailty, for that we carry about with us;) then the
Spirit of life derived from Christ, makes us bone of his bone. For indeed, in
his humane nature, being bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, he made us
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh: he became man, that we might partake
of the divine nature, being partakers of the divine Spirit. So that now the
Spirit of life in Christ, when we are knit to him, is a Spirit of
sanctification, altering our natures, and working in our hearts a disposition
like Christ's; that we judge, as Christ judges, and choose, as Christ chooses,
and aim at Gods glory as Christ did. For there is the same mind in us, that
was in Christ, Philip. 2. Philip. 2.
In our proportion, growing still more and more, to conformity with Christ,
till we be in heaven, till Christ be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 1 Cor. 15.
When he will change our nature to be holy as his own.

In the life to come.
Besides this liberty from sin, and death in this life, there is a glorious
liberty, and freedom tha^ we have by the Spirit of Christ, when we are dead:
for then the Spirit of life that raised Christ's dead body, will raise our
bodies, and that Spirit of Christ that raises his body, and raises our souls
in this world from sin to believe in him, will raise our dead bodies. The
same virtue, and power, that works in Christ, works in his members: this is
called, The glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Then we shall be freed
indeed, not only from the law of sin, but from sin it self, and not only
from the law of death, but death it self, and we shall live forever with the
Lord. Christ then shall be all in all by his Spirit. Christ will never leave
us, till he have brought us to that glorious freedom: we are freed already
from sin, and death, he has set us in heavenly places, together with
himself, now; In faith we are there already: but then we shall be indeed.
Thus you see how we come to have the law of the Spirit of life in Christ, to
free us from the law of sin, and death, and all the passages of it.

You see here that there is law against law. Use.
The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, Comfort against rebellion of lusts.
against the law of sin, and death. I beseech you consider that God has
appointed law, to countermand law, the Spirit of Christ to overcome sin in
us, not only in justification, but in sanctification; oh, let us therefore
comfortably think, there is a Law above this Law. I have now cold, dead, base
affections: but if I have the Spirit of Christ, he can quicken, and enliven me,
he will not only pardon my sin: but by the Law of his Spirit direct, guide,
and command me a contrary way to my lusts. And this is an Art of spiritual
prudence in heavenly things, whenever we are beset with dangers, to set
^reater then that against it. The Devil is an Angel; but we have a guard of
Angels about us. The Devil is a Serpent: but we have a bra^en Serpent that
cures all the stings of that Serpent. We have Principalities and Powers
against, but we have greater Principalities and Po^ers for us. The Law of life,
against the law of sin and death. We have a law of our lusts tyrannizing over
us, and enthralling us; it is true: but then there is a Law of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus, to overcome, and subdue that law of our lusts, if so be
that we use the prerogatives we have, if we use faith, and go to God, and
Christ, in whom are all the treasures of grace. How to use our prerogatives.
He is the treasury of the Church, of his fullness we receive grace for grace.
Are we troubled with any corruptions? go to the Spirit of liberty in Christ,
and desire him to set us at liberty from the bondage, and thraldom of our
corruptions. And remember what Christ has done for us, and where he is now,
in heaven: let us rai^e our thoughts, that we may see our selves in heaven
already; that we may be ashamed to defile our bodies and souls (with the base
drudgery of sin, and Satan,) that are sanctified in part in this world, and
shall be glorified in heaven. Certainly faith would raise our souls so: we
betray our selves, when being once in the state of grace, we are in^hralled
basely to any sin. For sin shall not have dominion over you, because you
are under grace, says the Apostle. Being under grace, if we do (...) use our
reasoning, and use faith, and exercise the grace we have given us, we cannot
be in thrall to corruptions. We shall have remainders to trouble us: put not
to (...), and reign, and domineere. For sin (...) bears ^way, but when we
betray our selves, and either believe not what Christ has done for us, or else
exercise not our faith. A Christian is never overtaken basely, but when he
neglects his privileges, and prerogatives, and does not stir up the grace of
God in him.

Learn this then, when we are troubled with any thing, set Law against Law;
set the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, against all oppositions
whatsoever, Comfort in temptations.
and let the temptation ^^e where it will: let it lie in justificati^^, as when
we are tempted by Satan to despair for sins, To despair.
for great sins, oh but then consider the Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ, has freed me from the law of sin, and of death. Christ was made
sin, to free me from sin. Consider that Christ was God-man, he satisfied
divine Justice, the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, though they be
as red as crimson. Thus set Christ against our sins in justification, when
the guilt of them ^^oubles our souls. Temptation by lusts.
And so likewise, when we are set on by base lusts, set against them the power
of Christ in sanctification. What (...) I now? a member of Christ, one that
professes my self to be an heir of heaven: there is a Spirit of life in
Christ my head, there is a Law of the Spirit of life in Christ; that is, there
is a commanding power in his Spirit, and that Spirit of his is not only in the
head, but in the members. If I go to him for grace, I may have grace,
answerable to the grace that is in him; grace that will strengthen me with his
power: be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. Ephesians. 6.
and in Christ I can do all things, by his Spirit, though in my self I can
do nothing.

Deadness of Spirit.
And so in deadness, and desolation of Spirit, when the soul is cast down
with discomfort; let us think with our selves, the Spirit of life in Christ,
is a quickening Spirit, if I can believe in Christ, he has freed me from the
guilt of sin, and he has by his Spirit, given me some little enlargement
from the dominion of my corruptions, why should I be cast down? I am an heir
of heaven; ere long Satan shall be trodden under my feet; ere long I shall be
free from the spiritual combat, and conflict with sin, that I am now
encountered with; therefore I will comfort my self, I will not be cast down
overmuch.

In the hour of death.
In the hour of death, let us make use of this freedom of the Spirit of life
in Christ Jesus from the law of sin, and death. When the time comes, that
there must be a separation of soul, and body; oh let us think with our
selves; Now I must dye, yet Christ has dyed, and I must dye in conformity to
my head, and here is my comfort: the Law of the Spirit of life, has freed me
from the law of death, it has freed me from spiritual, and eternal death. So
that now through Christ, death is become friendly to me; death now is not the
death of me, but death will be the death of my misery, the death of my sins,
it will be the death of my corruptions, death now will be the death of all that
before troubled me: but death will be my birth day, in regard of happiness;
Better is the day of death, then the day of birth. When a man comes into this
life, he comes into misery; but when he dies, he goes out of misery, and comes
to happiness; so that indeed, we never live till we dye, we never live
eternally, and happily till then: for then we are freed from all misery, and
sin. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, they rest from their labors;
they rest from the labors of toil, and misery, they rest from the labors of
sin; from all labors whatsoever. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, and
of all times then blessed; more blessed then before, they rest from their
labors, and then begins their happiness, that shall never end. So you see
what comfort a Christians soul sprinkled with the blood of Christ, may have
if, it go to God in Christ, and beg of Christ to be set at liberty, from all
enemies, to serve God in holiness and righteousness.

We are not only freed from ill, but advanced to good.
I speak too meanly, when I say, the Law of the Spirit of life, has f^^ed us
from (...)* and death: this is not all* the Spirit of life, not only frees us
from ill, but advances us to the contrary good in every thing, wherein this
freedom is. For we are not only called out of misery, but to a Kingdom* we
are not only freed from sin, but entitled to heaven, in justification: and
in sanctification, we are not only freed from corruption, but enabled by the
holy Spirit of liberty, to run the ways of Gods Commandments, and make them
voluntary, to serve God chearefully zealous of good works; we are not only
freed from the command, and condemnation of sin, and ^he rigor of the Law*
but we have contrary dispositions, ready, and willing, and voluntary
dispositions wrought by the Spirit of Christ, to every thing th^^ ^s good. And
so we are not only free from death and misery, (for so things without life
are, they suffer no misery) but we are partakers of everlasting life, and
glory, the liberty of glory. Gods benefits are complete, that is, not only
priuative, freeing us from ill; but positive, implying all good: because God
will show himself a God: he will do good things as a God, fully. For the Law
of the Spirit of life, not only frees us from the law of sin, and of death:
but writes the Law of God in our hearts: he not only frees us from the law of
death; but advance us to everlasting life, to the glorious life we have in
heaven, to live for ever with the Lord: o^ happy condition of a Christian! if
we could know our happiness.

Let us often meditate deeply of Christ, and of our selves in him, let us see
all our ill in him; and all our good in him: see death overcome, and sin
overcome by his death, he being made a curse for us: see the Law overcome, he
being made under the Law for us: when the wrath of God vexes, and terrifieth
us, see it upon him; He sweat water and blood in the Garden. It made him cry
out, My God, my God, why ^ast thou forsaken me? See all that may trouble us in
him, as our Surety. And all the good we hope for, see it in Christ first:
whatsoever he has in his natural body, it is for his mystical body; for he
gave his natural body for his mystical. God, in the world to humble us,
exercises us with troubles and calami^ies, as he did Christ: we must be
conformable to our he^d: but consider the poison, and sting of all ills we
need to fea^e, is swallowed up* and taken away by Christ. And as I said, let us
see all our good in him, we are sons in him* raised (...) him, blessed in
him, set in heavenly places with him, and shall be follow-heires, and Kings
with him; for we are his members; his Spouse, the wife shall enjoy the same
condition as the husband, whatsoever he has she shall have. What a
comfortable estate is this I we can fear no ill, nor want no good; whatsoever
he has, it is for us: he was borne for us: he dyed for us, he is gone to
heaven for us, for us, and our good, he did, and suffered all these things. We
cannot exercise our thoughts too much in these meditations.

Application to the Sacrament.
The Lords Supper is a Sacrament of union and communion, hence it has its name;
and by receiving the Sacrament our Communion, and union with Christ, is
strengthened. What a comfort then is it to think, if I have fellowship with
Christ, it is sealed by the Sacrament? when I take the Bread, and Wine, at the
same time I have communion with the Body, and Blood of Christ shed for my
sins; and as Christ himself, was freed from my sins, imputed to him, and
by his Resurrection declared that he was freed: so surely shall I be freed
from my sins. So that this Communion, taking the Bread and Wine, it seals to
us our Communion, and fellowship with Christ, and thereupon our freedom from
sin, and from the Law, and sets us in a blessed, and happy estate. We should
labor therefore, by all means to strengthen our union, and Communion with
Christ; and amongst the rest, reverently and carefully, attend upon this
blessed Ordinance of God: for the body of Christ broken, does quicken us;
because it is the body of the Son of God. My flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed: and he calls his body broken, the bread of life, Why?
because it was the body of the Son of God, who is life, Job 6. All life comes
from God. Now Christ taking our nature upon him, his death is a quickening
death: and by reason of the union with the divine nature, now, it is the body
of God broken, and the blood of God shed for us, (there is our comfort,) and
he was declared to be so by his Resurrection, that declared that he was God,
and that he was freed from our sins. Powerful must that Savior needs be,
that was so strong in his very death, when his very body was broken, and his
blood let out: then he did work the foundation of all comfort: for then he
satisfied the wrath of God. Christ was strongest when he was weakest. The
Resurrection was but a declaration of the worth of that he had done.) Now, in
the Sacrament we have Communion with Christ dying, especially, as his body is
broken, and his blood shed: for that is the foundation of all comfort by his
Resurrection. And because the Spirit of life was in Christ, and did quicken his
body while he was alive, and was a Spirit of life, even when he dyed, and
gave worth, and excellency to his death: therefore, when we take the
Communion, we ought not to meditate merely of the death of Christ, as his
blood was shed, and his body broken: but of the death of such a person, as had
the Spirit of life in him, as was God and man: and so set the excellency of his
person, against all temptations whatsoever. Set the excellency of Christ so
abased, his body broken, and his blood shed, against all temptations, if it be
the greatest; the wrath of God upon the conscience; yet when conscience thinks
this, God the party offended, gave his own Son to be Incarnate, and the
Spirit of life in him, did quicken man's nature, and in that nature, did die for
satisfaction: now, God will be satisfied by the death of such a Surety, as his
own Son: so that the excellency of the Person, having the Seal of God upon
him ( For him has God the Father sealed) John 6.
does wondrously satisfy conscience in all temptations whatsoever. What need a
man fear death and damnation, and the miseries of this life, and Satan? what
are all? if God be appeased and reconciled in Christ, then a man has comfort,
and may think of all other enemies, as conquered enemies. Now we cannot think
of the death of Christ, who was a quickening Spirit: but we must think of the
death of an excellent person, that gave worth to his death, to be a
satisfactory death for us. Therefore let us receive the Communion with comfort,
that as verily as Christ is mine, so his quickening Spirit is communicated to
me, and whatsoever he has is mine: If I have the field, I have the Pearl in
it, his obedience, his victory over death, his Sonship is mine, his sitting in
heaven is for me, he sits there to rule me, while I am on earth, and to take me
up to himself when I am dead, all is for me: when we have Communion with
Christ, we have communion with all: Therefore the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus (when I am one with him, it quickens m^) and frees me from the law of
sin and death.

FINIS.
SAINT PAUL'S CHALLENGE.

In one Sermon.

By The late learned and reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr
of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at GRAYES-INNE.

PSALM. 27.3. Though an Host should encampe against me, my heart shall not
fear; though war should rise against me, In this will I be confident.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne, and Rapha Harford, 1638.

SAINT PAVLS CHALLENGE.
ROMANS 8.30. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can
be against us?


THE words are a glorious conclusion, and triumph of faith: the conclusion upon
all the former particulars in the Chapter, and the foundation of all the
comforts that follow after, to the end of the Chapter. They are as the center
of the Chapter: all the beams of heavenly comfort in this divine Chapter, they
meet as it were in one, in this short clause, What shall we say then to these
things, etc.

In the words briefly, there is, first a question, What shall we say to these
things?

And then a triumph, If God be with us, who can be against us? It is a question
answered with another question, What shall we say to these things? He answers
it with another question, If God be with us, who can be against us?

What shall we say to these things?
To these things before mentioned: If w^e be in Christ, there is no
condemnation to us: if we be led by the Spirit; if we be heirs of heaven, and
fellow heirs with Christ, if we suffer with him, if we have the spirit of
prayer to help our infirmities in the worst conditions, if all creatures
groan with us, and if all work for our good; if God from all eternity has
written our names in heaven by election, and separated us from the rest of the
world in vocation, and has sanctified, and justified us, and will after
glorify us; what shall we say to these things?

The heart of man is full of doubtings, and misgiving, full of thoughts,
According to the multitude of my thoughts, thy comforts refreshed my soul, a
multitude of thoughts, and a multitude of comforts; there is comfort after
comfort, because there are thoughts after thoughts, and surmises after
surmises. There is no wast comfort set down in this Chapter; and when he has
set down all, he comes, and concludes in a triumphant manner, What shall we
say to these things? He propounds the quaere to himself, he catechiseth his
own heart, and others, if these things be so, what can be said against them?
Surely the unbeleeving, doubting, dark, rebellious heart of man, has many
things to say against divine truths, for though divine truths be lighter then
the Sun, and there is no greater evidence of any thing in the world; yet they
find no place in the unbeleeving heart. Let God say what he will, the doubting
heart is ready to gainsay it: but these truths are so pregnant and clear,
that it is a wonder, that any thing should be said against them, What shall we
say to th^se things?

Again he means, To show the greatness of our privileges.
what comfort can you have more? what can you desire more? what can be said
more? what use will you make of all that has been said? what will you suck
out of it? If all this be true that has been spoken before; that a Christian
is so elevated above the common condition: if God love him from everlasting in
election, and to everlasting in glorification; if in the middle time, all shall
work for the best; what comfort can the heart of man desire more? and what use
can you make of this for courage, and for comfort for the time to come? these
things are employed in this question, What shall we say to these things?

It is good, Use.
often to propound quaeres and demands to our own hearts, It is good to
propound quaere's to our selves.
when we read or hear divine truths, to ask our own hearts, you have heard
these things, what say you to them? For whatsoever God says in his Word, will
do us no good, till we speak to our own hearts, and be convinced of it, and
say it is so: therefore we should say to our selves, here are many comforts,
and duties pressed; but what say thou to it, my heart, do thou not stand
out against comforts, and advice? It is no matter what God says, unless he
overpower the unbeleeving heart, to say, what shall I say to these things?
shall I not agree with God, and his Spirit, and his comforts? shall they be
best in regard of an unbeleeving heart? o^, no; Therefore let our care be, to
store them in the treasury of our memory, which should be like the pot of
Mannah, to contain heavenly comforts: let us treasure up all the truths we
can, all will be little enough, when we shall need comfort. But when we have
them in our memory, let us ask our selves, are these things so, or no? If they
be so, believe them, if they be not so, then let us give liberty to our selves,
and away with hearing, and reading, etc. If they be so, for shame let me yield
to them.

Let us ask these questions with some fruit, let us deal thus with our own
hearts, often call them to account, whether ^^beleeve or no; for we have such
a faculty, and power, we can reflect upon our selves. And we ought to desire of
the Spirit of God* to teach our hearts, to reflect upon them selves, to examine
whether we know, and if we know, whether we believe, and what use we make of
these things, and why we should live thus; does this life, and course of mine,
agree with these principles? The best of us all are tardy this way; therefore
let not that part, without making some use of it. But I proceed to that, I will
more dwell on.

If God before (...), who can be against us?
Here is first a ground laid, and then a comfort built upon it. The ground that
is laid, is* If God be with us? when he says; If God be with us? he does not
put the case, but lays it as a ground; If God be with us? as indeed he is with
all his, in electing them, in calling them, in working all for their good, in
glorifying them after, etc. If God be with us, as he is, then this comfort is
built upon this ground, Who shall, or can be against us?

For the first, the ground that is laid, is that,

God is with his children. God is with his children.

I^de^d he is with the whole world, he is every where: but he is with ^is
Church, and children, in (...). The soul in^pred in the whole body, but it is
in the brain after another (...) it understands, and (...) he is not every
where comfo^ting, and directing, and sanctifying, nor every where giving a
sweet and blessed issue. So, beside^ the general respect, that will not now
stand on: God is with us, that (...) his, in a more pec^liar manner, in all his
sweet Attributes: How God is with them.
in his wisdom, to direct us, with his power, to assist, and strengthen us;
by his grade, and love, to comfort us; and he is with us, in all our
perplexities to stay our souls: he is with us by his sweet, and gracious
mercy, to feed (...) with hidden Mannah, with secret comforts in the midst of
discomforts: when there is no comfort else with us, then God is with us. And
then he is with us, in the issue of all that a godly man takes in hand in his
name, he is with him in all crosses, to direct and tu^^e them to his best
good: All things work for the best, to them that love God. He is with them, in
all his sweet relations, as a gracious Father in Covenant, as a Husband. He is
with them in those sweet comparisons, as a Hen, as an Eagle, to carry them on
his wings, above all dangers, as he carried the Israelites in the wilderness.
He is with them in all comfortable relations.

Therefore God, in the Scriptures borrowes (...) from every thing th^^ is
comfortable: He is with them as a Rock to build on, as a Shield to defend
them: in the time of heat and persecution, he is a shadow, to keep them from
the heat, he is with them as a light. Christ is our life in death, our light
in darkness, our righteousness in sinfulness, and guilt, our holiness in
impurity, our redemption in all our miseries. There is somewhat of God in every
creature, therefore God takes names from his own creatures: because there is
some strength or comfort in them. God gives himself variety of names, as there
are variety of our distresses. Are we in misery? God is a Rock, a Shield, a
Tower of defense, a Buckler: he is all that can be said for comfort. He is
with us in his Attributes, and sweet relations, and all sweet terms, that may
support our faith; that whatsoever we see comfortable in the creature, we may
rise more comfortably to God, and say, God is my Rock, and Shield, and my
light, and defense.

And then God is with us in every condition, and in every place whatsoever; he
is not only a God of the mountains, and not of the valleys, or a God of the
valleys, and not of the mountains; as those foolish people thought; but he is
in all places, and at all times with his. If they be in prison, he goes with
them: Act. 16. Act. 16.
He made the prison, a kind of Paradise* a heaven. If they be banished into
other Countries, he goes with them: I will go with thee oh Jacob, into Egypt,
and bring thee back again. If they be in death, he is with us to death, and
in death: In the valley of the shadow of death, thou art with ^e: at all times
whatsoever, and in all conditions, God is with us.

In all our affairs whatsoever, God is with us: Fear not Josua: Fear not
Moses: what was the ground of their comfort? I will be with thee. He was with
Saint Paul in all conditions, therefore he bids him fear not. So our blessed
Sa^iour, the head of all, in Act. 10.38. Act. 10 38.
in the speech of Peter to Cornelius, he did all things well, for God was with
him: you see how God is with his children.

Ground of it. From Gods free love.
What is the ground, that the great and holy, and pure God, blessed for ever,
should be with such sinful and wretched creatures as we are; that he should
not only be with us, and about us, and compass us as a shield, but be in us?

The ground of all, is his free love in Christ, Christ was God with us first.
God that he might be with us, ordained that Christ should be God with us,
Emmanuel, that he, should take our nature into unity of person with himself.
Christ being God with us, (that he might satisfy the just wrath of God for our
sins, and so reconcile God, and us together,) he has made God and us
friends: so that this, that God is with us, it is grounded upon an excellent,
and sound bot^om^, upon the Incarnation of our blessed Savior, that for this
very end, that God might be with us, was God with us, that is, he was God and
man, to bring God and man together, he was God and man in one, to bring God and
man, that were at contrary terms, to terms of reconciliation: to recollect
and bring us back again to God, from whence we fell. So the reason why God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are with us; it is because Christ, the
second Person, God and man, is with us: or else there could be no such sweet
terms as these are: you see how it is founded. Christ took our nature, and
advanced and enriched it. Now, he having taken our nature, and our persons to
be one with him, how near are Christ and we together? There is one common
spirit in him and us, one common Father, I go to my Father and your Father, to
my God and your God. There is one common Kingdom, and inheritance, we are
fellow-heires with him: oh how near is Christ to us! our souls are not so
near our bodies, as Christ is to us, and God in Christ. So you see this, that
God is with us; it is founded upon an excellent, wonderful, comfortable
mystery. This I suppose is clear, therefore I come to that I intend further
to enlarge, that is, the comfort built upon this ground, If God be with us,

Who shall be against us? The comfort on the former ground.

One would think this a strange question, for a Christian no sooner comes to be
one with Christ, and so to be reconciled to God, but he has against him all
the powers of hell, and then he has the whole world against him presently,
Satan's Kingdom: and then he has an enemy that is worst of all, (that stirs
up strife and rebellion, and contention, even in his own heart) his own
flesh. So that we may say, who is not against a Christian? If God be with us,
all else but God, will side against us. There are two grand sides in the world,
to which all belong: there is Gods side, and those that are his; and there is
another side, that is, Satan's, and those that are his; two Kingdoms, two
seeds, two contrary dispositions, that pursue one another, till all the one be
in hell: Satan and all his seed together, the Devil, and all that fight under
his banner, that are led with his malignant, poyson-full spirit; though it may
be they cannot do more hurt or do not out of politic respects; though they
have poyson-full hearts: yet these never leave contending till they be in hell:
and the other never leave, till they be in heaven together. Christ makes it his
prayer, My will is, that where I am, they may be also, and his will must be
performed: so that he need not ask the question, If God be with us, who shall
be against us? there will be enough against us.

How far the enemies of Gods children are against them.
It is true; but in what sense are they against us, and how far are they
against us?

They are thus far against us in their wit, in their plots, and policies; in
their wills they would devour all, if they could: they are against us in their
endeavors, they do what they can against the Church and people of God. They
are against us in their prevailing likewise: their endeavors are not idle, but
prevayle very far over Gods people, even to insolency: Where is now their
God? as it is often in the Psalms; and to the dejection of Gods people: The Lord
has forsaken me; The Lord has forgotten me. Gods people are brought very low,
to the pits brinke, the pit almost shuts her mouth upon them. So you see they
are against them many ways. God gives a great length to their tether.

And many reasons God has to let them prevail, Why God suffers them to
prevail.
both to draw out their malice the more; and then to show his people their
corruptions the more; and then to exercise their graces in waiting; and for the
just confusion of their enemies at the latter end: and for the sweet comfort of
his children at the end, (when God sees the fittest time to meet with the
enemies) that they might have sweet experience of Gods seasonable care, how
ever God put off a long time for some respects: so you see they may prevayle, a
long time. No man can be against Gods children.
Yet who can be against us in this sense; that is, to prevayle altogether? who
shall be against us, so far as to have their will in the issue? They prevayle
a great way: what do they intend? not to prevayle over the persons of Gods
Church and people, but the cause which in spite of Satan, and his instruments,
and all must stand invincible to the end of the world. In respect of Christ^
cause.
They intend likewise, to prevayle over the courage of Gods people, that they
cannot neither: for Saint Paul says after in this Chapter, In all these things
we are more then conquerours* that is, abundant conquerours* a strange high
term. The courage of his children.
But in some sense, we are more then conquerours: for if we consider what weak
persons Gods children are; what strong enemies they have, and what weak means
they prevayle with in the sight of the world, to flesh and blood, that such
persons, should prevayle over such enemies, by such weak means as they do,
in this respect, they are more then conquerours. So he may say, Who can be
against us? that is, to have their wills, to overthrow the cause of Christ, and
the courage of Gods children; they may prevayle in this, or that particular,
but at the last, all their plots, and counsels, shall prove abortive, and
bring forth a lie. All is but to magnify Gods power the more, in letting them
go so far: and then to dash all their molds, and plots. Gods children, they
have the Devil and all his company, the world, and the flesh: but there is God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for them, the blessed Trinity, that are able
to blow away the other three, and all the strength, and support they have
whatsoever.

Who shall be against us?
It is not a question of doubting, or inquisition to learn any thing; but it
is a question of triumph: he does (as it were) cast a bancke, and bid defiance
to all enemies whatsoever: Who shall be against us? Let them stand out, Satan,
and the world, and all Satan's supports, let them do their worst. There is a
strange confidence which is seated in the hearts of Gods children that they
dare, thus dare hell, and earth, and all infernal powers, they set God so high
in their hearts, that they dare say with a spirit of confidence, Who shall be
against us? The meaning is, not, who shall be against us, to take away our
lives or liberties, etc. As the speech is, they may kill us, but they cannot
hurt us: the worst they can do is to send us to heaven, and make us partakers
of that we desire most. First we desire that God will be with us here; and
secondly, that we may be with God in heaven: they make Gods children partakers
of their desires, by killing of them. Let Tyrants, and all persons, that have a
malignant disposition to the Church of God, and are armed with power, let them
do their worst, the cause must stand impregnable; Christ will have a Church,
and Kingdom in the world, and their spirits will be impregnable against them:
they may kill them, but they cannot hurt them; they may kill them, but they
cannot kill their courage. As we see in the Martyrs, there was the Spirit of
God in them, above all the dealings of of the persecutors: there was a fire of
Gods Spirit in them, above all outward fire whatsoever. You see it must be
taken for granted, that the Church of God, and every particular Christian, has
many enemies against them, as it is, Psalm. 129. Psalm. 129.
From my youth up (says the Church) they have fought against me, but they have
not prevayled. From my youth up, from Abel, to the last Saint that shall be in
the world, there will be always some against Gods people: yet their comfort is
that none shall be against them to prevail, either over the Spirit of God in
them, or over the cause that they manage.

Use.
First of all you see then, that the state of a Christian in this world is an
impregnable state, The state of a Christian impregnable.
and a glorious condition. Here is glory upon glory, from this clause to the
end of the Chapter. If God be with us, who shall be against us? If God gave his
Son for us, shall he not with him give us al things else? there is another
glorious speech. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods people? another
glorious triumphant speech, another glorious speech, Who shall separate us from
the love of God founded in Christ? He loves Christ first, and us in Christ as
members, and as he loves him eternally, so he loves us eternally too. Therefore
you see every way the state of a Christian is a glorious condition, Who can be
against us? You see the state of Gods people, it is an impregnable and glorious
condition. A Christian never alone.
Then, by this means, those that are strange Paradoxes to flesh and blood, yet
they agree in a Christian. He is never alone; when he is alone, God is with
him, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are with him, Angels are with him, God is
not only with him, but his guard is with him, and Gods Spirit is with him, and
in him victoriously both in grace, and comfort. Christ says to his Disciples,
when they thought to leave him alone: says he, you cannot leave me alone, My
Father is with me: and Saint Paul toward his latter end, that had deserved so
well of the Christian world, All forsook me (says he) but the Lord forsook
me not, but delivered me out of the mouth of the Lion. So a Christian is not
alone, he is not left to the mercy of his enemies; but God is with him, and
who shall be against him to prevayle over him?

Again though a Christian be a worm, A Christian, though weak in himself,
strong in God.
a person trampled upon: for so the Church is the most afflicted part of
mankind: yet Fear not thou worm Jacob. The world accounts them as worms,
and they account themselves so, they are trodden on as worms; they are worms
upon earth, yet they have a glorious head in heaven, and a glorious guard about
them, strange things agree in a Christian: therefore let us not stumble, though
we see not these things presently, the life of a Christian is a mystery.

Again, Christianity grounded strongly.
hence we see that a Christian profession; to be a sound Christian, to have
true faith in Christ, to be one with Christ, and to be taken out of the state
of nature, this condition and the happiness of it, it has the strongest
foundation of any life in the world. Christianity is founded upon the strongest
and the greatest reasons that can be: Faith stands with the greatest reason,
that a thing can do. Why? The comfort of a Christian is that he has no enemy
that shall prevail over him, and what is the ground of that? God is with him,
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Faith is that that lays hold upon that
presence and promise, and covenant of God, and is not faith well bottomed? A
Christian that carries himself valiantly and courageously, is not his course
grounded on sound reason? Is not God with him? God the Father, is his father;
God the Son is his Redeemer; God the Holy Ghost, is his Comforter. There is no
other men that have strong reason for their course, for that choice that they
make of their Religion and of their ways, they prove but fools in the
conclusion: only the sound Christian that by the Spirit of God has his eyes
open to see the cursed estate he is in by nature, and what it is to be in
Christ, and by a Spirit of faith is made one with Christ, he is the truly
wise man in his faith and affiance, that the world mockes at, that he has no
common supports in the world, which he cares not for, if God be on his side,
he cares not what man can do against him, as it is Psalm. 118. you see on what
ground it is founded: Psalm. 118.
God is with him, and none can be against him.

To lay up principles.
Let us labor to lay up these principles, we work according as our principles
are: Principles are the foundation of all conclusions that arise from them. As
our grounds are, so are we in our faith, and working, and grace, and comfort,
every way: if we have rotten principles, if the grounds of our comfort be
rotten, our course will be rotten, and uncomfortable in the conclusion. Let us
build upon the Rock, to be well bottomed, and founded, that our principles and
grounds be strong, and that they be so to us; for what if God be with his, if
he be not so to us? Let us labor to lay up sound grounds. Grounds have
influence into the whole course of our lives; this one Text has influence into
all the parts of our lives, in doing, in suffering, in all conditions. I know
not a more pregnant fruitful principle in the Scripture than this, If God be
with us, who can be against us? It is like a pearl, little in quantity, few in
words; but strong in sense, large in the fruit that issues from it. Therefore
as we may carry pearls or precious things wheresoever we go, because there is
a great deal of worth in them, and they be small in quantity: so we may carry
this principle with us, let us be sure to lay it up, and make use of it. There
be these two, That there is a God, and that God is with his children, and so
with his children, that he will subvert and overthrow all their enemies, and
all their plots and endeavors; a principle of wonderful comfort.

If this principle be well laid, Ground of Christian courage.
it is a ground of a Christians courage, in all conditions whatsoever: it is no
matter how many enemies he has; for as Cyprian says, Cyprian.
Non potest seculum, In opposition.
etc. the world cannot hurt him, that in the world has God for his protector:
for the Devil he is crushed already, though he keep ado, and stir up
storms, he perishes in the waves (as he says) he hurts himself more than
any body else, he increases his own torment, and so do all his children:
The flesh likewise it busles against the Spirit, but it loses, and the spirit
gains upon every ^oyle: why? here is the principle, God is with us, there is
no power can resist God; for then God should withstand himself: the power that
the creature has, it is but a borrowed power; and if by a borrowed power it
should withstand Gods purpose, God must be against himself, his Kingdom must
be divided, which is a contradiction. Therefore this is the ground of the
courage of a Christian in all conditions. What is the reason that the Scripture
has that phrase so often, Fear not, I am with thee; as to Paul, and Joshua,
and the rest? because it is the ground of all courage. We see weaker creatures
than man, a Dog in the sight of his master, he will fight courageously,
because he has a superior nature by him, that he thinks will back him: And
shall not a Christian when he has laid up this principle, that God is with
him, God incarnate, God in his nature, when he is a member of God (as it were)
of that person that is God, shall he not be courageous when he has him to
look upon him, and to back him?

And if God be with us, he is not so with us as to neglect us, he is so with
us, as he has interest in the cause we have, and in our persons, he is with
us as one with us, nay as in us by his Spirit, and whosoever touches us
touches the apple of his eye. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Here is
ground of courage in whatsoever may befall us, to stand it out in all
conditions whatsoever. Nothing can sever Christ and a Christian: this body
will never be beheaded: Christ will never be separated from his body, he will
not loose the poorest member he has. You see it is the duty of a Christian to
be courageous, and undaunted in the cause of God, and from this ground, because
God is with him, and who can be against him? Let all the world be against God,
and against the cause that a Christian professes, they do but kick against
the pricks, they dash against a rock, as the waves that break themselves,
they do not hurt the rock a whit, they do but cast stones upward that fall
upon their heads again. Therefore it is a desperate cause that malicious
spirits manage, who have more parts then grace, and arm themselves and their
wits to hurt the people and Church of God, and slander his cause, and do all
the hurt they can.

It is a ground likewise of encouragement in our callings; In our callings.
when God calls us to any thing in our places, that is good, he will be with
us: therefore in our places and standing, let us do that that belongs to us;
let us not fear that we shall want that which is necessary, or miscarry any
way. When Moses pretended he ^ould not speak, Who gives a mouth, says God to
him? Therefore let us take courage, not only in suffering, and opposition, but
in our places and standings. God will be with us, he gives his Angels charge,
to keep us in our ways, we have a guard over us.

Ground of contentment.
Here is a ground likewise of all contentment in any condition in the world,
what can be sufficient to him, that God cannot suffice? God All-sufficient is
with thee, thou can want nothing that is for thy good; thou may want this
and that, but it is for thy good that thou want it, Those that fear God,
shall want nothing that is good: It is a ground of all contentment, God is with
them, to fill their souls to the utmost. He is made for the soul, and the
soul for him: for our end is to have communion with God in Jesus Christ here,
and everlastingly in Heaven; God is fitted for us, and we for him. Here is
fresh comfort for the soul always, he can fill up every corner of the soul,
he is larger than our souls. Therefore let us be content, in what condition
soever we are in, God is with us; therefore, let the peace of God which passes
all understanding guard our hearts: even from this very ground and conclusion,
God is with us, who can be against us? Let Moses be cast into a basket of
Bul-rushes, if God be with him, he shall not be drowned: Let Daniel be cast
into the Den, if God be with him, God will come between the Lions teeth and
him: Let the three blessed men be cast into the fiery Furnace, a fourth shall
be with them, and keep them from the hurt of the flame* Let God be with Noah,
he shall swim upon the waters, and the greater the waters the more safe he,
and the nearer to heaven: Let God be with us, and we may be content with any
condition whatsoever.

Again, Not to be discouraged for our infirmities.
let us not be over much discouraged with our infirmities and corruptions; If
God be with us, who can be against us? Our corruptions are against us, and they
are worse to me than the Devil, and all enemies, says a poor Christian.
Indeed they are, for the devil has no advantage against us, but by our
corruptions: but if thou account thy corruptions thine enemies, they are Gods
enemies, and Christ's enemies, as well as thine, he will be with thee, and thy
corruptions shall more and more be wasted; for the flesh shall fall before the
spirit, this Dagon shall fall before this blessed Arc; stronger is he that is
in us, than he that is in the world. The Spirit of God is stronger in us, than
corruption in us, or the world without us; it ministers stronger grounds of
comfort than all other can do of discomfort. If you be under the spirit and
under grace, sin shall not have dominion over you: It may be in you, but it
shall not have dominion, because ye are under the covenant of grace. Therefore
though corruption be in us, for our exercise and humiliation, yet it shall not
be against us, to abridge us of comfort; they serve to drive us nearer to God.
Let none be discouraged, Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil;
therefore he came to destroy sin in us, which is the work of the Devil, he
came to take away, not only the guilt, but the very being of sin, as he will
at last: for if God and Christ be with us, who shall be against us?

Object.
But it may be objected by some: But I find not God with me.

Answer. God sometimes hides himself.
It is true, sometimes God hides himself, Thou art a God that hidest thy self;
he seems as a stranger in his own Church, to be as a wayfaring man, as the
Prophet says; he takes no notice of his Church and their afflictions, he
seems not to take them to heart, nor to pity his Church. Oh! but this is but
for a time, and for trial, Can a mother forget her child? Isai. 49. Isay 49.
Put case she should, yet will not I forget thee. God hides himself but a
while, to try the graces of his children, and to give way to the enemies, to
let his children to see their corruptions, and his wise dispensation. And these
desertions we must be acquainted with. God seems to be away from his
children, yet he is with them, and supports them with invisible strength. He
seems to be with wicked men in prospering them in the world, that they have
al at their will in outward things, yet he is far from them; he withdrawes
himself in spiritual things, they have no grace, no sound inward comfort. And
he seems opposite to his children, he leaves them outwardly, in regard of
assistance, and friends: but they have an invisible inward presence of the
spirit, to support and strengthen them; therefore measure not des^ertions, Gods
being, or not being with us by outward respects: for so he is with the enemies
of the Church oft-times, and not with his children: But he is with his in the
sweetest manner, supporting of them when they are in darkness, and see no
light of Gods* countenance; yet they have so much light, though they think
they see it not, as makes them trust in God, Let him that is in darkness and
sees no light, trust in the name of God. Therefore, as I said, it is a
principle pregnant for comfort, and use: if God be with us, he is with us in
life and death; for whom he loves, he loves everlastingly, from everlasting to
everlasting.

If this be so, Question.
what shall we do to God again? what is the best evidence to know that God
is with us?

There is a relation between God and his, Answer.
he is so with them, We may know that God is with us.
as that they are with him likewise in all passages. Does he choose them? they
in time choose him, When we are with him.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none in earth that I desire in
comparison of thee. Does he call them? they answer. Does he justify and free
them from their sins, they make that answer of faith that Peter speaks of, I
do believe, Lord help my unbelief; they have faith to lay hold upon the
forgiveness. And likewise, if God be with them, De^ight in Gods presence.
they can delight in Gods presence: Can God delight to be present with them
that have not grace to delight in him? Gods children maintain their communion
with him in all the sanctified means they can, they are afraid to break with
God. Therefore those that to please and give content to others, and for base
ends will displease their God, it is a heavy sign that God as yet has not
showed himself in his gracious mercy in Christ Jesus to them.

If God be with us, we will be of his side, and his enemies shall be our
enemies, Taking Gods side.
and his friends our friends. He that claims this, that God is with him, he
will say, I will be with God, and for God. God has two things in the world
that we must have a care of, his Church, and his cause; take them out of the
world, the world is but a hell upon earth, a company of miscreants, profane,
godless^, impudent, poysonfull creatures; take away the cause of God, Religion,
and the people that are begotten by Religion, and what is the rest of mankind?
The world would not stand (but be all upon heaps) for a company of sinful
wretches that will have their wills: but it is for the Church, and people of
God, that the world stands. Now he that has God with him, and he is in terms
with God, that they are friends (as Abraham was the friend of God) he will side
with God and Religion, Gods cause shall be his cause, and Gods people his
people, he will cleave to Gods side as the safest; if he may have never so
much pr^ferment in the world, he will not join with Antichrist* he will not
betray the cause of Religion, if he might have a world for it: Why? because he
knows if God be with him, who can be against him? God has given us
understanding, and grace, to maintain friendship with him, to have common
friends, and common enemies: Therefore if we stand not for God, let us never
talk of Gods presence with us. He* will be present to confound us* to
overthrow us, and pursue us to Hell, but not graciously present, without we
labor to maintain the cause of Religion as far as we may. God is with us,
if ^^e be with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.
2 Chronicles. 15. if we be with God to take his part, he will be with us to
protect and defend us* to guide and comfort us, and to give issue to all our
affairs: Not that our being with him, is the prime cause of his being with us,
but it is an evidence to know whether he be with us (as we make profession)
when as far as our callings will suffer, we be with him, and maintain his
cause.

Again, By testimony of conscience.
If we would know whether we be with God, and he with us, ask conscience
whether it be with thee, for conscience is Gods Vicar. Is conscience with
thee, do thou not sin against conscience? What conscience says, God says;
and what it forbids, God forbids, especially when it is enlightened by the word;
does conscience speak peace to thee from the Word? then thou art with God, and
God is with thee. Especially in the great point of justification, does
conscience speak peace to thee in the blood of Christ? is thy heart sprinkled
with it; that it is not as the blood of Abel that cries for vengeance? ha^t
thou a spirit of faith, to believe that Christ shed his blood for thee in
particular* then thou art with God, and he with thee, because God has
sprinkled the blood of Christ upon thy heart.

Quest.
What course shall we take to keep God comfortably with us? Look thou be in
covenant with him, Answer.
and not only at large in covenant: How to have God with us.
but look that continually upon all occasions thou renew thy covenant: By
renewing our Covenants.
for sometimes Gods children may be in covenant, they may be his children; yet
because they renew not their covenant, especially after some breaches, God is
not with them, so comfortably as he would, to free them from their enemies; as
we see in the case of the Benjamites, Gods people sometimes may have the
worst, though they be in covenant because they have committed some sin, and
have not renewed their peace and covenant with God. Therefore if we would make
a comfortable use of this truth, that God is with us, and would find him so in
our affairs and business, let us renew our covenant upon all occasions, and
our purpose to please God.

And then look to the cause we take in hand, Look to our cause.
and to our carriage in that cause, if our persons be good, be in covenant, and
the cause good, and our conscience good, and our carriage suitable, then God
will be with us. Let us make use of these principles, that we may be in love
with the comfortable secure condition of a Christian; there is no state so
glorious, so comfortable, so secure, and free from danger. If we were in heaven
and should look down below upon all snares, and dangers, what would we care
for them? Now if he be with us, and we with him, God is our habitation, we
dwell in the secret of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.
he is our high Tower, The way of wisdom is on high, to escape the snares
below. Therefore let us raise our souls as high as heaven, and God is, and set
our selves where our hopes are, where our God is, and we have set our selves
in our Tower, that we have set God in our hearts, and set our selves in him;
then we may overlooke the devil, and men, and death, and danger and all. As a
man that stands upon the top of a Rock, that is higher than all the waves, he
overlookes them, and sees them break themselves upon the Rock: so when we see
God with us, and our selves with him, by a Spirit o^ comfort, we can overlooke
all with a holy defiance, as the Apostle says here, who can be against us?
what can separate us? Oh! the excellent state of a Christian, when he is
assured of his condition! Who would not labor for assurance that yields this
abundant comfort in all conditions?

November. 5.
A word of the occasion, for which I made choice of this portion of Scripture:
Here is a double fitness to the occasion, both at home and abroad, If God be
with us, who can be against us?

God was at home in 88. he was with us in the Powder Treason: He was with us
in the great sickness to preserve us, and to give us our lives for a prey, he
has been with us. And we ought not to forget this, but upon occasion of this
great deliverance, to call all former deliverances to mind, national, and
personal, to consider how often God has given us our lives, and how often he
has pre^erved us from death, and to take occasion to bless God for all at
once, and so to make some special use of these meetings.

Then if we look abroad, God has been with us in that he has been with his
Church; for they, and we, make but one body, that member that has not a
sympathy with the body, it is but a dead member: therefore if we be not
affected with the presence of God, with the Armies abroad, we are dead
members. We may say, in regard of these outward deliverances, God has been
with us, and none has been against us. If God had not been with us in the
Powder Plot, where had we been? Our lives would have been made a prey, that
that would have been done, would have been more then the blowing up of the
Parliament; they would have blown up the Kingdom with the King, and Religion
with religious persons, and the State with Statesmen: It would have brought a
confusion of all, and have molded all after an Idolatrous Antichristian
fashion, it would have overthrown the State, and persons and all; the issues
would have been worse than the present thing: And therefore if God had not
been with us, as he was graciously with us, what would have become of us?
Psalm. 1^9.
as it is in Psalm. 129. If God had not been with us, they had made us a prey,
and overwhelmed, and devoured us all, there had been no hope.

Have not we cause to bless God, and to be thankful? therefore let us
labor to do it for our selves, and for our neighbors. How shall we show our
thankfulness to God? not in outvvard manifestations only, which is laudable,
and a good demonstration of the affections of people: but alas what is that?
we must show our thankfulness in loving that Religion that God has so
witnessed for, and defended so miraculously: Labor to love the truth, to
entertain it in the love of it, and to bring our hearts to a more perfect
hatred of Popery* For if we wax cold and indifferent, or oppose Gods cause,
and undermine it, do we think that God would suffer this long, would he not
spue us out of his mouth? (with reverence I speak it.) Though he have
defended us again and again, he will be gone with his truth and religion: It
came not alone, nor it will not go alone; if Religion go, our peace, and
prosperity, and the flourishing of our state; all will go. It is our Arc, if
that go away, our happiness goes away, let us make much of Religion, that is
the way to be thankful.

Again, let us show our thankfulness by giving and doing some good to the
poor, by refreshing their bowels, that they may have occasion to bless God.

And for the time to come, let us trust in God, that God will be with us, if
we be with him; and to stick to him: who then shall be against us? Let the
Devil, and Rome, and Hell, be all against us, if God be with us. Bellarmine
goes about to prove Luther a false Prophet. Luther as he was a courageous man,
and had a great and mighty spirit of Faith, and prayer: so his expressions were
suitable to his spirit: what says he? The cause that I defend, is Christ's, and
Gods cause, and all the world shall not stand against it, it shall prevail; if
there be a counsel in earth, there is a counsel in heaven that will
disappoint all. God laughes in Heaven at his enemies, and shall we weep? And
things are in a good way, if we can go on, and help the cause of God with
our prayers, and faith that God will go on; and with our cheerfulness and
joy, that God may delight to go on with his own cause. We may encourage our
selves; though perhaps we shall not see the issue of these things, yet
posterity shall see it.

FINIS.
THE CHVRCHES ECHO,

In one Sermon.

By The late learned and reverend Divine, RICH. SIBBS: Doctor in Divinity, Mr
of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at GRAYES-INNE.

ISAY 64.1. Oh that thou would rent the Heavens and come down, that the
Mountains might flow down at thy presence.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne, and Rapha Harford, 1638.

THE CHVRCHES ECHO.
REVEL. 22.17. And the Spirit, and the Bride, say, Come.


THis Book of the Revelation is an history of the state of the Church from the
first coming of Christ to his second coming.

These two last Chapters set down the glorious condition of the Church in the
latter end of the world, and as it shall be in the consummation of all things:
when the present state of things shall determine in the second coming of
Christ. For howsoever (no doubt but) there is set down the glorious condition
of the Church in this world in part: yet the desire of the Church rests not in
any condition here, therefore it is carried to the consummation and perfection
of all. There shall be a kind of new world at the conversion of the Jews: but
when the Church is under that blessed condition, yet it is under desires still
of farther perfection, till an end be made of all things. Therefore this saying
here, Come, has reference to the future state of the Church. All the desires
of the Church are restles till the consummation of all things in the latter
coming of Christ. It carries all before it in a desire, Come Lord therefore to
call the Jews: Come Lord to confound Antichrist, which must be before that:
for the Jews will never come in, till the scandal of Idolatry be removed: and
when all this is fulfilled, then come Lord to make an end of this sinful world.

Simile.
As it is with a river, it carries all before it, till it discharge it self
into the Ocean, where it is swallowed up: so it is with the desires of a
Christian; they carry all in the mean time, between heaven and them in a
stream, and never rest ^^ll they be swallowed in heaven it self, and ^^e
second coming of Christ to finish (...)s, and then is the period of all
happiness, and ^he accomplishment of all promises; when Christ shall come to
be glorious in his Saints.

The words they are (as it were) ^n echo a^ answer back again of the Bride,
the Spouse of Christ, unto his promise of his coming, which he makes twice in
this Chapter, in ver. 7. Behold I come quickly, and in ver. 12. Behold, I come
quickly; and he comes not empty handed, My reward^ is with me. Now the Church
here echoes back again, Christ says, I come, and the Spirit, and the Bride
say, come. The words contain the most heavenly desire that can be, of the most
excellent personage in this world, the Queen, the Bride of Christ; and it is a
desire to the most excellent person absolutely, Christ himself, a desire of
his coming; and it is stirred up by the most excellent Spirit, the holy Spirit
of God: for the meaning of the words is this, The Spirit and the Bride say,
Come, not as distinct and severed, but the Bride by the Spirit says, Come, the
Holy Ghost in the Bride, as it is Romans 8.26. Romans 8.26.
We know not what to pray, but the Spirit makes intercession; How is that? The
Spirit makes intercession, by making us make intercession: for what Christ
does, the Spirit causes us to do, for there is one Spirit in Christ, and us.
So the Bride by the motion of the holy, and blessed Spirit, say, Come. The
order of our discourse upon these words shall be this, First, to speak of the
person wishing, and her condition, The Bride. And then of the desire of this
excellent personage, the Bride.


And then of the mooving cause that stirs up the Bride to desire the coming
of Christ,

First, The Church ^ Bride.
for the person, the Bride.

The Church is sometime compared to a woman for weakness; sometimes to a
wife, for faithfulness to her Husband and Christ; sometimes to a Bride;
because she is contracted to Christ in this world; sometimes to a mother for
her fruitfulness; sometimes to a Virgin, for her chastity: here to a Bride,
because this life is but the time of Contract; but the consummation of the
marriage shall be in heaven. Now this contract between the Church and Christ,
and between every particular soul and Christ: for both are the bride of
Christ. Even as it is the same soul that is in the little finger, and in all
the whole body, the same soul enlivens both: so it is the same Spirit in the
Bride in general, and in every particular Christian, therefore the Bride is
both every particular Christian, and the whole Church. Now the contract that is
made between the soul, and between the Church and Christ, it is by the Spirit
of God which knits the soul to Christ, and Christ to the soul. And for this
end that Christ might be a Husband, and contract this Bride to himself in our
nature, he married our nature, that he might marry our persons.

There is a threefold degree of union.

An union of Nature. An union of Grace. An union of Glory.
The union of nature was, then Christ took our nature upon him. The union of
grace, is when we take his nature, when we partake of the divine nature: The
union of glory is when we shall all be in heaven. The first is, for the second,
and the second for the third. Christ became bone of our bone, in nature, that
we might be bone of his bone, with him in grace, and so perfectly one with him
in glory. We see the Bride that is the Person. Here I might take occasion to
speak of the sweet comfort that issues from this, that the second Person in the
Trinity should dignifie us so much, as to take us to unity, with, and contract
us to himself; but I will not speak much of this point, having spoken more at
large of it out of the Canticles. Can. 5.


If marriage be honorable, what is this marriage and contract? which is indeed
the pattern of all other, Use 1.
others are but shadows to this. Hence comes the sweet security and peace of
the Church, Comfort by our marriage to Christ.
from this contract between Christ and it* for all our debts are discharged by
this, he took upon him our sins. And then the Church has interest in him, and
all his in this contract and marriage, which is to be consummate, all that he
is and has, is the Churches. All is yours, because you are Christ's. What a
large comfort is this? if we had hearts to consider of it, and to improove it;
his grace serves for the Church, Of his fullness we receive grace for grace.
So we may say of all the privileges that Christ has; they are first in him,
and then in the Church, the Church shines in his beams. And as it is matter of
wondrous comfort, so it is likewise matter of more special comfort, in case of
infirmities. The Church is a woman, therefore the weaker vessel. Now God that
bids us bear with the woman, as the weaker vessel, to honor her with the
honor of gentle usage: (for that honor is meant) he that teaches man his
duty, will he not perform it himself? to bear with his Church, as the weaker
vessel. Hosea 2.
Especially when it is the condition of the marriage, Hosea 2. I will marry
thee to me in mercy; we may claim mercy as a part of our dowry by Christ,
pardoning mercy, forbearing, pitying mercy; we make not use of this comfort,
when we are discouraged.

But this teaches us likewise how to carry our selves to Christ as we should
do, Use 2.
chastely, to take heed how we judge of things, we must keep our judgments
chaste. A Christian has not liberty to riot in his opinion, to run at random,
to see what (...) reason ^aith: No, he must think what Christ thinks, and
submit his judgment to him. And he must have no will of his own^, he must give
it up to his contracted Husband, Christ, and be content to be ruled by him in
all things; be must forget his fathers house, and his former condition, and not
to make this marriage, (as carnal professors do) a cover for their adulterous
unfaithfulness. What is the course of many Christians? They make the
profession of Religion, a cover for their ill dealing, for their unfaithful
courses, what a shame is this? It is abominable. What makes the faults of
wives worse, then the fault of single persons? because they are contrary to
covenants, besides many other inconveniences, the confusion of offspring, and
the like: but this is one grand difference, to make the exageration of the
fault, it is contrary to former covenant. Those that are swearers, and filthy
persons, that disgrace Religion, and yet notwithstanding cover themselves under
p^etence, that they are contracted to Christ, they are baptized, and come to
the Sacrament, etc. such wretched persons shall know ere long, what it is to
dally with Religion, what is the aggravation of the faults of such persons?
They deal as fil^hy adultresses do, they make Religion a cover for their
wreched courses. God is merciful, Christ dyed, we are Christians, we are
baptized, etc* This is an obligation to a stricte^ life, it gives men no
liberty, but is a stricter bond to^ holy life, the renewing of the new
covenant again, and again. Therefore there is no comfort for any such
wretched persons, that countenance themselves under the profession of Religion:
in add a greater degree to their offense; Oh ye adulterer^, and adulteresses,
says S. James, know ye ^ot that the love of the world, is unity with God? When
we let (...) loose to vain things, and (...) are c^ntracted to Christ, we are
adulteres^, and adulteresses.

I beseech you there for (...) name of Christ, for it is our office that are
(...) Christ and his (...) together (...)phi, friends of the Bridegroom, (...)
new Testament. Let me (...) you in (...), (...) those (...) not (...) given up
their names to Christ (...) (...) with (...) all to him in (...) man, in (...)
judgments and will be and affections^ and than you shall find (...) condition
in this world. Indeed (...) fort of this condition, to be indeed^ and not in
outward profession (...) covenant with Christ, to be (...) to him (...) if you
will take liberty (...) the profession of Religion, to live loosely, to be
wearers, etc fil^hy persons; to use your tongues as you lift, as if you had
made no promise to Christ, as indeed we all have, what will be the confusion of
your souls ere long? oh, that we dallyed with Religion, that we were entreated
to be as we should be by all sweet bonds, and yet we preferred our own lusts,
and base affections. This will be the aggravation of hell and damnation it
self; this entreaty of Christ, and the excellent prerogatives and privileges,
that we have in Christ; and in the mean time we stand more upon our own base
courses, and will not leave any thing, to give up our selves to Christ: but I
mean not to dwell on this point. This is the person: The Bride, she is called
the Bride, The Church why called a Bride.
and not the wife, because she is only contracted here on earth; and she is
called the Bride, in opposition to the whore of Babylon in this Book, that is,
the filthy adulteress, the false Church. The true Church of Christ is a Bride,
and a virgin, in heaven she shall be a wife: the false Church is a whore; she
defiles her self with Idolatry and abominations: so partly for distinction
from it self, in heaven where it shall be a wife, and partly in opposition to
the false Church, she is here called a Bride.

To come in the next place, to the desire of the Church. The desire of Christ's
coming.
How should the Church know she is a Bride? This is one way: The desire of the
marriage; where there is a true contract, there is a desire of the marriage, of
the consummation of it, a desire of the coming of Christ. In this there are
two things considerable.

First, that Christ will come.

And then the Church has a desire of this coming. That Christ will come. I
need spend no time to prove it, for it is an Article of faith, He shall come
to judge the quick and the dead. There must be a second coming of Christ.
And he will come to make an end of what he has begun here. He came to redeem
our souls, he must, and he will come to redeem our bodies from corruption.
He came to be judged, and to die for us, he must come to be judge of the
quick, and dead, he came to contract us, he will come again to marry us, and
to take us where he is. He loved us so, that he came from heaven to earth where
we are, to take our nature, that he might be a fit Husband, but he will come
to take us to himself, we shall enter into his Chamber, to the Palace of the
great King, Psalm. 45. Psalm. 45.
He will come; there is no question of that.

The uneven carriage of things in this world to the eyes of men evinceth so
much. You see how it is here with mighty persons, that shake off Christ's yoke;
how they bear sway; how Satan plays reaks in opposing Christ, he rules in the
children of pride: this must not always be so, there must, and will be a time
when Christ will be glorious in his Saints. Now the life of Christ in the
Saints, is a hidden life, there must be a day of revelation. And even as it was
in Christ's first coming, there was all kind of arguments and witnesses to
prove that he should come in the flesh, a Quire of Angels from Heaven to
witness it; and on earth, the wise men among the Gentiles; and among the
Jews, old Simeon, there was men and women, all kind of witnesses. So in his
second coming, there is all kind of witnesses: in this Chapter here is Christ
and the Angel, and John, and the Spirit, and the Spouse, the Church in
general, and every particular soul, their desire of his coming shows that
he will come; for the desires stirred up in the heart by the holy Ghost, they
will not be in vain. The desires of his coming show that he will come; for
spiritual desires must have their accomplishment; there will be a coming of
Christ, there is no question of that.

And the Church here desires it: it is the disposition of the Church to be
carried in her desires to it: wherein we will show the ground of this desire.
And then the use that we are to make of it.

The Church desires the coming of Christ in regard,
The grounds why the Church desires the coming of Christ, are manifold.

First of all, look but to the present condition of things in this world, Of
scandals.
the state of things, the scandals that are in the Church: there will be a
desire in the Church that all scandals and offenses may be removed, as it is in
the Gospel, Christ will come, and take away all that offend.

Persecutions.
Look again to the state of the Church here, it is but a persecuted afflicted
estate; nay those that should countenance the poor Church, how roughly is the
poor Church used ofttimes of those? Those that should encourage the Church,
their rugged and rough usage stirs up this desire in the Church, when those
that should be most encouragement, are often times the greatest discouragement.

Then again the Church has Antichrist to oppose it, Oppositions in the Church.
and false Brethren in it; false persons that hang in their affections to the
world; and however they make a show, yet their minds are carried to pomp, and
to a false Religion, because they are besotted with a proud carnal
disposition, which they prefer before the simplicity of the Gospel, vain
persons in the bosom of the Church that know not what the glory of the Church
is.

Then again, Weakness of Christians.
if we regard even the weakness of the Church it self, it breeds a desire of
Christ's coming: for alas, there is but a weak sight in men; and variety of
sight where there is weakness, breeds variety of judgment; and where there is
variety of judgment, there will be jealousies even among good persons, and
these are irksome to the Spirit of God in any that love the sweet peace, and
concord of Christians, that are contracted to Christ: this will not be avoided
in this world; only those that are wise and stro^gest in grace, they will be the
greatest peace makers, and bear with the weak in this kind.

Then again, Corruption by Satan.
while we are in this world, there is not the best thing but Satan will put his
foot and claw in, except grace overpower him. The Magistracy, and ministry
alas how are they many times profaned and abused by Satan and corrupt hearted
men, that know not how to manage them graciously, and fruitfully? The
Magistracy that is for good, it is turned ofttimes for grievance, as if all the
world were made for them, and they to do nothing but to have others Idolize
them. And then for the Ministry, those that should be teachers of others many
times discourage those that they should cherish: and as the Prophet complains
in his time of the false Prophets, they discourage those that they should
encourage, and strengthen the hands of the wicked, and grieve those that God
does not grieve by their false carriage, taking contrary ways to Gods Spirit;
they grieve those that they should cherish, and comfort, and strengthen the
hearts of those that they should take down, by flattery and false
applications: This will be to the end of the world (notwithstanding the
excellent Ordinance of God, by which God works his own good ends) while the
world stands there will be a taint upon Gods Ordinance till Christ come, and
then all that grieve and offend shall be taken away; there shall be no Sun nor
Moon then, for the Lamb will do all; there shall be no Magistracy nor
Ministry then, God will be all in all.

And so for all conditions; there is no condition nor nothing that is good in
the world, but Satan labors to bring a vanity upon it, and the corrupt heart
of man is prone to yield to him: this will be to the end of the world.
Therefore we should not be overmuch offended, to see things carried otherwise
than we would have them. Why should we wish for that condition that will never
be in this world? Wish we may, but we must wish it in its own time, it will
be hereafter. Let us labor that it may be so then, and bear with all here as
patiently as we can.

Again, Christians conflict.
take the best Christians of all, in themselves, in their own particulars.
Alas, what a conflicting life has a Christian with his own heart? Sometimes in
general he can see truths very clear, but in a particular, some passion or
other, of Anger, or Revenge, etc. it clouds his judgment, that he cannot see
what is to be done, what is best. The reason is, the imperfection of the work
of mortification, hinders him in his passages, and business, that he cannot
clearly decide of what is best at this time. S. Paul complains of this, that
he could not do the good that he would, and that he did the ill that he
would not. There are none but they carry some of these dregs with them in this
world, that hinders them in their designs and determinations: only those that
have the power of Gods Spirit in a greater portion then the rest, they get more
victory over these things, and can more clearly see any thing then others: yet
notwithstanding, all have some impediment this way, even the best.

The necessities of this life enforce a great deal of trouble, The necessities
of this life.
the supplying the necessities of nature, and of the condition that God has
set us in, which all shall have an end then.

Then again, the relation between Christ, and this contracted Spouse, The
relation between Christ and the Church.
and every faithful soul, inforceth a desire of his coming. It is the time
of the Churches contract, she is a Bride now, she is contracted: now all the
time between the contract, and the marriage, it is a time of longing and
desire, therefore the Church cannot but desire the second coming of Christ. It
is the nature of imperfection, where there is truth in imperfection, to desire
perfection: you see the little seed that is sown in the ground, it breaks
through the thick clods, because it is not in its perfection, till it be in
the ear, nature has given it an instinct to break out: so where the seed of
grace is, it will break, out and shoot forward to desire still, and still,
till it comes to perfection. Grace being an imperfect state here, it puts
forward in desiring that perfection, that it cannot attain in this world, but
in the world to come: therefore the Spirit, and the Spouse say, Come.

From the nature of love.
And then from the nature of the affection of love it self where it is
planted; it is an affection of perfect union, contract will not serve, but
marriage must come after. Love will not satisfy it self in imperfect union,
but it cries, Come, Come, still it is carried in a restless desire, till it
come to perfection. Therefore put the case the Jews were called and converted,
and Antichrist subdued, has the Church an accomplishment of the period of her
desires, to say no more Come? oh no: yet Christ is not come as he will, there
is not a perfect consummation of all, until that of time it self, there will
be a desire of the Bride and Spouse, to say, come. Thus we see what grounds
there are of this desire.

But is this only true of the Church militant, Question.
herebelow, does not the Church in heaven say Come too? Answer.
Yes the Church in heaven says, Come, The Church in heaven desires Christ's
coming.
too. The Church in heaven, and earth are but one Family; they are (as it were)
but one Parliament, there is the higher house in heaven, and the lower on
earth, and both say come. What is the reason that the Church in heaven says,
Come? Because the Church in heaven have bodies that be rotting in earth; which
bodies helped them to serve God on earth, fasted with them, and prayed with
them, and endured pains and toil with them. The soul acccounts it self
imperfect, till it be joined to its old companion, the body again; therefore
it desires Come Lord, that my body may be united to me again, that so we may
both perfectly praise thee in heaven.

Then again, they have not all their company, all the Saints are not gathered,
and they will not be merry indeed, till they all meet in heaven: therefore that
all may meet, even the Church in heaven, has a desire, Come Lord: so both
heaven and earth, agree in this, they meet in this desire.

This may be a ground of trial, Use 1.
whether we be truly the Bride of Christ, Trial of our estate.
or no; the ground of the trial may be gathered hence; whither is the bent of
our desire carried? is our condition so here, as that we desire to be as we
are still? then all is naught with us. The Church we see says come, nothing
will content her in this world: so those hearts that are wrought upon by the
Spirit of God, nothing here will content them but still they say come. The
disposition in carnal persons is clean contrary; they say as it is in Job,
Depart from us, we will none of thy ways: they are of the mind of the Devil,
in the Gospel, Why do thou come to torment us before our time? do not come.
If it were in the power of most men in the Church, whether Christ should come
to judge the world or no, do you think they would give their voice that way,
that Christ should come? they would never do it: for they know how unfit a
condition they are in for the second coming of Christ. If thieves and
malefactors might have liberty to choose, whether there should be Assizes, or
no, surely they would never have any, so it is with the men of the world, that
live in sinful wretched courses, that abuse their tongues, and their bodies,
are they of the disposition of the Bride, to say, come? oh no, they know they
have not done their duty: therefore let us enter deeply into our own souls,
and try whether cordially we can yield this desire of our hearts, to say come?
Therefore to (spend a little time in a further search) if we can truly say,
Come, By desiring Christ to come into our hearts now.
we will desire Christ to come into our souls now, to rule our souls now, to
come and make way for himself in our hearts. Is it possible for the soul to
desire to go to Christ, that will not suffer him to come to it? If Christ rule
not in us, we shall never reign with Christ: if Christ's Kingdom come not to
us, we shall never enter into Christ* Kingdom: therefore the soul that has
this desire truly, to say, Come, it will give Christ entrance into it, and let
him come by his Ordinances. Come Lord by thy word, come by thy Spirit into my
heart, close with my heart, drive out whatsoever is there, that will not give
thee liberty to reign as thou will: these desires will be in a true heart, it
will not cherish wilfully those desires that are contrary to this.

Shall we think that that Christian that says these words in good earnest,
will put Christ away in his Ordinances, and not care for to hear his word, nor
care to meet Christ here in earth, and yet pretend a desire to meet him in
heaven? where is Christ, here? is he not in his Congregations, and Assemblies
of his Saints? those therefore that despise the Ordinances of God, and yet
pretend, that they desire that Christ should come, do they not profane the
Lords Prayer, when they say, Hallowed be thy name, Thy Kingdom come? They
patter it over, they do not mean it in good earnest: when they despise the
Ministry, and the Ministers, and whatsoever is Christ's, despise the motions of
his Spirit, and will not suffer him to rule in their hearts, but are ruled by
rules of policy, and reason, and flesh: can they say, Come? No, they do
abhominably profane the Lords Prayer: what kind of Service is that, when their
desires are quite clean contrary? It is a protestation contrary to their
faith, and therefore it is a nullity: they profess in their prayers, that they
would have Christ to come, and yet their course of life is contrary, they would
not have him come. Again, those that truly desire Christ should come, they
will be subordinate helpers under Christ, They promote his coming.
to promote those things that tend to his coming: before Christ comes,
Antichrist must be abolished and consumed; the Jews must be converted, and the
number of the Elect must be consummate, and finished. Therefore what shall we
say, when those that pretend to desire the coming of Christ, shall countenance
heresies that m^st have an end first? And those that are against wholesome
Laws to be made in that kind, those that countenance Idolatry, and false
worship, stablishing what Christ must abolish before he come, can they say,
Come in good earnest? Their course is contrary to what they pray. Therefore
indeed, and in good earnest we pray, Thy Kingdom come, and say with our souls
as the Church here, Come, when we set our selves to abolish heresy and false
worship of God, that is adulterous, and promote the true Service of God; when
we labor in our places that the number of the Elect may be consummate, when
we labor, that our children may be Gods children, and our servants, may be
Gods servants, and every one in our places labor that the Kingdom of Christ
may be enlarged. If we put not to our helping hand, to that we pray for, it
is a contradiction. Those therefore that live scandalous lives, i^ scandalous
courses and speeches, and hinder the conversion of peoples souls, and labor
to draw them to wicked hellish courses, when they post to hell themselves, and
labor to draw others into cursed society with them selves, they cannot truly
say, as the Church here, Come. Let us take it to heart, that we do not mock,
and dally with Religion, it is a greater matter then we take it for. It is
impossible, but a Christian that says his prayers in earnest, should be thus
affected, unless we make a mockery of Religion.

Again, Fitting for it.
if we can indeed say Come, there will be a fitting for this coming, a
preparing our selves for it, for our going to Christ. Is it not so in civil
things? and does not grace work that, that nature does in a higher degree? If
we desire that a great person should come to us, will there not be a fitting of
our houses, of our apparel, and entertainment ^^table to the worth of the
person? or else a man may say, surely you loo^e for no body this day, there is
nothing fitted, and prepared: so if we pretend we desire Christ to Come, and
yet notwith standing we are careless of getting knowledge, and of purging our
souls, of growing in grace, careless of being such as Christ may delight to
come unto: This carelessenesse of fitting, and preparing our selves, shows
that we do but in hypocrisy speak the words, when we have no such thing in
our hearts. Those that desire the Kingdom of Christ, and the happy condition
of Christians in another world, they desire the way of it here, that is, by
fitting, and preparing themselves for that estate, and indeed it will work
those effects, as it is Tit. 2. and other places, what is the motive there to
live a holy, and righteous and sober life? Looking, and waiting for the
glorious appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. There he inserts a
holy life between the two commings of Christ, showing that the believing the
end of both, will work this effect in the change of our lives, To be sober to
our selves, and just to others, and holy to God: The grace of God has
appeared, that is, in the first coming of Christ, teaching us to deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, etc. and then looking forward still, for the
second coming of Christ. So that he believes, that the grace of God has
appeared in saving our souls by the death of Christ in his first coming; and
he that believes that he will come to be glorious after in his second
coming; certainly he will live justly and soberly, and righteously in this
present world, he will fit himself for that estate that he professes to
desire. Let us try our selves by these evidences in some measure, and not
think our state good till we can say from our hearts, Come.

But are Christians always in this state of soul, that they can say, Come?

Answer.
I answer, they are always in some degree fitting themselves for Christ;
Christians not always fitted alike for Christ's coming.
but notwithstanding, they are not always so exact and watchful, that they
could wish, that he should come at this time. Take the comparison from a wife,
a spouse, she heartily desires the coming home of her husband: yet perhaps
sometimes things may not be in so good order, as to wish that he were here now;
nay, I have not yet prepared. This is the state of careless Christians, that
have soundness of grace, and yet are careless: they desire the coming of
Christ, and they love the glory of the life to come, and endeavor weakly for
it; yet they are so careless, some corruption hanges on them, that they have
not so mortified, and subdued as they should do; they are not yet so fitted as
they should be. Therefore God often rouseth such by afflictions, and other
courses in this world, to weane them more from the love of the world, and to
prepare us, because we are sloathfull, and careless to prepare our selves. So
I say that sometimes the best Christians sometimes may be more indisposed then
at others, by reason of security growing on our souls, so weak are we, and
beset with temptations: therefore let none be overmuch discouraged with that;
but let us strive as the Church here, to be in such an estate, as we may always
say, Come.

Well upon trial if we find our selves not so disposed as we should, how
shall we carry our selves, Use.
that we may say, Come?

Let us labor to purge our selves by mortification more and more, Direction to
come to desire Christ's coming.
he that has this hope purges himself. To purge our selves.
And let us endure Gods purging of us, and justify Gods purging of us by
afflictions; and think that God has this aim; certainly this is to make me
more heavenly minded, to raise my affections up. I will therefore bear the
anger of God, I have deserved it, and he has holy ends in it to make me
partaker of his righteousness. Let us purge our selves by grace, and endure
the course that God takes to purge us by daily crosses; for God aims by it to
weane us more and more from the world.

Unloose our hearts from the world.
And let us labor daily more and more, to unloose our hearts from the things
below. Those that would remoove a Tree, they loosen it from the root of it; so
our affections are rooted to earthly things, therefore we should labor to
loose them daily more and more, by the consideration of the uncertainety and
vanity of all things: they are not that that will stick to us, and give us
content, when we shall stand in most need of them: here we must leave the
things of the world, as we find them here, we must part with them. Therefore
we should labor to unloose our hearts, and to plant, and set, and pitch them
where they may be safe, and swallowed up in better things.

Meditate of our happy condition.
And to this end, often meditate of the excellency that shall be in the second
coming of Christ; oh, the glorious time then! See the means how the Church
comes to be stirred up here, to say Come. Christ says before, that he was the
Root of David, the bright morning Star, he sets out himself gloriously, and
the gloriousness of that time: then the Church, hearing what the excellency of
that state will ^e then, and the excellency of Christ, the Church has desires
suitable to those manifestations. Therefore let us meditate of the state of the
Church, what it will be, and of the excell^^cy, and glory of Christ, when he^
shall com^ to be glorious in his Saints, what a happy condition it will be; and
to feed our meditations; let us be often in hearing, and reading, of these
things. If we hope for any thing to come in this world: as if a young heir^
that shall have great possessions, the more he grows toward years, the more
he thinks, I shall have this manor, and that, he thinks of the possessions
he has* so a Christian, the nearer he grows to heaven, the more he thinks
upon, and talks, and is willing to hear of that condition that he shall
have. The more we are in meditation, and to help meditation* the more we are
in thinking, and speaking, and conferring of these things, what will befall us
ere long (if we be Gods,) the more our affections will be raised up, as we see
in the Spouse here, upon the manifestation of the excellency of Christ, comes
this desire after the coming of Christ. This is one reason of the deadness of
our hearts; we do not awaken them with such holy thoughts as we should, and
we are not under those means as we might often times. There cannot be any
thing more ^weet, and powerful to draw up our souls, then meditation in this
kind.

Labor for the Spirit.
Again, that we may be able to say, come, let us labor to be more and more
spiritual, that the holy Spirit may rule our spirits, and then the spirit is
always for Come. Nature says not come, because it is above nature: I mean
nature not corrupt, ^aith not Come. It is a hidden secret to nature, nature
says slay still, it has no desire to it, the flesh is contrary altogether:
but the Spirit in the Spouse says, Come. The Spirit does all, as the soul
does all in the body, it acts it, and leads it, and comforts it, and gives
beauty to it: so the Spirit first knits Christ and us together: there is the
same Spirit in Christ the head, and in the Church, there is one common Spirit
in head, and members. And when it has done, so it acts, and leads, and
sanctifies, and purifies the Church, it acquaints the Church with the good
things that God has given her, acquaints her with the deep meaning of God,
the love of God in Christ, it acquaints God with our desires, he knows our
meaning in our prayers, and we know his meaning, it acquaints us with the state
we shall have after, and assures us of it; It is the earnest of the
Inheritance: the Spirit, and the graces of it are not only the earnest, but a
part of that Inheritance, a part of heaven, where our bodies shall be
spiritual; not that they shall turn to be spirits, but they shall be ruled
wholly by the Spirit, as the soul rules the body.

As it is in a river, it is impossible that the stream should run higher then
the springhead from whence it comes: so it is impossible that our desires
should rise higher then the spring from whence they come; the desires of nature
cannot go higher then nature; the desires of the flesh are fleshly: but
spiritual desires, as they spring from heaven, (they have a noble original,
and head) so they carry to heaven again. Therefore as the Spirit comes from
God the Father and the Son; so it carries us back again to the Father, and
the Son; as it comes from heaven, so it carries to heaven back again. That
is one way to know whether our desires be spiritual or no; our desire of
death, and of the coming of Christ, if it be from wearisomnesse of life, and
from afflictions in the world, so nature may desire. I were better be dead then
to be thus; as Jonas wished death, and the children of Israel, and Elias in a
passion; oh that I were dead, etc. but if those desires spring from the Spirit,
then they come from heaven: from the consideration of the excellency of the
state we shall have there, that it shall be better with us, and that death is
but a dark passage to a glorious condition. We may know our desires are
spiritual from the rise of them, if they come from spiritual, and holy, and
heavenly considerations: the Spirit does all in the Spouse that is holy and
Spiritual.

Therefore let us give entertainment to the Spirit of God, Means to get the
Spirit.
and be where we may have further, and further communion with the Spirit, in
spiritual Ordinances. The preaching of Gods holy Word, (though it be meanly
esteemed by the world) it is the Ministry of the Spirit; in the hearing of
it, the Spirit is given: if we would have the Spirit, let us attend upon the
Ministry of the Spirit. And let us study Christ, and make him all in all.
Saint Paul questions with the Galathians, says he, I would know of you, how
came ye by the Spirit? by hearing of Christ's Gospel, or of the Law preached?
No, it was by the Gospel: so that not only the Ministry in general, but the
Evangelicall Ministry that unfolds Christ, and the infinite love of God in
Christ, the excellent condition we have in this world, and look for in the
world to come: the Spirit is effectual with these thoughts to make us holy and
heavenly. The Law beats down; but the Gospel, especially these Evangelicall
truths make us spiritual. Therefore we should be willing to hear spiritual
points. There are a company of men, that love to hear curious and nice points,
and if a Minister be quaint, an^ satyricall, and unfold points suitable to their
apprehension, they can digest this: but come to speak of things above nature,
of Christ, and the benefits by him; they are spiritual, they are remote, and
transcendent above their nature, that they cannot relish them. But he that has
the Spirit of Christ, of all points, there are none to those that unfold
Christ, and the benefits by him, the glory that we hope for by him in another
world.

And let us not grieve the Spirit, but give way to his motions. The Spirit is
now among us in his Ordinance knocking at our hearts, and desiring
entertainment, let us give way, and not quench the good motions that he
stirs up, and the Spirit shall be given more and more to us; The Holy Ghost
is given to them that ebey him. And let us beg the Spirit, God will give his
holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. Luke 11.
As if he should say, the Spirit is the best thing that God can give, you that
are evil, can give good things to your children: but your heavenly Father has
one good thing instead of all, he will give his Spirit. Therefore, when we
find our hearts dead, and d^ll, and earthly, and base-minded, think thus:
Alas, I am a lump of flesh now, where is the Spirit of God? certainly if I had
the Spirit in me, I could not be as I am. If we love our souls, we will take
this course, we trifle with Religion else. God does all by the Spirit, the
Spirit is Christ's Vicar: here is no need of a Ministerial head between the
Spouse and Christ, the Spirit and the Spouse are so near together: there is
such a conjunction between Christ and his Church, that where the Spirit is,
he stirs up desires of his coming. Only let us attend upon the means, and
Ordinances, that he has left in his Church. And let us consider we are not
for this life, we are not to live here always: the child in the womb is not for
that life, and when it is in the world, it is not for this life, there is a
third life that we are for. An imperfect state rests not till it come to
perfection: our best is behind: let those that are naught, fear the second
coming of Christ. Let Herod, and Judas, and the beast of Rome fear, that
shall be cast into the burning lake. Let Felix tremble, the corrupt Judge, and
all that live in corrupt courses. But we that profess our selves to be
Christians, and hope for better things in another world, let us labor to
banish base fears: and to this end, let us labor to be spiritual, and not to
be lead by the flesh, Whosoever is Christ's, has the Spirit of Christ, or else
he is none of his, as it is sweetly, and largely, and heavenly prooved, Romans 8.
We have nothing to do with Christ, unless we have his Spirit, to stir up
motions, and desires of better things then this world can afford.

FINIS.
DAVID'S CONCLUSION: OR, THE SAINTS RESOLVTION.

In one Sermon.

By the late learned, and reverend Divine, RICHARD SIBBS. Doctor in Divinity,
Master of Katherine-Hall in Cambridge; and sometimes Preacher at Grays-Inne.

Jeremy 30.21. Who is this that ingageth his heart to approach unto me, says
the Lord?

James 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne and Rapha Harford. 1639.

DAVID'S CONCLUSION: OR, The Saints Resolution.
Psalm 73.28. But it is good for me to draw near to God.


THis Psalm is a Psalm of Asaph, or a Psalm of David, and committed to Asaph
the Singer: for Asaph was hoth a Seer, and a Singer. Those Psalms that David
made, were committed to Asaph, so it is thought to be a Psalm of David; and if
not of David, yet of Asaph, that likewise was a Singer in the house of God.

The Psalm represents to us a man in a spiritual conflict; by a discovery of
the cause of it, The contents of the Psalm.
and a recovery out of the conflict, with a triumphant conclusion afterward.

A conflict.
He begins abruptly, as a man newly come out of a conflict, Truly God is good to
Israel: as if he had gained this truth in conflicting with his corruptions,
(and Satan who joins with corruption in opposing:) say the flesh what it can,
say Satan what he can, say carnal men what they can; yet God is good to
Israel.

A discovery.
After his conflict he sets down the discovery, first of his weakness, and
then of his doubting of Gods providence, and then the cause of it, the
prosperity of the wicked; and Gods contrary dealing with the godly: then he
discovers the danger he was come to, Verse 13.
v. 13. verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence, etc.

And then the recovery in verse 17. I went into the Sanctuary, The recovery.
and there I understood the end of these men. The recovery was by going into
the Sanctuary; Verse 17.
not by looking upon the present condition: but upon Gods intention, what
should become of such men, and there he had satisfaction.

The Victory.
Then his victory, and triumph over all, verse 23. Nevertheless I am
continually with thee. Verse 23.
It was a suggestion of the flesh that thou wast gone far from me: by reason
of the condition of carnal men that flourish in the eye of the world. No; Thou
art continually with me, and thou hold me by my right hand; thou upholdest
me I should fall else. But what would God do so for the time to come? he will
guide me by his counsel, while I live here, and when I am dead, what will he
do fot me after? he will receive me to glory: whereupon says he, who have I
in heaven but thee? and there is none in earth that I desire besides thee.
Therefore, though for the present my flesh fail; yea and my heart fail; yet
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. We see here his
victory set down, and he gives a luster to it, by Gods contrary dealing with
the wicked: for lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish: thou have
destroyed all them that go awhoring from thee. Now in the words of the text,
you have his Conclusion upon all this, nevertheless, it is good for me to
draw near to God.

This is the Conclusion upon the former principles; The scope of the words.
this is as it were the judgment upon the former demurrs; the sum of all comes
to this: let all things be weighed, and laid together, I am sure this is true:
It is good for me to draw near to God. So he ends where he began, God is good
to Israel; therefore because God is so good to Israel, It is good to draw near
to God. So you see in what order the words come; they are the words of a man
got out of a conflict, after he had entered into the Sanctuary, and after he had
considered the end of wicked men, at whose prosperity he was troubled, and
took scandal.

Before I come to the words, it is not amiss, briefly to touch these points,
to make way to that I am to deliver.

First of all that,

Gods children exercised with conflicts.
Gods dearest children are exercised with sharp spiritual conflicts.

God suffers their very faith in principles sometimes to be shaken. What is
more clear than Gods providence? not the noone day: yet God suffers sometimes
his own children to be exercised with conflicts in this kind, to doubt of
principles written in the book of God (as it were) with a Sun-beame; that have
a luster in themselves. There is nothing more clear, than that God has a
particular special providence over his; yet Gods ways are so unsearchable,
and deep, that he does spiritually exercise his children; he suffers them to
be exercised, as you see here, he comes out of a conflict: but it is good for
me to draw near to God. I will but touch it, therefore I will extend it only
to Gods people, that (if by reason of the remainders of corruption, God suffer
their rebellious hearts to cast mire, and dirt, to cast in objections that are
odious to the spiritual man, that part that is good) they may not be cast down
too much, and dejected. It is no otherwise with them, than it has been with
Gods dear children; as we see in Jeremy, Habakuk, and others. It is a clear
truth; I only point at it, that we might have it ready, to comfort our selves
when such things rise in our souls; it is no otherwise with us, than it has
been with other of Gods dear children.

The second point is, that, Gods children when they are in this conflict they
recover themselves. Gods children recover (...) of conflict.


God suffers them to be foiled; but then they recover themselves. First there
is a conflict, and then often times the foil: a man is foiled by the worst part
in him: and then after awhile he recovers, and then (as in other conflicts)
there is triumph, and victory: as we see here, his conflict, and recovery.

For Gods children go not far off from him, Reas. Gods children go not far
from him.
(as it is in verse 27. Lo, they that are far off from thee, shall perish)
they may have their thoughts unsettled a little concerning Gods providence:
Verse 27.
but they run not far off, they go not awhoring as carnal men do. They begin to
^lip; but God has a blessed hand under them, to recover them, that they do not
fall away, that they fall not foulely. They may slip, and fall a little to
stand better, and surer after; but they go not far off, as wicked men do:
they never slip so low, but Gods goodness is lower to hold them up: he has
one hand under them, and another hand above them, embracing them, so that they
cannot fall dangerously. This is the second, from this that we see here, he
recovers out of this conflict.

Which may serve to discern our estate in grace; Use. To discern our estate.
if we belong to God, though such noisome imaginations rise, yet
notwithstanding there is a contrary principle of grace always in Gods children
that checks them, at the least afterward, if not presently. Such noisome
thoughts as these rule, and reign in carnal men: for they take scandal at
Gods government, and they judge indeed that the ways of wicked men are happy:
they have false principles, and they frame their course of life to such false
principles, and rules: from cherishing athiesticall doubts of Gods providence,
and the like. It is far otherwise with Gods children: there are conflicts in
them; but there is a recovery, they check them presently; they have Gods
spirit, and the seed of grace in them, that is never extinct.

The way to recover out of conflict to enter into Gods Sanctuary.
The way of recovery, is to enter into Gods Sanctuary: for we must not give
liberty to our selves to languish in such a course; to look to present things
too much: but look into Gods book, and there we shall see what is threatened to
such, and such ill courses; and what promises are made to good courses: and
then apply Gods truth to the example; see how God has met with wicked men in
their ruff, and advanced his children when they were at the lowest; when they
were even at the brink of despair. Examples in this kind are pregnant, and
clear, throughout the Scripture. The Lord says, It shall go well with the
righteous, and it shall not go well with the wicked, Let him escape a thousand
times. Doubtless there is a reward for the godly. Let us look in the book of
God, Benefit of entering the Sanctuary.
upon the predictions, and see the verefying of those predictions in the
examples that act the rules, and bring them to the view: let us see the truths
in the examples. This entering into Gods Sancturary it is the way to free us
from dangerous scandalls, and to overcome dangerous conflicts: for the
conclusions of the Sanctuary are clean contrary to sensible carnal reason.
Carnal reason faith, Different conclusions of Gods word, and carnal reason.
such a one is a happy man, sure he is in great favor, God loves him: oh but
the Sanctuary says, it shall never go well with such a mam. Carnal reason
would say of Dives, oh, a happy man: but the Sanctuary says, he had his good
here, and Lazarus had his ill here. Carnal reason says, is there any
providence that rules in the earth? is there a God in heaven, that suffers
these things to go so confusedly? I, but the word of God, the Sanctuary says,
there is a providence that rules all things sweetly, and that all things are
beautiful in their time.

We must not look upon things in their confusion, but knit things, To look to
the end of Gods providence.
Mark the end, mark the end of the righteous man, Psalm 37. Look upon Joseph
in prison, Psalm. 37.
here is a horrible scandal: for where was Gods providence to watch over a
poor young man: but see him after, the second man in the Kingdom. Look on
Lazarus at the rich man's door, and there is scandal: but see him after in
Abraham's bosom. If we see Christ arraigned before Pilate, and crucified on the
Cross; here is a scandal; that innocence it self should be wronged: but
stay awhile; see him at the right hand of God, ruling principalities and
powers, subjecting all things under his feet.

Thus the Sanctuary teaches us to knit one thing to another, and not brokenly
to look upon things present, according to the dreams of men's devices; but to
look upon the catastrophe, and winding up of the tragedy. Not to look on the
present conflict, but to go to the Sanctuary, and see the end of all; see how
God directs all things to a sweet end. All the ways of God (to his children)
are mercy, and truth; though they seem never so full of anger, and
displeasure. Thus you see, Gods children are in conflict often times, and
sometimes they are foiled in the conflict; yet by way of recovery, they go into
the Sanctuary, and there they have spiritual eye salve; they have another
manner of judgment of things, than flesh and blood has.

The sight of faith ^rawes us near to God.
Again, we see, when he went into the Sanctuary, the very sight of faith makes
him draw near to God. Sometimes God represents heavenly truths to the eye of
sense, in the examples of his justice. We see sometimes wicked men brought on
the stage: God blesses such a sight of faith, and such examples to bring his
children nearer to him: as we see immediately before the text, thou will destroy
all that go awhoring from thee, and then it follows, It is good for me to
draw near to God. So that the spirit of God in us, and our spirits sanctified
by the spirit, takes advantage when we enter into the Sanctuary (and sees the
diverse ends of good, and bad) to draw us close to God.

Indeed that is one reason why God suffers different conditions of men to be
in the world (not so much to show his justice to the wicked, Why God suffers
different conditions of men.
as) that his children seeing of his justice, and his mercy, and the
manifestation, and discovery of his providence in ordering his justice toward
wicked men, it may make them cleave to his mercy more, and give a luster to his
mercy. It is good for me to cleave to the Lord: I see what will become of all
others.

The next that follows upon this; Gods children have a contrary course to the
world.
that Gods children thus conflicting, and going into the Sanctuary, and seeing
the end of all there. They go a contrary course to the World. Similie.
They swim against the stream. As we say of the stars, and Plannets, they
have a motion of their own, contrary to that rapt motion, whereby they are
carried, and whirled about, in four and twenty hours, from East to West; they
have a creeping motion, and period of their own; as the Moon has a motion of
her own, backward from West to East that makes every month; and the Sun
has a ^everall motion from the rapt motion he is carried with, that he goes
about in a year. So Gods children they live, and converse, and are carried
with the same motion as the world is: they live among men, and converse as men
do: but notwithstanding they have a contrary motion of their own, which they
are directed, and carried to by the Spirit of God: as here the holy Prophet
says; It is good for me to draw near to God. As if he should say, for other
men, be they great or small, be they of what condition they will, let them take
what course they will, and let them see how they can justify their course, and
take what benefit they can; let them reap as they sow; I do not matter much
what course they take, I will look to my self; as for me I am sure this is my
best course, to draw near to God.

A Christians rule of life not from the world.
So the sanctified spirit of a holy man; he looks not to the stream of the
times, what be the currents, and opinions, and courses of rising to preferment,
of getting riches, or attaining to an imaginary present happiness here: but
he has other thoughts, he has another judgment of things, and therefore
goes contrary to the worlds course. Hear Saint Paul, Phillip 3. says he
there, Phil. 3.
All men seek their own, I cannot speak of it without weeping: whose end is
damnation, whose belly is their God, who mind earthly things. But what does
Saint Paul, when other men seek their own, and are carried after private ends?
oh says he, our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior; who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like his glorious
body; according to his mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself. So you see the blessed Apostle, (led with the same spirit as the man
of God here) he considers not what men do, he fetches not the rules of his
life from the example of the great ones of the world, or from multitude: these
are false, deceiving rules: but he fetches the rule of his life from the
experimental goodness he had found by a contrary course to the world. Let the
world take what course they will, it is good for me to draw near to God.

I might add a little further, Corrupt courses of the world settle Gods
children.
that The course, and corrupt principles of the world, are so far from shaking
a child of God, that they settle him. They stir up his zeal the more. As we
say; there is an antiperistasis, an increasing of contraries by contraries; as
we see in winter the body is warmer, by reason that the heat is kept in; and
springs are warmer in winter, because the heat is kept in. So the spirit of God
in the hearts of his children, works, and boyles when it is environed with
contraries; it gathers strength, and breaks out with more zeal, as David,
Psalm. 119. Psalm 119.
when he see men did not keep Gods law; we see how he complains to God, It is
time Lord for thee to work. Indeed it is the nature of opposition to increase
the contrary: those that have the spirit, and grace of God in truth, they
gather strength by opposition.

Therefore the use we are to make of it, Use.
is to discern of our selves, of what spirit we are, Of tr^all.
what principles we lead our lives by, whether by examples of greatness, or
multitude, or such like, it is an argument we are led by the spirit of the
world, and not by the spirit of God. Gods children as they are severed from the
world in condition (they are men of another world) so they are severed from the
world in disposition, in their course, and conversation: therefore from these
grounds their course is contrary to the world. But, it is good for me; (But) is
not in the original, it is, And it is good for me; but the other is aimed at:
the sense is, But it is good for me to draw near to God, and so it is in the
last translation. Thus you see what way we have made to the words. I do but
touch these things, and it was necessary to say something of them: because the
words are a triumphant Conclusion upon the former premises.

Doct.
And in the words, in general, observe this first of all, Wisdom justified of
her children.
that, God by his spirit inableth his children to justify wisdom by their
own experience.

To make it good by their own experience, It is good for me to draw near to
God. And this is one reason why God suffers them to be shaken, and then in
conflict to recover, that after recovery they may justify the truth nihil tam
certum, etc. nothing is so certain as that that is certain after doubting,
nothing is so fixed as that that is fixed after it has been shaken; as the
trees have the strongest roots, because they are most shaken with winds, and
tempests. Now God suffers the understanding, Gods c^ild^en shaken, why?
that is, the inward man, of the best men to be shaken, and after settles
them; that so they may even from experience justify all truths: that they may
say it is naught, it is a bitter thing to sin: Satan has abused me, and my
own lust abused me, and intised me away from God: but I see no such good
thing in sin, Similie.
as nature persuaded me before. As travelers will tell men, you live poorly
here; in such a country you may do wondrous well, there you shall have plenty,
and respect; and when they come there, and are pinched with hunger, and
disrespect, they come home with shame enough to themselves that they were so
beguiled. So it is with Gods children: sometimes he suffers them to be foiled,
and lets them have the reins of their lusts awhile, to taste a little of the
forbidden tree; that after they may say with experience, it is a bitter thing
to forsake God, it is better go to my former husband, as the Church says in
Hosea, when God took her in hand a little, sin will be bitter at the last. So
the prodigal, he was suffered to range, till he was whipped awhile; and then
he could confess it was better to be in his fathers house. God suffers his
children to fall into some course of sin, that afterward by experience they
may justify good things, and be able to say that God is good.

And the judgment of such is more firm, and does more good than those that
have been kept from sincking at all. God in his wise providence suffers this.

Use.
We should labor therefore to justify in our own experience all that is good.
What is the reason that men are ashamed of good courses so soon? It may be they
are persuaded a little to pray, and to sanctify the Lords day, to retire
themselves from vanity, and such like: I, but if their judgments be not settled
out of the book of God, and if they have not some experience, they will not
maintain this, therefore they are driven off. Now a Christian should be able
to justify against all gainsayers whatsoever can be said, by his own
experience; That to read the book of God, and to hear holy truths opened by
men led with the spirit of God, it is a good thing* I find Gods spirit
sanctify me by it. To sanctify the Lords day, I find good by it by
experience. That where there is the communion of Saints; holy conference, etc.
I can justify it, if there were no Scripture for it: I find it by experience
to be a blessed way to bring me to a heavenly temper, to fit me for heaven.
So there is no good course, but Gods children should be able both by Scripture,
and likewise by their own experience to answer all gainsayers: when either
their own hearts, or others shall oppose it, he may be able to say with the
holy man here, it is no matter what you say; It is good for me to draw near to
God. So much for the general. To come more particularly to the words.

It is good for me to draw near to God.
HEre you have the justification of piety, of holy courses, which is set down
by drawing near to God. And the Argument whereby it is justified, It is good.
This gloss put upon any thing, commends it to man: for naturally since the
fall there is so much left in man, that he draws to that which is good: but
when he comes to particulars, there is the error, he seeks heaven in the way
of hell, he seeks happiness in the way of misery, he seeks light in the way
of darkness, and life in the way and path of death; his lusts so hurry him,
and carry him the contrary way: but yet there is left this general foundation
of Religion in all men; as the heathen could say, naturally all men from the
principles of nature draw to that which is good. Here religious courses are
justified, and commended from that which has the best attractive, and most
magnetticall force. It is good to draw near to God. Good has a drawing force:
for the understanding that shows, and discovers: but the will is the chief
guide in man; and answerable to the discovery of good or ill in the
understanding, there is a prosecution or aversation in the will, which is that
part in the soul of man that cleaves to good discovered. To unfold the words a
little.

[ It is good] To draw near to God who is the chief good. It is good in
quality, and good in condition, and state; It is good in quality and
disposition: for it is the good of conformity for the understanding creature to
draw near to God the Creator, who has fitted the whole inward man to draw
near, to conform to him.

And then it is good in condition: for it is his happiness to do so; the
goodness of the creature is in drawing near to God. The nearer any thing is
to the principle of such a thing, the better it is for it: the nearer to the
Sun, the more light; the nearer to the fire, the more heat; the nearer to
that which is goodness it self, the more good; the nearer to happiness, the
more happy: therefore it must needs be the happiness of condition to draw
near to God. So you see what is meant, when he says here, it is good: It is a
pleasing good, conformable to Gods will, he commands it: and it is for my good
likewise, it advances my condition to draw near to God.

To go (...) God (...).
[ To draw neare] what is it to draw near to God, we shall see by what it is
to go from God. God is every where, we are always near to God, Whither shall
I go from thy presence? If I go to hell, thou art there, etc. says the
Psalmist. God is every where indeed in regard of his presence, and power, and
disposing providence but then there is a gracious presence of God in the hearts
of his children. And there is a strange presence of God to Christ, the presence
of Union; which makes the humane nature of Christ the happiest creature that
ever was, being joined by a hypostaticall Union to the second person; but we
speak not of that nearness here. How God is near us
There is a gracious nearenesse, when the spirit of God in the spirits of those
that belong to God, sweetly inlargeth, and comforts, and supports, and
strengthens them, working that in them that he works in the hearts of none
else: for instance, The soul is in the whole man, it is diffused over all the
members; it is in the foot, in the eye, in the heart, and in the brain: but
how it is in all these? It is in the foot as it moves it, it is in the heart as
the principle of life, it is in the brain, and understanding, using, and
exercising, his reasoning understanding power: so that though all the soul be
in the whole man, yet it is otherwise in the brain than in the rest; so,
though God be every where, yet he is otherwise in his children than in
others: he is in them graciously, and comfortably, exercising his graces in
them, and comforting them; he is not so with the rest of the world: you see
how God is present every where, and how he is graciously present with his. So
answerable we are faid to be near to God (we are near him in what state
soever we are; How we are near to God.
but then) there is a gracious nearness when our whole soul is near to God,
as thus: when our understandings conceive aright of God, In our understanding.
as it is said of the young man in the Gospel, when he began to speak
discreetly, and judiciously, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God: when
men have a right conceit of divine truths, they are not far from the Kingdom
of God; when there is clearness of judgment to conceive aright. Those that
have corrupt principles, are far off; if the understanding be corrupt, all
the rest will go astray: there is the first nearness when the judgment is
sanctified by the spirit to conceive aright.

In our minds.
Then again, there is a nearness, when we not only know things aright, but
mind them; when the things are present to our minds, when God is in our
thoughts. David says of the wicked man, God is not in his thoughts. When we
mind, and think of God, and heavenly things, they are near to us, and we to
them: For the soul is a spiritual essen^e, it goes every where, it goes to
heaven, and is present with the things it minds; we are nearer to God, and
heavenly things, when we mind them, and think on, and feed our thoughts on
them.

In our wills.
Again, we are near them when our wills first make choice of the better part
with Mary; when upon discovery of the understanding, the will chooses
deliberatly: upon consideration follows the determination, and choosing of the
will, and upon choice, cleaving, which is another act of the will; when it
chooses that which is spiritually best, every way best for grace, and
condition, then it cleaves to it. As it is said of Jonathan, his heart did
cleave ^o David: so the woman cleaves to her husband, as Saint Paul speaks:
when the will chooses, and cleaves to that which is good, then there is a
drawing near.

And likewise when the affections are carried to God as their object, In the
affections
then there is a drawing near to God, Love.
when our love imbraceth God, and heavenly things: for love is an affection of
union, it makes the thing loved, and he that loves to be one: it is the
primary, the first borne affection of the soul, from which all other
affections are bred, when we love God we desire still further, and further
communion with him. Desire.
And where there is love, if we have not that we love, then the soul goes
forth to God in desire of heavenly things; the heart pants after God, as the
Heart does after the rivers of waters, and after holy things, wherein the spirit
of God is effectual. And when we have it in any measure, then the soul shows
a sweet enlargement of joy, and delight in God. Io^.
Thus when we judge aright of, and mind heavenly things, and make choice of
them, and cleave to God with all our affections of love, and joy, and delight,
when these are carried to God, and heavenly things, then we draw near to him.

Faith.
And especially when the inward man is touched with the spirit of God, even as
the Iron that is touched with the Lodestone, though it be heavy of it self,
it will go up: so, when the inward man is touched by the spirit of God, with a
spirit of faith, which is a grace by which we draw near to God with trust: for
it is confidence, and trust that draws us near to God. Faith it is wrought in
the whole inward man, in the understanding, in the mind, in choosing, and
cleaving: but especially it is in the will: for faith is described to be a
going to God, a coming to him, which is a promotion, or going forth, which is
an act of the will, so by faith, and trust, specially we draw near, and cleave
to God. Even as at the first we fell from God by distrusting of his word, says
the Devil, ye shall not die at all, we believed a lier more than God
himself. Now we are recovered by a way contrary to that we fell; we must
recover, and draw near to God again by trusting, and relying upon God. You
see what is meant by the words, It is good for me to draw near to God.

Doct.
To come to observe some things from them, Con^iction of the judgment, the
ground of pr^ct^se.
first this, that, Spiritual conviction of the judgment, it is the ground of
practice.

It is good, and good for me; For we know in nature that the will follows the
last design of the understanding; that which the understanding says is to be
done, here, and now all circumstances considered it is best, that the Will
chooses, and that a man does: for the Will rules, and leads the outward man.
Now where there is a heavenly conviction of the understanding of any particular
thing, this at this time is good, all things considered; and weighed in the
balance, on the one side, and on the other; where this is, there comes in
practice, and drawing near to God always. Conviction is when a man is set down,
so that he cannot gainsay nor will not, but falls to practice presently: then a
man is convinced of a thing. That which is immediately before practice, and
leads to practice, it is conviction; Now there are these four things in
conviction. 4. Things in conviction.


There is first truth, a man must know that such a thing is true. Then it must
not only be a truth, but a good truth; as the Gospel is said to be the good
word of God, and it is a true, and a faithful saying. It is a true saying,
that Christ came to save sinners; and it is a faithful, a good saying. If it
be not good as well as true; truth does not draw to practice as it is truth,
but as it is good.

As it must be truth, and a good truth, so it must be good for me, as the holy
man says here, It is good for me, etc. A thing may be good for another man;
the Devil knows what is good; and that makes him envy poor Christians so;
wicked men know that which is good, when they sin against the holy Hhost; but
for them it is better to keep in the contrary: so that we must know it is a
truth, and a good truth, and good for us in particular, that it is best for us
to do so.

The fourth is this, though it be true, and good, and good for us; yet before
we can come to practice, it must be a good that is comparative, better than
other things that are presented, or else no action will follow. A man must be
able to say, this is better than that. A weak man that is led with passions,
and lusts, he ofttimes sees the truth of things, and sees they are good, and
good for me, and wishes that he could take such a course: but such is the
strength of his passions at this time that it is better to do thus, it is
better to yield to his lusts, and he trusts that God will be merciful, and he
shall recover it afterward. These four things, therefore must be in
conviction, before we can take the best course; and these are all here in this
holy man: for he saw it was a truth, a duty, and likewise that it was a good
truth: for to be near to God the fountain of good, it must needs be good:
And then it was good for him to be so: nay it was good, all things considered:
for it is a Conclusion (as it were) brought out of the fire, out of a conflict;
Nay say the flesh, and say all the world what it can to the contrary, It is
good for me to draw near to God, he brings it in as a triumphant Conclusion.
Put drawing near to God in one balance, and lay in that balance all the
inconveniences that may fallow drawing near to God; the displeasure of great
ones, the loss of any earthly advantage; and lay in the other balance all the
advantages that keep men from drawing near to God: as if a man do not keep a
good conscience, he may please this or that man, he may get riches, and
advance himself, and better his estate; consider all that can be, yet
notwithstanding, it is better to draw near to God, with all the disadvantages
that follow that course, than to take the contrary: Thus you see the truth
clear, that conviction is the way, and foundation of practice.

Therefore we should labor by all means to be convinced of the best things.
Use. To labor for conviction.
It is not sufficient to have a general notion, and slightly to hear of good
things: no, we must beg the spirit of God that he would seal, and set them
upon our souls, and so strongly set, and seal them there, that when other
things are presented to the contrary, with all the advantages, and colors, and
glosses that flesh and blood can set upon them: yet out of the strength of
spirtuall judgment we may be able to judge of the best things out of a
spiritual conviction, and to say it is best to cleave to God. So said the
blessed man of God Moses, there was in the one end of the balance, the
pleasures of sin, the honors of a Court, there was all that earth could
afford: for if it be not to be had in a Princes Court, where is it to be
had? his place was more than ordinary, he was accounted the son of Pharoh's
daughter: yet lay all that in the balance; and in the other part of the
balance, to draw near to Gods people; though the people of God were a base,
fore-lorne, despised, afflicted people at that time: yet notwithstanding to
draw near to the cause of Religion, the disgraced cause of Religion, to draw
near to God when he is disgraced in the world (it is easy to draw near to
God when there is no opposition) but to draw near to Gods part, and side, when
it is disgraced in the world, Moses saw it the best end of the balance, put in
the afflictions, and disgrace of Gods people, or what you will. So it was with
Abraham when he followed God (as it were) blindfold, and left all, his
fathers house, and the contentments he had there. So it was with our Saviors
Disciples, they left all to follow Christ: they were convinced of this; surely
we shall get more good by the company of Christ, than by those things that we
leave for him.

Profaneness whence it is.
Let us labor therefore to be convinced of the excellency of spiritual things,
and then spiritual practice will follow. And undoubtedly the reason of the
profane conversation of the world, it comes from hidden atheism: that men
make no better choice than they do, that they draw not near to God; let them
say what they will, it proceeds from hence. I prove it thus; when men are
convinced of good things, they will do good: for conviction is the ground of
practice, and when men do not take good courses, it is because they are not
convinced of the best things. Therefore men that swear, and blaspheme, that
are carnal bruit persons, at that time Atheism rules in their hearts; that
they believe not these things in the book of God to be true. Can the swearer
believe that God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain:
that a curse shall follow the swearer? and the whoremonger, that whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge? and so the covetous, and extortioners, (they
that raise themselves by ill means) shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
can men believe this, and live in the practice of these sins? (if they did
believe these things indeed, as the word of God sets them down, if they did
believe that sin were so bitter, and so soul a thing as the word of God makes
it) certainly they would not: therefore it comes from a hidden Atheism. Indeed
there is a bundle of Atheism, and infidelity in the heart of man, and we
cannot bewail it too much: In the best there are some remainders of it: as
this holy man, so foolish was I, and as a beast before thee, when he thought of
his doubting of Gods providence. Therefore considering that the cause of all
ill practice, is that we are not spiritually convinced of the contrary, that
sin is a naughty, and bitter thing; nor are we sufficiently convinced of the
best things, let us labor more and more to be soundly convinced of these
things --

Now, nothing will do this but the holy Ghost, The holy Ghost ^^^meth. John 16.
as ye have it John 16. Christ promises to send the Comforter, the holy
Ghost, and he shall convince the world of sin: that is, he shall so set sin
before the eyes of men's souls, that they shall know there is no salvation but
in Christ; he shall convince them of unbelief, that horrible sin; they
shall have it presented so to them, that they shall believe presently upon it.
This the holy Ghost must do.

But the holy Ghost does it in the use of means; The holy Ghost convinces in
the use of means.
therefore it must be our wisdom, to hear, and pray, and meditate much, that
God would vouchsafe his spirit to persuade us, to convince our understanding,
to convince us of all our false reasonings against good things; that there may
not a vile imagination rise in our hearts contrary to divine principles.

It is good to draw near to God: therefore it is good to come to the
Sacrament, Application to the Sacrament.
which is one way of drawing near to God. Let us be so convinced of it, that
it is not only a necessary, but a comfortable, and sweet duty to have communion
with God: for will we suffer for Christ if we will not feast with him? What
shall we say of those therefore, that are so far from drawing near to God
when they have these opportunities, that they turn their backs? They clean
thwart this blessed man here, he says, It is good for me to draw near to God;
nay say they, it is good for me to have nothing to do with God, nor Christ, no
not when he comes to allure me. Now he is come near us indeed, that we
might come near him: because we were strangers to God, and could not draw
near to him simply considered, God became man, Emmanuel, God with us, that he
might bring us to God. Christ is that Jacobs ladder that knits heaven and earth
together; Christ, God and man, knits God and man together: this was the end of
his incarnation, and of his death, to make our peace, to bring those near that
were strangers, nay, enemies before, and of our part and portion in the benefit
of his death, we are assured in the Sacrament. Therefore let us draw near to
our comfort, with cheerfulness, for his goodness that we have these
opportunities. Let us draw near to God to have our faith strengthened, and our
commuion with him increased.

Only let us labor to come with clean hearts, God will be sanctified in all
that come near him. Let us know that we have to deal with a holy God, and
with holy things, and therefore cast aside a purpose of living in sin, let us
not come with defiled hearts: for then, though the things be holy in
themselves, they are defiled to us; let us come with a resolution to renew our
covenant, and come with rejoicing that God stoups so low, to use these poor
helps, that in themselves are weak, yet by his blessing they are able greatly
to strengthen our Faith.

FINIS.
KING DAVID'S EPITAPH: OR, An Epitome of the life and death of King DAVID.

In three Sermons.

By The late learned, and reverend Divine RICHARD SIBBS.

Doctor in Divinity, Master of Katherine-Hall in Cambridge; and sometimes
Preacher at Grays-Inne.

Luke 1.74, 75. That we being delivered from our enemies, might serve him in
holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our lives.

2 Samuel 14.14. For we must needs die, and are as water spilt upon the ground.

LONDON, Printed by E. P for Nicholas Bourne and Rapha Harford.

KING DAVID'S EPITAPH.
Acts 13.36. For David after in his own Generation he had served the Counsel
(or will of God) he fell asleep, and was laid to his Fathers, and saw
corruption.


THe words are part of a Sermon of blessed Saint Paul, wherein he proves out of
the old Testament Psalm. 16. that David prophesied of Christ, and not of
himself. David saw corruption; but he of whom David spoke, saw no Corruption:
therefore David was not the Messiah. He shows that the things there spoken, do
no way agree to David, but to the Messiah, who saw no corruption: For David
after he had served his own Generation fell asleep and saw corruption. In
general observe this; How to understand the Scriptures.
One of the best ways to understand the Scriptures, is to compare the old
Testament and the new together.

That which was spoken, and foretold of Christ in the old Testament; and
fulfilled in the New, that must needs be true. Christ is the true Messiah;
why? It was foretold so of him in the old Testament, and accomplished in the
new: therefore Christ is the true Messiah, comparing the prophecy, and the
event together. For the old, and new Testament make up but this syllogism: He
that should be so, and so as was prophesied: Born of a Virgin; that should come
at such a time in the later end of Daniels weeks etc. he is the true Messiah:
But Christ was such a one, he was borne of a Virgin, came at such a time, he
saw no corruption: for he rose the third day: therefore Christ is the true
Messiah.

Gods children leave a good name.
Again, you see the holy Ghost here could not mention David without terms of
honor; David after he had served the will of God in his Generation, etc.
Precious to God is both the life and death of his Saints. The righteous shall
be had in everlasting remembrance. The name of Josias is as an ointment poured
out: so indeed the names of holy men are as ointment poured out, they sweeten
men when they are gone. David's body was buried among them: but David had a
better Tomb, he was buried in the best monument, in the hearts, and
remembrance of Gods people; and in the remembrance of God. God wraps him up as
a valiant man in his own colors. He mentions not David barely here, but his
serving the will of God.

Let wicked men cast what aspertions they will upon the names of Gods people:
let them eclipse them, and cloud them as they please, as their malice
instigates them therein; the names and reputations of Gods people are not in
their keeping, and power: For David shall have a good name (in spite of all
the ^^oeg's and Shemeies, when they are rotten body and name together) we see
here many hundred years after he is mentioned with titles of honor. It should
encourage us therefore to serve God as we regard a good name.

Mark here the language of the holy Ghost, Savoury language of Scripture.
the language of Canaan. When he speaks of a good man, he speaks of him in
savorie terms: he does not say that David after he had been so long, or lived
so long, or reigned, and flourished so long: (as we see in stories such a man
lived, or reigned, etc. so long and then died:) yet this had been true, after
he had lived, and reigned so long he died. But that is not the language of
the holy Ghost; but after he had served God so long. The Scripture values men
by that that God values them, and not as men do, by their life, and reign, and
flourishing in the world, and their esteem with men, but as his carriage has
been to God. David served the will of God in his generation.

And then when he speaks of his death, he fell asleep he sweetens the harsh
name of death, with a sweet term the Scripture puts upon it. It is a
comfortable thing to consider the very language of the Scripture, how savoury
and heavenly it is, raising us up to comfortable and heavenly thoughts, even
from the very manner of the phrase. Different (as I said) is the phrase of
Scripture from other histories, that say, such a man lived, and reigned so
long, and then he died. And indeed a man may say of a wicked man, he was so
long in the world, but if he did no good, a man can scarce say that he lived:
for what is life without doing good, but a mere being in the world? Or if his
life be ill, we may say, such a man troubled the world so many years, and then
went to his own place, as it is said of Ind^s: but this is the Epitaph of a
holyman, he served God so long, and then he slept, and had happiness of God;
another manner of Epitaph than other men have when they are gone. This I
observe from the very language or phrase: David when he had served the will (or
counsel) of God as the Word is.

Again in the third place observe this in general, that God sets down David
here only as he was a good man, and passes by all his in^irmities and
breaches: whereas alas David* life was woven with good and ill* there were some
ill spots in that excellent garment; there were some ill parenthesis made in
that excellent speech; there was somewhat (by the infirmity of man) that was
not so good: but does God speak of that when he mentions David? Oh no! But
David after he had served God in his generation, etc. The spirit of God in
Saint Paul, passes by all that was amiss, and sets down that which is good;
to show us this comfortable point, By what God values his children.
that God values those that are in Christ, (and have repented of their sins)
not by what they have been, or have done at some time: but by what they are,
and what they resolve to be.

God values them by their better part, by that that is his in them, by that
that is spiritual in them. He judges them by the tenor of their lives, and
not by a particular flaw in their lives. This is Gods infinite mercy, when he
pardons, he pardons absolutely, he forgets as well as forgives: therefore the
phrase of Scripture runs, He will cast our sins behind his back, and cast them
into the bottom of the sea, that they shall never rise up in remembrance. When
we have once repented of our sins, they are to him as if they had never been
done; they are as things forgotten. Peter, after his foul fall, he was not so
much as upbraided by Christ in particular, Thou have denied me, etc. only
Christ comes sweetly over him with a question, Love thou ^e* he tells him not,
thou have betrayed me thus and thus: no, he does not so much as upbraid him
with the mention of it. So curious is God for troubling the peace of his
people, that when they have soundly repented of their sins, they shall never
hear of it to their confusion, nor at all, except it be to better them, and to
perfect the work of humiliation.

Contrary to the fashion of the corrupt poysonfull nature of man: if they have
but one thing (in all a man's life) to hit him in the teeth with, he shall be
sure to hear of it often enough, and pass by whatsoever is good in him. God does
not so with his children, but though they have some breaches in their lives, he
passes by them, and takes notice of that which is good in them; as we see here
the Apostle does, being directed by the spirit of God.

But though God so sweetly pass by David's faults when he mentions him, and
calls him a man after his own heart, etc. yet there is one thing that God puts
in as a scarre upon David* he was a man after Gods own heart; in all things,
Why the matter of Vriah so objected to David?
but in the matter of Vriah. Why does that come in Scripture? Surely God
mentions that, because that was done with more deliberation and advice, it was
done in cold blood; it was not infirmity, but presumption in that. Now the
more will there is in any action of sin, the more heinous the sin is, the
more the guilt is increased. There was more will in that: for it was not done
in heat of passion, but deliberatly: therefore it was a foul act. The spirit
of God takes notice both of the good, and of the evil; Rev. 2.
as we see in the Epistles, (in Rev. 2.) to the Churches, he had found fault
with them before, and (indeed God discerns directly where we are to blame) yet
this thou have, that thou have the works of the Nichol^itan, etc. If there be
any good, God takes notice of it. Davi^ after h^ had repented of that foul
sin, and was sharply corrected for it (as indeed he was,) David was a good
man for all that, he served God in his Generation.

But (to give you an item by the way) however God passed by the sin in David,
and accounted him after his repentance a good man; God corrects his sharply for
their sins.
yet he must be sharply corrected for it. Let no man therefore presume upon
this that God will judge him by the tenor of his life; and therefore he will
commit particular enormities: oh no! it cost David dear: for besides his
heart-smart in his own particular (God made his heart bleed, it cost him many
a salt tear, besides that) it was punished in his posterity: God raised up his
own bowels to take arms against him; he made him wish a thousand times that
he had not so offended God. It is ill trying conclusions with God; though God
afterward pardon us, and turn all to good; yet it shall cost us dear first.
Though God will bring us to heaven: yet if we will venture upon sins against
conscience, and take liberty to offend God, he will take sharp courses with
us, yet it shall not prejudice our salvation; you see those sins of David after
he had repented and was corrected for them, they were forgotten, and David (in
regard of the course of his life) served God; his life was a service of God
notwithstanding some particular actions. These things may be useful to the
best of us all: therefore I observe them in general from Gods manner of
mentioning David here with honor; and passing by his infirmities. To come more
particularly to the words.

Then David after he had served in his Generation, the will of God, etc.
THe words are a short Epitome of the life and death of the blessed man David
First, I will speak of his life, and then of his death. In his life there are
these two parts:

First, the time in which he lived, when this service was done: In his
Generation.

And then the manner of his carriage in that time of his generation, It was a
service of God, He served God.

And this service of God is set down by the object of it; God. By the rule of
his worship; the will of God. He served God, but how? as he had revealed his
will to him, not at random: God will be served according to his own will. And
then here is the act, he served* So here is the proper object of worship, God,
in whom all our service is terminate; whatsoever we do it must rest in him; if
we do good works to men, it must be for Gods sake, we must serve God in it.
Then here is the proper rule carrying us to that object, his Will And then it
must be a service, it must be done in obedience to God. David in his Generation
served the will (or counsel) of God, as the Word is. For his death, we shall
speak of it after.

First, The time.
for the time, In his generation. [Generation,] in the Scripture, signifies a
succession of men one after another, as you have it in Matthew. 1. Matthew. 1.
from such a one to such a one, so many generations, Generation, wh^^ it is.
so many successions. You know in the Latin tongue, seculum, is taken for an
age, or generation; the space of an hundred years: though Moses shut up the
life of man in a shorter time. Succession of one man after another, is a
generation. Generation, sometimes in a general sense, is taken for all of one
kind. The generation of Noah, and the generation of the righteous; that is,
all of that kind, without restraining it to succession. But most commonly it
is the consideration of men from succession of them; having the term from the
way whereby we enter into the world, that is, by generation; therefore the
succession of men from one to another, is called Generation.

Now here, Generation implies both the times, and the persons. The persons of
men are a several generation, and the time wherein they live is a generation,
and both are here included: David in his Generation (among the age of men, and
in the time wherein he lived) ^erved God. The meaning of the place is clear. The
points considerable here, are, First of all, that there is a generation, a
succession of men one after another. Secondly, that every man has his
particular generation, Davi^ had his generation, wherein he served the Lord.
Thirdly, that he served God in his Generation, that is, the whole time of his
Generation: yet with this limitation, he served God only in his generation
while he was here, before he came to heaven. In heaven there is a kind of
service, but it is not by way of work, but of reward. We must serve God in our
generation here. If ever we look to reap herafter, we must sow now. David
served God in his generation.


First of all, There is a generation, a succession of men. Obser.


Th^re is a succession of men.
Particular men go off the stage; but the species, the kind is eternal; kinds
of things continue forever. Man dies no^, but Paul and Pete^ and David die:
there is a succession of particular men. It is with men, as it is with the
waves of the sea; one wave goes away, and another comes after. It is with men
as it is with trees: for men are compared in Scripture to trees: trees of
righteousness; and man, take him in his nature, is like a tree: the Poet could
say to that purpose; it is with men as with trees, some leaves fall off in
Autumn, and others come in their place the next spring: so it is with men,
they have their several Generations, there is an Autumn, a decay, and there
is a spring of them, there is a succession of Generations. Use 1.


To teach us this lesson, To make use of our short time.
that, our time being short here; (every man has his generation; one
Generation goes away and another comes, as the Scripture says: we must be
laid to our Fathers, and otherr must stand up in our place; Rise up Joshua; for
Moses my servant is dead, (says the Lord:) one servant of God dies, and
another rises. There be many that must act their parts in this world,
therefore some must go off the stage, that others may come on) therefore while
we have time here, let us be sure to do good, before we be taken away,
suddenly, we know not how soon and there be no more generation. Here there will
be a succession of generations till we all meet in heaven, and then there will
be no succession, there shall be no more death; but as the Apostle says, we
shall be for ever with the Lord.

And it should teach us likewise (considering that in regard of our being and
natural condition in the world, Use 2. To make sure an e^^rnall Generation.
there are several successions, generation after generation, that now we are
here, and presently after no more seen in the world) to make sure an eternal
generation, to be borne anew of the immortal seed that never dies, as Saint
Peter says, that tends to immortality; there is no death in that birth. A
Christian as he is a new creature, has a generation to eternity, he never
dies. In regard of our being here, there is generation after generation;
successions of men: but when we are newborn, though we cease to be here, we
go to heaven. He that believes in me (says Christ) shall never die. Man that
is (...) of a Woman (says Job) has but a short time to live, and (that short
time) is full of misery: but man that is borne of the spirit, has an eternal
time to live, and that a happy life. All flesh is grass in regard of this
life we lead, which is supported with meat, and drink, and the comforts of this
life: all flesh is grass, and the beauty of it as the flower of the grass;
but the Word of God indureth for ever; and as Saint John says, he that does
the will of God, indureth for ever. The word of God indures for ever, because
it makes us (having the spirit of God) to endure for ever. The world passes,
and the lusts of it, but he that does the will of God, (that is, newborn by
the word of God, and transformed to the obedience of God, he) abides for ever.
Would you abide for ever, and not pass from alteration to alteration, (as
wicked men) they alter, and come to nothing, and worse than nothing) then labor
for this estate, this is the way to abide for ever: this life has no date of
days, no death.

Labor to plant our selves in Christ by faith, To get into Christ by faith.
that so in him we may have an eternal estate. Psalm. 90.
Thou art our habitation from generation to generation. It was a Psalm that
was made upon occasion of their falling away in the Wilderness; they dropped
away as leaves, and few of them came to Canaan: Well, (says he) we fall away
here, and wither as grass, etc. But thou art our God from generation to
generarion, that is, we have a perpetual subsistence in thee. A Christian
when he is in God (by being in Christ) has a perpetual everlasting
subsistence. As we are Temples of God: so he is our Temple, we dwell in him,
thou art our habitation, etc. Who would not labor to be in such an estate?
for in this world there is nothing, but a succession of Generations.

Secondly, Obser.
Every man has a particular generation. There is some emphasis in this: Every
man has his particular generation.
David in his generation: For men drop not into the world at all adventure: but
every man has his own time appointed, when to come into the world, and when to
go out, some in one time, and some in another. Therefore the times wherein they
live are foreknown of God: he has set down when such a man shall be borne, in
such an age of the world; so long he shall live, such work he shall do, and
when he has done his work, he shall be taken away hence, and another shall
come, and stand up in his place. So every man has his own generation designed,
and appointed, and ordained by God himself from all eternity; not only his
generation, but all the circumstances of it, the very place of his abode, the
time, and season, and country where he shall live, all are set down.

It is useful for this end, Use.
to observe in what times our lot is fallen, To observe in what Generation we
live.
to what times God has reserved us, what generation, and age we live in: to
consider of the state of the times. Are they good? bless God that has
reserved us to those times We pity some good men that lived in ill times; as
our Countrie-men in Queen Mary's time, To bless God if they be good.
and other dark times; they were worthy men, and it was pity they lived not in
better ages: certainly they would have been excellent men then: Therefore we
should bless God for reserving us to better times. What makes the times
better? The discovery of salvation by Jesus Christ: the discovery of the means
of happiness in another world: In what age there is a cleerer discovery, where
there is most spirit working together with the outward means: that is a
blessed age: the spirit of God was not working so much in former times of
darkness, and Popery. Then there were many that followed the Beast to their
eternal destruction, though God had mercy on many souls that followed him. As
it is said in Scripture, they followed Absalom in the simplicity of their
hearts, not knowing whither they went: so they followed Popery in the
simplicity of their hearts, not knowing the danger, God had mercy on them; yet
certainly, thousands of them were wrapped up in darkness: they were miserable
times then. Those that know Popery will say so; those that read the story will
say so: the world was wrapped in wars, and miseries in those times.

It is true, In what respect t^ese times are.
our times are not so good as they should be, and in many regards they are
miserable times: Miserable.
and we must not murmr at this dispensation of God, if God has so appointed
that our lot shall be to live in hard, and ill times. I say in some respects
these are bad times: for the world, the older it grows, the worse it is;
Simile.
As it is in a sinck, the further it goes, the more soil it gathers: so all the
soil of former times are met in the sinck of later times, and in that respect
this generation is an ill generati^: but if we consider what makes times good,
Happy.
the manifestatio^ of Christ's glorious Gospel (that has shined for a hundred
year, and more in our Church) the discovery of the means of salvation so
clearly, the abundance of the spirit with the means, making men to apprehend
the means, enlightening their understandings to make use of them, and working
their hearts to obedience: look in what age these are, they are happy times.
Witness our Savior (and he is the best Judge;) Happy are the eyes that see
the things that ye see, and the ears that hear the things that you hear.
Oh! in former times if they had seen that that we see, and heard that that
we hear, they would have accounted themselves happy: Oh! those that lived two
hundred years ago (though they were good men) if they had lived to see that
that we see, and to hear that that we hear, (living in the glorious luster
and Sunshine of the Gospel) how would it have rejoiced them? Therefore as we
have cause to consider of the ills of the time, and generation, that we be
not swayed away with them: so we have cause on the other side to bless God,
that has reserved us to these times of knowledge. In regard of the ills we may
say with Saint Austin. August.
Lord to what times are we reserved! But in regard of the good things we may
say, blessed be God that has reserved us for these things: that he has cast
our time thus, that we should be borne in this generation, in the blessed time
of the Gospel, in this second spring of the Gospel: We should bless God for
it.

Use. 2. To be bettered by the good in the generation.
Well; but that is not all: we are to be accountable to God for the time and
means we enjoy here in our generation. If we be not the better for it, we
shall be so much the worse. It had been better for us to have been borne in
times of Popery, and darkness, in places of ignorance, than living in the
glorious times of the Gospel, and in places where the light is discovered, and
to be naught in the midst of such light. Those that are bad now, Sins under
means greater.
are very bad: we see by experience, that of all men, the most outrageous
wretched persons are those that are ill in good places: for God gives them up
to more than an ordinary measure of profaneness. A man shall have better, and
more civil usage; he shall see better carriage in a Pagan, than in many
Christians that are not good under the means. There be degrees of those that
are naught; some God gives up to a profane spirit in the midst of the means:
a fearful brand. Those that are bad now in the glorious times of the Gospel,
their sins are presumptuous sins: they are not damned simply for sinning,
so much as for sinning against the means, for sinning against such light, for
sinning in these times; Those that lived in darkness they could do no better.
What; to be swearers now! to be licentious* disordered persons now! to contemn
holy things now! to be corrupt in our callings now! In this generation when
the light of the Gospel has so gloriously shined! what excuse can men have for
their sins now? Certainly it shall agravate their damnation that they were
children of darkness in the midst of light: nothing will trouble their
consciences so much as that they have offended against so many means, and so
many helps as they had in the days they lived in. I beseech you therefore, as
we should bless God for reserving us for these times and places of knowledge,
and light: so let us take heed lest they be a means of aggravating our
damnation afterward; that we shall wish that we had never been borne in such
times, but rather in times of darkness. It shall go better with our
Forefathers that lived in darker times, than with us, if we live in profane
and ungodly courses.

Use. 3. Not to be tainted with the sins of our generation.
Now there is no generation so good, but there be gross sins in all times,
and generations: therefore let every man be careful (as to consider the good
of the generation, to take good by it; so likewise) to consider the sins of
the time wherein he lives that he be not tainted with the sins of that
generation. Gods children have a counter-motion, a contrary motion, to the
motion of wicked persons in every generation: therefore in our generation let
us do as David did in his generation, stand against the ills of the times; go
against the stream in that which is ill. It is the commendation you see in the
old Testament; Noah was a good man in his generation; and such, and such, were
good men in their generations. David in his generation served God, Psalm. 12.
and yet the times were naught: help Lord (says he) for godly men perish from
the earth. The times were naught when he lived: there was Doeg, and
Achitophell, and Shemei, and other wicked men: yet David was a good man in his
generation, he was not carried with the stream of the times.

A godly man considers who are good, and who are naught in his generation, and
he walks to heaven with those that are good, though they be never so few; he
goes in a contrary motion to others, he does not conform to the world, Romans
12.
Romans 12. he fashions not himself according to the world, according to the
wicked men in the generation he lives in: but he fashions himself to them that
are of another world, that go a contrary way to the world.

Every generation has a Genius both for manners and study: Use 4. To set our
selves against the sins of our generation.
former times they were given to Barbarism: now these times are more refined
for outward respects. So for sins; every age has particular sins that
reign; Superstition in former times: but now the clean contrary; Profaneness,
Atheism, hardness of heart against the light, Presumption, Looseness, and
the like. Now these being the sins of our times, we should go so much the
stronger against the stream of Profaneness, and Atheism. The Devil discovers
himself in diverse shapes, Diverse sins in diverse ages.
in diverse generations: sometimes he prevails with ignorance; and then he is
a spirit of darkness: sometimes he is a spirit of Profaneness, and
Looseness. Now consider by what sins the Devil has most advantage, and be
sure to set our selves against them.

And let every one in his place, Use. 5.
labor to make the generation we live in as good as we can. To labor to make
the Generation we live in, good.
Why does God speak thus honorably of David? He served God in his generation;
that time was the better for him. We have all cause to bless God for such
men, they are blessed men. Let every one of us in our generation carry our
selves so, that when we are gone, it may be said; such a man did much good in
his time, and place, and hindered much ill, What a blessed thing is it when in
our generation we hinder all the ill, and do all the good we can! that others
may say to our comfort, and credit, the times, and place was the better for
such a man. Beloved, every one of us has his generation: some have a longer
generation, some a shorter; some have a longer glass appointed to run out;
some their glass is run out in a shorter time: Well, be it longer or
shorter; let us be careful that we trifle not out our generation, and time
wherein we live unprofitable; that little part of time that God has given us
to work in, let us be sure to bestir our selves in our generation, we know not
how long or short our generation is.

Alas, if most men ask their own consciences, wherefore they live; what is
the life of many, but an annoyance? they infect the air with their oaths; they
are a burden to the earth; they mis-spend the blessings of God: but what has
the times been the better for them? their lives have been scandalous, wicked,
and vicious. It should be our glory to shine in our times, as lights in the
midst of a sinful generation. I beseech you therefore let us take the counsel
of holy Saint Paul. Gal. 6.
Gal. 6. While we have time, let us do good: while we have a part to act here
upon the Stage of this world, let us act our parts; do that wherefore we came
into the world. We have not assurance from God that our generation shall hold
thus long, or thus long: therefore whatsoever we have to do, let us do it
presently, let us reform our wicked lives presently, before we go hence and
be no more seen. And for the good we have to do, do it presently; put it not
off: no man is assured of his continuance here.

In the next place, We must serve God our whole time.
David served God in his generation, he did not do it by starts, and fits; he
did not do this or that good act: but he served God in his whole generation: So
must every man, not only be content to do now and then a good action; for the
veriest wicked man in the world may do good sometimes, and the best men may do
ill sometimes: but in the whole course of our life, we must do good in our
generation, our course must be holy, the whole tenor of our lives while we
are in the world. All things have their time, but there is no time for sin,
there is no time for vanity, no time for swearing, no time for sensuality, and
loosnesse.

Therefore let the whole course of our lives be spent in the service of God.
What do we know but that that little time wherein we yield to the service of
the Devil, may be the time when God will fetch us hence? and what will become
of us then? therefore resolve not a moment to serve sin; our whole time is but
short in respect of eternity: what is our generation to world without end?
Therefore let us be content to serve God our whole generation.

We must serve God in our life time.
He served God in his generation, that is, in his lifetime, while he was here:
for God has placed us in the world to do him some work. This is Gods working
place, he has houses of work for us: now, our lot here is to do work; to be in
some calling, and course to work for God. We are not sent here into the world
to play, or to live idly. Religion is no vocal profession: every man must have
some calling or other, and in his generation he must do good: For what will our
account be afterward else, when we shall give an account to God how we have
spent our time in our generation? what good we did, what ill we hindered? It
will be a fearful account; when we have spent our time idly, perhaps
scandalously, and offensively, and sent others to hell by our example. We must
serve God in our generation, in our life.

Danger of deferring Gods service.
Thou that live profanely day after day, when do thou mean to serve God?
at the hour of death? did David serve God when he was to die only? No, he
served God in his generation, and then fell asleep. Alas, why do we put off?
there is no sowing after this life; then is the time of reaping; and why will thou defer the time of sowing till thou come to reap? It is a time to reap
the comforts of religion at the hour of death; shall we defer to serve Gods
will till we come to make our own will? and often times it is forced what we do
then. No, we must serve God all our time: David served God all his generation.
To do a few good works at our death only; it is a swinish doing good: the swine
will do good when he is dead; then there is profit of his flesh, though all his
life he were noisome. Those men that put off thus, they are rather swine than
men; beastly men. God seldom accepts the good they do then, and it is a forced
good; if they were not to die then, no good at all would be done: that they do,
is because they can keep it no longer. It shows they have no grace nor faith
at all: for if there had been faith to depend upon God, they would have done
good before; but they think, I may come to misery my self, and I know not what
distrustful base thoughts; therefore they will do no good in their lifetime.
But we must serve God in our generation, if we will be saved. These things
are of some use, and we should not forget them; but I come to the service it
self, which I shall a little more stand upon.

David served the will of God.
HEre is considerable, as I told you, these three things.

The object whom he served, God. The rule by which he served him, his will:
and then: The service it self: for to know the will of God, and not to serve
him, it is to no purpose; all must go together, we must serve the will of God;
as we see here David did.
Doct.
For the first; It is a known truth, that God is the maine object of all our
service. God the object of our service.
Indeed we serve men: for in love (which is a very busy grace) we must serve
one another in good works, but the love of God must set all on work, and all
must be done in obedience to him. God is the object that must terminate all
our service to men; whatsoever duty we do, we must do it as to God. If we
serve men; (if we be Christians) it must be with reference to God, because he
commands us, and that we may honor God. Psalm. 16.
We can do no good to him; what does he care for our goods? but he has
substituted men in his place, he has appointed such and such men in our
generation to do good unto: and he accounts what we do to them for his sake, as
done to him. God is the object of our service: God in Christ as our Father.

God, God as Creator to be served.
as God, without Christ a Mediator, ought to be served for our very Creation;
if we were to go to Hell when we had done; or should vanish to nothing, with
the beasts: for our very subordination, and subjection to God as creatures,
implies service. He is the object of service, as being our Maker, having given
us a being, having given us reason to serve him. But now God considered as a
Father in Christ, in the Covenant of grace, we ought to serve him in a higher
regard; not as creatures the Creator only, and as servants their Lord: but as a
gracious Father. So God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and Christ Mediator
God-man, are the object of our service, the whole adaequate, fit object: we
must not go beyond them: for whatsoever else we do, it must be in reference to
them. I will not dwell upon the point; it is a foundation to that I am to speak
of.

The next thing is the rule of his service, he served the will of God.

The will of God.
THe word signifies Counsel, Will of God, Counsel, why?
and it is better translated Counsel, than Will* because it is more
emphaticall: Gods will is his Counsel, not in regard of imperfection in
Counsel; for Counsel implies somewhat imperfect; as deliberation, and
consultation; God sees all at once, he does not deliberate: but in regard of
that which is eminent in Counsel; what is that? Wisdom; by Counsel thou
shall be established: so whatsoever is Gods will, that is Counsel; it is
wise; it is weighed, it is as gold seven times tried. Therefore we should
stoup to whatsoever is Gods will; either in his word, or in events; his Will is
Counsel, he is wise, he is not rash. A pattern to all those that would be
like God, to do all by Counsel, and not by Will. Those that are put to their
will, if there be not answerable wisdom to guide it, to what mischief do
they plunge themselves and others?

God must be served according to his Counsel, or Will, as he has discovered
himself in his word: Service what.
for service is nothing but an action done with an eye to the will of another:
for if a man does an action that one would have him do; if he do it not with
respect to his command, it is no obedience, nor service: he that has not some
care in the act, it is no obedience. As the Civil Law says, infringit
obedientiam, etc. it breaks from the nature of obedience, that has no cause
for it; he must know his reason: at the least there is the command of the
superior must be a reason, and ground for what he does in all his obedience
and service. Therefore there is a like necessity of the word of God, as of his
service: for what Master will be served according to the will of his servant?
why does the Scripture mislike will worship; worship that is according to our
own will? Will worship. why forbidden?
because there in we make our selves God, we serve ourselves, and not God. We
must not serve God, as we would be loath to be served our selves; we would
be loath to have a servant complement with cap, and knee, and then do as he
list himself: and so for us to come, and complement with God, to hear his
word, as if we would be directed by him: to kneel, and pray to him for
fashion, and then all our life after to do as we list. It is a delusion to say
we serve God, unless we serve him according to his Will.

Therefore there must be a rule of our service, Gods written word the rule of
our service.
and that rule is the written word of God. There was a time when the word of
God was not written; Heb. 1.
and then God discovered his Will by dreams, and visions, and many other
ways: but when the world was enlarged, and mankind spread further, traditions
from hand to hand was not a fit means, and way to deliver truths: because it
was subject to corruption. God therefore would deliver his Will (how he would
be ^erved) in writing: and God sanctified this course, and gave credit to it,
by his own example, writing his own Law with his own finger. The ten
Commandments were written by God himself. God was the first Preacher, and the
first writer; he was the first Preacher, he preached the Gospel to Adam in
Paradise: and the first writer, the ten Commandments being written by God
himself. Now, we have the written word of God to be our rule (how God must be
served) an exact, and perfect rule. I will not speak by way of controversy: I
(hope we are grounded well enough) but by way of direction for a godly life.
Gods Will is a sufficient rule.

What is requisite in a Rule?
Properties of a Rule, appliable to the word of God.
First, a rule must be clear, and open, that it may be made use of, by those
that are to be regulated by it: therefore we say, The secret will of God can
be no rule, Open, manifest.
because it is secret. That which is a rule must be manifest and open:
therefore the revealed will of God that every one may see, Secret Will of God,
no rule, why?
that is our rule. We may cross Gods secret will and do well, and we may
serve it, and yet do ill. A Father may pray for his child's life, and may cross
the secret will of God, and yet does well; God allows bowels in Fathers. A
wicked man may do according to Gods secret will, and yet sin: therefore that
was not the rule of David's service, nor cannot be of ours. Secret things belong
to God: but revealed things to us and our children, says blessed Moses. The
will of God as it is discovered must be the rule of our actions: A rule must be
open, or else it is no rule.

Again, the rule by which we must lead our lives it must be infallible,
Infallible.
not subject to error; for then it cannot be the rule of our service. The Word
of God is an infallible rule, it cannot deceive, because it is the Word of God:
men wrote it indeed; but it was God that dictated it: the finger writes, but
the head dictates: holy men wrote it according as they were guided be the holy
Ghost. The will of any man cannot be the rule of any man's service, further than
it is agreeable to the first rule, why? because it is subject to error, and
mistake. That which must be the constant rule of a man's life, it must not be as
popish traditions and the like; it must be infallible: now the word of God is
so, it is infallible: a man may err, and be a man, and a good man too: but God
cannot err, and be God; the word of God cannot be false and be the word of
God, therefore it is an infallible rule.

When this is applied to any creature, The Grand lie in the Church of Rome.
it is a Grand lie, and the foundation of misery in that Church: this is the
first lie in the Church of Rome; That the Church consisting of a company of men
cannot err: what a horrible absurdity is this, to make the will of man the
rule: that the Church cannot err, that Popery cannot err? though they err
egregiously; they account rebellion service; and make traitors merit, etc.

But are our Tenants subject to such gross things? No, we make the rule of
obedience the infallible word of God, that cannot err. To attribute that of
that which cannot err, to that which can err, it is a horrible absurdity:
but I will not enter into controversies.

In extent.
Again, that which is a rule must be perfect in commensuration, in measure: it
must be of equal extent to all things that are to be ruled. Now the things
that are to be ruled, is our whole carriage, and conversation: therefore that
that is the rule for a man, it must rule his thoughts, his speeches, and
actions: so the word of God, it rules the whole carriage of a man. There is a
proportion between the rule, and all things that are to be ruled by it; all
things fall under the word of God to be directed, and ruled by it: It gives
direction to our thoughts, to our speeches, to our actions, in our callings; it
gives direction to Magistrates, to Ministers, to Masters, to Servants, to all
estates, and conditions, in life, in death. It is exceeding large as David
says, All things come to an end, but thy Commandments are exceeding large. It
is a rule that extends to all things that are to be ruled whatsoever: no other
rule but Gods will does so: for men's laws, they have nothing to do with
thoughts: thought is free for them.

Authentical.
Again, a rule must be authentical; what is that? It must be credited for it
self, it must have authority of, and for it self, and not depend upon another
(if it be the first rule;) Indeed there be subordinate rules, there is a rule
ruled, and a rule ruling men's laws; the Magistrates will, it is a rule ruled
by a higher rule: and as long as it so, it is a good rule; but there must be a
rule ruling, above all subordinate rules whatsoever; what is that? The word of
God; it has authority from it self, not borrowed of men: it is a rule that
rules all, and is ruled of none others rule: but by this rule; this is a rule,
ruling the very rulers of the world. No man's will is a law further than it is
squared by this law of laws. Inflexible.
It is an inflexible rule, it cannot be bent to men's purposes; man would bring
Gods will to his will; but it is the measure that measures all, and is measured
by none: for we must not judge the word, the word must judge us. You have some
presumptuous persons that will judge, and murmr at the word, but the word
will be too good for them, and judge them. He that judges the law, and gives
sentence on the law, shows himself a fool, the law must judge him: much more
the law of God; therefore it is authentical. These are the maine properties of
that that must be a rule to judge our lives by. Now the word of God, is both
known; and is not subject to error any kind of way: and it is equal to all
things that may fall under it; and it is authentical, of credit for it self
(let men say what they will,) it must rule, and not be ruled. Therefore David
when he ordered his course of life by this will of God, he deserved this
commendation, that in his generation he served the will of God.

There be subordinate rules in their kind; as the Law of Nature, and the Laws
of men, direct in things of this life, to do them in that manner, according to
the rule: a civil Law for civil actions: men's Laws for men's actions: but
when we do any thing holily, we must have direction from Gods Law, and that
must put the respect of service to God upon our actions. For howsoever we do
things civilly by the Civil Law; and do things comely by the Law of Nature:
Nature teaches us to carry ourselves in a decor^m, to give every man his due:
but it is not a service of God, except it be directed by the rule of God, a man
cannot serve God without a higher rule than man can give.

But you will say, How to apply the rule in particular actions.
how shall we apply, and make use of this rule in particular actions; the Word
is but short, but actions are infinite; the Word of God directs me not to this,
or that action; and ^aith, you shall do this, or that in particular; but gives
general rules: how shall we come to carry our selves in particular actions?
here is the skill: for a rule is not to hang up, a measure is not to be cast
aside; but to be applied; a rule is a thing in relation to a thing ruled, and a
measure to things measured; and if we do not apply it, we lose the use of it.
How shall we know how to serve the Will of God in every particular action?

Outward helps.
Besides the general Word of God, we have some outward helps, and some inward.
The outward helps are:

First the Ministry, The Ministry.
that is one maine outward help; and what is the Ministry for, but to dig up
the treasure, the Mine of God, to lay open the Will of God in particular; to
branch out, and lay open, and anatomize the duties of such, and such callings,
by their Ministerial gifts, which God has given his servants in a competent
measure, to give particular directions? They have their callings for this end,
to speak a word in season; they have the tongue of the learned, God has not
set up this calling for naught, therefore, as we go to the learned in the Law,
in doubts in that kind: so in particular doubts, why do we not make use of
those that study that way? if it be in such a case, as perhaps we have no light
in our selves. It is one end of their calling, because perhaps our callings are
such, as that we cannot study particulars our selves, therefore God has
sanctified that calling, that we might have the use of it: that is one.

Another outward help for particulars; Communion with good people
it is communion with good people, those that are led with the spirit of God:
for we must know, that God often times lays up the practice of one man in the
breast of another: because he would knit man to man. We are often times at a
loss, the best of us all, in particular directions what to do: sometimes a
meaner man (in some things) than our selves, can give better directions in
particular than our selves; shall we storm, and swell at this? no; it is Gods
wisdom that one man should carry that which is for the special use of
another: that we might take counsel, and ask advise one of another. A wise
man orders his doings by Counsel, says the Wiseman: and often times he that
takes advise of himself, has a fool to his Counselor; and he beshrewes
himself that he would not take the benefit of another man's advice: therefore,
besides the public Ministry, this is one help, our Christian friends, and
acquaintance; and they are reserved for such a time: A friend is made for
adversity, for ill times, in perplexed, and doubtful cases: this is to make
use, and benefit of others.

Again, Laws of men.
the Laws of men; what are the Laws, if they be good, but particular
determinations of the Will of God. We ought to have reverent conceits of the
Laws: for they do but bring Gods generals to particulars, if they be good
Laws: if they have not their derivation from Gods Laws, they are naught; but
if they back that in any thing, they are nothing but a particular determining
of the general rules in Gods Word, to give every man his due, etc. Therefore
in many cases we may know what the Will of God is, by the good Laws of the
kingdom, which bind the Conscience to obedience. There is no disobedience to
men's Laws, but where there is disobedience to Gods Laws first, which has
stablished men's Laws.

And then in some particulars (when it does not appear what we should do)
the example of good people, Example of good people.
of the wisest, and best in the rank, and place where we live, till we know
the contrary, the best way is to rest in their judgment, to follow the advice
of others, the direction of friends, or the Laws and customs; and not to be
refractary, and opposite, except there be reason to the contrary: for man's
spirit is a divine thing, it must always be led with some reason: but with this
reservation, a man may keep to others, till it appear otherwise, till he see
other light, and direction, to take this course. This is the ^disposition that
should be in every peaceable ^man. These be some outward helps to know the
Will of God in particular actions.

The inward helps to know what Gods Will in particular is, Inward helps.
together with the Word of God unfolded.

The Spirit of God, The Spirit of God.
which is as a voice behind us, saying, This is the way, walk in it. Isa. 30.
Isa. 30.
Wherefore serves the blessed Spirit, but to be a Counselor? as Isa. 9.7.
Isa. 9.7.
Christ, he is the blessed Counselor, how comes he to be so? not immediately
by himself, but by his Spirit. All things he does to his Church, is by his
Spirit: he fills his Church with his Spirit. Now the children of God having
this Spirit of Counsel to advise them in particulars, they are led with the
Spirit. This is one inward help, and a maine one. And surely, if we would give
way to the blessed guidance of Gods Spirit, and not grieve, and quench, and
resist the Spirit; the Spirit of God would be ready to direct us upon all
occasions, we should be guided in particular actions with a better Spirit than
our own. And this Spirit we may have by prayer, God will give the Spirit to
them that beg him, Luke 11. Luke 11.


Particular grace Prudence.
Then another inward help, is particular grace, which God gives to his
children. Particular prudence, to speak words, and to do actions in season,
that every thing may be beautiful in its time. There is Sapience, Wisdom,
and Prudence: I Wisdom dwell with Prudence. It is the wisdom of a man, to
understand his way, what to do in particular, or what not to do. It is
Prudence, or discretion to discern of differences: now that grace of God is in
some measure given to all his children: he makes them wise to understand their
own way. They are not so wise perhaps for other things, it is not their way.
God lets some men go with a less measure of discretion to heaven than others;
because he has less work for them to do: but every man has as much as will
bring him to heaven; the less he has himself, the more he shall have of
others. Some men are excellent in gifts of Wisdom, they can tell you
generals out of the Book of God excellent well: but come to directions in
particular, and you shall have meaner men of better discretion than they.
Either we have it our selves, or else God will associate us, and by his
providence cast us upon other acquaintance, that have a greater measure of this
grace, that he will have us acquainted with. God gives every one of his a
Spirit, to discern what to speak, how to advise, how to comfort, what to do.
And the meanest Christian is more in this for religious actions, than the
greatest man in the world, that has not the Spirit of God: for he can tell in
particular, how to bear afflictions, and how to enjoy prosperity, because the
Spirit directs him what to do.

Again, Conscience.
God has put into every man a Conscience, wherefore serves conscience, but
especially to direct in particulars? There is a faculty of the soul, that we
call a Treasury; a preserving faculty, that is to lay up general rules out of
the Word of God, and directions out of good books, and from the counsel of
other men: it is a faculty to treasure up rules, therefore it has the name of
preserving: but there is a conscience under this, that being sanctified by the
Spirit of God, and being directed in general by the word of God, it directs in
particular. Conscience tells us, this in particular you ought to do; this you
have done: in this particular you have done well, in this you have done ill: so
conscience is put in us to check, or direct us in particular. It is Gods Vicar
in every man, together with the Spirit: Conscience, together with the Spirit is
a great help to know Gods Will in particulars. If men would not be too bold
with Conscience, Conscience (together with Gods Spirit) would be faithful to
them. Conscience may say as Reuben said to his brethren, when they were in
misery; Did not I tell you, do no hurt to the lad? deal not so hardly with
Joseph as to cast him into the pit? so many men do many things amiss,
Conscience may say; did not I tell you this before, it was naught, and yet you
would needs do it? yes certainly: and when Conscience is not hearkened unto as
a director, it will scourge as a Judge. It has many offices; and it is good to
keep this Conscience in its office, to let Conscience do its full duty, let
Conscience direct us to the full. Certainly, if we would hearken to this
Vicegerent in our hearts; (this littlegod, that God has placed there (in
mercy) to guide our lives in particular) it would be better with us than it
is, we should end our days with more comfort, and give a better reckoning
than we can.

Experience.
Again, experience may be added as another help. Experience is a great help
in particulars: for indeed generals are raised out of experiments in
particular. Therefore those that are wise Politicians, Statesmen, they are not
so out of books altogether; but men of experience, that can say, such a case
has been so at such a time: so that out of observation, and particular
experience, they are able to say (upon the like case) it should be now at this
time thus, and thus. If therefore we would treasure up experience, it would
be a good help to know what is to be done in particulars: to consider how it
has been in former time, and consider the experience of others; you see then
what the rule of our service is, Gods Will: with these helps subordinate to
it, how to direct our selves in particular actions to serve the Will of God: So
much for that point.

He served.
NOw I come to the act of Service, The Act, he s^rved God.
God must be served according to his own Will: we must search, and try what
is the good, and holy, and acceptable Will of God Romans 12. Romans 12.
I have showed how we may search in particular what the good, and acceptable
Will of God is: Now when this is discovered, the next thing is to serve God in
the knowledge of his Will: for all the blessings are annexed to service, and
not to knowledge. If ye know this Will; is there all? no; happy are ye if ye
do it. If we know the rule and do it, we are happy. What if we do it not?
He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. It will but aggravate our damnation, To know Gods will, and not do
it, aggravates our damnation.
to know the rule, to have directions what to do, and not to do them. Then
the rule that we have, has another use: if we use it not for direction in what
we do, it will be brought against us at the day of judgment, as a direction
for God to damn us by: this you knew, this counsel you had, these motions of
the Spirit you had; this, Conscience told you; this, the Ministry, and your
friends told you; notwithstanding you crossed, and thwarted all; when it is not
a direction for us to obedience, it will be a direction for God to give
sentence. Therefore let us make conscience, first to know the will of God,
(which is the rule of all our actions) by all the means we can, and then to
give service to it. David served the will of God: his life was not
unfruitfully, and wickedly spent; but he served the Counsel of God that had
planted, and placed him there in the world for that purpose. Why has God
planted us here, in the Paradise of the Church? that we should not be barren
trees; or bring forth ill fruit: but that we should serve him, and be
fruitful in our places

This word service, is a harsh word, and such a thing as proud spirits could
never digest. Why did the Devils fall? Cause of the fall of Angels.
they would be in a state independent, and not under others: they would have
their own courses; and therefore the Scripture says, they kept not their own
standing. God set them in one course: and they swelled and would not keep it.
The particular is not set down in Scripture: but they kept not their own
standing. Neither the Devil, who is a proud creature, nor men led with the
spirit of the Devil, can endure service: every man would be a God to himself,
to be guyded by his own lewd will, and lusts, (and God knows) they are blind
guides, and we shall know it to our cost, if we have not a better guide; when
the will of God is revealed therefore, we must have a care to serve it.

Now, to serve, To serve, wha^?
implies two things especially, an action, and a reference of that action to
the will of another, that is service (as I said before) to do a thing, and to
do in obedience: for if a man do never so many things, if it be not in
obedience to the will of another, it is no service, he serves himself: so to
serve God is, when we know the will of God, to do accordingly, and to do it
because it is the will of God; then it is service: or else it is a work indeed
done, but no service, or obedience.

All obedience is with looking to the will, and pleasure of another, that has
authority to direct us: and then we serve the revealed will of God, when the
whole inward and outward man is fashioned, and framed to that: when there is a
measuring of both together: as when we obey the directions, when we tremble
at the threatenings, when we imitate the examples of holy writ, when we are
raised up with the comforts; when answerable to every divine truth, there is an
answerable disposition of soul: when there is a sweet harmony between Gods
truth, and our inward, and outward man. Romans 6. Romans 6.
We must be cast into the mold of the word: as a thing when it is molded in
another frame, it carries the print of the frame or mold; so we serve the
will, and word of God, when we are molded answerable to that will.

Service of God.
Now more particularly, this service of the will of God; It is either immediate
inward service of the will of God; or outward service.

Inward service, is the obedience of the first Commandment, Inward.
when upon the konwledge of God, we set him up in our souls, and cleave to
him in our affections, of trust, and joy, and love, and delight, to give him
the supremacy of all these; then we serve him with inward worwip, and service;
and this indeed is to set the Crown upon Gods head, and to make him King, and
God in our hearts; he must have the prime of our inward service: when we love
God above all, and fear him above all, and delight in him above all, and
cleave to him when all things else fail us, this is the immediate service of
God in our hearts, when we give God his own in our hearts. Hence comes all
other service whatsoever: or else it is but the eye-service that is not
enlivened with the inward worship of God.

Now, besides this inward, there is a service of God that comes from this
inward service, which is, of the outward man, that is, when we pray to God* and
that requires our words, when we praise God in thanksgiving, when we come to
hear the word, and to receive the Sacrament; and so all outward holy actions
are the service of God, and are drawn from the inward immediate worship of God
that I spoke of before.

Besides these (which come more immediately from a sanctified spirit) there is a
service of God, Service in obeying the second Table.
that is the obedience of the second Table, when we do good to men with an eye
to serve God as we say; there is an elicite proper service of God, and a
commanded service of God, cultus imperatus. All duties to men are a service of
God, when we do them as commanded of God, as, because I love God, therefore I
honor my parents, and Magistrates, and therefore I will not commit adultery, as
Joseph, shall I do this and offend God? So the Scripture alleges reasons out
of the first Table, when we are tempted to sins against the second Table:
and then the duties of the second Table are a worship, and service of God, when
they are commanded by the first. And this is the difference between a mere
formal man, Difference between a formal man and a Christian.
and a Christian in his outward performances; a Civil man is altogether for the
second Table: but he has not his rise from the first; he gives every man his
due, etc. but it is not in obedience to God, because God has commanded him to
do it: but because he sees it is a deformed thing to be unjust, out of the
light of nature) he condemns the sin, but not out of religious respects: it
is not a service of God all this while. I, but when it is from love to God,
when that great command ( thou shall love God above all) sets him upon this,
then all the duties he performs to man are a service of the will of God: for
God commands them. Even the basest works are a service of God, when they are
done in obedience to God, as Saint Paul tells them in Collos. 3. Collos. 3.
and Ephesians. 6. Ephesians. 6.
the poor servant serves the Lord Christ; when a poor servant is at his work,
employed in the business of man, poor common things; yet he serves the Lord
all the while: For God has set him in that calling, and he does the second
Table in obedience to the first; and he serves men, those that are his
governors with an eye to the great Governor, and Master that is above all,
that will reward them for their poor service, Ephesians. 6.
however their Master reward them, Ephesians. 6. This is to serve the will of God
then, to yield to him the immediate service of the soul, and the outward
expressions of it, and to go through all other duties as they spring from the
first: then we are molded (as I said before) answerable to the word of God.

To apply this to our blessed man David, and then to make use of it to our
selves. Application to David, ^e served God.


Thus did David serve the will of God in his time: for you may see what he was;
he is anatomised, and laid open to our eyes in the Psalms, In the inward man.
you may see his care of serving God in his (...) See how he cleaved to God in
his (...) in Psalm. 18. Psalm. 18.
how he loved God, and joyed in God, and in the word of God, above all things
in the world; he esteemed the light Gods coun^enance, more than corn, or
wine, or oil. Psalm. 4. Psalm: 4.
I give but a touch to show how this description is true of this blessed man,
that ^e served the will of God.

And for the expression of (...) praise, Outward.
and prayer he was a man after Gods own heart, especially in this, he was
ready upon all occasions to bless, and praise God; he kept his communion with
God, as we see, though he were a King, yet his (...) was to serve God, as we
see in Psalm. 1. Psalm. 1.
he meditated in the word of God day and night. What time had he to rule his
Kingdom then? The meaning is, that all the spare time that he had, it was to
think of God, to look to the rule, the word of God, how to guide his life.

And for his outward calling (there is a double calling wherein we serve God as
Christians, For the second table.
our general, and our particular calling, wherein we are to deal with men)
what an excellent man was he ^hee served the will of God, as a Governor of a
family, we see in Psalm. 101. Psalm. 101.
how he carried himself in the midst of ^his house, to all his servants, a
liar should not abide in his house. You have a direction there how to guid^
your families, you see how he served the Will of God as a governor; yet there
was a fault in him in that respect, he was too indulgent to Absolon, and
Adoniah. A man may be a good man, and yet be too blame in some particulars: but
when his heart is right, God pardons the rest.

As a King.
You see how he carried himself as a King, he was an excellent King, the
delight of Israel: he carried himself every way as a King should do: he
tempered mercy, and judgment together: I will sing of mercy, and judgment:
so he did in his whole carriage sweetly temper mercy, and justice, he
dispensed these two. And as a King must not only serve God himself; but to
make others serve God: so his care was to stablish the worship of God, as you
find in the story. David, when he saw all in peace and quiet, then he begins
to take care for the Arc, 1 Chronicles. 17. 1 Chronicles. 17.
I dwell in a house of Cedar: but the Ark of the Lord remains under
curtains: therefore he took a course for that. So governors should do, when
God has settled them in their government quietly, to begin to think of Gods
house: for they rule not well, they serve not the Will of God, except, besides
their own service, they call others to serve him. A Magistrate must be the
keeper of both Tables himself, and cause others to do it, he must lay down
his crown at the feet of Christ, as it is in Isay. Thus David was a nursing
father to the Church of God, he served God in his particular calling.

Now (to make use of another division) the Will of God it is either in things
to be done, In suffering.
or to be suffered, and obedience answerable to that is either active, or
passive; as David served God in doing, so he yielded obedience, and served the
Will of God in his passive obedience: wherein he did deny himself
exceedingly, as much as ever man did, next to Christ; you see how he denied
himself in his carriage toward Saul, in matter of revenge, how he overcame
himself, because he knew that revenge was Gods, and that God was his, and
therefore would right him well enough; and in Shimei, God has bid him rail;
he would not revenge* and other notable examples we have, how he submitted to
Gods Will, as in 1 Samuel 30.6. 1 Samuel 30.6.
when he was in extremity, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God; there
he stayed himself in extremity; and in 2 Samuel 15.25. 2 Samuel 15.25.
there is a notable place how he submitted himself to God. The King said,
Carry back the Ark of God, if I have found favor in the eyes of God he will
bring me again; but if God say thus, I have no delight in him; behold here I
am, let him do as seems good to him. Here was a resignation of himself to
the will of himself in serving of him: so in Psalm. 39. Psalm. 39.
I held my tongue Lord; because thou did it. Thus you see how he served the
will of God, in the inward service of God, and in the outward to God, and man;
in both callings, as a good man, and a good governor, in his family every way
he served the Will of God.

Use.
And wherefore is all this? Here is a pattern for us that we should serve the
Will of God: To imitate David.
to serve the Will of God immediately, to labor to bring our hearts to trust in
him, to fear him above all, to delight in him above all; and to express it in
our outward service of him, and in doing duties to men from inward respect to
God; in conscience of our duty, to serve God when we serve men: to carry our
selves in our general calling, as Christians, and in our particular place, not
only to be good men; but good in our callings; good Students, good Lawyers,
etc. Let us show our Religion there, as David did: this is to serve the Will of
God. That is not Religion that is left behind in the Church^ as Lactantius
says, Lactantius.
that is no Religion that we leave behind, when we come to the Church door:
but that is Religion, when we learn our duty here, and carry it in our
breasts to practice it every day in the week, when we show it in our places;
that is the service of God. Therefore let this holy man be an example to us;
wherefore are these particular things recorded of him in the Scriptures, but
that we should transform our selves to this blessed pattern.

The whole life of a Christian we see is a service of God: there is nothing
that we do but it may be a service of God; no, not our particular recreations,
if we use them as we should; as whettings to be fitter for our callings, and
enjoy them as liberties with thankfulness to God that allows us these
liberties to refresh our selves. There is no passage of a man's life, but it may
have the respect of a service of God: it is not the matter, or stuff, but the
stamp that makes the coin: so it is not the work, but the stamp that makes it
a service, when we do it with a^ eye to God. Similie.
Let the King set a stamp but upon brass, upon a token, yet it will go for
current, if it have the Kings authority, and stamp upon it: let it be but an
action of our callings, suppose to give counsel in our studies, or pleading of
the Law, etc. if it have Gods stamp upon it, if there be Prayer upon it to
bless it, and it be done in obedience to God, and with justice; not against
the rules of Piety, and Charity, (and as far as it may displease God to balk,
and avoid all temptations in our callings out of Religious respects) it is a
service of God: our whole life not only in the Church, but in our particular
places may be a service of God; as it is said, here David served God.

Oh, if we could think of this wheresoever we ar^, we would take no liberty
to offend God in any things we would not thrust Religion into a corner, into a
narrow room, and limit it to some days, and times, and actions, and places;
and then take liberty to defraud, and dissemble; to abuse our selves this way,
and that way; is this to serve God? to serve God is to carry our ^elves as the
children of God wheresoever we are: so that our whole life is a service of God.

A Christian is no Libertine, no man of freedom, he is a servant. Indeed we
have changed our Master: we are set at liberty from the slaverie of sin and
Satan; but it is not that we should do nothing; to be Belialls, without
voake: but it is to serve God, we are taken from the service of Satan to be
the Lords freemen, and indeed it is to that end, we are delivered that we
might serve God; therefore all the actions of our life should be a service to
God. Luke 1.


Quest.
To make this a little clearer: how can this be (will some man think) that
every common action should be a service of God?

I will make it clear by an instance; the beasts, Answ.
and other creatures, and we, have common actions; How common actions may be a
service of God.
such as we do in common, as to eat, and to drink, and to move: the beast
does this, and man does it; when a man does them, they are reasonable actions,
because they are guided with reason, and moderated by reason: but when the
beast does them, they are the actions of a beast; because he has no better
faculty to guide him. So common actions, they are not a service of God, as they
come from common men, that have not grace, and the Spirit of God in their
hearts: they are mere buying, and selling, and going about the actions of
their callings, as the actions of a beast are the actions of a beast. But let a
Christian come to do them, he has a higher life, and a higher spirit, that
makes them spiritual actions that are common in themselves; he raises them
up to a higher order, and rank. Therefore a Christian serves God in all that
he does, he has an eye to God: that which another man does with no eye to
God, but merely in civil respects. We say of policy: it is an ancient
observation, which is good, and very fit. The knowledge of a common wealth; it
is a building knowledge, a commanding knowledge: for though a Statesman does
not build, he does not buy and sell, and commerce: but he uses all other
trades for the good of the State. It is a knowledge commanding all other
inferior Arts, and Trades (in a common wealth) to the last end: they should
all be serviceable to the commonwealth, and if they be not, away with them.
So Religion, and the knowledge of Divine things, it is a commanding knowledge,
it commands all other services in our callings, etc. It does not teach a man
what he shall do in particular in his calling: but it teaches him how to
direct that calling to serve God, to be advantageous, and helpful to his
general calling: to further him to heaven, to make every thing reductive to
his last end, which he sets before him, that is, to honor, and serve God in
all things, to whom, he desires to approve himself, in life, and death: he
has a principle, the holy Ghost in him, and he labors to reduce every thing
to the maine end, oh that we were in this temper.

To serve God in our su^ferings.
And as we must labor to imitate holy David in doing: so likewise in
suffering. We must be careful that nothing of Gods displease us, as we are
careful (for our selves) that nothing of ours displease God. In doing, we
ought to be careful that nothing of ours displease God: in suffering, that
nothing of Gods dealing displease us: for there is rebellion in both, in
passive obedience, as well as active. There is rebellion when we murmr, and
will not be as God will have us, as if we were wiser than he, to appoint our
own condition: whereas we should resign our selves as David, here I am, let
the Lord do as it pleases him, and as they said in the Acts; The will of the
Lord be done: and as we pray in the Lords prayer, Thy will be done,
insinuating, not our own. We must be content to stoup in our sufferings
obediently to God, because he is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all
his works; in all the courses he takes with us, we should be ready to justify
God in all things

David served God.
Now, how did he serve God, for the manner of his service? The manner of his
service was as it should be, and so he was exemplary to us all in that,
amongst others, his servi^e was*

First, Universal.
universal, to God, and to men every way.

Secondly, it was uniforme; he was good in all conditions; Uniform.
a good Shepherd, a good King, he was good in his family, etc. So the service
of the children and servants of God, it must be uniforme in all estates: to
know how to want, and how to abound, etc.

And then his service was cheerful; Cheerful.
we see how often he rouseth up himself in the Psalms, awake my Harp and
Lute, etc.

And lastly his service was sincere. Sincere.
It was to God: Signs of cincerity.
you may know his sincerity by this; he cared not for scoffings, he practiced
duties that were scorned at. To practice scorned duties.
That is, an evidence of sincerity, when in ill times, the children of God
stand to God, and Religion. When Micholl mocked him, says he, I will be yet
more vile for God. When God may have glory, and Religion defense, for men to
stand for God in ill times it is a sign of sincerity; an hipocrite will never
do so. David did at all times, in his Generation.

And then it was a sign of sincerity, To appeal to God.
that he would appeal to God: Try me Lord, if there be any way of wickedness
in me: when a soul can go to God, and say, Lord, if there by any way of
wickedness in me, any secret lurking corruption in me (that may endanger the
state of my soul) that I know not of, discover it to me; that is a sign that
a man is in league with no sin: but his service is sincere.

Comfor^.
A man that is not sincere, has no comfort: so much sincerity, so much comfort.
If a man do not things to God in sincerity, all is lost to God, a man may have
commendations of the world, as the Pharisees had (which is nothing but a kind of
curse) you have your reward, that is, you have it here, and shall lose it
hereafter. So much concerning the life of David, in those words, David in his
Generation served the Counsel, or Will of God. Now (to make a perfect
discourse of it) we will speak something of his end.

He fell a sleep, and was gathered to his Fathers, and saw Corruption.
HE fell asleep, that is, he died: for sleep in Scripture, it is a middle
phrase, appliable to good, and bad: for wicked men (in Scripture) are said to
sleep, Difference in the death of godly and wicked.
and good men are said to sleep. Only the difference is, as the persons are:
for the sleep of wicked men, it is like the sleep of a male factor before his
execution, that is oft-times tripped in his sleep: Simi^e.
or like the sleep of a man in sickness, or in a mad fit, his sleep does but
concoct the malignant humor, and after he wakes, he rages three times more
than he did before. So the sleep, the death of a carnal wicked man, it is but
a preparation to his execution: it is but the sleep of a distempered man, that
wakes with more horror, and terror, and rage, than ever before: indeed
properly the death only of the godly is a sleep. But to observe something first
briefly in general.

We see here is a time of dying, Obser.
as well as (...) a time of living. A time of dying as well as living.


There is a time to serve God in living, and there is a time to yield our
souls to him as well as a time to serve God in doing the actions, and
functions of this life.

Which should teach us this, Use.
not to fix our thoughts too much on life. Not to think much of long life.
As there is a time for all things to the living: so there is a time to cease
to live: and therefore to use the world with moderation, as though we used it
not, knowing that the fashion of the world passes away. It should teach us to
serve God as well in living as in dying.

And it should teach us to do all the good we can while we have time. David
served God while he lived, and he served God in dying: because his death was
in obedience: but (as I said before) after death, properly there is no service
of God: but a receiving of wages, therefore let us serve God while we live,
while we have time; because there is a time when night will come, the night of
sickness, and of death, and then no man can work; if he would never so feign.

He fell asleep. Why did he not die before? he served God a great while, he
did not die when he was first a good man.

Obser.
God will have his Children serve out their Generation. Gods children must serve
their time.


They must serve out their time. As soon as ever we believe, we have right to
heaven: To gain others.
but God will have us bear the burden of the day awhile, to bring others to
heaven with us; to go before others in the example of a godly life; to gain as
many as we can.

To try our graces.
To try the truth of our graces before we come to heaven, whether they be true
or no; that they may be true tried graces.

And he will have us perfect before we come to so holy a place, To perfect us.
he will have us grow in grac, as Ahasueros his wifes were to be perfumed*
and prepared before they came to him. It is a holy place that we hope for, a
holy condition: therefore, he will have us by little, and little, be fitted by
the spirit of God. Many such reasons there be, why God in heavenly wisdom will
have us go on here a time before we come to heaven: though as soon as we
believe we are in the state of salvation, as Christ said to Zacheus, This day
is salvation come to thine house.

Use.
Therefore let us not repine that God will have us live. Not to repine that God
will ^ave us live.
Indeed, as soon as a Christian has faith, he has life in patience, and
death in desire, for he is impatient to want his crown: oh, but here is the
time of service: and when he considers the eternity of the reward he shall
have after; he will be glad to serve God, and he will be ashamed that he can
do it no more. When he knows he shall have an eternal weight of glory for a
little service, then he will deny his lusts, and pleasures to serve God in the
place he lives in, whether he be Magistrate, or Minister whatsoever; to
undergo the burden of a little service.

Again, in that it is said here, Then he fell asleep, not before; till he had
served the counsel of God.

God has allotted a man a time.

He has set him a glass that must be run, Obser.
he has given him a part to act, God has alo^ted a man a time.
and he cannot be taken away till that be done; he can never fall asleep till
he have served the counsel of God. As it is said in the Gospel, concerning
our Savior Christ, his hour was not yet come. They have laid wait for him:
but his hour was not come: so there may be many snares laid for the children
of God by Satan, and his instruments: but till their hour be come, all the
Devils in hell, nor all the Devils instruments on earth, cannot shorten a
man's life one minute of an hour: for he shall fall asleep when he has served
the counsel of God; when he has done all that God will have him to do.

Therefore it is ground of resolution: Use.
let us go on in our places, Ground of resolution.
and callings, undantedly, and wisely too, not to tempt God, to rush into
dangers: but (I mean) without base fear, and distrust: for we must serve God
to day and to morrow, and then we shall be sanctified. We must serve God the
appointed time that he will have us to live here; and then we shall fall
asleep, and not before: no creature has power over the life of man to shorten
his days.

The next thing we will observe from the nature of sleep is, that,

Obser.
The death of the godly is a sleep, in respect of refreshing. The death of the
godly, refreshes as sleep.


Sleep does refresh, and repair, and as it were recreate, and make a man anew.
Sleep, and rest, it is the blessed ordinance of God, it is an excellent thing
to repair man: so after death, nature shall be repaired better; we shall rise
fresher, as it is, Psalm. 17. ult. when I arise, Psalm. 17. ult.
I shall be satisfied with thine image, we shall rise refreshed, better than
we lay down. Cessation from l^bour.
So that as we go to bed then, to sleep, to cut off all cares: so when we rest
in death, all cares, and fears, and terrors; all annoyances are cut off.
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; they rest from their labors:
insinuating, that there is no rest before: for to a man that knows that this
world is a workhouse, and his life a service to God, he thinks of no rest
till he be in his grave; so death it is a sleep, in regard of that rest. We
rest from the labor of sin, we rest from the wearisome labor of the body,
from the labor of afflictions, and oppressions, from the molestations of other
men among whom we live, every way this life is tedious, and death rest.

Again, it is in this respect a sleep: Hope of rising.
because a man goes to bed with assured hope of rising again, and therefore he
goes quietly: though it be a state of darkness for the time, all the senses
are bound up, yet he knows that in Gods ordinary providence, he shall rise
again: therefore men not only quietly, but cheerfully go to bed. So there is
greater ground to know that we shall rise again out of our graves, than that
we should rise out of our beds: for many men's beds have been their graves, in
some sort, (I mean) they have died in their beds: but for the resurrection, we
have the word of Almighty God, (that is a God of his word) that we shall rise
again: and we have it in the pledge of our Saviors resurrection, there is no
doubt of that.

Therefore when we die (if we have faith) we should make no more of death,
than men do to go to bed: hoping undoubtedly of an assured, and joyful
resurrection. The want of faith in that kind, makes us backward to this: you
see in what respect death is said to be a sleep. To speak only of those
references, and relations that are most pertinent between sleep and death.

David fell asleep, and very willingly: for he had lived a painful life:
After ^abour.
he served God, both as a private man, as a Shepherd, and as a King, Eccles.
5.12. To a laboring man sleep is sweet, Eccles. 5.12.
so to a man that has served God carefully in his calling, and kept a good
conscience, death is very sweet. We see children that have been playing all
day, they are loath to go to bed, but to a man that has wrought all day,
sleep is sweet, as wise Solomon says, to a laboring man. Would we then have
death as a sweet rest to us? Use.
let us do as David did, that is, To be pain^^ll*
be painful, and laborious in our particular place, and in our general
calling: let us be faithful in them to keep a good conscience, and set all in
order as much as we can while we live; Set all in order.
to leave no seeds of debate when we are gone. Some men die carelessly this way
in disposing the good things that God has given them; they lay a foundation of
perpetual jarring afterward: and so their death is skarsly a sleep and rest:
they cannot but be disquieted, when they think how they leave things, because
they were not wise before hand. David settled Solomon in his Throne, and set all
things right before he died, and that made him die, not only in rest, but in
honor, in 1 Chronicles. 29.28. David died in a good old age, 1 Chronicles. 29.28
full of riches and honor.

Get fait^ in Christ.
And let us labor to get assurance of a change for the bette^: David his flesh
rested in hope, because he believed in Christ, that Christ's body should see no
corruption, P^al. 16.
Psalm. 16. So if we would have death sweet as a sleep, let us labor to get
assurance by faith in Christ: and so our flesh may rest in hope, that as Christ
raised his own flesh, so he will raise ours. Good Simeon, when he had seen
Christ once, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace, etc. so after we have
gotten a sight of Christ, to be our Christ, our Savior, and Redeemer, and have
interest in him; Lord now let thy servant depart in peace. So much for the
term, sleep.

It is added besides, that

He was gathered to his Fathers.
HE^ was gathered to his Fathers both in regard of his body, and in regard of
his soul* for his body went to the house of the dead, the grave: and his soul
went to his fathers, to heaven. As I said before of sleep, so of this: it is a
phrase of Scripture that must be understood as the persons are. When a man
dies, his body goes to the place, or house of all men, the house of darkness,
the grave* but for his soul that goes as the man is (to his fathers) to hell,
if he be naught: to the souls of just and perfect men (as the Apostle
speaks) if he have lived a gracious, and a good life; and so it must be
understood here, because he speaks of a blessed man.

He was (...) to his Fathers; Fathers, who meant.
he means not to his immediate fathers, but all believing men before him, that
were the children of Abraham, his soul went to them, his body to the first
Mother; the Earth, out of which it was taken. So the General is nothing but
this, that

Obser.
When we die we are put to our fathers.

When w^ d^e, we are put to our fathers.
Therefore this should moderat^ our fear of death, and our grief for the
departure of others. Why we are not lost when we die; the soul and body is
taken asunder, it is taken in pieces: but both remain still; the body goes to
the earth from whence it was taken, and the soul goes to God that gave it. And
for our comfort, we go to those that we knew before (many of them) to our
fathers; not to strangers. Especially in respect of our souls, we go to our
fathers* to our next forefathers, and to our old fathers; to Abraham, Isaac,
to Jacob, to David, to blessed Saint Paul, and Peter, and all the blessed men
that died in the faith. And when we are dead, we go to those that are more
perfect than those that we leave behind us. This should moderate our grief:
oh, I leave my friends behind me, my father, and mother, and children^ it is to
go to better, to greater; and those that love thee better. Thou go to
greater: for they are in their pitch, they have attained their end, they are in
heaven* and to better, they are refined from those corruptions that men here
are subject unto: and then their love is perfect likewise: therefore going to
our fathers, and not to strangers, to those that are better, and greater, and
love us more perfectly; why should we think much to die? they will be ready
to entertain us; oh the welcome that souls find in heaven! and at the day of
the Resurrection the sweet imbracings, when all the blessed souls that have
been from Adam to the last man, shall meet together! seeing therefore we go
to our fathers, it should rather make us cheerful: Here, whom do we live
with? take them at the best, our friends? men, subject to jealousies and
weaknesses; our jealousy makes us suspect them, and their weaknesses makes us
think the meaner of them: so our love is not perfect, nor our graces are not
perfect; therefore we cannot have perfect love, and contentment while we are
here. But in heaven there shall be no jealousy, nor fear, nor imperfection,
which is the ground of jealousy: we shall perfectly love them, because they
shall be perfectly good; and they shall perfectly love us, because we shall be
perfectly good; and one shall stand admiring the graces of God in another; and
that will maintain a perpetuity of love: therefore it is want of faith that
makes us unwilling to yield our souls unto God at the point of death. It is a
going to our fathers.

But then we must take heed what fathers we imitate here, Take heed whom we
imitate.
take heed who are our patterns while we live; Heb. 13.7.
for if we do not imitate them here, we cannot live with them in heaven when
we are dead. Therefore it is a very necessary item in Heb. 13.7. Look to them
that rule over you; that speak the word, whose faith follow: Considering the
end of their labor. Let us look before what kind of men those have been, that
we desire to live with in heaven: and mark the end of their conversation: for
such as we delight in, and frame our carriage to here, such we shall live with
hereafter. We must not think to live with Nero, and die with Paul; to live
Epicures, and die Christians; to live dissembling, and falsely in our places,
and to die comfortably, and to go to the blessed souls at the hour of death,
and at the resurrection. No, God will gather our souls with wicked men, if we
fashion our carriage to wicked men: such as we delight in, and live with, and
set as patterns before us, with such we shall live for ever hereafter. He was
gathered to his fathers.

To del^gt in the communion of Saints.
One sign of a man that shall be gathered to believing fathers, to his good
forefathers (besides imitation) is this, to delight in the congregations of
just men here. A man may know he shall go to the congregation of perfect souls
in heaven, if he delight in the congregations of Gods Saints here: for surely
he that has a confidence, to be in the proper heaven, heaven that is so
blessed; he will have a care while he lives, as much as he can, to be, and
delight in the heaven upon earth. Now the chief heaven upon earth, is the
Church of God; Oh how amiable is thy dwelling place oh Lord! where many souls
meet together, to join in speaking to God, and in hearing God speak to them.
Those therefore that delight not in the congregations; that delight not in the
service of God; what hope have they to be gathered to the congregation of the
faithful when they are gone? so much for that, he was gathered to his fathers.

And he saw Corruption.
IT is an Hebraisme, for, he felt Corruption, he had experience of Corruption.
All other senses are attributed to sight, that being the principal of all the
senses, they have their term from it: because sight is the most excellent, the
most capacious, and quick sense, therefore (I say) the actions of all the other
senses are attributed to it; as we say, see how he speaks, and so here, he saw
Corruption, that is, he had experience of it; because sight is a convincing
sense. He could not properly see when he was dead: but the meaning is, he had
experience of Corruption; the truth is this, in a word, that, Obser.
The best, The best, and greatest subject to corruption.
and greatest men in the world, when they are gone, they are subject to
corruption.

David was a King, and a Prophet: a man after Gods own heart; yet this could
not keep David's body from Corruption.

Reas. 1. We are dead men here.
The reason is, we are but dead men here: this is not the life that Christ has
purchased for us; we are going to death: our natural life is but Cursus ad
mortem, a continual going to death. We are alive now, but alas our life is
nothing, but a continual dying: every day cuts off a part of our life. It is a
statute, that all must die.

We cannot be crowned else.
And it is our perfection to die, we cannot otherwise see God, and enjoy our
Crown. Death indeed is nothing but misery: but when we die, we go to live. The
best must see Corruption.

Therefore this should be an argument to support the soul, Use.
when we think of the rottenness in the grave, To support us against corruption
and of that place, and time of horror, when we shall be no more here upon
earth. It is no otherwise with us than it has been with the best in the
world, they all saw Corruption in their time.

Again, considering we have but corruptible bodies here, To take most care for
the soul.
bodies that must see corruption: let us take care for the better part. He is a
mad man, that having two houses, one freehold, the other a rotten tenement,
ready to fall about his ears, that shall take delight in that, and neglect his
own inheritance, which is a goodly thing; it is for want of wit: and it is as
much want of grace, when we having a double life, the life of grace, that ends
in glory; the life of the soul, the life of God, as Saint Paul says: and then
the life of the body (which is communicated from the soul to the body) which
is corruptible: our bodies are but tabernacles of clay, whose foundation is in
the dust: for us to take care of this vile body as the Apostle calls it, Phil.
3. Who shall change our vile body; Philip. 3.
and make it like to his glorious body: according to his mighty power: to take
care of this vile body, and to neglect our precious souls. It is the care of
most (such is the carnal breeding of men: and they follow those that bred them
in this brutishness, as if they had no souls, as if there were no life after
this, their care is) what they shall eat, and what they shall drink, and put
on; what to commend themselves by in the outward man, to the view of others;
all their care is for their outward man. Alas, what is it, but a corruptible,
vile body? it is but the case of the soul; they forget the Jewel, and look
all to the Casket, which is a base body, take it at the best while we are here.

And take heed we be not ensnared with the bodies of others. Not to be ensnared
with the bodies of others.
This is the corruption of men, to gaze in this kind. You see wise Solomon, and
others, were much troubled with temptations in this kind. Consider, that body
that thou dotest on now, and which is made by the Devil a snare to thee: what
will it be ere-long? so noisome, that thou will not endure the presence of it;
it is but a flower, and it is fading, fresh in the morning, and dead at night.
All flesh is but grass: it is a corruptible body. If thou will needs love, be
acquainted with such as have excellent spirits, that shall live eternally: Oh,
there is an object of love indeed! that is the true love, and acquaintance that
is spiritual. Many things may be lovely in the outward person: but see that
there be a heavenly spirit; that is mounting up, that savours of good things, a
spirit that has life begun in it: that shall be for ever happy in heaven:
unless there be this, there cannot be a fit ground for the love of any wise
man.

To imitate David in life, and death.
To end all, you see here a short story of a good life, and a blessed death: let
us make this blessed man of God exemplary to us in both. Let our whole life be
nothing but a service of God: and let us consider the generation wherein we
are to take, and do all the good we can in our time. And then consider what
death will be; when we come to die, it will be a sweet s^eep to us; and our
resurrection will be a refreshing, our flesh shall rest in hope, as David
says: We shall be gathered to our fathers, we shall see Corruption, indeed:
but mark what David says, Psalm. 16. Psalm. 16.
my flesh shall rest in hope, because thou will not suffer thy holy one to see
Corruption Then this is the upshot of all: though we see Corruption when we are
dead; yet with the ^y of faith we see a rising again from Corruption. We see
death but as a pot to refine us in: even as it is with silver when there is
much corruption and heterogeniall matter mingled with it, the fire refines it;
but it is not lost: so the grave refines the body, and fits it for a glorious
resurrection. The flesh rests in hope all the while, though the body see
Corruption: because our head saw no Corruption: if the head be above water,
what if the body be down? our head saw no Corruption, that is, Christ: for he
rose out of the grave before his body putrified: for his body had a
subsistence, and was gloriously united to the second person in Trinity: and
being united to the Lord of life, it saw no Cortrption. For that did not lie
upon Christ as our Savior, to be corrupt, but to die, to be made a curse for
us; and then especially, I say, by reason of the near union of it to the God
of life.

Well then, what is David's argument of comfort? in Psalm. 16. Psalm. 16.
My flesh shall rest in hope; because thou will not suffer thine holy one to
see Corruption. Because Christ rose from the grave himself; the holy one of
God: our flesh may rest in hope, though we see Corruption: because the same
divine power that raised christ our head out of the grave, (that his body saw
no Corruption) will raise our bodies to be like our glorious body. Our
blessed Savior that overcame death in his own person; by his power he will
overcome death for all his mystical body, that is, his Church: it shall be
perfect in heaven, soul and body together, as he himself is glorious now in
heaven. That we may say with David, notwithstanding our bodies see Corruption
(as his did) yet our flesh shall rest in hope, because Gods holy one saw no
Corruption.

FINIS.
The Table.
Part, Page
A
Abasement.
ABasement of Christ the greatest 1, 10. Abasement of Christ, whence it was, 1,
11. Fruit of Christ's Abasement, 1, 13.
Adam.
Our estate in Christ better then in Adam, 1, 43.
Affections.
Affections not taken away by religion, 1, 249.
Afflictions.
Benefit of Afflictions, 1, 279.
Against.
How far the enemies of Gods children are Against them, 2, 74. In what
respect none are Against Gods children, 2, 75.
Alone.
A Christian is never Alone* 2, 78.
Angels.
Angels, the cause of their fall, 2, 202.
Anointed.
Three sorts of persons Anointed, 1, 34.
Appetite.
How to get Appetite to feed on Christ, 1, 183.
Application.
Application wrought by the Spirit, 2, 43. Faith the grace of Application,
Ibid.
Approach.
Comfort in our Approach to God, 1, 27.
Ascension.
The Spirit given more abundantly since Christ's Ascension, 1, 53.
Authority.
Authority of Christ from his Father, 1, 202.
B
Behold.
The word B^^^ld how used, 1, 5.
Blame.
Blame to be laid upon our selves in judgments, 1, 316.
Bodies.
Bodies of others not to be doted on, 2, 229
Bondage.
Freedom in sin a Bondage, 2, 17.
Bride.
The Church of God a Bride, 2, 101. Why the Church is called a Bride, 2, 106.
C
Care.
Ground of Care in our carriage, 1, 82.
Ceremonies.
Bondage of Ceremonies in the Law, 1, 263.
Chains.
Sin as Chains, 2, 7.
Choice, Chosen.
Christ Chosen of God how, 1, 19. We should rest in Gods Choice, 1, 20.
Christ.
Christ not to be neglected, 1, 21. How to know we are in Christ, 1, 30. All
that is good is first in Christ and then in us, 1, 40. To take heed of refusing
Christ, 1, 210. The greatness of the sin to refuse Christ, 1, 212. Comfort for
such as receive Christ, 1, 213. See Chosen, servant, delight, Adam.
Christians.
Difference between Christians and others, 1, 238. 2, 205. Disposition of true
Christians, 1, 246.
Church.
Three degrees of men in the Church, 1, 156.
Cleansed.
To labor to be Cleansed by the blood of Christ, 1, 296
Comfort.
Comfort from the ground of Gods love, 1, 25. Comforts when to be stored up.
1, 131. Ground of Comfort for weak Christians, 1, 228.
Coming.
There must be a second Coming of Christ, 2, 107. The Church desires Christ's
Coming, 2, 108. The Church in Heaven desires Christ's Coming, 2, 113.
Christians not always fitted alike for Christ's Coming, 2, 118. Directions how
to desire Christ's Coming, 2, 119 Communion, See Saints. Common, See Service.
Condition.
Why we should consider our former Condition, 1, 140. Why God suffers different
Conditions of men, 2, 137.
Conflict.
Gods children exercised with Conflicts, 2, 132. How to recover out of
Conflict, 2.134.
Confession.
Confession of sin necessary, 1.288. Good men in their Confessions rank
themselves with others, 1, 289.
Conscience.
Conscience after long sinning hardly comforted. 1, 94
Conjunction.
Four Conjunctions wonderful, 1, 10
Consideration.
Hindrances of Consideration, 1, 103.
Contentment.
Ground of Contentment, 2, 84.
Contraries.
Contraries agree in a Christian, 1, 302.
Conviction.
Ground of Conviction, 1, 127. Conviction of judgment the ground of practice,
2, 148. Four things in Conviction, 2, 149. Conviction to be labored for, 2,
151. Conviction wrought by the Holy Ghost, 2, 155.
Correct.
God Corrects his children sharply, 2, 169.
Counsel.
The will of God called Counsel, why, 2, 187.
Corruption.
The best men subject to Corruption, why. 2, 227. Ground of support against
Corruption, 2, 218
Courage.
Ground of Christian Courage, 2, 81.
Course.
Every man has his Course, 1, 107. God judges men according to their Course,
1, 108 Gods children have a contrary Course to the world, 2, 137.
Creator.
God to be served as a Creator, 2, 187. Cr^^^ion, See Redemption.
Creature.
God shames men's pride by other Cr^atures, 1, 115,
D
Danger.
What to do in times of Danger, 1, 129.
Death, Dead.
Men naturally Dead, 1, 141. Death what, Ibid. Death spiritual wherein it is,
1, 142. Sin it self a Death, 1, 144. Signs of spiritual Death, 1, 145.
Difference in natural and spiritual Death, 1, 152. The best have remainders
of Death* 1, 155. Every man under the law of Death, 2, 25. How we are under the
law of Death, 2, 27. Sin and Death go together, 2, 28. ^reedome from sin and
Death what, 2, 49. Difference in the Death of godly and wicked* 2, 216. See
Sin.
Defect.
Three maine Defects in man, 1, 34.
Defiled.
The best actions of the best men Defiled, 1, 299
Delay.
Repentance not to be Delaied, 1, 91. Danger of Delaying, 1, 92.
Delight.
Delight in Christ the ground of it, 1, 28. Desir^, See Coming.
Dying.
There is a time of Dying as well as living, 2, 117.
Devil.
Carnal men better then the Devil would have them, 2, 11.
Diligence.
Diligence how stirred up, 1, 254.
E
Enemies.
How far God suffers the Enemies of his children to prevail, 2, 75. See
Against.
Eternity.
Eternity of misery should deter us from sin, 2, 30.
Everlasting life.
What meant by meat that indures to Everlasting life, 1, 175. Excellent, See
Necessity.
F
Face.
Face of God what, 1, 322. Conflict of faith when God hides his Face, 1, 323.
God^ Face how to be sought, 1, 324.
Fade.
Men Fade as leaves, how, 1, 315.
Failing.
How to make use of Christ in our Failings* 1, 49.
Faith.
How Faith does that which Christ does, 2, 45. To get into Christ by Faith,
why, 2, 175. Faith draws near to God, 2, 137.
Father.
The consideration that God is our Father what it should work, 1, 326. Fathers
who meant by them, 2, 223. When we die we are put to our Fathers, 2, 224.
Feed, Food.
Christ and his benefits why called Food, 1, 176. Difference of spiritual and
corporal Food, 1, 182. How to know we have Fed on Christ, 1, 188. Motives to
Feed on Christ, 1, 197.
Formality.
Formality in religion a forerunner of judgments, 1, 121.
Freedom.
Freedom acceptable, 2, 31. Freedom from all ill by Christ how, 2, 32.
Freedom double, 2, 46. See Violence.
Full.
Christianity a Full state, 1, 232
G
Generality.
Generality in sin no plea, 1, 98. Generality of sin a forerunner of judgment,
1, 120.
Generation.
Generation what, 2, 171. An eternal Generation to be made sure, 2, 173. Every
man has his particular Generation, 2, 175. To observe the Generation we live
in why, 2, 176. To take benefit by the good in our Generation, 2, 178. Not to
be tainted with the sins of the Generation, 2, 180. We should labor to make
the Generation we live in good, 2, 182.
God.
God is with his children, how, 2, 69. Ground of Gods presence with his
children, 2, 72. How to know God is with us, 2, 87. What course to take that
God may be with us, 2, 90. To go from God, what, 2, 144 See Prayer.
Godly.
Difference between the Godly and others, 1, 96.
Good.
There is Good in our actions though they be defiled, 1, 300. We are advanced
to the greatest Good by Christ, 2, 56 See Generation.
Gospel.
Difference of giving the Law and the Gospel, 1, 69. Gospel why disesteemed,
1, 266. Spirit effectual in the Gospel, 1, 267.
Guilty.
The best men Guilty of the sins of the times, 1, 291.
H
Happy.
The judgment of the world who are Happy, 2, 18.
Heaven.
The Church the Kingdom of Heaven, 1, 326. Threefold signification of the
Kingdom of Heaven, Ibid. Why grace, and the means of grace are called the
Kingdom of Heaven, 1, 229.
Help.
Helps to do Gods will, 2, 197. See Outward.
Hide.
God sometimes Hides himself, 2, 86.
Hold.
We must stir up our selves to lay Hold on God, 1, 308. Hopeful, See
Violence.
Horse.
Wicked men compared to Horses, 1, 110.
Humility. Humiliation.
Grounds of Humiliation, 1, 16, 320. Humility why to be labored for, 1, 73.
Humiliation necessary, 1, 281. Kinds of Humiliation, 1, 282. Helps to
Humiliation, 1, 283. Verbal Humiliation, 1, 287. Humiliation extraordinary, 1,
314.
J
Idolatry.
Idolatry the ground of it, 1, 47.
Image.
Image of God defaced by sin, 1, 112.
Importunate.
Why to be Importunate with God, 1, 310.
Imitation.
Imitation of holy men needful, 2, 210. To take heed whom we Imitate, 2, 125,
231.
Impregnable.
The estate of a Christian Impregnable, 2, 78.
Endeavor.
Difference between Endeavors of Christians and others, 1, 256. See Success.
Infirmities.
Infirmities should not discourage us, 2, 85.
Innocence.
In what case to stand on our Innocence, 1, 303.
Judgment, Judging.
What meant by Judgment, 1, 63, 113. Judgments of God how spoken of amiss,
1, 85. How to speak aright of Gods Judgments, 1, 87. God offended when we
repent not by his Judgments, 1, 88. Neglect of self- Judging the cause of
misery, 1, 101. After long patience God sends Judgments, 1, 117. Judgments
coming how known, Ibid. Sin to be looked to in Judgments, 1, 318. Justice,
See Sin.
K
Kingdom.
What things are in a Kingdom 1, 231. Excellency of Christ's Kingdom, 1, 268.
See Heaven.
L
Labor.
Labor for earthly things when immoderate, 1, 173. To Labor for Christ as
food, 1, 216. Labor distinguishes Christians from others, 1, 219.
Language.
Language of Scripture savoury, 2, 165.
Law.
Law what, 2* 5. See Gospel, Sin.
Leprosy.
Sin a Leprosy, 1, 294.
Life.
Life what, 1, 141. Life spiritual whence, 1, 142. Life in Christ, how, 2, 34.
To serve God in the time of Life, 2, 184. Long Life not to be looked for, 2,
217. Not to repine if God give us Life, 2, 218.
Lie.
Grand- Lie in the Church of Rome, 2, 191.
Love.
Christ Loved of God how, 1, 22. Decay in our Love a forerunner of judgment,
1, 127.
Lust.
Comfort against rebellion of Lusts, 2, 51.
M
Marriage.
Comfort by our Marriage with Christ, 2, 103.
Means.
Greatness of sinning against Means, 2, 179.
Mourn.
To Mourn for the sins of the times, 1, 130.
N
Name.
Gods children leave a good Name behind them, 2, 164.
Nature.
Things made use of in Scripture from Nature, 1, 116. To see what we are by
Nature, 1, 150. Natural parts how to be used, 1, 153. Every one tainted by
Nature, 1, 293. In actual sins to see the corruption of Nature, 1* 298.
Near.
God Near us how, 2, 145. How we are Near to God, 2, 146.
Necessity.
Necessity of what we pray for, 1, 309.
Newters.
Newters hateful to Christ, 1, 247.
O
Obedient.
The Spirit given to the Obedient, 1, 58
Offices.
Offices of Christ in what order performed, 1, 36.
Old.
God can convert Old sinners, 1, 154.
Opposition.
Grace increased by Opposition. 1, 260.
Outward.
Outward service alone not accepted, 1, 310. Outward helps to do Gods will, 2,
194.
P
Patience, See Judgment.
Peace.
Four things trouble a Christians Peace, 2, 1.
Perish.
Meat that Perishes what, 1, 167. Not to gain things that Perish with the
loss of our souls, 1, 170.
Plague.
Sin worse then the Plague, 1, 297.
Popery.
To be thankful for freedom from Popery, 1, 266. Popery opposes preaching,
why, 1, 270.
P^^er.
Power of Christ to give himself and his benefits, 1. 201.
Prayer.
Prayer a means to obtain the Spirit, 1, 61. Forms of Prayer useful, 1,
278. Danger of neglecting Prayer, 1, 305. Prayer lays hold on God, 1, 307. To
look for answer of our Prayers, 1, 312. Resignation of our selves in Prayer,
1, 328. See Worship.
Preaching.
Grace wrought by Preaching, 1, 68 See Popery.
Precious, See Violence.
Priestly.
Christ's Priestly office the principal, 1.37.
Prerogatives.
How to use our Prerogatives, 2, 52.
Principles.
Principle in a Christian double, 1, 302. Principles to be laid up, 2, 80.
Prom^se^.
Christ Promised in the Old Testament, 1, 3.
Profaneness.
Profaneness whence it is, 2, 152.
Providence.
To look to the end of Gods Providence, 2, 135.
Q
Querie.
It is good to propound Queries to our selves, 2, 67.
R
Reason.
Different conclusion of Gods Word, and carnal Reason, 2, 135
Redemption.
Gods love greater in Redemption then in Creation, 1, 12, 26.
Reflect.
Man can Reflect upon his actions, 1, 100.
Repentance.
Late Repentance seldom true, 1, 92. Benefit of lively Repentance, 1, 95. See
Sin.
Reproach.
Reproach not to be regarded, 1, ^45.
Resolution.
Ground of Resolution, 2, 219.
Riches.
To carry our selves answerable to our Riches, 1, 48.
Rule.
Properties of a Rule appliable to Gods Word* 2, 190. Rule, how to be applied
in particular actions, 2, 194. See Word.
S
Salvation.
Christ as man chosen to Salvation, 1, 19.
Saints.
To delight in the communion of Saints, 2, 225.
Sanctuary.
Benefit of entering Gods Sanctuary, 2, 135.
Satan.
When we are under Satan, 2, 10.
Scripture.
How to understand the Scripture, 2, 164.
Sealing.
Se^ling of Christ, what, 1, 201. What use to make of Christ's Sealing, 1, 204.
How to know Christ is Seal^d for our good, 1, 205, 209. Sealing threefold, 1,
206. Sealing of the Spirit, what, 1, 207.
Servant, Service.
Christ a Servant, how, 1, 7. Comfort, that Christ was a Servant, 1, 17. To
offer Christ in our Service to God, 1, 20. Danger of deferring Gods Service, 2,
184. God the object of our Service, 2, 186. Service what, 2, 188, 203. Common
actions a Service of God, how, 2, ^12. Qualification of our Service of God, 2,
214. See Life.
Shaken.
Gods children Shaken, why, 2, 141.
Secret.
Secret will of God no rule, 2, 190.
Security.
Security a forerunner of judgment, 1, 119.
Sight.
Sin takes away the Sight of it self, 2, 21.
Sin.
The hurt we have by Sin, 1, 90. Particular Sins foreshewing judgments, 1,
121. Naturally we are under Sin, 2, 5. Sin threefold, Ibid. Justice of God to
give men up to Sin, 2, 8. Misery to be under Sin, 2, 9. Fruit of thraldom to
Sin, 2, 16 Men not given up to all Sin alike, 2, 22. We should see death in
our Sins, 2, 28. See Generality, Death, Leprosy, Judgment.
Sleep.
The death of the godly a Sleep, 2, 220.
Society.
Society with carnal men to be avoided, 1, 151.
Soul.
The Soul chiefly to be cared for, 2, 228.
Spirit.
How to know we have the Spirit, 1, 30. Degrees of receiving the Spirit, 1,
32. The Spirit put on Christ how, 1* 33. Spirit given, and received by Christ
how, 1, 38. Three things we receive by the Spirit, 1, 42. How Christ gives the
Spirit, 1, 55. Spirit in Christ how, 2, 36. Means to get the Spirit, 2, 123.
See Ascension, Gospel, Stir, See Hold.
Strength.
God the Strength of a Christian, 2, 79.
Success, Succession.
Christians endeavors Successful, 1, 255. There is a Succession of men, 2,
172.
Sufferings.
Service of God in our sufferings, 2, 209, 214.
Supply.
Our Supply whence it is, 1, 46.
T
Table.
Service of God in obeying the second Table. 2, 205, 207.
Taste.
Taste a most necessary sense, 1, 193.
Temptation.
Comfort in Temptation, 2, 53. Thankful, See Popery. Thraldom, See Sin.
Time, Times.
Time when especially to be improved, 1, 129. Why to make use of Time, 2, 173.
How our Times both miserable and happy, 2, 177. To serve God our whole Time,
2, 183. Gods children must serve their Time, 2, 218. Every man's Time allotted
by God, 2, 219.
Tirannie.
Tirannie of sin, 2, 19.
V
Vainglory.
Vainglory why to be avoided, 1, 72.
Value.
Ground whence to Value Christians, 1, 30. By what God Valews his children, 2,
167.
Violence, Violent.
Violence offered the Kingdom of Heaven how, 1, 233. Christians disposition
Violent how, 1, 235. Ground of this Violence, ^, 236 To judge our estate by our
Violence, 1, ^41. Violence after outward things, 1, 242. Violent only take
Heaven, 1, 251. Freedom of grace inforceth Violence, 1, 253. Holy Violence
hopeful, 1, 254 Precious things require Violence, 1, 259. Exhortation to holy
Violence, 1, 61. Gospel in Luthers time embraced with Violence why, 1, 265.
How to get holy Violence, 1, 271. See Wisdom.
Understandings.
How to use our Understandings, 1.102.
Vnfruitfullnesse.
Vnfruitfullnesse a forerunner of judgment, 1, 126
Us.
All good in Christ before in Us, 1* 40. How the Spirit takes from Christ and
gives to Us, 1, 41. How the Spirit is put on Christ for Us, 1, 50. What Christ
did was for Us, 2, 41.
W
Washings.
Washings in the Law what they signified, 1, 295.
Watchfullnesse.
Watchfullnesse when requisite, 1, 130.
Will.
Will of Christ to give himself, 1, 119. Will of God known and not done
aggravates sin, 2, 201.
Will Worship.
Will Worship why forbidden, 2, 189.
Wind.
Wicked men blown away as with a Wind. 1, 317.
Wisdom.
What violence may stand with Wisdom, 1, 244. Wisdom in man corrupted, 2,
21. Wisdom justified by whom, 2, 140.
Word.
Spirit given in the Ministry of the Word, 1, 55. Written Word the rule of
our service, 2, 189.
World.
Business of the World hinders consideration, 1, 104. VVorldly things to be
neglected why, 1, 171. Christians rule of life not from the World. 2, 138. Ill
courses of the World settle Gods children, 2, 139.
Worship.
Prayer put for all Gods Worship, 1, 304.
FINIS.

