Corona Charitatis, THE CROWN OF CHARITY: A Sermon Preached in Mercers
Chapel, May 10. 1625. at the solemn Funerals of his euer-renowmed Friend, of
precious memory, the Mirroir of Charity, Mr. RICHARD FISHBVRNE, Merchant, And
now consecrated as an Anniuersary to his FAME;

By NOT: SHVTE, Rector of the Parish of Saint Mildred in the Poultry, LONDON.

NVM. 23.10. Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
his.

Si non vacat omnes paginas Scripturarum euoluere, tene Charitatem, and in ea
inuenies omnem scientiam.

B. AVG. de temp. Sermon. 39. Libri aspecti non placent, sed inspecti,

LIPSIVS Prolog. Politic. LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY for SAMVEL MAN,
dwelling at the Swanne in Paul's Churchyard, 1626.

TO HIS MOST WORTHY AND MVCH honored friend, Master JOHN BROWN Merchant.
Noble Sir.
AS you had a Partner-ship, in service, in estate, nay in the hearts each of
other, with that euer-memorable Partner and brother of yours, Master Richard
Fishburne, as appeared in health, but most plainly in the time of his
sickness, by your mutual tears oftentimes interchangeably answering each
other, so so give me leave I pray you to make you Partners still in this
Work, for I consecrate this little book to your living Person, and to his
living Memory. To cast fresh flowers of Commendation upon him that is gone,
and that before you, were but to move you to a new regret, and sorrow for him,
nay it were to lend eyes to the Eagle. To tell you that which you knew better
then my self. To write of you, not what you deserve, but what I owe, I dare
not, lest the least suspicion might take you, that I did not write but paint,
nay, not paint but dawbe; For I so far understand you, that you love not the
common varnish of the world, and that you turn in the fairest part of your
abilities from the ordinary view; wherein I must needs say, you much honor
your self, and show your self a true Diamond, which Artists best discern, by
shining in the dark, it being as great wisdom in our sufficiency not to
know our selves, as it is in our wants to know our selves. Sicut liuoris nota
est silere quod nouera^, ita crimen est non enarrare quod senseram Fulgent Car.
Mytholog. l. 2.
Only herein your modesty disaccomodates your friends, while it will not
admit, no not a deserved thankfulness. And I my self while I fear by writing
what I might to flatter you, am forced by not writing, in a manner to be
unthankful. Yet I consider again, that paper is but a weak reflection of a
stronger affection; and no true friend when he writes most, yet has that gift
to write as fully as he loves: therefore instead of my pen I enclose my heart
in this small leaf, and present them both together for a token of my
sincerity to you; and because I may not be so thankful for that love of
yours which is past, my resolution is with me to promise you my best service to
come; An instance of which in short (because an Epistle as Seneca says, Sen.
Epist. 45.
must not fill the Readers hand) is this little book which I now dedicate to
you, the first Commencement and beginning of my labors in this kind, and
undertaken not for the burnishing of mine own name (as mine own conscience
dictates unto me) but for the lengthning of his memory, who was your
deerly-accounted Partner, and my deepely-esteemed friend. Accept it I beseech
you, for the arguments sake, it is of Charity, a virtue, I know you love with
the very inside of your heart, accept it for his sake whose Character it is,
with whom as you were Partner on earth, so I pray you may be Partner with him
in heaven. Nay such a claim your own goodness has given me in you, and
such ground have I gotten of you by your favors, that J dare entreat you to
accept it for mine own sake, as proceeding from that heart that has no furrow
of dissimulation in it and from him, who vows himself

Your most obseruant, and ever affectionate poor friend in life and death.
Not. Shute.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL THE Master, Wardens, Assistants and Commonaltie of the
Mystery of the MERCERS of the City of LONDON.
Right Worshipful,
I Have not without fair cause inscribed this Sermon unto you. First, It was
preached in that sacred Circumference and Assembly, whereof you were a
principal part: Secondly, it was preached upon your own ground, even in the
bosom of your own Bethell, your own Chapel. Thirdly, it was preached for
one, who was, not long since a conspicuous member of your Company, and one, who
has laid up his greatest trust, for the decurrence of many great works of
Charity, in your faithful hands. As it is then justly consecrated unto you,
so I desire you to receive it with the right hand, that it may pass under the
Conuoy of your worthy names; This is the first time, that ever I set to Sea in
this public manner, that ever my Name came into the Printer's stocks.

And though I have not wanted that, which is now made the common bridge of
Pretense under which most Books pass, I mean the Abetting of diverse friends
to these Publications; nor yet I thank my God some small thongs of meaner
abilities in my self, yet had it not bin, out of conscience of my
thankfulness to my blessed friend of euer-deere memory, rather to keep up
his Remembrance, then to spread mine own, I would still have kept mine own
private way, and never have rode in the common dust. But so sweet was the
thought of his tender affection ever unto me, that I could not obtain rest of
my self by erecting him a monument only in mine own heart, but that I must
present this walking monument of him in paper to all the World, and first to
you. Nay, sooner had this small Bark of mine floated abroad, but that the last
year God troubled our waters, and turned them into blood. Howsoever, I hope it
is not out of season, for a man that cannot serve the Occasion, and pay at day,
to pay a due debt, when the Occasion serves him: though I could not by reason
of that storm put out immediately after his death: yet now it comes as an
Anniuersary, at the end of a year, to kindle his Memory once again.

Therefore I humbly crave, that you would be pleased to lodge these poor
labors in your good opinions, and the rather for his sake, whose goodness yet
sparkles in your eyes, and the Image of whose virtues is in this little
Codicill represented to you. So shall you bind up his Name in your own names:
And further bear a strong obligation of Respect and Humility over

Your Worships most devoted poor friend and Servant, NOT. SHVTE.

THE CROWN OF CHARITY.
The Text NEHEM. 13.14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not
out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices
thereof.


WHen first mine eye fell upon this Text, no sooner began I to see, then to
wonder, much like a Goldsmith, who being to touch some old Coin, first wonders
at the stamp, and then tries it; so was it with me; I being to take up this
sheckell of the Sanctuary; to satisfy the present occasion, I did long admire
the confidence of the words; before I durst once adventure to touch the matter:
But after second thoughts, which like good Merchandise ever rise better and
better, finding out the works of this Princely speaker, I ceased to wonder at
his words, and began to wonder at his works; This Nehemiah the Author of
these words, was by birth a Jew, by present condition a Captive, in a strange
soil; where yet he grew high and flourisht in the estimation of the King of
those Lands, and became his Cupbearer: Neh. 1.11.
upon which preferment, his purpose was not, as many men do, to build his own
fortunes, and by regarding his own skin, to neglect the body of the Church
and Commonwealth; But like an obedient Child to his own Mother Country,
bestowed all his thoughts how he might now refresh and repair decayed
Jerusalem. To this purpose, he first acquaints Heaven with his intention, Neh.
1.5.
and prays to God; Next he spreads his request humbly before the King: no
string left he untouched to fetch about this resolution; He undertakes his
journey to Jerusalem, viewes, no doubt, with a watery eye, and looks through
his tears upon the miserable breaches thereof, Neh. 2.14.
and as he found a place, where his beast under him could not pass; so he
might now well conceive that he himself might find such a work; as he could
not easily pass. Men thought that to build Jerusalem was to make burnt stones
whole again; Neh. 4 2. 1. Cor. 13.7.
Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burnt;
yet Charity thinks nothing impossible: it belieues all things; he teaches
his hand to work, and begins it, yea not withstanding the derisions, Neh.
4.1.8. and 6.6.12. Cic. pro Sestio.
conspiracies and calumniations of his enemy; nay, the hiring of the tongue of
a false Prophet, to forbid men as it were from Heaven; he goes on acri animo,
as the Orators Phrase is with a keen spirit to finish the work; Even with
such a tide and current of valor as that neither he, Neh. 4.23. and 6.15.
nor his brethren, nor his servants, nor the men of the guard put off there
clothes save only for washing, and that for two and fifty days together; I
omit and fly over the public administration of his office, as he was
Governor of the Land, his care for the Ministers and the service of God:
Tertull. de pallio. c. 4.
in all which respects I might crown him with the speech of the Father; he was
Rex sola gloria minor; a Prince inferior to nothing, but to glory it self; No
marvel therefore, if we see such a fiery stream of confidence in his words,
and so near a line of familiarity with God; Nulli ita Deo familiares, Eusebius.
Emislen homil. 21. post Pentecost.
sicut boni Reges; None so familiar with God, as good Kings; The cleerest blood
makes the best spirits, and a good life the greatest confidence; The purest
air breeds the greatest agility, and the purest life the fairest hope, of
which we have here a full example; Remember me; O my God, concerning this, and
wipe not out my good deeds, that I have done for the house of my God, and for
the offices thereof.

The Text is a Prayer in which there be two things; Diuis.
the matter or the things desired, Remember me, concerning this, and wipe not
out my good deeds that I have done for the house of God and for the offices
thereof, Secondly, the manner, familiarly in these terms, O my God, twice
expressed: the matter of his request for a reward, delivered in two sorts,
first, affirmatively, Remember me, Secondly, by way of negation, wipe not out
my deeds; concerning these deeds; first, he mentions one in particular, namely,
the provision for the Leuits and Singers of the Temple; Remember me concerning
this, Secondly, Neh. 13.10:
he mentions them indefinitely, Deeds in the plural number; these deeds are
described; first, by their adiunct: They are good deeds, Secondly, by their
object, and that is double: first, For the house of my God, Secondly, for the
offices thereof. These be the several beams of this divine light shining in
this Text, Let us now through God, look upon the first.

God cannot properly be said to remember, Remember me.
as man reme^bers. There is a double memory in man, first, sensitive, which is
common with the beasts, when the representation or species of any object,
seen, heard, smelt, tasted or felt, (after the object is gone, and it self
vanished out of the fancy, is reduced again into the fantasy, either by the
representation of the same individual object, which was before or of some like
unto it; as for example, a beast, being well fed in an Inn, when he comes to
the same Inn again, or one like it, he remembers it, and there turns in.
Secondly, there is an Intellectiue memory, when not only by a representation of
the same, or the like object, we reduce a thing into memory, but by discourse,
Ab hoc in hoc, as the Schools say, from one thing to another, which the beasts
cannot do, therefore it is called in the beasts, memory, but in man,
Reminiscentia, that is, remembrance. Now neither of these memories are properly
in God: First, God has no sensitive memory, for having no sensible organs, he
cannot have any sensible representations. Secondly, he has no Intellectiue
memory by intelligible representations either created, or acquisite, by which
Angels and men understand, for he understands by no other mean, but by his
own essence.

But he is said to remember improperly, and according to man's capacity, when
he shows mercy to his creature, either without promise, God remembered Noah
and every living thing, Genesis 8.1. Psalm. 105 8. Aug. in Psalm. ^7
or with promise, He has remembered his covenant for ever, Tunc dicitur Deus
meminisse quando facit; tunc obliuisci, quando non facit; nam neque obliuio
cadit in Deum, quia nullo modo mutatur: neque recordatio, quia non
obliuiscitur. God is then said to remember, when he does, and then to forget,
when he does not; for neither forgetfulness is incident to God, because he is
no ways changed; neither yet remembrance, because he does not forget.

So then, Nehemiahs, Remember me, is no more, then do for me, O Lord, and let
me find a reward with thee through thy mercy, even as I have been an
Instrument of thy glory, and have wrought for thee; from this exposition shoot
forth two conclusions, first, on Gods part in the word remember; to remember
with God, is to do; when God speaks, he does, He spoke and it was done, Psalm.
33.9. 1. John 5.15.
when he hears, he grants, If we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we
know, that we have the petitions, that we desired of him; when he knows, he
helps; Take no thought, Matthew. 6.31.32.
saying what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, for your heavenly Father
knows; that ye have need of all things: now what comfort could once draw
near unto the soul of man, out of this that God knew our wants, if Gods
knowledge were not a help withal? yea, when he remembers, he does: Luke 1.72.
To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers, and to remember his holy
covenant; Gods performance and his remembrance go together as the light and
the Sun; which notes the propension that is in God to mercy, to whom, in
giving help to man, it is enough to remember him; whose memory, and mercy are
but as it were one act; and again to us it is an example; that our memories
may guide our hands to mercy, and that we should in a manner; as suddenly,
relieve our brethrens wants, as we do remember them; The second Conclusion,
Is, on Nehemiah's part, expressed in this particle me; by which he desires a
reward from God for his good deeds. A request, I confess, full of that (...),
or liberty, wherein, as the word imports, Remember me. Heb. 11.26. (...).
Phauorin. v. (...), Budaeus v. (...). 2. Tim. 4.8.
a man may say any thing to God, in a holy manner; yet for all this, lawful
enough.

It is lawful to think on a reward, yea to think upon it as a recompense. He
had respect unto the recompense of the reward. The word signifies to look up
in admiration curiously, which we call in Latin Suspicere. Secondly, It is
not only lawful to think on it, but to joy in it. Henceforth there is laid
up for me a crown of righteousness. Thirdly, It is lawful to ask it, yea
to ask it daily, Matthew. 6.10.
Thy Kingdom come, for whatsoever some braine-perisht Anabaptisticall spirits
think to the contrary; the Lords prayer is to be said every day, it is
Quotidiana oration, Enchirid. c. 71.
as Saint Augustine calls it, a daily prayer: thus Ezekiah when he stood in
extrema tegula, Sen. epist. 12.
as Seneca's phrase is, upon the last tile, ready to leap down into his
grave, Es. 38.3.
had his Remember me, Remember now O Lord I beseech thee how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, If any man's fancy work him another way to think that
Ezekiah desired not a reward confidently, because he seemed by his tears to
fear death; I recommend this answer to him, he wept not for fear of death
absolutely, but because he had no child to succeed him in the throne of his
Kingdom. Hieron. in Es. 38.
For Manasses his son, upon whose shoulders the staff of government lay
next; was borne out of the new lease of fifteen years; which God added even
three years after; not having climbed above the age of twelve years, 2. Reg.
21.1
when he began to reign; Jeremy had his Remember me, and that with such a
pitch of confidence, that for my part, I think few or none dare pray his words
after him O Lord thou know, Ier. 15.15.18
remember me, know, that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke, will thou be
altogether unto me as a liar. If he durst thus far draw out his zeal, in
asking a temporal blessing, which is not to be asked but as it were lamely,
and with condition, what a rise and advantage will faith take for a spiritual
reward? She will beg of God as freely, as ever Bathshebah did of Solomon, 1
Reg. 2.20.
I desire a petition of thee, I pray thee say me not nay. Even Christ
himself, as a man, desired a reward of Glory. Ioh. 17.4 5.
I have glorified thee on the earth, and now, O Father, glorify thou me with
thine own self, whose example I have reserved like the best wine, to the
last, that no man, that has his brains in his own keeping, or has his head
about him, can now doubt that it is lawful to ask a reward with Nehemiah,
Provided always that in some measure or other he be a Nehemiah, that asks
it, for this strong meat is not for every nouice, neither can a small stream
carry so great a wheel; there are that dare not say, remember me for a
Kingdom, Luke 23.42.
but Remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, Iud. 9.49.
As amongst Abimelechs soldiers, some cut down greater branches, some less,
according to the proportion of their strength, so among Christ's soldiers, some
carry a greater, some a lesser confidence. Act. 27.44.
Saint Paul's mariners some saved on boards, some on broken pieces of the Ship:
so among Christians, some arrive heaven, with one measure of trust, some with
another: All the members of the body, are knit unto the head; but some nearer,
some farther off; so in Christ's body, all draw grace from him, yet in
difference of grace, there is difference of hope. Secondly, That the just
themselves that have this transcendent confidence, in asking a reward, do not
assume this out of arrogance of merit; for this strong Harness of merit, is
only fit for the Son of God; he that said here, Remember me, said no more
but Remember me, he said not, reward me, according to my deserving; nay, after
he says, Neh. 13.12.
Remember me O my God, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy
See how modesty and confidence at one time kiss each other. The Saints that
are ascended high in obedience, are like men gone up high upon a ladder; the
higher they are gone up, the faster they hold; and they are not without some
passages of fear, to slip again. Grace and merit fight like fire and water;
the one puts out the other: It Is a truth I confess, beyond the line of all
exception; that, as the Rainebowe in the cloud, so peace in the conscience,
upon a good ground is a fair sign of reconciliation; but yet withal, with
Nehemiahs remember me, Ps. 25.7
David's remember me accords well; According to thy mercy remember thou me for
thy goodness sake O Lord. And thus much for the depth of Nehemiahs confidence
in asking a reward;

Wipe not out my deeds.
The second term which conueighs his request for a reward, is in these words,
and wipe not out my deeds; this being in a negative form, as the other in an
affirmative: This word wipe not, has a direct eye, or reference to that which
the Sacred finger of the Scripture points at elsewhere, that a man's good deeds
are written by God; Apoc. 20.12
The dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books
according to their works whether good or evil: Now there are three things of
a good man written by God: first, his fear of God, A book of remembrance was
written before him for them that fear the Lord. Mal. 3.16
Concerning whom, lend me but your eyes a little further, and see what God
says in the next verse, And they shall be mine, Verse 17.
says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels, These be Gods
prime servants, his Jewels, the signets of his right hand, whom he did not
write in a book, with the rest of his Saints, but made a book as it were, a
part for them; and such a book, wherein they should be diligently remembered
as the word imports. Secondly, he writes our tears, Put thou my tears into
thy bottle, Sepher Siccaron.
are they not in thy book; God has both a bottle and a book for our tears;
A bottle to put our tears themselves in, Ps. 56.8.
and a book to write down the Number, and the bitterness of these tears.
Thirdly, he writes down our good deeds, as in this place, (...). 70.
nay the word in the Greek signifies as much as if they were not only written
but painted, yea, and that in oil, for perpetuity, O the infinite mercy of
God, what tongue so rich, that is able to embellish it? He does not only
write our names in the book of life, Luke 10.20.
nay, write and engraue our remembrance in manibus suis, Esaias 49.16.
in the palms of his hands, with great Characters, even the nails of his
Cross, his blood being his ink, his paper his own flesh, yea, our very
members are written by him, Psalm. 139.16.
but writes our works and that so tenderly and favorably, Job 13.26.
that though our deserts might sway his hand to write bitter things against us,
yet he writes for us.

Men's Chronicles, the truer they are, the freer they are in taxing errors: 2.
Reg. 21.17.
as an ingenuous Painter takes out the moles, as well as the fairer lineaments,
The rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his sin that he sinned, are they not
written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, but the veins of
Gods mercy are so large and full, that as he suffers his mercy to triumph over
his justice in rewarding, Iac. 2.13.
so he suffers the same mercy to triumph over his truth in writing; and writes
not our sins, but only our good deeds; Gods Book is not like a Merchants
Book of Creditor and Debtor, wherein a man writes, both, what is owing him
and what he owes himself; for God in his mercy, wips out that we owe him,
and writes that only which he owes us, by promise, much like the clouds that
receive ill vapors from us, yet return them to us again in sweet raines:
that man's brain is yet dark, that does not duly consider this, for a great
mercy; Again, if God write up our good deeds, this is as a full wind in our
sails, to put us on, even to load Gods Chronicle with them; writing upon our
selves, by a real profession of his service, as Aaron did, Exodus 28.36. Esaias
49.4.
Holiness to the Lord. For, Surely our Judgment is with the Lord, and our
work with our God: What man's heart so dry, that is not moved when he hears
that our prayers and our alms goes up for a memorial before God? Acts 10.4.
not to be remembered, as it were with one sole act of his memory, (...),
but as the word carries it, to be a standing monument and remembrance of us
for ever in his presence: Shall our good works be like Esai's trees, Esaias
10.19.
so few, that a child may write them, when we have such a God, for whom we
work, will not only think upon our works, but write them up in such royal
paper as his own Book. Let no fear invade us, as if that paper could sink,
and so we should lose our works, for if men lose not small deeds sometime, 2.
Sam. 1.18.
and Saul's teaching but of the use of a bow, deserved a room in a Chronicle;
certainly better deeds shall never be blasted, but God will write them and
seal them up for all eternity. Secondly, as this word wipe not out implies,
that our good deeds are written by God, so again it tells us, that though they
be written, yet they they may be wipt out again, else had it been in vain
for Nehemiah, and a dead request, to have commended such a petition to the
ears of God, that his works might not be wiped out actually, had he not
first presumed a possibility of wiping them out; For not to touch the skirts of
the fiery hill, I mean the question, of falling or not falling away from
justifying faith, or imputed righteousness; A man may fall away from some part
of sanctification, by a sin of profaneness, for he that so sins, cannot
be holy and unholy in the same respect. As it is granted by all, Enormibus
peccatis pij reatum mortis incurru^t Synod. Dordracena, c. 5. artic. 5.
that good men may fall into grievous and ennormous sins, so this instance
following shows that a contrary act of profaneness must needs wipe out some
part of sanctification. David chaste before, falls into adultery, we must needs
say he lost that part of his holiness, except we say his adultery was holy,
which no man of the leanest understanding will affirm.

Now how far, not one mortal sin, perchance originally proceeding from
infirmity, or precipitancie may quite eat out sanctification, and so faith,
as some say, (considering probably, that an habit of faith is not easily lost,
but may seem to stand with some true acts of inward Sanctification, some being
lost, as in another case, the foundation may stand, when the roof or a pillar
of the house is fallen) but many several acts of foul and wilful sinning,
without repentance, Jude, verse 20.
not only efficienter. by acts directly contrary to the habit of faith, but
demeritorie, by acts contrary to the habits of other virtues; when a man does
(...) sends away or casts far from him a good conscience, as the word
imports; how far, I say, these sins may make, or not make na^fragium fidei,
the shipwreck of faith, 1. Tim. 1.19.
I will lean upon the bosom of the Church, till it be determined; only I
desire leave to add my poor judgment, which is, that if this question and
some others were not so rigidly stated, the division had not grown like Ahabs
cloud from the bigness of a man's hand to a storm. But no more of this,
because my text is properly of wiping out deeds of sanctification. Secondly,
because I can no more contract the whole discourse of this argument within an
hour, than all the beams of the Sun within a ring.

Thirdly, because in gathering herbs, I am loath to touch the wild Vine, or if
I touch it, 2. Reg. 4.39.
I will not gather my lap full, or if I gather it, I will not shread it into
the pot of the Sons of the Prophets; I wish from the center of my heart, that
the Church of England may not have a wrinkle in her garment, not the least
contention; for, there is a fear beats upon my heart; that when we have
stretched all the sinews we have in these difficulties; we shall make but a
Flemmish reckoning of them. L. 8. c. 5. (...), etc.
Sozomen says, that always in the dissension of the Church, the Commonwealth
was also troubled; Therefore for my part, in my poor way, I shall be ready
to offer still to Gods people the staff of bread, I mean the weightier things
of the Law, and to keep their brains from burning, with such subtle
lightning, as this is.

My good deeds.
Now in this phrase, wipe not out my good deeds, there does further rise up
before our consideration what deeds these are; Neh. 13.10.12.
First, he speaks of one in particular, Remember me concerning this, which was
the sustentation of the Leuits by the tithes of Corn, Wine, and Oil, a work
of that grace and favor with God, that Nehemiah dares beg a reward for it
alone in particular. Cum decimas dando and terrena and coelestia possis munera
promereri quare per auaritiam duplici benedictione te fraudas? Aug. de temp.
ser. 215.
Remember me concerning this, Seeing by giving of Tithes, thou may obtain
both earthly and heavenly rewards, why do thou by covetousness defraude thy
self of a double blessing? says Saint Augustine, But because this particular
is drowned in the general clause of his mercy, To the offices of the house of
God. I only thus far salute it, and next inuit you to his good works in
general.

And first I bespeake your attention to the name of them; (...) 70.
miserationes meas. Vulgata misericordias meas. Pagnin. pietates meas, Munster.
in loc.
The word in the Hebrew signifies as much as my mercies, and so does the Greek
and Latin render it, with others, because he did it with a free heart, as
Caietan says, and not for humane favor, but for Gods glory, as Lyra has it;
Every mercy is a good work, but every good work is not a work of mercy. Two
things make a good work a work of mercy: The first, is in subiecto, or him
that works, when he does it freely without respect of glory or carnal
profit to himself, or others; and this is properly Grace. Gratia.


The seccond in the object, or the matter, upon which we transfer our Charity,
whether it be on men, or things belonging to God or men, Misericordia.
when they are in the jaws of Necessity; and this is called Mercy. Both which
conditions were in Nehemiah's works, for he did them freely sine rimula
Ostentationis, without tha least chinke of Ostentation; and he did them
mercifully, in case of necessity; therefore his works are not every sort of
works, but works dyed in a deeper grain, they are mercies; but I cannot
stand to view every several room in my Text: Time is my Master, I must
subject my self to him. And so I give out from the name of these deeds, in the
Original, and come upon the second thing which is their Attribute, They are
Good deeds.

The works of good men are good indeed, first, Gal. 5.22. Nihil a Deo non
bonum quia diuinum, Tertull. de fuga in persecut. cap. 4.
in regard of their efficient, God: who not only commands them, but produces
them: The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace; Now God, neither commands
nor produces any thing that is faulty. Nothing from God, but it is good,
because it is from God, says Tertullian. Secondly, they are good in regard of
the object and matter, Iac. 2.19.
Thou beleeuest that there is one God, thou do well; Thirdly, in regard of
the form, whence they proceed, Mat. 7.18. 2. Sam. 18.27.
from a good heart purified by true faith, A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, as David said of Ahimaaz; He is a good man and comes with good
tidings; so a good man has good works. Fourthly, in regard of the end;
because by them men intend Gods glory, their brethrens good, Mat. 6.22.
and their own salvation, If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full
of light; Even as a good eye is the glory of the face, so a good intention is
the glory of the action, Ipsa iustitia nostra vera est propter very boni fine^
ad quem refertur, Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l. 19 cap. 27. Bell. de iustific. l. 4.
cap. 10. Stapl. de iustif. l. 6. c. 7. and alii.
Our righteousness, says Saint Augustine, is a true righteousness, because
of that end of true goodness, to which it is referred.

Our Adversaries then of the Chruch of Rome, show but the Canker in their
mouths and pens, to say and write, that we hold good works to be sins,
nay, mortal sins. For that we say may be put up into these three
conclusions. First, that Good works done according to the conditions
forenamed, are in the truth and substance of their nature, and of themselves,
good, yet by accident, they are, though not sins, yet mingled with sin in
that they pass through this channel of our corruption, these graves of our
concupiscence, even as water, of it self clear, contracts corruption by
running through a foul pipe.

Secondly, They are truly good, but they are not perfectly, absolutely, or
meritoriously good, whereby a man may fulfill the law or deserve heaven, as our
adversaries would blazon it, for, for meritorious works in the stiff sense of
condignitie, it was never embraced of old, Pueri. meritorij Cic. in Philip. 2.
nor yet can be, except it be in one sense, that we call works meritorious,
as boys or harlots are called meritorious, which deserve rather shame or
death, than a reward. Thirdly, yet does not this accidental mingling of our
works with sin, nor want of this absolute perfection take away the kind or
essence of our good works. For the first: Though that Concupiscence, which
blisters our good works, be by the law moral and in it own nature, yet
under Christ, a mortal sin (for Christ destroyed no part of the moral law,
quoad obligationem obedientiae and reatus, in regard of the obligation of
obedience and guilt) yet quoad obligationem poenae in regard of the obligation
of punishment; That which is mortal in it own nature, is now not mortal, by
effect through Christ's death. Romans 8.1.
There is now no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.13.
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: And Christ has redeemed
us from the Curse of the law, being made a curse for us; a part of which curse
was, Gal. 3.10. D. John White Way to the true Church. Digress. 37. Docet hoc
tantum ad quam perfectionem contendendum sit, sed non obligat. Staplet. de
Iustif. l. 6. c. 1. Soto de iustit. l. 2. q. 5. a. 4. co. 2
that the law bound us to bear the punishment of every inconformitie to her,
in thought word and deed; Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the law, to do them; but now sins of
ignorance, infirmity, and inconsideration, are not through Gods mercy in
Christ imputed to Gods children; and so do not extinguish the works of our
true righteousness, neither make the works loose the name of good works, nor
put the doers into a state of damnation, as a reverend Divine of late has it.
For though it is true that we are bound still to a general perfection of
obedience, whatsoever our Adversaries blab to the contrary, who still gather
where it is not strawne; Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and withal thy mind, and that he that is bound must needs incur a guilt by
breaking his bond, yet does not that guilt in smaller things, now through the
death of Christ and Gods mercy apprehended by faith, put him into a state of
damnation, because one man at the selfsame time cannot be in a state of
salvation in regard of his faith and works that please God, and in a state of
damnation, in regard of his necessary imperfections; Water mingled with Wine
does not tollere substantiam vini, but diluere, does not take away the
substance of wine, but weaken it; so our smaller sins take not away the
nature of good deeds, but do weaken them, and make them less perfect. Malum
per accidens non destruit bonum per se.
Black sprinkled upon white does not take away the whole color of white but
only darkens it: so our good works are not rooted up by our infirmities, but
only defaced and obscured. The law is like Sampson, Iud. 16, 20.
with his hair cut off, it goes out to shake it self as before, but it has
in this case no strength to rise against us.

Secondly, Gradus non mutat speciem,
Neither does the want of the degrees of absolute perfection take away the
kind or substance of good works, no more than the want of a finger the being
of a man; or the want of a fringe the substance of a garment. The imperfection
of the worker is to be distinguished from the substance of the work. A man
that is in cutting down a tree, with an ill axe, cuts it down in the end,
though not so neatly; and a good man is still destroying the body of sin by
obedience, though it be with some hacking and imperfection, but I will put out
this lamp and conclude. Good works are not sins formally and properly
taken, much less mortal: but of themselves and in their nature good; only by
accident mingled with evil, as appears, even by this one thing; Heb. 13.16.
that they please God; To do good, and to communicate forget not, for with
such sacrifices God is well pleased. Now it is a thing against the grain, if
not blasphemous, to say that a work which is properly a sin, should, though,
by the indulgence of God, be pleasing unto God. But to turn mine hand from our
adversaries to our selves, If our good deeds be good indeed, I cannot but
deeply censure them, that under pretense of advancing faith, do deuance good
works; and because good works are mingled with evil, therefore to make them
cheap and contemn them, as if a man should persuade a beaten trauailer to
seek an unknown way, and to leave the high way, because there is a little
dust in it. What is this but to do with Religion as Joseph's brethren did with
him, Gene. 37.23.28.
strip her of her parti-colored coat, her robe of righteousness, and sell her
away to the Midianites. Let us banish this spiritual idleness; Though we
receive grace freely, and without labor at the first, yet we cannot preserve
it without labor: (...). Council. Nicaen. 1. part. 2. cap. 31. A. Gell. l. 5.
c. 6.
say the blessed Fathers of the first Nicaene Council. Thy labors proceeding
from a sincere faith and to a sincere end, are not only good in themselves in
the truth of their nature; but notwithstanding their smaller cracks and
imperfections, God will entertain them as perfectly done; yea, crown them in
the end, even as the Romans when they gave the Obsidoniall Crown to one that
had delivered a City from the siege of the Enemy; made him a Crown of that
grass, and those flowers, where the City was besieged, so will God give us a
reward of those works, which we have done well, for the glory of his name,
and the good of our brethren; Though perchance our gold want some few grains.
Which I have done for the house of God.
But all this while my Sun has shone through a cloud in general, let us now
fasten our thoughts upon the good deeds of Nehemiah in particular.

These are of two sorts, or have a double object, First, those good deeds which
he did for the house of God: Secondly, those which he did for the offices
thereof. First, for the house of God.

The Temple of Jerusalem was called the house of God. First, in a wider or
larger sense, ab efficiente, (...) as we say, because God commanded it to be
built; Thy son whom I will set upon thy throne, 1. Reg. 5.5.
in thy room, he shall build an house unto my Name. Secondly, more pressely
and in a closer sense, in regard of the end, or use of this house; and that was
double, First, in respect of God, who dwelt in this house, and had possession
of it, that is, testified his presence more clearly there, then elsewhere,
both in the Arc of the Covenant and the Cloud; The Lord has chosen Sion, 1.
Reg. 8.6.11. Psalm. 132.13.
he has desired it for his habitation. Secondly, in regard of his Service,
Sacrifices, and Prayers, and other holy exercises being performed there by Gods
people, therefore it was called the place: where his Name should be, 1. Reg.
8.29.
I might here bury a great part of my time, about the distinction and dignity
of the house of God above other places, not consecrated or made over, to Gods
service; but I must draw in my sails. So I travel on from the term of the
house of God, to place mine eyes upon the liberality of Nehemiah to this house.

Upon this house, besides his flaming zeal in repayring it, and the wall about
it, he gave with a full hand to the enriching of it a thousand drammes of gold,
Nehem. 7.70.
fifty Basins. five hundred and thirty Priests garments; a rich example for
every able man to put up unto his consideration, it being a holy good work, to
do good to Gods house: Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, Ezra 7 27.
which has put such a thing, as this in the Kings heart, to beautify the
house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. They that built only the walls of
Jerusalem, yet are curiously registered in the Scripture, by the places which
they repaired, by their names, Neh. 3.5, 8, 9, 17 22, 32.
yea, by their conditions; for some were Noblemen, some Governors, some
Leuits, some Priests, some Apothecaries, some Goldsmiths, some Merchants.

Sulpit. Seuerus, hist. sac. l. 2.
Darius had three Hebrew young men, the Squires of his body, one among the
rest, by his wisdom drew both the Kings affection and admiration upon
himself; whereupon Darius bade him one day, Ask of him what he would and he
should have it, He answered, that he desired nothing, but that Jerusalem might
be rebuilt again.

Egnat. exempl. l. 1. c. 1. Baron. ann. 324. number. 62. exactis Siluestri.
And Fame reports of Constantine, that in the erecting of a Church at Rome, he
himself carried out twelve baskets of earth upon his own shoulders, as
appears by the foundation of the Church.

What strangers then are they to this Charity of Nehemiah, who either demolish
holy places, or through sloth and covetousness suffer them to fall? Sure this
is no Christian, Psalm. 79.1.
but a right heathenish trick. O God, the Heathen are come into thine
inheritance, thy holy Temple have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on
heaps, nay, the Heathen would never do that to the Temples of the false Gods,
Plut. in Timoleonte.
that we Christians do to the houses of the true God, for they hated and fled
from all sacrilegious persons. Were the Church leprous, we could do no more,
then pluck out the stones, as they did in the old Law; Leu. 14.40.
in a Leprous house, nay, they would not, even in such a house pluck out all
the stones, as they do in Churches, Conueniat me Ianus iratus qua velit front
Tertull. Apollog. c. 28.
but only such as were Leprous; Well let Ianus in his anger look upon me with
either of his faces; (to borrow Tertullians words) yet I will ever proclaim,
that, Next to the injury done against the temple of man's body, there can be no
greater injury then that which is done against the body of the Temple: And I
wish that all sacrilegious persons, might feel the whip upon their conscience,
which sometime Celsus felt, who after the robbing of many Churches, hearing one
day that place of Esaias read, Woe unto them that join house to house, Es. 5.8.
Gregor. Turon. lib. 4. cap. 24.
that lay field to field, till there be no place that they may be placed alone
in the midst of the earth; cried out immediately, Vae mihi and filits meis, woe
be to me and my children.

Secondly, Neither can they find in their hearts to be on Nehemiahs side, who,
in their hearts regard no Temple, nor any public place consigned to Gods
service, 1 Reg. 14.23.
but build them as it were groves on every high hill, and under every green
tree; Or if they be in the Temple, behave themselves there as reverently, as
in a Stable, 1 Reg. 7.25.
worse than ever Hirams brazen Oxen; whose hinder parts were not to be seen in
the Temple for modesty, but these men's Religion is rudeness; as if Religion
were best clad in a fools coat; (...). Chrysostom in. 1 Cor. 14. hom. 36. Exurge
veritas and quasi de patientia crumpe, Ipsa Scripturas tuas interpretare, quas
non nouit consuetudo. Tertull. develand. virginibus cap. 3. Psalm. 102.14. And
the offices thereof. Neh. 7.1. and 13.10.
Justly may we complain with Saint Chrysostom, In the Primitive Church
houses were Churches, but now Churches are as houses, nay, worse then houses.
But manum de tabula, I will put up my pensill and conclude this point with that
of Tertullian. Rise up O Truth, and break from thy patience, and interpret thy
self, thy Scriptures, which custom knows not; Never can that man's hand be
liberal to the Temple, that does not first in his heart, favor the dust of
the Temple.

But now as the fairest house without a light, is worth little, nay has no
room in our estimation, so the fairest Church without a Minister. Therefore
Nehemiah was not only liberal to besprinkle the house of God, but the Offices
thereof with his mercy: He appointed the Porters, the Singers, and the
Levites, yea a maintenance for them, without which the Priesthood can no more
stand then a plant without juice. And here we have found another fresh spring
of his bounty: It is one of his good deeds, and our president, to let part of
our mercy fall upon the Ministers of God; were not this work a welcome and an
acceptable work to God, he would never have set so strong a guard upon the
contrary. Take heed to thy self, Deuteronomy. 12.19. Mat. 10.41.
that thou forsake not the Leuite, as long as thou live upon the earth.
Christ says, He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, that is, as
the Father expounds it, (...). Jsidor. Pelus. l. 4. ep. 135 2. Chr. 31.4.
not for indirect ends, but with a naked heart, looking to religion and
goodness shall receive a Prophets reward.

Thus Hezekiah commanded to give the portion of the Priests, the schedule or
reason is annexed That they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. It is a
laudable Charity and such as deserves the silver pen, to still the crying
bowels of the poor; yet if we will lend credence to Aquinas; Quae sunt ad
finem, quanto ei propinquiora tanto meliora. Aqu. 22. qu. 81. a. 6.
That of those works which are ordained to one end as the glory of God, those
are best which draw nearest to the end, then must it needs follow, and weigh
down this consequence, that the works whereby Gods worship is maintained,
because they do more directly and immediately tend to Gods glory, do deserve
a larger table of commendation, then ordinary charity to the poor. They that
anoint the skirts of Aarons Garments, and they that anoint Aarons head, do
both repose their charity in Gods hand; only those repose it in Gods left
hand, these in his right; pardon my zeal I pray you, if I seem to scortch one
side more then an other, Number. 17.8.
that Aarons rod may, if not flourish above the rest of the rods of Israel,
yet flourish together with the rest. I speak not to take away the least thread
from the poor; but as it happens sometime, that even the fairest coats of
Arms may have some bar or defect so may charity to the poor (if it be
with a contempt of the maintenance of Gods service) loose, if not the
Principal, yet some part of the Interest of her commendation. Neither do I
here serve our own cause, to call upon the maintenance of our persons, without
the service of God; but it is Gods cause that gives fire to this discourse, For
I could wish that the arc of Gods worship might never shake, but God forbid
that it should be overthrown. In Gods cause, I dare throw a stone of reproof
against the face of such as care not for the demolishing of Gods public
worship, Judge. 17.10.
so every Micah may have a wandering Leuite in his own house.

And to this purpose it is, that they seek out stains in our coats, and in
the public Officers of the Church (as it is an easy thing to find a spot in
black) and being found, they wash them so often in Nitre and Fullers Soap, that
in the end these garments are almost worn to rags. Well I say, If he that
neglects to hear the Church, Matthew. 18.7.
must be unto us as a Heathen man, or a Publican, he that robs the Church is
worse then a Heathen or a Publican; to curtall the garments of the servant of
the most high God, deserves no better a reward; Fulgos. l. 1. c. 2.
the^ that which Bambas the King of the Goths gave to Paulus Graecus the
Church-robber to crown him with a Crown of Pitch. Let such men convent
themselves before their own understanding; and they shall plainly see a direct
tract of just fear in these sacrilegious actions, namely, that he that alters
Gods Decree concerning his service, many times rowles himself into the same
judgment, which He incurred, that altered Cyrus his word, concerning his
bounty to Jerusalem, which was; Ezra. 6.11.
that a piece of timber out of his own house should be his ruin. But now to
seal up this point. In Spain of old, Ammian. Marcell. l. 16.
they that brought in the Evening Lights, cried Vincamus, Let us Overcome; as
if the very light should inflame them unto Victory: so now have we Nehemiah for
a Light, I as your Servant present this Light unto you, and exhort you with all
the blood I have Vincaemus, Let us overcome, Let us overcome, I say, our
Hardness with Liberality to Gods service, that God may remember us concerning
this, and never wipe out the good deeds we have done to the house of our God,
and the offices thereof.

Thus having lodged the colors and run out the matter of Nehemiahs Prayer, the
manner of it, now attends your consideration, wound up in this familiar term,
My God. But the hour is declined; and seeing I have already compelled you a
mile, I will not compel you twain; And the rather not in this point, because
the matter of the Prayer, was the principal Land-marke or Beacon at which I
aimed at this time, the manner, at least wise, this manner of familiar Prayer,
is no ingredient into the essence of Prayer, but a degree of perfection in
Prayer. Therefore praeternauigabit oration I will sail by it, and only now
retriue some few things spoken by way of conclusion, unlade my ship perfectly,
and put her up into the creek.

Conclus. Plin. l. 10. c. 3.
Your ears have received this day the steely confidence of Nehemiah, how like a
true Eagle, he durst look upon the Sun of righteousness, and ask a reward,
I have led you likewise to the golden anchor of his confidence, His good deeds:
which with her two teeth, lays fast hold upon his Charity to the house of
God, and to the ^ffices thereof. No sweeter friend, no better companion, then a
good conscience; nor no better deeds in the World to warm the conscience with
a comfortable hope, then these two.

Micah the Idolater treasured up to himself a sweet content, by but an
appearance of one of these actions; Now know I that the Lord will do me good,
Iud. 17.13.
seeing I have a Leuite to my Priest, what then remaynes, but that we
transform our selves into this example? Let not our Adversaries grind the face
of our Religion, to say Religion and Charity were at one time thrust out of
this Kingdom: Though we have sent them their Religion, yet we have kept (and
my hope yet lives) shall keep their Charity. For what is wealth, without the
true use of it? no more then those ornaments about the necks of the
Midianitish Camels; Iud. 8.24.
the poor beasts possessed them without understanding, and strait-skind rich
men possess their wealth without true comfort. If there be any difference,
here it is, that those Jewels were bound to the Camels, but rich men more
basely are bound to their wealth. Again, how quickly may death snatch us away,
as in a whirlewind, as he snatched away the rich man in a night, from his barn
doors, who sung a requiem to his own soul, but never asked himself, in what
posture other men's states stood. Even as a brook, with a fall of rain waters,
swells, and as if it were proud of his late increase, makes a noise, nay, runs
here and there, Sicut torrens aquis pluuialibus redundat perstrepit, currit and
currendo decurrit: sic est omnis iste cur suo mortalitatis, Aug. in Psalm. 109.
to show it self till by running it has run out all that ever it had: Even
so some rich men, upon some fall of wealth begin to swell, as if they were
little Seas; then make a noise of ostentation, and because they have but one
tongue of their own, they get the Echo of Flatterers; they ouer-flow the
lower grounds, that is the poor, and spread their names in text Letters of
blood; in the end, after some short noise, as the brook leaves nothing, but
mire; so leave they nothing at their death to themselves, but confusion before
God and men. And now to bury all the ashes of this Sacrifice at the foot of the
Altar, and to end my text, This is the common Sewer into which all humane
vanity runs: as Julian said when he was taken in to be Emperor with
Constantius, Nihilo se plus assecutam quam vt occupatior interiret Amm. Marcel.
l. 15.
and some unexpected mischief dropped upon him. That he got nothing by his
advancement, but only to dye with more trouble; so this estate follows many
times those that have estate, namely that Wealth abused yields no better crop
then sour weeds of discontent; to make a man's death bitter; Whereas the good
man's death, is like Music, though it consist of Sharps, yet it ends in a
Diapason, and with a sweet close; Pro. 14.32.
The righteous has hope in his death, Nay both in life and in death as the
Prophet speaks, Hos. 14, 2.
dares to take words with him, and say, Remember me, O my God, concerning
this; and wipe not out my good deeds, which I have done for the house of my
God, and for the offices thereof.

And so I fall down from the Text to the occasion.

In all that whole row of solemnities, which men observe on earth, there is
none more powerful to let down the heart of man, then the solemnity of
funerals; our Churches mourn; our houses mourn, we our selves mourn, yea
the very air by a kind of repercussion of blackness, seems it self to be
black; and mournes.

The death of man in general, is able to make our Sorrows run; what pity
is it that he that even now was Monarch of the air; to breathe where he
listed, should by and by have his lungs stopped with dust, and be locked up
well-nigh for ever, in the breathless earth? That he that had Gods candle
shining upon his head even now, Job. 29.3.
should presently lay his head upon the sable pillow of the bed of darkness?
That he that kept the best company with men, Buxtors. Sina Iud. c. 11.
should by and by have no other company but with worms? If the Jews in the
feast of reconciliation think the swealing of a candle ominous; what may we
think of the dying of a man? Certainly, if we blow up this powder into our
heads, it will awake us from our Lethargy; specially such, who take up this
consideration withal, that the same death that slew their brother, may next
tread upon their heels.

But above all things my judgment runs this way, that the death of good men,
should make our veins cold; when an ordinary man breaks rank and dies, there
falls a vapor, but when a good man dies, there falls a Star: when the
Israelites shook off Egypt, and departed, they robde the Egyptians; and when a
good man shakes off the world he robs the world. Such was the death of this
thrice-worthy and euer-renowmed Gentleman, Master Richard Fisburne, whom death
too soon for us, though too late for himself, has with an Habeas corpus,
removed into another world; So sour is the remembrance of it that my Prayers
are rising still, that his death with other good men, may not be a lightning,
before a great thunder, and that the losing of such corner stones may not
perish the whole building. But before I spinne out the particulars of his
virtues, I must first shape some Apology, for my self and my dead friend of
neuer-dying memory: On my part, some men's thoughts may bubble up within them,
and imagine that I speak for my fee. Others out of a gloomy suspicion may
conceive, that there might some desire start from him, to have his Sepulcher
whited after his death; and this commendation painted upon it, but I will put
in mine answer. First, for that imputation that may be rolled upon me; I do
profess with an untainted heart, that though I have as good a cause, as a
poor man can have to dote upon the remembrance of my friend, yet shall not any
sinister end, set my tongue on work; further then the truth commands me.

For him having now no relike of him, but only his Remembrance, (which is no
more to a friend himself, then a shadow to the body) I will ever defend it,
and keep his name bright, from the rust of contradiction; yea, I should slay
mine own conscience, if I should not wipe out the least imputation that is
cast upon him. He did diverse times, both in the beginning of his sickness and
toward the end, grate upon the abuse of this custom of ouer-spicing the dead
in large commendation; and entreated me, yea, with some flashes of importunity
that I would perform this last office of Preaching for him, but speak nothing
of him; And indeed had it not been, that by my silence I should have maimed
the common expectation, his honor, and your example; I had turned these words
into sighs, and have imposed this duty upon mine eyes, and not upon my
tongue. But who can part with so good a man, so sweet a friend, in so rude a
manner, as to say nothing? If I must needs therefore err one way (as in these
occasions commonly the wind stands in our faces, and our actions return upon
us again) I will rather be immodest in denying the modesty of my friend, then
unthankful in denying mine own duty; And so I break away from the Apology
to the matter.

This brother of ours deceased, was by birth a Gentleman of the Town of
Huntington, cut out of no mean quarrie, borne of a good house, what the
strength of his education was, and how he was translated out of Nature, into
Grace, shined clearly in the virtues, lent him by God when more years fell
upon him. Commonly the heat of good institution which is put into a child
young, glowes in him little or much, while he has a day to run through in
this life; And as many times the Husbandman, that has the eye of experience,
will give a fair guess of the whole day, by the morning: so many times to a
man of a fresh sight youth is an Optick-glasse to discover afar off, the
sequel of many years; After that he was well inlayed by his education, God
having endowed him with excellent parts of Nature, he was transplanted into
the service of a Noble Countess in this Kingdom, where (as the fairest
flowers have oftentimes the faintest smells) he did not long like the candied
happiness of the Court. From thence therefore he took his way into the
Ciite, and became servant to a Gentleman of full esteem and credit Sir Baptist
Hickes, now Knight and Baronet, from whose own mouth I heard it with what
diligence and faithfulness, even for many years together, he disindented and
discharged himself of that service.

For his understanding, so much as might lie within the compass of an ordinary
brain:

Fame it self could scarce lie of him; which knowledge of his he often watered
with assiduous reading professing in his sickness, the large comforts he had
culled to himself out of those hours laid by for his private studies. And
this was ascertained afterward, by a Book in folio, which bare the
collections which he had fisht out of diverse Books of Divinity, History, and
the like. Pet. Martyr. M. Perkins, etc.
Besides by the voice of reason, it is commonly true, that he that is
provident in his youth, is rich in his age; so he that is studious of good
things in his former years, is all comfort in his death.

He wsa an affable man, He that looked but upon his face, might have seen
goodness and courtesy look out of his eyes. If a poor man, whose hopes
perchance, lay a bleeding, had, had any request to have advanced unto him; he
carried such a dew in his lips, and answers, that he would have breathed, as
it were another life in his face. His gestures so without all specks of
offense, and injury, as that he deserved the name which Nicholas the third had
for his modesty, to be called Compositus, Volateran. Anthropolog. l. 22.
A man well composed, This was that which made him Lord of so many hearts.
Scarce was there a man within the compass of our memory, that ever won
himself more love in his health, more Prayers in his sickness, more
lamentation after his death. He was a just man in his words, yea, in his
actions (for his actions did second his words) He professed upon his last bed,
even on his deathbed where every man speaks, with an unmasked conscience, that
to his knowledge, he had not gotten any part of his goods iniustly. O blessed
example! O rare president! In the large list of many Ages, but one man, even
Aristides, reached the name of a Just man; I could wish that the Emblem, which
sometimes Ferdinand Count Palatine of Rhine, Iac. Typot. symb. Princ. tom. 2.
made, might be set upon our shop-wals, and Counting-houses, which was, The
Picture of Justice, taking her leave of the World, and sitting upon a Dolphin,
with a Balance in her hand, and these three words written about her, Cognosce,
Elige, Matura, Know, Choose, Make haste, Know that Justice is incorrupted,
Choose that which is just, Make haste, lest by a momentany sin, thou bind thy
self in everlasting punishment. He was a religious man in private, His manner
was, Before he would dip his hand in any public worldly action, his Prayers
should first lead him out of doors. For his understanding favored him so
far, as to know that it was Prayer, that like Rahabs Scarlet Thread in her
window, gave defense to our houses, our persons, and all.

He was religious in public, He was a frequent, reverent, attentive, and
impartial Auditor of the Word. He was none of the Peripatetick Professors, who
have a walking Religion, from one Church to another: and from their own
ordinary Pastor to a worse; much like the silly-hearted Doves, that for no
reason leave the common Doue-house, and build perchance in the next place they
see, Barn or Steeple. O the strangenes of these times! Religion, which was
wont to have but one face, is now a monster; and has many. Nay, there are some
Ministers, that have so much stout blood in their veins, that they start not,
to give the people this sour milk, some indirectly, some directly, that this
Sin to leave their own Pastors, is a part of Religion. Indirectly at men's
tables, where every Chair is a Pulpit, they play under board and teach by it,
by casting a foame upon their Brethrens names; and so draw all the water to
their own Mils. Nay directly, even in the sacred ground of Pulpits, some dash
through all manner of waters, and by brinish declamations against others, wind
all the best Thread upon their own Clues; Insomuch that the Prophet's words
whip our times, Ier. 5.31.
as well as his own, The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear
rule, by their means, and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do
in the end thereof? I sweat not now, in hatred of any man's person; nor to
besmoake the weakest labors of any man, with the least prejudice, specially
when they fall from a sincere heart, But yet I hate Hypocrisy, as Hell it
self; when a man for an ell of Lawne, more or less, or a silver Cup at a
Christning, or hope of some Legacy at a man's death, shall unwind his tongue,
this way and that way, and even rock any cradle, as we say, though of a
bastard, to fill his own Cisterne with some water.

Shall the Disciples in a private house eat any temporal food set before
them, Luc. 10.7.
and shall not the people in Gods House eat the spiritual food that is
offered them?

Shall every man have his own set house, 1. Cor. 21.22.
to eat and drink in, and shall Religion have no certain house to dwell in?
I ask a man (if he have the temple of his soul in his conscience, not in his
fantasy) will he say with a broad forehead that a Minister is bound to
preach, and can he say with narrow lips that the people are not bound to
hear? Is it the ordinance of God, even in the court of their own judgments,
that a Minister should preach, and does not the same impregnable Ordinance lay
hold on the people to yield their ears? Let them weaue this web a little
closer; It is a bookecase in the Scripture, They that resist the ordinance of
God, Romans 13.2.
sta^^ receive to themselves damnation. Yea but they gruntle and say they
cannot edify, and what then? Shall we do evil that good may come? Romans 3.8.
Again, to cut a little nearer the hoof, it wants scarce a hairs breadth of
blasphemy to say this, that they cannot edify; For edification, being a work
of the spirit, is clasped to no certain persons or gifts; how powerful soever
in working upon the affections; but to the Ministry in general, The Gospel
in general, in whatsoever Minister it is, it is the power of God to salvation,
Romans 1.16.
as the light in the Sun is the same, in a cottage, as in a Palace. And Saint
Paul says, Notwithstanding every way, Phil. 1.18.
whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached, I therein rejoice and
will rejoice. Thirdly, thou brayest yet, and say, thou can not edify,
perchance the fault lies in thine own bones; either thou have not prepared thy
self by prayer and repentance, or else thou art laden with a prejudice against
the Preacher or else thou resignest thyselfe over to wandering thoughts and then
no marvel, if he that is stopped at the heart, cannot breathe freely, and he
that has an unprepared, a prejudicial, and an unstable soul, cannot edify.
Lastly, though God has opened the people a door of liberty, to judge of the
doctrine of the Prophets, by the Scriptures, in things fundamental and plain,
yet from what coast came their power or art to judge of the gifts of the
Prophets; whether by them they are able to edify or no. Specially in one thing
I am sure, that their judgment breaks not even, who set a price on every
Preacher, not by his knowledge but by his zeal.

If edification be no more then building, surely, he that has least skill is
the worst builder, but I crave pardon, that I have thrown away so much time to
cut this weed so near the ground. Let every man look to his own hearth that
the Sun put not out his fire, nor his zeal his knowledge. To me, it sounds
all one, for a man to leave his Pastor, and for a child to leave his Father.
So to re-salute the occasion again, He was a charitable man, charitable in
his life time, while his health followed him, charitable when sickness
arrested him, charitable in private. He washed the feet of many poor and was
ready as occasions were put up unto him by others, to rear up all the children
of Necessity with his mercy; Nay he was not drie-handed to some Hospitals in
private before his death, but blessed those dead bones with his charity, and
obtained the name of a merciful man, Act. 22.28.
as the chief Captain obtained his freedom with round sums of money? O
beautiful charity! The closest day the greatest heat, and the water that
runs under the earth is ever the purest; secret charity open virtue, Thy
Father which sees in secret, Mat. 6.6.
shall reward thee openly.

He was charitable in public, and that not in handfulls, but in sheaues, I
shall remonstrate to you not a table only, but a field of mercy, not a paper,
but a book of good works; even so large, that without the help of a
Catalogue, my memory would stagger in the rehearsing of them. It is ordinary,
that no man almost does all the good which another man remembers, but it is
rare that a man should not remember all the good which another man does. I
might here enterlace the Legacies of Nature, which he powered into his kindreds
laps; Ruth 3.15.
as sometimes Boaz powered into Ruths veil six measures of corn: for, even
for this one principal beam of charity, I may translate that saying of the
Canticles from thence, to this place; We have a little sister and she has no
breasts; Cant. 8.8, 9,
what shall we do for our sister in the day, when she shall be spoken for?
If she be a wall, we will build upon her a Palace of silver: and if she be a
door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.

One thing there is, the remembrance of which I cannot leave hehind me; and
(to behead all unnecessary circumstances) it was thus, A friend of his one day
infused into him this particular, that in such a place, there was a Gentlewoman
attending upon a Lady of good quality, who by mere chance hearing the name of
Fishburne in discourse at that time, presently conceived, that he was her
kinsman, and with a winged desire instantly addressed her self to know the
place where he dwelt; and so for that time put up her desires again. This
Narration arriving with Master Fishburne, he with a strong gale of affection,
Vne vogue de saueur. Proverb Gallic.
bears now toward the place of this Gentlewomans abode; and there descrying
this truth by lively circumstances, that she was a stem of the same tree of
alliance with himself; for that time most courteously entreated her, after,
presented her with no mean present, shortly gathered her home to his own, and
while breath was with him, nourisht her with respect and bounty; and when he
was with the good Samaritane to leave the Inn of this body, placed that care
of her upon his dear and worthy Partner, and Executor; and with a blessed hand
cast a thousand pound upon her. But I must sup up many things with a short
breath.

I might here likewise dish out his Legacies of thankfulness to his Master,
and all his Masters chief Allies, and to many other friends, and that not with
a narrow hand, which very thing is not barren of his praise neither; For he
that is unthankful is not a Christian, is not a man, no not so good as a
beast; but a very dunghill, on which if you cast never so sweet odours, yet it
will send you evil for good: I might here add more links to this discourse;
and speak of his Legacies of love, which he derived upon his servants; his
memory not ouer-leaping one that had been with him, even from seven years
before his death. Giving to some ten pounds, to some fifty pounds, to some
an hunhundred pounds, to some two hundred pounds apiece, a work that has the
face of Charity upon it, as well as the other; But I must drive on a little
faster, to his weightier works of mercy. To the Poor, and to the Church.

First, he laid his hands upon the poor, and gave,

To the poor of Christ's Hospital a thousand Marks.

To the Hospital of Bridewell, two hundred pounds.

To Saint Bartholomewes Hospital, a hundred pounds.

To Saint Thomas his Hospital, a hundred pounds.

Item, To the Mercers a thousand pound for five young men of that Company, two
hundred pounds apiece for five years together gratis, and so from one to
another for ever.

Item, To the Poor of Saint Bartholomewes where he lived, five hundred pounds
to purchase five and twenty pounds a year for ever,

Item, To Saint Botolphs Bishopsgate, To Saint Giles Cripplegate, To Saint
Leonards Shoreditch, To Saint Mary White-chappell, To Saint Sepulchers Parish,
twenty pounds for sixty poor men.

Item, To the Mercers a thousand pounds more, to purchase fifty pounds per
annum, for thirty poor brethren, or Widows of that Company, to be bestowed
in Gowns; Shirts, Hose, and Shoes, every Michaelmasse for ever.

Item, He gave to the poor of Huntington; where he was borne, two thousand
pounds for Almes-houses, Lecture, or School, which they most needed, one
hundred pounds per annum, for ever.

Item, He gave to the poor of Coxall in Essex, fifty pounds.

He gave to Prisoners, To Ludgate, the two Compters, Bedlam, and the Fleet, a
hundred and fifty pounds, thirty pounds apiece.

To the Kings Bench and Marshallsea, forty pounds, twenty pounds apiece.

He next turned the right eye of his Charity upon the Church and Gods Service:
As for Sermons at Mercers Chapel, from the first Sunday in Michaelmas Term,
every Sunday, to the first Sunday in Lent (except those that fall out in the
twelve days of Christmasse) five hundred pounds to purchase five and twenty
pounds per annum, for ever.

Item, He has given five hundred pounds to purchase five and twenty pounds a
year for ever, for a Lecture to be read at Saint Bartholomewe's where he
lived, on the Week day.

He has given two thousand eight hundred pounds, to buy in certain
Impropriations, in some Northern Counties, where there is least preaching.

Next his Charity came upon the Ministers, first, he gave to six by name,
the sum in all three hundred and thirty pounds.

Item, He gave twenty Preachers beneficed in London, whose Livings were of
small value, four hundred pounds, twenty pounds apiece.

Item, He gave to twenty vnbeneficed Preachers in London, four hundred
pounds, twenty pounds apiece.

Here is a fair bank of Charity; In all it amounts to the sum of 10726.
pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. Besides that which he conferred
upon his Company, Kindred, Friends, and Servants, which runs out to wel-nigh
five thousand pounds more. O the large arms of Charity! And withal, one
notable thing which stays my consideration upon it. That in all this Magazine
of bounty, he has not made Usury his Executor as some do; He would not that
his Works of Charity should grow out of the black root of Usury, but that
Land should be purchased for the perpetuating of them.

But to turn in again one short turn to these Mercies, Orator est vir bonus
dicendi peritus, Isidor. Etymol. li. 2. c. 3. Acts 9.39.
what cost of words is able sufficiently to express them? I confess, I want
one part of an Orator which is words, yet I want not altogether the other,
which is goodness; therefore, I must needs with Dorcas her Widows, at the
least show the Coats and Garments of mercy which he gave. Nay, I will blow this
coal a little more, and add, If God made houses upon earth for the Midwiues
of Egypt, for their mercy, Exodus 1.21.
surely God has made him a house in Heaven for his mercy; and we have cause to
build him some Monument of his memory. Blessed be that mercy which betakes it
self into the Bowels of the Poor, to lodge there! Happy those hands, Cant.
5.5.
which drop such Myrrh! Let the Poor be your Altars, whereon these Sacrifices
are to be offered; Josh. 2.18.
And as Rahabs house was saved by the Scarlet Thread, so shall your works be
the means of the saving of you, they shall be as the Angels were to Lazarus,
to receive you into everlasting habitations. Let your Charity shine upon the
sick; Get you within the shadow of this example, Bibulam animam salsugo
ambitionis occupat, Cypr. prolog. in sermones. Proximorum aperuit sauces
Constantinus, saginauit Constantius, Ammian. Marcell. lib. 16. Quid tam
populare quam libertas, quam and a bestijs expeti videmus, Cic. de lege Agraria
orat. 2. Isidor. Etymolog. lib 6. cap. 10.
as sometimes they did within the shadow of Peter, and there cure that
ouer-salt desire, You have in getting; that as Fame gave out of Constantine,
that he opened men's mouths, but Constantius filled them; so may this honor
ever dwell with you, you worthy Citizens, that your Fathers opened the mouth of
the poor, but you filled them.

Let the Prisoners likewise feel the soft hands of your mercy. Liberty is a
thing which the very beasts desire: A Prisoner has few friends, scarce his
own Parents are his friends. Therefore, as curious Grauers look sometimes
upon green Flies, to recollect their scattered sight again: So let the sighs
of the poor Prisoners come before you and place your eyes upon them, that you
may work out that curious work of your salvation with more comfort.

And let the Ministers coats have a little more wool upon them; too often
brushing makes them threadbare, This deceased Gentleman, he gives you aim;
scarce any man within the list of our memory, who showed more true life of
affection to the Ministers then he. I will demonstrate unto you the whole
Picture of his mercy in this kind by one line.

A certain Minister in this City, making suit to the worthy Society of the
Mercers, for the renewing of a Lease of a house, in which the said Minister
dwelt; The Company allowed him this answer, that he should have his desire,
with condition of paying fifty pounds for a fine. The grave Minister
professing his inabilitie to this su^me, the heart of this deceased Gentleman
did so run over with compassion that presently he suggested into the ear of
a faithful friend of that Ministers, that he out of his own purse would pay
that fine for him: which being not suddenly accomplished, through some other
occasions interleaping, at his death he firmed it, and gave him fifty pounds
for that purpose.

But I haste to that Princely work of his Charity, in recalling
Impropriations to the Church, where because words are many times like smells,
which do not nourish, but only refresh; and that we speak often to the
wind, not to the hearts of men. I desire you in our Saviors own accent, Who
has ears to hear let him hear.

Matthew. 13.9.
Shall we provide for men's bodies and not for their souls? Shall we look to
the roof and not to the Principal? Will we not commit the cure of a finger to
an unskillful Surgeon, and shall we commit men's souls to unlearned Ministers?
has Christ redeemed the souls of men with his heart blood (one drop of which
carries more worth then a thousand worlds) and have we such broad and wide
consciences as to suffer a man that has but four pounds a year, to sell a
thousand souls to the Devil, for scarce so many pence? I will not open the
wrong vein, Potius ne non scriberent, quam vt vera scriberent.
to dispute now the civil right that Laymen have to Tithes; Neither can I now
dispute the divine right of Tithes, against which some have written rather,
least they might not write at all, then write the truth and have thrust their
flesh-hookes into other men's pots. I dare trust the records of mine own
reading in one thing there is no divine right to put holy flesh into every
garment, nor to give Tithes to Lay men; Therefore I could wish to lay this
burden upon my friends, nay my enemies not to snatch these coals from off Gods
altar, but to let the Seraphims only do this.

And if such a man have this consecrated gold in his tent that he cannot,
being ouer-mastred by Necessity well leave it; I would be his Author to
persuade him to wave the tenth sheaue of his tenth, and to pinch himself
rather then God, in providing a sufficient Minister; yea I would to God I could
persuade some rich men, though they have not wet their feet in this sacred
oil, yet not to take up their standing there only, to do no harm but to
help by their mercy, that the Church may run upon her own wheels again. As
God breathed counsel on David when he should hear the sound of a going in the
tops of the Mulberrie trees, 2. Sam. 5.24.
then to bestir himself against the Philistines, so I upon you, that you by
the sound of the feet of this Gentleman and others (the remembrance of their
charity in this kind) would rank your thoughts in that file, to root out this
Ark-robbing Philistine, Sacrilege. If robbery of a common house, and piracie
of a ship of ordinary fraught, make our blood boil within us; what may the
robbery of Gods house, and the piracie of the Ship, where Christ is, do? But
now to steer my discourse to you of this worthy and famous Company of the
Mercers, whose care this Gentleman has borrowed, as the Prophets widow did
her vessels to receive this oil for others; let me return you his own words
in his own will, which he bequeathed you, together with his Charity. And I
heartily entreat the said Wardens, and Commonaltie for Gods sake that they will
be careful from time to time, to make choice of such as be well known to be
honest, discreet, and learned men, fearing God, and painful in their
Ministry, that by their life and doctrine they may win many souls to
Christ Jesus. Oh what words are here? not words but goads. What heart so
hard-skind where these words cannot enter? I am already seasoned with an
opinion of this Society, that you will do all this. If he had only said,
for his own sake and not for Gods sake, yet you would never have wounded your
reputations to have neglected his desire. As there was a double mercy reigned
in him, not only to give, but to be careful that that which he had given,
might run in the right Channel, so let a double care ever accompany you in
your meeting about this occasion, 1. Sam. 6.9.
that the Arc may go by the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh; Mine own
experience chatters thus much to me, that when the presentations of these
newborn Benefices shall be deuolued upon you, that many wandering Doves will
fly to your Arc; and that the Fountains above and below will be moved,
Power from great ones, and friends among your selves, molded on purpose, for
some private ends. Therefore then look upon the Picture of this Gentleman, I
mean his Will, Let neither Might nor Partiality blow away that care he
entrusted you withal. And though many lines be requisite to make a fair
Image, and many gifts to make a Preacher; yet principally I would set forward
one request unto you, that you would adorn your Election, not with men too
young, and of the first head, but with men of temper, whose brains were settled
long since; For a Minister without discretion is like Sampson without his eyes,
fitter for a Mill, then a Church, and so I resign the rest to your wise
considerations, and join my self again to my former argument.

If any shall turn the point of this Objection against this Mercy, and say
that this Gentleman was a single man, and had no children; therefore his
Charity bore the less price (having no ways else so fair a way to direct
it) I now answer for his ashes: First, Many a single man leaves the World as
the Assyrians left their Camp with a noise and a tumult, and out of confusion
dispose just nothing. Secondly, Though he had no children, yet he wanted not
these of his name, and kindred, one of which he might have adopted, and have
powered all this Oil into one Vessel; if he would have hunted as many do,
after a worldly continuance of his name; Whatsoever men blatter to the
contrary; I shall still send out my Prayers unto Heaven, that this Mother of
Israel, this Honorable City may bring forth many such Children.

But enough for his life. If I have broken my limits and banks with too long a
discourse, I crave pardon, because, though I may have overrun my self in
affection to his person, yet I have not ouer-reacht in the truth of the cause.

And so I come to his death, which was like Sampsons death, no less famous if
not more famous then his life: for ever as the premises are, so is the
conclusion; and a good life draws after it a good death.

Shall I color out unto you his devout and comfortable receiving of the
Sacrament in his sickness? the use of which howsoever now some Opiniasters
after so long a dissent of practice, arraigne at their own bars, An iustitia
and fortitudo fuerint animalia. Sen. ep. 113.
(for this is an age to question any thing, even whether virtues be Creatures)
yet lies it so fair to the eye; if we will not ride all Antiquity and
Reason, that they that will kick at this, Nec fi solemn ipsum manibus gestemus,
fidem commodabunt. Lactant. l. 7. c. 1.
will not lend us their faith, though we should carry the Sun in our hands.

Shall I set before you that judicious confession of his Faith, which he made
at that time? I cannot unrip every piece, thread by thread, the time forbids me.

Shall I conduct you to the desire he had to the absolution of the Church,
which was accordingly performed I know there are some, who would have Religion
to be like a coat without shape or decency; who think it fitter to break
open heaven gates with an untempered violence, Non claue, sed clauo.
then to open them with a key, and these with their Iron horns push at this
practice of the Church, as if it were some Syrian, some Popish rag. But I crave
passage for a word or two. First, I do not believe that there is the same
power in the Minister, as in God, authoritatiue by original and prime power to
expiate and purge sin, Vere tanquam dei ministriab solvunt id quod deus ipse
efficit Catechis. Romans pa. 2. c. 5. uum. 15 Haec soluendi and ligandi potestas
non minor est in Ecclesia, quam in Christo Cusan. epist. 2. ad Bohemos.
nor yet the same in substance, and differing only in degree of eminency in
God, and ministry in man; as our adversaries auerre; for if it were the same
in kind with Gods power, whether originally or by deriuation to forgive sin,
it must needs be always effectual, as it is in God, and the keys should
never err, which the Papists themselves will not defend, for the key of our
absolution may sometimes bend or turn round, and not open the gate of heaven,
Secondly, if that proper and neuer-erring power of forgiving sins be not in
the Minister, then reason binds us to believe that it is some other act,
improper, and indirect, which is only attributed to man, in forgiving sins,
as, first by disposing a man in the use of the word, public or private, to
repentance, and so to make him capable of remission of sins. Secondly, upon
probable signs of repentance, to pronounce such a man penitent, absolved.
Thirdly, by actual absolution of him; as in a Patent the Conditions are first
drawn. Secondly the Patent is sealed. Thirdly, it is delivered and applied: so
does Christ attribute to the Ministers for the honor of their Ministry, a
nearer act of remission of sins; and says, Whosesoeuer sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them. Joh. 20.23.
for he that only disposes a man to forgiveness, or pronounces him
forgiven, is remotely said to forgive. Yet this actual absolution is not a
proper act of forgiving neither, namely such a one as has a direct necessary
and physical influence into the effect of absolution; but only it is causa
moralis or concilians, a cause moral, whereupon God is stirred up, seeing the
preparation of the Penitent, and the absolution of the Minister, that is his
own ordinance, to concur with that act of the Minister and to forgive
sins. And this does neither too much Idolize this power of forgiving sins
with the Papists, nor yet too much tread it underfoot with others, whom the
false fire of their own Imagination leads to think, that the Absolution
appointed by the Church and confirmed with other things by Act of Parliament,
is a superfluous and Popish observation; Statut. Eliz. 1.
and that God has lent no power at all to it. But I will draw in my breath.
One thing I am sure of, that after the receipt of this Sacrament, and the form
of absolution, God blew upon that Garden of Spices, his heart, and raised him a
great deal of comfort; as others can bear a part with me in this testimony.
Shall I bring forth all his religious sayings which passed from him, during all
the time of his sickness? Amongst many others, He did bless God, that he
was to die in such a Religion, where the Ministers gaped not after dying men's
goods, as the Popish Priests do, but after their souls. For indeed they do
not so much give the sick oil, as take from them; and vngendo emungunt, by
anointing them they vnskrew the more easily their charity. There were four
Ministers of us with him in his sickness, and I dare say with a clear
forehead, though we had a yielding subject to work upon; yet not one of us
parted our lips, to exhale the least gift from him for our own particulars. As
his stomach ever kicked against Popery, so was he a true wouen Protestant,
and a natural son of the Church of England; insomuch that though he wanted
not the Chariots of Israel, (the prayers zealous, and frequent of many for him)
yet he desired the blessing of the Church; I mean the common prayers to be
read to him before he should tradere lampada, resign his last breath: to
testify the spiritual delight he sucked from them in his life; and that
comfort which he assuredly hoped to borrow from them at his death. Shall I lay
out his comfortable speeches to others, when he saw their eyes run over with
tears for him, he would often say: Trust in God; for his own heart taught
him, that seeing all the pleasures of this life must be rolled together, and
all should be filed upon that file of Solomon, Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity, it was the truest wisdom to hang upon
God.

Shall I encroach so far upon your patience as to show you his Patience
toward God? All the time that fatal sickness fed upon him, even till death,
He lowed not under the hand of God, as the Kine did under the Arc, 1. Sam.
6.12.
as if he were unwilling to leave this world, as they were to leave their
Calfes, but was willing to bear that hand in adversity, that had borne him in
prosperity; Quadratus lapis Christianus, quocunque verteris, stat. Aug. in Ps.
86. homil. (...).
like a four squared stone, which way soever you throw it, it rests; so did he
(...) casts his passions asleep, as Saint Basil says, and was content what
way soever God came upon him, whether from the North or the South, in Judgment
or in Mercy.

Shall I bedew you with his tears? Never any man, at whose death I have been,
drew more tears from his eyes then he. Those Limbecks of his never ceased
distilling. These Fountains above were almost always open; Surely as Saint
Augustine says, Procella ingens magnam vim ferebat lachrymarum, Aug. Confess.
l. 8. c. 12
There was some great storm within him, against sin, that brought down such
a flood of tears, yet not without some beams of joy, for he would say
himself, See you these tears? These shall be all botled: And certainly we saw
that upon his weeping a wonderful assurance of comfort came upon him: even as
the fire from Heaven followed the water powered upon Elias his Sacrifice.

Lastly, for his faith and hope, which did assist him, till his last hour;
mine eyes were never witnesses of a greater confidence in any dying man, his
comfort never so much as once shaken. If he had had any broken fancies in his
sleep, that might seem to have ouer-shadowed his hope; he would chase them
away still, as he waked. Indeed his confidence was so high-built that I began
to look at the foundation; fearing that there might be some bogge of
presumption; and that all was not built upon the firm Rock. To that purpose,
doubting he might be too forward, I set him backward to consider the many
snares and temptations of this life, which lie as thick as the rine in Autumn
before our feet; and the many sins which oftentimes men of the best fame are
gored with. He answered me, I confess I have been a great and grievous
sinner; but yet I thank God; I did ever labor privately to make my peace with
God again. Nay, this he sealed again, with a fairer stamp, for being asked by
me often, why, finding such comfort, he wept so much; He regested this answer,
Ipsa obmutescit facundia, si aegra sit conscientia, Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
Octonar. 6.
many times together, Poor Fisborne shall be a Saint. Thus as the Sun cannot
be without light, no more can goodness be without hope; And as after showers
of April rain, the air is the sweeter: so after these tears of his, was his
joy the more sensible, as on the contrary, If the conscience be sick, the
tongue is dumb; as Saint Ambrose says; Nay, that it may appear, that with
this very hope he took Heaven, the very last word that he spoke in this
World testify aloud; when, it should seem, reuoluing with himself, the
Passion of Christ (a cordial meditation for all dying men) he crowned his
death with these Golden words, I am now hasting to Mount Caluary to my Savior:
and so after a little more sand run out (his glass never to be turned
again) in peace and in a good old age, rendered himself into his hands, with
whom he now rests in that bosom of glory, and shall so rest for ever and
ever. Only he has left the World, as Lot left Sodom, in smoke and
combustion. He that made God heir of his goods; himself the heir of God,
and the earth the heir of his body; he has made many friends, the sorrowful
heirs of his memory. As the long looking upon the Sun, makes our eyes water:
so the serious remembrance of his Goodness must needs fetch out tears; If
some men's eyes be dry for the present (for many times the deepest wounds bleed
not soonest, nor the greatest sorrows weep soonest) yet my heart whispers to
me, their hearts are not dry. Nay, our sorrows for him will yet rise to a
higher tide, when we come hereafter more to want him; we now bury him in the
earth; we shall then bury him in our hearts. Time will tell them that loved him
without a false bottom, that in this I have now said, my tongue struck not on
both sides, I confess, I distrust not Gods power, nor has my hope forsaken
me, of any man's goodness, but yet mine eyes despair, almost ever to see a
man, with such a retinue of graces: so wise, so loving, so just, so religious,
so charitable, so hopeful in his death; even all these beams contracted into
one Glass. Per eandem lineam serram reciprocare. Tertull. de Corona militia,
cap. 3.
But I must not draw my Saw the same way again, as Tertullian's phrase is. I
will only sound mine hoarse Trumpet once again, and so end.

Farewell, a Luster to this City; Farewell, a glory to his Company; Farewell,
a beauty to the Merchants; Farewell, a credit to the place where he lived;
Farewell, an honourer of the Church; Farewell, a Patron of the Poor;
Farewell, the joy of all his Acquaintance; And if any man have a part in this
sorrow, I have not the shortest; Farewell, the noblest, louingest, and
faithfullest friend that ever poor man had; Farewell, once again thou second
Nehemiah; Farewell Text; Farewell Time. Finally, brethren fare you well. Be
ye good Nehemiah's, like him; underprop Gods service. And God Almighty
remember you; and never wipe out the good deeds which ye shall do to the
house of God, and the offices thereof; From this time forth and for evermore.
Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

