THE SAINTS SAFETY IN EVIL TIMES.

Delivered at St MARY'S in Cambridge the fifth of November, upon occasion of the
POVVDER-PLOT.

Whereunto is annexed a Passion-Sermon, Preached at MERCERS CHAPEL London upon
Good Friday.

As also the Happiness of enjoying Christ laid open at the Funeral of Mr
Sherland late Recorder of Northampton.

Together with the most virtuous life and Heavenly end of that Religious
GENTLEMAN.

BY R. SIBBES D. D. Master of Katherine-Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher at
Grayes-Inne LONDON.

John 3. 30. Let him increase, let me decrease. LONDON, Printed by M. FLESHER
for R. Dawlman at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1633*

THE SAINTS SAFETY IN EVIL TIMES.

SHOWING The nearenesse of God to such as own his cause, stand for his truth,
and walk closely with him in Well-doing.

Preached at S. MARY'S in Cambridge, November 5.

BY R. SIBBS D. D. Master of Katherine Hall, and Preacher of Grayes-Inne.

DAN. 3. 17. The God whom we serve, is able to deliver us out of your hands.
LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1634.

THE SAINTS SAFETY IN EVIL TIMES.
PSALM. 7. 14. Behold, he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief, and brought forth a lie.
Here be the words of David; the Title shows the occasion, on which was, the
malicious slander and cruel practices of Achit^phel or Shimei in the time of
Absoloms rebellion: The words express the conception, birth, carriage, and
miscarriage of a plot against David. In which you enemies God did. we all
should do: his enemies intention, Gods prevention, and our duty: his enemies
intention, be travelletb with iniquity, and conceives mischief; Gods
prevention, he brought forth a lie, our duty, Behold.

His enemies intention, or action is set out by a proportion to a bodily
conception: The Holy Ghost delights to present unto us the plots of wicked men
under the resemblance of a bodily conception and birth, by reason of the
Analogy between both: the mind has its conceptions as well as the body. The
seed of this conception was some wicked thought either raised up by the heart
it self, or cast in by Satan that envious man; not only wicked men, but their
devices are the seed of the Serpent; the understanding was the womb to
conceive, the will to consent; the conception was the hatching of a mischievous
plott; the quickening of it was the Resolution and taking it in hand; the
impregnation, growing big, and traveling of it, was the carriage of it the
due time: the birth it self was the execution expected, but yet miscarried and
still borne; they intended the destruction of David, but brought forth their
own ruin.

1. For the conception, observe aggravation of the sin, Voluntary.
he conceives. Quo minor necessitas peccandi, ^o majus pecc^tum.
1. He was not put upon it, or forced unto it, it was voluntary; the more
liberty we have not to sin, makes our sin the greater; Involuntarium minuit
de ratione peccati.
he did not this in passion, but in cold blood; the the less will, less
sin; here could be no plea, because nothing is more voluntary than plotting:
where the will sets the wit a work to devise, and the body to execute
mischief, it shows the spreading and largeness of sin in any man: for the
will being the desire of the whole man, carries the whole man with it.

Besides, when a man sins voluntarily, Voluntas appetitus totius sup^osit^.
there is less hope of amendment, because his will is not counsellable: if the
defect were in the u^derstanding of a man, then sound direction might set it
right; but where the will is set upon a thing, and is the only reason of it
self, (as when a man will because he wills) there counsel will not be heard:
for tell a roving person, that he is out of the way, he knows it well enough
already, and means not to take your direction, but tell an honest traveller,
that ignorantly mistakes his way, and he will thank you. So tell a Popish
Atheist that he is in an error, he heeds^i^nor, because he is a papist for
by-ends, not in judgment, and resolve^ to be so bring what reasons you can*
his hope being to rise that way: though the will follow some kind of
understanding, yet it is in the power of the will what the understanding shall
consult and determine of, and therefore unless the malice of the will be
first taken away by grace, it will always byas our judgments the wrong way.

Neither was this plot only voluntary but with delight, because conception:
Delightful.
b^rths are with more pain; Delight carries the whole strength and marrow of
the soul with it, much of the soul is where delight is.

spirtuall sin, the spirit of a man is the chief seat of Gods good Spirit,
Spiritual.
wherein he frames all holy devices and good desires: the spirit is either the
best or the worst part in a man; here Satan builds his neast, and forges all
his designs, his master pieces, his powder plots: the chief curse or blesing
of God is upon the spirits of men; If men be raised never so high in the world,
yet if they are given to a malicious and devilish spirit, they are under a most
heavy judgment, carrying Satan's stamp upon them; Diseases that seize upon
the spirits of men (as pestilentiall diseases, etc.) are more deadly than those
that seize upon the humors: Spiritual wickednesses are the most desper ate
wickednesses: sins are more judged by the mind than by the fact.

And as it was a spiritual sin, artificial, Artificial.
there was a great deal of art and cunning in it; and in evil things, the
more art, the worse: Art commends other things, Doli non sunt doli, ni
astucoles.
but it makes sin the more sinful. When men are mitty to work mischief and
wise to do evil, then they are evil in grain: It is best to be a bungler
at this occupation: Ingenous men carry their hatred open; but this plot was
spunne with so fine a thread, as could not easily be discerned.

Again, they were very diligent Diligenec in it.
for it was a curious webb; And as in weaving, head and band, eye and foot, all
go together, so here they mustered up all their wits. Judas is awake when
Peter sleeps

And which is worst of all, bratt of their own brain, Dwelling upon it.
that they traveled of it; it increases guilt, when men upon view and fight of
their plot, grow so far in love with it, that they long to be delivered of it;
the more the soul dwells upon and sinful plot, the more efragement there is
from God; because the happiness of the soul consists in cleaving to God the
fountain of all good; the more deliberation any man takes in sinning, the more
his soul is pleased with wickendnes. A heart long exercised in sin will
admit of no impression of grace; for the spirits are so absorpt with other
designs, that they are dry and dead to better things. Many thousands are in
hell at this day, for suffering their spirits to thove them too far into
sin; Many suck out the delight of sin before they act it, as Esau pleased
himself by thinking the day of mourning for his father would come, Genesis 27. 41.
wherein he might be revenged of his brother.

Yet this sin was not only transient likewise, it reached against the second
Table; and therefore against the principles of nature, and against society, out
of which God gathers a church; there was false witness and murder in this
finne; In this respect it is, that the sins of the second Table are greater
then the sins of the first, because they are against more clear light; A
natural conscience has a cleerer eye in these things, here is light upon
light; for both grace and nature condemn these sins. Yet for order in
sinning, the rise of all sin against man is our sinning against God first,
for none sin against men, but they sin against God in the first place,
whereupon the breach of the first commandment is the ground of the breach of
all the rest; for if God were set up in the heart in the first place, there
parents would be honored, and all kind of injury suppressed for conscience
sake: the Scripture gives this as a cause of the notorious courses of wicked
men, that God is not in all their thoughts, they forget there is a God of
vengeance, and a day of reckoning: the fool would needs enforce upon his
heart, that there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1.
and what follows, Corrupt they are, there is none does good, they eat up my
people as bread, etc. they make no more bones of devouring men and their
estates, than they make conscience of eating a piece of bread: What a wretched
condition has sin brought man unto, that the great God who fills heaven
and earth should yet have no place in the heart which he has especially made
for himself? The sun is not so clear as this truth, that God is, for all
things in the world are because God is; if he were not, nothing could be: It
is from him that wicked men have that strength they have to commit sin,
therefore sin proceeds from Atheism (especially these plotting sins) for
if God were more thought on, he would take off the soul from sinful
contrivings, and fix it upon himself.

But by whom and against whom, was this plotting? by children of the Church,
not uncircumcised Philistims: Opposition is bitterest betwixt those that are
nearest; as betwixt the flesh and the spirit in the same soul, between
hypocrites and true hearted Christians in the same womb of the Church:
Brethren they were, but strange children: Children by the Mothers side, all
bred in the same Church, but had not the same father; Children by the mothers
side only, are commonly persecutors; Popish spirits count it presumption to
know who is their father which shows them to be bastard children; The
greatest sins of all are committed within the church, because they are
committed against the greatest light; whereupon that great sin against the Holy
Ghost (Which like lonas his whale devourous all at once) is not committed out
of the Church at all. Oh beloved, how should we reverence the blessed truth of
God, and gracious motions of his Spirit? If it be sin to kill infants in the
womb, what is it to kill the breed of the blessed spirit in our hearts?

But against whom was this plot directed? even against David, a prophet, and a
King* a Kingly Prophet, a man after Gods own heart, though not according to
theirs: A sacred Person, and therefore inviolable, Touch not mine Anointed, and
d^^ my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. 15.
it was a prohibition from heaven: David was a man eminent in goodness; and
goodness invested in greatness is a fair mark for envy to shoot at; What
men for sloth care not to do, for weakness cannot, or for prid^ will not
imitate that they malign, sitting cursing* and sretting at the (...) o^ the
hill, a those which they see go above them, whose life, g^^^gth witness
against them* When goodness shines forth it presently meets with envy, until it
come to the height to be above envy, as the Sun at the highest has no
shadow: Envy hathan ill eye, it cannot look on goodness without grief, the
spirit that is in us lusts after envy: pursuing of goodness in men, and men
for goodness, is a sin of a deep dye; because whosoever hates a man for
goodness, hates goodness it self, and he that hates goodness it self hates
it most in the fountain,and so becomes a hater of God himself; and if Christ
were in such a man's power he should escape no better than his members do, for
Christ is joined either in love or hatred with his cause and children: he and
his have common friends and common enemies: Men think they have to deal with
silly men, but they shall one day find that they have to deal with the great
Lord of heaven and earth.

But what was the manner of carrying their design? this cruel plot was
cunningly carried, for they kill him in his good name first, and accuse him as
an enemy to the State, that so their slanders may make way for violence; Satan
is a liar first, and then a murderer, yea therefore a liar that he may be a
murderer the better; he is first a Serpent, then a liar and first a lion
couchant, then a lion rampant; he teaches his Scholars the same method:
Cruelty march^^h furiously, and under warrah^ with privilege, when it has
slander to counten^nce it. Tai^o men once in the opinion of the world and then
they lie open to any usage, it is not only (...) but glorious to oppose (...),
and thus Virtue comes to have the reward due to wickedness, and passes under
public hatred: the open cause and pretense is one, and the inward moving cause
another; which perhaps lies hid till the day of revelation of the secrets of
all flesh; as in a clock the wheels and the hand appear openly, but the
weights that move all are out of sight.

But what course took David herein? Innocence was his best apology, and when
that would not do, then patience; he saw God in the wrongs he suffered, God
bad Shimei, etc. but this invites more injuries, therefore by prayer he lays
upon his soul to God; David's prayer prevailed more in heaven, than Achitophels
policy could do on earth: Carnal men are pregnant and full of wiles and
fetches to secure themselves, but godly men have one only refuge and hiding
place, (yet that is a great one) namely to run to God by prayer, as to their
rock and tower of defense in their distresses. From all this that has been
said there arises these conclusions.

First, Obser. 1.
that even the best of Gods Saints are liable to be the subjects of the plots
of wicked men. 1. From an Antipathy between contrary seeds in them. 2. Because
God will not have love the world, therefore he suffers the world to hate them,
3. They are strangers here, strange entertainment from them that think
themselves at home: There has ever been from the beginning of the world a
continual conspiracy of Satan and his instruments against God and goodness;
Emperors and Kings became Christians, but Satan never yet became a Christian,
but has always bestirred himself to maintain the first division, and never
yet wanted a strong faction in the world.

Secondly, Observe. 2.
observe that it is the character of a man wicked in an high degree, to
contrive wickedness; reprobate sense, and it is reckoned among other vile
sins, that they are full of maliciousness, and inventers of ill, Prove. ^. ^4.
etc. A son of Beliall carries a froward heart and devises wickedness comes
from the wicked (as naturally and speedily) Prove. 4. 16.
as poison habit, which is a stamping of a second ill nature upon the former;
when as their hearts are exercised to do mischief. 4. It shows they are of
the devils Judas began to betray Christ, the devil entered into him; Lukc 22.
3.
he was the child of the devil in some degree before, but now the Devil took
stronger possession of him: his unnatural treason did in some sort change him
into the very form of the devil. When Simon Magus sought to turn away the
deputy from the faith, Saint Paul had no fitter terms for him than to style
him, Thou full of all subtlety and mischief, Act. 13. 10.
and child of the devil. And indeed there is no disposition so contrary to the
sweet spirit of God (which is a spirit of love and goodness) as this is.

Learn^ hence therefore, Use.
as you love God to abhor this hateful disposition: The serpent indeed was
wiser then all the beasts of the field, Genesis 3. 1.
yet when he became an instrument of mischief, he was cursed above all the
rest: Satan labors to serve his turn of the best wits: but what greater curse
can befall a man than to serve the basest creature in the basest service, and
that with our best abilities? Men of a devilish spirit, carry Gods curse under
zeal, yea they carry the devil in their brain, in all their works of
darkness: for alas, what should the subtlety of Foxes, and fiercenes of Lions,
and malice of Devils do in an heart dedicated to Christ? Such men work from a
double principle, the illness of their own disposition within, and Satan
going with the tide of that, whose chief labor is to make a prey of me^ of the
best parts, that by the^ he may either snare others, or else vex them that
have so much wit or grace as not to be catched by his baits: this is a course
contrary to humanity as we are men, contrary to ingenuity as we are civil men,
and contrary to Religion as we are Christian men; and plainly argues that such
persons are lead with another spirit than their own; even by the Prince that
rules in the air.

Our care and duty therefore should be to submit our spirits to the sweet
guidance and government of Gods good spirit, to be contented that every device
and imagination of our hearts, should be captivated to higher and better
reasons than our own.

We are not wise enough of our selves that our own wills and wit should be our
first movers: Every thing is perfitted by subjection to a superior: where
there should be a subordination to higher wisdom, there to withdraw our
understanding and wills, is mere rebellion: That which the Prophet speaks is
too true of many in these days Thy wisdom has made thee to rebel, Esaias 47.
10.
such are too wise to be saved.

We need not be ashamed to learn some things of our very enemies: Use
If they be so pragmaticall for evil, why should not we be as active for
good? I am sure we serve a better Master: true love is ^ull of inventions, it
will be devising of good things: so soon as ever our nature is changed, the
stream of the soul is turned another way, the bent of it is for God; Alas it
is a small commendation to be onley passively good, and it is a poor excuse to
be only passively ill. A good christian thinks it not enough to see good
done by others, but labors to have a hand in it himself; and he that suffers
evil to be done which he might have opposed and hindered, brings the guilt
thereof upon his own head: Curse you Meroz (says God) for not helping the
Lord against the mighty, Judges 5. 23.
etc. What shall we think then of those that help the mighty against the
Lord, that cast oil to kindle where they should cast water to quench, that
inflame the rage of great persons, when they should labor to reduce all to ^
moderation? Of this spirit was that Apostate which stirred up the Emperor to
kill man, woman, and child of the Protestants with all their kindred and
alliance, fearing left any living should revenge the others quarrel.

We see God has stooped so low as to commend his cause unto us, as if he
stood in need of our help, and usually what good he does to us is conveyed
by men like our selves; therefore we should labor to appear on his side, and
own his cause and children: In the house of God there be vessels of al kinds,
some are of more honorable use than others: some make the very times and places
good where they live, by an influence of good: others (as malignant Plannets)
threaten misery and desolation where ever they come; these are the calamities
of the times. Men may know whether they be vessels of mercy or no, by the use
they are put too; the basest of people are sit enough to be executioners; the
worst of men are good enough to be reds of Gods wrath; how much better is it to
be full of goodness as the Scripture speaks of Josiah, and Hezekiah, etc.
Indeed what is a man but his goodness? such men live desired, and dye lamented,
yea their very name is as the ointment of the Apothecary poured out, they leave
a sweet favor in the Church behind them.

Now I come to their miscarriage, they brought forth a lie, a lie in regard of
their expectation, their hopes deceiving them; but a just defeating in regard
of God; it was contrary to their desire, but agreeable to Gods justice; Neither
were they disappointed only so as to miss of what they intended, but they met
with that misery they intended not, yea even with that very misery which they
thought to bring upon David.

This defeating arises by five disappointed, danger, 3. they contrivers of
this danger themselves, 4. there was a p^^nall proportion, they fell into the
same danger which they plot^ed another, 5. they were a means of doing good to
him, whom they devised evil against; and raised him, whom they thought to pull
down: David sped the better for Shimeis: malice, and Achitophels policy. See
all these five likewise in the example of Haman and Mordecai, 1. H^man missed
of his plot; 2. he fell into danger, 3. he fell into the same danger which he
contrived himself, 4. he fell into the same danger which he contrived for
Mordecai, and 5. was the means of Mordecaies advancement. It had been enough
to have woven a spiders webb, which is done with a great deal of art, and yet
comes to nothing, but to hatch a Cockatrices egg that brings forth a viper
which stings to death, this is a double vexation; Yet thus God delights to
catch the wise in the imagination of their own hearts, Luke 1. 51.
and to pay them in their own coin. The wicked carry a lie in their right
hand, for they trust in man which is but a lie, and (being liars themselves
too) no marvel if their hopes prove deceitful, so that while they sow the
wind, Hosca 8. 7.
they reap the whirlewinde.

The reason of Gods dealing in this kind, 1. Reas.
is first in regard of himself; God will not lose the glory of any of his
Attributes, he will be known to be God only wise, and this he will let
appear then especially when wicked men think to overreach him.

tender care over his children; they are as the apple of his eye; and as they
are very near, so they are very dear to him; they cost him dear, they are
his Jewels, and he gave a Jewel of infinite price for them: he is interessed
in their quarrels, and they in h^s; If they be in any misery, Gods bowels
yearne for them, he is always awake and never slumbereth; as we see in the
parable, the Master of the house waked, while the servants slept. Gods eye is
upon them for good, he has them written in the palms of his hands, Christ
carryest them always in his breast: Christ who is the husband of his Church,
is Lord of heaven and earth, and has all power committed to him, and will rule
in the midst of his enemies: He is the only Monarch of the world, and makes
both all things and persons serviceable to his own end, and his Churches good;
he is higher then the highest: Satan the God of the world is but his (and his
Churches) slave: All things are the Churches to further its best good.

Another reason is the insolency whose fierceness turns at length to Gods
praise; Psalm. 9. 16.
for as he is a just Lord, so he will be known to be so by executing of
judgment; it shall appear, that there is a God that judges the earth.

Again, Gods children will no rest; when he seems to sleep they will awake
him with their prayers; They will not let him go without a blessing from him,
Genesis 32. 26.
they will prevail by importunity as the widow in the Gospel. Having to deal
with a just God, in a just cause, Luke 18. 5.
against common enemies, his as well as theirs; they bind him with his own
promises, and he is content to be bound, because he has bound himself first:
he will not lose that part of his title, Psalm. 65. 2.
whereby he is known to be a God hearing prayers.

But it will be objected, Object.
that wicked men do not only set themselves against the people of God, but
prevail over them, even to the scorn of the beholders: Tully could say, The
gods show how much they esteem of the Jewish nation, by suffering them so
often to be conquered. Has not Antichrist a long time prevailed? and was it
not foretold that the beast should prevail? where is then the bringing forth
of a lie?

I answer, Answ.
the enemies have power, but no more then is given them of God, (as Christ
answered Pilate) they prevail indeed, but it is for a time, a limited time, and
that a short one too, ten days, etc. and what is this to that vast time of
their torm^nt; the time will come when there shall be no more time for them to
persecu^e in.

Besides even when they do part only, not over the whole, they prevail over
persons it may be, not over the cause, that stands impregnable; they prevail
over men's lives perhaps, but not over their spirits, which is that they chiesty
aim at. A true Christian conquers when he is conquered: Act* 7.
Steven prevailed over his enemies when they seemed to prevail over him; God
put glory upon him, and a spirit of glory into him.

prevail in some place but then (as the sea) they lose in another: The more
they cut down Gods people (as Pharaoh did the Israelites) the more they
multiply; and the more they are kept strait, the more they spread and are
enlarged. God suffers the enemies of his truth to prevail in some passages, to
harden their hearts the more for destruction, as Pharaoh prevailed in
oppressing the Israelites, and He rod in killing John, etc. but yet lay the
beginning and the end together, and then we shall see they prevailed not; and
so far as they did prevail, it tended only to hasten their own ruin,
because the present success lifts up the heart. We see Antichrist prevailed
(but spiritually) only over those whose names were not written in the Lambs
book of life; Revel. 13. ^.
and outwardly over the Saints, for so it was prefixed, Revel. 18. that he
should make war with the Saints and overcome them, and this was objected as a
fiery dart against the Christians in those times, that therefore they might
think their cause naught, because they were so prevailed over: but they by
help of the spirit of God, understood so much of the Revelation as concerned
themselves; and used this as a weapon, confessing that they were the conquered
people of God, but yet the people of God still. But the chief stay and
satisfaction of the soul herein, is to look to the day of the righteous
judgment of God, when we shall see all promises performed, all theatnings
executed, and all enemies trodden for ever under Christ and his Churches feet.

This is a point of mavelous comfort, Use. 1.
when Israel can say, They have afflicted me from my youth but yet they have
not prevailed over me; Psalm. 129. 1.
the gates of hell may let themselves against the Church, but shall not
prevail: the Church is not ruled by man's counsel: We neither live nor dye at
man's appointment: Our lives are not in our own hands, or Satan's, or our
enemies, but in Gods: they can do no more, they shall do no less, then God
will, who is our life, and the length of our days. God may give way a while
that the thoughts of many may be reve^led, Luke 2. 35.
and that his glory may shine the more in raising his children and confounding
his enemies: but he will put a period in his due time, and that is the best
time: There is a day of lacobs trouble when his enemies say, This is Sion, J.
^. 30. 7.
whom none regards: but God sets bounds both to the time of his childrens
trouble, and to the malice of the wicked: Their rod shall not rest overlong
upon the back of the righteous: Psalm. 125. 3.
God will put a hook into the nostrils of these Leviathans, and draw them
which way he pleases.

Again we see here, Use 2.
that mischievous attempts, are successelesse in the end: for did ever any
harden themselves against God and prosper long? Let Cain speak, let Pharaoh,
Haman, Achitophel, Herod: Let the persecutors of the Church for the first 200.
years, let all that ever bore ill will toward Sion Speak, and they will
confess they did but kick against the pricks, and dash against the rocks: The
greatest torment of the damned Spirit is, that God turns all his plots, for
the good of those he hates most: He tempted man to desire to become like God
that so he might ^uine him, but God became man and so restored him; God serves
himself of this Arch politician; and all his instruments, they are but
executioners of Gods will while they rush against it: Joseph's brethren sold him
that they might not worship him, and that was the very means whereby they came
at length to worship him. God delights to take the oppressed parties part:
Wicked men cannot do Gods children a greater pleasure then to oppose the^, for
by this means, they help to adva^ce the^.

The ground of the miscarriage of wicked plots, Why wicked plots (...).
is, that Satan and his maintain a damned cause, and their plots are under a
curse; Every one that prays thy kingdom come, prays by consequence against
them as opposers of it, and how can the men and plots of so many curses but
miscarry, and prove but as the untimely fruit of a woman? they are like the
grass on the house top, which perks above the corn in the field, but yet no
man prays for a blessing upon it; when men come by a goodly corn field, every
one is ready to say, God bless this field, etc. Beloved it is a heavyer thing
then Atheistical spirits think of, to be under the curse of the Church; for
as God blesses out of Sion, so usually the heaviest curses come out of Sion:
Woe be to the Herod's and Iulians of the world, when the Church either directly,
or indirectly prays against them.

This is a ground of staying the souls of Gods people, in seeming confusion of
things: there is an harmony in all this discord: God is ^itting his people for
a better condition, even when they are at the worst; and is hardening and
preparing the wi^ked for confusion, even when they are at the best: The wicked
practice against the righteous, but God laugheth them to scorn: Psalm. 2. 4.
for he sees all their plottings, and his day is acomming: whilst they are
digging pits for others, there is a pit a digging, and a grave a making for
themselves: they have a measure to make up, and a treasure to fill, which at
length will be broken open. Which (me thinks) should take off them which are
set upon mischief, from pleasing themselves in their plots; Alas, they are but
plotting their own ruin, and building a Babell which will fall upon their
own heads. If there were any commendation in plotting, then that great plotter
of plotters, that great Engineir Satan, would go beyond us all, and take all
the credit from us? But let us not envy Satan and his in their glory, they had
need of something to comfort them* let them please themselves with their trade;
the day is coming wherein the Daughter of Sion shall laugh them to scorn;
there will be a time wherein it shall be said, Micah 4. 13.
Arise Sion, and thrash; And usually the delivery of Gods children, is joined
with the destruction of his enemies; Saul's death, and David's deliverance; the
Israelites deliverance, and Egyptians drowning: The Church and her opposites,
are like the scales of a balance, when one goes up the other goes down.

Hamans wife had learned this, that if her husband began once to fall before
the Jews, he should surely fall. Wicked men have an house, and they will be
sure to take it; and God has his house too, and will be as sure to take that.
The judgments of the wicked, are mercies to the Church; so says David, He
flew mighty Kings, Ogg King of Basan for his mercy endures for ever, Psalm,
136. 20.
etc.

God has but two things in the world, that he much regards, his Truth, and
his Church begotten by his truth; and shall we think that he will suffer long,
wretched men who turn that wit and power which they have from him, against his
truth and Church: No assuredly, but he will give them up by that very wit of
theirs, to work their own destruction; they shall serve their turn most,
whom they hate most. God sits in heaven and laughes them to scorn. Shall God
laugh, and we cry? They take counsel together on earth, but God has a
counsel in heaven that will overthrow all their counsels here. Mark the
bitter expressions in Scripture, Psalm. 2. 1.
Why do the heathen rage without fear or wit? Esaias 8.
Go to now (says God) gather a counsel, etc. Beloved it goes to the heart of
proud persons to be scorned, especially in the miscarriage of that which they
count their Masterpiece: they had rather be counted Devils then fools: Let us
work wisely (says Pharaoh,) Exodus 2. 10.
when he was never more fool: they usurp upon God and promise themselves
great matters for the time to come; whereas that is only Gods prerogative, and
they neither know what the womb of their counsels, nor what the womb of to
morrow may bring forth: that which they are big of may prove an abortive, or a
viper to consume the womb that bred it. Esaias 51. 11.
Go to now (says the Propher) all ye that kindle a fire, walk in the light
of your fire, but take this of me, you shall lie down in sorrow, etc. The
Scripture is full of such expostulations, and up braidings; Genesis 3. 22.
Man is become like one of us, says God. When men will have a way of their
own, and think themselves wiser than God, then it stands upon Gods honor to
out-wit them; Yet God is wise, says the Prophet; you think to go beyond God,
deceive not your selves, God is wise and you shall find him to be so; ^e has
a way to go beyond you: Do not many men spinne a fine thread and weave a
fair webb, when by their turnings, and devices, they turn themselves into
hell? Hosea 9. 2, 3.
Woe be to them that dig deep (faith the Prophet) and think to hide their
counsels from the Lord, God has an eye to see into the most secret and dark
conveyances of business: God has a key to open the closet of their hearts,
let them be never so close locked up: Oh that men would more fear this
al-seeing eye of God; and be wise for themselves, and not against themselves:
It is a miserable wisdom when men are wise to work their own ruin:
Beloved, when men have had all their plots, God has a plot still beyond them;
he takes them failing in something or other: their devices are like a curious
clock, if the least thing be out of frame all is marred; God suffers them to
spinne a ^ine thread a great while, and at length cuts the webb and there is an
end: And they may thank themselves for all this, for they carry a
justification of God in their own breasts; they perish because they will
perish: and this will be the torment of all torments to graceless persons,
that they polled destruction upon themselves. Malice blindes the understanding
in Satan and his instruments; for if their malice were not above their wit,
would they to gratify their ill affections knowingly rush into the displeasure
of God, and into such courses as will unavoidably bring their ruin? malice
drinks up the greatest part of its own poison. Prove. 5. 22.
His own iniquity shall take the wicked himself, (says Solomon) and he shall
be holden with the cords of his own sin.

This may be enlarged to all sinful courses; every sinner works a
deceitful work, and brings forth a lie. Austin says well, Every sin is a
lie; Men would be happy, yet they will not live so as they may be happy; what
more deceitful than this? It will be the complaint of every sinner at length,
that was Fvah's, The Serpent has deceived me. It was S. Paul's complaint, and
it will be the complaint of all sinful wretches at the last day; What has
pride profited us? Romans 7.
What can the favor of men (upon whom we bear our selves) do us good now?
Sin promises us contentment, continuance, secrecy, full satisfaction etc.
but does it make good this? Were ever any, when the beginning and ending was
laid together, established by wickedness? Take it from God himself, (we have
a commission to speak it) Say, it shall not go well with the wicked, though
they escape an hundred times, Eccles. 8. 12.
yet it is but a reprivall for some further service which God has to do by
them. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Galat. 6. 7.
When we can be more subtle than the Devil, or more strong than God, we may
think to thrive by sin; Can we think God will alter the course of divine
justice for us? Had we not better believe this than find it so hereafter?
Beloved, hell is for those to feel, that will not believe; Certain it is,
that those who will sin notwithstanding Gods justice, shall be severely
punished notwithstanding his mercy. God is not more peremptory in any one thing
than in this; If any man bless himself in an ill way, De^t. 29. 19, 20.
my wrath shall smoke against him: therefore it is a good prayer, Lord give
me not over to lying, (that is) not to trust in that which will lie and
deceive me.

This is the unhappiness of us Ministers; all other professions are believed
when they discover danger, but who believes our report? Esaias 53. 1.
We are men's enemies, because we tell them the truth: Galat. 4. 16.
We labor to take away the sweet morsells from men,(their Herodians) and to
divide betwixt men and their sins, which they love better than their souls; No
creature but man loves that which will be its own bane; Only wretched man
seek os happiness in the way to misery, and heaven in the way to hell. I
beseech you therefore, as you would not be deceived (as indeed who would) take
heed of the deceitful works of darkness, Satan that tempts us, is but a
lying spirit, 1 King, 2^. 2^.
(which he is not ashamed to confess) and sin is like unto him; What got
Ahab by his vineyard? Judas by his thirty pieces of silver? Matt. 27.
What god Haman (and so of the rest) by their sins at the last? Men are
usually ashamed of an ill bargain, because the very thought thereof, upbraids
them with weakness and folly. What ever we get by sin for the present, it
will prove the worst bargain that ever we made; Oh therefore let us use our
wits and parts to better purpose, if we will needs be plotting, let us plot
for eternity, that is worth the plotting for: Let us plot how to avoid Satan's
plot; Our time is short, Opportunity (the flower of time) shorter: Our talents
are many, our accounts strict our Judge unpartiall, Let us be sowing to the
spirit; Let us labor to be like our judge, who went about doing his Fathers
work, and came to destroy the works of the Devil; Oh beloved, shall we build
up that which Christ came to destroy? All his miracles tended to goods; he
wrought the salvation of those that wrought his destruction: he shed his blood
for those that shed his blood;Satan is all for mischief, and rather than he
will not do hurt, he is content to be set about drowning of swine: Mark 5. 14.
And such are all those that are led with his spirit, men witty to destroy, and
acute to malice others, who take a great deal of pains to go to hell and
carry others with them: Those that are skillful in the story of nature write of
the Scorpion, that he whets his tail often upon stones that so it may be
sharp and ready for a mischief; some crooked wits there are which make it
their exercise to vex the quiet of the land; it is as natural to them, as
poison to a Scorpion.

But our happiness is how to be like the Idea, the pattern of all grace and
the glory of our nature, by whom we hope to be saved: Psalm. 1.
Our happiness is to bring forth fruit and our own fruit in due season; to
have opportunity, ability, and a heart to do good; how comfortable is death
when it takes men so doing? The time will be ere long, when it will comfort us
above all things in the world besides, that we have been honored to be
instruments of doing good, and stood in the gappe to hinder evil: Beloved, we
serve a good master, we shall not lose a good word for a good cause, there is a
book of remembrance for every good word and work we do; Malach. 3. 16.
When wicked men have beaten their brains, spent their spirits, and wasted
their strength, what becomes of them at length? A conscience often wounded will
receive no comfort, but take Gods part against it self. When the other powers
are wearied, then Conscience comes and does its office; then the eyes of the
soul are opened to see what it would not see before; then sin that lay at
the door, (at the going out of this life) flies in our faces: pleasure and
profit for which wicked men project and contrive so much, comes all to nothing;
but sin it self, and the punishment of it, abides for ever; Men (like Popes)
will dispense with themselves, and conceit a latitude and breadth in their
courses, that they may do so and so, and yet do well at last; but who tells
them this? Is it not a spirit of illusion? Indeed punishment is often deferred,
it comes not like thunder and lightning all at once, yet as sure as God is
true, sin will be bitterness in the end; when the honey is gone, the sting
will remain.

To conclude this point, when we are tempted to any hurtful design, let us
look upon Christ and that great project for our redemption undertaken by him,
and reason thus with our selves; Has he plotted and wrought my salvation, and
shall I plot against him in his members?

I beseech you stir up your hearts to conceive and bring forth good purposes;
Satan is an enemy to all strong resolutions and masculine conceptions
indeavoring to kill them in the very birth. Alas, how many good thoughts are
conceived whilst the word is hearing, which yet prove abortive and stick in
the birth? How few actions come to their due ripeness and perfection? I am
sure our encouragements to good, are far more, than our encouragements to
evil; we serve a better master, and for better wages; they may prosper for a
time but nothing is more wretched than the happiness of wicked men; it first
hardens them, Prove. 1. 32.
and then destroys them.

Our only way is, 1. to get the true vine, then we shall take and bear fruit
presently, and draw and suck out of him the same disposition.

2. And then lay up good principles end of our life, and see that all the
particular passages of our life tend to that: It is an arguement of a narrow
heart to bewise in some particular business, for some particular end, and yet
to be careless in the maine; Other creatures are carried by a particular
instinct to some particular thing; A spider is witty to catch flies, a bird to
build nests, etc. As man has larger parts, so he should have larger aims

That which we should especially labor for is, 1. to be good in our selves,
and 2. to do all the good we can to others, even as God our father is good,
and does good; and the further our good extends, the more we resemble our
Father. Such as we are, such are our thoughts, such are our devices; A good man
will devise of liberal things etc. Every vermin can do mischief, we see some
are never in their element, but when they are plotting or working mischief, as
if they were borne for no other end but to exercise the graces of men better
than themselves. It is a poor commendation to be counted a cunning person for
selfe-ends: alas the heart of man (which is deceitful above measure) has
abundance of turnings and windings in it, J^r. 17. 9.
and can suggest trick enough to circumvent the best of us.

I come in the third place to our duty, which is to Behold; the ordinary beakon
kindled to discover some extraordinary thing.

But what is here to be beheld? Quest.


Behold the subtlety, malice, Answ.
and restless endeavor of the enemies of goodness; Is it not a matter with
grief to be beheld that one member should tear another? that one professing
the same religion, should study to supplant and devour another? behold
likewise their bootlesse enterprise, they bring forth a lie.

But especially behold the mercy of God to his children, his wisdom in
discovering, his justice in confounding the mischievous practices of their
enemies, making them the workers of their own ruin.

The things which especially deserve our beholding are either, excellent, and
so are all Gods works in their reason, yea Justice it self: or, 2. Things
rare, as comets and eclipses: or else, Great things, as stars of the first
magnitude etc.

Even such and much more is Gods mercy to his children, and justice against his
enemies; Psalm. 126. 2.
Behold what great things he has done for them: Shall the heathen say so, and
shall not Israel much more? Beloved, we ought to seek out Gods works, and
shall we not take notice of them when they are offered to our view? this is
especially the duty of the Saints of God, All thy works praise thee, and thy
Saints bless thee, says David; Psalm. 145. 10.
The works of God praise him by our mouths and by our tongues; Were it not for
some few, that by a more divine light and spiritual eye see more of God than
others do, what glory should God have in the world? God has not brought us on
the stage of this world to be mere gazers, but to extract something out for
our own use, and to give him the glory of his excellencies. But we are too
wise to admire any thing; it is a matter too mean for our parts to take notice
of God, and his works: you have some that can see nothing in the works of God
worth the admiring, and yet they will have men's persons in admiration, in hope
of some advantage by them; We are apt to admire any outward excellency, like
the disciples (before the Holy Ghost came upon them) who stood admiring of the
goodly stones of the temple; When our minds are thus taken up, it were good,
Mark 13. 1.
if we heard Christ speaking to us as he did to them, Are these the things you
wonder at?

Beloved, it is our duty to observe special occurrences, (not out of any
Athenian curiosity, but) to begin our employment in heaven, now whilst we are
upon earth; to take occasion from thence to bless God; We should compare the
ru^e, and the event together, and observe what truth or attribute God makes
good by that which is so fallen out; see how God commenteth upon himself by
his own actions: and from observation of particulars, it is good to rise to
generals, as Deborah from the destruction of one enemy; to the destruction of
all; So let all thy enemies perish, O Lord: Judges 5. 31.
This was Moses song, and Hannah's, and the Virgin Mary's, etc. they mounted
from a consideration of their own particular, and had their thoughts enlarged
with the mercy and instice of God to others, in succeeding generations.

And among all Gods works we should more take notice of his mercy to the
Church than of his justice toward his exemies; because his justice is (as it
were) a foil to give luster to his mercy; God delights more in mercy (as
being his proper work issuing from his own bowels) than in works of justice
that are occasioned by the malice of men God is wonderful in his Saints, and
more in saving them, than in destroying his enemies: Considering therefore that
mercy bears the chief office in the great works of God, we ought to dwell
most in consideration thereof; and feed our thoughts more with the meditation
of his saving works to his Church than of the ruin of his enemies.

We pray hallowed be thy name; unless we practice what we pray for, we mock
God and deceive our own souls: Let not God lose any glory by us; Let not us
lose such a pledge of future happiness, as glorifying God is; Oh that men
would praise the Lord, says David, who (fearing lest God should lose any glory
from his creatures) stirs up Angels and all creatures to bless the Lord:
Psalm. 148. 2, 3
God takes it very unkindly when we do not observe (especially the excellent
pieces) of) his workmanship: A fool considers not this, etc.

The Lord has done mavelous things for his Church of late whereof we should
rejoice. We should do as Moses did when he came out of the sea; and as the
Church (in resemblance of that deliverance from Egypt) did; who sang the song
of Moses being delivered from their spiritual Pharaoh.

We see now the vial poured upon the Sunn^, we see the Prophecies against
Antichrists kingdom in fulfilling, God has vouchsafed to strengthen our says
by experience, we have something to lay hold on, which may encourage us to
expect more from God, and to look for those Halleluj^^ to be sung from all
creatures in heaven and earth, upon the utter confusion of Antichrist; which
whosoever labors to hinder any kind of way, hinders the glory of God, and the
joy of his people.

It is good to observe how the Scripture sets out the enemies of God Church, in
a double representation. 1. as terrible, terming them Lions, Bulls, etc. 2. as
Base, comparing them to chasse and dust before the wind, (...)
dung, etc. that when we see them in their present ruff and jollity, we
should stay our selves with consideration of their future besenesse. Faith
looks on things as present, because it looks upon them in the word of I^hovah
who will give a being to all his promises and threatenings; and therefore faith
is called the subsistence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1.
because it gives a kind of being of things to the mind and affections of
man, as if they were present, therefore the believing of the final deliverance
of Gods people, and the ruin of his enemies, cannot but raise up the souls of
good men to a mavelous degree of joy and thankfulness to God: Who would not
fear to cleave to Antichrist if they did but present to themselves by faith
the certain ruin of that state, which the Scripture sets down (in a
Prophetical manner) as a thing already present, Revel. 16. 2.
Babylon is fallen, etc.

But to come to a more particular application, suitable to the present time; the
occasion and the text are as parallel as may be: Our gun-powder-plotters were
as pregnant in mischief as ever these. For conception; It could not but come
from beneath the Vault; there was the very qnintessence of devillishnesse in
it; Satan emptyed all his bowels (as it were) in this project. If all the
devils in hell were set a work to devise the like they could hardly do it.
There was scarce from the begginning of the world, a design more prodigious
and unmercifull, of greater depth and extent of villainy: Were not this
Anniversary Commemoration of it, posterity would hardly believe that a plot so
hollish could be hatched in the hearts of men, of English men, of Catholic
men, as they would be termed, of men so borne withal notwithstanding their
dangerous corresponcy with foreign enemies, and but half subject, their
better parts (their spirits) being subject to another visible head, who can
untye the bond of Allegiance at his pleasure.

Neither did they only conceive this hellish wickedness, but were big of
it, and kept it close many months, and pleased themselves in the same as
monstrous and misshapen as it was; there wanted neither wit, nor counsel, nor
combination, nor secret encouragement to effect it.

Nay it was an holy villainy, sealed with oaths, sacrament, and all the bonds
of secrecy that could be invented; Oh horrible profanation, to set Gods seal
to Satan's plot; But God who delights to confound all presumptuous attempts,
discovered it when it should have come to the birth, and so it proved but the
untimely fruit of a woman.

They brought forth a lie, for whereas they intended to have blown up King,
and Kingdom, Churchmen, and Church, Statesmen, yea the whole State it self,
all at once, without any warning to prepare themselves for another world, they
not only missed of this, but brought that ruin upon themselves which they
intended to others; whereas they thought for ever to have established their
(Religion, shall I call it, or Idolatry, or) superstition, they have by this
means made it more odious than ever before; As the Northern Gentleman could
say, that though he was not able to dispute, yet he had two arguments against
Popery, equivocation and the Gun-powder-treason; But they turn it off easily
(as they think,) Alas it was but the plot of a company of unfortunate
gentlemen; It was our happiness that they were unfortunate; whereas if it had
succeeded well, they would have had other terms for it; successful villainy
goes for virtue.

Well, the net is broken, and we are delivered; God thought of us when we
thought not of him, and awaked for us when we were asleep (here is a place for
behold) for what a miserable face of things would there have been if their plot
had succeeded?

Now what return shall we make for all this? they conceived mischief, let us
conceive praise, and travel of holy resolutions to give up our selves to God,
who has given us our King, our State, yea our selves to our selves; He has
given us our lives more than once every one of us in particular, especially in
the last heavy visitation; but had it not been better for many in regard; of
their own particular, to have been swept away in that deluge, than to live
longer to treasure up further wrath to themselves: Many are not content to go
to hell alone, but they will draw as many others as they can into their
fellowship here, and torment hereafter: Oh beloved, the preservation of such,
is but a reservation to further judgment: What good got the King of Sodom by
being delivered once, Genesis 19.
and then after to be consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven? Exodus 14.
What got Pharaoh by being delivered from ten plagues, and then to perish in
the Sea? What are all our remporall deliverances, if we live still in sin, go
on in sin, die in our sins, and so perish eternally? Blessings, without
return of due thanks, increase the guilt of sin, and the increase of guilt
causes the increase of judgments.

The most proper homogeniall way of thanks, is to stir up our selves to a
greater harred of that Religion: they would saine free it, as if it were the
fault of some persons only, but alas what can be else distilled from those
dangerous points they hold, (as that, the Pope has te^porall jurisdiction over
Princes, that he may excommunicate them; that he may (out of fullness of power)
dispense with the oath of allegiance; that he cannot err; that subjection to
him is a point of absolute necessity to salvation, etc. What, I say, can be
distilled from these opinions, but treason in a people that live under a Prince
of a contrary Religion? the dispositions of many of them are better then their
positions.

However perhaps the present Pope may be more moderate and neuter all, yet this
is the infusion of their religion where ever it prevails, and these tenants
shall be acted and in full force when they please, and it will please them
when it shall be for the advantage of the Catholic cause; This was Bellarmines
tenent, If the Pope should err in commanding vice or forbidding virtue, the
Church is bound to believe vice to be good, and virtue to be ill, or else it
should sin against conscience; for it is bound to believe what he commands:
thus they make the judgment of man the rule of truth and falsehood, good, and
evil; Whereas truth is truth, and that which is false is false, whether men
think so or no; there is an intrinsicall evil in evil which the judgment of
any man cannot take away; and the truth and goodness of things, stands upon
eternal grounds, not flexible or alterable by the will of any creature;
otherwise it were all one as to think the course of the Sun should be guided
by a dyall; Is there any hope of their coming to us, when they had rather have
the rules of nature and Religion (which are as unmovable as a mountain of
brass) to vary, than be thought to confess that the Pope may err? which
indeed is the grand and leading error of all. But how should we expect our
words should prevail, when as the great works of God prevail not at all with
them? The efficacy of error is so strong in many, that though they should see
the vial powered out upon the throne of the beast, Revel. 16.
yet will they not repent.

For our selves, we cannot better show our thankfulness for this deliverance
by means whereof we enjoy our lives and our Religion, than to preserve that
truth (that is grounded upon the foundation of truth) which has been derived
unto us from those that went before who held out the same truth; that has
been sealed by the blood of so many Martyrs, that has been established by
the Authority of gracious Princes, that God has given witness to by so many
deliverances, that concurres with the confessions of all Reformed Churches,
that God has blessed with a constant tenor of peace, even to the rejoicing of
all Neighbor Churches, to the envy of our enemies, and to the admiration of
all, etc.

We see all countries round about us in a confusion, and we (as it were the
three young men in the fiery furnace) safe, Daniel 3.
without so much as smoke or smell of fire; as if we were the only people of
Gods delight; Now what is that which God cares most for amongst us but his
truth? which if we suffer (as much as in us lies) to take any detriment, God
may justly make us the spectacles of his wrath to others, as others have been
to us: Beloved, God has a cause and a people in the world, which he esteems
more than all the world besides let us therefore own Gods cause and people:
his side one day will prove the better side.

I beseech you consider, what hurt have we ever had by the reformation of
Religion? has it come naked unto us? has it not been attended with peace and
prosperity? has God been a barren wilderness to us? Jerem. 2. 31.
has not God been a wall of fire about us? which if he had not been, it is
not the water that compasses our Island could have kept us: So long as we
keep Christ's truth, Christ will keep us: Otherwise (trust to it) Christ and
his truth will leave us, No nation under heaven has so much cause to say
Behold, as we have; Men are ready upon all occasions to be sensible of civil
grievances, (as in Solomon's time gold was as stones in the street) but we
should be sensible of the spiritual favors we enjoy; If we look upon other
kingdoms abroad, what nation under heaven has the like cause to bless God
for Religion, for Prince, for peace, etc. as we have? Beloved, we cannot better
deserve of our King, Church, and State, than to give up our lives to God who
has thus blessed us; The greatest enemies of a Church and State, are those
that provoke the highest Majesty of heaven, by obstinate courses against the
light that shines in their own hearts. It is seriously to be considered what
Samuel says to the people; and therefore, if not for love of our selves, yet
for the love of our King, Religion, and State, let us take heed of provoking
courses, and take heed of tyring the patience of God overlong; To conclude
all, it is prayer that gets, but thankfulness witnessed by obedience that
keeps blessings; and what can our thoughts devise, our tongues utter, or our
lives express better than the praise of our good God that even loadeth us with
his benefits? that so God may delight still to show himself unto us, in the
ways of his mercy, and think thoughts of love toward us, and dwell amongst us
to the worlds end.

FINIS.
THE CHVRCHES VISITATION.

DISCOVERING The many difficulties and trials of Gods Saints on earth:

Showing wherein the fountain of their happiness consists:

Arming Christians how to do, and suffer for CHRIST;

And directing them how to commit themselves, and all their ways to God in
holiness here, and happiness hereafter.

Preached in sundry Sermons at GrayesInne, LONDON,

BY R. S. D. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1634.

THE SAINTS SAFETY IN EVIL TIMES: Manifested by S. Paul from his experience of
Gods goodness in greatest distresses, out of,
2 TIMOTHY 4. 17, 18. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me,
that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gent les might
hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion.

And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me
unto his heavenly kingdom; to whom be glory for ever and ever; Amen.


BLessed Saint Paul, being now an old man, and ready to sacrifice his dearest
blood, for the sealing of that truth, which he had carefully taught; sets
down in this Chapter, what diverse entertainment he found both from God and
Man in the preaching of it. As for men he found they dealt most unfaithfully
with him, when he stood most in need of comfort from them. Demas (a man of
great note) in the end forsook him: Alexander the Copper smith (thus it
pleases God torry his dearest ones with base oppositions of worthless persons)
did him most mischief: Weaker Christians forsook him, etc. But mark the
wisdom of Gods Spirit in the blessed Apostle, in regard of his different
carriage toward these persons. Demas, because his fault was greater, by reason
of the eminency of his Profession: him he brands to all posterity, for looking
back to Sodom, and to the world, after he had put his hand to the Plough:
Alexanders opposing, because it sprung from extremity of malice toward the
profession of godliness, him he curses: The Lord reward him, etc. Weaker
Christians who failed him, from want of some measure of spirit and courage,
tetaining still a hidden love to the cause of Christ; their names he conceales,
with prayer, that God would not lay their sin to their charge. But whilst
Paul lived in this cold comfort on Earth, see what large encouragement had he
from Heaven? Though all forsook me, yet (says he) God did not for sake me,
but stood by me, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. And the Lord
will deliver me, etc.

In the words, we have (in Paul's example) an expressing of that general
Truth, set down by himself, Romans 5. 3. And not only so, but we glory in
tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works patience. and patience
experience: and experience hope, etc. So here, affliction breeds experience of
Gods mercy in our deliverance: and experience breeds hope of deliverance for
the time to come: and both his Experience and Hope stirs him up to glorify
God, who was his deliverer: so that here offer unto us to be unsolded, 1. Paul's
experience of Gods loving care of him, in his deliverance past. 2. His assured
hope, built upon his experience, for the time to come: set down in two
Branches: 1. The Lord will deliver me from every evil work. 2. He will
preserve me to his heavenly kingdom.
3. The issue he makes of both: as they flow from Gods grace, so he ascribes
him the glory of both: [To whom be glory for ever and ever: Amen.]


For the first; I find that most both Ancient and Modern writers, by Lion,
understand Ner^, that cruel Tyrant, thirsty of blood; especially of
Christians: Some also understand it to be a provetbiall speech; to express
extremity of danger; both which are true: but if we take the words in the
just breadth of the Apostles intent; we may by Lion, understand the whole united
company of his crull enemies; as David in many places has the like: and by the
mouth of the Lion, the present danger he was in, by reason of their cruel
malice. Whence observe,


For the second; his hope built upon his experience; both Branches thereof has
its limitation and extent: The Lord shall deliver me; not from evil suffering,
but from evil works: this he could boldly build on: he could not conjecture,
what he should suffer; because that was in the power of others: but he could
build upon this, what God would give him grace to do: and so he limits his
considence; He will deliver me from evil works, and he will preserve me; from
what? from danger? from death? no, here is the limitation: He will preserve me
to his heavenly Kingdom. He will not preserve me from death; (and yet he will
do that whilst I can do his service by my life:) but sure I am, he will
preserve me beyond death, to a state of security and happiness: He will
preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom.

And then for the third: after his experience, confidence, and hope well built;
(as his fashion is) when his heart was once warmed; he breaks our into
thanksgiving, in the consideration of Gods favors past, and to come: his
tongue is large thereupon, and God has the fruit of it: To whom be glory for
ever: and lastly, he seals up all with the word, Amen

[ I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, etc.] Beloved, by nature we
are all Lions and nothing will alter us, save the effectual knowledge of
Christ: Education may civilize, but not subdue: A Sound knowledge of Gods
Truth, has a changing power: for (when the spirit becomes tender, and when the
heart, which lies in a cursed estate, under and in danger of the wrath of a
just God, whose eye cannot spare iniquity unrepented of, is cited and
affrighted effectually by the spirit of bondage) it will cast down, and pull
sorrow from the strongst spirit; making it melting and tender. Again, in this
estate when the soul has felt favor shining upon it; when the eye is opened,
to see the high prerogatives and exceeding riches of Christ; when we find
ourselves that we are delivered from the Lions mouth; we cannot but show that
pity to others, which we felt from God our selves. Paul thirsts as eagerly
after the conversion of others now, Acts 9. 22.
as ever he did for their blood before. The Iaylor also, a man by nature,
custom, and calling, Acts 16. 33.
hardened in the practice of cruelty; yet after he had felt the power of Gods
blessed truth, showed forth those bowels of pity, he felt from Christ, which
were shut before.

Let us then be thankful, that God has changed us from being Lions: and with
meekness submit our selves unto Gods ordinances: desiring him to write his
Law, not only in our understandings, but in our very hearts and bowels; that
we may not only know, that we should walk harmless and full of good; Jer.
31. 33.
but be so indeed: resembling him by whom we hope to be saved, in a right
serviceable plyablenesse to all duties of love.

And because our impersect measure of mortification in this life, hinders us
from a full content in one another communion; let this make us the more
willing to be translated to Gods holy Mount, where, being purged from all such
lusts, as hinder our peace and love, we shall fully enjoy one another, without
the least falsenesse or distrust: then shall we see total accomplishment of
these promises, which are but in part fulfilled in this life.

That God suffers his children to fall into the mouth of Lions, Obser. 1.
or into some danger proportionable, where in they shall see no help from him
is a truth clear as the Sun: The History of the Church in all ages shows as
much: Was not Christ in the mouth of the Lion, Mat. 2. 13.
so soon as borne, when Her^d sought to kill him? Did not satan, and all the
spiritual powers of Hell daily come about him, like ramping and roaring Lions?
And has it not been thus with Gods Church from Abel to this present, as
appears by the children of Israel in Egypt, at the redsea, and in their
journey to Canaan, being environed round about with cruel enemies, and dangers
on every side, like Daniel in the midst of Lions. Psalm. 44. 9.
So far God gave them up to the power of their enemies, that the wisest of
the Heathen judged them a forlorn people, hateful to God and men. For
particular instances; see Job and David, so near, as there was but a step
between them and death.

Besides God often awakens the consciences of his children and exercises them
with spiritual conflicts; their sins, as so many Lions, stand up against them,
ready to tear their souls: Nay, rather then those that belong to God shall
want that, which will drive them unto him; God himself will be a Lion unto
them, as unto Ephraim, Hosea 5. 14. which made David pray, Psalm. 6. 1.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy het
displeasure. Of all the troubles which a child of God undergoeth in his way to
heaven, these bring him lowest; when the body is vexed and spirit troubled, it
is much: but when God ^rownes, when neither Heaven nor Earth yields comfort to
a distressed soul, Psalm. 6. 1.
no evil in the world is like to this; Imagine the horror and straits of such
a soul (when all things seem against it, and it self against it self) as
near to the pains of the very damned in hell.

The reasons of this dispensation of God are, 1. because we arm of flesh; that
unless God drives us from these holds (by casting us into a perplexed estate)
we shall never know what it is to live by faith in God alone, when all other
props are pulled away; and when the stream of things seem cross unto us. That
God therefore may train us up to live the spiritual life of the just, (which
is by faith in him,) when all else fail; he suffers us to fall into the
Lions mouth; that so our prayers which are the flame of faith, may be more
ardent and peircing, rather cries than words: Why cryest thou unto me, Exodus
14. 15.
faith God to Moses? when was this? even when he knew not what way to turn
him. It was out of the depths that David cried most earnestly unto God: Psalm.
130. 1.
and Christ in the days of his flesh cried unto God with strong cries and
tears in a deep distress, Heb. 5. 7.
and was also heard in that which he feared: strong troubles force from the
afflicted strong cries: even experience shows, in prosperity, and a full
estate, how faint and cold the prayers and desires of men are.

Peter: Mat. 26. 33.
others underprize themselves and of the gifts and graces of Gods spirit in
them, thinking that they want Faith, Patience, Love, and. who yet, when God
calls the^ out to the cross, shine forth in the eyes of others in the
example of a meek and faithful subjection. The wisdom of God therefore
judges it meet that there should be times of sifting; that both the Church
and our selves may know, what good or ill is in us: what soundness or
looseness remains in our hearts. When therefore we are wanting in fanning our
selves; God in love takes the fan into his hand.

It is likewife behoovefull, that false Brethren may be discovered: Afflictions
are well called trials; because then it is known what metal men are made of:
whether Pure of Reprobate silver: think it not strange then, when our estate
seems desperate: it is but with us after the manner of Gods dearest ones; why
should we have a severed condition from them? Remember this, that God, as he
suffers his children to fall into the Lions mouth, so he delivers them out: and
that he never leaves his (especially in extremity) but in fit case of soul,
to receive the greatest comfort, and to render him the greatest glory, for then
it is known to be Gods work; our extremity is his opportunity: God will
especially show himself at such a time, and make it appear that the Church
stands not by man's strength: When Christians are at a loss, and know not which
way to turn themselves, then is God nearest hand and cares most for them.

And this the Lord does both for the greater shame of those, that contrive
mischief; when they make themselves s^rest to bring their wicked plots and
purposes to pass, then their designs are most frustrated.

As also, to draw on others, not yet called: that they seeing Gods immediate
care over his Church and children, may come in and obtain like protection and
deliverance.

The manner how God delivers his children out of the Lions mouth, Diverse
Waye^ ho^ God delivers from the Lions mouth.
is diverse: 1. By suspending their malice for the time: as in Noah's Arc, the
fierceness of the wild creatures was stopped by Divine Power, from preying upon
the tamer: so the Lions mouths were stopped from preying upon Daniel Daniel 6.
22.
in the Lions Den.

2. By stirring up one Lion against as the Persians against the Baby lonians:
Grecians against Persians: Romancs against the Grecians: and the other
barbarous nations, as the Goths and Vandals, against them: so whilst Lions
spit their fury one upon another, the Sheep are quiet. Thus the Turk, and
other enemies have kept Popish Princes from raging, and tyrannizing over the
Church to the height of their malice.

3. By casting something unto these Lions, to divert them another way from
their intended prey; as when a man is in danger, a Dog is cast unto the Lion:
Thus when Saul was ready to devour David, 2 Samuel 23. 27.
the philistines made a breach upon him, invaded the Land, and turned his fury
another way.

By altering and changing Lions to be Lambs: as when Paul was set upon havoc
and mischief, God, by changing his heart, gave the Churches cause to glorify
God for him; of whom before they were most afraid.

5. God shows himself a Lion by breaking their teeth and Jaw-bones, striking
them with sudden and fearful judgment; Acts 12. 23.
as Herod and the persecuting Emperors: and as in 88, when God with his four
winds fought for us against the enemies of his truth,

6. By making them Lions to witness Achit^phel, Saul, and other such like
enemies of Gods children.

7. Again, God makes them by putting into their hearts some conceit for the
time, which inclines them to favor, as in Nehemiah, Nehem. 2. 8.
God put it into the Kings heart to favor his people: Genesis 33. 4.
Esau was not changed, only God for the time changed his affections to favor
Jacob so God puts it into the hearts of many, (groundedly naught) to favor the
best persons.

God makes his own children sometimes Lions to their Adversaries: for the
Image of God shining in his children, has a secret Majesty in it, and strikes
an awe upon wicked men: so Pharaoh at length could not endure to see Moses and
Aaron any more: Exodus 10. 28.
and Foelix trembled whilst Paul disputed of temperance and judgment. Acts 24.
25.


Thus we see the Lord knows how to deliver his, Use of instruction and
consolation.
and can if he will; and will do it in their extremities, when is most ^or his
glory, his peoples comfort, and confusion of his own and their enemies: never
despair therefore of thy self, or the Church of God: it shall rather than
fail breed in the Lions den: Paul salutes the Philippians from the Church in
Caesar's house, a place (in appearance) little fitter for a Church, than Philip.
4. 22.
hell it self: what though things seem past recovery abroad? when they are at
the worst, then are they nearest mending. When the task of brick was doubled
by Pharaoh upon Israel; Exodus 5. 11.
then came Moses to work out their deliverance: when the Jews heard news of
their liberty to return from captivity, Psalm. 126. 1
they were as those that dreamed; they could not suddenly believe it, it seemed
so strange a thing in that their hopeless estate. Learn woe then, from this
dealing of God with his people, in the midst of all extremities to allege unto
God the extremity we are in: Help Lord, for vain is the help of man: is a
prevailing argument. Allege the pride of enemies; the presumption of those
that fear not God, etc. and that he only can give issue from death when he
will: And as God brings us to heaven by contraries, so let us in one contrary
believe another; hope against hope; In misery, look for mercy: in death for
life: in guiltiness for forgiveness. Learn to wrestle with God, when he
seems thy enemy; oppose unto God his former dealings, his nature, his
Promise, etc. Job had learned this, Job 13. 15.
Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Be of Jacobs resolution, Genesis 32
26.
I will not leave hold of thee, until I get a blessing: whatsoever we are
stripped of, let us never forsake our own mercy. Jonah. 2. 8
This one word, I despair; takes a ^ay God, and Christ all at once: We must
remember, Our sins are the sins of men, but mercy is the mercy of God. God
will never leave us, but be with us whilst we are with him. The world, and all
comforts in it, leave a man when they can have no more use of him, nor he of
them; Satan leaves his sworn vassals at their wits end, when he has brought
them into danger: But blessed be for ever our gracious God; then of all other
times he is nearest to help us, when we stand most in need of him. He was
never nearer Moses, than when Moses seemed furthest from comfort: Exodus 3. 2.
never nearer Jacob, than when heaven was his Canopie, and a Stone his pillow:
Genesis 28. 12.
never nearer Joseph, than when in prison. Jonas, then in the belly of the
Whale, for God went down with him: never nearer Paul, Acts 16. 26.
than when in the Dungeon: A Christian is not alone, 2 Cor. 4. 9.
when left alone: not forsaken, when forsaken: God and his Angels supply them
the want of other comforts. Is it not a greater comfort that a Prince should
come in Person to a subject, and cheer him up, than send a meaner man? And
whence is this to me, Luke 1. 43.
(said Elizabeth) that the mother of my Lord should come unto me? Is it not the
greatest comfort to a Christian soul, when God in want of means, comes
immediately himself unto us, and comforts us by his Spirit? for in defects of
second causes comforts are ever sweetest: therefore in all extremities, let us
wait and hope still for mercy: If the vision stay (says Habakkuk) wait, Habak
2. 3.
for it will come.

This is a maine difference Differences of godly, and wicked.
betwixt the Child of God, and a person destitute of sound grace: for the Child
of God in extremity recovers himself; as David after a great conflict gets
still the upper hand: Yet my soul keep thou silence unto God: for God is yet
good to Israel: Psalm. 73. 1.
as if he should say, Though when I look upon my present outward condition, I
stagger, yet when I consider more deeply of his dealing, I am resolved; God is
good to Israel: thus after much tossing, they get up upon that rock which is
higher than they But those, who are not uprighthearted, in any great extremity
sink down with despair, as heavy bodies to the Center of the Earth, without
stop. The reason is, in their best estate they never were acquainted with
relying upon God, but bore themselves up with fleshly helps, which being taken
away, they must needs fall down right: But a sincere Christian in midst of his
flourishing estate acquainteth himself with God, and sets not his heart upon
present things: Job says, that which he feared in his best case, that ^efell
unto him: Therefore they can rest upon Gods mercy, Job. 3. 25.
when other props are taken away.

Yet there be diverse degrees of upholding us when we are at a spiritual loss:
Of our support in Spiritual losses.
for usually in what measure we, (in the times of our peace and liberty)
inordinately let loose our affections; in that measure are we cast down, or
more deeply, in discomfort: when our adulterous hearts cleave to outward things
more than becomes chas^ hearts, it makes the cross more sharp and extreme:
For, That which is not enjoyed with overmuch pleasure, is parted withal
without overmuch grief. But for, spiritual extremities, oftentimes the
strongest feel them with quickest sense; for God herein respects not always
sins past, or more, or less measure of grace, as in Jobs case, who could
without much distemper of soul, endure extremities of body and estate, but
when God wrote bitter things against him; Job. I9. 25.
presently he begins to sink, and but begins only: for when he was at worst,
he stays himself upon his Redeemer, to the glory of Gods Grace, and shame of
the devil: Thus sometimes God makes his Children triumph, whom he sets as
Champions in defiance of Satar. They in weakness think they shall utterly
fail and perish, but their standing our in greatest conflicts shows the
contrary.

But to come to that, which I intend chiefly to insist on; The Lord shall
deliver me from every evil work, etc. wherein we may see; 1. The Author of
his safety; 2. The deliverance it self.


The Author is the Lord: No less then an almighty power is necessary to
deliver from any evil work. For such is our inclinablenesse to join with
temptation; such the malice and strength of our enemy; so many be the snares,
and so cunningly spread in every thing we deal withal; that whatsoever
delivers us, must be above Satan and our own evil hearts; more wise, more
powerful, more gracious to preserve us; than any adverse power can be to draw
us unto evil works: In which case, well said Moses; when God in his wonted
glorious presence refused to go along with them O (says Moses) if thou go^
not with us, Exodus 33. 15.
carry us not hence.

[ Deliver] supposes danger possible; or present: Beloved, Our lives are such,
as stand in need of perpetual deliverance. Our estate here is waving: The
Church lives always in tents,and has never any hope of rest, until the day
of triumph: therefore, after forgiveness of sins, follows, lead us not into
temptation: because though sins past be forgiven, yet we are in danger to be
led into temptation: let none promise a truce to himself, which God promises
not; if Satan and our corruptions join, we cannot be quiet: after sins of
youth, we are in danger of sins of riper age* for though by grace in some
sort sin be subdued, yet (until it be wholly mortified) there will be some
stirring up, until that which is imperfect in us be abolished.

But I hasten to that which follows: The Lord will deliver me from every evil
work.

Whence (from the form of the argument) observe, that, We ought to reason with
God from former experience, 1 Samuel 17. 37.
to future; yea it is a binding Argument with God: 2 Cor. 1. 10.
he loves to be sued, and pressed from former mercies, and suffers them to be
bonds unto him: men will not do so, because their fountain is soon drawn
dry; But God is a spring that can never be emptied: as he was able to help in
former time, so he is also for the time to come: He is always, I AM, JEHOVAH;
always where he was, his Arm is not shortened; what he has done heretofore,
he can do now.

We should therefore register Gods favors Use.
(which is the best use we can put out memories to) and make them so many
arguments to build upon him for time to come, as David: 1 Samuel 17. 37.
The Lord, that delivered me(says he) out of the pawe of the Lion, and out of
the pawe of the Bear, will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. Oh
were we but acquainted with this kind of reasoning with God, how undaunted
would we be in all troubles? we should be as secure for the time to come, as
for the time past, for all is one with God; We do exceedingly wrong out own
souls, and weaken our faith by not minding of Gods favors. How strong in
faith might old men be, that have had many experiences of Gods love; if they
would take this course? every former mercy should strengthen our faith for a
new: as conquerours, whom every former victory incourageth to a new conquest:
So old favors should help us to set upon God afresh.

But what is the limitation here? from every evil work: which words we will
first touch a little severally, and then consider more particularly of them

Sometimes God speaks of duties as they issue from man; because indeed the
will is man's from whence the duty comes; and therefore the Scripture speaks,
as though the duty came from us, because the powers are ours from whence they
spring. Sometimes the Scripture speaks of holy duties as they issue from a
higher power; from God: so here ( The Lord will deliver me from every evil
work) he means, that God would stir up his heart to a care to avoid evil
works. We are agents and patients in all we do: we are agents, because the
powers are ours; we are patients; because the Lord does all. Now it is the
language of the holy Ghost for the most part* when he speaks of good duties*
to go to the fountain; especially when faith is to be strengthened.

But how does God deliver? Quest. Answ.


By keeping us from occasions; or by ministering strength, if occasions be
offered: by giving occasions of good* and by giving a heart to entertain those
occasions. He preserves us from evil works by planting the graces whereby we
are preserved; and by peace which guards our souls from despair; and
tumultuous thoughts; yea he preserves us from evil works, Philip. 4. 7.
through faith unto his heavenly Kingdom.

God preserves his children by making them better: by weakening corruptions by
his Spirit, stirring up a clear sight and hatred of the same in them: and by
withdrawing occasions which might prevail over us, and by keeping us from
betraying our selves unto them: by chayning up Satan, until our strength be
such as may encounter him; a great mercy it is, though little thought on, that
God lettet^ not loose Satan upon us every moment; how should this stir us up
with David to thankfulness and dependence upon God.

He delivers also wicked men from dangers; (not out of any love to their
persons, but) because he has some base service for them to undertake, to
exercise the patience of his children, and vex others better than themselves,
which is not fit for godly men to do: They are only gods Rod, and their
deliverance is no preservation, but a reservation to worse mischief; it is not
a bettering deliverance.

But God delivers his, graciously, not only from danger, but from those evil
works they are subject to fall into in their danger; it is not ill, to suffer
ill, but to do ill. For, doing ill makes God our enemy; suffering ill does
not: doing ill stains and defiles the soul, and blemisheth the Image of God
in us; suffering ill does none of this: doing ill ^inders communion and
acquaintance with God; suffering ill does not: God is more immediately
acquainted with the soul in suffering ill. Doing ill is the cause of all i^s;
suffering ill, comes from doing ill: the ill of sin, is the ill of ils,
because it is evil it self, and the cause of all other evils whatsoever: We
may thank our ill in doing, for our ill in suffering; and therefore the
Apostle is well assured what he says, The Lord will deliver me from every
evil work, not from every inward infirmity and weakness, but from every
evil work that is scandalous and offensive to him.

It is an aggravation of ill when it is manifested; for then it either taints
orgrieves others. Indeed so soon as the resolution of the soul has passed
it, when the will resolves on such a thing, it is done, both in good and evil,
before God. But in regard of the world, and of the Church we live in; the
bringing of the work upon the stage (as it were) is an aggravation of evil;
because (besides the hurt which is done to evil men) good men are either hurt
or vexed at it. Therefore the Apostle says, The Lord will deliver me from
every evil work. This a Christian should especially labor for, that God in
all things would keep him free from sin. Yea this differenceth a Christian
from another man; take a carnal man when he is like to fall into danger, he
studies how to get out of suffering evil, not how to prevent doing evil; he
plots, devises, and intangles himself in his own wit, and makes the matter
worse by equivocation, and such like sinful courses, as we might learn from
the Papists, if we had not enough from our own breast. But Paul's care was to
be delivered from evil works: For a man indeed is never overcome (let him be
never so vexed in the world by any) till his conscience be cracked. If his
conscience and his cause stand upright, he prevails still, Romans 8. 37.
In all these things we are more than conquerors, says the Apostle. The
meaning is, sufferings cannot quell our courage, they cannot stain our
conscience, they do not hurt the cause, but it gets victory in despite of
them: so that our courage is undaunted, and our conscience abides unstained:
let it be our care therefore, to take heed of evil works. Look into the
world and see what is the care of most men we converse with, oh, if they can
get such a place, if they can get such an estate! I, but it cannot be had
without finful abasement, without cracking of conscience, and unlawful
engagement: O say they, it is no matter, God will pardon all, I care not so I
may have my wish; this is the heart of many graceless persons that are not led
with heavenly respects. But take a Christian, and he had rather beg, do any
thing in the world, than do a thing unworthy his profession, unbeseeming the
Gospel, or that high calling whereunto he is called. Shall such a man as I
do this? he will not, and therefore his care is to take heed of ill works:
for then he is sure to have God his friend, who has riches and honor enough
for him, because the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof: Psalm. 24. 1.
this is the care of a judicious well instructed Christian.

But mark the ( Extent) from every evil work: Saint Paul's care is not for
one or two, but that God would keep him from every evil work.

Why so?

Because he that truly hates one sin, Why S. Paul says from every evil
work.
will hate all the kinds of it, both come from the same love of God: he that
loves God as he should, will hate whatsoever God hates: and have respect to all
Gods Commandments (as the Psalmist speaks) partial obedience, Psalm. 119. 128
is indeed no obedience at all: for he that obeyes one, and not another, obeyes
not simply because of the Commander to yield obedience unto him: but only to
satisfy his own corrupt nature, picking and choosing what pleases himself,
which belongs not to an inferior, but to a superior to do: And therefore,
such make themselves gods, in that they single out easy things that do not
oppose their lusts, which are not against their Reputation, etc. and therein
perhaps they will supererogate, and do more than they need, only because they
will have a compensation with God, that he should quit with them for other
things: I have done that, and therefore he must bear with me in this. Oh, but
there is no compensation here; a man is never so straightened but he may escape
without sin: there is no pretense will serve: but we must abstain from every
evil work: Satan keeps many men in his snare by this, and so he has them
safe in one sin, he cares not: therefore he will suffer them to hear, read,
and pray, etc. holding them fast in one reigning sin, wherein he will let
them alone till the time of some great affliction, or death; and then he will
roar upon them. Oh beloved, we cannot provide worse for our own souls, than
to cherish a purpose of living in any one sin, for that is enough for the
devil to hold his possession in us by, and at the hour of death to claim us
for his own. If we regard any iniquity in our heart, the Lord will not hear
our prayers, Psalm. 66. 18.
I beseech you therefore let us labor to have clear consciences, freeing our
selves from a purpose to live in any sin; that in all our slips and failings
we may say with an honest heart My purpose was not to do this, but to refrain
from wickedness.

Again, he speaks of this for the time to come; the Lord will deliver me from
evil: A true Christian is as careful to avoid sin for the time to come, as
to be freed from the guilt of sins past. Judas may desire to have his
conscience freed from former sins, but Indas cannot desire to be a good man
for the time to come. Nothing argues a good conscience more than this. The most
wicked wretch that breathes, may desire to have his conscience stilled, and yet
never have any purpose or power to abstain from sin; but like a dog (after
he has disgorged himself) return to his vomit again. True Repentance is a
turning from former evils, to a contrary good. Our grief no further yields
comfort of sound repentance, then it has care attending for prevention of
sin; according to that which Christ said to the woman taken in adultery, Go,
and sin no more, and as David prays Purge me O Lord and cleanse me (but
withal) establish me with thy free spirit for the time to come: As if he
should say, Lord I know it is not in man to order his own ways, I desire not
the forgiveness of my sins, that there by I might with more liberty offend
thy Majesty, but with pardoning grace, I beg preventing grace; No false heart
can move such a desire as this to God A gracious heart that prays aright,
prays as well that God would preserve him from future sin, as forgive him
his former sins. It is a ridiculous thing of the Papists, to make confession
of a sin which they mean to commit; as some late Traitors confessed such and
such things which they were to act, and were straight absolved for it: So your
cursed duelists that will pray and repent when they mean presently to fall one
upon another. Is this repentance, when a man is inveigled with the sin he
means to commit: and cannot overcome himself in the case of revenge? Do
these men think they repent? No certainly, repentance is of sins past, and
the carriage of every true Christian is to avoid evil for the time to come.

Again, it is here a perpetnated Act; the Lord will deliver me still from
every evil work: whence you see that In every evil work we are tempted to,
we need delivering Grace, as to every good work assisting Grace. Indeed our
whole life (if we look upwards) is nothing but a deliverance, but if we look
to our selves, it is nothing but danger and a warfare; and therefore we have
need of a deliverance. How little a temptation turns over a great man? as
sometimes a little wind turns over your mighty galleys. We see this in David
and Solomon, and (if God leave us to our selves) even the strongest man in the
world, how soon is he overturned? in the midst of sinsull occasions, how ready
are we to join with them, and betray our own souls?

But from the whole, take it as it comes from God altogether, the truth is thus
much, that a Christian, who is privy to his own soul, of good intentions to
abstain from all ill for the present, may presume that God will assist him
against all ill works for the time to come. I say a Christian that has his
conscience telling him, that he means to be better, and is not in league with
any sin, may believe this for the time to come, that God will keep him from
evil works. I speak this, because many who are yet sinners, think it in
vain to strive; for they shall never be better. What do thou talk man?
have thou a mind to be better? God will meet thee one time or other: is thy
will at liberty? he that gives thee the will, will also give thee the deed: is
not this the Promise that God will deliver thee from every evil work? and
therefore away with all discouragements.

O but There are sons of Anak mighty Giants, Object.
that molest me; my sins are as so many Giants to stop my proceeding, I
shall never be^ better: Sol.
Say not so; nay, rather thou will not be better: thou art in league with some
secret sin, thy heart rises against those that reprove thee of it, thine
own conscience tells thee that thy heart is naught: for if thou would set
thy self to obey God in truth, assuredly he would deliver thy soul. And
therefore the Apostle to prevent such doubts, speaks of deliverance from evil
works, as coming from God.

But some may object, Object.
we sin every day; and if we say we have no sin, 1 John 1. 8.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

You must not understand this Phrase Legally in the vigor of it; Answ.
as that God will deliver us from every ill thought, or rising in the heart, or
from every outward slip and failing, etc. But by every evil work, the Apostle
means, every reproachful sin that breaks the peace of our conscience, that
swallows up a man's salvation; from such kind of sins that bring a stain and
discredit unto a man's profession, that wound his soul, and may discourage
others, the Lord will deliver his* he will keep them from greater sins
altogether, and from being in league with lesser. You know in falls there are
several degrees, there is a slip, a falling, and a falling on all four, (as
we say) a flat falling: Now God will deliver his children from falling so foully.

Nay, Sometimes he will deliver How God deli^ers from ill works, by not
delivering.
He will deliver from great ill works, by letting them alone in losser ill
works. God delivers from evil diverse ways, he delivers from falling into
ill, and he delivers out of ill when we are fallen, he delivers from ill
likewise by supporting us: nay, which is more, he delivers from ill works by
ill works.

How is that? Quest.


How do Physicians deliver from an Apoplexy ^ from a Letharg^e? Sol.
Is it not by casting the sick person into an Ague, to awaken that dull
sickness: so God to cure the conscience of a man, when he sees him in danger
of security by those soulekilling sins, Pride, Covetousness, Looseness,
Hypocrisy, and the like, suffers him sometimes to fall into less offenses, to
awake his conscience, that being rouzed up he may fly to Gods mercy in Christ:
so infinite is Gods care this way that he will deliver either from ill works,
or from the evil of ill works; or if he deliver not from ill works, yet he
will deliver us from worse works by those ill works: Austin says, I dare
presume to say, it is profitable for some men to fall: if a man be of a proud
peremptory disposition, or of a blockish, dull, and secure nature; it is good
he should be acquainted what sin he carries in his breast, where his
corruptions are, etc. that so he may know himself and his danger the better.

I beseech you make use of this, Use
to help your faith and thankfulness; when we are delivered from evil
works, it is God that does it: The consideration whereof me thinks should
strengthen our faith against Satan and all his fiery darts, and encourage us to
set confidently upon any corruption, that we are moved to by others, or our
own natural inclination; It is Gods enemy, and it is my enemy: it is opposite
to Gods will, and it is an enemy to my comfort; God will take my part against
that which is opposite to him, he has promised me to assist me against every
evil work by his holy Spirit. A Christian is a King, Revel 1. 6.
and he has the triumphing Spirit of Christ in him, which will prevail over
all sin in time.

But some poor soul may Object.
object; Alas, I have been assaulted by such a corruption a long time, in a
grievous manner, and am not yet delivered from it.

God does by little, Answ.
and little purge out corruption, as every stroke helps the fall of the oak,
the first stroke helps forward: so every opposing of corruption (never so
little) helps to root it out, and it is weakened by little and little, till
death accomplish more mortification:

But to proceed, God does not only deliver from evil works, but preserves us
to his heavenly Kingdom. We must take [ preserve] here in its full breadth he
preserves us whilst he has any work for us to do in this life; and when he
will have us live no longer, he will preserve us to heaven: howsoever by death
he takes us away, yet even then the Lord still preserves us.

He will preserve us in our outward estate, Under-preservers of the Saints.
by himself, and by under-preservers, for there be many such under God: as
Angels that are his ministering spirits, and Magistrates who are the shields of
the earth, they may preserve under God; and likewise Ministers that are the
Chariots and horsemen of Israel; and good Laws, etc. but God is the first
turner of the Wheel, we must see him in all other preservers whatsoever. And
therefore the Apostle in the language of the holy Ghost, and of Canaan, says
here: Psalm. 47. 9.
The Lord will preserve me. 2 Kings 2.^ 2.
And rather than a man shall miscarry when God has any thing for him to do,
God will work a miracle. Dan. 3. 25. and 6. 12.
The three men could not be burned in the fire, God so suspended the force
thereof: Daniel could not be devoured of the greedy Lions, etc. rather than
Gods purpose shall fail, that a man should perish before the time that God
has allotted him, the Lions shall not devour, and the fire shall not burn; God
has measured our glass and time even to a moment, and as our Savior Christ
(out of knowledge of this heavenly truth) says, My time is not yet came: so
let us know that till (...) hour comes, all the Devils in hell cannot hurt one
hair of our head: And this is a wondrous ground of confidence, that we should
carry our selves above all threatenings, and above all fears whatsoever. John
19. 10.
Thou can do nothing except it were given thee (says Christ) to bragging
Pilate, who boasted of his power: alas, what can all the enemies of Gods people
do except God permit them?

If a King or a great man should say to an inferior, Go on, I will stand by
thee and preserve thee, thou shall take no harm: what an encouragement were
this? Oh but when God shall say to a Christian, walk humbly before me, keep
close to my word, be steadfast in the ways of holiness, fear not man, you are
under my protection and safeguard, what an encouragement is this to a believing
soul.

But put case we cannot be preserved from death, (for so it was here with the
Apostle, he dyed a bloody death) Why let us observe his blessed carriage in
all this, and do likewise: I regard not that, says he, do your worst, God
will preserve me still. So it should be the bent of a Christians soul to come
to God with this limitation, in his faith and in his prayer: Lord if thou will
not deliver me from suffering ill, preserve me from doing ill: If thou will not
preserve me from death, preserve me from sinful works. This we may build on,
that either God will preserve us in life, or if we die, he will preserve us in
death to his heavenly Kingdom. And sometimes God preserves by not preserving
from death: for indeed death keeps a man from all danger whatsoever; he is
out of all gunshot when he is once dead: death is a deliverance and a
preservation of it self, it sends a man to heaven strait, and therefore the
Apostle knew what he said, The Lord will preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom.

That is, he will preserve me til I be possessed of Heaven, he will go along
with me in all the passages of my life: he will carry me through all, and bring
me thither at last. As the Angel that struck off Peter's bolts, shined in the
prison, Acts 12. 7.
and carried him out into the City: So God by his Spirit, shines into our
souls, and carries us through all the passages of this life, never leaving us
till he have brought us to his heavenly Kingdom.

And not to open unto you things that are beyond my conceit, much more my
expression; what a state this heavenly kingdom is, unto which S. Paul hoped to
be preserved: observe briefly thus much, 1. It is a Kingdom; of all
conditions the freest: 2. The most glorious: 3. The most abundant in all
supplies: 4. It is a heavenly Kingdom: 5. It is an everlasting Kingdom.


Things the nearer the Heavens they are, The excellency of the heavenly
Kingdom.
the purer they are; 1. heaven is a most holy Kingdom, no uncleanenesse can
enter there. 2. it is a large Kingdom, and 3. an everlasting Kingdom. Other
men's Kingdoms determine with their persons; perhaps they may live to outlive
their glory in the world; as Nero did (the king that Paul was under now, when
he wrote this Epistle) who came to a base end: But this Kingdom can never be
shaken: Gods preservation shall end in eternal glory.

Here is a special ground to Gods children of perseverance in weldoing: Use 1.
what, does God undertake, even from himself to deliver us from evil works
which might endanger our salvation, and to preserve us until he have put us
into heaven? where is the popish doctrine of falling away then? Object.
Oh but I may sin and so fall away: Sol.
I, but God will deliver us from evil works, he takes away that objection:
He that keeps Heaven for us, keeps us for heaven, till he have put us into
possession of it; We are kept (we are guarded as the word is) by the power of
God to salvation. 1 Pet. 1. 5.
Salvation is kept for us, and we for that; If we endanger heaven any way, it
is by ill works, and God keeps us from them: what a most comfortable doctrine
is this.

But to add a second, Use 2.
against that foolish, vain, and proud point of Popish Merit; we see what a
strain they are in: first before conversion, they will have Merit of
congruitie, that it befits the goodness of God, when we do what we can, that
we should have grace. 2. When we are in the state of grace, they will have
Merit of condignity; but how can that be, when as free grace runs along in
all? God preserves us from evil works, and preserves us to his heavenly
Kingdom of his mere love and mercy; where then is the merit of man? Indeed,
we do good when we do good, but God inables us: we speak to the praise of
God, but he opens our mouth: we believe, but God draws our heart to it: as
Austin says, we move, but God moves us.

I beseech you observe further Vs^ 3.
here: How complete Gods favors are to his: He deals like a God: that is,
fully, and eternally with his children. If he deliver, it is from the greatest
evil; if he preserve, it is to the greatest good; Who would not serve such a
master? O the baseness of the vile heart of man, that is a slave to inferior
things, and afraid to displease men, never considering what a blessed
condition it is, to be under the government of a gracious God, that will keep
us from ill (if it be for our good) for ever; Outwardly from evil works,
inwardly from the terrors of an il conscience; that will preserve us here in
this world, and give us heaven when we have done. I beseech you let this
complete and full dealing of God quicken us to a holy courage and constancy in
his service.

And see here a point of heavenly wisdom: Use 4.
to look (when we are in any danger) with the Apostle to the heavenly
Kingdom. When we are sick, look not at death; Paul cared not for that, but
says he; The Lord will preserve me to his kingdom. He looked to the bank of
the shore as a man that goes through a river, has his eye still on the shore so
the Apostle had his eye fixed upon heaven still, I beseech you therefore in all
dangers and distresses whatsoever (if you would keep your souls without
discouragements, as you should) be much in heaven in your thoughts, minding
the things above, and conversing with God in your spirits. Look to the Crown
that is held out to us: let our minds be in heaven before our souls. It is a
wondrous help to our weakness in the time of trouble, not to think; I am
full of pain, I must be turned into the grave, and rot, and what shall become
of me then, etc. away with this carnal reasoning it much weakens faith and
damps the hearts of Christians.

Again, Use 6.
How does this arm the soul with invincible courage in any trouble: God may
call me to trouble, but he will preserve me in it that I shall not stain my
conscience; What a ground of Patience is this? Patience is too mean a word:
what a ground of joy and triumphing is it? We rejoice under the hope of glory.
Romans 5. 2. A Christian should triumph in soul over all evils whatsoever, and
be (as the Apostle faith) more than a Conqueror; Romans 8. 37.
considering that God will be present with him all his life long and after that
bring him to an everlasting kingdom: what an encouragement is this? Heaven is
holy, and shall we not fit our selves for that blessed estate. There is much
holiness required for heaven: the sinful, wicked, malicious, poysonfull
world, lays reproaches upon holiness; Heb. 12. 24.
but without it no man shall see God. Does that man believe he shall obtain a
heavenly kingdom, who never sits himself with holiness for it? Oh no: Faith
and hope have this efficacy (in the breast) wheresoever they are, to frame the
heart to the thing believed. 2. Pet. 3. 13.
If I believe a kingdom to be where righteousness and holiness dwells; this
belief forces me to carry my self answerable to the state there. And
therefore (says the Apostle) Our conversation is in heaven, Philip. 3. 23.
from whence we look for the Savioure, etc. because he was assured of heaven,
therefore he conversed as a Citizen of heaven before he came there. He praised
God, kept himself undefiled of the world, and conversed with the best people;
every way he carried himself (as much as earth would suffer him) as they do^
in heaven. Certainly, He that has the hope of a heavenly kingdom, 1 J^hn 3. 3.
is pure as Christ ^s pure: He endeavors and aims to be holy as God is holy
who has called him. Faith is of efficacy to conform a Christians carriage to
the likeness of him whom he believes to be so excellent. And therefore they
are insidels and have no saving faith, profane persons; who live in sins
that stain their consciences, and blemish their conversation: not believing
that there is a heaven. Deceive not your selves, neither Whoremongers, nor
Adulterers, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
nor Extortioners, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God. Do men who live in
these sins (without remorse) think to come to heaven? as though they should
come out of the puddle to heaven? no, Mat. 25. 41.
no, away you workers of iniquity, I know you not, faith Christ. Let no man
cherish presumptions of a heavenly kingdom; except he abstain from all
sins against conscience; The Apostle when he would urge to holiness of life,
uses this argument Col^ff. 3. 1.
If you be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ
is at the right hand of the Father.

Well, let us often (I beseech you) present unto our souls the blessed condition
to come, which will be effectual to quicken and stir us up to every good
duty, and comfort us in all conditions whatsoever. What will a man care for
crosses, and losses, and disgraces in the world, that thinks of a heavenly
Kingdom? What will a man care for ill usage in his pilgrimage, when he knows
he is a King at home? We are all strangers upon earth, now in the time of our
absence from God: what if we suffer indignities, considering that we have a
better estate to come, when we shall be some body? What if we pass unknown
in the world? It is safe that we should do so: God will preserve us to his
heavenly kingdom, and all that we suffer and endure here, it is but a fitting
for that place. David was a King anointed many years ere he was actually
possessed of his Kingdom; but all that time between his anointing and his
investing into the Kingdom; it was a preparing of him, by humility, that he
might know himself; and learn fitness to govern aright: So we are appointed
Kings as soon as we believe: for when we believe in Christ who is a King,
Priest, and Prophet, we communicate with his offices: we have the same blessed
anointing powered on our Head, (...)
and runs down about us. But we must be humbled by crosses, and fitted for
it, we must be drawn more out of the world, and be heavenly minded first.

Would you know some rules of discerning whether heaven belongs to you or not?
(...)
In brief of heaven: that see a vanity in all outward things, which makes them
humble in the midst of all their bravery: those that see themselves empty of
al, without Gods favor: The poor in spirit etc. theirs (says Christ) is the
Kingdom of Heaven.

2. Faith makes us Kings, because Church is the Queen of Heaven, ^and Christ
is the King of Heaven. Where this grace is in. truth, happiness belongs to that
soul.

3. Those that are Kings have the hopes of a young Prince puts into him a great
deal of spirit, otherwise perhaps above his disposition. So all that are
Kings, have a royal spirit in some measure, which naiseth them above all
earthly things, and makes them see all other things to be nothing in
comparison of Christ, to be but dross and dung, Philip. 3. 8.
as holy S. Paul says. Those therefore that are slaves to their base justs, to
riches, honor, pleasure, etc. know not what belongs to this heavenly Kingdom.
What do men think to reign in heaven, when they cannot reign over their
own hase corruptions? We see David prays to God for an enlarged spirit,
Psalm. 51. 12.
that he might be capable of the best things; and certainly those that have
this knowledge are of a spirit above the world more excellent than their
neighbors as the Wiseman says. You cannot shake them with offers of
preferment, or with fears: they will not venture their hope of eternity for
this or that base earthly thing, they are of a more royal spirit than so.

I beseech you therefore let us discern of our spirits, what they are; whether
God has stablished us with a free spirit or not: the kingdom of Heaven is
begun upon earth, the door whereby we must enter in, is here. Those graces
must be begun here which must fit us for happiness hereafter, as the stones
of the Temple, 1 Kings 6. 7.
were first hewne and then laid upon the Temple, so we must be he wne and
fashioned here, ere we can come thither: those that are not fitted and squared
now, must never think to be used of God as living stones of his Temple then. A
word now of Paul's use of all, and so I conclude:

To whom be glory for ever and ever.

When he had mentioned the heavenly kingdom, and set himself by faith (as it
were) in possession of it; he presently begins the employment of heaven; to
praise and glorify God: even whilst he was on earth. For faith stirs us up
to do that which we shall do when we obtain the thing believed: it is
called the evidence of things not seen; ^eb. 11. 1.
and makes them (as it were) present to the soul. Because when we are in
heaven (indeed) we shall do nothing else but praise God. Faith apprehends it,
as if he were now there (for all is sure to faith, God having said it, who will
do it) and sets the soul upon that employment here, which it shall have
eternally with God hereafter.

It is therefore Christian wisdom, to fix our souls on good meditations, to
have them wedded to good thoughts, to have those praeclar as cogitationes,
be^itting Christians, that may lead us comfortably in our way to heaven: Let a
man think of Gods deliverances past, and that will strengthen his faith for
the future deliverances: Let him think of future deliverances, and that will
lead him to a kingdom, to praise God: and this praising of God will stretch
his soul, for^ver and for ever: as if there were no time sufficient to
glorisie God, that is so excellent and glorious. What a blessed condition is
this, to have Gods spirit warming our souls and perfuming our spirits with
holy ejaculations, continually putting us upon the employment of heaven, till
at length it has safely brought us thither.

Here then is the use of al uses: What is the former use which Paul makes of
the experience of Gods delivera^ce? The Lord has delivered me; and therefore
he will deliver me: but what use does he make of this, that God will deliver
him? To glorisie God: here is the end of all ends, to praise God; happy we
when Gods end and our end meet together. He has made all for his own glory,
and when we with a single eye can aim at that too, what a sweet harmony is
there?

To direct us in this duty in Paul (for I go no surther than the text leads
me) seriously meditate on Gods mercies, both past and to come; nothing moves
thankfulness more than this. A Christian when he looks backwards has
comfort; and when he looks forward, he sees comfort still: for preservation,
and Kingdoms, and Crowns abide for him. If a man would praise God therefore,
let him consider how graciously God has dealt with him: He has delivered me
already by Jesus Christ, from sin and eternal wrath; and he will deliver me
from every evil work to come, that may endanger my salvation. Think of these
things, and see whether your hearts can be cold and dead or no; see if your
spirits can be straightened. Certainly both heart and mouth will be full, thou
can not but say in the apprehension of Gods mercies: To him be glory for
ever.

2. Consider the kinds of favors they are either positive or privative:
spiritual, or temporal. Positive, the Lord will preserve me: privative, the
Lord will deliver me from every evil work. Temporal, the Lord in this life
will keep me: spiritual, he will deliver me from the power of sin: Eternal,
He will preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom. Think forward or backwards:
outward or inward: spiritual or temporal: where ever you look, tell me if
you can do otherwise then break out with the holy Apostle, in the praises of
so good a God.

Think of the greatness of all these: the greatness of the deliverance from
sin, and damnation. The Apostle to make himself the more thankful, says;
he was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion: he had large apprehensions of
Gods goodness; So should we, beloved, consider the greatness of the misery we
are in by nature, being slaves of Satan, in danger to slip into Hell every
moment; and when God has secured us from this, think of the greatness of the
benefit, a heavenly kingdom. When we think not only of the benefits, but of
the greatness of them; it is a wondrous encouragement to be thankful. Labor
then to have a due and high esteem of every mercy. God has brought us out of
darkness into mavelous light, says the Apostle; Great is the mystery of
godliness, and the unsearchable riches of his grace, he had not words big
enough to express Gods goodness: Oh the height, and breadth, and depth, and
length of his love. When we consider these dimensions, our thankfulness must
be answerable.

Again, if you would be Labor to have humble spirits, to see God in all
things, and then you will sacrifice to him alone; not to thy parts, and graces,
friends, abilities, etc. the meek are fit to pray to God, Seek the Lord ye
meek of the earth; Zeph. 2. 3.
and an humbled meek soul is the fittest to praise God of any other; he that
knows he is worthy of nothing, will bless God for any thing: he that knows
he has nothing in himself, will be thankful for the least measure of grace:
an humble soul is a thankful soul. We see it was Paul's disposition here; he
gives all to God, which makes him so break out in praising his name.

Paul here) and begin Heaven upon Earth; Labor to be assured of salvation,
and perseverance in thy Christian course. The Papists that speak against
Assurance and Perseverance, kill prayer and praising of God. Shall a man praise
God for that which he doubts of? I cannot tell whether God will damn me or
not, perhaps I am but fitted as a sheep to the slaughter, etc. how shall a man
praise God for any blessing he enjoyes, when these thoughts are still with
him? how shall a man praise God for salvation, when perhaps he shall not come
to it? how shall a man praise God for that which perhaps he may fall from,
before he die? when perhaps he is Gods to day, and may be the Devils to
morrow? How can there be a hearty thanks, but when a man can say, The Lord
will deliver me from every evil work, that by mine own weakness, and Satan's
malice, I may occasionally fall into, betwixt this and Heaven? Therefore if we
would praise God as we should, let us work our hearts to labor after
assurance of Gods favor, let us redeem our precious time, and every day set
some time apart to strengthen our evidences for heaven, which will set us in a
continual frame to every good work.

Thus we see out of Paul's example, how we should be disposed here, to be in
heaven before our time. For, undoubtedly he who praises God is so much in
Heaven, as he is given to thankfulness; for he is in that employment now,
which shall be there altogether. But how long does he desire that God should
have glory? For ever and ever.

A Christian should have the extent of his desires of Gods glory, Obser.
carried to eternity. Upon what ground? because God intends him glory for ever
and ever: a Christian that is assured of his salvation, is assured that God
will eternally glorisie him: He knows that Christ is King for ever: He knows
that Christ is a Priest for ever: He knows that the state and condition that
he is kept for, is everlasting, It is an inheritance immortal and unde^iled, 1
Pet. 1. 4.
that fades not away: and therefore he says, Has God eternal thoughts of my
good? and is Christ an eternal head? an eternal King to rule me both in lise
and in death? Surely I will extend my desires of his glory as far as he
extends his purpose to do me good. Now his purpose to do me good is for
eternity, and my desire that he may have glory, shall be ^or eternity, world
withont end. This is the disposition of a gracious soul, not that God may be
honored by him alone; but of all. To whom be praise (not by me) but by all; I
am not sufficient enough to praise him: To him be praises in the Churches
throughout all ages for ever: David had not largeness enough in himself to
bless God; and therefore he stirs up his spirits, and all within him to
praise his holy name, Psalm. 103.
as if all were too little to set out the glory of Gods infinite goodness,
mercy, wisdom, and power; those gracious attributes, that show themselves
glorious in bringing man to salvation, and in governing the Church.

Learn this duty therefore: Use.
If we will make good to our own souls, Use.
that we are in the state of grace, we must plot for eternity, and endeavor to
lay a ground and foundation, that the Church may flourish for eternity. No man
can warrant himself to be a good Christian, but he that labors to have the
Church and Common wealth flourish; to have a happy Kingdom, happy government,
and happy laws: not only to have the Church in his own Family, but that the
Church may flourish in those that stand up when we are gone the way of all
flesh: and therefore to declare the mind of God, and his favors to us, and
our children, that they may strengthen their experience, with their fathers
experience, and say to God, Thou art the God of my Fathers, therefore be my
God; those that are called to places of dignity, should consider that it is
required at their hands to labor, that there should be means to continue
Religion, even to the worlds end (if it may be) and to stop all the breaches
in this kind. And if it were possible, it were to be wished that there were
set up some lights in all the dark corners of this Kingdom, that might shine
to those people that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.

to have a care that there be no breaches made upon the sound doctrine that is
left unto us, and has been sealed up by the blood of so many Martyrs. We had
it dearly, it has been taught by our forefathers, and sealed with their
blood; and shall we betray it? No, let us labor to deliver it to our
posterity, from hand to hand, to the coming of Christ; and then we shall in
effect (and not in word only) do that which Paul says here, labor to
glorify God for ever and ever, both in the Church, and in heaven. Surely those
that will glorify God in heaven, he will have them so disposed, to glorify
him on earth.

It is a dangerous thing when persons are naught; we see what comes of it
(especially if they be great:) It is said of Manasseh when God had forgiven him
his sin, yet afterward God plagued the Kingdom for the sins that Manasseh
committed: 2 Kings 24. 3.
how can this be? because he by his sin (though he repented, himself) yet
set the Kingdom in an evil frame. And no question but he had naughty
principles: and among people that are given to licentiousness, if there be
any thing in great men, it will go to posterity after them. So that when
Governors are naught, they are not only a poison to the Church and State,
while they live, but the mischief of it is, after and after still. And so it
is in the best things, if the Governor be good, he lays a foundation of good
for the Kingdom in time to come, as well as for his own time.

How will it shame a man when he shall think, I do these things now, but what
will Posterity think of me? what will be the remembrance of it when I am gone?
then my name will stink. The wicked Emperor Nero, was of this resolution when
he should die: Let Heaven and Earth mingle together, says he, when I am gone:
He knew himself to be so naught, and that he should be so evil spoken of,
that he wished there were no posterity, but that the world might end with him.
So it is the wishes of those that are wretches themselves, and that lay a
foundation of wretched times after; they wish that Heaven and Earth may mingle,
that no man might censure them when they are gone. What a shameful condition
is it for men to gratify a number of unrulie lusts, and give such sway to
them, as to do ill while they live, and to lay a foundation of misery for
aftertimes.

On the contrary, what a good thing is it (like Iosi^^ and Nehemiah) to be
full of goodness while we live? and to lay a foundation of happiness and
prosperity to the Church and State when we are gone? What a happy thing is it
when a man is gone, to say, such a man did such a thing? he stood stoutly for
the Church, for Religion, he was a public man; he forgot his own private
good, for the public; he deserved well of the times wherein he lived. What a
blessed commendation is this (next to Heaven) to have a blessed report on
earth? and to carry such a conscience, as will comfort a man that he has
carried himself well, and abounded in well doing.

I beseech you let us think of this; For ever and ever: it is not enough that
we be good in our times that are circumscribed to us; but as God has given us
immortal souls, and preserves us to immortal glory, and a crown of
immortality: so let our thoughts and desires be immortal, that God may be
glorified in the Church world without end. Oh what a sweet comfort will it be
when we are on our deathbed, to think what we have done in our life times?
then all our good actions will come and meet together, to comfort and refresh
our souls.

The better to encourage us to glorify God while we are here; Encouragements
to glorify God.
and to lay a foundation to eternize his glory for the time to come; Consider,
1 Samuel 2. 3o.
I. Gods gracious promise:

2. Consider, that we honor our selves, when we honor God; nay, the more we
honor God, the more we are bound to God; for it is from him that we honor
him: the sacrifice comes from him, as well as the matter for which we
sacrifice. Genesis 22. 13.
He found a Ram for Abraham to sacrifice: he gives the heart to be
thankful: the more we are thankful, the more we shall be thankful, and the
more we ought to be thankful for our thankfulness.

The more we praise God, the more we should praise him; for it is the gift of
God: when God sees we honor him, and frame our selves that we may be such as
may honor him, by emptying and disabling our selves to be sufficient to do
him any service; he will bestow more upon us; as men cast seed upon seed where
there is fruitful ground, but they will sow nothing upon a barren heath: So
the more we set our selves to do good in our places, the more we shall have
advantage thereunto; and the more we do good, the more we shall do good.
When God sees we improve our talents so well that he trusts withal, he will
trust us with more.

Our glorifiing and praising God, causes others to do so; which is the main
end wherefore we live in this world; It is the employment of Heaven, and we
are so much in heaven, as we are about this work: and when God gives us
hearts to glorify him here, it is a good pledge that he will afterward
glorify us in heaven. Who would lose the comfort of all this, to be barren,
and yield to his base unbeleeving dead heart? to save a little here? to sleep
in a whole skin? and adventure upon no good action? Who would not rather take a
course that has such large encouragements attending it both in life and death.
I beseech you think of these things. Christ ere long, will come to be
glorified in all those that believe: 2 These. 1. 10.
He will come to be glorified in his Saints. Our glory tends to his glory;
shall we not glorify him all we can here, by setting forth his truth, by
countenancing his Children and Servants, by doing good, and deserving well of
ungrateful times we live in? Let men be as unthankful as they will, we look
not to them, but to the honor of God, the credit of Religion, the maintenance
of the truth, etc. Let men be as they will be, base, and wicked, enemies to
grace and goodness; we do it not to them, but to God. Consider this, will
Christ come from Heaven ere long to be glorified in us, and shall not we
labor to glorify him, while we are here? He will never come to be glorified
in any hereafter, but those that glorify him now. As we look therefore that
he should be glorified in us, and by us, let us glorify him now: for so he
condescends to vouchsafe to be glorified in us and by us, that the may also
glorify us.

Saint Paul says, The Wife is the glory of the Husband; Quest.
what means he by this? That is, Sol.
she reflects the graces of a good Husband; if he be good, she is good, she
reflects his excellencies. So let every Christian soul that is married to
Christ, be the glory of Christ, reflect his excellencies; 1. Pet. 1. 15.
be holy as he is holy; fruitsull, as he was, in doing good; meek and humble
as he was; every way be his glory: and then, undoubtedly when he comes to judge
us, he will come to be glorified in us, having been before glorified by us.

Beloved, these and such considerations should set us on work how to do
Christ all the honor we can: as David says, is there any of Ionathans
posterity alive, 2 Samuel* 9. 1.
that I may do good unto them for his sake? so considering we shall beso
glorified by Christ, and that he will do so much for us in another world; We
should enquire, Is there any of Christ's posterity here, any of his Children in
this world that I may do good unto them? Is there any way wherein I may show
my thankfulness, and I will do it? Let us consider that we shall be for and
ever glorified; the expression of it is beyond conceit, we shall never know it
til we have it. Let this (I beseech you) stir us up to study how we may be
thankful to God, set forth his glory, and deserve well of the Church and times
wherein we live. God has children, and a cause in the world which he dearly
loves, let us own the same, and stand for it to the uttermost of our power,
maugre all the spite and opposition of Satan and his wicked instruments.

The Lord in mercy settle these truths upon our hearts, and encourage us in his
most holy way.

FINIS.
CHRIST IS BEST: OR, S. PAVLS STRAIT. A SERMON PREA ched at the Funeral of Mr.
Sherland, late Recorder of Northampton.

BY R. SIBBS. D. D. Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher of
Grayes-Inne, LONDON.

PSALM. 42. 2. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come
and appear before God? LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman, at the Brazen
Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. I634.

CHRIST IS BEST.
PHIL. 1. 23, 24. For I am in a strait between two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ which is best of all; nevertheless to abide in the
flesh, is most needful for you.
THe Apostle Paul here, had a double desire, one in regard of himself, to be
with Christ; another out of his love of Gods Church and people, to abide still
in the flesh, and between these two he is in a great strait not knowing
which to choose; but the love of the Church of Christ tryumphed in him, above
the love of his own salvation; so as he was content out of self-denial to
want the joys of heaven for a time, that he might yet further comfort the
people of God.

In the words you have, 1. S. Paul's straites, 2. his desires that caused them,
as in regard of himself, which was to be with Christ; so in respect of the
Church of God, which was to abide still here. 3. the reasons of both, 1. to be
with Christ, is far better for me. 2. to abide in the flesh, more needful
for you: and 4. his resolution upon all, being willing for the Churches good
still to abide here, rather than go to heaven and enjoy his own happiness.

S. Paul's soul was as a ship between two winds, tossed up and down, and
as iron between two Loadstones drawn first one way, then another; the one
loadstone was his own good to be in heaven, the other was the good of Gods
people to abide still in the flesh.

Observe hence, Obser.
that the servants of God are oftentimes in great straits; some things are so
exceeding bad, that without any deliberation or delay at all we ought presently
to abominate them, as Satan's temptations to sin, to distrust, despair, etc.
some things also are so good that we should immediately cleave unto them, as
matters of Religion and piety, there should be no delay in these holy
businesses; deliberation here argues weakness. Some things (again) are of an
ambiguous and doubtful nature requiring our best consideration, such was Paul's
strait in this place; he had reasons swaying him on both sides, and such is the
happy estate of a Christian that whatsoever he had chosen, had been well for
him, only God who rules our judgments will have us to make choice; God might
have determined whether Paul should live or die,, but he would not without
Paul's choice; that which is good is not good to us, but upon choice and advice;
when God has given us abilities to discourse and examine things he will have
us make use of them, and therefore the Apostle uses reasons on both sides; It
is better to die for me, It is better to live for you, etc.

Wicked men have their deliberations and their straits too, but it is with the
rich man in the Gospel, What they shall do? how they may pull down their
barnes and build bigger; Luke 12. 18.
etc. Their maine strait is at the hour of death, live they cannot, die they
dare not, there is so much guilt of sin upon their consciences, they know not
which way to turn themselves; oh what fearful straits will sin bring men
into? but the Apostle was straightened in an higher nature than this, whether it
were better for the glory of God (which he aimed at above all) for him to go
to heaven and enjoy happiness in his own person, or to abide still for the
comfort of Gods Saints on earth.

The ground of this difficulty and strait, was his present desire,

I have a desire.

Desires are the immediate issue of the soul, the motion and stirring of the
same to something that likes it; when there is any thing set before the soul
having a magneticall force, as the Loadstone to draw out the motions thereof,
we call that, desire, though for the present it enjoyes it not.

Paul's desire was, 1. spiritual, not after happiness so much as holiness; oh
miserable man that I am (says he) who shall deliver me from this body of
death, Romans 7.
his desire of death was to be freeed from the body of sin more than to be
taken out of the flesh, and his desire of holiness to have Christ's image stamped
on his soul, was more than of eternal happiness; nature cannot do this, its
a work above the flesh, for that will not hear of departing, but rather bids
God and Christ depart from it.

2. This desire came from a Paul knew what a sweet communion Christ was.

3. It was a constant desire, he I desire, but I have a desire, I carry the
same about me, and that carries me to a love of Christ and his members.

4. It was efficacious, not a sluggard, I would, and I would, but a strong
desire carrying him even through death it self to Christ: desires thus
qualified are blessed desires, as where we so vapors arise, there are
springs usually below them, so where these desires are, there is always a
spring of grace in that soul; Nothing characterizeth a Christian so much as
holy and blessed desires, for there is no hypocrisy in them.

I desire to depart.

There must be a parting and a departing; there must be a parting in this world
with all outward excellencies, from the sweet enjoyment of the creatures; there
must be a parting between soul and body, between friend and friend, and
whatever is near and dear unto us, all shall determine in death.

And there must be a departing also, here we cannot stay long, away we must, we
are for another place. Oh that we could make use of these common truths! how
far are we from making a right use of the mysteries of salvation, when we
cannot make use of common truths which we have daily experience of? Holy
Moses considering the suddenness of his departure hence, begged of God to
teach him to number his days that he might apply his heart unto wisdom.

Death is but a departing, which word is taken from loosing from the shore, or
removing of a ship to another coast; we must all be unloosened from our houses
of clay and be carried to another place, to heaven; Paul labors to sweeten so
harsh a thing as death by comfortable expressions of it, It is but a sleep, a
going home, a laying aside our earthly tabernacle, to teach us this point of
heavenly wisdom, that we should look on death as it is now in the Gospel,
not as it was in the Law and by nature, for so it is a passage to hell and lets
us in to all miseries whatsoever.

Some things are desirable for themselves as happiness and holiness, some
things are desirable not for themselves, but as they make way to better things,
being sour, and bitter to nature themselves, as Physic is desired not for it
self, but for health; we desire health for it self, and physic for health,
so to be with Christ is a thing desirable of it self, but because we cannot
come to Christ but by the dark passage of death, says Paul, I desire to
depart that so my death may be a passage to Christ, so that death was the
object of S. Paul's desire so far as it made way for better things.

I desire to depart, and to be with Christ.

To be with Christ that came from heaven to be here on earth with us, and
descended that we should ascend, to be with him that has done and suffered so
much for us, to be with Christ that delighted to be with us, to be with Christ
that emptyed himself, and became of no reputation, that became poor to make
us rich, to be with Christ our husband now contracted here, that all may be
made up in heaven, this was the thing Paul desired.

Why does he not say, Quest.
I desire to be in heaven?

Because heaven is not heaven without Christ, Answ.
it is better to be in any place with Christ than to be in heaven it self
without him, all delicacies without Christ are but as a funeral banquet, where
the master of the feast is away, there is nothing but solemnnesse: what is all,
without Christ? I say the joys of heaven are not the joys of heaven without
Christ; he is the very heaven of heaven.

True love is carried to the person; It is adulterous love, to love the thing,
or the gift more than the person, S. Paul loved the person of Christ, because
he felt sweet experience that Christ loved him; his love was but a reflection
of Christ's love first, he loved to see Christ, to embrace him, and enjoy him,
that had done so much and suffered so much for his soul, that had forgiven him
so many sins, etc.

The reason is, because it is best of all; To be with Christ is to be at the
springhead of all happiness, it is to be in our proper element, every creature
thinks it self best in its own element, that is the place it thrives in, and
enjoyes its happiness in; now Christ is the element of a Christian. Again, it
is far better; because to be with Christ is to have the marriage consummate,
is not marriage better than the contract? is not home better than absence? to
be with Christ is to be at home; is not triumph better than to be in conflict?
but to be with Christ is to triumph over all enemies, to be out of Satan's
reach; is not perfection better than imperfection? here all is but imper^ect,
in heaven there is perfection, therefore that is much better than any good
below; for all are but shadows here, there is reality; What is riches? what
are the worme-eaten pleasures of the world? What are the honors of the earth,
but mere shadows of good? At the right hand of Christ are pleasures indeed,
honors indeed, riches indeed; then is realitie.

If we speak of grace, and good things, it is better to be with Christ than
enjoy the graces and com^orts of the Holy Ghost here; Why? because they are all
stained, and mixed, here our peace is interrupted with desertion, and trouble,
here the joys of the holy ghost, are mingled with sorrow, here the grace in a
man is with combat of flesh, and spirit, but in heaven there is pure peace,
pure joy, pure grace; for what is glory but the perfection of grace; grace
indeed is glory here, but it is glory with conflict; the Scripture calls grace
glory sometimes, but it is glory with imperfection; Beloved, perfection is
better than imperfection, therefore to be with Christ is far better.

And is it much far better to die, that we may be with Christ, than to live
here a conflicting life? Why should we then fear death, that is but a passage
to Christ? It is but a grimme servant that lets us into a glorious palace,
that striks off our bolts, that takes off our rags that we may be clothed
with better robes, that ends all our misery, and is the beginning of all our
happiness, why should we therefore be afraid of death? it is but a departure
to a better condition? It is but as Jordan to the children of Israel, by which
they passed to Canaan, it is but as the red sea by which they were going that
way; therefore we have no reason to fear death: of it self it is an enemy
indeed, but now it is harmless, nay now it is become a friend, amicable to
us, a sweet friend; it is one part of the Churches jointure, death All things
are yours says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Paul and Apollos, life and death, death is ours and for our good, it does us
more good than all the friends we have in the world, it determines and ends all
our misery, and sin; and it is the suburbs of heaven, it lets us into those
joys above. It is a shame for Christians therefore, to be afraid of that
that Paul here makes the object of his desire.

But may not a good Christian fear death?

I answer, Not; so far as a Christian is led with the spirit of God, and is
truly spiritual: for the spirit carries us upward; but as far as we are
earthly and carnal, and biased downward to things below, we are loath to
depart hence; In some cases Gods children are afraid to die, because their
accounts are not ready, though they love Christ, and are in a good way, yet
notwithstanding because they have not prepared themselves by care, as a woman
that has her husband abroad and desires his coming, but all is not prepared
in the house, therefore she desires that he may stay awhile; so the soul that
is not exact, that is not in that frame that it should be in; Psalm. 39.
says, Oh stay awhile that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and
be no more seen; but as far as we are guided by the spirit of God,
sanctifying us, and are in such a condition as we should be in, so far the
thoughts of death ought not to be terrible to us, nor indeed are they.

Beloved, there is none but a Christian that can desire death; because it is
the end of all comfort here, it is the end of all callings and employments, of
all sweetness whatsoever in this world. If another man that is not a
Christian, desire heaven, he desires it not (as heaven) or to ^e with Christ
(as Christ) he desires it under some notion suitable to his corruption: for our
desires are as our selves are, as our aims are; no carnal worldly man, but
has carnal worldly aims; a worldly man cannot go beyond the world, it is
his sphere; a carnal man cannot go beyond the flesh, therefore a carnal man
cannot desire heaven, a man that is under the power of any lust, can desire
nothing but the satisfying of that lust, heaven is no place for such; none but
a child of God can desire that: For if we consider heaven, and to be with
christ, to be perfect holiness, can he desire it that hates holiness here? can
he desire the Image of God upon him that hates it in others and in himself
too? can he desire the communion of Saints, that (of all societies) hates it
the most? can he desire to be free from sin, that ingulfes himself
continually in sin? he cannot, and therefore as long as he is under the
thraldom, and dominion of any lust he may desire heaven indeed, but it is
only so far as he may have his lusts there, his pleasures, honors, and
riches there too; if he may have heaven with that, he is contented: but alas,
brethren, heaven must not be so desired, S. Paul did otherwise, he desired to
be dissolved to be with Christ, he desired it as the perfection of the Image
of God, under the notion of holiness and freedom from sin, as I said before.

Which is far better.

Again, Obser.
we see that God reserves the best for the last, Gods ^a^t works are his best
works, the new heaven and the new earth, are the best; the second wine that
Christ created himself was the best; spiritual things are better than
natural; A Christians last is his best.

God will have it so for the comfort of Christians, that everyday they live,
they may think, My best is behind, my best is to come, that every day they
rise, they may think, I am nearer heaven one day than I was before, I am
nearer death, and therefore nearer to Christ, what a solace is this to a
gracious heart? A Christian is a happy man in his life, but happyer in his
death, because then he goes to Christ, but happiest of all in heaven, for then
he is with Christ. How contrary to a carnal man, that lives according to the
sway of his own base lusts? he is miserable in his life, more miserable in his
death, but most miserable of all after death; I beseech you lay this to heart,
me thinks considering that death is but a way for us to be with Christ, which
is far better, this should sweeten the thinking of death to us, and we should
comfort our selves daily that we are nearer happiness.

But how shall we attain this sanctified sweet desire that Paul had, Qu^^t.
to die and be with Christ?

Let us carry our selves as Paul did, Ans.
and then we shall have the same desires; S. Paul (before death) in his life
time, had his conversation in heaven, his mind was there, Phil. 3. 1.
and his soul followed after; there is no man's soul comes into heaven, but
his mind is there first. It was an easy matter for him to desire to be with
Christ, having his conversation in heaven already; Paul in meditation was where
he was not, and he was not where he was, he was in heaven when his body was on
earth.

Paul had loosed his affections from all earthly things, therefore it was an
easy matter for him, to desire to be with Christ, Gal. 6. 14.
I am cruci^ied to the world and the world is crucified to me, etc. If once a
Christian comes to this pass, death will be welcome to him; those whose hearts
are fastened to the world, cannot easily desire Christ.

Paul labored to keep a good conscience in all things, herein I exercise my
self to have a good conscience toward God and men, Acts 24. 16.
etc. It is easy for him to desire to be dissolved, that has his conscience
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, free from a purpose of living in any sin;
But where there is a stained, defiled, polluted conscience, there cannot be
this desire: for the heart of man naturally, as the Prophet says, casts up
mire and dirt, it casts up fears, and objections, and murmurings, and
repinings: Oh beloved, we think not what mischief sin will do us when we
suffer it sease upon our consciences; when it is once written there with the
claw of a Diamond, Jer. 17. 1.
and with a pen of iron, who shall get it out? Nothing but great repentance and
faith, applying the blood of Christ, it is no easy matter to get it off there,
and to get the conscience at peace again; and when conscience is not appeased,
there will be all clamours within, it will fear to appear before the
judgment ^ea^; a guilty conscience trembles at the mention of death. Therefore
I wonder how men that live in swearing, in looseness, in filthiness, in
deboisednesse of life, that labor to satisfy their lusts and corruptions, (^
wonder how they) can think of death without trembling, considering that they
are under the guilt of so many sins; Oh beloved the exercising of the heart
to keep a clear conscience, can only breed this desire in us to depart, and
to be with Christ: you have a company of wretched persons (proud enough in
their own conceits, and censorious, nothing can please the^) whose whole life
is acted by satan joining with the lusts of their flesh, and they do nothing
but put stings into death every day, and arm death against themselves, which
when once it appears, their con^cience, which is a hell within them, is
wakened, and where are they? they can stay here no longer, they must appear
before the dreadful Judge, and then where are all their pleasures, and
contentments, for which they neglected heaven, and happiness, peace of
conscience, and all: Oh therefore let us walk holily with our God, and maintain
inward peace all we can, if we desire to depart hence with comfort.

4. Again, Paul had got assurance that he was in Christ by his union with him;
I live not says he, but Christ lives in me: Gal. 2. 19.
therefore labor for assurance of salvation, that you may feel the spirit of
Christ in you, sanctifying, and altering your carnal dispositions to be like
his, I know whom I have trusted, says he; he was as sure of his salvation as
if he had had it already. How few live, as if they intended any such matter as
this, assurance of salvation, without which how can we ever desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ? will a man leave his house, though it be
never so mean, when he knows not whither to go? will a man leave the prison
when he knows he shall be carried to execution? Oh no, he had rather be in the
dungeon still; So when there is guilt on the soul, that it is not assured of
salvation, but rather has cause to fear the contrary: can it say, I desire to
depart, and be with Christ, etc? No; they had rather abide in the flesh still,
if they could for ever, for all eternity; therefore if we would come to Paul's
desire, labor to come to the frame of the holy Apostles spirit, he knew whom
he had believed, he was assured that nothing could separate him from the love
of God, neither life, nor death, Romans 8.
nor any thing whatsoever could befall him.

5. Paul had an art of sweetning the thoughts of death, he considered it only
as a departure from earth, to heaven, when death was presented unto him as a
passage to Christ, it was a easy matter, to desire the same; therefore it
should be the Art of Christians, to present death as a passage to a better
life, to labor to bring our souls into such a condition, as to think death
not to be a death to us, but the death of it self, death dies when I die, and
I begin to live when I die; It is a sweet passage to life, we never live till
we die. This was Paul's Art, he had a care to look beyond death, to heaven,
and when he looked upon death he looked on it but as a passage to Christ, so
let it be our art and skill; would we cherish a desire to die, let us look on
death as a passage to Christ, and look beyond it to heaven: All of us must go
through this dark passage to Christ, which when we consider as Paul did, it
will be an easy matter to die.

I come now to the next words, Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you.

This is the other desire of Paul that brought him into this strait, he was
troubled whether he should die, which was far better for himself, or live,
which was more needful for them, but the love of Gods people did prevail in
holy S. Paul, above the desire of heaven, and the present enjoying his own
happiness. Oh the power of grace in the hearts of Gods children, that makes
them content to be without the joys of heaven for a time, that they may do
God service, in serving his Church here upon earth.

Observe hence, Obser. 1.
that the lives of worthy men* especially Magistrates, and Ministers are very
needful for the Church of God.

The reason is, because Gods manner of dispensation is, to convey all good to
men, by the means of men like our selves for the most part; and this he does
to knit us into a holy communion one with another, therefore it is needful that
holy men should abide; in regard of the Church of God* their lives are very
useful.

If we consider good, the great benefit, that comes by them, we shall easily
yield to this; For what a deal of sin does a good Magistrate stop and
^inder? when there were good Judges and good Kings in Israel, see what a
reformation there was: Antichrist could not come in when the Roman Empire
flourished, 2 These. 2.
though now the Roman Empire hinder the fall of Antichrist, because Antichrist
has given her the cup of fornication, and they are drunk with the whores cup;
but at the first it was not so. Beloved, whilst good Magistrates and good
Ministers continue in a place, there is a hinderance of heresies, and sin,
etc. If they be once removed, there is a floodgate opened for all manner of
sin, and corruption to break in at. Yea there is abundance of good comes in by
gracious persons.

The lips of the righteous feed many.

2. By their reformation of gappe and stop evil, they reform it and labor to
stablish that which is pleasing to God.

3. Gracious persons, in what

4. They do a great deal of lights of the world, that give aim to others in
the darkness of this life.

5. They can by their prayers this way, a praying force and army is as good as
a fighting army. Moses did as much good by prayer, as the soldiers in the
valley when they fought with Amelek; they are favorites with God in heaven,
therefore S. Paul says, It is needful for you that I abide in the flesh:
Gracious men are public treasures, and storehouses wherein every man has a
share, a portion; they are public springs in the wilderness of this world to
refresh the souls of people; they are trees of righteousness that stretch out
their boughs for others to shelter under, and to gather fruit from: You have an
excellent picture of this in Daniel, in the dream of Ne^^chadnezar; Dan. 4. 21.
the Magistrates there are compared to a great tree, where in the birds build
their nests, and the beasts shelter themselves* so a good Magistrate especially
if he be in great place, is as a great tree, for comfort and shelter; Oh
beloved, the lives of good men are very useful. A good man (says the
Philosopher) is a common good, because as soon as ever a man becomes gracious,
he has a public mind as he has a public place, nay, whether he has a
public place or no, he has a public mind; It is needful therefore that
there be such men alive.

If this be so, then we may lament the death of worthy men, because we lose
part of our strength in the loss of such, Gods custom being to convey much
good by them, and when there is scarcity of good men, we should say with Micah,
Micah 7.
Woe is me, the good is perished from the earth: they keep judgments from a
place, and derive a blessing upon it, howsoever the world judges them, and
accounts them not worthy to live yet God accounts the world unworthy of them,
they are Gods Jewels, they are his treasure, and his portion, therefore we
ought to lament their death and to desire their lives; and we ought to desire
our own lives, as long as we may be useful to the Church, and be content to
want heaven for a time: Beloved, it is not for the good of Gods children that
they live; as soon as ever they are in the state of grace they have a title to
heaven, but it is for others; when once we are in Christ, we live for others
not for our selves; that a father is kept alive, it is for his childrens sake;
that good Magistrates are kept alive, it is for their subjects sake; that a
good Minister is kept alive out of the present enjoying of heaven, it is for
the peoples sake, that God has committed to him to instruct, for as Paul says
here, in regard of my own particular, it is better for me to be with Christ.

If God convey so much good Use.
by worthy men to us, then what wretches are they that malign them, persecute
them, etc. speak ill of those that speak to God for them? does the world
continue for a company of wretches, a company of profane, blasphemous, loose,
disorderly livers? Oh no, for if God had not a Church in the world, a company
of good people, heaven and earth would fall in pieces, there would be an end
presently; It is for good people (only) that the world continues, they are the
pillars of the tottering world, they are the stakes in the fence, they are the
foundation of the building, and if they were once taken out, all would come
down, there would be a confusion of all, therefore those that oppose and
disquiet gracious and good men, are enemies to their own good, they cut the
bough which they stand on, they labor to pull down the house that covers
themselves, being blinded with malice, and a diabolical spirit: take need of
such a disposition, it comes near to the sin against the holy Ghost, to hate
any man for goodness; because perhaps his good life reproacheth us, such a one
would hate Christ himself if he were here, how can a man desire to be with
Christ, when he hates his image in another? therefore if God convey so much
good by other men that are good, let us make much of them, as public persons,
as instruments of our good; take away malice, and pride, and a poisonfull
spirit, and all their good is ours: what hinders that we have no good by them?
pride, and an envious spirit, etc.

A second thing that I observe hence is this; Obser.
Holy and gracious men that are led by the Spirit of God can deny themselves,
and their own best good, for the Churches benefit. They know that God has
appointed them as instruments to convey good to others, and knowing this they
labor to come to Paul's spirit here, to desire to live, to have life in
patience, and death in desire in regard of themselves; for it were much better
for a good man to be in heaven out of misery, out of this conflicting
condition with the devil and devilish minded men.

The reason is, Reas. 1.
because a good man as soon as he is a good man, has the spirit of love in
him, and love seeks not its own but the good of another, and as the love of
Christ and the love of God possesses, and seizes upon the soul, so
self-love decays; what is gracious love, but a decay of self-love, the more
self-love decays, the more we deny our selves.

Again, Gods people have the spirit of Christ in them, who minded not his own
things; If Christ had minded his own things where had our salvation been?
Christ was content to leave heaven, and to take our nature upon him, to be
Emanu^l, God with us, that we might be with God for ever in heaven; he was
content not only to leave heaven, but to be borne in the womb of a Virgin, he
was content to stoop to the grave; he stooped as low as hell, in love to us.
Now where Christ's spirit is, it will bring men from their altitudes, and
excellencies, and make them to stoop, to serve the Church, and account it an
honor to be an instrument to do good; Christ was content to be accounted not
only a servant of God, but of the Churches, Es^y 53. 11^
My righteous servant, etc. Those that have the spirit of Christ, have a spirit
of selfedeniall of their own, we see the blessed angels are content to be
Ministering spirits for us, and it is thought to be the sin of the devil,
pride, when he scorned to stoop, to the keeping of man an inferior creature
to himself. The blessed Angels do not scorn to attend upon a poor child,
little ones: A Christian is a consecrated person, and he is none of his own,
he is a sacrifice as soon as he is a Christian, he is Christ's, he gives
himself to Christ, and as he gives himself so he gives his life, and all to
Christ, as Paul faith of the Corinths, they gave themselves and their goods to
him; when a Christian gives himself to Christ, he gives all to Christ: all his
labor and pains, and whatsoever he knows that Christ can serve himself of
him for his Churches good, and his glory; he knows that Christ is wiser than
he, therefore he resignes himself to his disposal, resolving, if he live, he
lives to the Lord; Romans 14. 8.
and if he die, he dies to the Lord; that so, whether he live or die, he may be
the Lords.

Oh beloved, Use
that we had the spirit of S. Paul, and the spirit of Christ to set us a work,
to do good while we are here, to deny our selves; oh it would be meat and
drink as it was to our blessed Savior Christ, to do good all kind of ways;
consider all the capacities and abilities we have to do good, this way, and
that way, in this relation, and that relation, that we may be trees of
righteousness, that the more we bear, God will mend his own trees, he will
purge them and prune them to bring forth more fruit, God cherishes fruitful
trees: in the law of Moses, when they besieged any place, he commanded them to
spare fruitful trees: God spares a fruitful person till he have done his
work; we know not how much good one man may do though he be a mean person,
sometimes One poor wise man delivers the city, Eccles. 9. 15.
and the righteous delivers the Island; We see for one servant Joseph,
Potiphars house was blessed. Genesis 39. 3.
Naaman had a poor maidservant, that was the occasion of his conversion. Grace
will set any body aworke, its puts a dexterity into any though never so mean,
they carry Gods blessing wheresoever they go, and they bethink themselves
when they are in any condition to do good, as he says in Hester God has
called me to this place, perhaps for this end: we should often put this
quaere to our selves, why has God called me to this place? for such and such a
purpose.

Now that we may be fruitful as Paul was, let us labor to have humble
spirits; God delights in an humble spirit, and not in a proud spirit, for that
takes all the glory to it self, God delights to use humble spirits, that are
content to stoop to any service for others, that thinks no office too mean.

2. Get loving hearts, love is full of invention, how shall I glorify God? how
shall I do good to others? how shall I bring to heaven as many as I can? love
is a sweet and boundless affection, full of holy devices.

3. Labor to have sufficiency in our places, that you may have ability to do
good: oh, when these meet together, ability and sufficiency, and a willing, a
large, and gracious heart and a fit object to do good too: What a deal of good
is done then?

4. And when we find opportunity of doing any good, let us resolve upon it,
resolve to honor God, and serve him in spite of flesh and blood: for we must
get every good work that we do out of the fire, as it were; we must get it
out with travail, and pains; we carry that about us that will hinder us, let
us therefore labor to have sincere aims in that we do to please God, and
then resolve to do all the good we can.

To stir us up to be more and more fruitful in our places, let us consider
we live for others, and not for our selves when we are good Christians once.
It was a good speech of that godly Palsgrave, great grandfather to him that is,
(Frederick the godly they called him) when he was to die, satis vobis (says
he) I have lived hitherto for you, now let me live for my self; we live here
all our life for others, therefore let us think while we live how we may do
most good in the Church of God.

For encouragement hereunto consider, God will undertake to recompense all the
good we do, to a cup of cold water; we shall not lose a sigh, a groan, for
the Church, God would account himself dishonored if it should not be
rewarded, he has pawned his faithfulness upon it; Heb. 6. 10.
He is not unfaithful to be unmindfull of your good works.

Nay, we have a present reward and contentment of conscience: as light
accompanies fire, so peace and joy accompany nie every good action; All is not
reserved for heaven, a Christian has some beginnings of happiness here, when
he does that that is contrary to flesh and blood, how full of sweet joy is a
fruitful soul? those that are fruitful in their places never want arguments
of good assurance of salvation. It is your lazy lukewarm Christian that
wants assurance. Therefore I beseech you be stirred up, to live desired in the
world, and die lamented, labor to be useful in your places all you can, to be
as the Olive, and fig tree, delighting God and man, and not to cumber the
ground of the Church with barrenness: sins of omission, because men were not
fruitful in their places was a ground of damnation: Cast the unprofitable
servant into utter darkness: M ^. 2.
put case he did no harm, I, but he was unprofitable; such was the cursed
disposition of Ephraim, he brought forth fruit to himself: Oh this looking to
our selves, when we make our selves the beginning and the end of all the good we
do, it is an argument of a barren person, none ever came to heaven but those
that denied themselves.

I see I cannot proceed in this point, you may by the spirit of God enlarge it
in your thoughts and bring home what has been said to your ownes souls,
labor that you may be such as others may make use of you, and not be the
burdens and calamities of the time, as many are, that live for nothing but to
do good men good by vexing of them, that is all the good they do, by vexing
their patience they exercise their grace a contrary way; let us not be briars
and unfruitful plants, laboring to be great by the public miserics: As they
say, great fishes grow big by devouring many little ones; as a dragon comes
to be great by devouring many little serpents, so many grow great by the ruin
of others; Oh beloved, it had been better for such that they had never been
borne. Therefore as we desire to have comfort when we die, let us labor to be
fruitful while we live. S. Paul when the time came that he should die, when
he had done his work, you see he that was thus full of self-denial, how
gloriously he ended his days; The second Epistle to Timothy was the last
Epistle that ever he wrote, and when he had done his work, says he, 2. Tim.
4. 7.
I have sought a good fight, I have kept the faith, I have finished my course,
from henceforth there is a crown of righteousness reserved for me; what a
glorious end is here? and indeed those that are thus careful, and fruitful in
their lives and conversations, end their days full of comfort, and resign
their souls to God with full assurance of a blessed change, and only those:
For you have many, when they come to die, what hinders them? Oh I have been
unfruitful, I have not done that good that I might, I have not wrought out my
salvation with fear and trembling. In such a thing I have done ill, such a
thing I have omitted, so they are enemies to their own comfort, enlarge this
in your own meditations, and consider what will comfort you hereafter when you
shall need most comfort: So I leave the text, and come to the occasion.

This holy and blessed man whose funeral now we solemnize, was of S. Paul's
spirit, he did desire to die, and be with Christ, he had a desire while he
lived to take all opportunities to do good: I speak of that time when he
lived, that is, when he was good, for we live no longer than we are good: let
us not reckon that Life wherein we do no good. After God had wrought upon his
hea^rt, he had a public heart to do good. If I wanted matter to speak of, I
could tell you of his alliance and birth, having two worthy Judges of reverend
esteem, the one his grand father, the other his uncle; the one bred him, the
other cherished and promoted his study and endeavors; but what should I
speak of these things when he has personal worth enough? I need not go
abroad to commend this man, for there were those graces and gifts in him, that
made him so esteemed, that verily I think, no man of his place and years,
lived more desired, and dyed more lamented.

parts of nature, they were pregnant and sollid, but as one said to Melancthon,
his disposition and loving mind did gain as much love from men as his parts,
though they were great.

His learning was good, for elegant learning, and controverted points of
divinity; he was a good divine: Indeed in the turning of his life when he
should have adventured upon a profession, he had some thoughts of being a
divine, had not his friends, especially his uncle, Judge Telverton, disposed
him otherwise, by promoting his study in the Law, and when he took upon him
that profession, he grew so in it, that he was a credit to the profession, for
integrity, sincerity, and ability.

disposition he was every way a man of an excellent sweet temper: mild, and
yet resolute; meek, and yet bold where cause was; discreet, yet not
overdiscreet, so as not to stand out in a good cause in the defense of it; he
was humble, yet thought himself too good to be isntrumental to any services
other then stood with the peace of his conscience; he was tractable and gentle,
yet immoveably fixed to his principles of piety and honesty; he was exact in
his life, yet not censorious; very conscionable and religious, but without any
vain curiosity; indeed he was every way of a sweet temper, if he stood out in
dislike of any, in any matter, he carried it usually with evidence of such
sincerity, and denial of selfeseeking, that he usually prevailed where he put
in.

To come to his private personal nearer communion with God; he enquired of
those he conversed with, of the way to attain the same, and was willing to
hear any discourses that tended that way.

For his care of the Sabbath, it for want of this, how many sermons are lost in
this great City? how much seed is spilt in vain? What nourishment can there
be without digestion? it is the second digestion that breeds nourishment; when
we chew things, and call them to mind again and make them our own: This was
his custom every Sabbath.

constant friend, and his study was to labor to make those good he conversed
withal, he conversed with few but they were the better for him, he was so
fruitful; and he would have intimate society with none but he would do good
or take good from them; you have many in the society where he lived, that may
bless God all the days of their life, that ever they knew him.

For his carriage in his government Place where he lived, I think there are
none that are able to judge, but will give him the testimony of a faithful
prudent govern^ur; he was so careful of the town where he was Recorder, that
he provided for them after his death, and gave them a large legacy, 200.
mark, to set the poor on work.

For the honorable society order and good exercises, and was such a strict
opposer of any abuse, which he judged to be so, that the house will have a
special want of him: I fear, rather I desire from my soul that that
honorable society may so flourish as they may have no want of good Master
Sherland.

Public carriage, by virtue of his place at Northampton where he was
Recorder, he was called to be a member of the body representative in
Parliament, wherein both his ability, and spirit appeared to all that knew
him; you may see by this what manner of man we have lost.

He died before he was come to the middle of his years, a young man to speak
of, and he did a great deal of work in a little time, God had ripened him for
his business extraordinarily; and gave him a spirit to bestirre himself to
doc all the good he could: These be wondrous ill times, beloved, to lose such
men as he was, therefore we have cause to lay it to heart the more, the
commonwealth wants him, the town and country where he lived will want him,
the society where he was a governor will want him, the family where he was
a governor, will find a miss in him; he went wisely in and out, he was
able for family duties, he had more than ordinary sufficiency, he was of
Iosuahs mind, Choose who you will serve, Jos. 24. 15.
but I and my house will serve the Lord; and to help him the more, he had the
happiness to marry into a religious family, he had a good helper.

Now for the Church, though his profession was the Law, yet that will have a
great want of him, he was a hearty and true Promoter of the cause of
Religion, and showed his love to the Church, by his care of it now he is
departed, he gave four hundred pounds to buy in impropriations, he gave an
hundred pounds for the breeding up of Poor scholars, and there is never a
good Minister round about where he lived, but had encouragement from him;
Indeed he was a man of special use, and service; and as he honored God in his
life, so God has honored him in his death, as you may see by this honorable
assembly of worthy people, met in love to him.

His death was (as the death of strong men uses to be) with conflicts between
nature, and his disease, but with a great deal of patience; and in his
sickness time, he would utter Paul's disposition, Oh says he, You keep me
from heaven, you keep me from glory, being displeased with those, that kept
him alive with conference out of love.

He had a large heart to do good, for though he were fruitful and studied
to be fruitful, yet often in his sickness in a complaining manner, he would
say, Oh, I have not been so wise for my own soul, as I ought to be: I have
not been provident enough in taking opportunities of doing and receiving good.

Beloved, shall such a man as he was, so careful, so fruitful, so good, shall
he complain thus? what shall a company of us do? Beloved, those that have
warmed their hearts at the fire of Gods love, they think zeal it self to be
coldness, and fruitfulness to be barrenness; Love is a boundless affection,
he spoke not this from want of care, but love knows no bounds, therefore he
took the more opportunities of doing good.

Well, I beseech you beloved, let not this example Pass without making good
use of it, God will call us to a reckoning not only for what we hear, but for
what we see: he will call us to a reckoning for the examples of his people,
therefore as we see here what a holy disposition was in St. Paul, and in this
blessed man now with God, so let us labor to find the same disposition in our
selves. Paul has now his desire, he is dissolved, and he is with Christ, that
is best of all. This holy man has his desire, he desired not to be kept from
his glory and happiness, on which his mind was set before; let us therefore
labor with God in the use of good means, to have the same disposition, And in
this moment let us provide for eternity: out of eternity before, and
eternity after, issues this little spot of time to do good in. Let us sow to
the spirit, account all time lost that either we do not or take not good in;
opportunity is Gods Angel; time is short, but opportunity is shorter; let us
catch at all opportunities; this is the time of working, oh let us sow now:
shall we go to sowing then, when the time comes that we should reap? some
begin to sow when they die, that is the reaping time; while we have time let us
do all good, especially where God loves most, to those that are good.

Consider the standings and places, that God has set us in; consider the
advantages in our hands, the price that we have* consider opportunity will not
stay long, let us therefore do all the good we can, and so if we do, beloved,
we shall come at length to reap that, that this blessed Saint of God, Saint
Paul here in the text, and this blessed man, for whose cause we are now met do
enjoy: Therefore if we desire to end our days in joy and comfort, let us lay
the foundation of a comfortable death now betimes: To die well is not a thing
of that light moment as some imagine; it is no easy matter. But to die well is
a matter of every day, let us daily do some good that may help us at the time
of our death, every day by repentance pull out the sting of some sin, that so
when death comes, we may have nothing to do but to die; to die well is the
action of the whole life, he never dies well for the most part, that dies not
daily, as Paul says of himself, I die daily; he labored to loose his heart
from the world, and worldly things: if we loose our hearts from the world and
die daily, how easy will it be to die at last? he that thinks of the vanity of
the world, and of death, and of being with Christ for ever, and is dying daily,
it will be easy for him to end his days with comfort; but the time being
past, I will here make an end; Let us desire God to make that which has been
spoken effectual, both concerning Paul, and likewife concerning this blessed
man, for whose cause we are met together.

FINIS.
CHRIST'S SUFFERINGS, FOR MAN'S SIN.

Laid open in a Passion Sermon at Mercers Chapel London, upon Good Friday.

By R. SIBBS, D. D.

Isay. 53. 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes
are we healed. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman, at the Brazen Serpent
in Paul's Churchyard. 1634.

CHRIST'S SVFFERINGS, FOR MAN'S SIN.
MATH. 27. 46. About the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, Ely, Ely,
Lamasabac-thany (that is to say) My God, my God, w^y have thou forsaken me?
THE dying speeches of men of worth are most remarkable; at that time they
stir up all their spirits and abilities which remain, that they may speak
with greatest advantage to the hearts of others, and leave the deeper
impression behind them.

These be some of the last words of our blessed Saviors, uttered from the
greatest affection, with the greatest faith, and to the greatest purpose that
ever any words were spoken, and therefore deserve your best attention.

In this Portion of Scripture you have Christ's Compellation, My God, and his
Complaint, Why A compellation with an ingemination or reduplication of the
words, My God, my God, to show the strength of his affection, and desire of
help at this time.

complaint by way of expos^ulation, Why have thou forsaken me? I will draw all
that I have to say into these four propositions. 1 That Christ was forsaken^ 2
That he was very sensible of it, even unto complaint, Why have thou for saken
me? 3 His disposition and carriage in this extremity, his faith failed not, My
God, my God, his present grief tied him the closer and faster to his God. 4
Neither was it only faith, but a faith flaming in prayer, whereby he
expressed, that God was his God; He not only prayed, but cried to him, My
God, my God, etc. This is the sum of what I intend.


Christ being in extremity was forsaken.

Being forsaken, he was very sensible of it, and from sensiblenesse complains
pouring out his soul into the bosom of his Father.

And not only complains, but believes certainly that his Father will help
him.

And to strengthen his faith the prayer; the fire of faith in his heart kindled
into a flame of prayer (and that not in an ordinary manner, but in strong
supplications) he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me? To
come to the particulars.

Christ was forsaken. Obs. 1.


I will briefly touch some circumstances, and then fall upon the point it
self, as,

time wherein he was forsaken a time of darkness, ( the sixth hour) in which
there was a darkness over the whole earth, and in the land of Judea
especially; Neither had he darkness without only, but within likewise; his
soul was troubled from a sense of his fathers displeasure; two Ecclipses
seized upon him together, Math. 26. 38.
the one of the glorious light of the Sun, the other of the light of his
Fathers countenance; He must needs be in a disconsolate estate, and doubly
miserable, tha^ is encompassed with such darkness: whatsoever was done to
Christ our surety, shall be done to all that are out of him: blackness^ of
darkness is reserved for them. As Christ wanted the comfort of light from
heaven, so those that are out of Christ, shall have no comfort from any
creature at at the last; the Sun shall not shine upon them, the earth shall
not bear them, they shall not have a drop of water to cool their tongues;
they were formerly Rebels against God, and now every creature is ready to serve
the Lord against them; when the King is displeased with a man, which of his
servants dare to countenance him?

This darkness being in Judea, did likewise portend the miserable condition of
the Jews here, and that eternal darkness in the the world to come, which
should be their portion if they repented not.

three hours in torment; And though God delayed him long, yet he said nothing
til now by way of complaint; we should beware of darkness of spirit in
trouble; God may delay help to his dearest children (as here he did to his
only Son) to perfect the work of sanctification in them, therefore submit to
his will, rest contented with whatever he sends, look to thy Head and Savior,
etc. But of this more anon.

conflicts were toward his latter end, toward the shutting up and cloze of
his life: though a little after he says, All is finished, yet now he cries
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Afflictions are sharpest toward
our Ends. I speak this for prevention of discomfort, in those that find
extremities upon them: when miseries are extreme, help is nearest. They will
either mend or end then; the darkness is thickest a little before the morning
appears: and Satan raged most a little before his casting down.

As also to prevent security from seazing upon people; take heed of deferring
repentance till thy last hours; there may be a confluence of many extreamities
then upon thee, pains of body, terrors of conscience, Satan's temptations,
Gods wrath, etc when all these meet together, and the poor soul in its best
strength, finds enough to do to conflict with any one of them; what an
unhappy condtion will that be? Oh put not off your repentance to this time. But
I pass these circumstances, and come to the point of forsaking it self.

In the unfolding whereof I will show: 1 In what sense Christ was forsaken. 2 In
what parts he was forsaken. 3 Upon what ground. And 4 To what end all this
forsaking of Christ was.


forsaking is nothing else, but when God leaves the creature to it self,
either in regard of comfort, or of grace and assistance. I will show you how
Christ was le^t of his Father, and how he was not le^t.

How Christ was not forsaken.
for my Father loves me (says he) because I give my life for my sheep; God
never loved Christ more then now, because he was never more obedient than at
this present.

2 Nor in regard of Union, for divine nature from the humane; there was a
suspension of vision indeed, (he saw no comfort for the present from God) but
there was no dissolution of Union; for the divine nature did many things in
this seeming forsaking; that was it which supported his humane nature to
su^taine the burden of our sins and the wrath of God, as also that gave
merit and worth of satisfaction to his sufferings.

3 Neither was this forsaking grace, as if faith, or love, or any other grace
were taken from Christ; Oh no, for he believed before he said, My God, my God.
Would he have committed his dearest jewel into the hands of God, if he had
not believed in him?

How then was Christ forsaken? Quest.


Answ.
he could not else have been a sacrifice; for as we cannot suffer by way of
conformity to Christ, unless there be some desertion that we may know the
bitterness of sin; no more could Christ have suffered for our iniquities, had
there not been a suspension of light and comfort from his gracious soul.

privatively deprived of all joy and happiness, but positively he felt the
wrath and fury of the Almighty, whose just displeasure seized upon his soul
for sin, as our surety. All outward comforts likewise forsook him, the Sun
withdrew his light from above, and every thing below was irksome to him; He
suffered in all the good things he had, body, soul* good-name; in his eyes,
ears, hands, etc. he was reproached proached and forsaken of all comforts
about him; He had not the common comfort of a man in misery, pity; none took
compassion upon him, he was the very object of scorn.

But in what part was Christ forsaken? Quest.


In all, Ans.
both in body and soul too, as may plainly appear.

First, because he was our Surety, and we had stained our souls and bodies
too, offending God in both; (but in soul especially, because that is the
con^river of all sin, the body being but the instrument.) Some sins we call
spiritual sins, as pride, malice, infidelity, and the like, these ^ouch not
the body, yet are the greatest sins of all other.

Secondly, if he had not suffered Soul the sense of Gods displeasure, why
should he thus cry out, when as the poor thieves that suffered by him made no
such exclamation? If he had suffered in body only, the sufferings of Paul and
Moses had been more, for they wished to be separated from the joys of heaven,
out of a desire to promote Gods glory on earth, therefore it was he says in
the Garden, My soul is heavy unto death.

Some will grant that Christ suffered in soul, Object.
but (say they) it was by way of sympathy; for there are sufferings of soul
immediately from God, and sufferings by way of sympathy and agreement with the
body, when as the soul has a fellow feeling of the torments thereof; and so
Christ suffered in soul indeed.

That is not all, Answ.
beloved, but there were immediate sufferings, even of his soul also, which he
groaned under: God the Father laid a heavy stroke upon that; He was smitten
of the Lord: and when God deals immediately with the soul himself, and fills
it with his wrath; no creature in the world is able to undergo the same. None
can inflict punishment upon the soul but GOD only: Satan may urge and press
arguments of discouragement, and affright us with Gods displeasure; but the
inflicting of anger upon the soul issues immediately from the hand of the
Almighty. We must here therefore consider God as a righteous Judge, sitting in
heaven in his judgment seat, taking the punishment of the sins of all his
people upon Christ; there was a meeting together of all the sins of the
faithful, (from Adam to the last man that shall be in the world, as it were) in
one point upon him, and the punishment of all these was laid on his blessed
shoulders, who suffered for them in both body and soul.

But how could Christ be forsaken of God, 3. Conclus.
(especially so forsaken as to suffer the anger of his father) being an
innocent person?

Ans.
First, the Paschall Lamb was an innocent creature, yet if the Paschall Lamb
be once made a sacrifice, it must be killed; though Christ were never so
unblameable, yet if he will stoop to the office of a surety, he must pay our
debt, and do that which we should have done. If a Princes son become a
surety, though his father love him, and pity him never so much, yet he will
say, Now you have taken this upon you, you must discharge it.

Secondly, as in natural things head is punished for the fault of the body; so
Christ by communicating his blessed nature with ours, made up one mystical
body, and suffered for us.

But upon what ground should Christ become our surety? Quest.


1 Because he was able to discharge our debt to the uttermost, Answ.


2 Christ most willingly gave

3 He was designed and predestined anointed, set out and sealed for this
business by God himself, and is not this sufficient ground why he should
become our surety? especially if we consider,

4 That Christ took the him for this very end, that he might be a full
surety, that his righteousness being derived to us, and our guilt to him, Gods
wrath might be satisfied in the self-same nature that offended. You see in
Societies and Cities, if some people offend, the whole City is o^tentimes
punished, though perhaps many are guiltless in it, yet by reason of the
communion all are punished; so likewise a Traitors son that never had any hand
in his fathers sin (but behaved himself as an honest subject should do,
yet) having communion with the person of his father, (being indeed a piece of
him) is thereupon justly dis-inherited by all Law.

But how could Christ take our sins upon him and not be defiled therewith?
Object.


He took not the stain of our Quest.
sins, but the guilt of them. Now in guilt there is two things.

1 A worthiness and desert of punishment. 2 An obligation and binding over
thereunto.
Christ took not the desert of punishment upon him, (from any fault in
himself) he took whatsoever was poenall upon him, but not ^ulpable; as he
was our surety, so he every way discharged our debt, being bound over to all
judgments and punishments for us.

Now we owe unto GOD a double debt.

1 A debt of obedience, and if that fail, 2 A debt of punishment.
And both these has Christ freed us from; First, by obeying the will of his
Father in every thing: and secondly, by suffering whatsoever was due to us for
our transgressions.

Some Heretics that would shake the foundation of our faith, will grant
Christ to be a Mediator to intercede for us, and a Redeemer to set us at
liberty from slavery, etc. but not to be a surety to pay out debt, by way of
satisfaction to God for us.

Let such remember, that Gods pleasure to redeem lost mankind, is not so much
by way of power and strength, as by way of justice; and therefore Hebr. 7. 22.
Heb. 7. 22.
it is said, Christ is become o^r sarety; and Paul when he became a Mediator to
Philemon for Onesimus a fugitive servant, Philem. 18.
did it by way of surety, If he owe thee any thing I will discharge it: And
Christ Jesus our Mediator blessed for ever, so intercedeth unto GOD for us, as
that he fully satisfies his justice for our offenses.

But why was Christ thus forsaken of his Father? Quest.


To satisfy God for our forsaking of him; Ans.
Christ's forsaking Adam, and indeed what do we else in every sin we commit,
but forsake the Lord, and turn to the Creature? what are all our sins of
pleasure, profit, ambition, and the like, but a leaving of the fountain of
living waters to fetch contentment from broken Cisternes?

But Christ was chiefly forsaken,

Some shallow heretics there are that would have Christ to be an example of
patience and h^linesse in his life and death, and do us good that way only.

Oh no, beloved, the maine comfort we receive from Christ is by way of
satisfaction; there must be first grace, and then peace in our agreement with
God. Sweetly says Bernard, I desire indeed to follow Christ as an example of
humility, patience, self denial, etc. and to love him with the same affection
that he has loved me; but I must eat of the Passover Lamb, (that is) I must
chiefly feed o^ Christ dying for my sins. So every true Christian soul
desires to follow Christ's obedience, humility, patience, etc. and to be
transformed into the likeness of his blessed Savior. Whom should I desire to
be like more than him, that has done so much for me? But yet the main comfort
I receive from Christ, is by eating his body and drinking his blood; my soul
feeds and feasts it self most of all upon the death of Christ, as satisfying
for my sins. And what a comfort is it that Christ being our surety, has made
full satisfaction for all our sins; surely we shall never be finally and
wholly forsaken, because Christ was forsaken for us: Now we may think of GOD
without discomfort; and of sin without despair; Now we may think of the law
of death, the curse and all, and never be ^errified; Why? Christ our surety
has given full content to divine justice for wrath and law, sin and c^rse,
etc. they are all linckes of one chain, and Christ has dissolved them all*
Now sin cea^eth, wrath cease, the Law has nothing to lay to our charge;
deaths sting is pulled out, how comfortabley therefore may we appear before
Gods tribunal? Oh beloved, when the soul is brought as low as hell almost,
then this consideration will be sweet, that Christ was forsaken as a surety
for me; Christ overcame sin, death, Gods wrath, and all for me; in him I
triumph over all these; what welcome news is this to a distressed sinner ^
when ever thy sou^e is truly humbled in the sense of sin; look not at sin
in thy conscience, (thy conscience is ^ bed for another to lodge in) but ^t
Christ: if thou be a brokenhearted sinner, see thy sins in Christ thy
Savior taken away; see what he has endured and suffered for them; see not
the Law in thy conscience, but see it discharged by Christ; see death disarmed
through him, and made an entrance into a better life for thee; whatsoever is
ill see it in Christ, before thou see it in thy self; and when thou
beholdest it there, see not only the hurt thereof taken away, but all good made
over to thee; for, Romans ^.
All things work together for the best to them that love God* The Devil
himself, death, sin, and wrath, all help the maine; the poison and
mischief of all is taken away by Christ, and all good conveyed to us in him;
we have grace answerable to his grace; He is the first seat of Gods love, and
it sweetens whatever mercy we enjoy, that it comes from the fountain God the
father, through Christ unto us. I beseech you embrace the comfort that the Holy
Ghos^ affords us from these sweet considerations.

Again, in that Christ wa^ forsaken; and (not only so, but) endured the
displeasure and immediate wrath of God seazing upon his soul, and filling his
heart with anguish at this time; we may learn hence.

1 In what glass to look upon the ugly thing sin, How to discern the
ugliness of sin.
to make Angels ^umbled out of heaven, and reserved in chains of darkness for
offending God; see it in the casting of Adam out of Paradise, Genesis 3.
and all us in him; see it in the destruction of the old world, and the Jews
carried to captivity in the general destruction of Jerusalem, etc. but if you
would indeed see the most ugly colors of sin, then see it in Christ upon the
Cross, see how many sigh^^ and groans it cost him, how bitter a thing it was
to his righteous soul, forcing him to weep tears of blood, and send forth
strong cries to his Father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? If
sin but imputed to Christ our surety, so affected him that was God-man, and
lay so heavy upon his soul, what will it do to those that are not in Christ?
certainly, the wrath of God must needs burn to hell; he will be a consuming fire
to all such. See ^inne therefore chiefly in the death of Christ, how odious it
is to God, that it could be no otherwise purged away, than by the death of his
beloved Son. All the Angels in heaven, and all the creatures in the world
could not satisfy divine justice for the least sin. If all the agonies of al
creatures were put into one, it were nothing to Christ's Agony; if all their
sufferings were put into one, they could not make satisfaction to Divine
Justice for the least sin: Sin is another manner of matter than we take it to
be; see the Attributes of God, his anger against it, his justice and h^linesse,
etc. Beloved, men forget this, they think God is angry against sin indeed,
but yet his Justice is soon satified in Christ. Oh, we must think of the
Almighty as a Holy GOD, separated from all stain and pollution of sin
whatsoever, and so holy that he enforced a separation of his favor from
Christ, for becoming our surety, and Christ underwent a separation from his
Father, because he undertook for us; so odious is sin to the holy nature of
God, that he left his Son while he strugled with his wrath for it; and so
odious was sin to the holy nature of Christ, that he became thus a sacrifice
for the same. And so odious are the remainders of sin in the hea^ts of the
Saints, that all that belong to God have the Spirit of Christ, which is as fire
to consume and waste the old Adam by little and little out of them; No unclean
thing must enter into heaven; Those that are not in Christ by faith, that have
not a shelter in him must suffer for their transgressions eternally; Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire; Mat. 25.
so holy is God that he can have no society and fellowship with sinners.

Do you wonder why GOD so much hates sin, that men so little regard, not
only the lewd sort of the world, but common dead-hearted persons, that set so
little by it, that they regard not spiritual sins at all, especially hatred,
malice, pride, etc. clothing themselves with these things as a comely garment.
Certainly you would not wonder that God hates sin, if you did but consider
how sin hates God; what is sin but a setting of it self in Gods room, a
setting the devil in Gods place? for when we sin we leave God, and set up
the Creature, and by consequence Satan that brings the temptation to us,
setting him in our hearts before God: Beloved, God is very jealous, and cannot
endure that filthy thing sin to be in his room; sin is such a thing as
desires to take away God himself. Ask a sinner when he is about to sin,
Could you not wish that there were no God at all, that there were no eye of
heaven to take vengeance on you? Oh I, with all my heart; and can you then
wonder that God hates sin so, when it hates him so, as to wish the not being
of God? oh marvel not at it, but have such conceits of sin as GOD had when
he gave his Son to dye for it, and such as Christ had, when in the sense of
his Fathers anger he cried thus, My God, my God, etc.

The deeper our thoughts are of the odiousness of sin, the deeper our
comfort and joy in Christ will be after; therefore I beseech you work your
hearts to a serious consideration what that sin is that we cherish so much,
and will not be reproved for, and which we leave GOD and heaven, and all to
embrace; conceive of it as God does that must be a Judge, and will one day
call us to a strict account for the same.

If Christ cried out thus, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as being
our surety for our sins, we may see what to conceive of sin, and of GOD the
better.

But above all things I desire you to see often in this glass, in this book
of Christ crucified, (it is an excellent book to study) the mercy of God and
the love of Christ, the height, and depth, and breadth of Gods love in Jesus
Christ, which has no dimensions: What set God on work to plot this excellent
work of our salvation and redemption by such a surety; was it not mercy? did
not that awaken wisdom to reconcile justice and mercy to Christ? But what
stirred up this wisdom of God? Oh, bowels of compassion to man; he would not
have man perish, when the Angels did without remedy.

Therefore let us desire to be inflamed with the love of God* that has loved
us so much: All the favors of God in Christ tend (next after satisfaction to
justice) to inflame our hearts to love him again, wherefore else are the
favors of creation and Providence? How sweet is God in providing for our
bodies, giving us not only for necessity, but abundance, withholding no
comfort that is good for us, etc.

But chiefly in his Masterpiece God would have us apprehend the greatest love
of all other, because there he has set himself to glorify his mercy more
than any thing else? therefore we may well cry with the Apostle, Oh the height
of his love, etc. I beseech you fix your thoughts on this, think not now and
then slightly of it, but dwell on the meditation of the infinite love of God
in Christ, till your hearts be enlarged and warmed and inflamed with the
consideration thereof; and then love will set you forward to all good works;
what need we bid you be liberal to the poor, to be good subjects, just in
your dealings, etc? all this may be spared when there is a loving heart: And
when shall we have loving hearts? when they are kindled and fired at Gods fire,
when they are persuaded of Gods love, then the apprehension of his love will
breed love in our hearts again; and that is the reason why the Apostles are
not so punctual as heathen Authors in particularities of duties; they force
upon men especially the love of God, and the ground-points of religion, as
knowing when the heart is seasoned with that once, it is ready prepared to
every good duty. Think seriously of this, The love of Christ constrains me
^ there is a holy violence in love, 2 Cor. 13.
there is a spiritual kind of tyranny and prevailing in this grace.

One thing further we may learn from this forsaking of Christ, viz. that,

It is no strange thing for GODS dear children to be forsaken. Conclus.


To have the apprehension of their sins, and the wrath of God; to be
forsaken (in regard of sense) of all comfort: do we not see it done in the
natural son, and shall we wonder that it is done in the adopted sons? We
see this forsaking was in the nature all branch, and shall we wonder that it is
done in the grafted branches? It was done to the green tree, and shall we
wonder if it be done in the dry? no certainly.

The whole Church complains Psalm. 44. Psalm. 44.
Of drinking Gall and Wormwood, Ezekiel. 36.
that God was hid in a cloud, Lam. 3.
etc. both the head complains, and the body too, as we see in David, Job, and
other Saints; so that there is a kind of desertion and forsaking that the
child of God must undergo.

What is the ground and end of it? Quest.


Ans.
Gods prerogative is such that sometimes when there is no great sins to
provoke him to withdraw comfort, yet will he leave holy men to themselves, to
show that he will do as pleases him.

comfort and new supplies of joy.

Again, our disposition is to sense more than by faith, we are as children in
this, we would have God ever smile upon us that we might walk in abundance of
comfort; and I cannot blame Christians for desiring it, if they desire the work
of grace in the first place, if they desire the work of God in them, rather
than the shining of comfort by the Spirit, ( for that is the best work.) Now
because Christians desire rather to live by sight than by faith, wherein they
might honor God more, he leaves them oftimes. Sight is reserved for another
world, (for the Church triumphant) there we shall have sight enough, we shall
see God face to face.

Sometimes Gods Children are negligent, and keep not a holy watch over their
souls, they cleave to the creature too much, and then no wonder though God
forsake them, since they will have stolen waters of their own, and fetch
comfort elsewhere.

conformity to Christ, he suffered for our sins, and God will conform the
members in some measure to their head, though Christ drank the cup of Gods
wrath to the bottom, yet we must sip and taste a little, that we may know how
much we are beholding to Christ; and there are few that come to heaven, few
that truly belong to GOD, but they know what sin is, and what the wrath of
GOD is, first or last; the wrath of God is the best corrosive in the world to
eat out sin. A little anger of GOD felt in the conscience will make a man
hate pride and malice, and all sin whatsoever.

But for what end does GOD leave his children, Quest.
as he did here our blessed Savior?

1 In regard of himself. Ans.
2 In regard of his Children.
In regard of himself, he leaves he may bring more love with him, and that
they may love him more than before; there will after a little forsaking, be a
mutual reflection of love between GOD and a Christian: God delights to show
himself more abundantly after a little forsaking, and the soul inlargeth it
self after it has wanted the love of God; for want inlargeth the capacity of
the soul, and want makes it stretch it self to receive more comfort when it
comes: God does this for the increase of his love to us, and of our love to him
again; he both draws nigh to us, and goes away in regard of feeling for our
good.

watchful over our hearts for the time to come, that there may be a more
perfect divorce and separation wrought in us to the creatures, our adulterous
hearts have stolen delights that GOD likes not, and therefore when we have
smarted for it in the anger and displeasure of God, a divorce will be wrought.
It is hard to work a separation from sin, sin and the soul being so
nearely invested together, yet God therefore uses this way of spiritual
desertion to effect the same.

soul ransacke and search the ground of all the comforts that are left him by
God: It will make him rifle and search all the Scriptures; Is there any comfort
for me poor wretch, that am troubled with sin? It will make him search the
experience of other Christians; Have you any word of comfort for me? It will
make him regard a gracious man as one of a thousand, it will make him stretch
his heart in all the degrees of grace; Have I any evidence that I am the Child
of God, and not a castaway? It will make him search his heart in regard of
corruption; Is there any sin that I am not willing to part with? etc.
Beloved, God many times leaves us, and not only leaves us, but makes our naked
conscience smart for sin; oh this is a quickening thing; A child of God that
is of the right stamp will not endure to be under Gods wrath long, oh it is
bitter; he knows what it is to enjoy communion with GOD, he will not endure
it; therefore it stirs him up to all manner of diligence whatsoever.

But is there no difference between Christ's sufferings and smart for sin,
Quest.
and ours.

Yes, Ans.
the sufferings of Christ ours proceed from him as a loving Father, for God
when we are in Christ is changed, he lays aside the person of a Judge,
having received full satisfaction in Christ, he is now in the relation of a
sweet father to us.

measure, we take but a taste of the cup sweetened with some fort, and
moderated; but Christ drank deep of the same.

3 In the end and use, the sufferings medicinal; the nature of them is quite
changed, they are not for satisfaction, for then we should die eternally,
disable the satisfaction of CHRIST, they are crosses indeed, but not curses:
whatsoever we suffer in soul or body is a cross, but not a curse unto us,
because the sting is pulled out, they are all medicinal cures to fit us for
heaven; whatsoever we suffer in our inward or outward man, prepares us for
glory, by mortifying the remainders of corruptions, and fitting us for that
blessed estate.

4 All other men's deaths are Le^ says, Singula in singulis, they are single
deaths for single men; but it is therwise here, for all the Children of God
were forsaken in their head, crucified in their head, and dyed in Christ their
Head; Christ's death was a public satisfaction; no man dies for another, (let
the Papists say what they will,) only Christ dyed for all, and suffered for his
whole body. And thus much of the first general, that, Christ was forsaken.

The second is this, 2. Conclus.
Christ was very sensible of it, even to complaint and expostulation, My God,
my God, etc. Why should it be thus between the Father and the Son, between
such a Father, and such a Son, a kind loving Father to his natural
obedient, and only Son: the word is strong beloved, he was not only
forsaken, but exposed to danger, and left in it, being very sensible of the
same; every word here expresses some bowels; he does not say, The Jews have
foraken me; or, my beloved Disciples and Apostles that I made much of have
forsaken me, or Pilate would not do the duty of a true Judge; my feet are
pierced, my Head is wounded, my body is wracked, hanging on the Cross, etc. he
complains of none of these (though they were things to be complained of, and
would have sunk any Creature to have felt that in his body that he did) but
that which went nearest to him, was this, Oh my God, why have thou forsaken me?
I stand not upon others forsaking, but why have thou forsaken me? I stand more
upon thy forsaking than the forsaking of all others; Christ was very sensible
of this, it went to his very heart.

But what special reason was there that Christ should take this so deeply?

the loving kindness of the Lord is better than life it self, Psa. 63.
as David the type of Christ well said; the forsaking of God being indeed worse
than death; the loving kindness of the Lord is that that sweetneth all
discomforts in the world, the want of that imbitters all comforts to us: If we
be condemned traitors, what will all comfors do to a condemned man? The want
of Gods love imbitters all good, and the pre sense thereof sweetneth all ill,
death, imprisonment, and all crosses whatsoever; therefore Christ having a
sanctified judgment, in the highest degree, judges the loss of this to be
the worst thing.

2 The sweeter the communion love. Those that love, live more in the party
loved, than in themselves; Christ was in love with the person of his father,
and lived in him, now to want the sense of his love, (considering that love
desires nothing but the return of love again) it must needs be death unto
him.

wrath that had so deep a taste of love before.

body; the griese of Christ both in body and soul was the greatest that ever
was, for he was in the strength of his years, he had not dulled his spirits
with inte^perancy; he was quick and able to apprehend pain, being of an
excellent temperature.

Was Christ so exceeding sensible of the want of his Fathers love, Use.
though it were but a while? I beseech you then, let us have merciful
considerations of those that suffer in conscience, and are troubled in mind;
oh it is another manner of matter than the world takes it for; it is no easy
thing to conflict with Gods anger, though but a little. It was the fault of
Jobs friends, they should have judged charitably of him, but they did not: take
heed therefore of making desperate conclusions against our selves or other,
when the arrows of the Almighty stick in us, when we smart and show our
distemper in the apprehension of the terrous of the Lord seizzing upon our
souls: God is about a gracious work all this while: the more sensible men are
of the anger of GOD, the more sensible they will be of the return of his
fa^our again.

There are some insensible stupid creatures, that are neither sensible of the
afflictions they s^ffer in body, nor of the manisestation of Gods anger on
their soul; notwithstanding he follows them with his corrections, yet they
are as dead flesh, unmovable, Esa. 1^.
therefore, Why should I smite them any longer, etc. says GOD.

This comes from 3 grounds.

pride, when men think it a shame for such Roman spirits as they are to
stoop.

hypocrisy, when they will not discover their grief, though their conscience
be out of tune.

Or else out of stupid blockishnesse, conscience is not put in us for naught;
you may stupifie and stifle the mouth of Conscience with this or that trick
now, but it will not be so for ever, it will discharge its office, and lay
bitter things to our charge, and stare in our faces, and drive us to despair
one day; sin is another matter when it is revealed to Conscience than we take
it, howsoever we go blockishly and stupidly on now; It is sweet in the
temptation and allurement, but it has an ill farewell and sting. If we could
judge of sin as we shall do when it is past, especially when we come to our
reckoning at the hour of death, and at the day of Judgment, then we would
be of another mind, then we would say that all sinners (as the Scripture
terms them) are fools. But to go on.

Christ we see expresses his sensiblenesse by complaint, My God, my God, why
have thou for saken me.

Here some Cautions must be rendered, Ca^tion.
that we do not mistake.

Christ complains not^ of God, but to God.

Was Christ ignorant of the cause of Gods forsaking him? Object.


No, he knew the cause, Ans.
for his sufferings were intolerable, but taking our nature upon him, he takes
our speech also, and expresses himself like to a miserable man, having the
greatest affliction that ever was upon a Creature. The divine nature of Christ
stopped the excess of any passion; he was turbated but not perturbated, he
was moved with the sins of men, but not removed; he was as water in a clear
glass, there is nothing but water though you stir it never so much, if there
were mudd in it, it would so^one be unclean; we cannot stir our affections
and complain but with a tincture of sin, it was not so with Christ, he knew
when to raise and when to allay his affections; and though there were much
nature in these affections, a natural shunning of grief, and a natural
desire of Gods presence, yet here was grace to direct and sanctify the same;
for nature sometimes carries grace with a stronger wind, more fully when they
go both in one current, as here: It was grace to have the love of GOD, yea, it
was death to be without it, and it was sinlesse nature to desire ease, for
(without sin) nature may desire ease, so it be with submission of it self
to God. For the soul may have diverse desires as there are diverse objects
presented to it; when the soul apprehends releafe and ease, it rejoices and is
glad; but when upon higher considerations and better ends there is pain
presented to the soul to do it good, the soul may desire that, and upon
deliberation choose that it refused before: A man may have his hand cut off, and
cast his wares into the Sea, that he would not willingly do, yet when upon
deliberation he considers, I shall save my life by it, he will do it. So
Christ by a natural desire (without sin) might desire release of pain, but
when it was presented to him, what shall become of the salvation of man and
obedience to God then? Upon these considerations that respected higher ends,
there might be another choice; so in things subordinate one to another, one
thing may cross another, and yet all be good too.

But you must know this likewise, that ^orsaking and to be sensible of
forsaking is no sin, especially when it is not contracted by any sin of
ours; it is a suffering but not a sin; and to be sensible of it is no sin,
it is rather a sin to be otherwise affected. God allows those affections
that he has planted in us; he has planted fear and forrow in presenting
dolorous objects. If a man do not sorrow in objects of sorrow, he is not a man
after Gods making; GOD allows grief and sear in afflictions and trouble,
always remembering it be with submission to him, Not as I will, but as thou will. Mat. 26. 30.


Again, consider Christ was now in a conflicting condition between doubting
and despair, the powers of hell being round about him; Satan as he was busy
about him at the entrance into his office, Mat. 4.
so he was now vexing his righteous soul with temptations, God has for saken
thee, and this and that; we know not the malice of Satan at such a time; but
certainly the powers of hell were all let loose then upon him. The truth is,
God had a purpose to finish his sufferings presently upon his complaint, and
because he will have us all receive what we receive (even Christ himself) by
prayer and opening our desires to him, God suffers Christ to complain, and
power out his supplication into his bosom, that presently after he might be
released of all, seeing he had now fully satisfied for the sins of man.

The Use of it in a word is this, Use.
That God having stooped so low to poor creatures, to be a father and a friend
to them, will suffer them familiarly, (as there is a great deal of familiarity
in the spirit of adoption) yet reverently to lay open their griefs into his
bosom, and reason the case with his Majesty without sin, Why Lord am I thus
forsaken? what is the matter? where are the sounding of thy bowels? where are
thy former mercies? etc. There is another kind of familiarity between God and
his Children than the world takes notice of, yet withal remember, they are not
murmuring complaints, but seasoned with faith and love, as here, My God, my God
still: whence you see that,

Christ in his greatest extremities had a spirit of faith.

There is a question between the Papists and us, 3. Concl^s.
about Christ's faith; they will have him to be a comprehender and a traveller,
etc. indeed he needed no justifying faith to apply any thing from without him,
because he had righteousness enough of his own; but yet to depend up^ on God
as his Father, so he had faith, neither was he always in the state of
happiness, for that distinction is a confusion of the abaseme^t of Christ and
his exaltatio^: howsoever there was the happiness of union, (the humane nature
being always united to the Godhead) yet there was not always the happiness of
visi^n; he did not see the face of God, for the^ why did he cry out, My God, my
God, etc. Sight was due to him from his Incarnation in himself considered (not
as our s^rety,) Now that which made a stopp of the influence of comfort to his
soul, was, that he might fully suffer for our sins, that he might be
humbled and ^empted, and suffer even death it self. Therefore in regard of the
state of humiliation there was faith in him, faith of dependence; th^re was
hope in him, and he made great use thereof to support himself.

But what supported the faith of Christ in this woeful, Quest.
rufull estate he was in, being forsaken of God as our Surety?

Christ presented to his faith these things. Ans.


My God, etc. Whom he once loves he loves to the end* therefore he lays claim
to him, Thou have been my God heretofore, and so thou art st^ll.

contraries brings contraries to pass; He brings to heaven by the gates of
hell, he brings to glory by shame, to life by death, and therefore resolves,
notwithstanding this desertion, I will depend upon my God.

Again, Christ knew well enough that God is nearest in support when he is
furthest off in feeling; so i^ is of^, where he is neares^ the inward man, to
strengthen it with his love, he is furthest off in comfort to outward sense. To
whom was God nearer than Christ in support and sanctifying grace? and yet to
whom was he further off in present feeling? Christ knew that there was a secret
sense of Gods love, and a sensible sense of Gods love; he had a secret sense of
God that he was his Father, because he knew himself to be his Son, but he
had it not sensibly: Faith must be suitable to the thing believed; Now Christ
in saying, my God, suites his faith to the truth that was offered to him, he
knew GOD in the greatest extremity to be nearest at hand, Be not far off,
for trouble is near, etc.

This should teach us in any extremity or trouble to set faith on work, and
seed faith with the consideration of Gods unchangeable nature, and the
unchangeablenesse of his promises, which endure for ever; we change, but the
promise changes not, and GOD changes not, My God still, The word of the Lord
indureth for ever. GOD deals with ^is people in a hidden manner, he supports
with secret, though not with sensible comfort, and will be nearest when he
seems to be furthest off his Children. I beseech you acquaint your selves with
these things, and think it not strange that GOD comes near you in desertions,
considering that it was so with Christ; present to thy soul the nature of GOD,
his custom and manner of dealing, so shall thou apprehend favor in the
midst of wrath, and glory in the midst of shame; we shall see life in
death, we shall see through the thickest Clouds that are between GOD and us;
for as God shines in the heart in his love secretly through all temptations and
troubles, so there is a spirit of ^aith goes back to him again, My God, my
God; for faith has a quick eye, and sees through contraries: There is no
cloud of grief but faith will pierce through it, and see a fathers heart under
the carriage of an enemy; Christ had a great burden upon him, the sins of the
whole world, yet he breaks through all; I am now sin, I beat the guilt of
the whole world, yet under this person that I sustain I am a sonn^, and God is
my God still, notwithstanding all this weight of sin upon me. And shall not
we beloved say, My God, in any affliction or trouble that befalls us? oh yes.
In the sense of sin which is the bitterest of all, and in the sense of Gods
anger, in losses and crosses, in our families, etc. let us break through those
clouds, and say, My God still.

But you will say, Object.
I may apprehend a lie; perhaps God is not my GOD, and then it is presumption
to say so.

Whosoever casts himself upon GOD out of the sense of sin, Ans.
to be ruled by God for the time to come, shall obtain mercy. Now do thou
so? does thy conscience tell thee, I cast my self up. on God for better
direction, I would be ruled as GOD and the Ministry of the Word would have me
hereafter: If so, thou have put this question out of question: thou doubtest
whether there God be thy God; I tell thee God is the God of all that seck him,
and obey him in truth; but thy conscience tells thee thou do this; certainly
then, whatsoever thou were before, God is now before hand with thee, he offers
himself to be thy God, if thou trust in him, and wilt be ruled by him; and
not only so, but he entreats us, (we should beseech him, but he intreates us,
such is his love; nay he commands 1 John. 3, 23.
us to believe in his Son Jesus CHRIST. Now when I join with Gods entreaty,
Oh Lord, thou offerest thy self, thou invitest me, thou command me, I
yield obedience and submit to thy good word; then the match is stricken and
made up in doing so; God is thy God, and Christ is thy Christ, and thou must
improve this claim and interest here in all the passages of thy life long,
Lord thou art my God, therefore teach me, thou art my GOD, I have given my self
to thee, I have set up thee in my heart above all things, tho^ art in my soul
above all sin, above all profits and pleasures whatsoever, therefore save me
and deliver me, have pity upon me, etc. The claim is good when we have truly
given our selves up to him, Judge. 10. 14.
else Go^ may say, Go^ to the gods you have served; (...) were your gods for
whom you cracked you consciences, ^^ches and pleasure were your gods, go to
them for succor.

Oh beloved, it is a harder matter to say, My God, in the midst of trouble
than the world takes it; there was a great conflict in Christ when he said, My
God, when he brake through all molestations and tempr^^^ons of Satan, together
with the sense of wrath, and could say notwithstanding, My God: there was a
mighty strong spirit in him. But no wonder, faith is an Almighty grace wrought
by the power of God, and laying hold upon that power; it lays hold upon
Omnipotency, and therefore it can do wonders; it overcomes the invincible God;
he has made a promise, and cannot deny his promise, he cannot deny himself
and his truth: put case his dealing be as an enemy, his promise is to be as a
friend to those that trust in him; he is merciful, forgiving sins, his
nature now is such; satisfaction to his justice makes him show mercy.

I speak this that you might beg of God the gift of faith, which will carry
you through all temptations and afflictions, yea, even through the shadow of
death; Psalm. 23.
as David faith, Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, yet will
I fear no ill; why? because thou art with me my God and my shepherd. Though
we be in the valley of the shadow of death, yet notwithstanding if God be
with us, if we be in covenant with him, and can lay just claim to his
promise, by giving up our selves to him, we shall not fear; one beam of Gods
countenance when we are in covenant with him will scatter all Clouds
whatsoever. I beseech you therefore labor more and more for this precious
grace of faith, and increase it by all sanctified means, hearing the Word,
reading the Scriptures, and treasuring up promises, considering what special
use we have of this above all other graces. But to proceed.

Christ here does not only beleleeve, but

He vents his faith by prayer. 4. Conclus.
Good works are but faith inincarnate, faith working; they differ not much
from it; so prayer is but faith flaming, the breath of faith, as it were* for
when troubles possess the soul, it sends out its Ambassador presently, it
speeds prayer forth, and prayer stays not till it come to heaven, and there
takes hold upon GOD, and gets a message and answer from him back to comfort
the soul: faith and prayer are all one in a manner, when the soul has any
great desire of grace, or is in grief, apprehending the displeasure of GOD,
faith would (if it could) work to heaven, but we are on earth, and cannot till
we dye, therefore when it cannot go to heaven, it sends prayer, and that
mounts the soul aloft, and wrastles with God, and will give him no rest till
the petition be granted, and it can say My God.

Therefore if you have any faith at all, exercise it, and make it bright by
often prayer, James 5. 15.
The prayer of faith prevails much; How shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? Indeed it is no prayer at all without faith; great faith,
great prayer; weak faith, weak prayer, no faith, no prayer; they both go on
in an even strength: Christ here prays to God under this complaint, Why have
thou for saken me? There is a hidden prayer in it, oh do not forsake me,
deliver me out, etc.

I beseech you, even as you would have comfort, (from the ^ountaine of comfort
that usually conveyes all grace and comfort to us by a spirit of prayer) labor
to be much in communion with God in this blessed exercise, especially in
troubles, Psalm. 5^.
Call upon me in the day of trouble: the evil day is a day of prayer; of all
da^es in the day of trouble especially, Make your request known to God. Phil.
4. 6.


But perhaps GOD will not hear me? Object.


Yes, this fruit follows, The peace of God which passes all understanding
shall keep your hearts and minds; Answ.
When you have eased your souls into the bosom of God by prayer, you may go
securely, and know that he will le^ you reap the fruit of your prayers in the
best time.

Yea, but (...) prayed long, Object.
and have had no answer.

Wait in prayer, Gods time is the best time: Answ.
The Physician keeps his own time, he turns the glass, and though the
pa^i^^ (...) ou^, that he torments him, it is no matter, he knows his time. The
Goldsmiths will not take the metal out of the fire till it be refined; so God
knows what to do; wait his good leisure. In the mean time because we must
have all from God by prayer; I beseech you derive all from him this way; pray
for every thing, and then we shall have it as a blessing indeed.

But put the case I cannot pray, Object.
as sometimes we are in such a case that we cannot make a large prayer to God?

Then do as Christ did, Ans.
Cry; If thou can not pray, groan, and sigh, for they are the groans and
sighs of Gods Spirit in thee; there is a great deal of orator^ in these words.
What is the use of eloquence but to perswade^ and what could persuade God more
than when Christ showed how he esteemed his love, and how he was now, In the
absence of it, environed with grief before him? Here was Rhetoric; if Christ
had not spoken, his wounds had said enough, and his pitiful ease spoke
sufficiently* (every thing has a voice to (...) for mercy;) (...) ^hee adds
his voice to all, and cries vocally, aloud, My God, my god why have thou
forsaken me?

Beloved, if you acquaint your selves with GOD in prayer, then you may go
readily to him in any extremity; therefore in time of health and prosperity
cherish communion with his blessed Majesty, make him your friend, and upon
every good occasion improve this plea, Oh my God. If we have riches, if we
have a friend in the Court, we will improve them; if we have any thing we
will make use of it have we a GOD, and will we not improve him? have we a God
that is our GOD, and do we want grace? do we want comfort, and strength,
and assistance, and have we a God the Fountain of all to go to? Shall we
have such a prerogative as this, to have Jesus Christ to (...) be our great
peacemaker, that we may go boldly to the Thron of grace through him, and shall
we not improve the same? We may go boldly to God, and welcome, because GOD is
infinite, and the more we go and beg, the more he gives; we cannot exhaust
that Fountain, oh let us improve this blessed prerogative, then we shall live
the life of heaven upon earth; especially when the Conscience is troubled with
sin (as Christ was now with the displeasure of his Father;) then let us go to
God, and plead with his Majesty, and we may plead lawfully with him, Lord, thy
Justice is better satified in Christ than if thou should send me to hell, if
thou will thou may destroy me; (for conscience must come to a great
resignation, it cannot desire mercy but it must see its own misery) Lord, (...)
may justly cast me to hell, but it would not be so much for thy glory, thou
art more glorious in satifying thy justice in Christ, than if thou should
damn me to hell; Why? Because Gods justice is better satisfied in Christ. Man
sinned, but God-man satisfied for sin, man would be like God in pride, God
becomes man in humility, the expiation of God is greater than the sin of
man; He prayed for his persecutors, and gave his life for them; does not this
proportion more the justice of God than the sin of man? The Law does but
require a nocent person, a guilty person to suffer; Christ was innocent: The
Law requires that man should suffer, Christ was GOD; therefore Christ has done
more than satisfied the Law; the satisfaction of Christ is more than if we had
suffered; We are poor men, creatures; that was the satisfaction of Godman;
our sins are the sins of finite persons, but he is infinite; therefore the
soul may plead, Lord, I am a wretched sinner, but I should take away thee, and
take away Christ if I should despair; I should make thee no GOD, and make
Christ no Christ, if I should not accept of mercy, for Christ is given to me,
and I labor to make him mine own, by laying hold of him. Faith has a power
to make every thing its own that it touches; particular faith (which is the
only true comfortable faith) makes general things mine: when the soul can lay
a particular claim to God as his GOD, by giving himself to him only, then
we may plead in Christ better satisfaction to Gods justice, than if he should
cast us into hell. What a stay is this for a distressed soul to make use of!

Beloved, the Church of God (the mystical body of Christ) is thus forsaken in
other Countries, besides many particular humble brokenhearted Christians at
home, who find no beams of Gods love and mercy; what shall we do? Let the
body imitate the head, even go to GOD in their behalf, and power out your
complaint^ before him, Lord, where are thy mercies of old? where are thy
ancient bowels to thy Church? why should the enemy triumph? etc. GOD delights
when we lay open the miseries of his people, and our own particular
grievances before him: If there be a spirit of faith in it, oh it works upon
his bowels. If a Child can but say, Oh father, oh mother, though he can say
not a word more, the bowels are touched, there is el^quence enough: so when we
can lay open the pitiful state of Gods poor Church, what a blessing may we
obtain for them? It is thy CHVRCH, Lord, thine own people, thy name is called
upon them, and they call upon thy name; though they have sinned, yet thou
deservest to be like thy self, and Christ has deserved mercy for them. Thus
if we contend with GOD, and keep not silence, and give GOD no rest, faith
would work wonders. The state of the Church would not be long as it is, if we
would all improve our interest in heaven in their behalf. Beloved, Christ
strugled with the powers of darkness, and the wrath of his father a while, but
presently after, all was finished: so let us contend boldly, 2 Timothy 4. 7.
Fight the good fight of faith, and not yield to desperate suggestions; let
faith stir up prayer, and prayer go to GOD, and ere long it shall be said of
the CHVRCH, and of all particular troubles, All is finished: then we shall
enjoy the sweet presence of GOD, Psalm. 16. 11.
Where is fullness of joy, and that for evermore; the presence of GOD is that
the Child of GOD desires above all things in the world; it quickens and
strengthens him, it puts zeal and fire into him, it does all. What will not
the presence of GOD do when a man enjoyes his face? Therefore let us be
content to conflict here, to be exercised a while in faith and prayer, we
shall surely say ere long, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness.

I beseech you learn these lessons and instructions from our blessed Savior;
we cannot have a better pattern than to be like him, by whom we all hope to
be saved another day. So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE CHVRCHES VISITATION.
1 PET. 4. 17, 18, 19. For the time is come that judgment must begin at the
house of God, and if it begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey
not the Gospel? etc.
OUR nature, as it is very backward to do good, so likewise to suffer evil;
therefore the Blessed Apostle exhorts us at the latter end of this Chapter,
Grounds of comfort against the fiery trial propounded by the Apostle.
Not to think it strange concerning the fiery trial, but to rejoice in as
much as we are made partakers of Christ's sufferings: wherein are many grounds
of patience and comfort to the children of God.

strange but familiar to them; Acquainting our thoughts with them, takes away
offense at them; though it be a fiery trial, yet it shall consume nothing but
dross.

Then Christ joyneth with us in suffering; better to be in trouble with Christ,
then in peace without him.



To other grounds of comfort, he adds some in the words of my text, as

First, that the Church is Gods house, and therefore he will have a care of it.

2. That he will do it in the season; Such is the exigence of the Church and
people of God, that they require a sharp visitation; and therefore such is Gods
love, that he appoints out a certain time for them.

3. From the different condition godly and ungodly in suffering; both suffer,
but differ much; 1. in order, God begins with his own house; 2 in measure,
where shall the ungodly appear? their judgment shall be most terrible and
certain, it is set down by way of interrogation, and admiration* What shall
their end be^ And as Pharaohs dreams we^^ doubled for more certainty, (...)
here is a double question to make the matter more out of question, 1. What
shall their end be that obey not the Gospel? 2. Where shall the ungodly and
sinners appear?

Here is no unnecessary waste of words and arguments, for the spirit of God
knows that all is little enough to fortify the soul against the evil day;
unless the soul be well ballaced, it will soon be overturned when storms
arise. Therefore the Apostle in these three verses sets down, 1. some
foundations of comfort, and 2. an encouragement to build upon them, wherefore
let them that suffer etc.

The points considerable in the 17. verse are these. The points considerable in
the text.


That there is a certain time when he will do it, which those that are wise
may easily gather; for God comes not upon his Church on the sudden, as a
storm, or tempest, etc. but he gives them fair warning; there is a season when
God begins judgment with his own house.
Lastly. Why God begins with his own Church and people.

Of these in order.

First, Obser. 1. That the Church of God is his own house.
The Church of God, is Gods house; God has two houses, the Heavens which are
called his house, because he manifests his glory there, and the Church here
below, wherein he manifests his grace; yea the whole world (in a sort) is his
house, because he manifests his power and wisdom in it; but Heaven and his
Church in a more peculiar manner, and that in these respects: 1. Reason.
Because God by his grace has residence in his Church. 2. Because by the
means of salvation, the word, and Sacramets there administered, he does seed
his Church, as in a house. rests and takes contentment in his house, so God
takes his best contentment, in his Church, and people, they are the most
beloved of all mankind. jewels and precious things, so God lays up in his
Church whatsoever is precious, his praises, his graces, yea whatsoever is good,
and of high esteem that he bestows upon his Church and people.


For the further clearing of this, we must know that the Church and children
of God are said to be his house, either 1. As a family is said to be house, or
2. As the fabric or building is said to be the house.


First, God provide, for his Church as his own house.
a man provides for his family, (and he that neglects it, is worse then an
insidell) so does God provide for his Church; the very Dragons and Ostriges,
the worst of the creatures, al have some respect to their young ones, much more
will God provide for his own, And as a man protects his house from all
enemies, so will God protect his Church and people, and be a wall of fire, and
a defense round about them.

Now there is a mixture in the Church (as in a house of good and bad vessels;
but the godly are especially Gods house, as for hypocrites and false
professors, they are no more in the house, then the excrements are in the body,
they are in the body, but not of the body, and therefore as Ishmael they must
be cast out at length.

And as in every house or building, there are some open places, The heart of
true Christians is Gods private closet.
and some private closets, etc. So is it here; God has his private chamber,
and his retyring place, (which is) the heart of every true Christian; He
counts it not sufficient to dwell in his house at large, but he will dwell in
the best part of it, the heart, and the affections, therefore he knocks at the
doors of our hearts for entrance, Revel. 3. 20.
and his best children are glad he will reside in them; they set him up in the
highest place of their souls, and set a Crown upon him; their desire is, that
God may govern and rule their whole conversation; they have no Idol above God
in their hearts.

What a wonderful mercy is this, (...)
that we are Gods house, that he will vouchsafe to dwell and take up his
lodging in such desiled houses as our souls are; It is no mean favor, that
God should single out us poor wretches, to have his residence and abiding
place in our souls, considering there is so much ^ickednesse in the hearts of
the best of us.

Oh what comfort arises to a christian soul from the due meditation of this
point; If we are Gods house, then God will be our house; Thou art our
habitation (says Moses) from generation to generation; Psalm. 90. 1.
Howsoever we shuffle in the world, as they did in the wilderness, now here,
and now there, having no certain place of abode, but are here to day, and gone
to morrow, yet in God we have an house, thou art our habitation; he is ours,
and we are his. And what a comfort is this that we are Gods house; Certainly
God will provide for his own house; he that lays this charge upon others,
and has put that affection and care of provision into others for their
families, will he neglect his own? he that makes us love, and puts that
natural affection into us of those that belong unto us, has he not
infinitely more in himself, when as that which we have, is but a beam or ray
from his infinite brightness?

This should then instruct us to labor that God may dwell largely and
comfortably in us, Use 2.
to deliver up all to this keeper of our house, and suffer him to rule and
reign in us. The Romish Church is become the habitation of Devils, that which
was Bethel, is now become Bethaven. Why? because they would not suffer God to
rule in his own house, but would have coadjutors with Christ, as if he were
not a sufficient head of the Church to govern it, but he must have a Vicar the
Pope, who (as if Christ were too weak) will not suffer him to exercise his
Kingly office, unless he may support and help him: thus they set up the
abomination of desolation in the temple of God.

Oh beloved, it much concerns us, to cleanse and purify our hearts, that so
we may entertain Christ, and he may delight to abide and dwell with us: you
know how hainously he took it, Luke 19. 46.
when his house was made a den of thieves, and will he not take it much worse,
that our hearts should be made the very sinks and cages of all manner of
uncleannes?

How should we beg and cry to God that he would whip out these noisome lusts
and corruptions out of the temple of our hearts, by any sharp correcction, or
terror of conscience whatsoever, rather then suffer them to reside there still
to grieve his good Spirit. We should take a holy State upon us as being
temples of the holy Ghost, and therefore too good to be desiled with sin: Our
hearts should be as the Holy of Holies: And therefore the Apostle exhorts us to
abstain from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, 1 Cor. 7. 1
for this cause, that God may dwell amongst us, 2 Cor. 6. 14
for, What communion ^^th light with darkness?

Are Gods people his house? Use 3.
Then let the enemies of the Church take heed how they deal with them: for God
will have a special care of his own house: howsoever he may seem for a time
to neglect his children, yet remember this, they are his house still; and no
ordinary house, but a temple, whereon on sacrifice is offered to him
continually, 1 Cor. 3. 17.
he that destroys the temple of God, him will God destroy.

Here a question would be answered, Quest.
which some uncharitable spirits make, and that is this, Whether England be
the house of God, or no?

I answer. Answ.
The whole Catholic militant Church is but one house of God, That the Church
of England is Gods house.
though there be diverse branches of the same: As there is but one maine Ocean
of the Sea, yet as it washes upon the British coast, it is called the British
Sea; and as it washes on the Germans, the German Sea, etc. It has diverse
names of the diverse Countries which it passes through: nevertheless there is
still but one maine Sea: So it is with the house of God; God has but one true
Church in the whole world, which spreads it self into diverse Nations and
Countries upon the face of the earth; One branch whereof is among us at this day.

How prove you that? Quest.


Does not Christ dwell amongst us by his Ordinances, Answ.
and by his Spirit working effectually in the same? If a house be not in
perfect repair, is it not still a house? I beseech you let us rather give God
cause to delight to dwell still with us, then call in question whether he
dwells amongst us or no.

But to proceed. Obser. 2.
Hence further we see, that the house of God needs visiting and purging, and
the reasons of it.
that the house of God after some time will need visiting and purging, seeing
it will soon gather soil. There will abuses and disorders creep into it, so
that it will need Reformation. And this the Apostle seems to ins^nuate, when
he says, The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God. The
Lord saw cause for what he did: For,

First, Reas. 1.
such is the weakness of man's nature, that evil things soon discourage us,
and good things (except we wrestle with our spirits) prove a snare to the
best; Even the Church of God after a long time of peace is apt to gather
corruption, as water does by standing, and as the air it self will do, if it
have not the wind to purge it; And as it is in the bodies of men, if they be
not curiously looked unto, (after a certain time) they will gather such a
burden of humors as will rise to a distemper, so that they must be let blood,
or purged etc. So it is with the Church of God; Such is the infirmity of man's
nature, and the malice of Satan that enemy to mankind, that the best of Gods
people will quickly gather some distemper or other, and stand in need of
purging. You know a house will gather dust of it self, though clean at the
first.

2. Most certain it is that the Church of God cannot be long without some
affliction, Reas. 2.
considering that it is now in a state of Pilgrimage, absent from God, in
another world as it were; We live in a gross corrupt air, and draw in the
corruption of the times, one defiling another, Esaias 65.
I am a man of polluted lips (says Esaias) and dwell with men of polluted lips;
ill neighbors made him the worse.

Use.
This should stir us up to lament the miserable estate of man's nature, that
even the best of men (the Church and people of God) whilst they remain in
this world stand in need of continual purging and winnowing. Crosses are as
necessary to us as our daily bread, because we carry that about us which wants
them; We are as much beholding to Gods corrections, as to his comforts in this
world; the Church needs keeping under for the most part; Psalm. 55. 19.
God will not have us settle upon our dreggs. Ict. 48. 11.
This should teach us to bewail our condition, and to desire to be at home,
where we shall need no purging, where we shall be as free from sorrow, as from
sin the cause of it.

Observe we further, Obser. 3.
that as the Church will stand in need of chastisements, That God will come to
visit and purge his house, when need is.
so God will come and visit his Temple when need is; and but when need
requires neither; for God is no ^yrant, yet he will show that he hates sin,
wheresoever he finds it, even in his Amos(...)
own dear children and servants.

If God should bear with the abuses and sins of his own Church and People,
it would seem that sin was not so contrary to his holy disposition as it is.
Therefore, in whomsoever he finds sin, he will punish it: Our blessed
Savior found this true, when he took upon him the imputation of our sins,
and became but only a Suertie for us; you see how it made him cry out, My God,
my God, why have thou for saken me! Those glorious Creatures the very Angels
themselves, when they kept not their own standing, God would endure them no
longer, but thrust them out of heaven.

But why does God chiefly afflict his own people more then others? O^.


Because they are of his own family, Answ.
and are called by his name: Why God afflicts his own people before others.
Now the disorders of the family tend to the disgrace of the Governor of it:
the sins of the church touch God more nearly then others. And therefore
judgments must begin at the santuary first. I will be sanctified in Ezec. 4 6.
all that come near me, Levit. 10. 3
says God when he smote Aarons sons, The nearer we come to God (if we
maintain not the dignity of our profession) undoubtedly the more near will
God comes to us in judgment. We see the Angels, who came nearest to God of
all others, when once they sinned against him, they were tumbled out of heaven,
and cast into the bottomless pit: Heaven could then brook them no longer.

Beloved, the Gospel suffers lives they lead; what little conscience they make
of their ways etc. Little do men know how much Religion is vilified, and the
ways of God evil spoken of, through the loose carriage of Professors of the
Gospel, as if there were no force in the grace and favor of God to make us
love and obey him in all things; as if Religion consisted in word only, and
not in power. What a scandal is this to the cause of Christ? It is no marvel
God begins with them first. (...) 3. 2.
You have I known above all the families of the earth, and therefore will I
punish you. A man may see and pass by dirt in his grounds, but he will not
suffer it in his dining Chamber, he will not endure dust to be in his Parlour.

Gods house admit of a greater aggravation, The sins of the godly more
heinous then others.
then the sins of others: For, 1. They are committed against more light; 2.
against more benefits and favors; 3. their sins in a manner are sacrilege:
what to make the temple of God a den of thieves; to defile their bodies and
souls that are bought with the precious blood of Jesus Christ; Is this a small
matter? Again, 4. their sins are Idolatry; for they are not only the house
of God, but the spouse of God.

Now for a spous to be false and adulterous; this is greater then fornication,
because the bond is nearor; So the nearer any come to God in Profession, the
higher is the aggravation of their sin; and as their sin grows, so must
their punishment grow answerables, and proportionable: They therefore that knew
Gods will most of all others, must look for most stripes if they do it now

Hence therefore learn that no Privilege can exempt us from Gods judgments,
Use 1.
nay rather the contrary; No privilege can exempt us from Gods judgment.
where God does magnify his rich goodness and mercy to a people, and is
notwithstanding dishonored by them, he will at last magnify his righteous
justice in correcting such disobedient wretches. Some of the Fathers were
forced to justify God in visiting his Church more sharply then other people;
Augustine. Salvian.
because Christians are so much worse then others, by how much they should be
better. Their sins open the mouths of others to blaspheme. We should not bear
out our selves on this, that we are Gods house, but ^eare so much the more to
offend Him, else all our privileges will but increase our guilt not our comfort

Secondly, Use 2.
if God begins with his own house, let the Church besevere in punishing sin
there most of all: because Gods wrath will break out first there. What a shame
is it, that the Heathen should make such sharp laws against Adultery and other
sins, and we let them pass with a slight, or no punishment at all? No doubt
but God blesses a state most, when sin is discountenanced and condemned
most; for then it is the States sin no longer, but lies upon particular
offenders.

But I hasten.

As God will visit his Church, obser. 4.
so there is a certain time for it. God appoints a particular time for his
visitation.
God as he has appointed a general day to judge the world in, so he appoints
particular times of judgment in this life, he is the wise dispenser of times.
God does not always whip his Church, but his ordinary course is, to give them
some respite, as Acts 9. after Paul's, conversion the Church had joy, and grew
in the comforts of the holy Ghost. God has rejoicing days for his people, as
well as mourning days. fair weather, as well as soul, and all to help them
forward in the way to heaven. Beloved, God gives many happy and blessed times
to encourage weak ones at their first coming on, that they may the better grow
up in goodness, and not be nipped in the bud; but after a certain time, when
through peace and encouragement they grow secure and careless, and scandalous
in their lives, then he takes them in hand, and corrects them. God has
scouring days for his vessels.

What be those times wherein God will visit his Church? Quest.


I answer in general, Answ.
the time of visiting the Church of God is from Abel to the last man that shall
be in the earth; the Church began with blood, What be the times of Gods
visitation.
continues with blood, and shall end with blood; the whole days of the Church,
are a time of persecution; Psalm. 88. 15.
from my youth upward (says the Psalmist) I have suffered; so may the Church
of God say, even from my cradle, from my infancy I have been afflicted; yea
for thy sake we are killed all the day long, Psalm. 44. 22.
and counted as sheep for the slaughter; but this is not here meant.

The time for the Church of The Church is afflicted when the light of the
Gospel has most clearly shined.
is, when the glorious manisestation of the Gospel is more then in former
times; we see the ten first persecutions was after that general promulgation
of the Gospel, whereby the world was more, enlightened then formely. We read
in the Revelation of a white horse that Christ rides on, and a pale horse of
famine, and a red horse of persecution that followed after him; So presently
after the preaching of the Gospel, comes the fan, and the axe, (or though
not very presently yet) after a certain time when our need requires it; for
God will wait a while to see how we entertain his glorious Gospel, and
whether we walk worthy of it or not.

lacobs trouble, That now is the time of the Churches affliction.
even now God has put a cup into the Churches hand, and it must go round; the
sword has a commission to devour which is not yet called in.

But what be the more especial times wherein a man may know some judgment is
like to fall upon the Church of God? quest.
The Scripture is wondrous full in the point.

1. God usually before any heavy judgment visits a people with lesser
judgments; How we may know when some judgment approaches.
his foot. ^eps first appear in some small token of his displeasure, 1. Sign.
but if that prevayles not, then he brings a greater; Amos 4. 6. 7.
this, and this have I done (says the Lord) and yet ye have not returned unto
me; There be droppings before the ruin of a house; Lesser judgments make way
for greater, as a little wedg makes way for a greater; and therefore where
less affilictions prevail not, there cannot but be an expectation of greater,
Esaias 1. 5.
Why should I smite you any more (says God) you fall away more and more, (that
is) I must have a sweeping judgment to carry you clean away.

Again, 2. Sign.
usually before some great calamity, God takes away worthy men, Esa. 3. 2. 3.
the Councellor, and the Captain, and the man of war. This is a fearful
presage that God threatens some destruction; for they are the Pillars of the
Church, and the strength of the world; they are those that make the times and
places good wherein they live; for they keep away evil and do good, by their
example and by their prayers many ways. A good man is a common good; Prove. 11.
10. 11.
the City thrives the better (as Solomon says) for a righteous man; Eccl. 9.
15.
therefore we have cause to rejoice in them, and it is an evil sign when
such are removed.

God usually visits a people, 3. Sign.
when some horrible crying sins reign amongst them; as 1. Atheism. Beloved,
God stands upon his prerogative then, when he is scarce known in the world;
when they say, Where is God? God sees us not, etc. So likewise 2. when Idolatry
prevails, this is spiritual Adultery, and a breach of Covenant with God.
Again 3. when divisions grow amongst a people, union is a preserver; where
there is dissension of judgment, there will soon be dissension of affections;
and dissipation will be the end if we take not heed; for the most part
Ecclesiastical dissentions, end in ^ivill; And therefore we see before the
destruction of Jerusalem what a world of Schisms and divisions were amongst
the Jews, there were Pharisees, and Sadduces etc. It was the ruin of the ten
Tribes at length, the rent that Jeroboam caused in Religion; It is a fearful
sign of some great ludgement to fall upon a Church, when there is not a
stopping of dissentions; they may be easily stopped at the first, as waters in
the beginning; but when they are once gotten into the very vital parts of the
Church and Common wealth, we may see the mischief, but it is hardly remedyed.
4. Sign.
Again, when sin goes with some evil circumstances and odious qualities
which aggravate the same in the sight of God; as when sin grows ripe and
abounds in a Land or Nation: at such a time as this a man may know there is
some fearful judgment approaching.

But when is sin ripe? Quest.


1. When it is impudent; Answ.
when men grow bold in sin, When sin is ripe. making courses are their
conversation, they cannot tell how to do otherwise.

common, and spreads sarre; It is an ill plea to say; Others do so as well as
I; alas, the more sin, the more danger.

3. When there is a security in Allmighty, as if men would dare the God of
Heaven to do his worst; Oh beloved, such persons as go on still in their sins
to provoke the Lord, do put a sword (as it were) into Gods hands to destroy
themselves.

The old world (you know) was very secure; no doubt they mocked at holy Noah
when he made the Arc, as if he had been a doting old man; not with standing
he foretold them of the wrath to come; And our Savior Christ says, Before
the end of the world it shall be, as in the days of Noah; Beloved, God has
his old worlds still, If we have the same course and security of finning, we
must look for the same judgments. And therefore compare times with times; If
the times now answer former times, when God judged them, we may well expect
the same fearful judgments to fall upon us.

Unfruitfulness threatens a judgment upon a people; 5. Sign.
when God has bestowed a great deal of cost and time, he looks we should
answer his expectation in some measure. The fig tree in the Gospel, had some
respite given it, by reason of the prayers of the vine dresser, but afterward
when it brought forth no fruit, it was cut down and cast into the fire.
Beloved, who amongst us would endure a barren tree in his Garden? That which is
not fit for fruit, is most fit for fire; we can endure a barren tree in the
Wilderness, but not in our Orchards; when God, the great husbandman of his
Church, sees that upon so great and continual cost be stowed upon us, we
remain yet unfruitful, he will not suffer us long to cumber the ground of his
Church.

Again, decay in our first love is a sign of judgment approaching; 6. Sign.
God threatened the Church of Ephesus to remove his Candlestick from among them,
for their decay in their first love; that having surfetted of plenty and peace,
he might recover her taste by dyeting of her; decay in love proceeds from
disesteeme in judgment; and God cannot endure his glorious Gospel should be
slighted, as not deserving the richest streyne of our love; the Lord takes it
better, where there is but little strength and a striving to be better, then
when there is great means of grace and knowledge, and no growth answerable,
but rather a declining in goodness. I beseech you lay these things to heart;
The Lord is much displeased, when Christians are not so zealous as they should
be; when there is not that sweet communion of Saints among them, to strengthen
and encourage one another in the ways of holiness as there might be; when
there is not a beauty in their profession to allure and draw on others to a
love and liking of the best things; when there is not a care to avoid all
scandalls that may weaken respect to good things, and bring an evil report on
the ways of God; when they labor not with their whole hearts to serve the
Lord in a cheerful manner, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
The very not serving God answerable to encouragements, is a certain sign of
ensuing danger. Use.


Therefore I beseech you let us look about us, whether these be not the times
wherein we live, that judgment must begin at the house of God. The Lord
complains in Jeremy that the Turtle and other silly creatures knew the time of
their standing, Icrem 8. 7.
and removing but his people did not know his judgments. Do the creatures
know their times and seasons, and shall Christ complain that we know not the
day of our visitation? what a shame is this? I beseech you let us know and
consider our times; If we have a time of sinning, God will have a time of
punishing.

And have we not just cause to fear that judgment is not sarre from us, when
we see a great part of Gods house on fire already in our neighboring
Countries? we have had lesser judgments, and they have not wrought kindly
with us; we need a stronger purge; If we look to the carriage of men, what
sin is less committed now then formerly? How few renew their covenant with
God (in sincerity of Resolution) to walk closely with him.

And, what the judgment will be, we may probably foresee; for usually the
last judgment is the worst; we have had all but (war) the worst of all; for
in other judgments, we have to deal with God, but in this, we are to deal
with men, whose very mereyes are cruelti^s. The sword has a long time been
shaken over our heads, a cloud of war has hung over us to affright us, but
we rest still secure in our sinful courses, and think to morrow shall be as
to day, and that no evil shall come nigh us etc. Oh the frozen hearts of
Christians that thrust the evil day far from them; do we not see the whole
world (in a manner) in a combustion round about us, and we ( as the three
young men in the fiery furnace) untouched? Dan. 3.
Beloved, we have out-stripped them in abominable wickednesses; and however
the Lord is pleased that we should only hear a noise and rumor of war,
yet we in this Land have deserved to drink as deep of the cup of the Lords
wrath, as any people under heaven.

What course should we take to prevent the Judgment of God, Quest.
and keep it from us?

Labor to meet God by speedy repentance before any decree be peremptorily
come forth against us; Answ.
Of the means to prevent and escape Gods judgments.
As yet there is hope to prevail; 1. Means.
For (blessed be God) as we have many things to fear, To meet God by speedy
repentance.
so we have many things to encourage us to go unto God with comfort; we have
enjoyed a succession of gracious Princes that have maintained the truth of God
amongst us; we have many godly Magistrates and Ministers; together with the
Ordinances and many other experience of Gods love vouchsafed unto us. We have
yet time to seck the Lord, let us not defer till the very time of judgment
come upon us; for that is but self love; Assure thy self thus much, thou
can have no more comfort in troubles and afflictions when they do come, Note:
then thou have care to prevent them before they come; answerable to our care
in preventing now, will be our comfort then

Therefore if we would be bid in the day of Gods wrath; if we would have God
to set his mark upon us, and write us in his book of Remembrance, Mal. 3. 16
and to gather us when he makes up his jewels; If we would have him to own
us then, look to it now; Get now into Christ; be provided now of a sound
profession of Religion, and that will be as an Arc to shelter us in the evil
day; What we know let us do, and then we shall be built on a Rock, that if
waves or any thing come we shall not be stirred.

Usually God in dangerous times leaves some ground of hope which works
differently with men; Such as are carnal grow presumptuous hereupon; but the
Godly are drawn nearer to God, upon any appearance of encouragement; the good
things they enjoy from God, work in them a more earnest desire to please him.

It is the custom of the spirit of God, to make doubtful, imperfect, and (as
it were) half promises to keep his people still under some hope; whence we
read of these and such like phrases in Scripture, It may be God will show
mercy, and Who knows whether he will hear us? etc.

Again, 2. Means.
examine and try upon what ground thou professest Religion, To examine the
grounds of our Religion.
whether it will hold water or no, and stand thee in stead when evil times
shall come. Beloved, it nearly concerns us all, seriously to consider, and
narrowly to search upon what grounds we venture our lives and souls; try
graces, our knowledge, repentance, faith love, etc. of what metal they are;
those that have coin bring it to the touchstone, and if it prove counterset
they presently reject it, and will have none of it; Oh that we had this
wisdom for matters of eternity; If men would search and plough up their own
hearts, they would not need the plowing of Gods enemies; we should not need
Gods judgments, if we would judge ourselves; Psalm. 129. 3.
The Church complained that the enemies had made long surrowes on her back,
but if she had plowed her self she had saved the enemies that labor.

Before any judgment comes, 3. Means.
let us store up the fruits of a holy life; To store up the fruits of a godly
life before the judgment comes.
every day be doing something; do that now which may comfort thee then; store
up comforts against the evil day; when the night is come we cannot work; let
us therefore walk while we have the light; let us look about us, and do what
good we can, whilst we have time as the Apostle says. The time will come
ere long, that thou will wish, Oh that I had that opportunity and advantage of
doing good as I have had; Oh that I had such means of doing good as I have
had; but then it will be too late; then that where by thou should do good
will be in thy enemies hands; and therefore while we have time; let us be doing
and receiving all the good we can.

Again, 4. Means.
if we would have God to shield us, To moutne for our own sins, and the sins
of the tinies.
and be an hiding place to us in the worst times, let us mourn for our own
sins, and the sins of the times wherein we live. Let us keep our selves
unspotted of the sins of the world; let us not bring sticks to the common fire;
let us not make the times worse for us, but better; that the times and places
we live in may bless God for us.

And let us not only mourn for the sins of the times, but labor also to
repress them all we can, and stand in the gappe, endeavoring by our prayers
and tears to stop Gods judgments.

And we should set a high price upon that Religion and the blessings of God
which we do enjoy, 5. Means.
lest we force God to take them from us; To set an high price on our Religion,
and every truth of it.
and so we come to know that by the want of it, which we did not value when
we possessed it; Oh let us esteem the treasure of the Gospel at a higher
rate then ever we have done; we see how it is slighted by most of the world,
how they shake the blessed truths of God, and call them into question, being
indifferent for any Religion; Is this our proficiency beloved? It behooves us
to store up all the sanctisied knowledge we can, and to take heed we yield
not to any that would either weaken our judgment in Religion, or our
affections to the best things; we should every one in his place labor to
stop diffentions in this kind, and knit our heart together as one man in
unity and concord; factions have always fractions going with them; unity
makes strong, but Division weakneth any people; Even Satan's kingdom, divided
against it self cannot stand.

What is the glory of England? take away the Gospel, and what have we that
other Nations have not better then our selves? Alas, if we labor not to
maintain truth, we may say with Elies daughter, The glory of God is departed
from us. 2 Samuel 4. 21.


Sarah had her handmaids; and so has Religion been attended with prosperity
and peace, preservation, and protection amongst us, even to the admiration of
other Countries. Shall we not therefore make much of that Religion, which if we
had it alone (joined with many crosses and sufferings yet) were an inestimable
and unvaluable blessing? And shall we not now much more considering it has
been attended by God with so many mercies, cherish and maintain the same all
we can? Do we think it will go alone when it goes, whenever God removes it
from us? No no, therefore I beseech you let us highly esteem of the Gospel,
whilst we do enjoy it; if we suffer that to be shaken any way, our peace and
prosperity will then leave us, and judgment upon judgment will come upon us:
If we will not regard the truth of God which he esteems most, he will take
away outward prosperity which we esteem most.

But I come to the fifth point, Obser.
that judgment must begin at the house of God. That judgment must begin at
Gods house, and the reasons of it.


Why does God begin with his own Church and people?

1. Usually because he uses wicked men and the enemies of his Church for that
base service to correct and punish them. Reas. 1.


2. R^as. 2.
To take away all excuse from wicked men, that they seeing how severely God
deals with his own dear Children, might be stirred up to look about them,
and consider what will become of themselves at the last, if they go on in
their sinful courses; so many crosses as befall Gods children, so many
evidences against secure carnal persons; for if God deal thus with the green
tree, what will he do with the dry? If he scourge his children thus with rodds,
certainly the slaves shall be whipped with scorpions.

3. Reas. 3.
God begins with his own servants, that his children might be best at last; if
he should not begin with them, they would grow deeper in rebellion against
him, and attract more soil and filth to themselves, and be more and more
engaged to error and corruption; Gods love to his people is such, that he
regards their correction before the confusion of his e^emies.

Again, Reas. 4.
God does this, that when he sends them good days afterward, they might have
the more taste and relish of his goodness* after an afflicted life, we are more
sensible of happy times; God deals favorably therefore with a man, when he
crosses him in the beginning of his days, and gives him peace in his latter
end.

This is a point of mavelous comfort and encouragement to the faithful
servants of God; Use. 1.
for 1. though God correct them sharply, That God by our corrections shows
that we are his.
yet he shows thereby they are of his household; When a man corrccts another,
we may know it is his child or servant etc. God shows that we are of his
house and family by the care he takes to correct us; the vine is not hated
because it is pruned, but that it may bring forth more fruit; the ground is not
hated because it is ploughed, nor the house because it is cleansed.

But what is meant by judgment here? Quest.


Judgment is correction moderated to Gods children; Answ.
Judgment is twofold in Scripture; What is meant by judgment, and the diverse
kind^ of it.
the statutes of God are called judgments, and the corrections of God are
called judgments; The Statutes are called judgments, because they judge what
we should do, and what we should not do; Now when we do not that we
should* he is forced to judge us actually with real judgments.

The real judgments of God, are either, 1. upon the wicked, (and so they are
judgments in ^ury, for there is not the least taste of his love in them to
wicked men; they can make no sanctified use of them, because they are not
directed to them for their good.) Or 2. to Gods children, and so they are
moderate corrections, and therefore the Prophet so often urges, Ierem. 10. 24.
Correct us o Lord in judgment etc. God always moderates afflictions to his
own children, but as for the wicked, he sweepes them away as doung, as dross,
and as chafe. etc.

Again, Use 2.
it is a comfort to Gods children that he begins with them first; rather then
God will suffer them to perish and be condemned with the world, he begins
with them here, they have their worst first, and the better is to come.

This likewise is some comfort, Use 3.
that the time when God corrects his children is most seasonable and ^it for
them, God pruneth his trees in the ^ittest time. A plant cut unseasonably
dies, but being cut in due time it flourishes the better; All the works of God
are beautiful in their season. Every Ch^istian may truly say God loves me
better then I do my selse, he knows the best time of purging and visiting
his people, Micah. 7.
This is the time of lacobs trouble, etc. therefore we should lay our hands upon
our mouths, kiss the rodd, and stoop under judgments, as cosidering Gods
time, to be the best time, and that he knows better what is good for us, then
we do our selves.

Thus you see though we have cause of fearing Gods judgments, yet there is
something to comfort us in the midst of all. God mingles our Comforts and
Crosses together, whilst we are here; both to keep us in awe of offending his
Majesty, Securitatis custos timor.
and to encourage u^ in well-doing; Therefore let us always look what matter
of fear, Spes exercitat ad opus.
and what matter of hope we have, for both these are operative affetions; Oh
that I could stir up this blessed fear in you, it is that which preserves
the soul, and God has promised that he will put his fear into our ^earts,
Ierem. 32. 40.
that we shall not depart from hi^. I beseech you plie the thron^ of grace,
and desire the Lord that it may be to every one of your souls according to
his good word.

Labor likewise ^or i^c^ur^gement in the ways of holiness; (blessed be God)
yet we have a time of respite, God forbeares us with much patience and
goodness. Answerable to our good courses that we take n^w, will be our comfort
in the evil day. If we carelessly go on in sin, and think it time enough
to renew our covenant with God then when his judgments are abroad and ready to
cease upon us, we do but delude our own souls and expose our selves to
inevitable dangers. Mark what the Lord says, Because I called and you would
not hear, Prove. 1. 24. 26
etc. therefore will I laugh at your destruction; Is it not strange that the
merciful God should laugh at the calamity of his poor creatures? yet thus it
is with every wilful sinner, that dallies with God, and puts off his
repentance from time to time; God will take pleasure in the ruin of such a
man, and laug^ when his fear comet^; because those that seek him then do it
not out of any love or liking of God and the ways of goodness, but merely out
of self-love and respect to their own welfare.

THE VNGODLIES MISERY.
SERMON II.
And if it first begin at us, what shall the end of those be that obey not
the Gospel!
THESE words are p^opounded by way of admira^^^, as if the Apostle had been at
his wits end, and could not certainly set down, how great the judgment should
be of those that obey not the Gospel; it was so terrible and unavoydable. The
points considerable are these.

1. Three points consider^ble.
That the seeming prosp^rity of the wicked shall have an end. 2. That it is
wisdom to con^ider the end of graceless persons. 3. The description of them
in these words, they are such as obey not the Gospel.
It is naturally in the hearts of carnal persons, The seeming prosperity of
the wicked shall have an end.
to think it shall be always well with the^, whereas the Prophet says, the
happiness of a wicked man, is but as a candle, that ends in ^ snuff, or like
a Rose, the beauty whereof suddenly fades, and nothing remains but the
prickles. The favors of men, (for which theyso much offend God) shall have an
end; their strength shall end, their pleasure shall end: alas, they are but
pleasures of sin for a season; their life it self (the foundation of all
their comforts) that shall have an end; but their sins, by which they have
offended God, shall never have an end: See what a fearful judgment follows
every wicked wretch; that which he sins for, his honor, riches, delights, all
shall vanish and come to nothing, they shall not be able to afford him one
drop or dram of comfort at his dying day: but the sin it self, the guilt
of that, and the punishment due to the same, shall endure for ever to torment
his soul, without serious repentance and turning to God in time.

But secondly, Obser. 2.
if the happiness of wicked men shall have an end, The happiness of the
wicked is moment^nic* their (...) end les^e.
and their misery shall have no end; let us not be dazeled with their present
happiness, so as to im^tate their evil ways: let us tremble at their
courses, whose ends we tremble at; if we walk in the same path, shall we not
come to the same end? All wicked men that delight in the company one of another
here, are brethren in ^vill, and shall be like a company of tares all cast
into hell fire together hereafter: It is pity they should be s^vered then that
will not be severed now; Those men's courses therefore which we follow here, of
their judgment we shall participate eternally afterward

Let this admonish us to have nothing to do with sinful persons, Use
nor to be troubled with their seeming prosperity; Psalm. 37.
They stand in ^lippery places; Luke 16.
God lets them alone for a while, but their pleasure will end in bitterness at
last; all their riches shall end in poverty and beggary, They shall not have a
drop of ^ater to cool their tongues; Luke 16.
All their honor and greatness shall end in con^usion and shame, and lie in
the dust ere long. In deed we should rather pity them if we consider their
latter ends. Alas, what shall become of them ere long? The fall of there
wretches shall be so terrible, that peter could not set it down, but leaves
it to the admiration of the Reader, What shall the end of such be! etc.

One difference betwixt a wise man and a fool, is, that a wise man considers
his end, and frames his life suitable thereunto; therefore if we would be truly
wise, let us consider the end of those things in this world, which wicked men
offend God for, and set so light by Heaven and everlasting happiness for the
procurement of; Alas, whatsoever is here, shall have an end. A Christian should
frame his course answerable to eternity, that when his happiness shall end in
this world, it may begin in the world to come; else we may outlive our
happiness. Present happiness aggra^vates futur^ and et^rnall misery.


This is the misery of wicked men, that their souls are eternal, but their
happiness is determined in this life, here that ends; but their misery is
infinite, and has no end at all. Look what degree of excellency any creature
has if it be good, the same degree of misery it has, if it be evil; What
made the Angels worse then other creatures when they sinned? but only this,
they were most excellent creatures, and therefore when they became evil, their
excellency did but help them to subsist and be more capable of punishment. A
wise man under a^deth his misstry; Now the Angels when they fell became more
miserable, S^piens (...) plus miser.
because they were more capac^ous, and sensible of it, being Spirits.

So man being sinful and evil, his end will be more miserable then any
inferior creature, because he was more happy; his happiness helps him to
mo^e misery; How should this stir up every one to look about him, and not to
prize himself by any outward excellency whatsoever? The more excellent thou
art, the more miserable if thou sin against God; It is of all unhappinesses the
most unhappie thing, for a man to live happyly here a while, and be eternally
miserable afterward; for our former happiness tends to nothing else but to
make us more sensible of future miseries; what is all the felicity of great
persons when they die and leave this world? alas, it soon comes to nothing,
and serves but to make them apprehensive of more misery then meaner persons are
capable of; What shall the end of such be! etc.

From this, that the Apostle leaves the punishment of all sinful wretches,
Observe. 3.
to admiration and wonderment, The e^dlesse miseries of the wicked should warn
us from the love of their present pleasures and profits
rather then to expression, (for indeed it is above expression) we may learn;
when we are tempted to any sin or unalwfull course; to consider thus with our
selves. Shall I for a pleasure that will end, have a judgment that shall never
end? For the favor of men that will fail, shall I lose the perpetual favor
of God, whose wrath is a co^suming fire and burns to hell? shall I for a
little profit, lose my soul eternally? Beloved, as the good things of a
Christian (even in this life) are admirable beyond expressio^, peace that
passes all understanding, and joy unspeakable and glorio^s, etc. So when God
awakens our consciences, those gripes and pangs, and terrors o^ foul which
follow after sin committed, are unutterable, and unconceivable; I beseech you
therefore when ever you are solicited to sin for profit or pleasure, etc.
set before your eyes the fading and perishing condition of these things, and
the everlastingnesse of that judgment which attends upon them. Oh that we were
wise this way.

I come now to the third particular: Those that obey not the Gospel; where in
we have 1. A description of the thing. 2. And then of the Persons.


The thing is the Gospel of God; the Persons are wicked men; God is the
author of the Gospel, it comes out his breast, sealed with authority; Whence
learn this (by the way,) That in refusing the blessed Gospel, ^ee have to
deal with god himself; It is Gods word and Gospel, therefore when you reject
it, you reject God; in receiving it, you receive God; you deal with God
himself when you deal with the Ministers of his word; therefore when ever you
partake of the Ordinaces, say with good Cornelius, We are now in the presence
of God to hear what he will say.

But, what is it to obey the Gospel?

To obey the Gospel is to entertain the offers of it; Quest.
for indeed though the Gospel co^^and us to believe in the Son of God, Answ.
yet withal it offers the very command unto us; What it is to obey the Gospel.
To believe in Christ, being in effect a command to receive him, which
supposes an act of giving and tendering something to us; Now when we do not
receive and intertaine with our whole heart Christ and his benefits freely
offered, we disobey the Gospel, and so procure danger to our selves.

But more particularly, he obeies the Gospel that is sensible of his own
miserable and sinful condition, and from a sense thereof hungereth after the
grace and favor offered in Jesus Christ to pardon sin, which when he has
once obtained, walks answerable to that great mercy receved, He that receives
whole Christ to justify him, and sanctify him too, that receives Christ as a
king to rule him, as well as a Priest to save him, such a one receives the
Gospel: but those that are not sensible of their misery, or if they be, will
not go to Christ, but as desperate persons fling a way the potion that should
cure them, these are far from obeying the Gospel of God.

Such likewise as pretend, Oh, Christ is welcome with the pardon of sin, but
yet live in gross wickedness against ^^owledge and conscience, and suffer him
not to bear sway in their hearts, as if Christ came by blo^d alone, and not by
water, whereas indeed he came as well by water to sanctify us, as by blood to
die for us.

Many there are that think they obey the Gospel, who are indeed very rebels
and enenies unto it; they welcom^ the Gospel and they hate popery, etc. but
notwithstanding they will be their own Rulers, and live as they list, they will
not deny themselves in their beloved sins; they are full of Reveng^
notwithstanding the Gospel says, This is my Commandment that you love one
another. That bidds them deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly;
Yet they will riot, and follow their base courses still. The Gospel teaches a
man to acknowledge God in all his ways, to deal with Go^ in all things he
goes about; now when a man lives without God in the world, saying, God is
merciful, and Christ is a Savior, and yet persists in those ways which seem
good in his own eyes, never looking to God to guide him, or his law to rule
him, How can such a one be said to obey the Gospel?

But some others there are amongst us, That works have no place in the act of
just^fication.
that regard not Christ and his satisfaction alone, but join faith and works
together in justification, they will have other Priests, and other intercessors
then Christ. Alas beloved, how are these men fallen from Christ to another
Gospel, as if Christ were not an all-sufficient Savior, Gal. 2*
and able to deliver to the uttermost? What is the Gospel but salvation and
redemption by Christ alone?

Therefore Romes Church is an Apostate Church, and may well be styled an
Adulteress and a Whore, because she is fallen from her Husband Christ Jesus.

And what may we think of those that would bring light and darkness, Christ
and Antichrist, the Arc and Dagon together, that would reconcile us, as if it
were no such great matter? Beloved, they that join works with Christ in matter
of j^stification, err in the foundation, the very life and soul of Religion
consists in this; What was the reason the Jews stumbled at this st^^bling
block, and were never benefited by Christ? why; they set up a righteousness of
their ^wne which could not stand, but soon failed them. So when a man sets up
a righteousness of his own, neglecting the righteousness of Christ, it is
impossible he should ever be saved living and dying in that error. Philip. 3.
10.


Therefore I beseech you take heed of disobeying the Gospel of Jesus Christ in
any kind whatsoever, Why disobedience against the Gospel is so great a sin.
for of all sins this is the greatest, as shall appear by these reasons.

First, 1. Reas.
because sins against the Gospel are sins against those Attrib^tes, Because
sins against the Gospel, are against those attributes in which God is most
glorified.
wherein God will glorify himself most, as his grace, mercy, loving kindness,
etc. Therefore the Gospel is called grace, because it publishes, offers, and
applies grace; Now sins against ^^rcy are greater then sins against justice;
for God has made all things for the glory of his mercy. Even among men, are
not sins against favors the greatest sins? To wrong a man whether he
deserves well or ill is an offense. But what man will have his courtesies
rejected though never so mean? Love deserves love; Favor deserves respect
again: But now when we^ obey not the Gospel, we neglect and despise the
goodness and mercy of God; Oh what excellent blessings does the Gospel
reveal, if we had hearts to value them! Does not the Gospel bring salvation?
Is it not the word of grace, the word of life, the word of the Kingdom?
Beloved, I beseech you lay these things to heart, for whenever your refuse
the Gospel of Christ, you refuse with it the word of grace, of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and eternal life, and all; therefore the sins of the Gospel must
needs be the greatest sins.

Again, 2. Reas.
sins against the greatest light are most sinful; B^c^u^e those sins are
most sinful which are against the greatest light.
What makes sin out of measure sinful, but this, when it is committed
against a great measure of light? What makes a man fall foul? It is not when
he falls in a mist, or in a dark night (every one will pity him then, alas he
wanted light) but when he falls at noone day. Beloved, had we lived in former
times when the light was not powered forth so abundantly as now it is, our sin
had been the less, but now in this clear Sunshine of the Gospel for us to
live in sins condemned by so great a light, either in our judgment or
practice, it must needs make our sin the greater. John. 15. 22.
If I had not come and spoke to them (says our Savior) they had had some
pretense for their sins; but when Christ had once spoken, all excuse was
taken away, they could not the^ say they knew not the will of God; and this is
the reason of that speech of the Apostle, Ep^. 5. 8.
Now you are in the light, walk as children of light. And This is the
condemnation that men hate light, (not that men for want of light stumble, but)
that men love darkness more then light. It is not the sin it self, but the
love and liking of sin which aggravates men's wickedness, when as the malice
and poison of their hearts rebels against the discovery of Gods good pleasure
in Christ.

No people o^t of the Church are capable of this sin; Negative infidelity is a
lesser ^in them disobedience to the Gospel.
for how can they sin by infidelity and unthankfulness for the Gospel, that
never had it? And therefore Negative infidelity is as it were no sin in
comparison; John. 15. 22.
If I had not come among them they had had no sin, says Christ. Negative I
call that, when as men believe not, having no means, as infidells and
Heathens, etc. And therefore as they sin without the Gospel, so they shall be
damned without the Gospel; the rule of their damnation shall be the law of
Nature written in their hearts; for this is an undoubted truth, No man ever
lived answerable to his Rule; and therefore God has just ground of damnation
to any man, even from this that he has not lived answerable to the rule of
his own conscience; so that we need not fly to reprobation, etc.

Again, 3. Reas.
an other aggravation of sins against the Gospel is, Because they ^in
against a better cov^nant.
that they are against the better covenant; The first covenant was, D^e this
and live, against which we all sinned, and were under the curse; But now we
are under a more gracious covenant; ( a covenant of mercy) Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ and we shall be saved; therefore sins now must needs be more
heinous; for if we sin against the Gospel, either by presumption or
despair, or else by prophanenes, professing the Gospel but denying the power
of it, etc. there is no remedy left for us; If a man sin against the La^,
against Moral honesty and Civil Righteousness, there is a remedy in the
Gospel for him; but when a man sins against the sweet love and goodness of
God, in rejecting the Gospel of his dear Son, Mercy it self shall not save
such an one; That must needs be a strange sin that makes a man worse then a
sodomite, yet we read it shall be easier for Sodom and Go^^rrha in that
day, then for those that hear the Gospel, (the blessed allurements and
invitations to believe, and to lead an holy life answerable to our faith and
calling) and yet live in sins against conscience, despising the precious blood
of Christ.

Herod was a wretched man, yet notwithstanding it was said, he added this to
all, he put John in prison a Preacher of the Gospel: Luke 3. 20.
sins against the Gospel in a loose malignant Professor are many times worse
then all the rest. Oh therefore take heed of sinning against the favor and
goodness of God, for this will confound us a^ the day of judgment, when we
shall think, What, was so great mercy offered me and did I slight it in this
manner? Have I lost the favor of God, eternal life, and the glorious company
of the Saints in Heaven for a base pleasure of sin for a seas^n, to gratify
a brutish lust? Have I lost Christ and all the Good by him for ever, only to
satisfy my sinful disposition? to please a carnal friend? etc. Oh how will
this lie heavy upon the soul another day! we shall not need accus^rs, our own
hearts shall justify the sentence of God against us be it never so sharp,
that we have resused mercy so often tendered to us in the blood of Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7* 8.
Mark what Saint Paul says, The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, in
flaming fire taking vengeance upon those that know not God: and obey not his
glorious Gospel; he says not, only on those that are swearers, and profane
persons, but ignorant sots that care not to know God, though they be not open
sinners: H^ says not, those that persecute the Gospel or oppose it shall be
punished with eternal destruction from the presence of God, (which is true)
but those that sin in a less degree, such as obey not the Gospel, that value
not this inestimable jewel: that sell not all to buy this pearl, unto whom
all the world is not dross and doung in respect of the glorious Gospel of
Christ Jesus; how shall they escape which neglect so great salvation?

Oh say some, this concerns not me, I thank God there is mercy in Christ, and
I hope for pardon, etc. Beloved, here is the bane of men's ^oules, they will be
their own Carvers, and take of the Gospel what they list; Oh so much of
Christ as concerns their own good they will have, so much as concerns their
pleasure and profit, so much as they may have and be proud too, and be
devilish, and evil in their life and conversation too, this they allow of,
and it is pity he should live that regards not Christ in justification; but so
much as concerns mortification and selfe-de^yall, as crosses them in their
sinful course, this they are strangers to; But (we must know) the Gospel does
not only bring salvation, but it teaches a man to deny ungodlines and
worldly l^sts, 2. Ti^. 12.
to put off himself, his whole self, that he might have no judgment, nor no
affection contrary to God.

To make this more plainly appear, take these few insta^ces.

The very first lesson which the Gospel injoy^eth, 1. (...).
is to cut off our right hand, and pull out our right eye, (that is,) to deny
our selves in those sins which are most useful and gainful to us; now when
this is pressed in particular to some that live in their secret beloved sins,
presently they begin to hate this blessed truth, and the Ministry thereof;
they know so much as will damn them, but so much as without the which they
cannot be saved that they oppose; Contenting themselves with a bare form and
outside of Religion; they come to Church, and take their Books and read and
hear and receive the Sacrament, etc. and in these outward performances they*
rest: Alas Beloved what are these? I tell you, all the privileges of the
Gospel do but aggravate thy damnation, if thou art not bettered by them; for
as they are in themselves invaluable privileges and even ravish the heart of a
true child of God; so when they are not entertained to purpose, they make our
sin the more heinous; Every man is willing to accept of Christ, but it must
be upon their own terms, and what are those? So they may enjoy their worldly
delights, so they may increase their estates by such unlawful means, and not
be crossed; so long they are content that Christ and the Gospel shall be
theirs; but otherwise if they cannot enjoy Christ upon their own terms, (that
is) if they cannot go to Heaven and to Hell too, they will rather regard their
own profits and pleasures, then regard Christ. Oh, how do these poor wretches
delude their own souls; beloved the embracing and obeying the Gospel is a
spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and the believer. Now you know in Marriage
the will is given up to the Husband; the wife is no more her own, but at his
disposing: So when once we are truly united unto Christ, we take him for
better for worse, we must suffer with him, yea live and die with him, and
esteem him above all; we must take Christ upon his own terms, or else he
will not be had; if we love not him above Father and Mother (yea and life it
self) we are not worthy of him; 10. Matthew 37.
And therefore all that do not thus obey the Gospel are rebels, and shall
have the reward of rebels if they repent not in time. Were it not a comely
thing (think you) for a company of Traitors that had this condition propounded
to them, if you will come in and live as good subjects you shall have a pardon,
for them to go on presumptuously in their rebellion still, and think to have
^avour when they please? would not ^ sharp execution be the just desert of
such persons?

Again, 2. Instance.
Christ propounds pardon and forgiveness of sins upon this condition, that we
will come in, and live as wivesand as obedient subjects to his blessed Spirit,
and not in swearing* filthiness, and other abominable courses of which the
Scripture says, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
such shall (...) inherit the kingdom of heaven; yet notwithstanding Satan
has so bewitched many poor wretches, that they think their case is good, and
al shall go well with them be their lives never so loose and opposite to the
ways of God; they bless themselves when God does not bless them, but rather
curse them to their faces; the Devil himself is likely to be saved as soon
as such graceless persons as these, without repentance: No, no, if ever they
expect a pardon, they must live as subjects: If they frame not themselves to
be guided by Christ, and come under his government, to be ruled according to
his will; they have nothing to do with mercy and salvation, Those mine enemies
that will not have me rule over them, bring them hither, and slay them before
me, Luke 19. 27.
etc. we mock Christ if we will not suffer him to rule us.

But I cannot obey the Gospel of my self. Object.


It is true, Answ.
we cannot no more than we can obey the Law; nay, it is harder to obey the
Gospel then to obey the Law in a man's own strength; for there are the seeds
of the law in our nature, but there are none of the Gospel; that is ^eerly
supernatural; the prom^ses are above nature to apprehend them, therefore a
supernatural strength is required to plant the excellent grace of faith in our
hearts. But though we be as unable to believe and obey the Gospel as the Law,
yet here is the difference; together with the unfolding of our miseries by the
Gospel, the Spirit of God goes along to sustain us. The Law finds us dead,
and gives us no strength, but leaves a man cursed still; the Gospel likewise
finds us dead, but it leaves us not so, and therefore it is called the
Ministry of the Spirit; Gal. 3. 5.
Received you the Spirit by the Law, or by the Gospel? Gods blessed Spirit
goes together with the sweet message of salvation and eternal life; and this
Spirit does not only open our understandings, but incline and bend our wills
and affections to embrace the truth that is offered. Seeing therefore the Spirit
which accompanies the Gospel, is mighty and powerful in operation, let none
pretend impossibility; for though they find not the sweet blaze of the Spirit
at the first or second hearing; yet let them still attend upon Grace, Pro. 8.
34.
waiting at wisdoms gate, and the Angel will come at lenght and stir the
waters; God will make the m^anes effectual first or last to those that in
truth of heart seek unto him; for the Gospel is the Chariot of the Spirit,
and the golden Conduit through which the Spirit runs, and is convayed to us;
therefore if thou would not disobey the Gospel, withstand not the Spirit of
God working by the same. How the Spirit works with the Gosp^ll.


Now the Spirit works with brings some to be willing to hear the Gospel,
who yet presently neglect and dis-regard the the same. 2. Others are more the
stony ground) but because they opened not their hearts to the working of the
Spirit only, Math. 13. 20.
but will be ruled partly by carnal wisdom, and partly by the Spirit, it
leaves them at last altogether. 3. But any thing dishonor Christ, or grive his
good Spirit, and to such only has the Gospel come in power. If we would not
d^sobey the Gospel, disobey not the Spirit.
Therefore I beseech you seriously co^nsider of this truth if you would not
disobey the Gospel, disobey not the Spirit accompanying the same; deal
faithfully with your own souls. Which of you al has not some time or other
had his heart warmed with the sweet motions of Gods Spirit? Oh do not resist
these holy stirrings within you, give way to the motions of the blessed Spirit
of God, second them with holy resolutions to practice the same; let them sink
deep into your hearts, root them there, and never give over the holy
meditation of them, till you make them your own, till you come to see Grace
and the state of Christianity to be the most amiable and excellent thing in the
world, and sin and carnal courses to be the most accursed thing in the world,
worse than any misery, than any beggary, torment, or disgrace whatsoever.
Beloved til we have our spirits wrought upon to this high esteem of good
things, and to a base undervaluing of all things else, we shall rebel against
Christ first or last: for until such time as the heart of man is overpowred
with Grace, he cannot but disobey the Gospel, either by shutting it out
altogether, or by making an evil use of what he knows (thereby turning the
grace of God into wantonness) or else by revolting from the truth received
altogether: When times of temptation come, unfound Christians will do one of
these three, either despise, refuse or revolt from the truth. Therefore I
beseech you let your hearts be cast into the mould and fashion of the Gospel
of Christ, let it be soundly bottomed and ingrasted in you, that so you may
grow more and more obedient to the truth revealed, and so your end shall not be
theirs here, which obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

But, Qu^st.
how may I come to obey the Gospel?

Beg earnestly of God in the use of the means (else prayer is but a tempting
of God) that thy soul may be convinced, Answ.
of what evil is in thee, and what evil is toward thee unless thou repent;
How we may c^^^ to obey the Gospel.
Labor for sound conviction; for you shall not need to stir up a man that is
condemned to seek out for a pardon, or a man that seeles the smart of his
wound to get balm to cure it; oh no, when our hearts are once truly humb'^d
and pierced with a sight of our sins, then Christ will be Christ indeed unto
us; mercy is sweet at such a time, any thing for a Savior then, and not
before. Therefore labor every day to see more and more into the venomous and
filthy nature of sin, make it as odious to thy soul as possibly thou can,
hearken to the voice of conscience, give it full scope to speak what it can,
that so thou may fly to Christ. Consider how God plagueth us in this world
for sin, how it fills us with fears and horrors, causing our consciences to
torment us, and fly in our faces; consider what threatenings are denounced
against sin and sinners, for the time to come. Consider the fearful
judgments of God upon others for sin, how it cast Adam out of Paradise, the
Angels out of heaven, being so offensive to God, that it could no otherwise be
expiated then by the death and blood shedding of the Lord Jesus. I beseech you
let your hearts dwell upon these things, and consider with your selves how
bitter you have found it to offend God, though now it be a time of mercy.

1 John 3. 23.
consider how the Gospel lays open Christ unto us; this is his commandment,
that we believe in the Lord Jesus; he that commands us to do no murder, not
to ^teale, etc. commands us likewise to believe in Christ; He commands us to
love our own souls so much, as to take the remedy which may cure them; so
that now it is our duty to be good to our poor souls, and we offend God if
we be not merciful to our own souls. Oh what a favor is this, that God
should lay a charge upon me no^ ^o reject my own mercy, as it is in Jonah,
They who follow lying vanities forsake their own mercies; Jonah 2. 8.
If I do not love my own soul, and accept of mercy offered, I make God a
liar, and offend his Majesty.

Again, consider how God allures those that might except against mercy; Alas,
I am laden with sin, (will some poor soul say) why, Matthew 11. 28.
Come unto me all you that are heavy ^aden, and I will case you. But I have
offended God, I have broken my peace, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
yet I beseech you be reconciled to God, though you have offended, yet there is
hope; do but consider how ready God is to help you, how continual his mercies
are, and how he stretches out his hands to receive us.

Consider further, what a Christ as a King, and as an Husband; will he not
provide for his own family, for his own Subjects? Beloved, it is not mere
dominion that Christ stands upon, he aims at a Fatherly and Husband - like
sovereignty for the good of his children and Spouse, it is their welfare he
looks after; therefore I beseech you be in love with the government of Jesus
Christ and his blessed Spirit, oh it is a sweet regiment; the Spirit of God
leads us quietly, inlightning our understandings upon judicious grounds what
to do, by strength of reason altering our natures, and bettering us every way,
both in our inward and outward man; it never leaves teaching and guiding of us
till it has brought us to heaven and happiness.

To conclude, mark what the Apostle says here, What shall be the end of
those that obey not the Gospel? (he cares not what they know) Many say, we
have heard the Word, and we have received the Sacrament, etc. it is no matter
for that, how stands the bent of your souls? what has your obedience been,
this is that God looks after; every man can talk of religion, but where is
the practice? a little obedience is worth all the discourse and contemplation
in the world, for that serves but to justify Gods damning of us, if we live
not answerably: value not your selves therefore by your outward profess o^,
neither judge of your estate in grace, by the knowledge of good things; nothing
but the power of godliness expressed in our lives, will yield real comfort in
the day of trial.

And we should labor that our obedience be free and cheerful, Our obedience
must be free.
always upon the wing, Psalm. 1103.
(as we say) for that is Evangelical obedience; Gods people under the Gospel
are a voluntary ready people, Tir. 2* 14.
zealo^s of good works. Oh beloved, did we but consider what GOD has done for
us here, and what he means to do for us in another world, how would our
hearts be enlarged in duty to his Majesty? did we but consider of his
inestimable love in the Lord Christ, pardoning such wretches as we are, and
not only so, but accepting our service, and us to life everlasting, taking us
from the lowest misery to the highest happiness; from the lowest hell to the
highest heaven, of traitors to be Sons, of slave^ to be heirs of the
Kingdom, etc? Oh did we but seriously consider and believe these things, how
would they warm our hearts, and make us pliable and constant to every good
work and way?

The Apostle having tasted the sweet favor of GOD in Christ, might well use it
as a motive to quicken others, ( I beseech you by the tender mercies of Christ,
Romans 12. 1.
etc.) He knew this was a powerful argument, and if that wrought not upon men's
hearts, nothing would.

Let our obedience therefore be cheerful, for now we are not in the oldnesse
of the letter, we have not a Legal Covenant since Christ's coming, but we
serve God in the newness of the Spirit, Romans 7. 6.
(that is) considering that the Spirit is given in more plenty since his
ascension, we should be more spiritual and heavenly in our service of God;
considering that our Head is already entered into that high and holy place, and
we ere long shall be present with him, having but a spot of time to pass
here below, how ready and zealous should we be in obedience to Gods will, and
not suffer a heavy lumpishnesse and deadness of spirit to cease upon us in
holy performances: but I hasten to the second Amplification.

THE DIFFICVLTY OF SALVATION.
SERMON III.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear?
BY righteous here, What is meant here by righteous, to wit, a man endued with
Evangelical righteousness.
is meant that Evangelical righteousness which we have in the state of the
Gospel, (namely) the righteousness of Christ imputed to us; for Christ
himself being ours, his obedience and all that he has, becomes ou^s also;
and whosoever partaketh of this righteousness which is by faith, has also a
righteousness of sanctification acco^panying the same, wrought in his soul by
the Spirit of God, whereby his s^nfull nature is changed and made holy: for if
any man be in Christ he is a new creature. The same Spirit that assures us of
our interest in Christ, purifies and cleanses our hearts, and works a new
life in us, opposite to our life in the first Adam, from whence flows new
works of holiness and obedience throughout our whole conversation: There must
be an inward inherent righteousness before there can be any works of
righteousness; an Instrument must be set in tune before it will make music;
so the Spirit of God must first work a holy frame and disposition of heart in
us, before we can bring forth any fruits of holiness in our lives; for we
commend not the works of grace as we do the works of Art, but refer them to
the worker: all that flows from the Spirit of righteousness, are works of
righteousness. When the soul submits it self to the spirit, and the body to
the soul, then things come off kindly. Take a man that is righteous by the
spirit of God, he is righteous in all relations, he gives every one his due;
he gives God his due, spiritual worship is set up in his heart above all; he
gives Christ his due by affiance in him; he gives the holy Angels their due,
by considering he is always in their presence, that their eye is upon him in
every action he does, and every duty he performs; the poor have their due
from him; those that are in authority have their due; if he be under any, he
gives the^ reverence and obedience, Romans 13. 8.
etc. He will owe nothing to any man but love, he is righteous in all his
conversation, he is a vessel prepared for every good work: I deny not but he
may err in some particular, that is nothing to the purpose, I speak of a man
as he is in the disposition and bent of his heart to GOD and goodness, and so
there is a thread of a righteous course, that runs along through his whole
conversation; the constant tenure of his life is righteous; he hungers and
thirsts after righteousness, and labors to be more and more righteous still
every way, both in justification, that he may have a clearer evidence of that,
as also in sanctification, that he may have more of the new creature formed in
him, that so he may serve God better and better all his days. Now if this man
shall scarcely be saved, where shall the sinner and ungodly appear? where you
have two branches.

1. The righteous shall scarcely be saved. 2. The terrible end of sinners and
ungodly; Where shall they appear, etc.
Now in that the righteous man thus described by me, shall scarcely be saved,
consider two things.

1. That the righteous shall be saved. 2. That they shall scarcely be saved.
What do I say, The righteous are saved.
the Righteous shall be saved? he is saved already; This day is salvation come
to thine house, Luke 19. 9.
(Iaith Christ to Zacheus) We are saved by faith, and are now set in heavenly
places together with him; Ephesians 2. 6.
we have a title and interest to happiness already, there remains only a
passage to the Crown by good works. We do not as the Papists do, work to
merit that we have not, but we do that we do in thankfulness for what we
have: because we know we are in the state of salvation, therefore we will show
our thankfulness to God in the course of our lives.

How can we miss of salvation when we are saved already? Christ our Head being
in heaven, will draw his body after him; What should hinder us? the world?
Alas, we have that faith in us which overcomes the world; 1 John 5. 4.
as for the flesh, you know what the Apostle says, We are not under the law,
but under grace; the spirit in us always lusts against the flesh, and
subdues it by little and little; neither can Satan or the gates of hell
prevail against us, for the grace we have is stronger then all enemies against
us.

GOD the Father is our Father in Christ, and his love and gifts are without
repentance; Romans 11. 29.
when once we are in the state of salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
He will preserve us by faith to salvation; and we are knit to God the Son,
who will lose none of his members, the marriage with Christ is an everlasting
union, John. 13. 1
whom he loves he loves to the end. As for God the Holy Ghost, (says Christ) I
will send the Comforter, John 6. 14, 16.
and he shall be with you to the end: The blessed Spirit of God never departs
^here he once takes up his lo^ging: there is no question therefore of the
salvation of the righteous, they are as it were saved already.

Let this teach us thus much, Use.
that in all the changes and alterations which the faith of man is subject
unto, he is sure of one thing, all the troubles, and all the enemies of the
world shall not hinder his salvation; If it be possible the Elect should be
deceived, Matthew. 24. 24.
but it is not possible. Oh what a comfort is this, that in the midst of all
the oppositions and plottings of men and Devils, yet notwithstanding some what
we have that is not in the power of any enemy to take from us, nor in our own
power to lose, namely our salvation; set this against any evil whatsoever, and
it swallows up all. Put ca^e a man were subject to an hundred deaths one after
another, what are all these to salvation? Put case a man were in such grief
that he wept tears of blood; alas, in the day of salvation all tears shall
be wiped from his eyes. Set this ( I shall be saved) against any misery you can
imagine, and it will unspeakably comfort and revive the soul beyond all.

But it is here said, Object.
he shall scareely be saved.

This is not a word of doubt, Answ.
but of difficulty; it is not a word of doubt of the event, whether he shall
be saved or no, (there is no doubt at all of that) but it is a word of
difficulty in regard of the way and passage thither, so it is here taken, which
leads me to a second point, that the way to come to salvation is full of
difficulties.

Because there is much ado to get Lot out of Sodom, Observe. 1.
to get Israel out of Egypt, Why the righteous shall scarcely be saved.
it is no easy matter to get a man out of the state of corruption; oh the
sweetness of sin to an unregenerate man, oh how it cuts his very heart, to
think what pleasures and what profits, and what friends, and what esteem
amongst men he must part withal; what a do is there to pull him out of the
kingdom of Satan, wherein the strong man held him before?

hard in regard of the sin that continually cleaves to them in this world,
which does as it were shackle them, and compass them about in all their
performances, They would do well but sin is at hand; Romans 7. 21.
ready to hinder and stop them in good courses, so that they cannot serve God
with such cheerfulness and readiness as they desire to do; Every good work
they do, it is as it were pulled out of tho fire; they cannot pray but the
flesh resists, they cannot suffer but the flesh draws back; in all their doing
and suffering they carry an enemy in their own bosoms that hinders them:
Beloved, this no small affliction to Gods people; how did this humble Paul when
no other affliction laid upon him; Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death? Romans 7. 24.
it was more troublesome to him than all his irons, and pressures whatsoever.

Besides, it is a hard matter in Satan, for he is a great enemy to the peace
of Gods children; when they are once pulled out of his kingdom, he sends
floods of reproaches and persecutions after them, and presently sends hue and
cry as Pharaoh after the Israelites, oh how it spights him? What? shall a
piece of dust and clay be so near God, when I am tumbled out of heaven my
self? though I cannot hinder him from salvation, I will hinder his peace and
joy, he shall not have heaven upon earth, I will make him walk as
uncomfortably as I can; thus the Devil as he is a malignant creature, full of
envy against Gods poor Saints, so he is a bitter enemy of the peace and
comfort which they enjoy, and therefore troubles them with many temptations
from himself and his instraments, to interrupt their peace, and make the
hearts of Gods people sad all he can.

The^ by reason of great discouragement and il usage which they find in the
world form wi^ked men, who are the Devils pipes, ledd with his spirit to vex
and trouble the meek of the earth; (for though they think not of it, Satan
is in their divellish natures) he joins and goes along with their spirits in
hating and opposing the Saints of God: for indeed, what hurt could they do but
by his instigation? How are good men despised in the world? How are they made
the only Butt to shoot at? Alas beloved, we should rather encourage men in
the ways of holiness; we see the number of such as truly fear God is but
small, soon reckoned up, they are but as grapes after the vintage, or a few
berryes after the shaking; Mieha. 7. 1.
one of a City, Jer. 3. 14.
two of a Tribe, they have little encouragement from any, but discouragements
on all sides.

Besides this, Scandal makes it a hard matter to be saved; to see evil
courses and evil persons flourish and counten anced in the world; Oh it goes
to the heart of Gods people, and makes them slagget at Gods providence; it is a
bitter temptation and shakes the faith of holy men as we see Psalm. 73. Psalm.
73.
Again, J^^. 12. 1. 2.
it makes the heart of a good Chris^ian bleed within him, to see scandalls
arise from professors of the Gospel, when they are not so watchful as they
should be, but bring a reproach upon Religion by their licentious lives.

Yea Gods children suffer much for their friends, whose wicked courses are laid
to their charge, and sometimes, even by their friends for whilst they live
here, the best of all are subject to some weakness or other, which causes even
those that are our in^ouragers through jealousy or corruption, one way or
another, to dishearten and trouble us in the way to heaven.

difficult, we are too to apt to offend God daily, giving him just cause to
withdraw his spirit of comfort from us* Which makes us go mourning all the day
long, wanting those sweet refreshments of spiritual joy and peace we had
before; the more comfort Gods child has in communion with God, the more he is
grieved when he wants it; When Christ wanted the sweet solace of his Father
upon the Cross, how did it trouble him? My ^od, my God, why have thou for
saken me? How did he sweat water and blood in the garden, when he felt but
a little while his Fathers displeasure for sin? Thus is it with all Gods
children, they are of Christ's mind in their spiritual desertions.

And when they have gotten a little grace how difficult is it to keep it? to
keep our selves in the sense of Gods love? To manage our Christian State
aright? to walk worthy of the Gospel, that God may still do us good and
delight to be present with us? What a great difficulty is it to be always
striving against the Stream, and when we are cast back, to get forward
still, and not be d^scouraged till we come to the haven? None comes to
heaven, but they know how they come there.

Now God will have it thus to sweeten heaven unto us; Why God will have the
right^ous with such difficulty saved.
after a conslicting life peace is welcome, heven is heaven indeed then.
Because God will discard hypocrites, in this life; who take up so much of
Religion, as stands with their case and credit in the world, avolding every
difficulty which accompanyes go^linesse, but so they may swim two ways at
once, go on in their lusts still and be religious withal, this they approve
of; therefore God will have it a hard matter to be saved to frustrate the
vain hopes of such wretches* Alas, it is an easy matter to be an hypocrite,
but not to live godly.

If the righteous be saved with much ado, then never enter upon the
profession of Religion with vain hopes of ease and pleasure, Use
that it shall be thus and thus with thee etc. herein thou do but delude thy
own soul, for it will prove otherwise Forecast therefore what will fall, and
get provision of grace before hand to sustain thee. As if a man were to go a
dangerous journey, he provides himself of weapons pons and cordialls and all
the incourage^ents he can least he should faint in the way; where. as he that
walks for his pleasure provides nothing, he cares not for his weapon or his
cloak, because if a storm comes he can run under shelter or into a house
etc. He that makes Religion a recreation can walk a turn or two for his
pleasure, and when any difficulty arises, can retire and draw in his horns
again. An hypocrite has his reservations and politic ends, and therefore
what needs he any great provision to support him when he knows how to wind
out of trouble well enough, rather then to stand courageously to any thing. But
a true Christian that makes it the maine work of his life to please God, arms
himself for the worst that can befall him, and will be saved through thick or
thin, smooth or rough, whatsoever comes on it, so God will save his soul he
cares not; but rejoices (with Paul) if by any mean^s he can attain the
resurrection of the dead, Ph^l 3. 11.
by any means, it is no matter what; Let fire and fagott meet with him, yet
he is resolved not to retire for any trouble or persecution whatsoever that
stands between him and happiness. He is purposely armed to break through
every opposition to the best things and what ever may separate his soul from
the favor of God.

I beseech you beloved think of these things, How to make the way to heaven
e^sie.
and let it be your wisdom to make the way to heaven as easy as you can; to
this end beg the Spirit of Christ, you know the holy spirit is full of life
and strength, it is a spirit of light and comfort and whatsoever is good; the
spirit of God is like the wind; as it is subtle in operation and invisible, so
it is strong and mighty, it bears all before it; Oh therefore get this
blessed spirit to inlighten thee, to quicken thee, to support thee, etc. and it
will carry thy soul courageously along, above all oppositions and
discouragements whatsoever in the way to happiness.

graces of the Spirit, which will much cheer thee in thy Christian course;
above all labor for a spirit of humility; an humble man is sit to do or
suffer any thing; a proud man is like a gouty hand, or a swelled arm, unfit
for any Christian performance, he is not in a state to do good; but an ^u^ble
man is thankful that God will honor ^im so far as to let him suffer for the
cause of Christ; he is wondrous empty and vile in his own eyes, and admires
why God should reserve such infinite matters for so base a worm as he is.

When Christ would have us take his yoke upon us, he advises us to learn of
him to be meek and lowly, Matthew. 11. 29
etc. Some might say, This yoke is heavy, it will pinch me and gall me: No,
says our Savior, it shall be very light and easy; but how shall I get it to
be so? Why, get but an humble and meek spirit, and that will bring rest to
your souls.

Again, labor for a spirit of love; Love is strong as death; it Martyrs when
the fire was kindled about them, made them despise all torm^nts what soever:
this will warm our hearts, and make us go cheerfully to work. Let but a
spirit of love be kindled in Gods child, and it is no matter what he suffers;
cast him into the fire, cast him into the dungeon, into prison, whatsoever it
be, he has that kindled in his heart, which will make him digest any thing.
We see the Disciples when they had the spirit of Christ within them, to warm
their hearts, what cared they for whipping or Stocks, etc? You see even base
carnal love will make a man indute poverty, disgrace, what not? and shall not
this fire that comes from heaven, when it is once kindled in our hearts
prevail much more? what will make our passage to heaven sweet if this will
not? Nothing is grievous to a person that loves.

Exercise your hope likewise, hope feed upon these de^cates, cast Anchor in
heaven, and see if it will not make thee go on cheerfully in a Christian
course?

Faith will overcome the world, all the snares of prosperity that would hinder
us on the right hand. Faith, it presents things of a higher nature to the
soul, better than they; faith likewise overcomes temptations on the left hand,
all terrors and discomforts whatsoever, it considers these are nothing to the
terror of the Lord; therefore faith is called the evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11. 1.
because it presents things that are absent as present to the soul: If life
and happiness be once truly presented to our hearts, what can all the world
do to hinder our passage thither?

the mortifica^^o^ of our lusts; for what is it that makes the way to heaven
irk some unto us: Is it not this corrupt and proud flesh of ours? which will
endure nothing, no not the weight of a straw, but is all for ease and quiet,
etc. It is not duty which makes our way difficult, for it was meat and drink
to Christ to do the will of his father. John 4. 34.


Why is it not so with us? Quest.


Because he was borne without sin, Answ.
when Satan came he found nothing (of his own) in him; but when he
sollicites us, he finds a correspondency betwixt our corrupt hearts and
himself, whereby having intelligence what we haunt, and what we love, he will
be sure to molest us: the less we have of the works of Satan in us, the
less will be our trouble; and the more we do the will of God, and strive
against our corruptions, the more will make holy duties delightful to us; but
if we favor and cherish corruption, it will make Religion harsh; for the
ways of wisdom are ways of pleasure in themselves, and to the regenerate,
etc. I come now to the second clause.

Where shall the sinner and ungodly appear.

By sinner he means him that makes a trade of sin, What he mea^e^, by sinner.
as we say, a man is of such a trade, because he is daily at work of it, and
lives by it; so a man is a trader in sin, that lives in corrupt courses; for
it is not one act that denominates a sinner, but the constant practice of his
life.

Now this q^estion, Where shall the ungodly appear, implies a strong denial,
He shall be able to appear no where, especially in these three times.

Chafe before the wind, as wax before the Sun, as stubble before the fire:
when God comes to deal with a company of graceless wretches, how will he
consume and scatter them, and sweep them away as dung from the face of the
earth? he will universally make a riddance of them all at once: where shall a
Naball stand when judgment comes upon him? 1 (...). 25.
alas, his heart is become a stone; Where shall Balthazar appear when he sees
a handwriting upon the wall? Dan. 5.
Oh how the wicked tremble and quake when G O D comes to judge them in this
world, though they were a terror to others before?

But where shall they stand in death? when the world can hold them no longer,
when friends shall forsake them, when GOD will not receive them, when Hell is
ready to devour them, etc.

And lastly, Where shall the sinner appear at the day of judgment, that great
and terrible day of account, when they shall see all the world in a combustion
round about them, and the Lord Jesus coming in flaming fire, with his mighty
Angels, to take vengeance on such as obey not the Gospel? 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
how will they then call for the Mountains to cover them, and the Hills to
fall upon them to hide them from the face of him that sits on the Throne,
Rev. 6. 16.
and from the wrath of the Lamb, etc. Beloved, I beseech you let the
meditation of these things sink deep into your hearts, dwell upon them,
remember that they are matters which nearly concern your soul, and no vain
words touching you and your welfare.

THE SAINTS SAFETY IN EVIL TIMES.
SERMON IIII
1 PET. 4. 19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God
commit their so^les to him in well doing, as to a faithful Creator.
THough Divinity be clear in other differences from carnal or natural
reasons; yet it has hom^geniall reasons and grounds Of its own, whence come
inserences as natural as for the tree to bear fruit, or the Sun to shine;
so upon the former divine grounds (for it is a matter of suffering wherein we
must have pure Divinity to support our souls) The Aposlle comes to bring a
spiritual inference suitable to the same, in the words read unto you: Wherefore
concluding all to be true that was said before, Let them that suffer, etc.
Wherein consider, 1. That the state and condition of Gods children is to
suffer. 2. The dispensation of that suffering, (they suffer not at all
adventures, but) according to the will of GOD. 3. Their duty in this estate,
namely, to commit the keeping of their souls to God.

In the duty we have these particulars comprehended. 1. An action, To commit.
2. An object, what we must commit, the soul. 3. The person to whom, to God.
4. The manner, in well doing. Lastly, the reason which should move us hereunto,
employed in these words, as unto a faithful Creator. Whatsoever may support the
doubting of a godly man in any trouble, and enforce upon him this duty of
committing his soul to God, is briefly coprised in this, that God stands in
that near relation of a Creator, yea, of a faithful Creator to us; this is the
scope of the words.

Observe. 1. Obser. 1.
That the state of Gods children is to suffer, That the state of Gods chil^^
die^ is to suffer.
yea, to suffer of God, for sometimes he seems to be an enemy to his dearest
servants, as unto Job; but chiefly they are in a militant estate and condition
here.

Because they live among those that they cannot but suffer from wheresoever
they live: Why Gods children must suffer here.
Suppose they live among Christians, yet there are many Christians in name,
that are not so in deed, there has been secret underminers in all ages, and
what else may they look for but suffering from these? All that ever truly
^eared GOD, and made conscience of their ways, have found afflictions among
false brethren: It was never heard of that a Sheep should pursue a Wolf.

of themselves, for the truth is, the best of us all have many lusts to be
subdued, and a great deal of corruption to be purged out, before we can come
to heaven, that pure and holy place, into which no unclean thing can enter.
Though a Garden he never so fruitful, yet after a shower it will need weeding;
so after long peace the Church of God gathers Soil, and needs clensing.

But some carnal wretch will say, Object.
I thank God I never suffered in my life, but have enjoyed peace and
prosperity, and my hearts content in every thing.

Then suspect thy self to be in a bad estate, Answ.
for every true Christian suffers in one kind or other, In the best estate
there will be suffering one way or other.
either from without or within; sometimes Gods children are troubled more with
corruption than with affliction; at other times their peace is troubled both
with corruption within, and with affliction without; at the best they have
sufferings of sympathy. Shall the members of Christ suffer in other countries,
and we profess our selves to be living members, and yet not sympathize with
them? we must be con^^rmable to our Head, before we can come to heaven. But
the dispensation of our suffering is according to the will of God, where note
two things.

1. That its Gods will be should suffer. 2. When we suffer we suffer according
to his will.
To pass briefly over these, as not being the thing I aim at.

Gods will concerning our suffering is permissive in respect of those that do
us harm, but in regard of our patient enduring injuries, it is his approving
and commanding will; we are enjoined to suffer, and they are permitted to
wrong us.

It seems then there is some excuse for those that persecute the Saints,
Object.
they do but according to Gods will, and if it be so who dares speak against
them?

It is not Gods commanding will, Answ.
but his suffering will; he uses their malice for his own ends; God lets the
rain loose upon their necks; as a man is said to set a dog upon another when
he unlooseth his chain; so God is said to command them, when he lets them
loose to do mischiese; they are full of malice themselves, which God uses as
Physicians do their poison to cure poison; God and they go two contrary
ways, as a man in a shipp walks one way, but is carried another. In the death
of Christ the will of Judas and the rest went one way, and Gods will another;
so in all our sufferings, when God uses wicked men, their will is destructive
and hostile, but Gods will is clean otherwise, aiming at the good of his
people in all this. Nebuchadnezar did the will of God in carrying the people
captive, Esaias. 10.
how ever he thought not so. Esaias 10. 7.
Every sinful wretch that offers violence to the poor Saints, imagine they do
God good service in it, when as indeed they do but execute the malice and
venom of their own hearts. In the highest heavens (as they say in Philosophy)
the first thing moved is by a violent motion; the Sun is carried about the
heavens violently, against its own proper motion, which inclines to a clean
contrary course; so GOD deals with wicked men, he carries them they know not
whither; they are set to do mischief, and God uses their sinful
dispositions for his own ends, which plainly shows, that God is without all
fault, and they without all excuse.

But observe further, Obser.
that we never suffer but when God will; That we never suffer, but wh^ God will.
and beloved, his will is not, that we should always suffer: (though
generally our estate be so in one kind or other) God is not always chiding,
Psalm. 103. 9.
but has times of breathing and intermission, which he vouchsafes his
children for their good. He knows if we had not some respite, some
refreshment, we should soon be consumed and brought to nothing: Psalm, 103. 14.
The Lord knows whereof we are made, and considers we are but dust;
therefore he says, Though for a season you are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1. 6.
yot rejoice, etc.

And this the Lord does o^t of mercy to his poor creatures, that they might
not sink before him, but gather strength of grace, and be the better fitted
to bear further crosses afterward. You know, Acts 9. after Saul's conversion,
when he was become a Paul, then the Church had rest, and increased in the
comforts of the Holy Ghost; Acts 9. 31.
God gives his people pauzing times, some lucida intervalla; our time of going
into trouble is in Gods hands; our time of abiding trouble is in Gods hand, our
time of coming out is in gods hands: As in our callings he preserves our
going our and our coming in, so in every trouble that befalls us we come in
and tarry there, and go out of the same when he pleases. He brings us to
the fire as the Goldsmith puts his metals, and holds them there, till he has
refined them, and purged out the dross, and then brings them out again, Our
times (as David says excellently) are in thy hands, O Lord. Psalm. 31. 15.
Beloved, if our times were in our enemies hands, we should ^ever come out; if
they were in our own hands, we would never stay in trouble, but come out as
soon as we come in; nay, we would not come into trouble at all if we could
choose. Beloved, every thing of a Christian is dear unto God, Psalm. 116. 15.
his health is precious, his blood is precious, especially precious to the Lord
is the death of his Saints: Do you think therefore he will let them suffer
without his will? No, he will have a valuable consideration of all those that
are malignant Persecutors of his people, at last; and it is for matters better
than life that God lets his children suffer here; for alas, this life is but a
shadow, as it were nothing; God regards us not as we are in this present
world, but as strang^rs; therefore he suffers us to sacrifice this life, upon
better terms than life, or else he would never let us suffer for his truth,
and seal it with our dearest blood, as many of the Saints have done.

I beseech you therefore, Use.
considering all our sufferings are by the appointment and will of God; let us
bring our souls to an holy resignation unto his Majesty, not looking so much
to the grievance we are under, as to the hand that sent it; we should with
one eye consider the thing, with another eye the will of GOD in the same. When
a man considers, I suffer now, but it is by the will of God, he puts me upon
it, how cheerfully will such a one commit his soul to the Lord? It is as hard
a matter to suffer Gods will, as to do his will; Passive obedience is as hard
as active; in the active, we labor that what we do may please God, in the
Passive we must endeavor that what he does may please us; our hearts are as
untoward to the one as to the other; therefore let us beg of GOD to bring our
wills to the obedience of his blessed will in every thing: Would you have a
pattern of this? Look upon our blessed Savior, to whom we must be
comformable in obedience, if ever we will be conformable in glory: Lo I come
(says he) I am ready to do thy will O Lord; Heb. 10. 9.
what was the whole life of Christ, but a doing and a suffering of Gods will?
Behold, it is written in the Volume of thy Book, Verse. 7
that I should do thy will; and here I am ready pressed for it. It should he
therefore the disposition of all those that are led by the spirit of Christ,
(as all must be that hope to reign with him) to be willing to suffer with
Christ here, and say with him, Lord, I am here ready to do and suffer
whatsoever thou requirest; when once we are brought to this, all the quarrel
is ended between God and us.

I come now to that which I chiefly intend, which is the Christians Duty.

Let him commit his soul to God in well doing; wherein observe.

1. The manner how he must commit, in well doing. 2. What, his soul. 3. To
whom, to God. 4. The reasons moving, employed in these words, as unto a
faithful Creator.
Now this well doing must be distinguished into two times.

belial shall offer violence to a poor Saint of God, what a comfort is this,
that he suffers in well doing; Oh beloved, we should so carry our selves that
none might speak evil justly against us, that none, unless it were wrongfully
might do us hurt; we should be in an estate of well doing continually in our
general and particular callings, we must not go out of our sphere, but
serve God in our standings, that if trouble comes it may find us in a way of
well pleasing, either doing works of charity, or else the works of our
particular calling, wherein God has set, us; In all that befalls thee look to
this, that thou suffer not as an evil doer.

So likewise in suffering we well doing in a double regard.

1. We must carry our selves generally well in all our sufferings. 2. In
particular, We must do well to them that do us wrong.
First, I say, in affl^ction our carriage must be generally good in respect of
God, by a meek behavior under his hand, without murmuring against him.

cause of God, that we betray it not through fear or cowardice, through base
aims and intentions, etc. but endeavor to carry it with a good conscience in
all things; when we make it clear by managing any thing, that we are led
with the cause and conscience of our duty, it works mightily upon them that
well, not only before, but in suffering; we may not fight against them with
their own weapons, (that is) be malicious as they are malicious, and rail as
they rail: Beloved, this is as if a man should see another drink poison, and
he will drink too for company; he is poisoned with malice, and thou to
revenge thy self, wilt be poisoned too. What a preposterous course is this?
Ought we not rather to behave our selves as befits the cause of Christ, as
becomes our Christian profession, and as befits him whose children we are.

We should have an eye to God, and an eye to our selves, and an eye to others,
and an eye to the cause in hand, so we shall do well. We must not commit our
souls to God in idleness, doing nothing at all, nor yet in evil doing, but
in well doing; We must have a care (if we would suffer with comfort) not to
study how to avoid suffering by tricks, so to hurt the cause of Christ; this
is to avoid suffering, by sin, to leap out of one danger into another. Is
not the least evil of sin worse than the greatest evil of punishment? What
does a man get by pleasing men to displease God? perhaps a little ease for the
present. Alas, what is this to that unexpressible horror and despair, which
will one day seize upon thy soul eternally for betraying the blessed cause and
truth of Christ? How can we expect God should own us another day, when we will
not own him in his cause, and his members, to stand for them now; think on
that speech of our Savior, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, M^rke 8. 38.
or of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the
Son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his father.

Therefore avoid not any suffering, by sin; see how blessed S. Paul carried
himself in this case, The Lord (says he) has delivered me, and will deliver
me; from what, from death? no, from every evil work. What, will God keep
him from evil sufferings? No, for immediately after, he was put to death; what
then? why he will preserve me from every evil work, that is, from every
sinful act, which may hurt the cause of Christ, or blemish my profession; this
was it Paul chiefly regarded; not whether he will preserve me from death or
trouble, I leave that to him; but this I hope and trust to, that he will
preserve me from every evil work to his heavenly kingdom. Thus should it be
with every Christian in the cause of religion, or in a cause of justice, etc.
for there is not any good cause but it is worth our lives to stand in, if we
be called to it; It is necessary we should be just, it is not so necessary
we should live; A Christians main care is how to do well, and if he can go
on in that course, he is a happy man.

But I cannot do well, Object.
but I shall suffer ill.

Labor therefore to carry thy self well in suffering evil; Answ.
not only in the general, but even in particular toward those persons that
do thee wrong; endeavor to requite their evil with good; there is a great
measure of self-denial required, to be a Christian, especially in matter of
revenge, to pray for them that carseus, to do good to them that persecute us,
etc. and so heap coals of fire upon our enemies heads. How is that? There
are, 1 Coals of Conversion. 2. Coals of Confusion.


You know Coals do either melt or consume; How in suffe^ing we heap coals
of fire.
if they belong to God we shall heap coals of fire to convert them, and make
them better by our holy carriage in suffering: If they be wicked graceless
wretches, we shall heap coals of fire to consume them; for it will aggravate
their just damnation, when they do ill to those that deserve well of them.

Some will say, Object.
Christianity is a strange condition, that enforces such things upon men,
that are so contrary to Nature.

It is so indeed, Answ.
for we must be new molded before ever we can come to heaven; we must put
off our whole self, and he is gone a great way in Religion, that has brought
his heart to this pass: None ever overcame himself in these matters out of
religious respects, but hefound a good issue at last. It is a sweet evidence of
the state of grace, (none better) when a man can love his very enemies, and
those that have done him most wrong; it is an argument, that such a man has
something above nature in him. What is above nature if this be not, for a man
to overcome himself in this sweet appetite of revenge? Revenge is most
natural to a man, it is as Sugar, (as the Heathen says) and for a man to
overcome himself in that, it argues the power of grace and godliness in such
a one.

As Christianity is an excellent estate, an admirable advancing of a man to a
higher condition, so it must not seem strange for those that are Christians,
to be raised to a higher pitch of soul then other men. S^e how our Savior
dealt in this particular, Luke 23. 34.
Father, forgive them, they know not what they do; and so likewise Stephen,
(being led by the same spirit of Christ) desired God not to lay this sin to
their charge; Act. 7. 60.
and so all the Martyrs in the first state of the Church, (when the blood of
Christ was warm, and the remembrance of Christ was fresh) were wont to pray
for their enemies, committing their souls to God in well doing.

I beseech you let us labor by all means possible to bring our hearts
hereunto, The excellent victory of ^uffering.
if any thing overcome, this will do it, to suffer well. The Church of God is
a company of men that gain and overcome by suffering in doing good: Thus the
Dove overcomes the Eagle, the Sheep overcomes the Wolf, the Lamb overcomes
the Lion, etc. It has been so from the beginning of the world, meek
Christians by suffering quietly, have at length overcome those that are
malicious, and have gained eve^ their very enemies to the love of the truth.
What shall we think then of the greatest part of the world, who never think
of suffering, (which is the first lesson in Christianity) but study their ease
and contentment, accounting the blessed Martyrs too prodigal of their blood,
etc.

Others there are, who if once they come to suffer, presently fall to shifting
and plotting, how to get forth again by unlawful means, oftentimes making
shipwreck of a good conscience, and dishonouring the Gospel of God. I beseech
you consider these things. Every man would have Christ, and be religious, so
long as they may enjoy peace and quietness; but if once trouble or persecution
arises, then farewell religion, they cast off their profession then. I wish this
were not the case of many seeming Christians in these our days.

But suppose a man carry himself ill in suffering?

There is not the least promise of comfort in Scripture to such a man, unless
he return, and seek the Lord by timely repentance, for all encouragement is
to well doing: Oh what a pitiful thing is it for the soul to be in such a
state, as that it dares not commit it self to God? A man in evil doing cannot
go home to his own conscience for comfort, nor have any inward peace in the
least action he performs, so long as he does it with false aims, and carnal
affections, etc. who would deprive himself of the comfort of suffering in a
good cause for want of integrity? I beseech you therefore carry your selves
well in any thing you either do or suffer, otherwise no blessing can be
expected; for we tempt the Lord, and make him accessory to us, when we commit
our souls to him in ill doing: Even as your Pirates and other Miscreants in
the world, that will rob, and steal, and do wickedly, and yet pray to G O D
to bless them in their base courses; what is this but to make G O D like
themselves, as if he approved their thest and horrible blasphemy?

But what must we commit to God in well doing? the keeping of our so^les: The
soul is the more excellent part, witness he that purchased the same with his
dearest blood; Mar. 8. 36.
What will it profit a man (says our Savior) to gain the whole world and
lose his own soul? who could know the price of a soul better than he that
gave his life for redemption of it? yea, if the whole world were laid in one
balance and the soul in another, the soul were better than all. Therefore
whatsoever estate thou art in, let thy first care be for thy soul, that it may
go well with that. You know in any danger or combustion, (suppose the firing
of an house) that which a man chiefly looks after is his Jewels and precious
things, I have some wealth in such a place, if I could but have that I care for
no more, let the rest go: So it is with a Christian, whatsoever becomes of him
in this world, he looks to his precious soul, that that may be laid up
safely in the hands of God. Suppose a man were robbed by the high way, and had
some special jewel about him, though every thing else were taken a way from
him, yet so long as that is lest, he thinks himself a happy man, and says,
they have taken a way some luggage, but they have lest me that which I prize
more than all: so it is with a Christian, let him be stripped of all he has,
so his soul be not hurt, but all safe and well there, he cares not much.

But what should we desire our souls to be kept from in this world? Quest.


From sin and the evil consequents thereof. Answ
Beloved, we have great need our souls should be kept by God, for alas, what
sin is there but we shall fall into it, unless God preserve us in peace and
comfort, and assurance of a better estate; what would become of our poor
souls if we had them in our own keeping? Achitophell had the keeping of his
own soul, and what became of him? first, he did run into the sin of
Treason, and afterward (being a wicked Politician, and an Atheist having no
delight in God) was the executioner of himself. We shall be ready (as Job
says) to tear our own souls if God has not the keeping of them; we shall
tear them with desperate thoughts, as Judas, who never committed his soul to
God, but kept it himself, and we see what became of him. The Apostle bids us
go to God in prayer, and committing our souls to him, to keep from sin,
despair, distrust, and all spiritual evil whatsoever, Phil 4. 7.
and then the peace of God which passes all understanding (as the word in the
Original is) shall guard our souls in Christ; our souls have need of
guarding, and we of our selves are not sufficient to do it, therefore we
should commit them unto God, for except he preserve us we shall soon perish.

I am ashamed to speak of it, Wicked men think that they have no souls.
and yet notwithstanding the courses of men are such, that they enforce a man
to speak that which he is even ashamed of; What do I speak of committing
your soule^ to God, when many thousands in the world live as if they had no
souls at all? I am persuaded that your common swearers, and profane wretches,
who wrong their souls to pleasure their bodies, and prostitute both body and
soul, and all to their base lusts, think for the time that they have no
souls, they think not that there is such an excellent immortal substance
breathed into them by God, which must live for ever, in eternal happiness or
endless misery; Did they believe this they would not wound and stain their
precious souls as they do, they would not obey every base lust out of the
abundance of prophancnes in their hearts, even for nothing, as many notorious
loose persons do: Oh could we but get this principle into people, that they
have immortal souls which must live for ever, they would soon be better
than they are; but the Devil has most men in such bondage, that their lives
speak that they believe they have no souls, by their-ill usage of them.

But must we not commit our bodies and our estates to God, Object.
as well as our souls?

Yes, Answ.
all we have, for that is only well kept, which G O D keeps, but yet in time
of suffering we must be at a point with these things; if God will have our
liberty, if he will have our wealth, if he will have our life and a^^, we
must hate all for Christ's sake; but we must not be at such a point with our
souls, we must keep them close to God, and desire him to keep them in well
doing.

Suppose it come to an exigent, Object,
that we must either sin and hurt our souls, or else lose all our outward
good things.

We must desire God to preserve our souls, Answ.
whatsoever becomes of these; Our chief (...) must be (...) souls.
our principal care must be that that be not blemished in the least kind;
for alas, other things must be parted with first or last, this body of ours,
or whatsoever is dear in the world must be stripped from us, and laid in the
dust ere long. But here is our comfort, though our body be dead, yet our souls
are themselves still; dead S. Paul is Paul still: our body is but the case or
tabernae le wherein our soul dwells; especially a man's self is his soul,
keep that and keep all. I beseech you therefore, as things are in worth and
excellency in Gods account, let our esteem be answerable: you have many
complements in the world, how does your body, etc. mere complements indeed,
but how few will enquire how our souls do, alas, that is in poor case; the
body perhaps is well looked unto, that is clothed, and care taken that nothing
be wanting to it, but the poor soul is ragged and wounded, and naked; Oh
that men were sensible of that miserable condition their poor souls are in?

Beloved, the soul is the better part of a man, and if that miscarries, all
miscarries; if the so^le be not well, the body will not continue long in a
good estate. Bernard says sweetly, Oh body, thou have a noble guest dwelling
in thee, a soul of such inestimable worth that it makes thee truly noble; what
soever goodness and excellency is in the body, is communicated from the soul;
when that once departs, the body is an unlovely thing, without life or sense,
the very sight of it cannot be endured of the dearest friends: What an
incredible baseness is it therefore, that so precious a thing as the soul is,
should serve these vile bodies of ours; Let the body stay its leisure; the time
of the resurrection is the time of the body; in this life it should be
serviceable to our souls in suffering and doing whatsoever God calls us unto;
Let our bodies serve our souls now, and then body and soul shall for ever
after be happy; whereas, if we, to gratify our bodies do betray our souls,
both are undone.

Beloved, the Devil and devilish minded men (acted with his spirit) have a
special spite to the soul: Alas, what do they aim at in all their wrongs
and injuries to Gods children? Do they care to hurt the body? indeed they will
do this rather than nothing at all; they will rather play at small game than
sit out: the Devil will enter into the Swine, rather than stand out
altogether; some mischief he will do however; but his maine spite is at the
soul, to vex and disquiet that, and taint it with sin all he can.
Considering therefore that it is Satan's aim to unloose our hold from God, by
defiling our souls with sin, so to put a divorse betwixt his blessed Majesty
and us; oh let it be our chief care to see to that which Satan strikes at
most. He did not so much care in Jobs trouble for his goods, or for his house,
or children, etc. alas, he aimed at a ^urther mischief than this, his plot was
how to make him blaspheme and wound his soul, that so there might be a
difference betwixt God and him: He first tempts us to commit sin, and
afterward to despair for sin. Quest.


But to whom must the soul be committed? Ans.


Commit the keeping of your souls to God; Our souls must be committed to God.
Indeed he only can keep our souls; we cannot keep them our selves,
neither can any thing else in the world do it. Some when they are sick will
commit themselves to the Physician, and put all their trust in him; when they
are in trouble they will commit themselves to some great friend; when they have
any bad naughty cause to manage, they will commit themselves to their purse,
and think that shall bear them out in any thing; one thinks his wit and
policy shall secure him, another that his shifts may shelter him, etc. and
indeed the heart of man is so full of Atheism, that it can never light upon
the right object, to trust God alone, until it sees every thing else fail, as
being insufficient to support the soul, or to yield any solid comfort in times
of extremity and distress.

But why must we commit our souls to God? Quest.


Because he is a faithful Creator: Ans.
Whence observe,

That the soul of man being an understanding Essence, Obser.
will not be satisfied and settled without sound Reasons: Our soul is not sati
fied but by strong and sound Reasons.
Comfort is nothing else but reasons stronger than the evil which does afflict
us; when the reasons are more forcible to case the mind, then the grievance is
to trouble it: It is no difficult matter to commit our souls to God, when we
are once persuaded that he is a faithful Creator. A man commits himself to
another man, and has no other reason for it, but only he is persuaded of his
ability and credit in the world, that he is a man of estate and power to do
him good; so it is in this business of Religion, our souls are carried to any
thing strongly, when they are carried by strong reasons; as in this particular
of trusting God with our souls, when we see sufficient reasons inducing
thereto, we easily resign them into his hands: This shows, that Popery is an
uncomfortable Religion, which brings men to despair; they have no reason for
what they maintain: What reason can they give for their doctrine of doubting,
transubstantiation, perfect obedience to the law, etc. these are unreasonable
things, the soul cannot yield to such absurdities, it must have strong reasons
to stablish it, as here, to consider Godas a faithful Creator, etc. there is
something in God to answer all the doubts and fears of the soul, and to
satisfic it in any condition whatsoever. This is the very foundation of
Religion; not that any worth can accrue to the Creator from the creature, but
that there is an All sufficiency in the Creator to relieve the poor creature.
If a man consider in what order God created him, it will make him trust God;
Paradise and all in it were ready for him so soon as he came into the world.
God created us after his own Image, that as he was Lord of all things, so we
should be Lord of the creatures, they were all at his service, that he might
serve God; therefore after every thing else was created he was made, that so
God might bring him as it were to a table ready furnished.

And not only in nature, but in holiness, having an immortal and invisible
soul, resembling God. We must take God here as a Creator of our whole man,
body and soul, and of the new creature in us; God made man at the first, but
that was not so much as for God to be made man, to make us new creatures: God
created our bodies out of the dust, but our souls come immediately from
himself, he breathed them into us; and in this respect he is a higher Creator
tha^ in the other; for when we had marred our first making, and became more
like beasts than men, (for indeed every one that is not like God, sympathizeth
with beasts or Devils one way or other) God in Christ made us new again; yea,
God became man, to enrich us with all grace and goodness, to free us from the
hands of Satan, and bring us to an eternal estate of communion with himself
in heaven; for all the old heaven, and the old earth shall pass away, and the
old condition of creatures, and a new life shall be given them: God that made
the new heaven and the new earth, has made us for them. Considering therefore
that God gave us our first being, and when we were worse tha^ naught, gave us a
second being, in regard of our new creation, how should it stir us up to
commit our souls unto him? especially if we consider that in him we live and
move and have our being, Act 17. 28.
that there is not the least thought and affection to goodness in us, but it
comes from God, we are what we are by his grace.

What is the reason that love descends so much? Quest.


Because a man looks upon that which is his own, Ans.
and loves it; now God looks upon us, as upon those into whom he has infused
mercy and goodness, and he loves his own work upon us, and therefore having
begun a good work, will perfect the same: Do not men delight to polish their
own work? As in the first creation God never took off his hand till he had
finished his work; so in the second creation of our souls, he will never
remove his hand from the blessed work of grace, till he has perfected the
same; therefore we may well commit our souls to him.

But suppose a man be in a desperate estate, Object.
and has no way of escaping?

Remember that God is the same still, Answ.
he has not forgot his old Art of creating, but is as able to help now as
ever, and can create comforts for thee in thy greatest troubles. As in the
first creation he made light out of darkness, order out of confusion; so
still he is able out of thy confused and perplexed estate, to create peace and
comfort: Thou know not what to do perhaps, thy mind is so troubled and
disquieted; why, commit thy soul to God, he can raise an excellent frame out
of the Chaos of thy thoughts, therefore be not dismayed, consider thou have God
in covenant with thee, and have to deal with an Almighty Creator, who can send
present help in time of need. Do thou want any grace? do thou want
spiritual life? go to this Creator, he will put a new life into thee; he
that made all things of nothing can raise light out of thy dark mind, and can
make fleshy thy s^ony heart, though it be as hard as a rock; Therefore never
despair, but frequent the means of grace, and still think of God under this
relation of a Creator, and when he has begun any good work of grace in thee,
go confidently to his Majesty, and desire him to promote and increase the same
in thy heart and life; Lord, I am thy poor creature, thou have in mercy begun
a blessed work in me, and where thou have begun, thou have said thou will
make an end: When thou createdst the world, thou did not leave it till all
was done; and when thou createdst man thou made an end; Now I beseech thee
perfect the new creature in my soul: as thou have begun to inlighten mine
understanding and to direct my affections to the best things; so I commit my
soul unto thee for further guidance and direction to full happiness.

THE SAINTS SAFETY IN EVIL TIMES.
SERMON V.
1 PET. 4. 19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit their souls to him in well doing, as to a faithful Creator.
I Am now to treat of that other Attribute of GOD, which should move us to
trust in him, namely, as he is a faithful Creator. Now God is faithful. 1.
In his nature, He is immutable and unchangeable. 2. In his word; He
expresses is; the word that comes from God is an expression of the
faithfulness of his nature. 3. In his works; Thou art good, and do good,
as the Psal^ist says. God being faithful in himself, all must needs be so
that proceeds from him; whatsoever Relation God takes upon him, he is
faithful therein; As he is a Creator, so he preserves and maintains his own
work; as he is a Father, he is faithful in discharging that duty to the
full, for his childrens good; as be is our friend, he likewise performs all
the duties of that Rel^^ion, etc. And why does God stoop so low to take these
Relations upon him, but only to show that he will certainly accomplish the
same to the utmost: Whence is it that men are faithful in their Relations one
toward another, that the father is faithful to his child? is it not from God
the chief Father? That a friend should be faithful to his friend, is it not
from God the great friend?

All his ways are mercy and truth; Psalm. 25. 10.
they are not only merciful and good and gracious, but Mercy and Truth it
self: If he show himself to be a father, he is a true father, a true
friend, a true Creator and Protector; (as one says) Shall I cause others to
fear, and be a Tyrant my self? All other faithfulness is but a Beam of
that which is in God: Shall not he be most faithful that makes other things
faithful?

Now this faithfulness of God is here a ground of this duty of committing our
selves to him, and we may well trust him, whose word has been seven times
tried in the fire; Psalm. 12.
there is no dross in it. Every word of God is a sure word, his truth is a
Shield and Buckler, we may well trust in it; therefore when you read of any
singular promise in the New Testament, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
it is said, This is a faithful saying, etc. (that is) this is such a speech
as we may trust to, it is the speech of a faithful Creator.

Considering therefore that God is so faithful every way in his promises, and
in his deeds, let us make especial use of it: Treasure up all the promises we
can, of the forgiveness of sins, of protection and preservation, that he
will never leave us, but be our God to death, etc. and then consider withal,
that he is faithful in performing the same, when we are affrighted by his
Majesty and his justice, and other Attributes, then think of his mercy and
truth; He has clothed himself with faithfulness, (as the Psalmist says;)
In all the unfaithfulness of men whom thou trustest, depend upon this, that
God is still the same, and will not deceive thee.

When we have man's word; we have his sufficiency in mind, for men's words are
as themselves are. What will not the word of a King do? If a man be mighty
and great, his word is answerable. This is the reason why we should make so
much of the word of God, because it is the word of Ie^ovah, a mighty Creator,
who gives a being to all things, and can only be Lord and Master of his word:
we know Gods meaning no otherwise than by his word; till we come to the
knowledge of vision in heaven, we must be content with the knowledge of
Revelation in the Word.

And in every promise single out that which best suiteth with thy present
condition. If thou art in any great distress, think upon the Almighty power
of God. Lord, thou have made me of nothing, and can deliver me out of this
estate; behold I fly unto thee for succor, etc. If thou art in perplexity for
want of direction, and know not what to do, single out the Attribute of
Gods wisdom, and desire him to teach thee the way that thou should go. If
thou art wronged, fly to his Justice, and say, O God, to whom vengeance
belongs, hear and help thy servant. If thou be surprised with distrust and
staggering, then go to his truth and faithfulness; thou shall always find
in God something to support thy soul in the greatest extremity that can be
fall thee; for if there were not in God a fullness to supply every exigent that
we are in, he were not to be worshipped, he were not to be trusted.

Man is lighter than vanity in the Balance; Every man is a liar, that is, he
is false: we may be so and yet be men too, but God is essentially true, he
cannot deceive and be God too; Therefore ever when thou art disappointed with
men, retire to God and to his promises, and build upon this, that the Lord will
not be wanting in any thing may do thee good. With men there is breach of
covenant, Nation with Nation, and man with man; there is little trust to be
had in any; but in all confusions here is comfort. A religious person may cast
himself boldly in to the arms of the Almighty, and go to him in any
distress, as to a faithful Creator, that will not fortake him.

Oh let us be ashamed that we should dishonor him, Use.
who is ready to pawn his faithfulness and truth for us; If we confess our
sins God is faithful to forgive them; he will not s^ffer us to be tempted
above that which we are able. When we perplexe our selves with doubts and
fears, whether he will make good his promise or not, we disable his Majesty.
Do we not think God stands upon his truth and faithfulness? undoubtedly he
does, and we cannot dishonor him more, than to distrust him, especially in
his Evangelical promises; we make him a liar, and robb him of that which he
most glories in, (his Mercy and Faithfulness) if we rest not securely upon
him.

See the baseness of man's nature, God has made all other things faithful
that are so, and we can trust them, but are ever and anon questioning the
truth of his promise. We may justly take up Salvians complaint in his time,
Who has made the earth faithful to bring forth fruit (says he) but God? yet
we can trust the ground with sowing our seed; Who makes man faithful, (who is
by nature the most slippery and unconstant creature of all other) but God
only? yet we can trust a vain man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, and
look for great matters at his hands, before an All-sufficient God, that
changes not: Who makes the seas and the winds faithful that they do not hurt
us, but God? and yet we are apt to trust the wind and weather sooner than
GOD; as we see many Seamen that will thrust forth their goods into the wide
Ocean, in a small Bark, to shift any way rather than trust God with them.

Yea, let Satan by his wicked Instruments draw a man to some cursed politic
reasons, (for the Devil does not immediately converse with the world, but in
his instruments) and he will sooner trust him than God himself; so prone are
our hearts to distrust the Almighty, to call his truth in question, and to
trust the lies of our own hearts and other men's, before him. Let us therefore
lament our insidelity, that having such an omnipotent and faithful Creator to
rely upon, yet we cannot bring our hearts to trust in him. There are two maine
Pillars Of a Christians faith.

1. The Power of God. 2. The Goodness of God.
These two like Aaron and Hur, hold up the arms of our prayers. Let our estate
be never so desperate, yet God is a Creator still; let our sins and
infirmities be never so great, yet he has power to heal them. Oh how should
this cheer up our souls, and support our drooping spirits in all our
strivings and conflicts with sin and Satan, that we yield not to the least
temptation, having such an Almighty GOD to fly unto for succor.

Cursed is that man which makes flesh his arm; Jeremy.
he that we trust in must be no less than a Creator; We must not trust the
creature.
Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, (says God) he is a poor
creature as thy self is, raised of nothing, and shall come to dust again: If
we would beetrusting as we needs must, (for we are dependant persons, and
want many things whilst we are here) let us go to the fountain, and not to
broken Cisternes for comfort.

It is no small privilege for a Christian to have this free access to God in
times of extremity; be we what we can be, take us at our worst in regard of
sin or misery, yet we are his Creatures still; I am the Clay, thou art the
Potter, I am a sinful wretch, yet I am the workmanship of thy hands, O Lord,
thou have framed me, and fashioned me, etc. No wicked person in the world can
upon good ground plead in this manner, though they may say to God, I am thy
creature, yet they have not the grace in their troubles to plead this unto him.
Why Lord, though I be a rebellious son, and am not worthy to be called thy
servant, yet I am thy creature, though a sinful one. Surely had we^ faith, we
would take hold by a little. I he soul of man is like the Vine, (...) winds
about and fastens upon every little help; faith will see day at a little hole,
and where it sees any thing, it will catch at it; as the woman of Canaan;
Christ calls her Dog; why, be it so Lord, I am a dog, yet I am one of the
family, though I be a Dog; therefore have mercy on me.

Oh, it is a sweet reasoning, thus to cling about God, and gather upon him; it
is a special art of faith. Though a carnal man may reason thus, (as having a
ground from the truth of the thing) yet he has not grace to reason out of an
affection thereunto; though he should say, Lord, I am thy Creature; yet his
heart tells him thus, (if he would hearken to it) I am thy creature Lord, but I
have made all my members that I have received from thee, instruments to sin
against thee, and I purpose not to reform: My tongue is an instrument of
swearing, lying and profane speeches; my hands are instruments of bribery and
violence, continually working mischief in thy sight; my feet carry me to such
and such filthy places, and abominable courses; mine own heart tells me that I
fight against thee my Creator, with those very limbs and weapons which thou
have given me. Beloved, the conscience of this so stifles the voice of a
wilful sinner, that (not withstanding he acknowledges himself to be Gods
creature, yet) he cannot with any comfort plead for mercy at his hand in times
of distress.

But to a right godly man this is an argument of special use and consequence;
in the midst of troubles he may allege this, and it binds God to help him.
We see great ones when they raise any, (though perhaps there is little merit
in them, yet) they call them their Creatures, and this is a moving argument
with such to polish their own work still, and not to desert them: Will it not
be a prevailing argument with God then, for a Christian to plead with him?
Lord, thou have raised me out of nothing, yea, out of a state worse than
nothing; I am thy poor Creature, forsake not the work of thine own hands. We
may see what a fearful thing sin is in Gods eye, that the works of our
hands should make God depart from the work of his hands, as he will
certainly do at the day of judgment, Depart you cursed, etc. though we be
his creatures, yet because we have not used those gifts and abilities which
he has given us to serve his Majesty; he will not endure the sight of us in
that day.

But that you may the better practice this duty of committing your souls to
God, take these directions.

First, Directions how to commit our souls to, God.
see that thou be thy own man, it is an act of persons free to covenant; our
souls must be ours before we can commit Satan, the Strong man has
possession of us, and therefore our first care must be to get out of his
bondage; to which purpose we should much eye the sweet promises and invitations
of the Gospel, alluring us to accept of mercy and deliverance from sin and
death, as, Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden, etc. and so
cast the guilt of our souls upon God to pardon first, and then to sanctify
and cleanse, that we may no more return to folly, but lead an unspotted life
before him for the time to come.

It is therefore a silly course and dangerous, which poor worldly wretches
take, who think Lord have mercy upon them, will serve their turn, and that God
will certainly save their souls, when as they were never yet in the state of
grace or reconciliation with him, nor never had any divorce made between them
and their sins, and consequently never any league between God and their
souls to this day.

Beloved, when once a man has alienated his soul from God by sin, he has
then no more command of it, for the present it is quite out of his power; Now
when we would commit our souls to God aright, we must first commit them to
him to pardon the guilt of sin in them; when this is done, God will give us
our souls again, and then they may truly be said to be our own, and not
before. It is the happiness of a Christian that he is not his own, but that
whether he live or die he is the Lords.

In the second place, Direction 2.
We must labor to find our selves in Covenant with God; that is, to find
him making good his promises to us; and our selves making good our promises to
him; For a man cannot commit himself to God, unless he find a disposition
in his heart to be faithful to him.

There is a passive fidelity, and an active. 1. Passive faithfulness is in the
things that we give trust unto, as, such a one is a sure trusty man, therefore
I will rely upon him. 2. Active faithfulness in the soul, is, when we cast
our selves upon a man that is trusty, and depend upon him; the more a man
knows another to be faithful, the more faithful he will be in trusting of
him: and thus we must trust God if ever we expect any good at his hands; and
our dependence on him binds him to be the more faithful to us. He is counted
a wicked man indeed that will deceive the trust committed to him; Trust begets
sidelity, it makes a good man the more faithful, when he knows he is
trusted.

Learn therefore to know thy self to be in covenant with God, and to trust
him with all thou have; train up thy self in a continual dependence upon
him. He that trusts God with his soul, will trust him every day, in every
thing he has or does; he knows well, that whatsoever he enjoyes is not his
own but Gods, and this stirs him up to commit all his ways and doings to
his protection, esteeming nothing safe but what the Lord keeps; Jer. 10. 23.
He sees it is not in sinful man to direct his own steps, and therefore
resignes up his estate, his calling, his family, whatsoever is near and dear
unto him to the blessed guidance and direction of the Almighty: Oh (thinks he)
that I were in covenant with GOD, that he would own me for his, and take the
care of me, how happy should my condition then be?

He will likewise commit the Church and State wherein he lives, to God, and
strengthens his faith daily, by observing Gods faithful dealing with his
people in every kind.

How behovefull it is for Christians thus to inure themselves to be acquainted
with God by little and little, first trusting him with smaller matters, and
then with greater: how can a man trust God with his soul, that distrusts him
for the petty things of this life? They that give to the poor are said to lend
unto the Lord; and, if we cast our bread upon the waters, we shall find it
again. Beloved, he that parts with any thing to relieve a poor Saint, and
will not trust God with his promise to recompense it again, but thinks all is
gone, and he shall never see it more, etc. exceedingly derogates from the
truth and goodness of the Almighty, who has promised to return with
advantage whatsoever we give that way; He has secret ways of his own to
do us good, that we know not of. A man is never the poorer for that which he
discretly gives; It is hard to believe this, but it is much harder for a man to
commit his soul to God, when he dies; with assurance, that he shall partake of
mercy, and be saved at the last day.

Again, Take heed of these evil and cursed dispositions, that hinder us from
the performance of this duty; Direction 3.
as namely, carnal wit and policy, and carnal will, and affection, etc. There
is a great deal of selfe-denyall to be learned, before we can go out of our
selves and commit all to God, ere we can cast our selves into his arms, and
lay our selves at his feet: therefore take heed that we be not ruled, either
by our own carnal policy or others, to knit our selves to that: for I beseech
you do but think (what is true in all Stories, not only in the Scripture, but
elsewhere) the most unfortunate me^ that ever were (otherwise wise enough) were
always too confident of themselves: The greatest Swimmers you know are often
drowned, because relying overmuch on their own skill, they cast themselves
into danger, and are swallowed up of the deep; Even confidence in wit is
usually unfortunate, though it be great; let Solomon be an example, you see
how he strengthened himself by carnal supports; but what became of all?
alas, it soon vanished and came to nothing; the Jews would run to the reed
of Egypt, and that ran into their hands; in stead of helping it hurt them.
GOD takes delight to overthrow the ripeness of all the carnal policy of man,
that advances it self against his word and Gospel. Take heed of confidence
in prosperity, in wit, in strength; take heed of whatsoever hinders the
committing of our souls to God, and always remember, that bonestic is the best
policy, and that GOD reconciled in Christ is the best sanctuary to flee unto;
The name of God is a strong Tower (says Solomon) the righteous flee thereto
and are safe.

Let Christians therefore have nothing to do with carnal shifts, That Carnal
Policy hinders our safety.
and politic ends, for they have a strong Rock, and a sure hold to go to,
the Almighty is their shield. Beloved, God will be honored by our trusting of
him, and those that will be wiser than God, and have other courses distinct
and contrary to him, must look for confusion in all their plots. A Christian
should thus think with himself, Let God be^wise for me, his wisdom shall be
my direction, his will shall be the rule of my life; he shall guide me and
support me, I will adventure upon no course that I dare not commit my soul
with comfort to God in.

Oh beloved, if we tender our own welfare, let us shun all unwarrantable
courses, and adventure upon no action whatsoever, wherein we cannot upon good
grounds desire the Lords protection: It is a fearful estate for a man to
undertake such courses, as that he cannot if he were surprised by judgment,
suddenly commit him self to God in; The throne of iniquity shall not abide
with God, he will not take a wicked man by the hand, nor own him in a
distressfull time.

Study therefore I beseech you, to be always in such a blessed condition, as
that you may (without tempting of God) in a holy boldness of faith resign up
your souls to him. A guilty conscience cannot seek the Lord, naturally it
runs away from him; peace is not easily gotten, nor the gapp soon made up,
therefore preserve conscience clear and unspotted, if thou would have God
thy refuge in time of need. Adam when he had sinned ran from God. Peter,
(when our Savior discovered more than an ordinary Majesty in his miracles)
said, Lord, depart from me, I am a sinful man: Luke ^. ^.
It is the work of flesh and blood to depart from God, but when a man goes to
God, it is a sign he has more than flesh and blood in him, for this cannot
be done without a supernatural work of faith, which alone will make a
sinful conscience fly to God, and look to him as a father in Christ, and
desire him by his Almighty power, whereby he created heaven and earth, to
create faith in the soul. And when thou have cast thy soul into the arms of
the Almighty, labor to settle it there; and to quiet thy self in the
discharge of thy duty; say thus, Now I have done that which belongs to me, let
God do that which belongs to him; I will not trouble my self about Gods
work, but in well doing commit my soul to him, and let him alone with the
rest.

Christians should not outrunne Gods Providence, and say, What shall become of
me, this trouble will overwhelme me, etc. but serve his Providence in the use
of the means, and then leave all to his disposal. Especially this duty is
needful in the hour of death, or when some imminent danger approaches, but
then it will be an hard work, except it be practiced aforehand.

Labor therefore for assurance of Gods love betimes, Direction 4.
get infallible evidences of thy estate in grace, that thou art a renewed
person, and that there is a through change wrought in thy heart, that God has
set a stamp upon thee for his own. and that thou have something above nature
in thee; then may thou cheerfully say, Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit; L^ke ^. 3. 46.
I am thine, Lord save me, etc. otherwise having no interest in God, how can
thou expect any favor from him? Oh the sweet tranquillity and heaven upon earth
which those enjoy who have God to be their friend!

This lays a heavy prejudice upon Antichristian Religion, which maintains a
doctrine of doubting, affirming that we ought not to labor for assurance of
Gods favor. Oh beloved, what deprives a poor Christian soul of comfort more
than this? Alas, how can a man at the hour of death commit his soul into the
hands of Almighty God, that staggers whether he be his child or no? and knows
not whether he shall go to heaven or hell? Therefore it should be our daily
endeavor, as we would have comfort in the time of resigning and giving up our
souls to God, to gather evidences of a good estate, that we are in covenant
with him, that he is our Father, and that we are his children in Christ Jesus.

For will a man trust his Jewels with an enemy, or with a doubtful friend? how
can the swearer commit his soul to God? how can loose livers and your filthy
unclean wretches that live in continual enmity against the Lord, commit
themselves with any comfort unto him? They pray, Lead us not into temptation,
and yet run daily into temptations, into vile houses and places of
wickedness, wherein they feed their corruptions, and nothing else: They say,
Give us this day our daily bread, and yet use unwarrantable courses, seeking to
thrive by unlawful means.

Beloved, a man can commit his soul with no more comfort to God than he has
care to please him. If a man knows such a one has his Evidences and Leases,
and may hurt him when he list, how careful will he be of provoking or
giving offense to such a man? Suppose we knew a man that had the keeping of a
Lion, or some cruel beast, and could let it loose upon us at his pleasure,
would we not speak such a one fair, and give him as little cause of
discontent as may be? Beloved, God has D^vils and wicked men in a chain, and
can, if we offend him, set loose all the powers of darkness upon us; he can
make Conscience fly in our faces, and cause us to despair and sink. All our
evidence and assurances of (...) are in Gods hands (...) can bring us into a
state ^ll of discomfort and misery, and make us in a manner to (...) the very
flashes and scorchings of hell it self: Oh who would offend this God, much
less live in the practice of any sin, and yet think of committing their
souls to him!

To encourage you the more to trust in God, Direction ^.
observe the constant course of his dealing toward you. Psa. 71. 6. ^. 17. 18.
Lord, thou have been my God from my ^outh (says David) upon thee have I h^ng
ever since I was took out of my mothers womb, for sake me not in my gray
baires, when my strength fa^leth me, etc. We should gather upon God (as it
were) from former experience of his goodness, and trust him for the time to
come, having formerly found him true. Beloved, it is good to lay up all the
(...) of Gods love we can, that ^ee may trust him at the hour of ^ath; for all
our strength then will he little enough to uphold our fan^, when many troubles
shall me^^e in one (as it were in a Center) ^hen a world of fears and
distra^ions will seize upon our souls the guilt of sin past, thoughts of
judgment to come; for saking of our former lusts and delights, trouble of
mind, pain of body, etc. We have need of much acquaintance with God, and
assurance of his love at such a time; Therefore let us learn daily to observe
the experience of his goodness toward us, how when we have committed our
selves to him in youth, he has been a God from time to time in such and such
dangers to us. Ancient Christians should be the best Christians, because they
are enriched with most experiences: It is a shame for ancient Christians to
stagger, when they yield up their ^oules to God, as if they had not been
acquainted with him heretofore. You see how David pleads to God, Ps. 315.
Thou have redeemed me; he goes to former experience of his mercy, therefore
now into thy hands I commend my spirit in this extremity. This Psalm is a
practice of this precept; here is the Precept, Commit your souls to God, as to
a faithful Creator; here is the practice of David, Into thy hands I commend my
spirit, for thou have redeemed me O Lord, God of truth, etc. Therefore I
beseech you let us treasure up experience of Gods goodness, that so when
extremities shall come, we may go boldly to him upon former acquaintance with
his Majesty; and being strengthened with former experience, I beseech you let
us labor to practice these and the like rules prescribed, to encourage us in
the performance of so necessary a duty.

But will not God keep us without we commit our selves unto him? Object.


I answer; Answ.
God having endued us with understanding and grace, We must commit our souls
to God if we would be preserved.
will do us good in the exercise of those powers and graces that he has
given us; he will preserve us, but we must pray for it; Christ himself must
ask before he can have: Ps. 2. ^.
Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, etc. we
should therefore make it a continued act, every day of our lives to commit all
we have to the Lords disposal; and to that end observe how he discharges the
trust committed to him upon all occasions, how faithful he is in delivering
his poor Church in greatest extremities, and our selves also even in our worst
times; Thou never failest those that trust in thee, (says David) and, How
excellent is thy loving kindness, Psalm. 36. 7.
O God, therefore the children of man shall trust under the shadow of thy
wings; Daily experience of Gods loving kindness will make us daily to trust
under the shadow of his wings. It should therefore b^e our continual course to
observe the goodness, kindness, faithfulness and other Attributes of GOD,
and often to support our souls with them.

Think, I beseech you, how he numbers the very bones of men, they are all
written in his book of Providence; he knows every joint, every part which he
has made; he knows his own workmanship; therefore we may well commit our
souls to him. Does God number our superfluities, and not our natural and
essential parts^ Even our very hairs are num^ bred, our tears are taken
notice of, and put into his Bottle; our steps are told, our desires are known,
our groans are not hidd, we shall not lose a sigh for sin, so particular is
Gods providence; he watches continually over us; there is not any of our
members but they are all written in his Book, so that be, Psalm. 34. 20.
will not suffer a bone to be broken: We should therefore daily resign up
our souls to his merciful tuition, and bind our selves to lead unblamable
lives before him, resolving against every sinful course, wherein we would be
afraid to look his Majesty in the face; What a comfortable life were the life
of Christians, if they would exercise themselves to walk as in the presence of
the Almighty? This is that which the Scripture speaks of Enoch, Genesis 5. 24.
and the rest, who are said to have walked with God; that is, to have committed
themselves and their souls to him, (...) faithful Creator.

It may be objected, Object.
Here is a great deal of labor and striving against corruptions in deed, Of
wicked men's preserving, who do not commit their souls to God.
may not a man walk with God without all this ado? we see wicked men that
never commit their souls to God^ g^ow satt and lusty, and have as good
success in the world, as the strictest men that are.

I answer, Answ.
God many times preserves such wretches, but alas, that preservation is rather
a reservation for a worse evil to come upon them; Bs. 37. 13. 38.
There is a pit a digging for the wicked; he flourishes and bears out all
impudently, under hope of success, D^^ his (...) is a making, and his present
prosperity will but aggravate his future misery.

wicked shall be made good.

civilly good shall have civil prosperity, as the Romans had, they had a
common wealth well governed, and they prospered many years together, as
Chancer observes, God preserves wicked men from many calamities, he gives them
civil wisdom, good carriage, etc. and answerable to those common gifts, he
gives them preservation and protection, etc. but then there is vengeance on
their souls the while. Those that commit not themselves carefully and
watchfully to GOD, have dead secure souls, without any life of grace or power
of godliness in them. I speak this to waking Christians, that would know in
what case they should live, walking in the sense and assurance of Gods love;
they (I say) ought to practice this duty of committing the keeping of their
souls to God in weldoing, as to a faithful Creator.

Neither is it so easy a matter to commit our souls to God, What it is to
commit our souls to God.
as many fondly imagine; it is not the mumbling over a few prayers, saying,
Lord receive my soul, etc. will serve the turn, these are good words indeed, and
soon learned, but alas who can not do this? Our study therefore should be to
know the depth and meaning of the same, how that we are not only to commit
the essence of our souls to God, that he would take them into heaven when we
dye, but also to commit the affections of our souls to him, that he might own
us and govern us whilst we live; for how are our souls known, but by those
active expressions in ou^ affections, which immediately issue from them? when
we commit all our thoughts, desires and affections to him, setting him highest
in our souls, and making him our hope, our trust, our joy, our fear, etc.

Thus I have spoken of the duty, and of the thing to be committed, our souls;
and to whom, to God; and the manner, in weldoing; and why, because he is a
faithful Creator.

Now I beseech you consider how nearly it concerns us all to be thoroughly
acquainted with the practice of this duty, God knows what extremities we may
fall into; certainly in what condition so ever we be, either public or
private, whether in contagion and infection, or war and desolation, happy are
we if we have a God to go to; if we have Him to retire to in Heaven, and a
good conscience to retire to in our selves, we may rest secure; Psalm. 46. 2^4.
Though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into the midst of
the s^a, yet we shall be safe: (that is) Though the order of nature were
confounded, yet there is a river shall refresh the house of God; there are
Chambers of divine protection, that the Christian enters into, as the Prophet
says, Esa. 26. 20.
Enter into thy Chambers, and God is his habitation still: If a Christian had
no shelter in the world, yet he has an abiding place in God continually; as
God dwells in him, so he dwells in God. Satan and all other the enemies of man
must break through God before they can come to us, when once we commit our
selves to him, as to a Tower and habitation, and enter into him as into an
hiding place; the enemies must wrong him before they can hurt us; so blessed an
estate it is to be in God, having commended our souls to him, as unto a
faithful Creator.

But we see many of Gods dear children (that commit themselves to his care
and protection) miscarry, Object.
and go by the worst in the world.

Beloved, Answ.
it is not so, for when they commit themselves to out of trouble, yet he will
preserve them in trouble. Esa. 40.
I will be with thee in the ^ire, and in the water, (says God,) he says not,
I will keep you out of the fire, and out of the water, for he brought many
holy Martyrs into it, some were drowned, some burned, etc. Though God will not
keep us out of trouble, yet he will preserve our spirits in trouble; nay, God
many times by a small trouble preserves us from a greater; Even the sufferings
of the godly are often preservations to them; Was not Jonah preserved by the
Whale? What had become of him if that had not swallowed him up? A Whale that
one would have thought should be a means to destroy him, was a means to carry
him to the Coast, and bring him safely to land.

Again, God seems for a time indeed to neglect his children when they commit
themselves unto him, but mark the issue; All the works of God are beautiful
in their season; he suffers them it may be, a long time to be in danger and
trouble, till he has perfected the work of mortification in their hearts,
and crucified their confidence in earthly things, till he has made them more
sensible of the evil of sin, and watchful against it, but wait a while and
you shall see, Psalm. 37.
that the end of the righteous man is peace.

Gods presence and assistance to support his children in trouble is invincible,
they have gladness and comfort that we wo^e not of; they commit the safety of
their souls to God, and he seems to neglect them, if we look to their
outward man, but they have a Paradise in their conscience, God preserves their
souls from sin, and their consciences from despair, they have an invisible
protection. There was a sense about Job that the Devils saw, and a guard of
Angels that Elias saw, and that his servant saw afterward. Wicked men see not
the guard of spirits that is about the children of God, (as Christ says) They
have meat the world knows not of; they feed on hidden comforts.

As for carnal men that do not commit themselves to God, they have no
preservation, but rather a reservation to a further evil: Pharaoh was kept
from the ten plagues, but was drowned in the sea at last; and Sodom was kept
by Abraham, he fought for them, but yet it was destroyed with fire and
Brimstone afterward.

Let us then try our trust in God: those that intend to imbarke themselves and
their estates in a shipp, will be sure to try it first: This committing of our
souls to God, must be our ship to carry us through the waves of this
troublesome world to the heavenly Canaan of rest and peace: We should
therefore search and prove the same, whether it be indeed safe and sound, able
to support our souls in the evil day, and not leake and prove insufficient
for us.

Those that commit themselves to God aright, How to know when we trust God
aright.
are far from tempting his Majesty; 1. Trial.
God will be trusted, but not tempted; What though things fall not out
according to thy expectation; yet wait thou, and think God has further ends
then thou know of: God will do things in the order of his Providence,
therefore if we neglect that, it is our own fault if he do not help us. If
Christ had committed his health to God, and had cast himself down from the
Pinnacle, what an act had this been? but he would not so tempt the Almighty.
Neither should we unadvisedly run into dangers, but serve his Providence
upon all occasions; God uses our endeavor to this very end; He saves us not
always immediately, but by putting wisdom into our hearts to use lawful
means, and using those means he will save us in them. A Christian therefore
should be in a continual dependence upon God, and say, I will use these
means, God may bless them, if not, I will trust him; he is not tied to the
use of means, though I be.

Again, ^. Trial.
those that commit their souls, or any thing to God, find themselves quieted
therein; Is it not so amongst men? If a man commit a Jewel to a trusty friend,
is he not secure presently? Have we not Gods Word and faithfulness engaged,
that he will not leave us nor forsake us, but continue our Alsufficient God
and portion to our lives end? why then are we disquieted? Those that are full
of cares and fears may talk their pleasure, but they never yet had any true
confidence in God; for faith is a quieting grace, it stils the soul; Being
justified by faith we have peace with God. Those that are hurried in their
life with false doubts and perplexities, What shall become of me? what shall I
eat, and what shall I drink, etc? Though they use lawful means, yet commit
not themselves to God as they should; for where there is a dependence upon God
in the use of means, there is an holy silence in the party; All stubborn and
tumultuous thoughts are hushed in him; Psa. 42.
My soul keep silence to the Lord (says David) and trust in God, why art
thou so vexed within me? still there is a quieting of the soul where there is
trust. Can that man put confidence in God that prowles for himself, and
thinks he has no Father in heaven to provide for him? Does that child trust
his father, that (besides going to school) thinks what he shall put on? how
he shall be provided for, and what inheritance he shall have hereafter? Alas,
this is the Fathers care, and belongs not to him; Wheresoever these
distractions are, there can be no yielding up of the soul to God in truth.

There be two affections which mightily disturb the peace of Christians. 1.
Sinful cares, and 2. Sinful fears; to both which we have remedies prescribed
in the Scripture. 1. Fear not little flock (says Christ) for it is your
fathers will to give you a kingdom: As if he had said, Will not he that gives
you heaven, give you other things? In nothing be careful, Phil. 4.
(says the Apostle) that is, in a distracting manner; but do your duty, and
then let your requests be made known to God, and the peace of God shall keep
you; and therefore were we redeemed from the hands of our enemies, that we
might serve him without fear all our days.

A Christian should keep an inward Sabbath in his soul, and go quietly on in
doing all the good he can: what a fearful thing is it to see men lie
grovelling in the earth, and live without God in the world, troubling and
^urmoyling themselves how to compass this thing and that thing, as if they had
no God to seek unto, nor no promise to rely upon.

Again, 3. Trial.
where this committing of a man's self and his soul to God is, there will be
a looking to God only in all a man does, not fearing any danger or opposition
that may befall him from without; as the three young men said to Ne^uc^adnezar,
Our God can keep us if he will; Dan. 3.
But what if he will not? Yet know O King, that we will not worship nor fall
down before thy Image: So it is with a Christian foreseeing some danger,
disgrace or displeasure of this or that man which may befall him, he resolves
notwithstanding in despite of all, to commit himself to God in doing his
duty, come what will, whether God will save him or no, he will not break the
peace of his conscience, or do the least evil; he is no fool, but foresees
what may befall him for well doing; this inconvenience may come and that
trouble, yet he sets light by these; he has an eye to heaven, and sees more
good to himself in the Creator that gave him his being of nothing; and more
good for the time to come, (that will make him a blessed Saint in heaven) then
there can be ill in the creature: therefore come what can come his heart is
fixed to trust the Lord, and rather than he will displease him, desert his
honor and his cause, or do any unworthy action; he will commit himself to
God in the greatest dangers.

The ground hereof is this, Reason of trusting in God.
A Christian is the wisest man in the world, and he understands well enough
that God is Alsufficient; he sees there is a greater good in God than he can
have in the Creature, and counts it madness to offend God to please the
creature, because there is a greater evil to be expected from God, than from
the Creature, though it were the greatest Monarch in the world, considering
therefore that he has his best good in his union with God, and in keeping his
peace with him, he will not break with him for any Creature. And thus he
does wisely, for he knows, if he lose his life he shall have a better life
of God than he has in his body; for God is his life, God is his soul and his
comfort, and he has his being from God, he is his Creator, and he has a
better being in God when he dies than he had when he lived: for our being in
God makes us happy, and therefore Christ says, He that loves his life, before
God and a good cause, hates it; and he that hates his life when Christ calls
for it, loves it, for he has a better life in him; we give nothing to God,
but he returns it a thousand times better than we gave it. Let us yield our
lives to him, we shall have them in heaven if they be taken away on earth. He
will give us our goods a thousand sold, we shall have more favor in God then
in any Creature, and therefore a Christian out of this ground commits himself
to God, though he foresee never so much danger like to fall upon him.

Again, 4. Trial*
if we do in deed and not in pretense commit our selves to God, as to a
faithful Creator, we will not limit his Majesty, as many carnal hearts do;
oh if God will do so and so for them, then they would trust him, if they had
but so much to live on a year, and such commings in, etc. then they would
depend upon God: but they must have a pawn, and so much in hand first: What a
shame is it that we should trust the vilest man in the world as far as we
see him, and yet unless we have somewhat to lean on, we will not trust God?
Beloved, when a man limits God in any thing, such a one may talk, but he
trusts him not at all. Indeed we should indent with God, and tie him to look
to the salvation of our souls, but for other things leave them to his own
wisdom, both for the time, for the manner and measure, do what he will with
us; Suppose it come to the Cross, has he not done greater matters for us?
why then should we distrust him in lesser? If times come that Religion flourish
or goes downward, yet rely on him still; has he not given his Son to us,
and will he not give heaven also? Why do we limit the holy One of Israel,
and not cast our selves upon him, except he will covenant to deal thus and
thus with us?

A true Christian has his eye always heavenward, and thinks nothing too
good for God; O Lord, (says he) of thee I have received this life, this
estate, this credit and reputation in the world; I have what I have, and am
what I am of thee, and therefore I yield all to thee back again: If thou will
serve thy self of my wealth, of my self, of my strength, thou shall have it:
If thou will serve thy self of my credit and reputation, I will adventure it
for thee; If thou will have my life, of thee I had it, to thee I will restore
it, I will not limit thy Majesty, come of it what will, I leave it to thy
wisdom, use me and mine as thou will, only be gracious to my soul, that it
may go well with that, and I care not. Thus we should wholly resign our
selves to the Lords disposal, and thereby we shall exceedingly honor his
Majesty, and cause him to honor us, and to show his presence to us for our
good, which he will assuredly do, if we absolutely yield up our selves to
him. But if a man will have two strings to his Bow, and trust him so far, but
not so far; so he may be kept from this danger or that trouble, etc. this
is not to deal with God as an Omnipotent Creator: For he that does a thing
truly in obedience to God, will do it generally to all his commands; so far
as the reason of his obedience reaches, his trust extends; he that commits any
thing to God, will commit all to him; he chooses not his Objects; but upon the
same ground that he commits his soul to God when he dies, he commits his
estate, liberty, and all he has while he lives: He can never rely on God
for greater matters, that distrusts him in lesser.

Again, 5. Trial.
a man that truly trusts God, will commit all his ways unto him, he will
take no course but what he is guided in by the Lord; he looks for wisdom
from above, and says, Lord, though it is not in me to guide my own way; as
thy Word shall lead me, and the good counsel of thy Spirit in others direct
me, so I will follow thee. He that commits not his ways to God, will not
commit his comforts to him; God must be our Counselor as well as our
Comforter. Therefore the Wise man bids us, Acknowledge God in all our ways,
Prove. 3.
and lean not to our own wisdom. Most men look how safe their counsels
are, not how holy and agreeable to God; is this to trust in him? Will God save
us at last, and yet suffer us to live as we li^t now? Deceive not your selves,
he that will have his soul saved must commit it to GOD before hand to be
sanctified.

Again, ^* Trial.
those that commit themselves aright to God, will commit their posterity to
him, their wives and children, etc.

Why, Object.
do not men make their Wills and commit their goods to them?

Oh but how do they resign them? Sol.
how covetous and full of distrust are they? I must leave such a child so
much, and so much, and why I pray you? because God cannot bless him else: Oh
fearful, Is God ^yed to mean^s, cannot heblesse with a little as well as with
a great deal? Is not the earth the Lords, and the fullness thereof? Why? must
God have so much in hand or else he cannot enrich and raise up thy Children?
Oh consider, he has declared himself to be the father of the fatherless,
and looks to the Widow in a special manner, he doubles his Providence there;
he provides for all, but takes special notice of them; therefore quiet thy
self, they are in covenant with God, and God is thy God, and the God of thy
seed also; therefore if thou will commit thy soul, why not thy Wife, Children,
goods, etc.

Look into the course of Gods people in all times, those that have left but
little with honest dealing, God has blessed the same exceedingly; whereas
those that have left great matters ill gotten, in stead of a blessing have
often left a curse, and a snare behind them. Why then should men take indirect
courses, and wound their consciences for worldly pel^e?

Consider, Co^ sid. 1.
1. thy children are Gods and not thine, he gave them to thee at first, and he
can provide hereafter when thou artgone; thou art the father of their body, but
he is the father of their soul?

2. He provided for them before they were borne, does not he provide care and
affection in the Mothers heart? does not he provide suck in the Mothers
breasts, and will he not care for them now they are borne, as well as he did
before they came into the world? it is Atheism to think such a thought. Those
that commit themselves to God in one thing, will do so in all things,
otherwise they deceive their own souls, for it is a universal Act, that
runs through their whole life. Committing is an Action of trust, and there is
a kind of intercourse of trust between God and a Christian continually.

Lastly, 7. Trial.
those that commit themselves to God will be faithful stewards in whatsoever
he has trusted them withal. Thou committest thy self, and thy health, and
estate to God, and at length thou will commit thy soul when thoudiest unto
him; very well; but what does God trust thee withal? has he not trusted thee
with a Body and a soul, with a portion of goods, with place, time, strength
and abilities to do good? Have thou not all thou have from God as a Steward,
to improve for thy Masters advantage? If ever thou expectest the performance of
what thou have put in him, be faithful in that trust which he has committed
to thee. Those that have misused their bodies, and wounded their souls in
their lives, how can they commit the^ to God at their deaths? How dares the
soul look up to him, when the life has been nothing else but a perpetual
offending of his Majesty.

I beseech you let us learn this wholesome lesson, great is our benefit
thereby: He that trusts in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, that cannot be
moved; we may be shaken but shall never be removed. The earth is shaken with
Earthquakes, but the earth keeps its own Center still: Our best peace is in
God, and our chiefest safety in his protection. I laid me down to rest,
because thou Lord watchest over me, (says the Prophet) and, Return O my soul
to thy rest, for the Lord has been very beneficial to thee. Is it not a good
thing to have a sweet security of soul? that whether I sleep or wake,
whether I be at home or abroad, live or die, I have a Providence watching over
me better then mine own? When I yield my self up to God, his wisdom is
mine, his strength is mine, whatsoever he has it is for me, because I am his:
What a heaven upon earth is this, that a Christian out of a holy familiarity
with God, can resign up his soul to him upon all occasions? Set heaven and
salvation aside, what greater happiness can be desired? How sweet is a man's
rest at night after he has y^elded himself to God by faithful prayer?

I beseech you let us be acquainted with the practice of this duty, Use.
and labor to be in such a state as God may own us, Exhortation.
and receive our poor souls to himself; Let us keep them pure and
unde^iled, and labor to improve our Talents, that when we give any thing to
God we may say, Lord, according to the grace I have received, I have kept it,
and therefore now return it to thee again.

Beloved, when trouble of conscience comes, when sickness and death comes,
what will become of a man that has not this sweet acquaintance with God? he
was a stranger to God in the time of prosperity, and God is now a stranger to
him in adversity. Saul was a profane spirited man, he did not acquaint
himself with God in the time of his happiness, and therefore in time of
distress he goes first to the Witch, and then to the sword point. So fares it
with all wicked wretches in their great extremities; no sooner does any evil
be^ide them, or the least danger approach them; let conscience never so little
fli^ in their faccs, etc. but presently they go to cursed means, and run
upon desperate conclusions.

Therefore as we desire to die even in Gods arms, and yield up our selves into
the very hands of the Almighty with comfort; let us daily inure our selves to
this blessed course of committing our selves and all our ways to him in doing
good.

Come and see, says the Scripture; Beloved, if you will not believe me; make
trial of this course a while; did you once taste the sweetness of it, how
would your drooping spirits be cheared up?

Let a man continually keep a good conscience, and he shall be satisfied
with peace at last: Suppose he meets with danger and opposition in the world,
this may seem harsh at the first; o but he shall know afterward what it is to
part with any thing for Christ's sake, to commit his cause or whatsoever he
has unto God, as to a faithful Creator. Then we ^aste of God to the purpose,
when we put him to it; for God will not be indebted to us; we never find
such sweet immediate comfort from him, as when we deny our selves comfort of
the Creature for his sake.

Little do we know what times may befall us, there is much danger abroad, and
we have cause to fear, not far from us. It may be the clouds even now hang
over our heads; Oh if we would be hidd in the day of the Lords wrath, and have
no evil come nigh our dwellings, let us (above all things in the world) make
sure our interest in Christ, and title to the promise; We should seek to know
God more, and then we would trust him more. Psalm 9.
They that know thy name will trust in thee, says David: Oh the blessed estate
of a Christian, that now he may be acquainted with God, that through Christ
there is a Throne of Grace to fly unto! I beseech you improve this happy
privilege, and then come what will; come famine, come danger of war or
pestilence, etc. God will be a Sanctuary and an abiding place to you. A
Christian carries his Rock and sure defense about him; I will be unto them a
little Sanctuary in all places, says God. What a comfort is it to have a wall
of fire still compassing us about? a Shield that our enemies must break
through before they can come at us? He that trusts in God shall be
recompensed with mercy on every side; it is no matter what dangers compass
him, though he be in the midst of death and hell, or any trouble whatsoever,
if he commits himself to God in obedience, out of good grounds of faith in his
Word, he shall be safe in the evil day.

THE TABLE.
A
ABsence of Gods Spirit discourageth us in the way to salvation, Part 1. Page
111 Affliction, necessary, 1. 16, 17 It happens in the Sunsnine of the Gospel,
1. 25 Small ones not regarded, make way for greater, 1. 27 Our carriage therein
must be good, 1. 140 God will deliver his out of all, 2. 94 How, 2. 95, 96
Godly afflicted more than others, and why, 1. 18 This discovers false brethren,
2. 93 Art aggravates sin, 2. 7 Assurance of Gods love is to be sought
betimes, 1. 197 Atheism brings judgment, 1. 28 Attributes of God are to be
applied to our selves, 1. 17^
B
A Christians best things are last, Part 1. Page 47. Part 2. Page 196 Brethren
th^^ are false discovered by affliction, 2. 93
C
Calamity, in the common calamity the wicked dare not appear, 1. 122
Christianity contrary to nature, 1. 145 Children of God are known by Gods
correcting them, 1. 46 The Devil their enemy, 1. 107 These must be committed
unto God, 1. 232 Church of God is his house, 1. 5 Why, 1. 6 He provides for it,
1. 7 Whether the English Church be Gods house, 1. 13 Proved, 1. 14 The Church
needs purging, 1. 15 God cleanses it when need is, 1. 17 It should severely
punish sin, 1. 23 It is Gods Spouse, 1. 80 Impregnable, 2. 31 Commonnesse of
sin is a sign that it is ripe, 1. 30 Conception of mind is like the body,
2. 2 Conscience, good fears not death, 2. 189 Constancy in sin to be
shunned, 2. 7 Correction shows we are Gods Children, 1. 46 Covenant, we must
be in Covenant with God, 1. 187 Creator, comfort from God as a Creator, 1.
168, 180, 184
D
Death is a departing, 2. 184 How Paul desired it, 2. 186 Not to be feared by
a Christian, 2. 192 It may be desired by a wicked man, but for some by-ends, 2.
194 Our ends must be considered. 1. 58 The death of the godly to be lamented,
and why, 1. 209, 211 Their deaths a sign of judgment approaching, 1. 28. 2. 23
Deliberation in what things to be used, 2. 179 Deliverance we have daily from
God should cause us to glorify him, 2. 151 Desire, what, 2. 182 Despair to be
avoided, 2. 101 Devil, an enemy to Gods Children, 1. 107 Diligent, we are
diligent to sin, 2. 7 Disobedience against the Gospel the greatest sin,
why, 1. 68 How known, 1. 86 Division (1. 44) in a land is a forerunner of
judgment, 2. 29 Doctrine, we should keep sound that doctrine which was left
us pure, 2. 162 Doubting, Romish doubting disallowed, 1. 198
E
End, our end must be considered, 1. 58 Enemies to be prayed for, 1. 146, 147
Enemies of the Church represented two ways, 2. 68 Envy snarles at greatness
when joined with goodness, 2. 13 Eternity, our desire of Gods glory should be
carried to eternity, 2. 158 Evil we must not plot to do it, 2. 48 The
difference betwixt evil done and suffered, 2. 113 Manifestation thereof
aggravates it, 2. 114 Examination of the grounds of Religion a means to escape
judgment, 1. 40 Examples of Governors prevail much, 2. 163 Experience of
Gods care and love, expressed, we may collect the future, ^. 201. 2. 1^^
F
Faith, it is efficacy, 1. 119 It takes hold by a little, 1. 182 Active and
Passive, 1. 188 It is strengthened by deliverance, 2. 129 It is a sign of our
interest in heaven, 2. 147 Faithfulness of God to be trusted to, 1. 177 He is
faithful, 1. 171 We must be faithful in what he trusts us, 1. 233 Fear
disturbs peace, 1. 220 Fruitfulness required, 2. 217 Means to attain it, 2.
218 Future care and love in God collected by things past, 1. 207. 2. 108
G
Gospel, in rejecting it we reject God, 1. 63, 68 To sin against it is
worse than against the Law, 1. 72 It lays open Christ, 1. 90 Disobedience
there unto a great sin, 1. 68 How known, 1. 86 Glorify GOD for his
deliverances, 2. 151 Our desire of Gods glory should be infinite, 2. 158 Our
glorifying him makes others do so too, 2. 168 Vide Honor. Away to glorify
God, 2. 153 God, the Church is his house, 5 And he ours, 9 Our bodies and
estates must be committed to him, 1. 156 He is faithful, 1. 171 We must be
our own, ere we can give our selves to him, 1. 185 We must commit our selves
to him, if we would have him keep us, 1. 204 We must eye him in all that we
do, 1. 221, 226 Rely on him in all our courses, 1. 229 He will be known in
his Attributes, 2. 28, 29 His love to his, 2. 28 He is overcome by prayer, 2.
29 He is Author of our deliverance, 2. 106 Our glorfying him makes others do
so, 2. 168 We must be faithful in what he trusts us, 1. 233 Gods Attributes
are to be applied unto our selves, 1. 175 We must be in covenant with God, 1.
187 Comfort from God as a Creator, 1. 168, 180, 184 He must be glorified for
his deliverances, 2. 151 Trust to Gods faithfulness, 1. 177 Godly afflicted
more than others, why, 1. 18 Their sins greater than others, 1. 20, 21 They
may seem neglected by God, but their end is peace, 1. 213 They shall not be
subdued, 2. 34 Their prosperity makes way for the subversion of the wicked, 2.
39 They suffer, 2. 88 Yet differing from the wicked, 2. 102 Sometimes in
straits, 2. 179 Their death how to be lamented, 2. 209 They bring good to the
place where they are, 2. 211 They can deny their best good for the benefit of
the Church, 2. 213 Good men dying is a sign of ensuing judgment, 1. 28 We
must be Actively good as well as passively. 2. 23 Governors, their examples
avail, 2. 163 Government, it is good to be under Christ's government, 1. 92
G^aces of the Spirit make the way to heaven easy, 1. 116 Delivering gra^e
requisite against temptation* 2. 123 Greatness wh^^ joined with goodness,
envyed at, 2. 13 G^^-powder Tr^ason, 2. 64
H
Happiness present aggravates eternal misery, 1. 59 Heart of a Christian is
Gods Closet, 1. 8 Discovered in affliction, 2. 92 Heaven, how to make the way
thither easy, 1. 115 Faith a sign of our interest thereunto, 2. 147 Pride
purged, a sign of our interest, 2. 146 Honoring God we honor our selves, 2.
167 It is a sign we are in a good estate, 2. 160 Vide Glorify. Hope must be
exercised, 1. 119 Humility requisite to a Christian, 1. 116
I
Idolatry brings judgment, 1. 29 Impudency a sign^ of the ripeness of sin,
1. 30 Infidelity negative is less than disobedience against the Gospel, 1.
71 Judgment how to know when near, 1. 27 How to prevent it, 1. 37 It will
begin at Gods house, and why, 1. 46. What it (...) and its division, 1. 48
Wicked shall not appear in the day of judgment, 1. 123 Consideration and
examination means to escape judgment, 1. 40 Mourning for our own and others
sins, another way. 1. 42 No privilege can exempt from judgment, 1. 22
L
Love, decay therein a sign of judgment, 1. 33 Requisite for a Christian, 1.
117 It descends, why, 1. 166 Assurance of Gods love to be sought betimes, 1.
197 We love things present too much, 2. 91 Law, it is a lesser sin to offend
against that, than the Gospel, 1. 72 Lions, we are all naturally such, 2. 86
M
Magistrates needful in the Church, 2. 205 Mercy of Christ must not be
presumed on, 1. 76 Exceptions against Christ's mercy refeld, 1. 91 Gods merry
must be especially noted 2. 56 Consideration thereof is the way to glorify
him, 2. 153 Ministers, they are hardly believed, 2. 47 Mischief, to contrive
mischief is the sign of a man notoriously wicked, 2. 18 And therefore to be
abhorred, 2. 20 Moderators Catholic, 1. 67 Mortification necessary, 1. 121
Mourning for our own sins and of others is the way to avert judgment, 1. 42
N
Nature and Christianity different, 1. 145
O
Obedience to the Gospel what, 1. 63 Who have it not, 1. 65 It Is not of our
selves, 1. 82 But wrought, 1. 88 It must be free, 1. 94 And cheerful, 1. 95
Active and Passive, 1. 136 One good man may do much good, 2. 217 Opposition is
bitterest amongst those that are nearest, 2. 11 Others matters how to be
minded by us, 2. 214
P
Peace is a sign we have committed our selves to God, 1. 218 Disturbed by
cares and fears, 1. 220 Peace is the end of the godly man, 1. 213 Particulars,
from particulars we must rise to generals, 2. 59 Policy, carnal to be
eschewed, 1. 191 It hinders our safety, 1. 193 Posterity must be committed to
God, 1. 230 Motive, 1. 232 Pray we must e^e we shall obtain, 1. 204 Yea for
our enemies, 1. 146, etc. God is overcome by prayer, 2. 29 Present, we are too
much addicted to things present, 2. 91 Preservation is from God, 2. 131 Vide
Providence. Pride if it be purged it is a sign of our interest in heaven, 2.
146 To be avoided, 2. 215 Privilege, none exempts from judgment, 1. 22 Prizing
religion a way to avert judgment, 1. 43 Professors, their loose life wounds
the Gospel, 1. 20 Providence, God will keep us if we commit our selves unto
him, 1. 204 Eye him in all we do, 1. 221, 226 Rely on him in all our courses,
1. 229 Committing posterity to God, 1. 232 Vide Preservation. Prosperity, the
seeming prosperity of the wicked shall have an end, 1. 55, 208 We must not
grieve at it, 1. 57 Continual prosperity a sign of a bad estate, 1. 129
R
Religion must not be en^red on with hopes of pleasure and case, 1. 113
Reformation thereof has brought blessings, 2. 73 Repentance is a way to turn
away wrath, 1. 38 Righteous, what meant thereby, 1. 97 They are saved, 1. 101
Yet hardly, why, 1. 106, 112
S
Saints hated of wicked men, 2. 17 Salvation, certainty of salvation, 1. 104
Scandal makes it hard to be sav^d, 1. 109 Security a mark of the ripeness
of sin, 1. 31 Selfe-denyall required in a Christian, 2. 215 Sin, God
punishes it wheresoever he finds it, 1. 18 When ripe, 1. 31 Sin, against
the Gospel is against Gods Attributes, 1. 68 Sin is greatest when against
the greatest light, 1. 70 The nearest must be parted with, 1. 77 The effects,
1. 89 It is sweet, 1. 105 It sticks to all, 1. 106 Sins of the second Table
are grounded on sins of the first, 2. 10 It is full of deceit, 2. 45, 47, 68
God delivers us from great ones, 2. 126 Abstinence from sin present, is the
way to be delivered from sin to come, 2. 124 Art and diligence aggravate
sin, 2. 7 Should be severely punished by the Church, 1. 23 Constancy in sin
to be avoided, 2. 7 The sins of the godly greater than others, 1. 20, etc
Sinner what, 1. 121 Slander a cloak for cruelty, 2. 15 Soul must be
committed to GOD, 1. 151, 161 Why, 1. 162 It must be done sincerely, 1. 225
Reasons, 1. 223 Directions, 1. 185 What it is, 1. 209 How we know when we
commit it to God, 1. 216 Even in the most desperate estate, 1. 187 We must
desire to have it kept from sin, and the consequents, 1. 152 Wicked m^n
think they have none, 1. 154 Soul must be respected above other things, 1.
157 Not satisfied but by strong reasons, 1. 162 The soul often carried away with
delight, ibid. Spirit, how it works with the Gospel, 1. 84 Its power, 1. 116
It is the chiefest part of a man, 2. 6 It supports us in spiritual losses, 2.
104 A royal spirit is a sign of our interest in heaven, 2. 147 Spouse of
Christ is the Church, 1. 80 Suffering of the godly and ungodly differ, 1. 3 It
is best for Gods children so to do, 1. 127, 129 It comes when God will, 1. 132
We must look from whence it comes, 1. 136 Our well-doing must be seen before
our well-suffering, 1. 138 Suffering must not be avoided by sin, 1. 142 In
well-suffering we (...) coals of fire on our enemies, 1. 146 We overcome by
suffering, 1. 147 We must not have by-respects therein, 1. 149
T
Temptations, considerations against them, 1. 61 God will not be tempted, 1.
216 Grace requisite against those times, 2, 123 Time, there is a time appointed
for Gods visiting his Church, 1. 23, 50 When that is, 1. 26 We must use time
present in doing good against the day of judgment, 1. 41 The wicked shall not
appear in three special times, 1. 122 We must avoid sin for the time to
come, 2. 120 Trust, we must not trust to flesh, 1. 180 Trial, comfort against
the fiery trial, 1. 2
V
Unfruitfulnesse a sign of ensuing judgment, 1. 32
W
Weak faith how strengthened, 2. 129 Wicked, their end, 1. 56 The
consideration of their torments should weane us from the world, 1. 61 They are
reserved, 1. 207 To further plagues, 1. 215 They shall not prevail over the
godly, 2. 27 Though for a time over their persons, yet not over the cause, 2.
31 They get nothing by persecuting the Church, 2. 35 In their enterprises they
are but to work Gods will, 2. 36 Their plots against the Church miscarry, 2.
37 They are fools, 2. 42 Will of it self cannot be rectified but by the
understanding, 1. 4 It is Gods will that men suffer, how, 1. 130 Wilfulness
aggravates sin, 2. 3 Wisdom carnal is folly, 2. 20, 27, 41 Word of God like
himself, 1, 175 Works justify not, 1. 66
FINIS.
Places of Scripture explaned and opened.
Cap. Verse. Part. Page GEnesis 5. 24. 1. 217 1 King. 34. 3. 2. 183 Psalm, 14.
1. 2. 10 25. 10. 1. 172 31. 5. 1. 203 15. 1. 134 36. 7. 1. 205 46. 2. 1. 211 4.
ibid. 73. 1. 2. 103 90. 1. 1. 9 129. 3. 1. 41 Prove. 1. 24. 1. 52 26. ibid. Esaias
1. 5. 1. 27 3. 2. 1. 28 3. ibid. 43. 2. 1. 213 Ierem. 10. 24. 1. 49 Jonah 2. 8.
1. 91 Joel 2. 14. 1. 40 Matthew. 5. 30. 1. 77 Luke 3. 20. 1. 74 5. 8. 1. 196 Rom
7. 6. 1. 95 8. 37. 2. 116 1 Cor. 11. 7. 2. 171 Philip. 4. 6. 1. 220 7. 1. 154 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 1^. 75 8. i^ id. 1 Timoth. 1. 15. 1. 173 2. Timoth. 4. 18. 1. 143

To the Reader.
REader, in this Book there are two parts, the one begins at the Churches
visitation, and goes on orderly to Page 240. and there it ends, this I call the
second part. All the rest from the beginning and so forward I count the first
part: therefore when thou art directed to the fourth or fifth page, because thou
should not look in both, nor mistake, I have set it thus: 1. 4. which is 1
Part and 4 Page; or ^. 5. the second Part and fifth Page.


