THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENT.

AS IT WAS ACTED by her Majesty's Servants at the Private house in Drury Lane.

-- Haec placuit semel -- By. J. Shirley

LONDON, Printed by E. A. for Francis Constable, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Cra^e. 1631.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE GENTLEMAN, WILLIAM TRESHAM Esquire.
SIr, I have long cherished a desire, by some worthy testimony, to express how
much I honor you: But after a tedious expectation, hopeless to meet with an
occasion to make me so fortunate; I resolved, rather then to hazard the censure
of neglect, to snatch any opportunity of presenting my services. This (which to
me has no name, but what your bounty shall bestow) having pleased you upon the
Stage, coming into the world, offers it self to kiss your hand. If you be
merciful, I am upon even terms with the world beside, and will study next to
reach your mind with imaginations of a higher nature. In the mean time, grow
you up, and ripen your self for Honor; the flowings of your blood will
instruct you how to merit; while I rest content with my ambition, if I may
still write my self,

Your devoted Servant, I. SHERLEY.
THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENT.
PROLOGVE.
IT is a principle by Nature wrote
In all our understanding, there is not end.
One Art or action, but it must tend
And move from some beginning to its
The Soldiers that wear the honored bays
Upon their brows, and glorious Trophies raise
To fame on pile of wounds, knew a time when
They sucked at war. Your Muse inspired men
And of diuiner earth, sacred for wit,
Crept out of their first elements to it:
The goodliest Harvest had first seed and hope,
Ere it could lade with an enriching crop
The rural Teame, th'exactest building first
Grew from a stone, though afterward it durst
Wrap his fair head in clouds: nothing so true,
As all things have beginning: upon you
Dwell candid application; this Play is
The first fruits of a Muse, that before this
Never saluted Audience, nor does mean,
To swear himself a Factor for the Scene.
Though he employ some hours he only prays
You take it as first borne, although he says,
He meant it not his heir, since it is unjust
One should have all, as in the Law it must.
Accept then a beginning; all men know,
He first kissed bays, that wore them on his brow.
Drammatis Personae.
Cornelio, an ancient Gentleman. Infortunio, a Gentleman lover of Selina.
Rufaldo, an old Merchant. Antonio, son to Cornelio, in love with Hilaria.
Gasparo, a Gentleman a Lover of Felice. Ienkin, a Welshman. Bubulcus, a rich
Gull, in love with Hilaria. Iocarello, Ienkins Page. Gorgon, Antonio's Servant.
Ingeniolo, a Justices Clarke. Orlando Furioso, a Roarer. An old Countryman.
Offe his son. Seruingman. Shepherds. Selina Cornelio's daughter. Felice, her
sister. Hilaria, Rufaldo's daughter. Delia, a Chambermaid. Medulla, a Country
Gentlewoman. Shepheardesses.
THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENT.
Scena prima.
Enter Antonio and Gasparo. Antonio. Sir, this Welshman is in love with my
sister Selina, and has chosen me for his Prolocutor.


Gasp. O! this Love will make us all mad, thou know I loved a ^ifter of
thine once, but heaven knows where she is, I think she loved me too, do
think she did not?


Gasp. Well, thy father has reason to curse himself, beside some that she and
I have.


Ant. Nay, nay, thou't fall into passion again, when things are past recovery,
'twas a good wench, but come, prithee leave to think on her.


Gasp. Nay, I ha done, what shal's do?


Ant. Any thing but talk of State matters: thou have much intelligence in the
world, prithee what is the news abroad? I come forth a purpose to hear some,
and this is an age of novelties.


Gasp. News? O excellent news!


Ant. Prithee what is it? I long to hear some.


Gasp. There is no news at all.


Ant. Call you that excellent news?


Gasp. Is it not good news, that there is no bad news? the truth is, the
newes-maker Master Money-lacke is sick of a consumption of the wit.


Ant. The newes-maker? why, is there any newes-maker?


Gasp. Oh sir, how should younger brothers have maintained themselves, that
have traveled, and have the names of Countries, and Captains without book,
as perfect as their prayers, I and perfecter too? for I think there is more
probability of forgetting their prayers, they say them so seldom; I tell you
sir, I have known a Gentleman that has spent the best part of a thousand
pound, while he was prentice to the trade in Holland, and out of three sheets
of paper, which was his whole stock, a pen and inke-horne he borrowed, he set
up shop, and spent a hundred pound a year upon his whore, and found sheets
for them both to lie in too: it has been a great profession; mary most
commonly they are Soldiers: a peace concluded, is a great plague unto 'em, and
if the wars hold, we shall have store of them; O, they are men worthy of
commendations, they speak in print.


Ant. Are they Soldiers?


Gasp. Faith so they would be thought, though indeed they are but mungrels, not
worthy of that noble attribute; they are indeed bastards, not sons of war
and true Soldiers, whose divine souls I honor, yet they may be called great
spirits too, for their valor is invisible, these I say will write you a
battle in any part of Europe at an hours warning, and yet never set foot out
of a Tavern, describe you Towns, Fortifications, Leaders, the strength a'th
enemies, what Confederates, every days march, not a Soldier shall lose a
hair* or have a bullet fly between his Arms, but he shall have a Page to
wait on him in quarto, nothing destroys 'em but want of a good memory, for if
they escape contradiction, they may be chronicled.


Ant. Why, thou art wise enough to be an Informer.


Gasp. I mary, now you speak of a Trade indeed, the very Atlas of a State
Politic, the Common-shore of a City, nothing falls amiss unto 'em, and if
there be no filth in the Commonwealth can live by honesty, and yet be knaves
by their privilege, there is not an oath but they will have money for it!


Ant. Oh brave Trade.


Gasp. They can eat men alive and digest 'em, they have their conscience in a
string, and can stifle it at their pleasure, the Devils iourneymen, set up for
themselves, and keep a damnation house of their own; indeed they seldom
prove Aldermen, yet they are taken for Knights every day a'th week, when they
ride post, they have the art of insinuation, and speak writs familiarly, they
are Agents as I have heard for the Devil in their life time, and if they dye
in their bed, have this privilege, to be sons of hell by adoption, and take
place of Seriants.


Enter Infortunio and Selina. Gasp. Stay. Who Is there? thy sister and
Infortunio: let us observe.


Infor. I must have other answer, for I must love you.


Sil. Must? but I do not see any necessity that I should love you, I do
confess you are a proper man.


Infor. O do not mock Selina, let not excellence
Which you are full of, make you proud and scornful,
I am a Gentleman, though my outward part
Cannot attract affection, yet some have told me,
Nature has made me what she need not shame,
Yet look into my heart, there you shall see
What you cannot despise, for there you are
With all your graces waiting on you, there
Love has made you a Throne to sit, and rule
Ore (...), all my thoughts obeying
And honoring you as Queen, pass by my outside:
My br^st I dare compare with any man.

Sil. (...) can see this br^st you (...) of so?

Infor. Oh ^'tis an easy work, for though it be
Not to be pierced by the dull (...) who^^ beam
Is spent on outward shapes, th^r^ is a way
To make a search into hiddenst passage.
I know you would not love to please your sense:
A Tree that bears a ragged vnleau'd top
In depth of Winter, may when Summer comes
Speak by his fruit, he is not dead but youthful,
Though once he showed no sap: my heart's a plant
Kept down by colder thoughts, and doubtful fears,
Your frowns like Winter storms make it seem dead,
But yet it is not so, make it but yours,
And you shall see it spring, and shoot forth leaves
Worthy your eye, and the oppressed sap
Ascend to every part to make it green,
And pay your love with fruit when Harvest comes.
If my affection be suspected, make
Experience of my loyalty, by some service
Though full of danger, you shall know me better,
And so discern the truth of what you see not.

Sil. Then you confess your love is cold as yet,
And Winter's in you heart.

Infor. Mistake me not, Silena, for I say
My heart is cold, not love.

Sell. And yet your love is from your heart I Will warrant.

Infor. Oh you are nimble to mistake,
My heart is cold in your displeasures only,
And yet my love is fervent, for your eye
Casting out beams, maintains the flame it burns in.
Again, sweet Love,
My heart is not mine own, it is yours, you have it,
And while it naked lies, not dain'd your bosom
To keep it warm, how can it be but cold,
In danger to be frozen? blame not it,
You only are in fault it has no heat.

Sell. Well sir, I know you have Rethoricke, but I
Can without art give you a final answer.

Infor. Oh stay, and think a while, I cannot relish
You should say final, sweet, deliberate,
It does concern all the estate I have,
I mean not dunghill treasure, but my life
Does stand or fall to it, if your answer be
That you can love me, be it swift as lightning,
But if you mean to kill me, and reject
My so long loue-deuotions, which I have paid
As to an Altar, stay a little longer,
And let me count the riches I shall lose*
By one poor aerie word, first give me back
That part of Infortunio that is lost
Within your love, play not the Tyrant with me.

Sell. You Are ouer-weake to let your passions sway you:
If I knew any thing I had of yours,
I would not do you that injustice, sir,
To let it stay with me, and for your love
I cannot pay it back again with mine,
Either release the debt, or I shall dye in it,
Your suite is fruitless, hopeless, pardon me, farewell.

Ant. Now by all my hopes you are to blame, sister, come, this Gentleman
deserves your love, Infortunio.


Sell. Brother, you forget your self.


Ant. Why, I do remember I am your brother, I say you must love him.


Sell. Must?


Ant. What, does that move your spirit? what are you, but you may love? be not
petulant, you are a baggage and not worthy of a man, by heaven I now could kick
her.

Exit.
Gasp. Thy the other sister was of calmer temper, this a true woman.


Infor. Sir, had not nature made you brother to her, I should be angry.

Exit
Ant. Alas poor Gentleman, I do not feel my self in such an humor for
Hilaria, and yet by this hand I love her well enough, and now I think on it, I
promised her my company, she has a damnable usurious stinking wretch to her
father, that cannot abide me, but it is no matter, this wench and I may find a
place to meet in, in spite of his eyes and spectacles. How now Gorgon, what
says she?


Enter Gorgon. Gorg. Sir, I have done your remembrances to Mistress Hilaria, and
told her you should find her coming by and by, but you were best pass in some
obscurity, for her father Rufaldo is hard by sir. Lupus in Fabula.


Enter Rufaldo. Ant. Gasparo, and thou love me, show thy wit to entertain this
piece of black Dammaske and Velvet guards, while I go in to Hilaria.


Ruf. Old men are the truest lovers, young men are inconstant and wag with
every wind, we never move, but are as true as steel.


Gor. But in women's matters as weak as water, as weak as water.


Ruf. Besides, sweet Love, but do I court a shadow? to see whither love will
carry a man: let me see, I could find in my heart to bestow a ring upon my
Sweetheart, but that I am loath to part with it: hem, I will get but one
child, and that shall be a boy, lest having too many children, I undo my
heir, and my goods be divided. O sweet Selina, O amiable Selina; sure I am not
old.


Gor. I have it, Signior Gasparo, pray let me begin with my Merchant if you
love me, and if yo^ (...) it, second me.


Gasp. Go to Gorg^n, let us see thy w^^^ow.


Ruf. Old men walk with a staff, and creep along the streets, hold their
heads below their girdle, faulter in their speech, foame at mouth, and breathe
ten times in a furlong, and are ready to spit their lungs on every man's
threshold.


Gorg. God save you sir.


Ruf. God a mercy honest Gorgon.


Gor. I cry you mercy sir, I Will assure you sir, I took you for Master Rufaldo
the old Merchant.


Ruf. Why, and^am not I? is not the fellow drunk? I am Rufaldo.


Gor. It may be some kin to him, but not that Rufaldo I mean, you are younger
a fair deal.


Ruf. I am that Rufaldo, the Merchant, that buried my wife lately, and have one
daughter Hilaria, ancient acquaintance with Cornelio and your Master Antonio.


Gor. Oh sir, you must excuse me for that.


Ruf. Is thy name Gorgon?


Gor. What else sir, honest Gorgon I?


Ruf. Do I know thee to be Gorgon? what, shall I be faced out of my self? why
thou varlet, who am I, if not Rufaldo?


Gor. Why sir, it is plain, you have no gray hairs in your head, your cheek
is scarlet, a wanton youthful eye; Rufaldo had a head like frost, his eyes
sunk into his hollows, a rugged brow, a hoarie beard, and all his body not
worth a drop of blood, a very crazie old mealy-mouthed Gentleman, you are
younger at least by thirty years.


Ruf. I Will assure thee I was Rufaldo, when I rose in the morning.


Gor. You have not slept since, have you?


Ruf. No.


Gor. It Is the more strange. I have heard of some that have been changed in a
dream, but never waking before: this is strange, nay admirable!


Ruf. Young, changed, art sure thou do not mock?


Gor. I were a very knave then, if you be Rufaldo, I hope your worship knows I
have been bound to my good behavior.


Ruf. Altered young, ha! I would I were; and yet me thinks I am liuelier then I
was, I feel my joints pliable as wax, and my voice is stronger too. But tell
me, honest Gorgon, is it possible for an old man to be young again?


Gor. Nay, I see you will not believe me: well sir, I will be bold to report the
wonder abroad, and astonish all your friends.


Ruf. Nay, stay, honest Gorgon, ha! young, no gray hairs? stay, who is here?


Exit Gorgon. Gasp. Ha! it is not he, I Will speak to him, no it is in vain, I Will
see if he knows me. -- He passes by.


Ruf. Gasparo! what, does not he know me too?


Gasp. Sir, I should know you, are you not Signior Petrucchio, the dancing
Master?


Ruf. Tricks, passages, I am Rufaldo, old Rufaldo.


Gasp. Rufaldo indeed is old, but you are young, you do retain his
countenance, I would swear you were he, but you are younger far.


Ruf. It Is so, I am changed, I am younger then I was, I am that Rufaldo,
believe, I know you to be a learned Gentleman, named Gasparo, I was told before
I was altered, but not to trouble you with many questions, only one, Gasparo,
is it a thing possible for an old man to be young again? I know it is
admirable, but is it possible? you are a Scholar.


Gasp. Possible? oh yes, ^theres no question, for we see by experience, Stagges
cast their old horns, and prove vigorous, Snakes cast off their old coats,
Eagles renew their age, your plants do it familiarly, the Phoenix when she is
old, burns herself to ashes, from thence reuiues a young Phoenix again.
Possible? I have heard some old men have been twice children sir, --
therefore' this not impossible.


Ruf. It Is very strange: I am not yet confident.


Gasp. There be receites in Physic, sir, to keep them young, saving that
time runs on a little beforehand with em: yes, and to make young, since it is
harder to make alive when they are dead, then to make young when they are
alive, and Physic does revive some out of all question, though not so
familiarly as kill, for that they do with a little study; mary I think, if it
were as gainefull to the Physician to restore as to destroy, he would practice
the Art of recovery very faithfully.


Ruf. Why, do you think it would not prove as gainefull?


Gasp. Oh! by no means, for where an old man would give a hundred pound, to
have forty or fifty years wiped off the old score of his life, his wife or
next heir would join rather then fail, to out-bid him half on it, to put him
out of debt quite, and to send his old leaking vessel into mare mortuum.


Ruf. Well, well, but if I be young, I have took no Physic for it.


Gasp. If nay, it is past if, and, and too, you are certainly restored, let me
see, you look like one of four, or six and thirty, not a minute above, and
so much a man may take you for.


Ruf. Well, I know not what to say to it, there is some power in love has blessed
me: now Selina, be thou gracious.


Gasp. Are you in love? nay, the w^der is not so great; who can express the
power of Love? I have read of a Painter named Pigmalion, that made the Picture
of a woman so to the life, that he fell in love with it, courted it, lay in bed
with it, and by power of Love, it became a soft-natur'd wench indeed, and he
begot I know not how many children of her. Well sir, Selina cannot choose but
be mad for you.


Ruf. Not mad, Gasparo, I would be loath to be troubled with her and she be mad.


Gasp. Yes, and she be mad in love, there is no harm in it, she cannot be too
mad in love, your Cornucopia may be ^bated at pleasure, besides sir, the best
moral men say, Love it self is a madness, and the madder your wife is, the
more sure you may be she loves you.


Ruf. No, no, I love no madness on any condition, for fear of being horne-mad.


Gasp. Why sir, madness is not such a discredit, as the age goes: you know
there are many mad fashions, and what man but some times may be mad? are not
your great men mad, that when they have enough, will pawn their soul for a
Monopoly? besides mad Lords, what do you think of Ladies at some time of the
Moon, you may spell em in their names, Maddame? you have mad Courtiers, that
run madding after Citizens wi^es: the Citizens are mad too, to trust em with
their wares, who have been so deep in their wives books before: your Justice
of Peace is some times mad too, for when he may see well enough, he will suffer
any man to put out his eye with a bribe: some Lawyers are often starke-mad, and
talk wildly, no man is able to endure their Terms.


Ruf. Prithee mad-cap leave, I am almost mad to hear thee.


Gasp. Well, my old young Rufaldo, if you marry Selina, I shall have a pair of
gloves, I hope, and you will let me dance at your wedding.


Ruf. That thou shall, boy, and I Will dance my self too, hey, --


Exit leaping. Gasp. Farewell credulity; ha, ha, with what a greediness do
old men run out of their wits? 'Twas a good recreation to see with what
pleasure he suffered himself to be guld: faith Gasparo, play out thy hand, now
thou art in: me thinks I have an excellent appetite to make my self merry
with the simplicity of this age: let me see, it is Spring and, I mean to give
my head a purgation, it may beat off the remembrance of my lost Love Felice: a
pox of Melancholy, I will act two or three parts if I live in spite of it, and
if I die then

Exit Gasparo.
Enter Gorgon. Gor. Seignior Gasparo, my Master would speak with you: the
project too* I met the Youth strutting like a Gentleman Usher, 'twas my
invention.


Gasp. But I gave it pollish, Gorgon.


Gorg. I confess, you took off the rough-cast, but 'twas Gorgons head brought
forth the project, from my Jove's brain came this Minerua.


Gasp. I think thou art a wit.


Gor. Who, I a wit? I thought you ^ad 'more wit, then to make such a question,
all the Town takes me for a wit, here is a pate has crakers in it and flashes.


Gasp. And thou say the word, we will join in a project of wit, to make an
Ass of the world a little, it shall make us merry, if it take no other ways,
wo't join?


Gor. By this hand, any project of wit, what is it, good Gasparo? the project.


Gasp. Can be close?


Gor. As midnight to a Bawd, or a pair of Trusses to an Irish man's buttockes.


Gasp. Go to, thou shall now then excuse me to thy Master, I will presently
furnish my self with new lodgings, and expect to hear from me shortly my
brane Delphicke, I have it in Embrio, and I shall soon be delivered.


Gorg. If I fail, call me Spider-catcher.

Exit.
Gasp. Mum, not a word, if all hit right, we may Laugh all our melancholy
thoughts away.

Exit.
Actus secundus, Scena prima.
Enter Bubulcus. Bub. If I were a woman, now could I fall in love with my
self: every body tells me I am the proprest Gentleman in the Town, and I put
it up, for the truth is, I dare not give any one the lie, a pox a fighting, I
can look as big as another, but shall I be such an Ass, to venture my self
with beasts? for they say, your swords most commonly are Foxes, and have
notable metal in'em; let me see, I am now at Rufaldoes my father in Law that
must be, here he is.


Enter Rufaldo apparelled youthfully. Master Rufaldo, if you had been my own
father, as you are but like to be my father in Law, I should have proved my
self a fool, by this hand I should not have known you, why, how brisk and
neat, and youthful he is!

Ruf. I am something altered I confess, since I saw you.


Bub. By this flesh that shines, a man would not take you to be above five or
six and thirty at most, how came this?


Ruf. Just as Gasparo told me, it is apparent, nay, nay, son, forbear to be
inquisitiue, I confess I am abated of my age, the power of Love, and so forth,
but I see your fire of love is not out too.


Bub. No, mine was but raked up in the embers.


Ruf. Why, this Love does make us all ingenious too: come sit down, saving
your tail sir, a cushion, we may discourse with the more case.


Bub. Pray, how does my Sweetheart Mistress Hillaria.


Ruf. She is very well, ha son, I am in love too: son I call you, I hope you
will get my daughters good will, but you will find her peevish.


Bub. No matter, sir, for that, I would not have her easily, I would sweat for
her, I Will warrant, I Will make her love me.


Ruf. Look you can you read, I made a ditty to send to my Mistress, and my
Musician that I keep in my house, to teach my daughter, has set it to a very
good air, he tells me: you shall hear and judge of it, I hear him tuning his
Instrument.

A Song.
God of War to Cupid yield,
He is Master of the field,
He with Arrow hits the heart,
Thou with Lance the worser part.
Cupid greater is then Jove,
Since he wounded was with love,
Nay, in power by much ods
He excels the other gods.
Love transformed Jove to a Swan,
Made Ulysses a mad man,
But Rufaldo it does make
Young for his Selinas sake.

Ruf. How do you relish it, ha?


Bub. Itroth the Ditty is as pretty an air as ere I saw, it is divided into
three regions too, I warrant you, can make Ballads easily.


Ruf. Oh fie, they are barbarous and ignoble, that is beggarly.


Bub. But for all that, I have read good stuff sometimes, especially in your
fighting Ballads, When Cannons are roaring, and bullets are flying, etc.


Ruf. Fie, a whipping post, tinkerly stuff; how did you like the air?


Bub. As sweet an air as a man would wish to live in, but it is somewhat
backward.


Ruf. Oh Music, the life of the soul.


Bub. I should have learned Music once too, but my Master had so many
crochets, I could never away with it: but where is your daughter, sir? there is
no Music without her, she is the best Instrument to play upon.


Ruf. And you shall have her between your legs presently.


Bub. I had as liefe be betwixt hers, for all that.


Ruf. Hilaria, where is this girl? I Will fetch her to you, and leave her with
you, for I have a Love of mine own, to whom I mean in person to present this
Ditty, I Will fetch her.

Exit.
Bub. I do not see what fault shee'can find with me, and if I had some good
word to come over her: but I must help it out and need be, with swearing; but
here she is.


Enter Rufaldo, Hilaria, Antonio aloof. Ruf. Still Antonio with you? you are a
foolish girl: do I take care to provide a husband for you? and will you cast
away your self upon a Prodigal? but that I would not discontent his sister,
whom I hope to make my wife, I would forbid him my house; therefore be wise,
and take heed of him, he is giddy-headed, and loose-bodied. The Be may buzze,
but he will leave a sting: plant your love there: upon my blessing, he has many
Lordships.


Hill. Pray heaven he have good manners.


Ruf. I have set open the gate of opportunity; Cupid speed us both.


Bub. Let me alone to enter my man, now the point is open: hum, stay, there is
a man in her Tables more then I looked for: foot, he kisses her, I Will call
Rufaldo back, he is out of sight, it were but a cowardly trick, for me to
runaway.


Ant. Be Buzzard now, the sting of conscience eat up his gut, fry his suet,
and leave him at his death not able to weigh down a pound of candle.


Bub. He talks of suet, I do melt already.


Hill. Look, do you see that man of clothes? upon my fathers blessing he must
be my husband. What will you do?


Ant. Fight with him, his clothes are too big for him, I Will beat him till he
swell to 'em.


Hill. No, as you love me, do not strike him.


Bub. I will set a good face whatsoever come. Hilaria, how does my Love, come
kiss: why so: this comes of valor, we fall to, and he falls off, he is some
coward, I hope, and how do Hilaria? it is an age since I saw thee: what
Springals is that? ha.


Hill. One that desires to be of your acquaintance, sir.


Bub. My acquaintace, who is he? none but Knights, and Knights fellows, are of
my acquaintance, I scorn Gentlemen.


Hi. But for my sake, pray be acquainted with him.


Bub. Thou shall do much with me, sir, I am content for her sake whom I love,
to be acquainted with you, wo't borrow any money? for so do all that begin
their acquaintance with me, it is the fashion, he is a coward, is he not? here:
nay, and you scorn my money, I scorn your acquaintance.


Hill. Pray for my sake.


Bub. Why, he will borrow no money of me, I had never such a trick put upon
me, since I knew what acquaintance was: I Am sure there have been forty
acquainted with me, since I came to Town, and not one had not so little
breeding, to let me ask 'em the question, we could no sooner shake hands, but
the other was in my pocket: It may be it is his modesty. Sir, this is my Love
Hilaria, and if you will not borrow money of me, by this hand, there lies my
sword, he is a coward.


Hill. It appears.


Bub. Hilaria is my Mistress, and if any man dare be so venturous, as to blast
her reputation with a foul breath, he shall breathe his last.


Hill. It Is very sure, he shall not be immortal.


Bub. Or if you shall offer in my presence to defile her lip, or touch her
hand, or kiss but the nether part of her vesture, you had better kiss her in
another place; nay do but blow on her.


Hill. You forget your self, this is my friend.


Bub. Or wink at her, or speak to her, or make signs, or think on her to my
face, and you had better keep your thoughts to your self: now to conclude,
and if you be agrieu'd, my name is Bubulcus, and you lie.


Ant. And you lie there ath ground: why should not I knock his brains out
with his own hilts, or stake him to the ground, like a man that had hanged
himself? Sir clothes, Rat of Nilus fiction, monster, golden Calfe, oh, I
would kick thee till thou have no more brains, then thy cousin Woodcocke: I
will not dishonor my self to kill thee, half a dozen kickes will be as good
as a house of correction, out you Monkey.


Bub. Oh, that I could run thee through body and soul, I will challenge thee, a
pox on your toes, would I had the paring of your nails, were you dumb so long
for this?


Ant. Hence.


Bub. Who looked for you? when will you be here again? look for a challenge,
the time may come, when I will beat thee.

Exit.
Ant. Has thy father left a multitude of men, to make choice of this piece of
folly to be thy husband? oh, the blindness of a covetous wretched father, that
is led only by the ears, and in love with sounds! Nature had done well to have
thrust him into the world without an eye, that like a Mole is so affected to
base earth, and there means to dig for Paradise: but come, Hilaria. Fathers
their children, and themselves abuse, That wealth a husband for their daughter
choose.


Exeunt. Enter Cornelio, Rufaldo, and Selina. Cor. I did not think, Rufaldo,
pardon me,
You could have so prevailed, but if she can
Plant her affection on ye, I Will not be
Backward to call you son.

Seli. He does appear
With all the charms of love upon his eye,
And not rough drawn, but polisht, he assumes
A power above all resistance.

Cor. An old man's Darling, is a petty Queen
Above all her desires.

Ruf. Nay, she shall want nothing my wealth can purchase,
O my sweet Selina.

Cor. Rufaldo, with your patience, I would have
A word or two in private, you need not
Preiudicate me.

Ruf. With all my heart.

Cor. Selina, thou know I am thy father.

Sell. My duty, sir, shall speak it.

Cor. And you know whom you have rejected.

Sell. Young Infortunio.

Cor. And you know what man he is, with whom
You mean to tie that knot, nothing but
Death is able to undo.

Sil. Rufaldo, sir, an old man.

Cor. Oh Selina, Felice thy poor sister thou recalst
To sad remembrance, but heaven alas
Knows only where she is.

Sell. Sir, I have often heard you talk of her,
But never knew that sister well.

Cor. Thou with thy uncles tenderness wast kept
Always ith Country, not until her loss
At home with me, her fate taught me to give
A liberty to thee, her I restrained
Poor wench in love with Gasparo, till betwixt
Obedience to a father, and the love
To him, she left us both, father and friend,
Now to avoid the like affliction,
I vowed thy freedom, and thou see I do
Not encounter thy affection with the bonds
A father might enforce upon his child.

Sell. I humbly thank you.

Cor. But yet Selina,
Take heed, be not too rash, I have observed
You want no common judgment, O do not
Precipitate thy self into a sorrow,
Shall waste thee with repentance, let me tell you,
There is a method, when your passion's young
To keep it in obedience: you love Rufaldo,
Art thou not young? How will the Rose agree
With a dead Hyacinth? or the Honey Wood-bind,
Circling a withered Bryer?
You can apply, can you submit your body
To bed with Ice and Snow, your blood to mingle?
Would you be deaf'd with coughing, teach your eye
How to be rumaticke? Breathes he not out
His body in diseases, and like dust
Falling all into pieces, as if Nature
Would make him his old grave: I say too much.
O what are all the riches of the world,
To an oppressed mind? which then must be
Fed with despair of change, or will gold
Buy off the imprisonment? nay, will it not
Compose the chains, that bind you to endure it?
Well I have said enough, keep still your freedom,
And loose it where you will, you shall not blame
Me for your fate, nor grieve me with your shame.

Sell. Dear father, low as earth I tender you
The duty of a daughter, I have heard you
Not with a careless ear, that liberty
You have bestowed on me, for which I owe
All that I am, does make me confident
You will not be offended, if I tell you
My love is virtuous, were it otherwise,
I should elect as you premonish youth,
And prodigal blood: And father, I think here
I show my self your daughter, nor am I
Without good president too: how many fine
Young noble Ladies, in this Faiery I Will,
Have matched with reverend age? and live as they
Were borne from Natures purity, free from stain
Of sensual imputation, by their Loves,
Deriuing heavenly honors to themselves
Above merit of equality.

Cor. No more, heavens blessing and mine
Light on thee, shall have Rufaldo.

Sell. I would not leave Rufaldo for a world
Of rash intemperate youth, believe it sir.

Cor. Rufaldo, heard you that? she says she would not
Leave you for a world of other men.

Ruf. Nor I for thousand worlds forsake my Love.
Come seal it with a kiss, another, another, another.

Cor. As close as Cockles.

Ruf. Oh, that we were married! it is death to stay the
Ceremonies, would we were a bed together.

Cor. 'Twere time I see we were at conference,
To confirm all things for the marriage,
You being agreed, I think we shall not differ
In other circumstance, and 'twere sin to let
That keep your joys asunder by delay:
Please you we will have some treaties.

Ruf. Most willingly, O my bird, my Chicke, my Dove,
My America, my newfound world, I shall shortly
Run back into one and twenty again.

Exeunt Cornelio and Rufaldo. Sell. With what agility he moves himself,
As he were made of air? let weakness tax
Our inequality, I have a mind
Can easily contemn what the worlds malice
Out of its own first guiltines can throw
Upon our loves, 't shall be enough for me
Thus to convince the world of so much baseness,
Lodged in luxurious thoughts, by my chaste thoughts.
Rufaldo, thou art mine, all time, me thinks
Is slow, till we be actually possessed
Of mutual enjoying. Stay, who is this
Enter lenkin, and his Page locarello. The Welshman that delivers his affection
At second hand to me.

Ien. Look you Pages, where our Sweet-hearts and Pigsnies be, and her could
tell what to say to her now, know her heart very well, but pogs upon her,
cannot aule her knowledge speak Rethoricks, and Oratories, and fine words to
her? look you kanow better to fight, and cut doublets with her Welsh glaues,
mark you.


Ioc. Sir will you loose this opportunity, you will curse your self in Welsh,
two or three days together for it.


Ien. Sentilwoman, if her know not her name, was Ienkin, borne in Wales, came
of pig houses, and prittish bloods was have great hills and mountains aule her
own, when was get 'em again, any was her cousins, and our Countreyman was
never conquered, but always have the victories prauely, have her Arms and
scushrins, to know that say you, was give in her crests great deal of
monsters, and Dragons, kille 'em with their hooks very valiantly, as any
Sentelman in the whole world: pray you now was please you place her affections
and goodwils upon her, in ways of makemoney, mark you teale plainly, lenkin
was love her very honestly, else pox upon her, and her will fight in her cause,
and quarrels, long as have any plood in her bellies and backs too, mark you.


Sell. Sir, I am bound to you for the affection
You cast on me, it is far above my merit.

Ien. Merits say you? awte merits are awle banished our Countries and Nations,
you know dat: pray you was her love lenkin?


Sell. Love you, sir? I know not
How to be so inhumane, not to love you,
Your parts deserve a nobler object, I am not
Worthy so much opinion of your love,
But wherein I may do you service sir,
You shall command Selina.
Exit Selina.
Ien. Shall her, was make her means and satisfactions warrant her, or say
Senkin was Sentleman of Wales, say you now Pages, was have her matrimonies and
wedlocks very fast, look you, and when was get her awse her cousins, was make
joys and gratulation for her good fortunes upon her walsh Harpes, know you dat
very well Pages? her fear her shall be Knighted one days, and have great
cumulations of vrships, honors, and dignities too, a great while ago.


Ioc. And great Castles in the air.


Ien. Was give awle our lands, and craggy Tenements in Wales away to our cousin
up John, and live her self here upon very good fashions, with our moneys and
mighty riches, when her can get 'em.


Enter Infortunio. Infor. How now, whither so fast, man? thou may get to hell
by night, and thou go but an Aldermans pace.


Ien. By Cats blood, her will go to the Devil and her list, what is that to
her?


Infor. Cry you mercy, your name is Master lenkin.


Ien. And what have her to say to Master lenkin? lenkin is as good names as her
own, pray you was good Sentle man as her self, know very well, say you now?


Infor. Godboy, sir.


Ien. Boys, does her call her boys? hark you her? her name is lenkin, her be
no boys, no shildren.


Infor. I will not be used so.


Ien. Her shall be used worse, and her call lenkin boys, was knock as tall a
man as herself, an welsh plood be up, look you.


Infor. Can she love Rufaldo? it is impossible.


Ien. Piple pables, it is very possible.


Infor. His body has more diseases then an Hospital, an hunger-staru'd Rascal.


Ien. Raskals? sheshu! was never such names and appellations put upon her, awle
her days, Becar her will make you eat up awle her words and ignominies, or
her plade shall make holes in your bellies diggon.


Infor. A very puff, a weak Canniball.


Ien. Hey, puff, and Cannibals, if the Devil be in your mouths, her will
pick your teeths with her welsh plade, and pay you for all your puffes, and
Cannibals, warrant her.


Infor. But it is her fault, aloue impudent woman.
Oh, may you like Narcissus perish by
Your face, the fall of others, or vnpityed
Of heaven and earth, dye loathsome! I could curse.

Ien. Her can curse, and swear too, look you now.

Infor. Pardon diuinest sex, passions do force
My reason from me, I do submit,
Crave pardon, as your creature.

Ien. Nay, and her crave pardons, and make submissions, lenkin was put up awle
her angers and indignations, farewell.


Exit cum locarello. Infor. Oh, Selina!
Thou art too much an Adamant
To draw my soul unto thee, either be
Softer, or less attractiue: but Rufaldo,
It Is depth of witchcraft, oh, I could be mad,
Beyond all patience mad, it is some malice
Has laid this poison on her.

Enter Gorgon with a letter. Gor. Here Is Infortunio. Alas, poor Gentleman,
little does he think what black and white is here, a bitter handful of
commendations to him, my young Mistress is mad of the old Cockscombe, and will
marry him almost without asking, I cannot tell but if she do not cuckold him,
and make him cry corns on his toes ere he dye, he has fools fortune, for a
wise man would be out of hope to avoid it, he spies me.


Inf. Whither running, Gorgon?


Gorg. Not out of my wit, Sir, I have a Letter from my young Mistress Selina,
must in all haste have cleanely conueyance to old Rufaldo.


Inf. Let me but see the directions. To my beloved friend Master Rufaldo: it is
a lie, she was mistaken, it was I should owe this appellation, I Will not believe
the superscription, it is a painted face, I Would see the heart on it.


Gorg. I hope, sir, you will not throw open the sheet, and discover my Mistress
secrets? How he stares!


Inf. If you love me, and wish me constant, be your own friend, and let our
marriage day begin with the next morning: thine, mine. Oh Selina, she is mad.
All womankinde is mad; and I am mad: whom shall I rend in pieces for my wrongs,
and as with Atoms fill this poysned air, Rufaldo? Stay, is not she a creature
rational? oh no, there is no spark of nature in her, all is sunk, lost for
ever: stay, stay, see.


Gorg. He has made a Tailors bill on it, torn't apieces ere it be discharged:
What shall I do?


Inf. This is Medias brother torn in pieces,
And this the way where she with Jason flies,
Tom Colchos, come not near 'em, see, look,
That Is an arm rent off.

Gorg. This?

Inf. And the hand beckens us
To cry out murder.

Gorg. I Will but hold it by the hand.

Inf. That Is a leg o'th boy.

Gorg. This sir, a leg, it shall go with me then.

Inf. There, there it is, head and yellow curled locks,
His eyes are full of tears, now they do stare,
To see where all his other members lie.

Gorg. So I have all his quarters, I Will presently, sir, get poles for 'em, and
hang 'em upon the Gates in their postures for you.

Exit.
Inf. But she and Jason are both slipped, and Argos is
Sailing home to Greece, see how the waves
Do toss the Vessel, and the winds conspire
To dash it against a Rock, it rides upon
A watery mountain, and is hid in clouds,
It cannot stay there, now, now, it tumbles,
Three fatham beneath Hell, let 'em go,
Here comes the Father of Medea now,
Calling in vain unto the gods, and spies
His Sons limbs thrown about, in stead of flowers,
To his Daughters nuptials he does take 'em up,
He knows the face, and now he tears his hair,
And raues, and cries Medea, poor old man,
Command a funeral pile for thy young Child,
And lay the pretty limbs on, from whose ashes
Shall have another Son in the shape of Phoenix.
Shall I? excellent! Prepare a fire
All of sweet wood for my sweet boy, a fire, a fire.
Exit.
Actus tertius, Scena prima.
Enter Rufaldo. Ruf. It Is now early day: fie, what a long night has this
been? the Sun went drunk to bed the last night, and could not see to rise
this morning: I could hardly wink, I am sure, love kept me waking, and the
expectation of this my wedding day did so caper in my brains, I thought of
nothing but dancing the shaking of the sheets with my sweetheart. It is
certain, I am young every body now tells me, so it did appear by Selina's
consenting so soon to love, for when I had but broke the Ice of my affection,
she fell over head and ears in love with me; was ever man so happy as I am? I
do feel, I do feel my years fall off, as the rain from a man that comes
dropping in, I do feel my self every day grow younger and younger still: let
me see, an hundred years hence, if I live to 't, I shall be new out of my
teenes, and running into years of discretion again: Well, I will now to Master
Cornelios, and bid 'em good morrow with a noise of Musicions, and to see the
very talking of music, how my heart leapes and dances, at my wedding already!
I have bespoke the Parson to marry us, and have promised a double fee for
expedition. O now I am so proud of my Joy, my feet do not know what ground
they stand on.

Exit.
Enter Ienkin and Iocarello. Ien. Ienkin has risen very early this mornings,
and been in studies and contemplations, to make ditties and ferses upon her
Mistress beauties and pulchritudes, but the Deuil's sure in these Poetries, they
call it Furies and Raptures, look you, but Ienkins pate is almost mad, and yet
her cannot awle her inventions meet with these Furies and Raptures.


Enter Selina in Shepherds weeds. Sell. Thus far I have past without
discovery: the morning is auspicious to my flight. Selina, what an alteration
has a day made in thee, that to prevent thy so desired marriage, thou art thus
lost in a masculine habit, and do fly him? thou did so much love aged
Rufaldo, in what a Lethargy were thou fallen, Selina?


Ien. Iocarello, does her not name Selina? it is no very good manners to make
interruptions, her will hear more, look you.


Sell. Whither had reason so withdrawn it self?
I could not make distinction of a man,
From such a heap of age, aches and rheum:
Sure I was mad, and does increase my fury,
To think with what a violence I ran
To embrace such rottenness. O, my guilty soul
Does feel the punishment of the injury
I did to Infortunio of late,
Of whom as I despair, so shall the world,
Ever to know again hapless Selina.
This is the morn the sacred Rites should tie
Me to Rufaldo, ripe in expectation,
But like Ixion he shall graspe a Cloud,
My empty clothes at home, Selina thus
Is turned a Shepherd, and will try her fortune;
Hard by the Shepherds have their shady dwellings,
There let Selina end her hapless days,
Father and all farewell. Thus as Felice
My other Sister, I Will wear out my life,
Far from your knowledge: sacred love commands
Revenge and justice for my cruelty,
And reason now awaked shall lead me to it,
Thus I am safe, I go to find out that,
Will meet me every where, a just sad fate.
Exit.
Ien. Pages, have her seen treames and apparitions: hark you, was Selina
turned Shepherdess, pray you?


Ioc. Either we dream, or this was Selina, your Mistress, that is turned into
breeches, and become a Shepherd; the case is altered.


Ien. What a teuill is in the matters and businesses, pray you? cases never was
known such cases and alterations in awle her life, woman's never wear preeches
in Wales, it is not possible, we are awle in treames and visions, very treames
and visions.


Ioc. Sure we are awle awaked, sir, and it was Selina, did she not say she
would obscure her self from her Fathers knowledge, and live among the
Shepherds hard by?


Ien. It may be, but it is very impossible.


Enter Cornelio, Rufaldo, Antonio, Hillaria. Cor. I am amazed, when was she
seen?


Ant. Not to day, sir, I have searched her Chamber, and almost turned it out
ath' window, but no Selina.


Ruf. It is very strange, is not your man Gorgon come back?


Cor. What should this mean, it is a strange absence, ath' wedding day too.


Ruf. That angers me most, sir.


Cor. My heart misgiues me, some fatal accident upon my life, is happened to her.


Enter a Servant. Ruf. Have thou happy news?


Ser. I have traueiled all the Town over, and can meet no intelligence of her.


Cor. Be dumb, night-Rauen, she is lost, she is lost,
The Fates sure make conspiracy to take
My Daughters from me: one I lost because
I would not give her, and I have repented
Full justice for it, and am I so unhappy
To lose Selina too? but I Will not sleep,
Until I find her either alive or dead.
Rufaldo, you have interest in this sorrow,
Join in the inquisition. Oh my Girl Selina.
Exit.
Ruf. Have I been young for this? if I find her not, I will run, I will run, I
will run mad, mad.

Exit.
Ant. No more, I know where her clothes be: if it take, applaud my invention: I
have coozned my own Father before now, and I will try new conclusions, but I
must have thy assistance and secrecy: if my Sister have a conceit of mirth to
put upon us, I may chance put her to prove her self Selina, or remove her with
a Habeas corpus.


Exeunt Antonio, Hillaria. Ien. Iocarelloes, awle is true, Selina is gone in
Shepherds vestiments to the woods and Forests, but her will make travels and
ambulations after her: never was Sentilman in the hole world love as Ienkin now,
to make iourneyes and peregrinations for a woman's, look you: but if her find
her, as know her very well, her will there make awle sure works and
performances, warrant you Pages, here is moneys, pray you make provisions of
breads and victuals too, know vds are very bare places, and Shenkin was always
have cud stomachs and appetites, look you, pray you, do, pray you, do.


Exeunt. COMPLEMENT-SCHOOLE. Enter Gasparo habited punctually, Master of the
School, and Gorgon his Usher. Gasp. Be the hangings up, Curculio, and all the
Chaires and Stools put into method? the day is old, me thinks, time runs
fast, me thinks, upon the minute, brings my disciples. Do my bills of
complement still relish, Curculio, do they please the pallat, ha?


Gorg. My most ingenious and noble Criticotaster, bravely bills, pills you should
say, not faced, but lined, with gold they swallow 'em greedily, and still
flock to 'em, and conglomerate my son and heir of the Muses: a proclamation
is as quiet as the poor man's box, no man looks after it, not a Balladmonger
has any audience: but happy is the man that rides first poast to your papers
and cries admirable: your old men look upon 'em with their spectacles, as they
would eye an obligation within a minute of forfeyture.


Gasp. Thou have eaten up the furies already, and speak all buskins, but
close walk in the clouds, yet I have not heard of any Mountebanke of wit
durst ever attempt to set up shop ath' trade yet: but whist, Usher, take your
place.


Enter Bubulcus. Gorg. Foot, it is Bubulcus.


Bub. This is the Complement-Schoole.


He dances. Gorg. Three cuts and a half, hey. I give you, sir, generous
salutation, and wish a fair morn descend upon you: thrice Noble Spirit,
welcome, does your worship desire to be sprinkled with the drops of Hellicon,
to gather the Pippins of Pernassus, and have your forehead fillited with
Apollinean Bays, or Laurel?


Bub. Troth, sir, I do not know how to conster what you say, although I know
it be Latin, sir: the cause of my coming to you, is to let you understand,
that here is a Complement-Schoole, and I have great desire to be taught some of
your figaries, and brave words, I do mean to pay for it soundly too, sir: I
thank my stars, as they say, I have ready money about me.


Gorg. You shall be verberated, and reuerberated, my exact piece of stollidity:
please you draw near, there is the star of Eloquence, under whom I am an
Hypodidascall, in English, his Usher.


Bub. A Gentleman Usher at least.


Gorg. Approach without fear: here is a Pupil, sir, desires to suck the honey
of your eloquence, he is a Gentleman in Foli^.


Gasp. Your accession is grateful, my most gentile lump of insipience: what
complement does arride the palate of your generosity?


Bub. What says he pray, in English?


Gorg. He asks what kind of verbosity you would be practiced in? because I
perceive you are raw, I will descend to your capacity, he asks what complement
you would learn?


Bub. Why look you, sir, I would have two kinds of complements: for, sir, I
am in love, and I am in hate.


Gasp. How? in love, and hate too?


Bub. Yes, I am in love with a Wench, and would have a delicate speech for her,
and I am in hate with a Gentleman, a young Animal, and I would kill him now
without danger of the Law: to tell you true, he did abuse me in the presence
of my sweetheart, and did (saving this good company) kiss my backside.


Gorg. How?


Bub. But it was with his foot, sir: now in regard I have not the heart to
kill him with my sword, I would cut him in pieces, and murder him with
mouth-guns: look you, sir, here is money, please your self: but I pray you
give me a powdring speech, for I would blow him up: I beseech you, if ever you
put gall into your Ink, make it a bitter speech.


Gasp. Sir, I will draw you a sublime speech shall conjure him.


Bub. Pray do, for he has a great spirit in him.


Gasp. Usher, in the mean time entertain him with some copy of amarous
complement.


Gorg. There is an Vshers fee belongs to my place.


Bub. Here Is gold for your fee, I received it for good fee simple, I am sure.


Gorg. Simple, I am sure: so, sir, look you, I should teach
you to make a leg first, but these postures anon.
Resplendent Mistress, for thy face does far
Excel all other, like a blazing Star
We mortals wonder at, vouchsafe to cast
Out of those sparkling Diamond eyes thou have,
A sacred Influence on thy vowed creature,
That is confounded with thy form and feature.

Bub. Admirable!


Gorg. Goddess of Cyprus.


Bub. Stay, I do not like that word Cypres, for she will think I mean to make
Hatbands on her, cannot you call her Taffata Goddess, or if you go to stuff,
cloth a Gold were richer.


Gorg. Oh, there is a conceit, Cyprus is the emblem of morning, and here by
Cyprus you declare how much you pine and mourn after her, sir.


Bub. Very good, pray you go on.


Gorg. Goddess of Cyprus, Venus is a slut.


Bub. Stay, who do I call slut now? the Goddess of Cyprus, Venus, or my Love?


Gorg. You do tell the Goddess, that Venus is a slut.


Bub. I do so.


Gor. For thou art Venus fair, and she is not.


Bub. How is she Venus fair, when then I call her slut to her face?


Gorg. No, sir, your Love is Venus fair, and she is not:
That makes plain the other, that she is a slut.
O that I were a flea upon thy lip,
There would I suck for ever, and not skip.

Bub. Suck?

Gorg. That is, you would not bite her by the lip.
Or if thou think I there too high am plast,
I Will be content to suck below thy waste.

Bub. Which side she please.

Gorg. Thy foot I Would willing kiss, but that I know,
Thou would not have thy servant stoop so low.
She will give you leave to kiss higher.
Oh speak thou, wilt be mine? and I will be
The truest Worm e're trod on shoo to thee.

Bub. Worm?


Gorg. By Worm you do insinuate and wriggle your self into your affection,
and she by shoo will conceive your desire the length of her foot: how do you
like it, sir?


Bub. I would not for forty pounds but I had come to complement: why, I shall
be able in a small time to put down a reasonable Gentlewoman.


Gorg. Oh, any ordinary Lady, you must get it without Book. Now to make your
legs.


Bub. I have two made to my hands.


Gor. Oh, by no means, your legs are made to your feet.


Enter Delia. Gasp. Beauty and graces dwell upon the face
Of my disciple Delia.

Del. Muses inspire you: what, at study?

Gasp. Negotiating a little with the Muses.

Gorg. See me salute her.
As many happinesses wait on Delia,
As beams shoot from the Sun this pleasant morn.

Del. As many thanks requite you, as that Sun
Is old in minutes since the day begun.

Bub. What Is she, Curculio?


Gorg. Her Mistresses best moveable, a Chamber-maide.


Bub. She is an early riser: at School so soon?


Gorg. She is an early riser, and yet sometime as soon down as up, she cannot
be quiet for the Seruingmen, it is her hour between eight a clock and her
Mistress rising, to come to discipline.


Bub. It Is a pretty smug Wench, is her name Delia? she has a pretty name too.


Gorg. Oh, sir, all her credit is in her good name: it was Diana's the Goddess
of chastity, and therefore when she marries, she may cuckold her Husband by a
privilege, for Diana gave horns to Actaeon.


Enter a Seruingman. Ser. Where Is Master Criticotaster?


Gasp. Who Is that?


Ser. Sir, my Master has sent you a little gold, he desires you send him the
speech he should speak at Sessions in the Country, he is now riding down.


Gasp. Sir Valentine Wantbraine, that has never a Clarke?


Ser. The same, Sir.


Gasp. Newly put into Commission for the peace, being puisne, it falls to him to
give the charge. I have drawn it, let me see in Comitatu, etc. here, read it,
Curculio, he may the better instruct his Master, a touch, a touch.


Gorg. Good men of the Jury for this Session, I will not implicate you with
ambages and circumstances, I am unwilling to confound your little wits with
affected divisions of my narration, into quis, quid, quomodo, and quandoes: I
will neither utter by gross, nor part my speech into a doozen of long points,
knotted often in the middle, and vntagd in the end; your are to present
Malefactors, whereof you are the chief -- Reformers, and seeing you stand
ready for your charge, I will give fire to this great piece of service, and
send you all off with a powder, that in any case we may go to dinner betimes,
etc.


Gasp. So, it is enough: bear my respects to your Master, tell him it is a
speech will do him credit, bid him learn it perfectly without Book.


Gorg. And do you hear, if he chance to be at a nonplus, he may help
himself with his beard and handkercher, or it will be a good posture for his
hand now and then to be fumbling with his bandstrings. Farewell.


Exit Servant. Enter Mistress Medulla. Gasp. Mistress Medulla, the Sun of honor
shine upon your hopes, till it sublime you to a Ladyship: I will attend you
presently.


Med. Sir, bid your fellow make ready the Caroch, and attend me here about an
hour hence, I will ride home.


Bub. What Gentlewoman is that?


Gor. An old Country Gentlewoman, that has buried her Husband lately, and
comes up to be a Lady, for she swears she will not marry any more Gentlemen:
she is fallen out with a Justice of Peaces wife in the Country, and she will
have a Knight, though she pay for his Horse-hier, to spite her neighbors.


Gasp. A word with you, sir.


Bub. Your friend and Master Bubulcus. Ha you done, sir?


Gasp. The Cupidinaean fires burn in my breast,
And like the Oven Etna, I am full
Of Squibs and Crackers.

Bub. This will powder him.


Gorg. Lady, wounded by your beauty, I will acknowledge mercy if you kill me
not, yet rather murder me, then vulnerate still your creature, unless you
mean to medicine where you have hurt, and I implore no better remedy then I
may derive from the instrument wherewith you pierced me, like Achilles Spear,
your eye having shot lightning into my breast, has power with a smile to fetch
out the consuming fire, and yet leave my heart inflamed.


Del. Sir, although where I am not guilty of offense, I might deny justly, to
descend to a satisfaction: yet rather then I would be counted a murderer, I
would study to preserve so sweet a model as your self; and since you desire
my eye which enflamed you, should with the virtue of a gracious smile make you
happy in your fire, it shall shine as you would have it, and disclaim that
beam shall shine upon another object.


Gorg. So, very well, this is your cunning lesson.

Knock within. Gasp. Some strangers, Curoutio.

Gorg. Sir, the Country comes in upon us.

Enter an Old Man with his Son. Old. Is not here a Complement-Schoole?

Gasp. A School of generous education, sir.

Old. I have brought my Son to be a Scholar, I do mean to make him a
Courtier, I have an offer of five or six Offices for my money, and I would
have him first taught to speak.


Bub. He is a great child, cannot he speak yet?


Gasp. In what kind of complement, please you, venerable Sir, to be
edoctrinated? But we will withdraw.


Enter a Gentleman. Gent. Come, for another lesson, my brave Mars,
Now I am fit to quarrel with the Stars,
And catch at Jove.

Bub. What Is he?

Gorg. Orlando Furioso.

Gent. By the blood-staind fauchion of Mauors I will carbonado thee, keep off,
or in my fury I will cut thee into Atoms, and blow thee about the world.


Bub. I hope he does but complement.

Gent. I will out-labour Ioue-borne Hercules,
And in a greater fury ransack Hell:
Tear from the Sisters their contorted curles,
And wrack the Destinies on Ixions Wheel,
Brain Proserpine with Sisiphs rolling stone,
And in a brazen Caldron choakt with Lead,
Boil Minos, Eacus, and Radamant,
Throw Pluto headlong into moorish Fennes,
And sooty Regions.
Dam up Cocitus with tormented soul,
And batter down the brazen gates of Hell,
Make the Infernal three-chapt Band-dog rore.
Cram Tantalus with Apples, lash the Fiends
With Whips of Snakes, and poisoned Scorpions,
Snatch chained Prometheus from the Vultures maw,
And feed him with her liver, make old Charon
Waft back again the souls, or buffet him
With his own Oars to death.

Gorg. So, so, it is well, you shall take forth a new lesson, sit down and
breathe.


Bub. 'Twas a deuillish good speech.

Enter a Justice of Peaces Clerk, Ingeniolo. Ing. Oh, why did nature make thee
fair and cruel?

Bub. What spruce fellow's this?

Gor. He is an hundred and fifty pounds a yard in potentia, a Yeomans son,
and Justice of Peaces Clarke, he is in love with a Farmers daughter, and thus
he speaks his passion in blanke Verse.


Inge. Thou art some Goddess, that to amaze the earth
With thy celestial presence, has put on
The habit of a mortal, gods sometimes
Would visit Country houses, and guild ore
A sublunary habitation
With glory of their presence, and make heaven
Descend into an Hermitage: Sure thy father
Was Maias son, disguised in Shepherds weeds,
And thou do come from Jove, no marvel then
We Swains do wonder at thee, and adore,
Venus her self the Queen of Cytheron,
When she is riding through the milky way,
Drawn with white Doves, is but a blowze, and must,
When thou appearest, leave her Bird-drawne Coach,
And give the reins to thee, and trudge afoot
Along the heavenly plains, paued with stars,
In duty of thy excellence, while the gods
Looking amazed from their cristall windows,
Wonder what new-come Deity does call
Them to thy adoration.

Bub. O, heavenly Farmers daughter!

Gor. I Will call him in; Ingeniolo!

Cla. Your servant, sir. Lady, I kiss your hand, and reverence the antiquity
of your vestment, Delia. Fortune let fall her riches on thy head, that thou
may fill thy apron. I am your humble obseruicer, and wish you all cumulations
of prosperity.


Bub. Sir, I desire to suck below yor waste.


Cla. I do euaculate my self to be your shadows, my generous condisciples.


Gor. This is Scholler-like.

Bub. He Is one of the head form, I warrant.

Enter Gasparo, the old man and his son. Gasp. Sir, I receive your son, and
will wind up his ingeny, fear it not, but first he must be under my Usher, who
must teach him the postures of his body, how to make legs and cringes, and then
he shall be advanced to a higher Class. Curculio, lick him with your method
into some proportion, take off the roughness of his behavior, and then give
him the principles of salutation.


Old. Law you there, boy, he will teach you the principles of saltation. Well,
good morrow, sir, I Will leave my Jewel.


Gor. Your Jewel may have the grace to be hanged one day.


Enter Ienkin. Exit old man. Ien. Bless you Sentlemen awle, and your studies
and contemplations: is here a School of Complements, pray you?


Gasp. A place of generous breeding.


Ien. Generous preeding, hark you, her name was Ienkin, a good Sentleman, it is
known, her take no pleasures and delectations in vrds and phrases of
Rhetricks; Welsemen have awle hearts and fidelities, mark you, her was going
along pout creat business, but casting her eyes and visions upon your Pills and
significations of your skils and professions, look you, her come in, to see
the fashions and manners of your exercises, and yet if your vrships has any
Madrigals and Pastoral Canticles, look you, for in truths and verities was
going now to the Vds and Forests, and mean to turn Shepherds goddillings,
her will give you good payments of awle your inventions, and Muses, pray you
now.


Gasp. Amorous Pastorals? I can furnish you, venerable sir.

Turn, Amarilsis, to thy Swane,
Thy Damon calls thee back again,
Here is a pretty Arbor by,
Where Apollo cannot pry,
Here let us sit, and while I play
Sing to my Pipe a Roundelay.
How like you it, sir?


Ien. Roundelayes very good, here is moneys and considerations, look you.


Gor. We acknowledge your bounty, my Tenth-worthy.

Gasp. So Mistress, I have trespassed on your patience, now I will take occasion
by the fore-locke. You can say your lecture: have you your hand-kercher ready,
that when a Suitor comes, you may put him off with wiping your eyes, as if
tears stood in 'em ever since your husband was buried; well, suppose I have
had access to your chamber, I begin, Lady, think it not strange, if Love
which is active in my bosom, force me to turn petitioner, that I may be
reckened amongst your servants; all my ambition, sweetest, is to be made happy
in your affection, which I will study to deserve in my utmost possibilities.


Med. Alas, alas, I had a husband.


Gasp. Very well counterfeited, nay weep not, those eyes were made to shine,
not waste with dew: if it be for the remembrance of him you have lost, recover
him again, by placing your good opinion on a man shall sweat to do you
services.


Med. It does not, sir, become our modesty
To talk of love so soon, you will renew
My passion for his loss, and draw down tears
Afresh upon his Hearse: you do not well
TO oppress a widow thus, I pray, sir, leave me,
At least I will enjoin you, if you stay,
To speak no more of love, it is unwelcome.
What, am I perfect?

Gasp. So 'twas very well, at the next lesson you shall learn to be more
cunning.


Gor. Wilt please you hear the Nouice?


Gasp. Good boy, speak out.


Offe. God save you, sir, felicities be accumulated upon you, sir, I thank you
generous sir, you oblige me to be your servant, sir, in all my -- p -- o -- s
-- possibility, sir, I honor your remembrance, sir, and shall be proud to
do you my observance, sir, most noble sir.


Gasp. Very hopeful now: a repetition all together, the more, the merrier.


They all rehearse at once. Enter Infortunio. Infor. What, at Barley-breake?
which couple are in hell? are not you Hellen, whose insatiate lust ruined fair
Illium? and you sir Paris with a golden nose? hark you, Rufaldo is married to
Selina.


Bub. Who? that is my father in Law.


Infor. How, your father? look, he has cloven feet, I am glad I have found
you, what are you in hell for?


Gasp. Insinuate to 'em all for their own safeties, he is desperate mad, bid
none stir hence.


Infor. Hey, how came you all thus damned?

Ien. Damned, who is damned? is Ienkin damned?

Gasp. I beseech you, sir, to maintain the credit of my School, I shall be
undone else, humor him a little.


Ien. Will you have her be damned? when hear you pray' a Welshman was damned?
of all things in the vrld, her cannot abide to be damned.


Gor. See if you can roar him away.

Gent. Keep off, I am Hercules, son of Alcmena,
Compressed by Jove, I Will carbonado thee.

Infor. How, art thou Hercules?
Strikes him down. Lie there, usurper of Alcides name,
Bold Centaure: so he is dead, by this I prove
I am Jove borne.

Ien. Well, for your credits and reputations, her care not to be damned for
companies and fellowships, look you, has he knocked him down? would he had
knocked Ienkin down.


Infor. Now, on with your relations, and tell me all the stories of your
fortunes.

It Is I am Hercules, sent to free you all.
What are you damned for? In this Club behold
All your releasements. What are you?

Gor. Stand in order and be damned.

Gasp. I am the conscience of an Usurer,
Who have been damned these two and twenty years,
For lending money gratis.

Infor. How, a Usurer? why did not
Corrupt the Devil to fetch thy soul away?
Heel take a bribe for lending money gratis.

Gasp. Yes, sir, for thanks: I took no interest,
For at the lending of each hundred pound*
They brought my home some twenty or thirty thanks,
Indeed 'twas paid in gold.

Infor. Oh golden thanks I well, go to, I Will release you,
Upon condition you shall build an Hospital,
And die a beggar. What are you?

Gor. The soul of a Watchman.

Infor. How came you damned? could not you watch the Devil?


Gorg. He took me napping on Midsummer Eve, and I never dream 't on him.


Infor. Your wife had given you Opium over night.


Cor. No sir, I had watched three nights before, and because I would not wink
at two or three drunkards as they went reeling home at twelve a clock at
night, the Devil owed me a spite.


Infor. Well, you shall be prentice to an Alcumist, and watch his Stills
night, by night, not sleep till he get the Philosophers-stone. What are you?


Del. Sir, I am a Chambermaid.


Infor. What are you damned for?


Del. Not for revealing my Mistress secrets, for I kept them better then mine
own, but keeping my maidenhead till it was stale, I am condemned to lead Apes
in hell.


Infor. Alas, poor wench, upon condition you will be wise hereafter, and not
refuse Gentlemen's proffers, learn pride every day, and painting, bestow a
courtesy now and then upon the Apparitor to keep counsel, I release you,
take your Apes, and Monkies away with you, and bestow them on Gentlewomen, and
Ladies, that want plai-fellowes. What are you?


Cle. I am an Vndersheriffe, sir, damned because I told the debtors, writs were
out against 'em, brought 'em to composition without arrests, favored poor men
for a whole year together, was very good in my Office, gave up a just account
at the years end, and broke.


Infor. Oh, miracle! an honest man! thou shall be Churchwarden to a Parish,
draw the (...), and keep the poor men's box for seven years together, it is
pity, but thou the ^ldest have fifty writer, to propagate honest generation.
What are you?


Med. A Justices wife in the the Country, sir.


Infor. And who drew your (...) hither? what are you damned for?


Med. For refusing Satin gowns, and veluer petticots, turning back Capons at
Christinas, and Sessions times, and making much of one of my husbands servants,
merely for his honesty and good service toward me.


Infor. It Is injustice, you shall bury your husband quickly, wear some
blackes a while for fashion sake, and within a month be married to his Clarke,
unless you will be divided among the Seruing-men. What are you?


Old man's son. A younger brother, sir, borne at the latter end of the week,
and waine of the Moon, put into the world to seek my own fortune, got a
great estate of wealth by gaming and wenching, and so purchased unhappily this
state of damnation you see me in.


Infor. Came you in it by purchase? then you do not claim it by yours fathers
interest as an heir: well, I will ease you of the estate, because it is
litigious, and you shall make presently a bargain and sale of it to a
Scriuener, that shall buy it of you, and pay you both his ears down upon the
nail for it. What are you?


Bub. I am a Horse-courser.


Infor. And could not thou out-ride the Devil?


Bub. I had not the grace to mend my pace, I was an honest Horse-courser, and
suffered every fool to ride me, I knew not what belonged to horse-play, let
the world kick at me, I never winch'd, all that I am damnd for, is, that
desiring to thrine in the world, and to have good-lucke to horseflesh, I
ambled to the bed of a Parsons wife that was coltish once, and gave her husband
a Horse for it in good fashion, he nener gave me godamercie for it, indeed it
proved afterward to have the Yellowes.


Infor. There was some color for it: well, since your occupation is foundred,
you shall trot every day afoot, and walk a knave in the Horse-faire. What are
you?


Ien. Her have no mind at all to be damned, becar her will fight with her and
kill awle the Devils in hell: diggon.


Gorg. Sfoot, here is more ado to get one Welshman damned, then a whole Nation.
Sir, it is but in jest.


Ien. In jests, is it in jests? well, look you, her will be contented to be
damned in jests and merriments for you.


Infor. You will tell me what you are damned for?


Ien. And her be so hot, was get some bodies else to be damned for Ienkin, her
will tell her in patiences, look you, her was damned for her valor, and
ridding the vrld of Monsters, look you, Dragons with seven heads, and Serpents
with tails a mile long, pray you.


Infor. Oh, let me embrace thee, worthy in my arms, I Will charm the Destinies
for their bold attempt, for cutting off thy thread, thou shall cut their
throats, and be instald Lord in Elisium, Oh, let me hug thee, Owen Glandower.


Ien. Owen Glandower was her cousin, pray you.


Infor. Go your ways all: stay, take hence Prometheus and bury him, if you
come into hell again, there is no releasement.


Ien. So, farewell Sentlemen, now her mean to make travels and peregrinations,
to the vds and plains, look you, very fast. Good speed to awle.

Exit.
Gorg. We thank thee Iouiall Hercules.


Gasp. Live long thou King of hell. So, so, well done of all sides, here our
School breaks up, I might have run mad like, had I not taken off the edge
of melancholy. Thus poor Gentleman. O Love thou art a madness, Drawing our
souls with joy, to kill with sadness.


Infor. So, so, poor souls, how glad they are of liberty. This is a hot
house, I do scorch and broyle: I Will seek the Elisian fields out, and dye there.


Actus quartus, Scena prima.
Enter Antonio dressed in Selinaes apparel, with Hillaria. Ant. Have I not done
my part, wench, with confidence to proceed thus far with thy father? either I
am infinitely like my sister, or they are all mad with credulity: but our good
fathers are blinded with their passions, and that helps me much: well, I do
but think upon the nights work, there lies my masterpiece, I have it, it is
for thy sake Hillaria, I have assumed this habit, the end will speak it.


Hill. But what will you do? Antonio is lost now.


Ant. Well enough, is supposed to go after Selina, and is not returned yet,
out of my brotherly love, they will imagine I have but taken a journey in quest
of a sister, time enough to return again, and he goes far, that never does
wench by Story. Enter Bubulcus whetting his sword. Here Is Bubulcus.


Bub. Antonio is gone, no news of him: I am glad of that, I hope he will come
no more.


Ant. How now? what means this? what! sword drawn?


Hill. And he is whetting it.


Ant. For heavens sake, what is the matter?


Bub. Nay, nothing, nothing, I do but -- a --


Hill. By my virginity you make me afraid, what is the matter?


Ant. He means to fight with some body on my life.


Hill. Heaven defend it, good sir, tell me.


Bub. Be not afraid, Gentlewomen, for I do but, you see.


Hill. But what?


Bub. Whet my long knife, somebody shall smart for it, but --


Ant. He does mean to challenge somebody.

Hill. I charge you, if you love, tell me who is your enemy.


Bub. Nay, no body, I do not mean to fight, if I live.

Ant. What?

Bub. Nay, nothing, sweet Ladies, be not troubled, I do but sharpen my sword.


Hill. Tell me the truth, why?

Bub. I was eating Oysters the other day, and I had never a knife, and so --


Ant. Come, come, there is some other matter in it, pray tell me.


Bub. Welll, you are my friends, if you chance to hear of any man's death
shortly, then say Bubulens.


Hill. I hope you do not mean to kill any man in the field, you do make me
tremble, I Will assure you.


Bub. No, no, sweetheart, do not tremble, I will but --
He makes a thrust. Lose my honor? I Will be carved first.

Ant. What a Capon's this? pray let me persuade you.

Hill. And me.

Bub. No, no, it is but in vain to persuade me, I Am resolved, if you love me,
do not use any arguments:
The Cupidinaean fires burn in my breast,
And like the Oven Etna I am full
Of squibs and crackers. I had almost forgot --

Hill. The Oven Etna I Will be baked then: what a fury are you in? he looks like
the god of War.


Bub. The god of War? I think I have reason. Hillaria, I must, and I will,
and all the world shall not hold me.


Hill. But you shall not go away thus, till you be calmer.

Bub. O that I were a flea upon his lip,
There would I suck for ever, and not skip.
I will carbonado him, his face does far
Excel all other like a blazing star
We mortals wonder at. Vouchsafe to cast
Off the sparkling diamond eyes thou have:
O let me go on, me thy vowed creature,
That is confounded with thy form and feature.

Ant. Is the fool mad?

Hill. He has something in his head, and it were out: but here comes our Fathers.


Enter Cornelio, Rufaldo. Cor. Antonio not heard of yet?

Ruf. This morning we wanted a Bride too, but she was found, mary I cried for
her first. Father, come, my Brother Antonio is but gone to look his Sister:
ha, my sweet Wench, when shal's to bed.


Enter Gorgon. Cor. I hope it is so, and yet he stays too long. Here Is Gorgon:
Sir, where have you been all this day?


Gorg. Indeed, sir, I have made inquisition, both my tongue and my feet have
walked, but my Mistress is not to be found or heard of, I Will assure you.


Ruf. Gorgon, have lost thy senses? here is Selina.

Gorg. Mistress, then we are all made. -- He capers.

Cor. But sir, your Master Antonio's gone.

Gorg. Gone in wine, sir, for joy of his sisters finding again.

Cor. Go your ways, sir, and either bring me news of him, or look me in
the face no more, you will find we jest not.


Gorg. Pray', sir, let me take my journey in the morning, the wedding night is
fatal: I hope your worship does but jest, I may be drunk too night, and wake
early enough to be gone before day too, I beseech you sir.


Ant. Pray', sir, let him stay to night.


Gorg. By this hand there he is, where? did not I hear his voice?


Cor. Away sir.


Gorg. I have been mad all this while, and now am like to be my own man
again: since there is no remedy, Gentiles all, good night. Gorgon begins to be
a wandering Knight.

Exit.
Cor. I cannot be heartily merry: well, let us leave these two without any more
ceremonies, it is late, all joys be multiplied on my Son and Daughter: good
night, I do comfort my self with hope of Antonio's return, and yet fears
are great.

Exit.
Ruf. Lights there: so, so, welcome thou much expected night, I do salute thy
black brows: come, my Selina, shall find I have young blood: Hillaria, do
service to your Mother, make her unready.


Ant. It Is time enough.

Ruf. And why should we lose any? I pray thee let her come. I know it is your
Virgin modesty, loath to part with a Maidenhead, but it must off: come, prithee
be not idle: why, thou know I married thee, Selina, as thou love me --


Ant. Sir, by that love I must entreat you one thing.

Ruf. Any thing, sweetheart.

Ant. To ratify an ancient vow I made.

Ruf. Any vows, what is it?

Ant. I vowed when ever I married, my husband should not lie with me the first
night.


Ruf. Should any body else?

Ant. Not any man.

Ruf. Come, 'twas a foolish vow, and must be broke. Not lie with me the first
night? 'twere a sin beyond incontinency. I had rather lose half my estate,
then miss thee but an hour out of mine arms this night.


Ant. It Is but one night.

Ruf. Oh, it is an age, a world of time to me: why I have fed of Oister-pyes,
and rumps of Sparrows a whole month, in expectation of the first night, and
leave it for a vow?


Ant. Indeed you must.

Ruf. How? must, come? I know you do but jest, this is but your device to whet
me on, and heighten me, as if old age at once has soakt up all my marrow.
Hark you, how old do ye think I am?


Ant. Some threescore and seventeen.

Ruf. Out upon thy judgment: why I am not above, by all computation, six or
seven and thirty: I am restord, renewd, when first I loved thee, by this hand I
was.


Ant. I see then you would tire me, by this beard you must not lie with me to
night.


Ruf. How? nay then I see you will try my strength: thus I could force you.
Antonio throws him down. She has thrown me down, I know not how to take it,
nor well how to bear it, my bones ache, a pox a Gasparo, a my conscience I am
an old fool: ha? I will see more, and set a good face on it, you know who I am?


Ant. Yes, old Rufaldo.

Ruf. Ha, old? it is so, my spirits faint again: what did you marry for?


Ant. To make an ass of you.

Ruf. How?

Ant. Thou credulous fool,
Did thou imagine I should ever love thee,
Or lie with thee? but when I have a child
Would shame the Father: Oh the power of dotage,
That like an inundation does overcome
The little world of man, drown all his reason,
And leave him spoild, even of his common sense.
Did think I was a piece of stone sawne out
By Caruers art, so cold, so out of soul,
So empty of all fire to warm my blood,
I Would lie with thee, worse then the frigid Zone,
Or Isicles that hang on beard of winter?
Have I with wearied patience looked to see,
When thou would lay violent hands upon thy self;
For being so mad, so impudent to love me,
And would thou bed me too? did thou not tremble
To dare the holy Rites and nuptial Tapers?
Oh impious sacrilege! hence, go waste
Thy self with sorrow, pine that halfe-staru'd body,
Until thy bones break thy skin, and fall
To dust before thy face: nay, you shall endure me:
For since you have tied me to you, I will be
Thy constant Fury, worse then Hags or Nightmare,
If thou do talk of Love, or seek to be
At reconcilement.

Ruf. Selina, sweet Selina, hear me.

Ant. Sweet? oh villainous presumption!

Ruf. What will you do?

Ant. Save a disease, a labor, make an end of you, come sir, swear to
observe what I shall impose upon you.


Ruf. Oh, any thing, bitter Selina.

Ant. First, you shall never solicit me to lie with you.

Ruf. Never by this hand, and thank you too.

Ant. Stand bare in my presence.

Ruf. Starke-naked.

Ant. Run of my arrands.

Ruf. To the worlds end.

Ant. And keep a whore under my nose, nay, I will allow it.

Ruf. If you will have it so, I am content.

Ant. Swear, sir.

Ruf. Flesh, and blood, I do swear.

Ant. So, rise. In hope of your conformity, I forbear to let the punishment be
equal with your deserts.


Ruf. Oh, I have married a Devil, I shall be utterly disgraced, if this be
known: Pray sweet wife, let me beg one request of you, that you would not
discredit me, I will be content to endure your pleasure, do not forsake my
house, I beseech you that you would lie with my daughter.


Ant. Shall you appoint my lodging?

Ruf. Oh no, I do but humbly entreat you will be pleased to lie with my
daughter.


Ant. Well, since you submit so respectively, I will tender your credit in that
point upon your good behavior, are you not well?


Ruf. I am the worse for you by forty marks. One thing more, virtuous wife,
that you would not tell your father, nor any body else, how you have beaten me:
Goodnight, sweet virtuous wife.

Exit.
Ant. Ha, ha, Hillaria, my way to thee is free, I have beat my passage, and I
come to thee.


Enter Felice lika a Shepherdess, Selina, Shepherds. Sell. I had thought the
woods and such wild groves as these,
Had been the house of rapine, and could not
Afford humanity, beasts, and men like them,
Are wont to make such places desolate:
Did Nature make you thus at first, and are
We that have Cities, house, and Civil Laws
More rude then you? or has all virtue chose
You as divine earth to dwell upon?
Shepherdess, indeed I am in love
With your wild Kingdom here, and would not be
A King abroad, if I might be a subject
With such fair Nymphs as you.

1. Shep. Oh son, you would say so,
When our pleasures all you know:
We are not oppressed with care,
With which you in Cities are,
A Shepherd is a King, whose Throne
Is a mossie Mountain, on
Whose top we sit, our crook in hand,
Like a Scepter of command,
Our subjects, sheep grazing below,
Wanton frisking to and fro.

Fell. We nothing fear, awake nor sleep,
But the Woolfe goddild our sheep,
On a Country Quill each plays
Madrigals, and pretty Lays
Of passions, and the force of Love,
And with Ditties heaven move.
Birds will listen to our song,
And to leauy Arbours throng,
To learn our notes, and Mistress name,
Valleys ecchoing with the same.

2. Shep. When we hunt, as there is store
Of Dear, the trembling Hare, and Bore,
You would think that you had seen
Gods in Shepherds weeds again.
A hundred pretty Nymphs apace
Tripping ore the lands, and chase,
As many Lads, the gentle air
Playing with their dangling hair.

Fell. Sometimes we dance a Feary round,
Hand in hand upon the ground,
Shepherds piping, Garlands crowning,
With our harmless bosoms drowning.

1. Shep. Walk unto the silver brook,
You shall need no other hook,
To catch the dancing fish withal,
But a song, or Madrigall.

Fell. When the clouds let fall their showers,
We have at hand a hundred bowres,
Where under Sweet-bryer, safe are we
And honey-dropping Woodbind tree,
Here in spite of storms we tell
Stories of love, of Philomell,
Of Paris, and the Golden ball,
Of Echo, and Narcissus fall.

3. Shep. Here no false-loue brings despair,
Jealousy, or suspicion, care,
Always happy most of all
On Siluanus festival.

Sell. No more, good Shepherds, you undo a boy
With the opinion of his happiness:
If a few Jewels I have brought with me,
May find acceptance here, I shall bestow them
As freely as your loves have fallen on me.
Nay then, I Will force 'em on you, I have left
To purchase a Flock with you.

1. Shep. We thank you, gentle boy, gooden,
We must to our Flocks again.

Sell. But Shepherdess, or sister if thou will,
Oh would thou were, I preethee call me brother,
Has Love a part among you, tell me pray,
What punishment inflict you on false love?
But sure you are exempt from such
A misery: what then
Is her reward, that out of peevishness
Contemnes the honest passion of her Lover,
Insults upon his virtue, and does place
Unworthily her affection?

Fell. Though such a woman need no curse,
Being one her self, or worse,
Yet we Shepherds use to say,
May she love another day,
And not be loved, dye in despair,
And have no other Tomb but air.

Enter Infortunio distracted. Infor. A prey, a prey!
Where did you get that face?
That goddess face? it was Selina's once:
How came you by it? did she on her deathbed
Bequeath her beauty as a legacy,
Not willing it should die, but live and be
A lasting death to Infortunio?
Oh she was cruel, not to bury it with her!
But I am a fool, it is Venus and her Son,
Where be your Bow and Arrows, little Cupid?
Did thou maliciously spend all thy Quiver
Upon my heart, and not reserve one shaft
To make Selina love me? Tell me, Venus,
Why did you use me so? you shall no more
Be Queen of Love. Stay, stay, Cupid was blind,
How comes he now to see? yes, he did see,
He never could have wounded me so right else.
Why then let Fortune have her eyes again,
And all things see how wretched I am made.

Sell. Oh, is there not within the power of Art,
How to restore this Gentleman?

Fell. There is, and out of that experience we
Have in these woods, of simples, I doubt not,
But to apply a remedy.

Sell. He will be worthy of your care herein,
And should he be, which I cannot imagine,
Ungrateful to your skill, I would reward it,
And call you mother, or my sister for it.

Fell. It seems you have some relation to him.

Sell. Indeed he is the dearest friend I had:
And if my blood were powerful to restore him,
I Would spend it like a prodigal. I know Selina.

Inf. Ha, do you know Selina? she is married to Rufaldo,
the old Usurer, that went to bed before to his money, and begat forty in the
hundred: now he beds Selina,
And lays his rude hand over her sacred breast,
Embraces her fair body, now he dares
Kiss her, and suck Ambrosia from her lip.
Those eyes that grace the day, now shine on him,
He her Endimion, she his silver Moon,
The tongue that is able to rock Heaven asleep,
And make the music of the Spheres stand still,
To listen to the happier aires it makes,
And mend their tunes by it: that voice is now
Devoted to his ears, those cheeks, those hands,
Would make gods proud to touch, are by his touch
Profaned ^uery hour: oh, this makes me mad,
But I will fit 'em for it, for I Will die,
It may be then she will weep, and let fall tears
Upon my graue-stone, which shall be of marble,
And hard like her, that if she power out floods,
No drops shall sink through it to soften me,
I will be wrapped in Lead to keep out prayers,
For then I know, she will beg I would be friends:
But then I will be just, and hate her love,
As she did mine, and laugh to see her grieve.

Sell. Come, I will fetch Selina to you, if you will sleep.

Inf. Will you then? I will live, and you shall be my best boy.
Come, I scorn to weep, or shead another tear:
Sit down, I Will have a Garland for my Boy,
Of Phoenix feathers: Flowers are too mean
To sit upon thy temples; in thy face
Are many Gardens, Spring had never such:
The Roses and the Lillies of thy cheeks
Are slips of Paradise, not to be gathered,
But wondered at.

Sell. But you said you would sleep: when slept you last?

Inf. I remember, before I loved, but that I know not when
I slept soundly, and dreamt of gathering Nosegayes.
It Is unlucky to dream of herbs and flowers.

Fell. For Selina's sake I Will try my best skill on him, Get him to sleep, your
presence I see is powerful, yonder is a pleasant Arbor, procure him thither
while I prepare the herbs, whose precious juice may with Heavens blessing make
him well again.


Sell. A thousand blessings on you. Come, sir, go with me, and when you have
slept, I Will fetch Salina to you.


Iuf. Prithee do, I am very drowzy: come, I Will dream of some thing, my eyes
are going to bed, and leaden sleep does draw the curtains over them.


Sell. Will you go with me?

Inf. Yes, and we will pick a dish of Strawberies.

Exeunt. Enter Ienkin, having lost his way. Ien. Has almost lost her self in
these woods and wildernesses, was very weary of these iourneyes and travels in
foote-backs: have not since her commings beheld any reasonable creatures:
bless us awle, Iocarello is loft too, cannot tell where, in these mazes and
labyrinths. Iocarello, so ho.


Echo. So ho.


Ien. Ha, there is some bodies yet, hark you tere, here is a sentilman of
Wales, look you, desires very much to have speeches and confabulations with
you: where is her?


Echo. Here is her.


Ien. Here is her? know not which ways to come to her: pray you tell Ienkin
where you be?


Echo. Boobie.


Ien. Poobies? was her call her poobies? it is very saucy travels, her will
teach her better manners and moralities, if her get her in reaches and
circumferences of her Walsh blades truly.


Echo. You lie.


Ien. How, lies and poobies too? hark you, Ienkin was give you mawles and
knocks, for your poobies, and lies, and indignities, look for your pates now.
Exit with his sword drawn. Enter again. Here is no bodies but bushes and
briars, look you, awle is very quiet: so ho, ho.


Echo. So ho, ho.


Ien. Her am very much deceived, now it comes into our minds if these voices
be not Echoes, Echo.


Ecc. Echo.


Ien. It Is very true, but her marvel much, have her Echoes in these Countries
pray you?


Ecc. Yes pray you.


Ien. Warrant her it is a Welsh Echo, was follow Ienkin in loves out of Wales.


Ecc. Out of Wales.


Ien. It Is very true, bless us awle now, her call to remembrances and
memories, her had communications and talkings with this very Echoes in
Clamorgan-shire, in de valleys and Talles there look you, her am very glad her
has met with Echoes, was borne in her own Countries, hark you, Ienkin was
travel hither out of loves and affections to Selina.


Ecc. Nay.


Ien. Nay, yes very true, pray you tell her, be Selina in these woods, or no?


Ecc. No.


Ien. No, where is her den, have her taken awle these labors and ambulations
in vanities? say you, shall Ienkin then go back as he came?


Ecc. Ass he came.


Ien. Gone? it is not possible, hit may be Selina was turn spirits and be
invisible rather, she is not gone verily.


Ecc. There you lie.


Ien. Lie, very well, you have privileges to give lies and awle things in the
world, but her will not leave these woods for awle dat, her will be Pilgrims
all tayes of her life's, ere her go without her.


Ecc. Go without her.


Ien. How, not love Ienkin? then there is a Devil in awle female sexes: know
very well she promise loves and good wills in times, great while ago, pray you
now, her will talk no longer with you. Fare you well Echo, pray if you meet
her Pages, bid her make hasts and expeditions after her. Fare you well.

Exit.
Ecc. Fare you well.


Enter Gorgon. Gorg. I think Jupiter has snatched up my Master Antonio, to
make a Ganimede on him, he is not to be found yet, I have search 't all the
Tauernes ith Town, I am sure, and that method my nose led me to, hoping he had
been a good fellow, but, non est inuentus, well, my stock is spent, but with
this terrible face a buffe Ierkin, and a roaring basket-hilt, Gorgon will have
a trick of wit to bear his own charges: but here comes a Gentleman, to my
postures now.


Enter Gasparo. Gasp. I am resolved.


Gorg. Good your worship bestow a small piece of silver upon a poor Soldier,
new-come out of the Low Countries, that have been in many hot services,
against the Spaniard, the French, and great Turk. I have been shot seven
times through the body, my eyes blown up with gunpowder, half my skull seard
off with a Canon, and had my throat cut twice in the open field: good your
worship take compassion upon the caterwaking fortunes of a forlorn Gentleman,
that have lost the use of my veins: good your generous nature take compassion
upon me, I have but four fingers and a thumb upon one hand: can work, and
woonnot: one small piece of grateful silver, to for my lodging, I beseech you
venerable sir.


Gasp. Can not see?


Gorg. Only a little glimmering, sir, the beams of your gentility have
radiated, and infused light into my poor lanternes, sir.


Gasp. Can you feel then?


Gorg. Oh, sir, that faculty alone, fortune and nature have left inuiolated.


Gasp. Here Is somewhat for thee.
What, can you see now?

He kickes him, and Gorgon opens his eyes. Gorg. Gasparo, is it you? Pox on
your benevolence.

Gasp. Whence came this project of wit?

Gor. From the old predicament. Faith, necessity that has no Law, put me into
this habit: my Master is turned coward, and ran away from me.


Gasp. And thou art turned Soldier, to fight with him when you meet again: then
thou want a Master? hark sir, what say thou to another project?


Gorg. Oh, I could caper for it.


Gasp. I am now leaving the world, and going into the Country, woot turn
Gypsy, or Shepherd? I am for the woods, can Madrigals yet?


Gorg. Phillis fair, do not disdaeine
The love of Coridon thy Swain.

Gasp. Excellent I we will turn Shepherds presently, thou shall be Phillis, and
I Will be Coridon: let me alone to provide Russets, Crook, and Tarbox: they say
there is good hospitality in the Woods, and Songs and pastimes upon Siluaum day.


Gorg. But that were pretty, shall I be a woman?


Gasp. By any means, thou have a good face already, a little simpering will
do it, I Will accomodate thee early, keep thy own counsel, and I Will warrant thee
for a Maide-marrian.


Gorg. Foot! shall I run into my coats again? go to, put me into what shape
you will, I Will play my part: me thinks I do feel an hundred rural animals
taking up my petticoate already.


Exeunt. Enter Antonio, Bubulcus, and Hillaria. Ant. Pray' forward with your
relation.


Bub. As I was saying, having challenged Antonio for the affront he did me
before Hillaria, here by heaven, you must say nothing.


Hill. Not a syllable.


Bub. He did accept the challenge, and the weapons were soon agreed upon, and
we met: but not a word of fighting, if you love me.


Ant. You are not come to fighting yet your self, but by the way, what were
your weapons?


Bub. A long sword.


Ant. It Was long ere you could remember it, me thinks.


Bub. Soon as we came into the place appointed, we looked about, and saw all
clear.


Hill. As clear as day on your side.


Bub. We drew, but not a word of fighting, by this hand.


Ant. Not by that hand.


Bub. We threw our doublets off, to show we had no Coat of maile, or privy
shirt upon us, against the laws of duelling, in fine, I bid him say his
prayers.


Ant. It Was well thought upon, and what did you?


Bub. I let 'em alone, for I knew I should kill him, and have time enough to
say 'em afterward at my leisure.


Hill. When he had prayed, what then?


Bub. When he had said his prayers, he thought upon it, and let fall words
tending to reconcilement: a my conscience, he would have asked me forgiveness,
but I stood upon my honor, and would fight with him, and so we stood upon our
guard: but not a word of fighting, if you love me.


Ant. Oh, by no means, but when did you fight?


Bub. I Will tell you, Antonio when he saw no remedy, but that I would needs
fight with him, and so consequently kill him, made a desperate blow at my head,
which I warded with my dagger, better then he looked for, and in return, I cut
off his left hand, whereat amazed and fainting, I nimbly seconded it, as you
know I am very nimble, and run my Rapier into his right thigh, two yards.


Hill. Then you were on both sides of him?


Ant. Your Rapier, did you not say your weapons were long swords?


Bub. But mine was both a sword and Rapier, there is it, but not a word of
fighting, as you love me: well, not to weary you with the narration of the
inumerable wounds I gave him, I cut off every joint from his toe upwards, to
his middle, by these hilts, now you may believe me, there ended Antonio my
rival, judge, judge now, whether Bubulcus be valiant or not, but not a word of
sighting, as you love me, let it dye.

Exit.
Ant. It Was very valiantly done.


Hill. Hark you, Sweetheart, do you not remember who this is, that you have
discovered this business too? this is Selina, his own sister.


Bub. What a rogue was I, not to remember that?


Hill. Do not you know that she is my mother in Law? nay, nay, pluck up a good
heart, what will you do? there is no running away.


Bub. Have you never an empty chest?


Hill. What, to hide your self? that I know you would not do for your credit:
draw your sword, and stand upon your guard, we know your are valiant, that
could kill Antonio so bravely.


Bub. Hillaria, if ever you loved me, oh, I have made a fair piece of work,
would you not tell me it was his sister? oh, here they come.


He runs behind Hillaria. Enter Antonio, Rufaldo, and Officers. Ant. He has
confessed it, sir, your Daughter heard it, sir, I charge you lay hands upon that
murderer, he has slain my Brother Antonio.


Ruf. Did you hear him confess it?


Bub. Here Is right, confess and be hanged now.


Hill. I must confess I did.


Ruf. Bubulcus kill Antonio?


Bub. By this hand I do not know how to deny it for my credit.


Ruf. Nay then lay hands on him.


Bub. Yes Father, Rufaldo, Selina, oh, a plague of all coxcombes, what a rogue
was I?


Ant. I will have Justice, away with him.


Bub. I am a lying rascal by this hand.


Ant. We must require Antonio from you, sir, or your blood answer his. Away
with him, Hillaria.


Bub. I Will be hanged then, Father. Hillaria, will you see me hanged?


Ruf. There is no remedy: would thou had killed his Sister; I am plagued with
her, and dare not speak it for shame, I Will do what I can to get a Repriefe for
you; nay, and you kill folks, you must eene take your fortune.


Bub. A curse of all ill fortune, I killed no body.


Ant. Away, I say, out villain, hence, for I
Do hear my brothers blood for justice cry.

Exeunt. Actus quintus, Scena prima.
Enter Infortunio, Selina, and Felice. Infor. I do not know this place, nor
who you are,
Nor know I yet my self.

Sil. Infortunio?

Infor. That name I once did answer to, but then
I was not banished to a wilderness,
Nor slept on such a bed. Oh, if I be
He, whom you call Infortunio.
Tell me how I came hither, do thou weep?
I prithee tell me, boy, why do those tears
Drown thy fair cheeks? but that they will not show
Manly in me, I Would force my eyes to weep too,
And we would sit upon a bank, and play
Drop-teare, till one were bankrout. You amaze me:
I ask how I came hither? answer me
With other language, if you do not mean
I came by water, which you might express too
In words as well, nay, better, for you now
Are cruel to your selves, and murder me:
Tell me, or I shall be mad.

Sell. Oh, stay: that brought Infortunio hither,
You have now told your self, distraction brought you.

Infor. Ha distraction? now you increase my wonder:
Was I mad, or do not you by answering,
Study to make me so? why should I be mad,
Or being so, how came I well again?
For if I dream not, I am well and calm.

Sell. You owe this Shepherdess for your restore,
Whose skill heaven made so happy.

Infor. Did you, fair Shepherdess restore me then,
And by your art recover natures loss?
All my wel-beings yours: but yet if you
Could so Physicion-like cure the disease
Which is but the effect of some distemper,
You then should know the cause: for else you are
Uncertain in your applications.
Pray tell me then, why was I mad?

Sell. This Lad can tell you that, better then I,
But if his sorrow will not let his tongue
Deliver it, I Will tell you sir; you were in love.

Infor. With whom, I pray?


Fell. One whom they call Selina.


Infor. Ha, Selina? in what a depth of black forgetfulness
Is Infortunio fallen into? Selina,
Could I forget Selina? oh Shepherdess,
I was not mad till now: for can I be
My self, and forget her? oh, in this question
I am undone: for I do hold my self
And all my understanding by her name,
I am a beggar, she has purchased all,
Nor am I master of one thought of comfort
I borrow not from her: what curse was fallen
Upon my memory, to forget Selina?

Sell. Sir, you remember her too well, unless
She would deserve it better.

Infor. It is not in her power to deserve, boy,
For she is now beholding for her self
Unto another. Oh, this tears my soul,
You did not well to release me of my furies,
And make me sensible again of that
Was my first corrosiue, it was unfriendly:
Oh, it was a happiness to be mad, stark mad,
For she being lost, what have I else to lose?
I was all hers, I gave my self away:
And deeds of gift should hold.

Sell. Why should you be so passionate? let once reason so late recovered, teach
you love your self, reserved for nobler fortune.


Infor. It is true, I am a very fool in doing so,
And will you be a Mistress then, and teach me
How to forget my self? what say boy?
Shall I be Shepherd too? I will live here
And have thy company, thou art like my Love,
Shall we Shepherdess?

Fell. With all my heart.


Infor. Come let us sit down awhile, nature has spread
Her Carpets for us here, this is the lowest,
And yet it is higher then a Palace: pray
Teach me your Shepherds life, now I do long
To be a wood-man too, and you shall do
A double cure upon me.

Enter Gasparo and Gorgon disguised. Gasp. Stay, yonder are some Shepherds,
lets on this bank sit down and prattle. And how long is it, since your
Sweetheart forsook you?


Gorg. It will be a quarter of a year next grass.


Gasp. Alas, poor Mopsa, but come, put him out of thy mind, sing him away.


Gorg. Laugh, and sing him to his grave shall I?


Gasp. And never love him more.


Gorg. Oh no, his love like a canker has eat such a great hole into my heart,
I cannot forget him, but I Will sing a song of him.


Gorgon sings a song, all this while Gasp. Prithee do.


Gasparo eyes Felice. Infor. Here Is innocence of all sides, who would live
Out of this Commonwealth, where honest Swains
Are Lords and subjects? Here is no acquaintance
With craft and falsehood, all their souls are clad
In true simplicity: I will take a truce
With care a while, to talk with this poor wench.
Mopsa I heard you named, pray tell me,
Were you in love?

Gorg. Yes forsooth.


Infor. With whom, forsooth?


Gorg. With a Gentleman that has proved unkind, forsooth, broken his vows, and
oaths, forsooth, he made much of me, time was, before his father dyed,
forsooth, who was a good Yeoman, then he kissed me, forsooth, and coll'd
surreuerence, but now he scorns Mopsa: I was his equal once, and have danced
with him upon our Church green in a Morris ere now.


Infor. Alas, alas, has forsaken thee?


Gorg. He is now about to commit makrimoniall business with a young girl I
wisse.


Gasp. It Is she. I Will have a trick to know it.
Blessings on you Shepherdess,
Yet by this hand, you are no less,
You were in love with a fair man,
Crossed by a father, began
This Shepherds life, and russet weed,
Is it not the truth, I reed? ha, ha.

Fell. Sir, are you a Fortune Tellers?


Gasp. No, I am fool, and yet I know
Something, though you think not so.

Fell. Do you see all this here?


Gasp. That and more in this table

Lies your story: it is no fable,
Not a line within your hand,
But I easily understand:
Your line of life is fair, hard by
Ascends that of prosperity,
But broken in the midst to the Mount
Of Saturn here, which ill we count,
Ha, Triangle and Mercuriall line?
But Venus is no friend of thine.

Infor. How now, Palmistry? believe him not.


Gasp. In your face your fate is wrote,
You loved a woman, she not you,
You know whether I say true,
Her name began with S. but she,
Shall never be enjoyed by thee,
She Is married now to one that is old,
But very rich: your fortune's told.

Infor. Beshrew me he has cunning.


Sell. Do you believe him sir?


Gorg. Believe him? nay, you may believe him, he is abomination cunning man, he
told me my fortune as right as if he had been in my belly.


Shep. Does thy fortune lie in thy belly then, Sweetheart?


Gorg. Partly, sir, as other women's fortunes do.


Gasp. Damsel, you have yet a fate
Will make you wonder more thereat,
By collection, I dare prove,
That his name, whom you did love,
Began with G. but it is too true,
He has slain himself for you.
Felice faints. Felice, come again, do not believe me, I told thee false, I
did but try to gain a knowledge of thee: thy stars owe thee more
happiness, Felice, look up, see thy friend alive, I am Gasparo. Foot, I ha
made fair work.


Fell. Ha, it is Gasparo.

Gasp. Have I found thee, O wench, thou were unjust,
Too much unjust, thus to absent thy self
From Gasparo, thy cruel father since
Has wept enough to wash away his error.
Fates, I do thank you, for this blessed direction.
But Infortunio, I am sorry now,
I read the truth of thy unhappiness,
It is too true, Selina is beyond
Your sphere of hope, pardon, worthy sir,
The shape I took, was not to mock your fortunes,
But try mine own. And have I found the wench?

Gorg. Oh, no, no, your suite is in vain, hands off, Shepherds.


1. Shep. I will make thee amends and marry, prithee sweet Mopsa, beautiful
Mopsa.


Gorg. Beauty! I do confess I have reasonable beauty, for black and white,
for all other colors are but compounded of them: but the truth is, I cannot so
soon forget my old love; though he has proved false unto me, Mopsa will prove
true unto him: oh, and it were not for shame, now I would die for love.


Sell. Be not dejected, sir, you have a fate
Does smile upon you, I have a little skill.
In that this Gentleman seemed to have some knowledge,
I must needs cross his judgment, and pronounce
You are more happy.
Let not ought your soul annoy,
You that virgin shall emoy,
That you first loved, who does wait
To make your wishes fortunate,
And ere Sun twice declines to West,
You may be with marriage blessed.

Gasp. The boy is mad.

Infor. Do not undo, sweet boy, the benefit
Thou have already done me, thou do utter impossibilities.

Sell. Then with one Argument I can easily
Take off your wonders, look on thy Selina,
That on the wedding morn, forsook Rufaldo,
Touched with a sense of thy indignities,
Thus to obscure me from all curious search
And inquisition, but not hoping ever
To be made thine, now if true love maintain
The opinion you pretend, thus in your arms
I power my self.

Infor. It is Selina. Oh, I am rent in pieces
With joy and wonder.

Gasp. Hark you, sir, do not believe him,
Let not passion make you a mockery.
Is not Selina married to Rufaldo? then am I goose-giblet: I should have bin at
Church with 'em, but for a crotchet that I had in my pate all the morning: I
spoke with her father yesterday, and from his mouth I heard, Selina was very
well, I think I do not dream, indeed now I call to memory, he said Selina
was mist two or three hours ath' wedding morn; some figarie, I know not what:
and Antonio, as I supposed, gone in quest of her, not heard of since: but
Selina is sure Rufaldoes wife, or some Devil in her likeness has abused them
all with credulity. This is true, sir, therefore be not easy, do not deserve
more pity, this boy is mad, a iuggling boy.


Sell. Shall I not be believed then for my self? am I refused now?


Inf. It cannot be she: troth boy, thy conceit took me at first with much
credulity: but here is our natures weakness, apt to credit what we affect:
were there not too much against it, thou might deceive me: oh no, Infortunio
is given up, lost to all felicity.


Sell. Since then you put me, sir, to prove my self, let me not be lost, I will
not call you what I desire, nor name you sister: give me leave to find my
self, I know not where I am yet: my brother Antonio gone? what fury has
assumed Selina's shape?


Gasp. Come, put on a man's spirit, Mopsa.


Gor. Well, sir, in regard you are so Exit cum Inf. and Fell portunate, although
I have forsworn marriage, if you desist constant, you may chance to have a
lick at my Maydenhead.


Exeunt. Sell. I have it, my Bother's lost:
I Will send a shepherd in Antonio's name,
To inuit my Father hither, and that Incubus.
I vow not to forsake these Plains, till I
Possess my self, or be rejected quite,
Suspend thy passions then awhile, Selina,
To morrow is the Shepherds Holiday,
Which they solemnize with rural pleasures,
'Twill draw them sooner: ha, are they gone?
I will not leave 'em, with this thread I shall
Tread over the Labyrinth, and discover all.
Exit.
Enter Cornelio. Cor. Antonio slain? hapless Cornelio,
My hopes were treasured up in him, the staff
And comfort of my age, and is he gone?

Enter Antonio, Hillaria, Rufaldo. Hill. Have sent for Bubulcus?


Ant. I have,
Father, let not too much passion soil that temper
Has been observed in old Cornelio.

Cor. Why, was not he thy Brother? can thou
Thou have so little share in young Antonio,
That thou dare speak of comfort?

Ant. Sir, on my life Antonio is not dead.


Ruf. No, no, it is impossible.


Ant. Bubulcus, on my soul's a very coward,
And durst as well attempt to take a prey
Out of a Tigers jaws, as see a sword
With patience bent against him.

Cor. But cowards in despair prove desperate, and most unhappy.


Ant. A my conscience I could beat him into a mousehole.


Ruf. Nay, I could beat him, and I am sure you can beat me, wooed I were well
rid of you: it is a double misery to be abused, and dare not speak out.


Enter Bubulcus, Officers. Hill. Here Is Bubulcus.


Bub. Not guilty, not guilty, and please your Worships, let me not be hanged
for a lie of mine own making: it is well known I am a stinking coward: not
guilty, I beseech you; I never drew sword in anger in my life: if you hang me,
you undo me for ever.


Ant. Look you, sir, it is clear.


Bub. My conscience is as clear as Crystal: not guilty, my Lord, I beseech
you --


Cor. Did not thou kill Antonio then?


Bub. Let me be hanged if I did.


Cor. Stay, he will confess.


Bub. I confess I told a lie, thinking to have got some credit: but if ever I
saw Antonio, since he gave me two or three kicks, which I deserved well enough,
broyle me ath' coals. Mercy, oh mercy: do not cast me away upon the Hangman
now, in the pride of my youth: not guilty, my Lord.


Cor. Howsoever fear of death possess him so, I see the murder in his eyes.


Bub. My eyes? wooed they were out then: do you see murder in my eyes? are my
eyes blood-shot?


Cor. His very hand does show a guiltiness, look how it trembles.


But. The fear of hanging has put my whole body into palsy: My hands gui^ty?
I can wash my hands clean of it, I never killed a Fly. By this hand, not guilty.


Enter a Shepherd hastily. Shep. Which is Cornelio?


Ant. This: what is the matter? what makes this Shepherd here?


Cor. I am Cornelio: is it with me thou woo'dst?


Shep. If your name Cornelio be,
Contentment and felicity
I bring you: I am sent from one
That does call himself your son,
Young Antonio, who thus low
Would beg your blessing, prays that no
Affliction too much you dismay
For his absence, bad me say,
If you daine suspend your care,
A few hours, and repair
Unto the place of Shepherds by,
To grace their pleasures with your eye,
Antonio will himself declare,
Faithfully what causes were
Of his absence, and requite
These dolours with a fresh delight:
And so farewell. This is all:
Back again I hear them call.
Exit Shepherd.
Cor. Oh stay awhile.


Ant. He Is gone, sir: did I not tell you, Antonio was not dead? but this is
strange.


Cor. Do I not dream?


Ant. Antonio among the Shepherds? if he be there, I am dressed In Faith: By any
means, go sir.


Bub. Is Antonio alive again?


Ruf. Yes verily, alive again, let not the Hangman fright away your wits any
longer.


Bub. I hope I shall choose my own Gallows then. Hillaria, you would not
believe me: did I look as I had killed any body? now I hope you will hold me for
an innocent hereafter.


Cor. Babulcus, pray' let us have your company,
It does concern your freedom. Antonio living?
Rufaldo, let us make a merry day on it,
If it be true. If? I do sin against
Discretion to distrust it. O my stars,
I do acquit you all your injuries,
If you possess me of Antonio.
Never did man to bliss more willing go.

Bub. I am glad I am reprieu'd: come Hillaria.


Ant. 'Twere pretty if Antonio be multiplied: here is tricks indeed, I am
resolved to see what will the end of this confusion be.


Exeunt. Enter Ienkin. Ien. Never was Ienkin in such Wilderness, her have
walked and traveled creat deal of miles in these Woods: but her can find no
end nor euasions, look you: her have read in Histories, and Relations, and
Kernicles, very famous Knights, and praue Sentilmen of valors and shiualries
have been enchaunted, look you, in Castles and very strange dwellings, and
Towers, and solitary places, now was have creat fears and supicions, lest
Ienkin was fallen into some Wisheries and Coniurations, and was inchaunted,
bless us awle in these Deserts and Wildernesses for her valors and
magnanimities.


Enter Iocarello. Ioc. So ho, ho, Master Ienkin.


Ien. It is our Pages again. Iocarello, where have you been? you are very
tilligent Poyes, to lose your Master thus.


Ioc. I was lost my self, had not a Shepherd by chance found me, and carried
me into his house under the ground, where with a great many of Shepheardesses
we sat up all night in making Garlands for some show and pastimes to be done
this day, which they call their Festival: pray', sir, since we have run a
wildgoose chase so long, let us stay one day to see these sports and dancings.


Ien. Sports and dances, say you? take pleasures and delectations in dances?
Very well, Ienkin was know how to dance her self, was pred in awle Sentilmans
qualities, look you, her will make no peregrinations back till awle be done,
and it may be, was shake her legs in capers too, look you now.


Enter Cornelio, Rufaldo, Antonio, Bubulcus, Hillaria. Corn. Master Ienkin, you
are well met in these parts, I perceive you are early this morning, to partake
the pastimes of our Shepherds.


Ien. Good tayes and salutations, and cret deal of felities come to awle your
vrships.


Bub. Sir, my name is Master Bubulcus, and I am as good a Gentleman.


Ien. As who pray you? do you make comparisons?


Bub. I do embrace your familiarities, and remain your truest worm.


Ien. Not too much worms, nor familiarities pray you: ha Pages, here is
Selinaes in her own apparels and vestiments, awle was very true as our
Countrey-woman Echoes was make reports: Selina was gone back again: very well:
Mistress Selina's was very full of joys and exhillarations, to see you in these
places, you know how creatly and ardently Ienkin was taken with your peauties,
and pulchritudes, cret while ago: pray' when did you make returns out of
these woods? Ienkin had knowledge, and saw you in your Shepherd apparels, and
was make ambulations after you hither, out of mere amors and affections as her
was true Sentilman.


Ant. I make return out of these woods? I entered them but now.


Ien. Well, you desire not to have things declared, and puplished, her was
keep awle silences.


Ant. Upon my life you are mistaken quite in this, Master Ienkin.


Ien. Oh, pray you make not Ienkin ridicles, and derisions, look you, shall
hear no more of that matters, call you only to memories you promised loves to
Ienkin, pray you in matrimonies creat while ago.


Ant. I deny not that, sir, but I know not why you have long neglected me, and
I am now married to Rufaldo.


Ien. Rufaldoes? hit is not possible.


Bub. Father, he says it is impossible Selina should be your wife.


Ruf. How, not my wife? I would feign see that.


Ien. Is Selina your wifes in truths and verities pray you?


Ruf. Do you make question? My wife? I think there is some reason, she is my
very dear wife, I will assure you sir.


Cor. He has got a boy by this time.


Ruf. A boy? well, I have got something, a pox a your fingers. How say? is
not something, done Sweetheart?


Ant. Yes, in my conscience something is done.


Ien. Ienkin was never awle his days have such injuries and contumelies put
upon her: was ever Sentilman thus abused? have her made repetitions and
genealogies of her plood, for no matrimonies? Ienkin has peat the pushes, and
Rufaldoes has get the pirds. Hum! her love not to make quarrels and prabbles,
but Ienkin could fight with any podies in the whole vrld, awle weapons, from
the long Pikes to the Welsh-hookes, look you now, no matrimonies? her
Welsh-blood is up, look you.


Cor. Master Bubulcus.


Ien. Master Blew-pottles, have you any stomakes or appetites to have any
plowes or knogs upon your costards, look you?


Bub. No great stomach at this time, sir, I thank you: alas, I have 'em every
day, they are no novelties with me.


Cor. Come, Master Ienkin, I now perceive you loved my daughter, if you had
acquainted me in time, I should not have been unwilling to have called you
son, but since it is too late, let your wisdom check impatience: I know you
are of a noble temper, howsoever passion may a little cloud your virtues, lets
be all friends I pray.


Ien. Here is very cood honest words, yes, look you, Ienkin is in awle amities
and friendships, but --


Cor. Oh, no more shooting at that but: hark, I hear the Shepherds music,
and voice too, lets sit down I pray, Antonio keep thy word.


Music. Enter Shepherds and Shepheardesses with garlands. SONG.
Wood-men Shepherds, come away,
This is Pans great holy day,
Throw off cares,
With your heaven aspiring aires
Help us to sing
While valleys with your Echoes ring.
2
Nymphs that dwell within these groves,
Leave your Arbours, bring your loves,
gather poesies,
Crown your golden hair with Roses,
As you pass
Foot like Fayries on the grass.
3
Joy drown our bowers, Philomell,
Leave of Tereus rape to tell,
Let trees dance,
As they at Thracian Lire did once,
Mountains play,
This is the Shepherds holiday.
Dance. The song ended, Enter a mask of Satyrs etc. and dance. Enter a
Shepherdess with a white rod. 1. Shep. Post hence Satyrs and give way,
For fairer souls to grace the day,
And this presence, whip the air
With new rauishings, hence with care,
By the forelocke hold Time fast,
Lest occasion slip too fast
Away from us, joys here distill.
Pleasures all your bosoms fill.
Exit.
Enter Infortunio, Selina, Gasparo, Felice, Gorgon, Shepherd. They dance. Sell.
Fair Nymph, vouchsafe the honor to dance with me.


Ant. Troth, sir, I cannot dance.


Sell. We know you are Selina.


Infor. Your hand, fairest.


1. Shep. Disdain not, gentle sir.


Ien. Pible pables, with awle her hearts, look you.


Gorg. Noble sir.


Bub. Fair Lady, at your service.


Gasp. I will not change.


Fell. Nor I.


One measure. Cor. Which is Antonio?


Dance. Ruf. It will break out anon.


Sell. You are a thief.


Ant. Ha?


Sell. You have robbed Selina.


Ant. Then I Will make restitution, what are you?


Sell. Antonio.


Ant. The Devil you are! faith, deal honestly with me, and I Will be true to
thee: who art?


Sell. I am Selina by my hopes of heaven.


Ant. Ha, sister then!


Sell. I have no brother but Antonio.


Ant. And I am he. Oh happiness!


Sell. If thou be Antonio, what made thee assume my habit?


Ant. Of that anon. Lives Infortunio?


Sell. He Is here, and with him Gasparo and my sister the lost Felice.


Ant. I am ravished with this wonder.


Sell. Keep your face constant: the Music calls.


Dance. Cor. Ha, what means this?


Ant. Selina.


Fell. Your blessing, sir, we are your children.


Cor. Who Is this?


Sell. I am Selina, sir.


Ant. And I am Antonio.


Cor. Amazement: thou Antonio? he Selina?


Ruf. Ha, how is this, my wife become a man? I confess^ she played the man with
me.


Cor. But who is this?


Fell. I am Felice, sir, your long lost Daughter,
Found out by Gasparo, unto whom my vows
In Heaven were long since sacred, and I beg
Once more he may be mine.

Sell. As I to be possessed
By Infortunio here.

Cor. Stay children, stay: take heed, you do not know
What strength of joy my fainting age can bear:
You fall in too full showers, like swelling Nile
These comforts will exceed the narrow banks
Of my poor frailty: rise, enjoy your wishes,
And my blessings be multiplied upon you. Ha!
Rufaldo, here is Felice my lost Girl,
Take her, take her, Gasparo. Selina,
Art not thou Rufaldo's Wife?

Ant. No, sir, I ventured that, he knows me well,
Hillaria and I were bed fellows, at his request.

Bub. How? Hillaria and you bedfellowes? I Would laugh at that.


Ruf. I am abused, disgraced, undone.


Cor. Nay, Rufaldo.


Bub. Why then, it seems you were Antonio, that I killed so, and you have, as a
man should say, line with Hillaria beforehand.


Ant. I am not behind hand.


Bub. Nay, and you have tickled her before and behind, tickle her all over for
Bubulcus.


Ien. Hark you, is there another Selina's? bless us awle, here is very praue
loue-trickes, look you.


Ruf. Blessing on him: why he has made Stockfish on me, he has beaten away
all my inclination to give my blessing.


Cor. Come, upon recollection, you must make it a bargain: they have, it
seems, bought and sold already, it is past recovery, he shall be worthy of her.


Hill. Sir, that you may with more alacrity let fall your blessings: know, our
bloods are pure, Antonio and your Daughter are as chaste from any sinful act,
as when we were first mantled after birth.


Ruf. Ha, say so?


Ant. 'Twas none of my fault, I am sure.


Ruf. Then my blessings to you: come, you are both my Children.


Bub. How?


Cor. Amen, and mine: Why I am rapt beyond my self with joys. Infortunio,
Fate has effected that I begged of Heaven in many prayers for you, oh my
blisses.


Bub. So, so, I am guld, my house taken over my head?


Gorg. Sir, you know who I am, I am yet walking Terra incognita, I have a great
mind to Bubulcus, you know what I have suffered for him, and so forth.


Gasp. Let me alone, so, so: then pleasures run with a stream upon us, but
if we shall make a full day on it, here is one more to meet with her match, this
poor Virgin has been long in love with Bubulcus: troth, sir, look upon her
at length pitifully complaining: alas good soul, be honest at length: prithee
do, and marry her, you know what has past between you, it is a handsome Wench.


Bub. Vmh, I do remember she was in love with me, and so was twenty more:
what is that to me? Alas, would you have me descend so low?


Gorg. Oh, sir, you sung another song in my Mothers Dairy, when we sat up all
night together, and had a Sack posset.


All. Bub. I do remember such a thing, but what is that? I Will take it upon me.


Gorg. I beseech you, Gentlemen, speak for me, for I will have him, I am
ashamed to show my reasons.


Bub. Very small ones: away you durty queen.


Inf. What, has he got thee with child?


Gorg. More then that, sir.


Fell. Has he had any Bastards?


Gorg. Indeed Mistress, I Will tell you; he has begot thr^ children of my body.


Inf. Fie upon it, no less then three Bastards.


Bub. How? nay, she lies falsely, I got but two, so man^ I will acknowledge,
because they shall not doubt my sufficiency, had I any more then two? speak
you lying whore


Gasp. Sir, I tender your credit, there is but two ways either you must marry
her, or give her a piece of money that is the easiest way, she is poor: for
your reputation --


Bub. What do you think will content the Whore?


Ien. Hark you, best for you, make some satisfactions to this Sentilwoman, or
Senkin was learn you more ho nesties and behauiours toward these vmans,
warrant you Master blew pottles.


Gasp. A matter of twenty or thirty pieces, you can spare them.


Bub. You Strumpet, here is twenty pieces for you: do you hear? keep well the
boys then: but you shall swear, before these Gentlemen, you will never claim
marriage: there, be an honest woman hereafter.


Gorg. Yes, bear witness, Gentlemen, I do accept his wise benevolence, and
will never trouble him with marriage -- while Gorgon lives.


All. Gorgon?


Gorg. Your servant, and your pardons: nay, Gorgon has had his devices and
vagabunduloes as well as the best on ye: give you all joy, I wish you wit, sir.


Bub. I am foold of all sides, was I borne a fool?


All. Ha, ha.


Ien. Stay you, Master double colors, there be more* fools in the business as
your self: well Ienkin, were even best make shurneyes back into her own
Countries, and never put credits or conferences in any woman's in the whole
vrld: they all lie and coozen, and make derisions out awle measures.


Inf. Nay, nay, Gentlemen, let us all toget^^^
We Will drown all discontents this day with (...)*
Let Us take up all our Fates then, and proclaim
This (...) new Festiuals in Hymen's name.

Bub. Stay a little, and I Will along with you. Since I have mist my Wench, I Will
ask these Gentlemen's good wills to a second match, in stead of an Epilogue.


Courteous Spectators, and kind Gentlemen. -- Gor. Why, how now? what, are you
mad? will you speak the Epilogue? though you have played a fool in the Play,
you will not show your self an Ass before all this company. The Epilogue? I
hope I am the wiser ath' two, and the better read in complement.


Judicious Gentlemen -- Ien. Hark you, Master double-colours, and you good^
Gorgons, here is one wiser, Asses you both, to pronounce the Epilogue, warrant
you, and one, that knawes -- to speak in as good English, Gentlemen, now sans
Complement.


Our Loue-^^^kes have been shown, and we attend
To kno^ (...) acceptance crown the end,
The world is full of (...) but it will be
^
To these of (...) contentment dwell
On you we (...) Play (...) well,
Which (...) call, that we might prove
(...) your love.
(...) FINIS.

