AN EXPOSITION OF THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE OF St. Paul to the
PHILIPPIANS:

Also Two Sermons of Christian watchfulness. The first upon Luke 12 37. The
Second upon Revel. 16.15. An Exposition of part of the second Chapter of the
Epistle to the Philipp. A Sermon upon Mal. 4.2.3.


By the late Reverend Divine Richard Sibbes, D.D. Master of Katherine Hall in
Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at Grayes-Inne.

1 TIMOTHY 4.8. But godliness is profitable, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at the Glove
and Lion in Corne-hill, near the Royal Exchange, 1639.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. MAVRICE ABBOT KNIGHT, now Lord Mayor of the
Honorable City of London.
Right Honorable,
MY respects unto you (being your Honors engaged many ways) have put me upon
a design or project for you; the God of Heaven graciously prosper it in my
hand. The tenor of it is briefly this: to increase your honor, and to ease
the burden of that laborious government, which now lies upon your shoulder.

To mention your name before the glorious labor of so great and worthy an
agent in the factorage of Heaven (as the Author of this piece was) and to make
you a Protector of them: cannot (I conceive) in sober interpretation, but be
conceived, to add honor unto him that has, and cause him to have more
abundantly. Blessed is the wing that is spread over any of the things of Jesus
Christ to shelter them.

Again, to put into your hand, and from your hand into your heart, the
remembrance of that God, that will gloriously recompense your faithfulness in
that great trust committed to you, cannot but (by the blessing of him to whom
blessing belongs) be a cordial means to strengthen your heart in the pange
of government, and cause you to travail and bring forth with more ease. There
is no labor, nor travail, nor sorrow, nor difficulty, nor danger, nor death
that has any evil or bitterness in it, when Heaven is before us, and the
truth and faithfulness of the living God embracing us.

If I have miscarried in point of good manners, or otherwise in this Dedication,
your Honor shall do but justice to charge your own courtesy and respects
always showed unto me, (at least in part) with the blame of it. Had not there
been the tempter, doubtless in this case I had not been the transgressour.
The God of peace prosper the government of this great City in your hand; and
make it a glorious rise and advantage unto you of your greater glory in the
Heavens. And your Honor may assure your self that so it shall come to pass,
unless that God that hears prayer shall reject the prayer of,

Your honor to command in the Lord; I. G.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, to discourse the worth or commendations of the Author,
(especially the pens of others having done sacrifice unto him in that kind) I
judge it but an impertinencie: and make no question, but that if I should
exchange thoughts or judgments with thee herein, I should have but mine own
again. The book it self, judiciously interpreted is a volume of his
commendation: and those though from his own mouth, without any touch or
tincture of vanity or self affectation. Lo^uere ut videa?
The best sight of a man is to hear him speak, the tongue being a voluntary
and pleasant rack to the heart, to make it confess its treasure whether it be
good or evil. The diligence and care of those, that have interposed for the
preserving of what came from him in this way from perishing, have made the
Christian world debtors unto them, and great pity it had been, that what he
spoke in public, should have dyed in secret, and not be made seven time^ more
public, then speaking could do. The sparks of such fires as he kindled,
would have been ill quenched, till the world had been further served with the
light and heat of them.

It is true, heaps of books is one of the oppressions of the world, and the
invention of the Press has been the exaltation of weakness and vanity
amongst men as well as of learning and knowledge. Yet know I no way better to
retain the oppressed in this kind, then for men of worth and grown judgments
and learning, to appear in books also among the multitude. The time was, when
there were (as the Apostle speaks) Gods many, 1 Cor. 8.5.
and Lords many in the world, when the world was pestred with Devils of all
sorts, in stead of Gods: but the only means of discharging the world of them,
was the setting forth and preaching of the one true God, and Lord Jesus Christ:
so the furnishing the world with such books, as are books indeed, that
breathe spirit and life, and are strong of heaven, speaking with authority and
power to the consciences of men, is the only way to affamish the multitude of
Idol books, and to have them desolate without a reader. It is (questionless)
with men in respect of books, as it is in respect of men themselves (and
indeed how there should be any difference between men and books I know not,
the book being but the mind of a man, and the mind of a man being the man
himself) Homo homini Deus, Animus ^ujusque is est quisque^.
homo homini Lupus. There are men that are Gods to men, and there are men that
are Wolves to men; and the more men-wolves there are in the world, the more
men-gods there had need to be; otherwise the darkness would overcome the
light, and make the earth as the shadow of death. So there are books that are
laden with divine and true treasure, that will recompense the Reader, his
labor and pains seven fold into his bosom, that will open his mouth and
enlarge his heart to bless God, that has given gifts unto men: Again there
are books also that will deal cruelly and deceitfully with men, consuming
their precious time and opportunities, taking their money for that which is not
bread. Now the more dreamers of dreams there are, there had need be the more
that see visions. The more weak, hungry, loose and empty discourses the world
is overlayed and encumbred with all, the more need it has, by way of a
counter recompense, of a full provision of solid and masculine writings, that
may make men, men; and not always children in understanding.

But I must remember, that prefacing Authors with long Epistles is no
employment of any sovereigne necessity. Therefore I will no longer separate
between thee, and that which I desire to recommend unto thee more then any
thing of mine own. The blessing of him that gives the increase be upon the
labor of him that planted and watered much in the courts of the house of his
God; that though he be dead, he may yet speak to the edification of thine
and of many souls.

Thine with a single heart and multiplied affections in the Lord. I.G.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE THIRD Chapter of the Epistle of St. Paul to the
Philippians.
PHILIP. 3.1. Finally my Brethren, rejoice in the Lord.


THIS Chapter contains a general Exhortation to several duties: In this Verse
you have the manner of doing them, all must be done in rejoicing. From thence
he proceeds to back other particular Exhortations, with reasons and examples
of himself, which we will speak of particularly when we come at them. Now in
this Verse I will speak first of the Compellation, Brethren: then of the
Exhortation, Rejoice: and lastly of the Limitation, In the Lord.

The Appellation.
[ Brethren.] By this loving Compellation he labors to enter into their hearts
and affections; well knowing, That exhortations are of the more force, being
directed to those that are persuaded of the good affection of the speaker. If
exhortation comes from the pride of a man, the pride of man in the hearers will
beat it back, and give no entertainment thereunto.

But why are Christians Brethren?

First, they have the same beginning of life from the same Father: as also they
have the same common Brother, that is, Christ. They have the same womb, the
Church; the same food, the Word of God. They have the same promises: they are
all heirs, all borne to an Inheritance. Furthermore, the word Brother is a
word of equality and of dignitiy: of equality, though in personal Callings one
is superior to other, yet this takes not away the common Brotherhood. This
should fill up the valleys of men's hearts dejected here, in regard of their
mean estates; as also pull down the mountains of the proud hearts of men,
lifted up through these outward things. Kings must not lift up themselves in
disdain of others, because all these personal respects end in death, we carry
them not to Heaven; and in those respects that we agree in here, as in Grace
and Goodness, we shall continue united for ever. And yet must we honor such
as are in eminency, and acknowledge them as men worthy of all respect, and
give them dignity according to their places.

But further, this is a name of Dignity, it argues that we are not basely
borne, that we are sons of God, and heirs of Heaven: Christ after his
resurrection, the first term he gives his Disciples, tell my Brethren (says
he) I go to my Father and their Father. This word is also a word of love, and
therewith the Apostle insinuates the affections of the Philippians. Examine
therefore thy affections toward the sons of God. If we love and respect them
as our own Brethren, good is our estate: if we hate them, our estate cannot be
good.

And in the second place, Let not this word be appropriated to some, and not to
others, which are notwithstanding of the same number. For one brother cannot
make another no brother: for it is one and the same Father that makes Brethren.
So long therefore as thou see any thing of Christ in any, break not off thy
affection, and disdain not the name of brother to such: for where the spirit
is, it works in us a resemblance of God; and where it stamps his Image, it
makes them Brethren.

[ Rejoice. Exhortation.
] It is not only an affection, but a duty that we are enjoined. Wherein first
observe,

Isa. 40. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people; and Christ came to bind up the
broken in heart, and the Ministers sent to show men their unrighteousness.
Job. 33.23. The spirit that is in such is the spirit of joy: and therefore joy
is reckoned as a fruit of the spirit Gal. 5.22.

And why should not Christians rejoice? they are free from the spiritual
Egypt, from greatest miseries. Nay why should not we sing as the Israelites did
after their deliverance? our enemies, and deliverance, is far greater than
theirs. And we have the greatest prerogatives; we have here an assured hope of
eternal perfect happiness hereafter, we have peace with God. Romans 5.1. We
have free access in all our wants to the throne of grace, and we have a God
ready to hear all our prayers, and to help us; we have many gift, already
received, Christ is already given us, we are in a state of regeneration; and
for the time to come, we have promises from God, the God of truth, that
nothing shall separate us from Christ: surely these are great causes of joy in
us: and having such things as these, we dishonor them, the giver of them, and
our selves, and our profession, if we rejoice not in them.

only to Christians to rejoice. Others have neither cause of joy, nor
commandment to rejoice: the Ministers and Prophets are bidden to bid such
howl and lament, to show them their miserable estate. And indeed what ground
can a condemned person have of joy? for the wicked, till they have remission of
sins, they are in a damned estate, and though they will snatch this to
themselves, and say that they are sure to be saved, yet is salvation not their
portion. They joy indeed, but it is in sin; in seeing, or doing evil to
others. Or if sometimes they joy in the Gospel, (for a wicked man may do so)
it is but a forced joy: and much like hot waters to a cold fit of an Ague, it
brings heat, and expulses cold for the present, but it burns them after. So
this joy seems to comfort them now, but when trial comes it fails him, and
makes him more disconsolate to see himself thus beguiled. Fitter it were for
such to be first humbled, and brought to the sight of their estate, than to
administer comfort to them, to speak peace where none belongs is to undo men.
It is the broken that must be healed, and the weary that must come to Christ.

3 In the third place observe, Limitation.
The limitation of this joy; it must be in the Lord; That is, in Christ, who in
the new Testament is often called Lord, and he is our Lord: First by gift, God
has given us all to Christ. Secondly, by Conquest, he has gotten victory of
Satan. And thirdly by marriage. And therefore we may well call him Lord, and
rejoice in him, because he is our Lord: for by him we come to conquer all our
enemies, by him we have peace, Romans 5. he makes us Kings and Priests, and
brings us to heaven.

Now for the practice of this duty of rejoicing in the Lord, that we may be
encouraged, let us consider how it is a means not only of adherence to God,
but also of obedience to his Laws.

1 Joy, if it be sound, knits us firm to God, so as we rest contented in him
as our only and sufficient joy, seeking for no other joy in any other thing. To
us Christ is made all in all; That we should solace our selves in his fullness,
which if we truly do, we will count all other things as despised, assuring
our selves, they cannot minister, or add, any jote of sound comfort at all,
and therefore will not endure any thought of mixture of other things with
Christ, thereby to make him more sufficient and complete for our joy to rest
on.

Obedience to his laws: for joy stirs up cheerfulness to every duty, and
makes all duties acceptable to God and man: for the want hereof many are dead,
and dull in good duties; and where a large portion of this joy is, it will
remove all lets and delays to duty. It does not only enable us to, but in
duty. Cain no doubt came cheerfully to a good duty, to sacrifice: but for want
of this cheerful, and joyful spirit, what was his behavior in the
performance thereof? His countenance was cast down: this God espies suddenly,
and so he does in all our dull performances: for he looks things should be
done cheerfully, and reason too, for he has left us a treasure of excellent
promises to encourage us. We see it in men, they love when a thing is done
cheerfully, they know it betokens love in the party that does it: and can we
then think it strange that God requires it. Again, if we can fashion our
selves to this duty, God has promised to increase our joy more abundantly:
And he performed it to Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 29. end. He will give delight as a
reward to him that delights in his work. And therefore we ought to labor to
bring our selves to this duty; to the obtaining of which, observe these
directions.

First, Means to get Joy.
consider, that joy comes from Faith. For it is the sense of our reconciliation
with Christ, that makes us rejoice, Rom 5. and 1 Pet. 1.6. Now therefore
whatsoever strengthens Faith, strengthens also our joy; and contrarily what
weakens the one, must of necessity weaken the other. Furthermore, joy comes
from peace. Whatsoever therefore disturbs our peace, must needs disturb our
joy. Therefore Satan to despoile us of our joy, he spoils our faith through
our sins, and by them he weakens our hope and our comfort. What is to be done
then? Surely repair to the fountain of health, the well of joy, the Word of
God, Isa. 12.3. And from thence must we draw all our comfort. Use therefore the
ordinances of God, but use them as in the Lord, in obedience to his
commandment, and expect the issue with patience. Many there are that use the
means, but take no joy at all in them: why? they do it not as in obedience to
Gods command, but they rest in the deed done, and they think God is bound to
give them joy: God justly denies such that which they presume of.

In the second place; Pray that your joy may be full. See this in most of
David's Psalms, at the first he complains for the want of Gods presence of
Gods wrath and anger, but comes off with a large portion of comfort* Depart
from me ye wicked, for the Lord has heard my prayer, Psalm. 6. In the use of
all means therefore join prayer: pray for faith, for hope, and such graces as
may bring joy. Though at first thou find thy self to be cold, to have
little or no comfort at all, yet give not over, thou shall at length find
plenty thereof. Remember the woman of Canaan: at the first despised and called
dog, but what did her constancy gain? A gracious answer, O woman, great is
thy faith, be it to thee as thou desire.

In the third place; Remember former times as David did, Psalm. 77.6. he was so
oppressed, his sore ran in the night, and ceased not, (as he says.) But
then, I remembered the days of old, etc. Consider thou also in thy deepest
affliction, times were once when thou had the clear, and comfortable light
of Gods spirit present with thee: he will not leave thee, his nature is
unchangeable, etc.

In the fourth place: Have society with the Saints, and keep company with
those that are good, and as the two Disciples hearts did burn when they talked
with Christ; so verily thou shall find this heat of comfort, by little and
little to increase: For God blesses the communion of Saints, and such as are
discerning Christians, can tell us more, and opportunely bring things to mind
which thou thy self remembrest not, and can inform our judgments when they
are blinded with grief and melancholy. Use therefore the company of the good,
when thou find doubts arise, and make thy griefs known to some wise and
judicious Christian, for the devil is too strong for any one alone, he will
prevail against thee, thou will be too weak too wrestle with him hand to
hand. It is no wonder therefore that Melancholy persons are so destitute of
comfort.

Q. It will be asked: May we not rejoice in friends society, deliverance from
dangers, and the like good things of this world?

A. I answer yes: and yet joy in the Lord also, for when as whatsoever we have,
we receive it as a token of Gods particular love to us in Christ who both gives
us our daily bread, and the word of life; comforts both heavenly and earthly,
These outward things then, I say, do strengthen the faith of a Christian, and
thereby our joy is strengthened: wherefore we may thus joy in them, nay it is
our duty to do it. The wicked they indeed receive them, but only as from Gods
care of the general good of the world, or race of mankind: And therefore can
take no joy truly from them as the child of God does: who in the right use of
them, first rejoices that he is the child of God, and is reconciled to him in
Christ, that Christ is his; and then that he having the field, has also the
pearl; all blessings belonging to this life and a better are in Christ made
his, and he so rejoices in them, as he referres the comfort, and strength that
he receives from them to the honor of God. Gods children receiving good
things from him, are threatened for not rejoicing in them, Deuteronomy. 28.47. in the
45. verse he says: The curses shall be upon thee, for that thou servest not
the Lord thy God, with joyfulnesse, and gladness of heart, for the abundance
of all things. And it is expressly commanded, Deuteronomy. 26.11. Thou shall rejoice in
every good thing, which the Lord thy God has given thee, and thine house.

Q. But it may be questioned. Why (if this be true) are Gods children so
disconsolate, none are so much troubled in conscience, as they?

Answ. 1.
I answer, Their sorrow proceeds not from their good estate, in that they are
Christians, but from the want of the perfections to make them absolute
Christians indeed.

2 They either do not know themselves, or

3 Gods childrens joy, though it be great,

4 While Gods children live here, they have Paul had some base temptation,
which he calls the prick of the flesh, who therefore bids us to fear and
tremble, that we lose not the sense of Gods spirit, by the prevailing of our
corruptions.

But it will be objected, Ob.
that the Christian is fuller of sorrow than joy. To which

I answer, Answ.
it arises either from ignorance of the grounds of comfort, or from want of
application of them. When a man is a young Christian, newly begun, he knows
not, nor understands, what grounds he has of joy; they are as children, that
know not their inheritance at the first, nor their fathers love: especially if
he correct them, they think he loves them not. Even those that are grown
Christians, fail too often in this, either by mis-applying the grounds, and
mis-judging of their estate; or sometimes through the distemper of their body
through melancholy. These judge of Grace by the measure, when they should
judge by the truth of it, be it never so little. For it is not the measure,
that is the evidence of the child of God, but truth of grace. For there are
degrees of grace, in some more, in some less, and in one more in one time,
than in another. Take therefore a Christian in his right estate, one that is a
grown Christian, whom neither melancholy, nor temptation does trouble, take
him I say, as he should be, he does rejoice more soundly with true joy, and
hearty, than any one can, being an ungodly man, be he never so merry. How ever,
this we may be sure of, a Christian has the greatest cause to rejoice, and, as
I said before, he ought to stir it up in him by all means. And therefore
how ever undisposed he be thereto, he ought to search what good things God has
wrought in him: if he does not know his estate he cannot praise God as he
should. He must meditate also of the vanity of all worldly things, they
vanish, and they that put their trust in them ever failed of any true joy, it
never comes to the heart of a man, they are not deep enough to comfort men that
meet with afflictions: they only touch the fancy, as the fancy of a beast may
be delighted.

Let him also compare all discomforts that can come with this joy in the Lord:
and he shall find that it countervailes a world of sorrow: this has no end,
they are momentany, they last but for a night; this is in the Lord, in whom is
fullness of joy. This made the Saints of God so resolute, that they set light
by all afflictions whatsoever: and therefore in their greatest afflictions they
have the sweetest joy and greatest comforts. And let him also consider, that by
this he avoides the reproach of religion, and shows the force, and efficacy
thereof to be such, as is formerly declared. And let him take heed of the
hindrances of this joy. As first of all; of sin committed and not repented:
let him repent betimes, else it keeps a man dead, and dull, and backward: so
long as this Achan is unfound, it will keep him in discomfort. Let him take
heed of secret purposes either to sin, or to favor himself in any one sin
(how small soever) for time to come. This will rob him utterly of comfort,
for joy cannot lodge in such a heart. If I regard iniquity in my heart the
Lord will not hear me, (says David Psalm. 66.) Furthermore, let him take heed
of negligence in good duties. For it is not enough to do them, but he ought to
stir up the graces of God in him, to do them thoroughly; and he must strive
against his corruptions. For Christians have never so much joy, as when they
have labored with their endeavors to overcome their imperfections in good
actions.

Lastly, let him take heed of casting himself into dull or dead acquaintance.
It is true, we cannot avoid conversing with them, but we must have no secret
and inward acquaintance but with the best: a companion of fools shall be
beaten, and the wise with the wise will learn wisdom. We are all travelers
to Heaven; let us therefore choose such company, as may (as it were) be a
chariot to carry us thither, with their good example and discourses: And with
the Prophet David, think it a great grief when we have not such society as
may do us good. Psalm. 120.5
Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in the tents of Meshech. And
therefore if heretofore any of us, have been faulty, let us take warning of
this hereafter.

VERSE. 1. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not greevous, but
for you it is safe.
ALthough the Apostle had formerly bidden them to rejoice, in the former
chapter, 18. and 28. verses; Yet notwithstanding he bids them rejoice again,
saying; that it is safe for them to hear the same things often, and it is not
grievous to him, to write the same things twice. Besides, he does also bid
them, to beware of such as may hinder their joy, as Dogs, and those of the
Concision. Preventing thereby secret objections, which they might make against
repeating the same things. Whence we may in general observe,

The wisdom of the Word and spirit of God, Doctr. 1.
to know secret objections that might be made, and to prevent them; turning
away thereby whatsoever might hinder the force of the Word. And in the second
place, it teaches us;

That it is the duty of those, Doct. 2.
that mean to prevail by instruction, to know the secret dispositions of
those they deal withal. For when their minds are not quieted or cleared from
doubts and hindrances, they are not fit to entertain any good counsel at all.

And Thirdly, Note. 3.
(for I cannot stand on these things) it shows our disposition by nature, to
count repetition of the same things to be tedious and irksome. For since the
fall of man, we wander in our thoughts, affections, and intentions, and it is a
part of our loss to lose our constancy, and settled disposition. Wherefore we
find it noted of the Israelites, that they were weary of one kind of food,
although it is called Angels food.

In the fourth place (which I intend more to stand upon) observe with me, Doct.
4.
That dwelling on the same things is necessary, even for the best Christians.
And the reasons are

First, Reason. 1.
Because truth is supernatural, and our minds are carnal, and that which
must change these our minds must be assiduous, or else our minds will (...)
into their first estate. We are naturally changeable, and therefore had ne^d
to have the truth (as at the first to change us,) even so to be continually
presented to our souls, to keep us perpetually in this spiritual change. And a

Reason. 2.
Second reason may be: Because we often regard not the truth at the first,
second, or third time urged, and taught unto us. Wherefore Job. 33.14. It is
said, God speaks once or twice, yet man perceives not. Therefore, if the
caution and point be necessary, the repetition must needs be necessary also.

Reason. 3.
In the third place, There is such a breadth, and depth in the points delivered
out of the Word of God, that although we hear often the same thing, yet we
never come to understand the full extent of them. Our souls are narrow, we
cannot at the first so soundly, and deeply consider of them, neither can we
understand so many particulars as otherwise we should: for in every Christian
truth there is milk for children, and strong meat which requires digestion,
and likewise repetition.

A fourth reason may be, Because our corruptions daily increase and grow upon
us, Reason. 4.
and variety of occasion and worldly business (being natural to us, and
therefore more delightful) are too powerful, and do thrust out the
consideration of divine truths which are commonly against the hair. And we
cannot have variety of two things in our minds at the same time in strength.
Whence it comes to pass that the better is ever more subject to be thrust
out: and therefore had need to be hammered in with often repetition, and
insisting upon again and again.

A fifth Reason may be, Reason. 5.
Because we work as we understand, weakly, or strongly. When we work well,
we must have things present, strongly in the understanding; as when we tell men
of Gods justice, omnipresence, of the day of judgment, of death and the like:
the lively, and present remembrance of these things, keeps the mind of man so
in frame, as it cannot will any evil, no more than a lewd person will offend
in the presence of the Judge. And this lively remembrance of things, is wrought
chiefly by repetition, and often enforcing the same things; and it makes the
mind to be wholly taken up therewith. And therefore it is a good way when we
would do any good action well, to be taken up with reading, or hearing of
good, by way of preparation thereunto. And the want of the presence of good
things in our mind, lays us open, and makes us fit for all companies and
occasions of sin.

In the sixth and last place: Reason. 6.
Our memories are very weak to remember, and to retain any thing that is
good. Since the fall, they are broken, and good things sink through them, as
water through a sieve, and therefore has great need of remembrancers. And
after this manner has God dealt with man: as in the promise of the blessed
seed; how often is it reiterated, and typified: and to Abraham is it renewed
seven times. So God to David, often renewed his promise concerning the
Kingdom: as also, the promise concerning the deliverance of the people of
Israel from captivity, in Esaias is often repeated. This also did Christ the
great Doctor of his Church in his Parables, in one Chapter argues one
principal metter with four Parables one after another, although with some
variety; teaching Ministers thereby, to do the like to avoid tediousness.
Repetition in Scripture serves to diverse ends. Sometimes for the stronger
averring of the certainty thereof. Wherefore it was, that Pharoahs dream was
doubled: Sometime for Emphasis sake, as Christ did often, Amen, Amen: and in
dying, thou shall die, and the like phrases. But the maine end is, to stir up
us and our affections, and to keep them in life and action when they are
stirred up. Therefore, 2 Pet. 1.12. Because they knew they could not be
over-sure of salvation, nor grow too much in grace: he says, so long as he
lives he will put them in mind of such things.

Use. 1.
Let it not therefore be grievous to Ministers to do what is for the safety
of Gods children. They must do it till they see practice come to perfection,
and they must cast, and cast again; Peter he cast often and got nothing, yet
at Christ's word he cast again. So must Ministers: God that blesses not every
cast, may bless the last cast to the catching of many, and therefore a
Minister had need of a father-like affection to his hearers, as St. Paul had, 2
These. 2.11.

A second use, Use. 2.
may be for our selves: If we hear the same things repeated, hear them as an
impression: which may carry force, and work upon our hearts more strongly than
before: and know that God may work on us, by one means, at one time, which he
did not at another: as a dart pierces deeper, being cast by one, than by
another. And therefore, Let us not be weary of attendance on Gods ordinances,
for our corruptions daily increase, as our age does; our minding of things is
but slight, and our memory very brittle. And we must know that the word teaches
doing, and practicing, as well as knowing. And therefore to conceive a
necessity of a continual Ministry to perfect a Church as well as to begin
it. The Sacraments are necessary: receive them often, the Primitive Church had
them every Lords day. Till we come to the holy Land of that heavenly Canaan,
let us submit our selves to this Manna. It is Angels food, and they desire to
look into these mysteries. And therefore, take heed of fullness, or loathing;
for when we come to that pass that we must have Novum, or Nihil, God takes
away this Manna thus loathed. Thus did he with the Greek Churches, Rev. 1. and
2, 3.
they gave themselves not to the plain, sincere truth, but man's inventions,
whereby God gave them over to strange opinions: and indeed it is a rule; None
absents himself from Gods word, but he is given over (and that justly) to
believe toys, to attribute all praise and delight to this or that idle
Author, which it may be is Heathenish, or Popish. The Greek Churches affecting
Novelties, were justly given over to Mahomet; but to a true Christian heart,
there cannot be more delight than in the experimental knowledge of Christ's
death and office, of perseverance in grace: these are standing dishes in this
Christian banquet. It is a sign God means to plague that person, or nation,
that is delighted in such ill sawces, he will make them come out of our
nosthrils, we shall have our fill of them, and never hunger after the sincere
milk of the Word.

VERSE. 2. Beware of Dogs.
IN this general exhortation, Consider first the persons to whom it is
directed; Doctr. 1.
To all the Philippians, not only to the Pastor, but even to the common
Christians, They must beware of false Teachers. Is it so? Then surely they
ought to take notice of them, and to know them, and therefore they ought to
have rules to discern them by. Christ's sheep they discern between a wolf,
and a shepherd, Ioh. 10.45. His sheep discern an Heretic, or false-teacher,
from those that are true shepherds in the maine points of Christian Religion,
and therefore, 1 Ioh. 4.1. 1 John 4.1.
He bids all in general, to try the spirits: and the Apostle, 1 These. 5.21.
bids them prove all things, and hold fast the good: if they were then all of
them bound to try, and prove, they were no doubt bound to know the rules, by
which they were to try, which rules are only laid down in the word of God.

But some Popish heart may ask: Quest.
How common people should know the Word, to be the word of God?

For answer, Answ.
I would ask such an one, How they know the Popes Canons, or any Book of his
Constitutions to be the Popes? they will say, their teachers brings them in the
Popes name, and they believe their teachers. So say we, We believe our
Teachers and Ministers, who tell us this is the Word of God. Ob.
But they object and say, that we make every one a Judge. I answer, Answ.
there is a threefold manner of judging. First, A threefold judgment, to wit;
a judging whereby we discern of anything, and this every Christian must have,
so as it cannot be any plea to him at the day of judgment, Of Discretion.
to say, my Teacher did mislead me. No, both the leader and he that is led, if
they be blind, shall fall into the ditch, Matthew. 15. Then there is a second
kind of judging, Of Directi^n.
which is by way of direction, this is required principally in the Pastor, to
direct his flock. And there is a third kind, that is of jurisdiction; Of
Jurisdiction
this belongs to the Church and the Magistrate: yet every one must have a
judgment to discern the good from the bad. For he that knows not his Masters
will shall be beaten.

Philippians were a Church established in the truth: Eve was seduced, being in
her innocent estate* but I need not stand on this at this time. I proceed;

To the duty: which is to beware. Which word signifies; First, to discern of,
then to avoid: and aware of evil, by nature will avoid it. therefore beware,
here intends both discerning and avoiding of evil. For the Church of God in
this world is ever subject to danger, and God suffers it to be so: First, to
try who be true, and who false. And secondly, to try them that are good, and to
be as an evidence to them of their own estates, so as where such trial, and
danger is, it is true, ingeniosum est esse Christianum.

But concerning the words: Dogs, Concision, Evil workers, they all signify
the same thing, and he repeats the word beware, thrice: to show the necessity
thereof, take heed of them that urge works of the law with Doctrines of faith,
especially of Pastors. Nay take heed of these (for so the word in the original
is) these Dogs. By Concision, he means those that urged Circumcision, when
it was out of date, and when it was dangerous to be admitted of; But observe
the term, the Holy Ghost calls these Dogs, a strange term, and such an one
as I should not have dared to have given them, had not the holy Spirit led the
way thereunto: and therefore since it is so, let us not be more modest than he
is; but boldly affirm, that wicked men are Dogs. Doctrine.
Now wicked men, are either without the Church, or within. Without the Church,
all are Dogs. Matthew. 15.26. Its not meet to take the childrens bread and to
cast it to Dogs. Of this number are all Turks, and Jews, who were Filii,
Children, but are Canes, Dogs. We were Canes, bu^ now through Gods mercy are
come to be Filii. All therefore, that are without the Church are Dogs. But
there are also Dogs within the Church, and therefore the Philippians were
bidden beware of them, which St. Paul needed not to have done, if they had not
been troubled with them. And those Dogs he describes, in that they join
works of the law, and Christ together, in matter of salvation; these are in
St. Paul's esteem Dogs. And the reason hereof, may be grounded on Gods
esteem, on their behavior toward other men, and in regard of themselves. For
Gods esteem, we may see it in Esaias 66.3. he detests them as dogs. For their
behavior toward men, whom they go about to seduce, they fawn on them, and
use all manner of enticing, flattering, and false alluring words, Romans 16.18.
See the picture of a Iesuited Papist, a pleasing, humane, fawning nature, they
creep into houses, and when these dogs cannot prevail by flattery, then
they snarle, and bark against them, by false calumnies, and slanders, and
railings, and bitter scoffs, and the like; and this they do when they cannot
bite. But having gotten power in their hand, they persecute with fire and
sword, and the most exquisite torments that they can devise. In regard of
themselves also they are Dogs, rotten in nature, corrupt in life, filthy in
their own Courts: devouring their own vomit, and God justly punishing them,
by suffering of them to heap up wrath in store, 2 Pet. 2.22. and to return
with the sow that was washed, to wallow in the mire of corrupt courses. Hence
we may observe, and see, what a man is now brought to by sin: he that would
be like to God, is justly compared to the beasts that perish. Now all by nature
are no better than dogs, who are all for their bellies, for present
contentments, an envious and currish disposition against any that shall
endeavor to cross them in their unlawful lusts: and that rule of reason
which should overruled him, and amend him, he so abuses it, as thereby he is
made more like a Devil than a Dog. Would we be then changed, let us attend
on that word, that is able of Lions to make Lambs, it can cleanse us
throughout. Ioh. 15.3. It sanctifies and alters us. Moral precepts may
restrain and alter outward practices; the Word that alters the condition and
nature of men, it is the word of him that works all with his spirit. And
therefore take heed of them, and deal not more with them than thou must needs.
They will fawn, they will not be dogged at the first, but till Religion
alters him, assuredly he has a currish nature. But to proceed. He says
not only, beware of Dogs in general; But beware of these Dogs, of the
Concision, and these also ought we to beware of, for there is a perpetual
l^t^er of them: though those that the Apostle spoke of are gone, yet the same
spirit is now a days in many; fawners they are, and flatterers, yet do they
bark at Protestants: and of this sort are our Iesuited Papists and Seminaries.
Our Fathers were troubled with them: let these take heed, for were these men
dogs that press Circumcision with Christ; and shall not such be also, that
press merits with Christ, Saints with Christ, and equal traditions with the
Word of God. The dogs in St. Paul's time, had some excuse: Circumcision they
urged, but it was first founded by God; but these men out of their own brain
endeavor to establish fancies: and where they cannot prevail by conference,
they by scattering of Books seek to accomplish their intents. Magistrates
therefore in their place ought to look to them, and every private person look
to their own salvation. We ought also to take heed of Neuters, such as are, or
would be mediators, and will be of every Religion, or rather of none, who
jumble Religions, mixing truth and falsehood, light and darkness together. But
he that made distinction between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the
serpent, made also eternal distinction between Religion and irreligion:
though Judas thought he might keep fair quarter with the Pharisees and his
master, yet his fawning kiss could not keep him, but desperation overtooke
him. So these Neuters, let them fawn never so much, let them halt between two
opinions never so long, they shall at length know that they have betrayed their
Religion, and desperation shall at length assuredly overtake them, as it
overtook Spira. Take heed of them, there has been a continual brood of them
in the Emperors time: the Jews had some liberty granted to them, because
their ceremonies carried a show of a reverend antiquity. The Christians they
were Ludibrium humani generis, there were even then (as St. Paul found) such
Christians, as finding they were scorned, because they would be scorned of
neither, took part with either.

Quest.
But some will say: What a great matter do you make of this? is it not policy,
and wisdom for us thus to avoid reproach, and to get the good will of all?

Remember what christ says, Answ.
he that denies me before men, I will deny him before my Father. True say they,
I yet may inwardly be sound in my heart, I may honor Christ, though outwardly,
I may please others. What place is left for profession? with the mouth man
confesses to salvation, and such as are ashamed to confess Christ before men,
Christ may justly deny to acknowledge them in that fearful day of judgment.
For shall we try all things to be sure of our temporal estate? and shall not
we much more seek to assure our spiritual and eternal estate unto us? God
forbid.

In the next place, Let us not be discouraged, or hindered in a good course,
though these dogs bark never so much; yet they are but like the dogs who
bark against the Moon; though we meet with many changes, let us keep our
course still constantly, without turning aside. For thou must look to be
barked at before hand; thou art, or should be a stranger to this world, and
then assuredly the Dogs will take notice of thee. And comfort thy self, thou
shall be admitted into thine own Country, when these Dogs shall be kept out;
as it is in the last of the Revelations. Rev. 22.15.
And though we cannot have too harsh a conceit of them in regard of their
estate; yet are we to respect the Image of God they carry about with them, and
to esteem of them as of such as may become Lambs. And thus did St. Paul
respect, and reverence Agrippa: Yet see how sharp he is, not to those that are
Heathen; but to those that making a profession of Christianity, did add
Circumcision to Christ, where in we may observe his zeal for Christ's honor.

VERSE. 2. Beware of Evil workers.
BEware of such, as in general were bad, and in this particular especially,
they were evil workers, thereby seducing men from Christ. Seducers therefore
are evil workers, and Magistrates ought to look to them.

They are the keepers of the two Tables, and are to look to the souls of men,
as well as to their bodies. Let also private men look to themselves, lest they
be seduced by them. Neither is it likely, that these were only seducers by
false doctrine, but were also ill men and wicked livers: for God justly gives
such up to wickedness in life, that are seduced in judgment. And thus dealt he
with the Scribes and Pharisees, Do not after their works, (says Christ.) Some
think, if they so live as none can lay any gross sin to their charge, they
are good enough, its no matter what the heart is, how ignorant, how dark, God
will bear with them. Alas poor ignorant men, is not the understanding Gods, as
well as the outward parts? Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy mind:
the understanding is (sponsa veritatis.) And know, God looks to purity of
judgment; he cannot endure his children should be ignorant, for it is a
dishonor to God for his children to conceit of things (in Religion especially)
otherwise than is fitting, yea otherwise than they are.

VERSE. 2. Beware of the Concision.
THat is (as I formerly said) Circumcision; Called here by the name of
Concision, because it tended to cut and make a division and s^ct in the Church,
with a natural and proper elegance, not affected, describing, and naming it by
the effect. Its Gods use to call things from the event and effect of them. Why
will you perish? That is, why will you do those things that will lead you to
destruction? the end of them is death, and those that neglect wisdom hate
themselves. As it was also said to the Jews, that neglected the Gospel; they
judged themselves unworthy of salvation, because in effect, they hated
themselves, and deprived themselves of salvation. Circumcision formerly had
been an honorable Ceremony, serving for a partition between Jew and Gentile;
and for a seal of the Covenant of grace; but the Ceremony was to cease, it
not having a continual promise, it was to last till Christ came, and when he
died, it, and all other died also. St. Paul, and Christ, and Timothy, were
circumcised; but after the time came that Christ had broken down the partition
wall by his suffering, they did not only die; but were also deadly to all such
as would maintain the observancie of them: the use of them was prejudicial to
Christ's honor, and therefore Paul bids us beware of them. And now adays, this
instruction by proportion is of good use. For are there not those that teach
Concision? and that urge merits, as the Papists do? take heed of them, they
say we are the Concision, we have cut our selves from the true mother Church
of Rome.

I answer, We have suffered a Concision, we have made none. And again, we
acknowledge we have separated from these Romans, not from those that were in
Paul's time, its they that have made a Concision, and cut themselves from the
mother Church. But to pass from these, we have a Concision among us; and that
in a contrary extreme, that think every Ceremony, and thing that suits not
with their opinion, to be Antichristian and Concision. Not considering, that
there be many things urged, as fitting for order, being no parts of Gods
worship; yet even for these things, they make a Concision, cutting themselves
off from our Church, and unchurching us: Its dangerous for such; for when the
member is cut from the body, it must necessarily die, and how can we receive
grace from Christ as our head, but by union of our selves to the body, whereof
Christ is the head.

It must be our duty to beware of all manner of seducers, Remedies against
seducers.
and to this end let us

First, Remedy 1.
get fundamental truths into our hearts, affect and love truth: for want
hereof the Eastern Churches were given up to Mahomet, and Antichrist ruled
over many in these Western Churches, because they loved not the truth. 2.
These. 2.10. For none are seduced that are not cold in love.

Secondly, Remedy 2.
let us labor to practice that we know, and God will give us a fuller measure
of knowledge, whereby we shall learn to find and know seducers. Ioh. 7.17- If
any man will do his will, he shall know.

Thirdly, Remedy 3.
Pray to God for wisdom to discern of Schisms and Heresies, and ill disposed
persons: God has promised us any thing that is necessary for our strengthening
and bringing us to Heaven, God will not deny us so necessary an aid as this is.

Fourthly, Remedy 4.
let us look that we keep in us a holy fear, and reverence of God. Psalm.
15.12. What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way he
shall choose. And those things are we duly to observe, the rather because we
shall ever find seducers, it will ever be a hard matter for men to find the
way to Heaven. And though the doctrine and profession of Religion, be not ever
in all places opposed, yet shall we ever find the practisers thereof maligned:
As it is in these days, where none are accounted of to be Protestants, that
are not loose libertines, and thus instead of Concision from Religion, they
join that with it which is quite contrary to the power thereof. Beware also of
such; for their courses of life are as pernicious, as fundamental errors, for
none shall be saved for his knowledge.

VERSE. 3. For we are the Circumcision.
IN these words, and those that follow, our Apostle describes, who are truly
circumcised. We are the true Israel, the circumcised Sons of Abraham, who are
members of Christ. The Philippians, they were not circumcised outwardly, yet
were they truly circumcised, they had the truth of it; even as they that were
under the cloud and in the Sea, were said to be truly baptized in the Cloud,
and in the Sea. The Sacraments therefore, before and after Christ, were in
substance all one, as the Church was one and the same, they may be said to be
baptized, as we, and we circumcised as they: the difference was only in the
outward Ceremony and show, which the Church being then young had need of. It is
the same Religion, clothed diversely. Bellarmin says, that their government
was carnal, and the promises to them were carnal, but it is carnally spoken
of him. Heb. 11. The Fathers before Christ, had respect to the recompense of
reward: and in verse. 35. they accepted not deliverance, that they might obtain
a better resurrection: are these carnal promises? The Anabaptists, they press
rebaptizing, not considering that the same Covenant was before Christ, and
after, in substance. So as every true Christian is spiritually circumcised,
being once regenerate: before indeed he is uncircumcised, and a spiritual
leprosy over spreads all his frame of body, and mind, which must be washed,
pared, and cut off. We must part with uncircumcised hearts, ears, and lips:
that is, such ears as do delight themselves to hear corrupt lewd discourse,
such a tongue and lips, as delight to u^ter, and let out words savouring of a
rotten and uncircumcised heart: such eyes as do delight th^mselves, in the
beholding of lustful and sinful ^bjects, whereby the heart is kindled in^o
vain d^sires. I say, a Christian must circumcise himself, his heart, and
those parts that are uncircumcised, before he can ever think to go to
Heaven, whither nothing that is corrupt, or unclean enters. Religion
therefore is no easy thing. Circumcision is painful and bloody. Mortification
is very hard, corruption it must be cut off, though the blood follow, else it
will kill thee at length. Wherefore, we are also to labor for circumcised
hearts to understand Gods truth, his will and commandments; Cut off all
extravagant desires, who by little and little, take away comfort, and communion
with God, its no mercy therefore to spare them. Circumcise thy eyes, pray with
David, Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity. Stop thy ^ares at the
charming of such objects as may infect thy soul: we can never enjoy that
beatificall vision hereafter, if we weane not our selves from the liking of
these things. And though we cannot while we are in this house of clay come to
that perfection we should; yet endeavor to it earnestly, and God will accept
our very endeavors, and will further them; yea, we shall get the victory at
length. If sin begins to fall, it shall surely fall: the house of David in us
shall grow stronger, Means and ways to mortify sin.
and the house of Saul shall daily be weakened. The means to this duty, are

know thy sin, and thy particular sin: by thy checks of conscience, and by
the checks we receive from our enemies, who will spy what they can in us,
thereby to scandalize us. As also, observe what thy thoughts work most upon;
what is the maine thing, that generally takes up your cogitations.

Make it as odious as thou can: For Circumcision implies a thing that is
odious, and superfluous: now all sins that be cherisht in us, may well be
odious to us, for that it hinders us from all good, and clothes us with all
evil, and makes all outward things evil to us; who otherwise, are no further
ill, than as they strengthen our corruptions. It hinders us from all good
duties, pride of heart and corruption do dog us: this made Paul cry, not of
temporal bonds, but of the bonds of sin and of death; Who shall deliver me,
wretched man that I am, says he? Romans 7.23.24.

Thirdly, having found out thy sins, and Complain of them to God, as
Hezekiah did of the blasphemous letter that Senacherib wrote, and challenge the
fruit of Gods promise. For he that bids us circumcise, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Promised
that he himself will do it, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Faith in the promises is an
effectual means to attain to them. Men come with doubtings, they see a great
deal of corruption, they think their labor is vain, they cannot be releeved
against them, they are deceived. Touch but thou the hemme of Christ's garment,
fly to God in his name, and thou shall find this issue of sin, though not
wholly dried up, yet much abated. And here is the excellency of Faith, that
assures us of all the promises, concerning sanctification here, as concerning
glory hereafter.

VERSE. 3. Which worship God.
THe Apostle places ^ircumcision before worship: for unless there be a
cutting off, Three parts* viz.
we cannot bring our corruption to perform duties of Gods worship aright.

The Act, Worship.
The words contain, a description of a Christian by his proper act, Worship,
and by the proper object thereof, God; and by his most proper part, in spirit.
And the word Worship, is taken for the inward worship of God, commanded in the
first Commandment; also, comprehending our fear, love of God, and joy in him:
issuing from the knowledge of the true God. All our obedience, issuing
herefrom, is worship of God* including our duties to man, in obedience and
relation to Gods Commandment. The ground of this obedience and worship, is the
relation between God and the re^sonable creature* being the Image of God* now
this image being lost in the fall of our first parents, we must worship him,
not only as our creator and maker, but as reconciled to us in Christ, as he
has made us anew.

The Object, God.
Secondly, we are to worship him, as the wellspring of all grace, goodness,
excellency, and greatness.

The most part, viz. in Spirit.
Thirdly, As he does communicate all unto us, he is ours, Christ is ours, all is
ours: this should carry our souls to love him, be his, as he is ours:
especially, to be his in Spirit. By which is meant the reasonable soul,
understanding, will, and affections. And Secondly, with sanctified
understanding, sanctified will, and sanctified affections. Thirdly, with all
our strength, spirit, life, and cheerful readiness. Wherefore, God is the
proper object of spiritual worship. Trust on him, love him, joy in him, invoke
and pray to him, and to him only; not to the Virgin Mary, Saints, or Images,
as the Papists do. Mat. 4.10. Him only shall thou serve, as Christ says,
because our commandment is only from him, and extends only to him. The
promises are only from him, he only is present, in all places, he only
supplies our wants, and he only knows, what our wants are; and how to help.
Saints are not present in all places, they cannot hear many at once, nay they
cannot hear our prayers unless they be present, they are finite creatures,
they have no infinite properties. Christ, he bids us, invites us to come to
him, he has promised to hear us, and to ease us.

And further, God knows the secret wants, which the Saints cannot know, no,
we our selves know them not, and therefore are we to go only to God in all
our necessities: because it is most gainful for us to go to him that can
help us, nay we owe him this honor, by going to him, to acknowledge his
omnipresence, his willingness and ability to do good.

VERSE. 3. In Spirit.
THe Apostle in these words, shows the manner of true worship, by the most
proper, and fit part of a Christian; to wit, his Spirit, that is, as soul
truly sanctified, lively, and cheerfully, Reasons why God must be worshipped
in Spirit.
with a willing and ready mind, fitly disposed. Contrary to outward, false, and
hypocritical worship.

Because God is a Spirit, and therefore must be worshipped in spirit.

it is the best part of a man; and God who challenges all, and that justly,
looks especially that he has the best part.

Spirit has a being of it self, and praises, love^h, and rejoices in God,
when its out of the body; and the body is stirred up to this du^y only by the
spirit, it being of it self senseless as a block: and outward worship
without inward, is but the carcass of worship. The Prayer of a wicked man is
abominable, because he regards iniquity in his heart, Psalm. 66.18. And this
spirit of ours without the spirit of God, cannot worship him: and therefore
every one that is not changed, makes God an Idol.

Use,
This may deprive all such of comfort, as care not for this spiritual worship,
thinking they have done enough, if they have mumbled a few idle words over: God
accepts it no more than if they had sacrificed a dogs head, as he says, Esaias
66.3. And verily, what other is Popery, but a body without a soul? when they
worship in blind sacrifices, in a strange language. Is this a spiritual
worship? when they neither know what they do nor say? Let us show that we are
not of their number: Come we with love, and with the intention of all our
affections, and this will sway the whole man, body and soul; and so shall we
worship him in truth, and not in hypocrisy as many do, that bring their Idols
with them; their minds are on their pleasures and riches, though their body be
present before God. And it has ever been an error in the world, this limiting
and tying Gods worship to outward worship of the body, Reasons why outward
worship is so well liked and loved.
with a kind of ceremonious gesture: and it is very much liked for such like
Reasons as these are.

First, the outward gesture: as holding up Secondly, they make a glorious show
in the * its a commendable and good quality to be religious, especially if they
be observed so to be. Thirdly, its beneficial to men: when as hereby they are
known to be no Atheists, and Fourthly, outward worship satisfies conscience
men know they must worship God, and go^ to Church, that these are means to save
men, and they think that in doing so, they stop the cries of their
consciences. Alas! Alas! these sleepie, blinded consciences of theirs, will ^t
length awake, and will accuse them, for the outward ceremonious hypocritical
worship of him, that requires the spirit to worship him with.
Ob.
But some men may say, how shall we know whether we serve God in spirit, or no?

Answ.
I answer, observe these properties.

Signs of spiritual worshippers.
First, W^ether thou lamentest thy defects in the best actions thou do, and
art not puffed up with conceit of the sufficiency of thy performances. Paul
found this in him; for although he lived, being a Pharisee, as concerning the
Law unrebukable: yet when he was converted, he saw much corruption which before
he knew not, and laments and bewailes it, Romans 7.

whether thou make conscience of private closet duties? Of prayer in thy
study when none sees thee? Of thy very thoughts? Do thou serve God with thy
affections? and thy very soul? Do thou weep in secret for sins? yea for
thy secret sins. Do not thou do good duties to be seen of men, as the
Pharisees did? Contrariwise, will thou omit no place nor time, but always and
in all places thou will worship God. This must be done, for God is always and
for ever God and he is in all places, in private as well as public* and
therefore a Christians heart must be the Sanctum Sanctorum, where God must
remain present continually, and therefore he makes conscience of, and is
humbled for the least sins, yea those that the world esteems not of, and
counts them as niceties, and that in as great a measure as ordinarily men are,
for the greatest sins they commit.

Thirdly, Can thou endure the search of thy and thy infirmities by all
means, by thy self, by others, by the word, by private friends? Nay, can
thou desire this search, that thou may know thy ^inne more and more? for this
end, that thou may truly hate it, with a more perfect hatred? Can thou
truly appeal to God, as Peter did to Christ, thou know that I love and
prefer thee above all? It is a sure sign of thy sincerity which the world
cannot have: and therefore when they see their sins laid open, they spurn at
the ordinances, and spite the Minister and their true friends, that put them in
mind of their faults, accounting them as their only enemies. Surely they
shall never be able to endure the search of God hereafter, and the last day
when he shall lay them open, they shall be overcome with shame.

A fourth sign is, That at the hour of thy Thou may say with comfort as
Hezekiah did; Lord remember how I have walked before thee in sincerity. When
downright affliction comes, outward verbal profession vanishes, with all the
comforts thereof, then perishes the hope of the hypocrite. Two things upheld
Job in comfort, in his great extremity: he was first assured, that his redeemer
lived: and secondly, he knew his innocence in those things that his friends
charged him with: and such times will fall on us all, either at the time of
death, or before, when nothing but innocence, and sincerity shall be able to
uphold us.

Labor therefore for sincerity and spiritual worship, Worship God in spirit,
but let it be done outwardly also. But first, bring thy heart and intention to
what thou do, and that will stir up the outward man to its duty, and for
the performance hereof, Helps unto spiritual worship.
follow these directions.

learn to know God aright: For worship is answerable to knowledge, for how can
we reverence God aright, when we know neither his goodness, nor his
greatness? how can we trust on God, when we see not his truth in the
performance of his promises, in the Scriptures, and in our own experience:
those that do not these, know not God, for as the heart affects according to
knowledge. So also its true in divinity, as we know his justice we shall
fear, as we know his mercy we shall love him, and as we know his truth we
shall trust on him. Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name shall trust in thee:
and in other places of the said Psalm, the Lord is known in the judgment he
executes, verse. 16.

Secondly, know God to be the first mover men ordinarily fear the creature,
attributing that to it, which belongs to the Creator. But God, he is the giver
of all, and Christians look on the secondary means, as to the first author and
ground of all the rest, they behold the Magistrate as in God: fear them no
otherwise, but in the Lord. Atheists they will not stick at any sin
whatsoever, to get the love of those, that may bring them any worldly
commodity. A Christian, he pleases, and seeks the love of him that can make
enemies friends, when he lists, and when its for our good; he knows, in him we
live, move, and have our being.

Thirdly, make much of spiritual means:

4 Fourthly, Lift up thy heart to Christ, the 1 Cor. 15. Our hearts naturally
are dead: Christ is our life, when thou art most especially called to love, to
fear, to humility, pray to him to move thee, and yield thy self to him, and
then shall thou pray in spirit: as it is said in Jude 20. hear in spirit, do
all in spirit: do outward works of thy calling in spirit, for a true
worshipper will out of spiritual grounds do all outward works of his
particular calling; as well as the works of his general Christian vocation.
Let us therefore do all things from our hearts to God, and to our neighbor:
else will not God accept of our works. It is the Jew inwardly, who shall have
praise of God. The want of this sincerity, has extinguished the light of many
a glorious professor, and thereby has brought a great scandal upon the true
worshippers of God in spirit.

VERSE. 3. And rejoice in Christ.
THe word rejoice, implies a boasting, or glorying of the heart, manifesting it
self in outward countenance and gesture; as also, in speech, it also implies a
resting on, and contenting in, the thing we glory in: proceeding from an
assurance, that we glory in a thing worthy of glory, for they are fools that
delight in bables. Observe hence therefore,

Doctr. 1.
That those that will worship Christ aright, must glory in him: For the worship
of Christ is a thing that requires encouragement, and nothing can work this
encouragement like the glorying in Christ: and therefore Paul in the first part
of his Epistle to the Romans, having showed that God had elected them freely,
and had begun the work of sanctification in their hearts: he comes in the 12.
Chapter: I beseech you (says he) present your selves as a holy, living, and
acceptable sacrifice, to God. And in Tit. 2.11. The grace of God teaches, by
encouraging us to deny ungodlines, and to walk unblameably, soberly,
righteously, and godlily, in this present world. And therefore, whenever we
grow dull or dead, think of the great benefits that we have by Christ, and it
will quicken us, and all our performances.

In the next place observe: Doct. 2.
That Christ is the matter, and subject of true glory and rejoicing, and only
Christ: for they well go together, a full, and large affection, with a full
and large object: boasting is a full affection, the object is every way as
full. First, as he is God and man, he is God full of all things, he is man full
of all grace, and void of all sin, he is Christ anointed to perform all his
offices, he is a Prophet all-sufficient in all wisdom, in him are the
treasures of wisdom: he teaches us, not only how to do, but he teaches the
very deed: he is our High Priest, he is the sacrifice, the altar, and the
Priest, and he is our eternal Priest in Heaven, and on earth: on earth as
suffering for us; in Heaven as mediating for our peace. Who shall condemn us,
it is Christ that dies? yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us, Romans 8.34. He is also
our King, he is King of all: King of kings, and Lord of lords, a King for ever,
and at all times, subduing all rebellions within us, and all enemies without
us; and he is all these so, as none is like him: and therefore is worthy of our
glory.

Reason. 2.
Secondly, Christ is communicative in all these: he is Prophet, Priest, King for
us, he is God, man, he is Christ for us: he sought not his own, it was his
communicative goodness that drew him from Heaven, to take our nature.

Reason. 3.
Thirdly, he is present, and ready to do all good for us. he is present with us
to the end of the world: nay,

Reason. 4.
Fourthly, we are his members, he is in us: we are his wife; nay we are him.
Saul, why persecutest thou me? 1 Cor. 12. We are all one body with Christ.

Reason. 5.
Fifthly, We are even, whiles we are here, glorified with Christ: he is our
husband, if he be honored, we his spouse also are advanced: if he be our
King, we are his Queen: if the head be crowned, the body is honored: and

Reason. 6.
Sixthly, all this is from God, and freely comes from him: Christ is anointed by
the spirit, and sent from the father. 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption to us. And Ioh. 6.44. No man can
come to me, except the Father who has sent me draw him: and it is further said
that God sealed him. So that we may rejoice in Christ, because that thereby we
come to joy in God, for he reconciles us to God, who called him to this office,
which was witnessed at his baptism, when as the whole Trinity bare witness
thereof.

But it may be questioned. Quest.
What? may we not joy in any other thing else but in Christ.

I answer, Answ.
there may be two causes of our joy. One principal; Causes of true joy.
the other less principal. We must only rejoice in Christ, as the maine and
principal cause of our happiness. But we may rejoice in creatures, so far
forth as they are testimonies of Christ's love, and in peace of conscience, as
coming from Christ: and in the word of God, as it is the Gospel of the
revelation of Christ to us.

For use. Use. 1.
We may observe this doctrine, as a ground of the necessity of particular
faith. For none can boast, but the boasting must arise from a particular faith,
which only is the true ground of every man's particular assurance.

Secondly, Use. 2.
let it serve as a direction to every Christian that will rejoice, let him go
out of himself and rejoice in Christ, his King, his Priest, and his Prophet:
let him observe what he has done for him, and what he will do for him, and
thereby see himself perfectly happy, and

In the third place, Use. 3.
Let us first boast, that we have Christ, and then in his benefits and
blessings that follo^ him. First, rejoice that we have the field, then rejoice
in the pearl. And therefore the Apo^tle says not, rejoice in faith, or in
obedience, but in Christ: who being once mine, how shall I not have all things
with him?

Use. 4.
Those that are burdened with sorrow for their sin, let them consider. Why
do they grieve? do their sins trouble them? Christ, he came to dye for
sin, he is their High Priest, he came to save sinners. Does the devil accuse
them? let them know Christ chose them, he pleades for them, who can lay any
thing to their charge, Christ he is dead, risen; nay he is ascended into
Heaven. Are they troubled with crosses? That is the best time to rejoice in
Christ. We joy in tribulation, Romans 5.3. When nothing comforts us, then has
Christ sweetest communion with our hearts. St. Steven, when the stones ^lew
about him, and Paul in the dungeon had the most sweet consolation, and
comfortable presence of Gods spirit that upheld them. Nay in death, we may
glory most of all: it lets us into that state, into that sweet society with our
Savior and the Saints, the very hope whereof, does now sustain us, and cause
us to glory here: as in Romans 5.2. And death now is but a droane, the sting is
gone, all enemies are conquered.

Use. 5.
In the fifth place, See wherein the glory of a man, of a nation, of a kingdom
consists: it is in Christ, and that which exhibites Christ. What made the Jews
rejoice? mark the prerogatives they had. Romans 9.3. Adoption, covenant,
promises, and Christ. What made the house of Judah so famous? and Mary so bless
her self? All generations shall call me blessed: Christ that vouchsafed to
proceed out of her loins, and from that stock. Abraham rejoiced to see
Christ's day, though he saw it a far off by the eye of faith. And what should
we glory in above the Jews? above other nations? but in this; the veil is
taken away, Christ shines, and we have the Gospel in its purity. This the
Apostle looks for in the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 2.3. Having confidence that my
joy is the joy of you all. Now what was Paul's joy? God forbid (says he) that I
should rejoice, but in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14. Let us not therefore
rejoice in peace, or plenty, fortified places, or the like. No, if we had not
Christ to rejoice in, we were no better than Turks. Happy is the people whose
God is the Lord; for in him shall we have fullness of joy and comfort: make use
of this in time of temptation. When the devil would rob us of our joy, fly
to Christ, oppose him against all: oppose the second Adam against the first, he
came to do what ever the other did undo. Learn to see the subtilty of the
devil, and thine own heart, and fill thy heart with the Scriptures, and with
meditations of the promises, and they will cause our love to be so fervent, as
all our service of God will seem to be easy to us. As the time that Jacob
served seemed nothing, for the love he bare to Rachel.

But how shall we know whether we rejoice in Christ, or not?

Answ.
I answer* by these signs:

Signs of true Christian joy.
First, when we glory, see the ground whence it arises, whether from God
reconciled to us or not. 1, Sign.
If otherwise: remember that of Ier. 9.23. Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, all such rejoicing is evil. But
let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands, and knows me
that I am the Lord.

2. Sign.
Secondly, If we glory in the Lord, it will stir us up to thanks: What we joy
in we will praise: if we joy in Christ, we shall like the Spouse in Canticles,
ever be setting forth the praises of our beloved. Thus did Paul, Ephesians. 1.3.
and Peter, 1 Pet. 1.3. and therefore where deadness, and dullness is, it
shows no true Christian joy.

3. Sign.
Thirdly, Our glorying will be seen in duty: delight ever implies the
intention to do any good work, and diligence.

4. Sign.
Fourthly, if we glory in Christ aright, we shall not endure any addition to
Christ; and therefore we shall abhor that Popish Tenent, which puts so many
additions to Christ, in the meritorious work of our salvation. A true rejoycer
in Christ, sees such all sufficiency in Christ's merits, and work, that he
abhorres purgatory and such trash: and so much the more, by how much his
glorying in Christ, is the more fervent and sincere. Christ is our husband, we
are his spouse: if we cleave to any other, than to Christ, we are adulterers.
No, let him kiss us with the kisses of his mouth, and none but he.

Fifthly, 5. Sign.
this joy where it is, it will breed content in all estates: Paul could want
and abound, and so can a true rejoycer: in Christ he has all, he cares not for
earthly wants, so he wants no heavenly comfort; if he be poor, he is rich in
heaven; nay what he most complains of are good for him, life or death, all is
one with him, Christ is his, and in him all things.

But it may be said: Quest.
There are many Christians are not in this happy condition?

I answer. Answ.
Its their own fault, to yield to the devils policy, and their own
weakness, that will not labor to break through these clouds, and challenge
the promises.

VERSE. 3. And have no confidence in the flesh.
THese words are in truth included in the former: for he that glories in
Christ, will have no confidence in the flesh. But the Apostle notes this as a
plain demonstration and evidence of the glorying in Christ. For by the
copulative conjoyning of them, it is all one as if he had said: what a man
trusts to, he glories in, and what he glories in he trusts to, and is confident
of. If in wit his glorying be, he trusts to it though it be to his ruin; as it
fell out with Achitophel. If in eloquence of speech, he trusts to it, and it
brings shame, as it did to Herod. If in honor, he trusts to it, and brings
himself to dishonor, as Haman did.

By flesh, is meant outward things, as prerogatives, privileges, actions of a
man's own doing, and particularly, he aims at Circumcision, which he calls
outward, and that of the flesh. So as the observation that we may gather is:
That confidence in Christ, takes away confidence in outward things. The reason
is: if Christ be fully all sufficient, what need is there of any outward thing
to put confidence in? For these are two opposite things, and one overthrows the
other.

The second instruction is, That naturally men have confidence in outward
things: Doctrine*
for having not hearts filled with grace, they relish not Christ, but fly to
ceremonious outward actions as their refuge. Nay, in the Church, till we be
converted, we naturally fly to outward fleshly confidence. We have the Word
taught to us, we come to hear it twice on the Lords day: alas what is this if
thou be not transformed, and inwardly and outwardly conformed in obedience?
Have thou the Sacraments? do thou uncover thy head, or bow the knee? these
are good, and they seem fair: but where is the heart? how is that prepared?
have thou an earnest desire to leave off thy course of sinning? and do thou
resolve hereafter to amend thy life? O here is the hard spiritual work. So,
in outward fasting, and abstinence, its an easy matter, the Pharisee did it
often: but this is the fast that God has commanded, to loose the bands of
wickedness, Esaias 59.6. to fast from sin. The suffering of the flesh, if it
be separated from spiritual use, and alms, they profit nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3.
All Paul's prerogatives, which were many, 2 Cor. 11, and 12. chapters. Yet were
they in his account but dross and dung, in comparison of Christ. Most men are
like Ephraim, Hosea 10.11. as heifer^, who serve to tread out corn, and to
plow: Ephraim loved to tread corn where he might eat his belly full; for by
the law of Moses, the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, was not to
be musled: men, they are delighted in the performance of slight duties, but to
put their neck under the yoke, to plow its a hard work, who can bear it?

But some will say, Ob.
O what do you condemn outward duties, and use of them?

I answer, Answ.
we may consider religious duties two ways. First, as they are outward means
to salvation, for so they are. Secondly, as they are expressions of inward
truth, and so out of a sincere entire affection we bear to them, and out of a
desire to be wrought upon by them, we do them; thus they are commended that
use them: but let them want but an inch of this, all is abominable, all is
flesh. The Jews, they boasted in the name of holy people, in their law, in the
Temple, in the Holy land: yet for all these (says God) you shall go into
captivity: against such Christ preached; Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, you
tithe mint, but let pass justice and judgment. And Paul, be not high minded,
but fear. And the reasons, why men are taken up with this fleshly confidence,
are.

Reason. 1.
First, outward things are easy, and men cannot bend themselves to perform the
hard matters of the law. Reason. 2.
Secondly, they are glorious, and men desire to be observed. Reason. 3.
Thirdly, men have a foolish conceit that God is delighted with the outward act,
when the inward sincerity is wanting. Reason. 4,
Fourthly, men want knowledge of themselves; want the inward change, want sense
of their own unworthiness, and Christ's worthiness. Reason. 5.
Fifthly, God follows such with prosperity in this world; thereby they think
God is well pleased with them, til the hour of death come, and then they find
all but froth.
Quest.
How shall we know whether our confidence is fleshly or not?

Answ.
I answer, where this fleshly confidence is, there is bitterness of spirit
against sincerity: Signs of fleshly confidence.
the Pharisees, the Doctors of the law, sat in Moses

Secondly, where this fleshly confidence is, there is also a secret blessing of
our selves, in our performance of good duties, without humiliation of our
defects. Hypocrites think that God is beholding to them, and therefore do
bless themselves in the deed done.

In the fourth verse, he comes to an argument taken from himself against
those of the Concision.

VERSE. 4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh, if any other man
thinks, that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more.
AS if he had said: if any other man may glory in the flesh, then may I much
more. But I do not think, that I have cause sufficient to glory in the flesh;
therefore have not they, or may not they, glory in the flesh. And the reason,
or ground of this proposition, is taken from his many prerogatives he had, St.
Paul's prerogatives.
which he comes to in the 5. and 6. verses following.

Circumcision was the first prerogative before ceremony, for it was of it self
grievous, and a bloody ceremony. Wherefore it was that Moses his wife called
him a bloody husband: and this ceremony was not to be respited above eight
days, that the parents might not be delayed in their comfort. Whence we may
gather, that dying before baptism is no necessary impediment to the salvation
of the child: for the same covenant is annexed to circumcision, that is, to
baptism: and the Papists that hold, that the death of children before baptism
hinders the salvation of the infant, may as well hold, that all the children
that dyed before the eight day (being the day of circumcision) were damned.
Secondly, observe this; that children, though infants, may, nay must be
baptized, if it may be with conveniencie; for children were circumcised, nay
they were enjoined circumcision on the eighth day. Now seeing the covenant is
the same, and given to children, now as then: why may not the seal thereof be
now given in their infancy, as then?

VERSE. 5. Of the stock of Israel.
Jacob had his name changed of his wrestling with the Angel, and prevailed:
St. Paul says, he was of that stock of Israel that prevailed with God.

VERSE. 5. Of the Tribe of Benjamin.
THere were two Tribes of especial credit: Judah and Benjamin, they were Kingly
Tribes. Benjamin was honored with the first King, Saul the son of Kish, who
though he were a castaway, yet its a matter of great joy in the flesh, to have
great men, personages, and learned men of their lineage.

VERSE. 5. An Hebrew of the Hebrews.
MOre ancient than an Israelite: for Abraham was an Hebrew, before Jacob was an
Israelite: and he was an Hebrew borne, no proselyte, or converted Jew.

VERSE. 5. As touching the Law, a Pharisee.
BEfore Christ's time, there were diverse sects among the Jews; as Pharisees,
Scribes, Herodians, and Essaei; but the Pharisees were the greatest sect of
all: and as the word signifies, so they did separate themselves as better than
other Jews whatsoever. And St. Paul lays down this, as one especial carnal
thing, wherein he might glory; he was no common Jew, but a zealous Jew: so as
thence we may observe: That there is a fire and zeal that is not kindled by
heaven: but, as St. James says of the tongue, is set on fire of hell, out of
ignorance, blind zeal therefore is a ground of destruction: we are therefore
to take heed; for unless our zeal have an eye, nothing is more tempestuous
and troublesome, than that man is whom it possesses.

VERSE. 6. Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church.
WHere zeal is, if it be meant in the largest sense, it is very hot against
all opposites, it has the name from fire, separating Heterogenies, and
gathering things Homogeneall: our Apostle was none of those drowsy
professors, that would be content to mingle Religions: so as, where there is
no opposition there is no zeal: and therefore those that would reconcile
religions, false and true, they have not a spark of zeal, but are key-cold.
Again, Paul well joins persecution and a Pharisee together* for there was
never hypocrite but he was a persecutor. For he, making and grounding his
profession on pride, and a desire to be counted holy, when a down right person
esteems him not, but by his integrity puts the others outward profession out
of countenance, presently he falls a persecuting; especially if his
hypocrisy brings any profit, or gain. As it was with Demetrius in the Acts.
And as it is now with the Romish Church, whose chief end is profit, as
appears by their Purgatory, Indulgences, Pardons, Dispensations, and the
like: you shall have as much Mass as you will, and as little preaching. We may
observe further, That carnal zeal is persecuting zeal, and the persecuting
Church is the false Church. Christ's flock never persecutes wolves, it will not
indeed endure to be near them; but its not cruel against them. The Papists
indeed they speak much of their mildness and meekness, but what is the
reason? their hands are bound, Solve leonem, and senties leonem, loose the
Lion, and then shall you find he is a Lion.

VERSE. 6. Touching the righteousness which is in the law blameless.
THis was a great prerogative. Obj.
But how can he be said to be blameless as concerning the law, when he was
without the law? Romans 7 9.

I answer, its true he was without the law, in respect of the inward man, in
respect of sanctified knowledge, love, and fear* but in regard of his outward
course of life, no man could blame him. Let this be observed by carnal civil
men; they may be blameless as concerning outward conversation, and yet
without the law.

Quest.
But if he was blameless as concerning the law, how could he blame himself so
as he did? Romans 7.15.

Answ.
I answer; St. Paul then had a new esteem and judgment, he had a new light
which showed him much corruption, where before he saw none. This meets with
weak Christians, that think themselves unconverted, and cast-awayes, because
they see a great deal of sin in them. Paul was without blame, now miserable
man who shall deliver me. Christians therefore are to be comforted: and to
know that they are not the worse, because they see themselves sinful daily
more and more, but that they are better, as to whom God does daily bestow the
light of his holy spirit, to make them see more clearly into their estates. We
know that we see only the moates where the Sun shines, yet cannot we deny
but all the air is as full as that part which the Sun inlighteneth.

Let not such therefore be discouraged, but let them know, where there is any
opposition, there is spirit as well as flesh, and that at length the spirit
will have the victory.

VERSE. 7. But what things were gain to me, those I count loss for Christ.
THose things and privileges, that formerly

It is good therefore to teach by examples: Paul does here enforce rules by his
own experience and example.

It is also expedient sometimes, to speak of prerogatives, and privileges
that a man has in himself, and its not universal that we must not speak of
any thing, that might concern our own praise. For we may do it as St. Paul
does here, to beat down the pride of others, that are vain glorious; or we
may as Paul does, lift up our selves to abase and beat down our selves the
lower.

In the third place, when God vouchsafes his children any outward privileges,
he does it for the good and help of others, though we see it not at the first.
Paul had these privileges, that he might beat down the pride of the Jews
more powerfully. And Solomon had all abundance of wisdom, riches, and the
like; why? But only that he might without control judge of all, as of vanity
and vexation of spirit: and make it to be believed more firmly. For had an
ordinary man said it, men would have thought its easy for him to say so: but
if he had tried the^, he would have been otherwise minded. In these latter
times, our best teachers were at the first Papists, and of the more zealous
sort: As Bucer and Luther, being also learned men; as also Peter Martyr and
Zanchius, was brought up in Italy, and all this, that they seeing once their
blindness, might be the more able to confound them, as being not a whit
inferior to them in any outward respect whatsoever, when they were of their
belief.

In the fourth place, God (having to deal with men of a desperate condition)
suffers great and famous men to be in ignorance, nay to be persecutors, that
after their conversion they might comfort weak Christians: and therefore let
them comfort themselves, do they find that their sins are many, and great?
Paul was a Pharisee, a persecuting Pharisee, and continued so a long while Nay,
after his conversion, he complains of a body of sin, and yet found mercy,
and therefore do not despair.

But to proceed, we see what St. Paul was, and what now he is, how his
judgment is quite contrary to that it was; for where grace is, it makes men
opposite to themselves: and therefore this re-creation, is called a new
creature. Paul quite contrary to Saul, and yet both one person. Out of which we
may gather;

First, That a man before conversion, has ever that which is his gain: for
we are prone to think too highly of natural things, and our esteem shall be
grounded upon probabilities, rather than we will lose our esteem of them. For
we know this outward gain is easily gotten, the duties are easily performed;
fair outwardly, and will procure praise from men, which is all we naturally
look for.

Secondly observe hence; That, that which we before conversion thought gain,
is indeed loss and unprofitable, nay it is dangerous: for things may in use be
good, but in abuse dangerous. Riches are good in use, but in abuse mammon and
thorns, as Christ terms them. Circumcision, and Sacrifices, and Baptism, in
themselves were good, and many things are still good: yet when we trust in
them, and neglect inward graces, sacrifice is no more acceptable than a dogs
head. Good works are in their proper nature good, yet if we rely on them,
they stop the way to Christ. So as it is our wicked and abusing affections,
that has brought an ill report on the good creatures of God, so as to us they
are dross, and dung, nay loss: these terms does the holy spirit give to
alienate our affections from these earthly things; an outward, civil, and
conformable life, are, by our too high esteem of them, stoppes, staying many
from Heaven: for while they tell themselves they live honestly and justly,
doing no wrong, they suppose themselves to be very Saints, and look no
further. But every true Christian knows his infirmity, and the more he is
enlightened, the more he sees his darkness: he knows these things cannot be
gain to him.

For first, he knows they are meaner than the soul: these are earthly, the
soul is from heaven; these are outward, the soul is spiritual; and therefore
is only satisfied with spiritual and heavenly comforts.

Secondly, A Christian sees these things are fading* arising of nothing, and
tending to nothing; contrarily, he knows his soul is eternal, and requires
comforts that may last with it for ever. For those that joy in these outward
things, when they leave him, or he leave them, as of necessity he must; its
true they vanish to nothing: but he cannot, but must continue comfortless for
ever, and undergo the just wrath of God. Furthermore, a Christian does not
only know these things to be no gain, but he also knows them to be loss. For
that's loss which a man finds by experience to be loss, when his
understanding is awakened. But all things outward, what ever they be, whether
that a man is a Christian by profession, or that he is a Preacher, who has
good utterance, and is embraced of the people, and approved of, or what
privilege else soever: when the conscience is awakened, they breed more
horror; at the hour of death when we are to give an account of them, and they
set us further off from Christ. A profane person is nearer conversion than a
proud Pharisee: as Christ says; the publican, and harlots, go before you into
the Kingdom of God: the reason is, because they that are thus outwardly
affected, sing peace to their souls; when as the profane man has no starting
holes of excuse, his vileness being more manifest.

Secondly, God detests such boasters, more than those that are outwardly
profane: and therefore Christ inveighes against such ever. Woe to you
Pharisees, Hypocrites, and often threatens such with the punishment that is
provided for hypocrites, as if those were the men which his soul ab^orred, and
for which only hell was prepared.

But how shall we be qualified, that outward things may not be hinderers of us?

First, look to the foundation of all conversion* consider the nature of God,
and his law: by them we shall see a further degree of holiness, than the best
of us can attain to. The excellency of Gods nature is such, as Gods children
have been ashamed to be in his presence: As Job when God spoke abhorred
himself. Peter when he saw the power of Christ, said; Depart from me Lord, for
I am a sinful man. We are therefore to think often of the presence of God,
before whom ere long we must all appear.

Secondly, Bring thy self to the spiritual meaning of the law; as Paul did.
Romans 7. See into thy thoughts, and behold the uncleanness of thy heart.

Thirdly, converse with those that are better than thy self, and compare thy
self with them. Not as the Pharisees, who compared themselves with the
Publicans: and herein are many deceived, and by undervalewing others, they
over-valew themselves. For things compared with less, they seem somewhat; but
with bigger, seem nothing: it ought not to be so with us, let us compare our
selves to that rule that we live by; and to such examples as we are to follow.
Compare we our selves with Christ, our righteousness with his, and then shall
we see our wants.

Practice that which Christ so much beats on, that is, self-denial: hate
father, mother, world, nay thy self, or never think to come to Christ; they
will be loss to thee, unless thou account them loss: the young rich man's
wealth made him a loser: the love of the praise of men, kept the Pharisees that
they could not believe. Whosoever nourishes any lust, it will rule him and his
affections, that he shall make it his gain, be it never so vile in it self.
But St. Paul being guided by another spirit, casts away all, and so must we; if
we will not lose Christ, and suffer shipwreck, cast away these commodities
that load us and hinder us in our course. Neither is it meant here of an
actual casting away of our goods, thereby to establish the foolish vow of
poverty; But herein is meant a judicious discerning of the true worth of these
things in comparison of Christ, and from thence a preparation, and ar^ solved
mind, to part with all that may hinder us from the enjoyment of peace of
conscience, and the love of Christ. For a man may have a weaned soul, in the
midst of abundance: and he may live in the world, though not to the world,
which is a duty easily spoken of, yet not easily performed: neither was it
easily wrought in our Apostle, who being a persecutor of the Church, was
powerfully altered and changed from Heaven: and thus does God deal with his
children, whom he does first cast down and afflict, that they may find by
experience, that these outward things can stand us in no stead* it may be he
suffers them to fall into some grievous scandalous sin, that they might see
the body of sin that lies in them, and seeing no good, nor help in
themselves, their desires are stirred up to the embracing of some better thing,
wherein they may find comfort: then does God reveal Christ to us, to whom he
will have us to fly, and say: Lord what will thou have me to do? So as this
power of changing our selves, is not in our selves, but it is an almighty
power.

If we think therefore that we are selfe-lovers, go to God, present thy
self in the means, and then our eyes shall be opened to see and discern good
and evil: For God has promised to annex his spirit to the use of the means,
if that we in obedience submit our selves to them.

VERSE. 8. Yea doubtless and I count all things but loss.
THe words contain a kind of correction; as if in few words he had said: All
things, whatsoever I formerly boasted in, nay my very privileges, I count them
not only dung, but I do count them to be loss to me: nay, I have suffered
the loss of them all, in comparison and for Christ my lord. Yea, I desire to
express the earnest intention of my affections, by my desire to win him, to
know him, to be found in him, and to formable to his death.

In general observe:

The Apostles resolution, and zeal, his assured viz. his love of Christ, and
hate of all outward things whatsoever. Therefore we also in maine fundamental
points must be resolute, carrying a full sail; as in the truth of the thing
there is a certainty, so in us there must be an assured persuasion thereof. For
even from these uncertain irresolute hearts comes Apostacy, men being not
grounded, are carried about with every wind of doctrine: and hence also comes
different measures of grace in Christians; some say with Paul, Doubtless:
others are of doubting hearts. But the end of the word is to settle us. Ephesians.
4.13. And though it be never so true, yet if we not believe it; though the
foundation be sure, yet if we not build on it; the true hand force of it, is not
good unto us.

In the second place, from the Apostles example: We are to learn in
fundamental truths to be zealous. The Apostle speaking of any thing that
^e^kes competition with Christ for value, how does he vilisie it? that he has
not words sufficient to e^pr^sse his fervent hatred thereof. For zeal is such
an affection as causes a constant hatred against any thing that opposes that
which we entirely love: even such a hatred, as will cause us not to endure to
hear of it: And God therefore promises Ephraim he shall so abhor Idols, as
he shall not have to do with them. And indeed a jealous God, and a zealous
heart do well agree; when we have to do with any one that opposes God in his
truth, we are not to be cold, but to be zealously affected.

In the third place: We are to learn to be and therefore we are to be
ashamed of our shortness of breath, in speaking or meditating of Gods honor,
and glory, and his truth. But particularly from our Apostles esteem, we may
learn: That Gods children have sanctified and regenerate thoughts and
esteems. For with new souls, they have new eyes, new senses, new affections,
and judgments; what they saw before to be gain, they see now to be loss.
Beasts we know conceive not of men's matters, neither do weak simple men of
state matters: that which weak silly men admire, the Apostle scorns and
contemnes. Moses accounted of the afflictions with the children of God, more
than of the pleasure of Egypt. We may observe this as a mark to know our
estates by: what is high in thy esteem? is honor, riches, pleasure, or the
like? thou art not yet thoroughly sanctified; for if thou were, thou would
have a sanctified judgment.

But some may say, did Paul esteem all things to be loss, yea his good works?

Paul did, they are also dross, and dung.

Secondly, it teaches us, that we are not The Papists allege works as
meritorious, we contrarily do disclaim them. As to that purpose: I (say they)
you mean ceremonial works: we say no, we mean also moral. For Paul was
unblameable as concerning the works of the law, and yet counts them dung. O
(say they) St. Paul meaned those works before his conversion, and not those
after his conversion. I answer, yes; all things in respect of Christ, I do now
account them as dross, and loss. To prove this the fuller; If nothing after
conversion be perfect, then cannot they entitle us to heaven, but all our best
works, in state of regeneration are imperfect: to prove this; See the examples
of David, a man after Gods own heart, Psalm. 143.2. None righteous in thy
sight, and who can say his heart is clean. And Esaias 64.6. We are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousness as filthy rags.

O but Bellarmine says, the Prophet speaks this in the person of the wicked.
I hope he will not put the Prophet into that number; for he says, we, and
our, and our righteousness; not our ill deeds; and all our righteousness. Nay
of himself in particular: Esaias, says as much in Esaias 6.5. And besides, the
wicked do not use to pray, as the whole Chapter is to that end. And Daniel
also includes himself in his confession, Dan. 9.20. And to prove this by
reason; We know that weak and corrupt principles, must needs produce imperfect
effects: now the principles of all our motions, are evilly affected; our
understandings, memomories, affections, all are corrupt and weak. Corruptions
make combats in all parts of the soul and body: in whatsoever therefore we
do, there is flesh and spirit; and their own Authors agree hereunto: as
Ferus, and Catharen a Cardinal of their own, says there is donatajustitia,
and inhaerens. When the question is what we must lean to, it must be only on
Christ and his righteousness, wherewith from him we are endowed. And a Pope of
theirs, Adrian the fourth, says that all our righteousness is as the reed of
Egypt, which will not only fail us if we rest on it, but will pierce our
sides. St. Cyprian says also, that he is either Superbus, or Stultus, that
says or thinks he is perfect. And good reason, for that which shines in the
eyes of m^n, in Gods esteem is base. In thy sight shall no flesh be justified:
Now there are diverse degrees of judgments; in Gods judgment none shall be
justified, nor in judgment of l^w, for in many things we offend all: and for
the judgment of the world, what is it if it clear us? can that ^cquit us, if
God and the law condemns us? and for the judgment of our own consciences, if
they be cleared they will condemn us. Yea the Papists are not satisfied in
their own consciences for this point. For if there may be a perfect fulfilling
of the law in this life, by a man's own inherent righteousness, why do they
teach the doctrine of Doubting, as necessary to salvation? But how ever they
may br^bble in schools to maintain this their assertion, yet when death
comes, they must fly those shifts, and lay hold only on Gods love.

Some will say: what are the graces of Gods spirit? are the sacrifices, the
sweet odours, and ornaments of the spouse, are these dung?

I answer, Things admit of one esteem simply considered, and of another
comparatively; stars in the day are not seen, yet in the night are great
lights. So works in regard of Christ's works, are not visible, are nothing,
but in themselves are good.

Secondly, I say there are two courts, one of justification, another of
sanctification: in the Court of justification merits are nothing worth,
insufficient: but in the Court of sanctification, as they are ensigns of a
sanctified course, so they are jewels and ornaments.

But the ignorant Papist objects against us, Obj.
saying that we discourage men from good works, because we do so basely
esteem of them.

I answer. Answ.
A sick man cannot eat meat, but it breeds humors that strengthens the
disease: shall he therefore forbear all manner of meats? No, for meat
strengthens nature, and makes it able to overcome the power of the disease. So
by reason of our corruption we have within us, we halt in every good work we
put our hand to: shall we not therefore work at all? Yes, for notwithstanding
our weakness, though we merit not any good, yet God he over-lookes the
ill-nesse of our works, and accepts and rewards the good that is in them,
giving us comfort and assurance of our justification, by the sanctified
fruits, which though imperfect, yet are true. To conclude, Seeing we cannot
have Christ, putting any confidence in outward things: Let us labor to get an
esteem of the weakness and imperfections that are in them, as also in our
persons, and actions: that we may hunger after Christ. To this end, daily
renew we our repentance, and examination of our hearts, and when we do any
good, Examine what weakness, want of zeal, want of affection or attention
has possessed us in our performances (of praying, hearing, reading the Word,
and the like) and want of watchfulness in our courses, and then shall we be of
St. Paul's mind, all will be naught. And take heed of spiritual pride, and
conceit of any good in us, for it hinders spiritual comfort from us. Let us
meditate of the greatness of Gods love to us, and the infinite reward, and it
will make us ashamed of our weak requitance of Gods love to us. Consider the
multitude of our sins, before the time we were called: and consider of our
pronenesse to spiritual pride, let us by all means abase our selves. For
those that God loves, he will have them vile in their own esteem: for it is
his method; First, to beat down, then to raise up. And therefore John he
comes thundering, Hypocrites, generation of vipers. Then comes Christ; Blessed
are the poor, those that hunger and thirst after righteousness: as if only
they were blessed that feel their wants. We must disdain any other titles to
any good, but only in Gods mercy, and accordingly give the glory of all to
him. Thus did the Church militant, Not to us, not unto us Lord, but to thy
Name: and thus do the Church triumphant, Rev. 7.12. Honor, glory, and power,
be to the Lamb; those that do not thus, are no members of the Church.

Last of all, Let us take heed of extenuating sin: the Papists tell us of
diverse sins that are venial, such are surreptitious thoughts, taking of
pinnes, stealing of points, and the like; these they call venial. But we must
know, (to admit, that sin, as a sin, to be venial, is a contradiction,
though God do pardon it, for that is out of his free mercy) these
surreptitious stealing motions, that unawares do creep into us, though the
Papists do make them of small account, God may punish with his fierce
indignation. Moses, his anger kept him out of Canaan. Adam, his apple, cast him
out of paradise, every sin is a breach of the law, the least sin soiles us,
we must give account of idle words: and the wages of any sin (though never so
small) is death.

VERSE. 8. For the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus.
THat is, either all things are loss to me, that hinder me from the knowledge
of Christ Jesus; or, all things are loss in comparison of Christ Jesus.
Wherefore, before we can know Christ as we ought, we must know all other
things to be loss: for when we learn to know Christ aright, we then cast
those things out of our affections, which would else keep Christ out of our
heart. Wherefore its no wonder that great Scholars, should be erroneous in
many points of Religion: for look to their lives, and we shall see them
envious, and ambitious; they maintain Idols in their hearts, they account not
those things loss, which must be loss, or else they must account Christ
loss. Secondly, This knowledge of Christ is an excellent knowledge, better
than the Jews, who had all their knowledge shadowed out in ceremonies: but
this is unvailed, and therefore Christ said, Blessed are the eyes that see
those things that you see. And as the estate of the Church grows more
excellent now, than before Christ's coming, and shall be most excellent
hereafter in heaven: even so our knowledge does, and shall grow in its
excellent perfection. Wherein, and how the knowledge of Christ exceeds humane
knowledge.
Its better also than humane arts and sciences: not in regard of the Author,
for all knowledge is from God; but

in regard of the manner of revealing thereof: for whereas we come to the other
by the light of nature and reason, this is inspired into us by the spirit.

In regard of the matter of this knowledge: which is far beyond the other,
for this teaches the natures and person of Christ, God and man in one person,
which may swallow up the thoughts of man. Great is the mystery of godliness.
In the next place, It teaches us his offices: that he is a King to rule over
us, and deliver us, a Priest to make us acceptable to God, a Prophet to teach
and instruct us. And thirdly, it teaches us the benefit of his offices:
exercising them in his state of humiliation, and exaltation. Fourthly, It
teaches us to know our duties: to entertain him, rest on him, glory in him
only, and that all other things are loss in comparison of him.

This knowledge is better than other knowledge, in the effects it has: it
being a transforming knowledge, 2 Cor. 3.18. It makes glorious, happy, full of
comfort, carrying the spirit with it, which changes us into his similitude, and
therefore is it called the word of the spirit.

In the fourth place, its better than other In regard of the depth of the
knowledge: and therefore called, The manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10.
That a virgin is a mother, God is become man, this is far above natural
reach, and therefore Christ may well be called wonderful, Esaias 9.6. who being
God, should be also man, die, rise, and ascend far above all power.

Fifthly, This knowledge is a sweet knowledge: How sweet are thy testimonies to
my mouth, Psalm. 119.103. And if the promises here be so sweet to us, what
shall then the accomplishment of them be to us hereafter.

This knowledge, furthermore is excellent, In regard of the continuance
thereof: the knowledge of other things dies with the things; the world must
perish, and what use is there then of our skill in the nature thereof: only
this knowledge abides for ever, working grace, love, heavenly mindedness, and
brings us it is to glory.

This knowledge of Christ, teaches us to know God aright: his justice in
punishing sin his wisdom and mercy in reconciling us to him, and in
willing that Christ should become man, and dye for us. Neither could we know
these things, but by knowing Christ, who is the ingraved image of his father.

It teaches us to know our selves: our filthiness, our ignorance, in esteeming
tri^lingly of sins, counting them venial: But great surely must the sore be,
that necessarily requires such a salve, and such a Physician as Christ, and his
blood to be shed for the curing thereof.

This knowledge is altogether sufficient in it self without all other
knowledge; and none without this to make a man wise to salvation, both of soul
and body; and all men without this, are but fools.

Use. 1.
For Use hereof. This improves the shallow conceit men have of Divinity: that
the knowledge is but shallow, that every man may know it, and that any man may
soon have enough thereof. But alas, St. Paul had a large heart, and had more
in^ight into the deep mysteries of this knowledge than such, how ever they
boast, and yet he desires more, and could not pierce to the depth thereof, for
none ever could do it but Christ Jesus only. Nay, the very Angels they desire
to pry, and look into, and to know more of these deep mysteries, 1 Pet. 1.12.
Its therefore no shallow knowledge.

In the second place, Use. 2.
This ought to put us in mind to put apart times, to meditate of the
excellency of this knowledge: and to this end, we are to empty our selves of
whatsoever fills us. Especially, we are to empty us of sin, and of care for
the world, and the vanities thereof, and the knowledge of them: because both
it, and they shall all perish; make no excuses of venturing displeasure, or
suffering discommodity: true love pretends no delays, nor will endure them.
Behold Lord, half of my goods I do give to the poor, and I do restore to
every man his own, said Zacheus.

In the next place, Use 3.
We must call upon God to open our eyes: that we may see and know his nature,
his offices, his benefits, and our duties, to know more distinctly,
effectually, and setledly, to see the wonders of his law: that we may be even
ravished, when we behold his fullness. We

In the fourth place, Use. 4.
are to frequent places, where we shall have a fuller knowledge of Christ: such
places where the commerce is between Christ, and the Church, in the 5. Cant.
1. verse. Christ had made love to his Church, and woed her by his gracious
promises: she in the 2. ver. being drowsy, pretends excuses. Hereupon Christ
goes away, but leaves a gracious scent of his quickening spirit, enough to
stir her up to seek after her well-beloved that was gone (to the 8. verse.)
who asking after her well beloved, those whom she enquired of, enquired of her
who he was? and upon her description of him, are enamoured with him, and
stirred up to seek him also: (where by the way mark the benefit of
conference) Cant. 6.1. and are told that he is gone into his garden to the beds
of spices: that is, into the congregation and assembly of his Saints. If we
will know Christ therefore, we must go into these gardens, where he is ever
present, and there will he teach us.

Use* 5.
And then shall we be stirred up to magnify Gods goodness, and mercy, that
has reserved us to these times of knowledge: and this marvailous light,
wherein we are more blessed than John, who was the greatest of those borne of
women, we see (more than he saw) Christ our Savior, already ascended, to be
our eternal high priest.

VERSE. 8. My Lord.
THis is the end of all our knowledge, to know Christ to be our Lord, for else
the Devils knew Christ Paul I know, and Christ I know, said he to those
Conjurers, but he could not know Christ to be his Lord. My Lord. Not only for
his title that he has in me, but My Lord, for the title I have in him: My
Beloved is mine, and I am his. Mine he is, for he made himself mine, by
redeeming me and paying the price for me. My head, from whom I receive force
and vigor, my husband, my head of eminenci^: briefly, my Lord, making me his,
and stirring up in me, a love and desire to make him mine, and to rest upon him
by faith. In the Covenant of grace therefore, there is a mutual consent
between God and us: he is ours, we are his by faith to trust on him, and by
love to embrace him, which stirs up the whole man to obedience; we may not
think that this proceeded from a spiritual pride in the Apostle, as though he
thought himself the only darling of Christ; no, they are the words of a
particular faith, and love, in the Apostle; not excluding others from the like,
for every Christian must labor for this faith, that we may know Christ to be
our Jesus, our Savior which we shall be assured of; for if he makes us his,
he will make us to love him, and to say from our hearts, my Lord, and my head:
his love of us, is the cause of our love to him; we love him, because he loved
us first, hi^ knowl^dge is the cause of ours, he chose us, and therefore we
choose him, and if he loved me when I hated him, surely now I love him, he must
needs love me. Again, we shall know that we are Christ's: for then there will
be a likeness of Christ wrought in our hearts. For that spirit that stirs us
up to own Christ, does ever work the Image of Christ in our souls, as a seal
it imprin^s on our soul the image of Christ, in all graces, of love,
meekness, heavenly mindedn^sse, and goodness: if we be the spouse of Christ,
we shall represent and show forth his glory, for the woman is the glory of the
man. Else what ere we boast, we are therein but hypocrites: we must forsake
all in regard of Christ.

VERSE. 8. For whom I have suffered the loss of all things.
HEre St. Paul confirms his resolution and judgment of the value of Christ
above all other things: first, he said he accounted him gain, and all other
things loss: lest men should think these were but brags, he inferres he had
suffered the loss of all for him, and therefore did so highly esteem of him:
and then it was he was for Christ's sake stripped of all, he was in want,
hungry, naked, went in danger of his death often, nay he willingly suffered the
loss of his privileges, he was an Apostle, yet not worthy of the name, as he
says: and for his care in his office, though he were very diligent, yet by it
did he not look to merit: he suffered the loss of all willingly, he wrought
this on his heart, to lose all for Christ: which is the duty that a Christian
must learn, not to be only a patient, but willingly to lose, to part with
all: and therefore we are bidden to examine our selves, to judge and condemn
our selves; and though the Lord has not called us to the loss of all, yet
win thus much of thy mind, as to be prepared for to lose all when we shall
be called thereunto, and that in regard thereof, we may say we have parted with
all, for in that we part with themin our affections, God beholdes it, and takes
notice thereof, and likes it, and looks for it, and therefore he bids us leave
all and follow him, and if we forsake not all, honor, credit, yea our lives,
we cannot be his Disciples.

VERSE. 8. And do count them but dung.
Showing his lothing of them, and that he could not in dure the thought of
them, but did abhor it as dogs vomit or dogs meat, accounting it fit meat
for none but such dogs as he spoke before of: if therefore we love Christ,
there will be a detestation of those things that cross the power of Christ's
merits, in the same degree that we love Christ, and we will express our degree
of love of him, by expressing the degree of hatred we bear to other things in
comparison of him.

Quest.
But why does the Apostle so often inculcate these words?

Answ.
To show the expression of the largeness of his own heart, and thereby to
work an impression thereof in the hearts of the Philippians.

Acts 4.20.

show the excellency of the subject, he dwells upon it, that we should think
highly of it: Also

to show the necessity thereof, without which we cannot look for salvation.

difficulty of coming to this esteem of Christ, and to subdue our proud
imaginations of our own selves, which however it will prove a hard and
difficult matter.

Philippians, he knew it would be a difficult matter for them, and therefore he
sought out fit words to express the nature of the subject, and the truth of
his esteem, thus did the wise man, Eccles. 12.10, 11. who knew that the words
of the wise man are as goades: its our duty to take notice hereof therefore,
and to learn in what respect these outward things are good, and to rank them
in their right places.

VERSE. 8. That I may win Christ.
TO win Christ, in this place, is to get a more near Communion with Christ,
a fuller assurance of him, and a larger portion in him: for St. Paul had Christ
already, and that made him desire a fuller enjoyment of him, though his heart
was not large enough to entertain all Christ, yet he desired to be satisfied
with his fullness.

First, then, it is here to be granted that Christ else why should the Apostle
desire to win him: He is gain I say, both in himself considered, and having
respect to us: In himself considered, for no jewel is comparable to God-man,
to a Mediator, he was enriched with all graces that the manhood was capable of.
But much more in regard of us; for first, he is our ransom from the wrath of
God, now we know a ransom must be a gainful thing, and of no small price
that must satisfy Gods wrath.

He is not only our ransom, but our purchase, purchasing Gods favor and
heaven to us.

he is our treasure: for all things for this present life, as also for a
better, in him are the treasures of heavenly wisdom, and of his fullness we
all receive grace for grace: he is our comfort in trouble, and direction in all
our perplexities.

as he turns all to gold: all things are sanctified to us, death, grave,
crosses, all which though we be not freed from, yet he turns them all to work
our good.

by him we are made heirs, and have title to all things: he is our Lord, and
he that has given Christ to us, how shall he not with him give us all things,
so as in all our wants we may boldly come to the throne of grace.

We by Christ gain such offices as he himself had: we are Kings, we are
Priests, we are over the greatest of our enemies, no more thrals to lust, or to
the world, we may freely offer sacrifice for ourselves and others, in the name
of this our high priest.

Paul, he would have thought it the best bargain that ever he made, though he
had parted with all, if he had gotten Christ.

But it may be said, Obj.
true, Christ is gain, but what hope is there for us to attain hereunto, it
may be as Paradise in it self, yet kept from us by a flaming sword.

I answer, Answ.
no, this gain may be gotten; which is the thing I propound to speak of:
Christ is a treasure in a field, if any one will seek he may find, we had a
Savior before we were borne, he was elected thereunto, and we to gain heaven
through him; and he was manifested in the flesh in the fullness of time to
encourage us, and Christ our gain calls us to buy without money, and invites
us that are laden with sin to come to him: Isa. 55.1. 2 Cor. 5.20. To this
end, he appoints men to lay open his riches to allure us.

Secondly, we have the spirit, by which we lay * if we depend on God by prayer
for his spirit, and when we have gotten but a little portion of this gain, it
makes our gains increase; to this end he gives us the Word and Sacraments:
and this condemns those that live in the field where this pearl is, and have
the ministry to show them it, and yet they do neglect this so great a
jewel; and this ought to stir us up to magnify Gods goodness to us, who
has recovered us that were the lost sons of a lost father, and keeps us from
returning back into our former natural estate.

is not to be gotten but at a price, it must begotten by parting with all
outward things: so far, as to make them gain to us?

Quest.
Ah, but is God thus hard to us, that he will not allow us the enjoyment of the
comforts of this life, but we must for them lose Christ?

I answer, God denies us not our worldly comforts, Answ.
for Paul had them. But when they come in competition with Christ, for
excellency and superiority in esteem; as also, when thou art called forth for
the confession of the truth, then be at a point to count all, yea thy life,
dross and dung: we must therefore resolve and forecast the worst, and leave
not till thou workest this mind within thee, to endure the worst rather than
lose peace of conscience.

And therefore we may well conclude from hence, that confidence in Christ and
in outward things cannot stand together: we cannot love God and Mammon, and
therefore if we part not with the world, look to part with Christ; which we
may note against the politicians of our times, that think themselves the only
wise men, in their esteem Paul was but a weak man, and knew not how to esteem
things, they can trust in God they hope, and yet provide against the worst; the
time will come, when they will find they have been made fools indeed, when
God will say he knows them not, and their riches shall take their wings and
leave them, without hope of comfort.

And therefore let us acquaint our selves with Christ's value, with the vanity
of outward things, and meditate hereon, and at length thou shall find the same
mind in thee, that was in St. Paul.

In the last place we may hence observe, who they be that have not gained
Christ: for are there not many that will not part with a sin, no though it be
a sin that brings no profit or pleasure at all with it, as swearing and
blaspheming Gods name, nay are there not those that ( Judas like) sell Christ
for 30. pieces of money, nay, it may be for less. A goodly price to set
heaven, happiness, and their own souls at, let any man tell them hereof,
they will swear you do them open wrong, and be ready to cut your throat for
saying so, how far are these from true grace?

The fourth and last general observation is, have parted with all, we are to
know that we are gainers: For Christ in Mark. 10.30. says, (whose promises are
yea and amen) That he shall have a hundred fold in this life ^ that is, so much
content as shall be worth an hundred fold: for when a man's conscience can tell
him, these and these things I parted with, only to obtain peace of
conscience, that peace of conscience shall give him more content, than the
whole world can bring to him, and what can a man desire above content and
comfort, its all we seek for here, which if we have not, all is nothing.

Secondly, he that has Christ can be no loser; for in him all things are,
Eminently and Fundamentally: for he is Lord of all, and what I lose for his
sake (if it be good for me) he has said I shall have it.

Hence we may see therefore, the wisest man, and the noblest spirit, who is the
wisest man? He that makes the best choice, its judgment makes a man: not he
that has confused notions swimming in his brain: Now a Christian considers
things, lays them together, judges of them duly; he therefore is the wise man.
The wicked man he is a fool, he parts with an invaluable pearl, for his
present delight in a few idle, vain, childish bables and toys. Who is also
the most truly noble minded? An advised true Christian, he is able to set at
naught that for which the world forget God, heaven, soul and all for; he can
despise the pleasures of a Court and of a country, his eye is on his soul, on
heaven, on the innumerable company of Angels, on that presence where is
fullness of joy: a wicked man routs in the dirt of this world, see what manner
of stones and building are here, that is their delight, to admire the stage of
this world: But had they known this gift of God, this peace of conscience, and
the comfort thereof, they would look after another city and foundation, whose
builder only is God.

Quest.
But how shall we know whether we have made this choice, or not?

I answer, Answ.
by these signs;

First, Signs of the choice of Christ.
if a man accounts of any thing, his eye and mind will be on it: if we account
Christ as our gain, our hearts will be set on him continually; if he be our
treasure, our hearts will be on him.

Secondly, if we have made choice of him, our hearts will joy in him above all
things: as he that found the jewel, went away rejoicing. Show me the light of
thy countenance, for therein do I delight, says David; where true belief is
there is joy: Zacheus, the Iaylor, and the Eunuch, after they were converted
they rejoiced. This makes a covetous man not regard at all what men say of him,
for he has that which they would be glad of; so ought it to be with us, let
us be taunted, mocked, flouted at, if we have chosen Christ, ^ll's one, we
have other things to comfort us, and our eyes will be upon them.

The third note is, if we can part with any thing and endure any hard measure
for the sense and assurance we have in Christ Jesus: many are so far
herefrom, as they will not part with the least earthly pleasure for Christ;
such as these, though they say they have peace of conscience, they lie, for
they can have no more peace of conscience, than they have love to Christ, nor
more love, than they have an esteem of him above all things.

Fourthly, he that has made this choice, must part with all things what ever
he loves, yea his dearest affections and lusts: for a bird catched, though but
by a wing, yet is she as surely the fowlers, as if her whole body were bound;
so if we favor, or like and embrace but one sin, though we think not
thereof, there is a flood of sin comes in at that gate, he that is guilty of
one sin, is guilty of all.

Quest.
But the weak Christian will object, are we not (yea the best of us) troubled
with our personal secret infirmities, what shall then become of us?

Answ.
I answer, fear not: for its true, though the best child of God be thus
troubled, yet he pleades against it, he hates it, he undermines it, and
strives against it, and thus opposing it, it is not accounted to him by God.
But if he forsakes all sin in heart but one, the devil will suffer it, and
endure it well enough, for he knows he is sure enough.

That such an one can be content to be at some cost, yea loss and pains for
the Word, for the field wherein this pearl is hid: he that is not of this
mind cares not for the word. It is not that men can speak well and commend
it, for many will do so, yet afterward make a mock of it, especially being in
some company: but he that esteems it once will ever esteem it, and in all
company will extol it. Herod a very reprobate, may seem well affected, where
there is no temptation, or while the word is preached, can this be a plea to
God at the last day, who searches and knows thy heart, many dream they have
this, when indeed they have naught but the shell. How few can say in truth, I
have denied this or that commodity, and refused my profit for Christ's sake:
Those that have done this, let them know they have a most rich gain, and the
best gain of all others; they have an universal gain, that will comfort at
all times, riches and honors cannot cure the troubled mind, neither can they
deliver in the day of wrath.

Then in the next place, let them know they have an everlasting gain, that
will comfort us for ever and ever. In the last place, such as have won^e
Christ, they have such a gain as makes them that have him, truly rich, and
noble, and good: other riches without grace, do corrupt us, the Image of God
is the true and intrinsecall worth: Let this encourage us to labor to get
Christ, to attend the means that lay his riches open; and thereby shall our
love be so stirred up, and our judgment so sanctified, as we shall be of
St. Paul's mind, to account all other things loss in regard of him: and
therefore its no wonder that those that have not the benefit of the means,
want this esteem.

VERSE. 9. And be found in him.
SOme read the words actively, th^^ may find Christ; but the phra^e is in the
original varying from the former, and therefore it is better translated as we
have it, passively; But when is it that St. Paul desires to be found in
Christ? Ever no doubt, but especially at the hour of death, and day of
judgment.

The Phrase implies, first that there is an estate in Christ; Secondly, an
abiding in it; and Thirdly, to be found abiding in him. For the handling
whereof, we will first explain the phrase; Secondly, we will show what
doctrines it does clear, then we will come to some instructions arising
therefrom. The phrase, to be in Christ, is taken from plants which are grafted
into stocks, or from the branches which are said to be in the tree, thus are we
in the vine; its Christ's own comparison, and of this union with Christ, there
are three degrees.

First, we are in Christ, and in God, first loving us, and so we were in him
before we were, he chose us from all eternity. Secondly, when Christ died,
then we were in him as a public person. Thirdly, we are said most properly to
be in him, now when we believe in him, and thus principally is the sense
understood in this place: and thus we are in Christ, not as the manhood is in
Christ, but mystically; not as friends in one another by love, but by faith we
are ingrafted; as truly as the branches are in the vine, so are we one.
But Christ is in heaven, Obj.
we are on earth, how can we be united to him that is so far distant from us?

I answer, Answ.
if a tree did reach to heaven, and have its root in the earth, does this
hinder that the branches and the root are not united? In no wise. So Christ he
is in heaven, and we on earth, yet are we united to him by his spirit, and
receiving influence from him of all grace and goodness.

Now lets see what doctrines are cleared first, it cleares the point of
justification by Christ: For if the question be, how we are saved by Christ's
righteousness? I answer, Christ and we are both one, does not the eye see for
the body, are not the riches of the husband and wife all one? yes, and even
also whatsoever Christ has is ours, he is our husband, he is our head. In the
second place, it cleares the matter of the sacrament: the Papists would have
the bread transubstantiated into the body of Christ, that it may be united to
us. I answer, how is the foot in the head, is it not by spiritual vigor
passing to and fro through the body, but chiefly in the head: it is not
therefore necessary that there should be any corporal union. Nay, Christ
comforted his Disciples more by his spirit when he departed from them, than he
did by his corporal presence. We say also, that the mystical body of Christ
is invisible, because the spirit whereby we are made one is invisible.

This should comfort us at all times, and in all estates: before we were in
Christ, we were in an estate of horror, in an estate of damnation, now to be
reduced to Christ: (what comfort is it to be one of a politic body its but
for life, or to be in any man's favor its but at will) this is a most
excellent, glorious, and eternal being, that man's nature should be so highly
advanced as to be unit^d to the Godhead, yea our persons are mystically united
to Christ. Secondly, In all crosses or losses, what though we lose other
states, here is a state cannot be shaken. Thirdly, in the hour of death we
are in Christ: and blessed are they that dye in the Lord; death that separates
the soul from the body, cannot separate either from Christ. Fourthly, after
death can it go hard with me that am in Christ, that am his spouse, I am in him
in whom is fullness of comfort. Fifthly, in all wants here, I have him to
supply all, he will give what is necessary; if we should have fullness of
grace here, we should not desire to be in heaven hereafter. Sixthly, in
persecution all my hurt redounds to him: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
that which thou do to my members thou do to me?

In the fourth place, let us consider how this being in Christ, is a ground of
doing of all duty. I say therefore, it will direct us in duties to God, toward
men, and to our selves.

First, in duties toward God, how thankful ought we to be to him: for taking
us to himself, for being Emmanuel God with us, so that we are become bone of
his bone^ what need we now Saints or Angels to intercede for us, who should
Christ hear above his own flesh? For duties toward men, this ought to stir
us to duties of peace and unity, shall we be so unnatural as to fall out
with the members of our own body, Non est concors cum Christo ubi est discors
cum Christiano.

Secondly, it ought to stir us up to duties of respect to each other:
considering they are members of Christ as we are, and shall so be found in him
ere long.

Thirdly, this should stir us up to charity to the poor members of Christ:
they being his members are fellow members, and in loving them and doing them
good, we show our love to Christ himself.

And in the last place, toward our selves we are to carry our selves with more
respect: and not to prostitute our selves to every base pleasure: consider in
whom am I, and to what I am redeemed, and with what price; shall I make my
body the member of an harlot, who am the member of Christ, this pride and high
esteem of our selves above base pleasures and lusts, this is commendable; and
therefore the Apostle had good reason thus to account of these earthly things
to be dross and dung. In the second place, this will teach us to see our
residence in Christ, and growth in him: for if we be in Christ, we will have
an especial eye to our conversation, that we be not feet of iron and clay
under a golden head, as many base licentious drunkards and filthy persons
esteem of themselves: will Christ own such members as these, think we? no,
those that are in Christ Christ will be in them, discovering himself by ruling
in them; his house is holy, if we be of his house, we will not desire, grieve,
nor affect, but by the sway of his spirit.

How shall we come to be found in Christ?

Answ.
I answer, we must first come where he is; we shall find him in the Temple, The
means how to be united to Christ.
teaching and strengthening our faith, and love, and so in our judgments and
affections we shall be in him. Secondly, we must separate our selves from the
contrary to Christ, as a loyal wife will from all doubtful acquaintance; we
must depart from Antichrist, our own corruptions and lusts, and daily we must
labor to get ground of them.

And from the words this we may learn; First, that a Christian is continually
under Christ's wing, till he be in heaven: else how could the Apostle desire to
be found in him at the day of judgment.

Secondly, we learn that there is such a time when God will, as it were with a
Candle, search men out, and lay them open as they are. This is not thought
upon, men now shuffle it off, I shall be saved as well as any other, and this
and that good company I am acquainted withal: trust not, I say, to good
acquaintance, there is a time of separation, when thou shall be found out as
thou art in thine own colors.

Thirdly, hence we learn that the foundation of future happiness must be laid
now: before we can be with Christ in the Kingdom of glory, we must be his
members in the Kingdom of grace: do thou live therefore a corrupt and carnal
life here, never think to be found in him hereafter. And therefore let the
uncertainty of this life be a spur to thee, to watch over thy ways, so as
thou be such at this and all other times, as you would be willing to be found
at that day: many boast hereof, but their lives savor nothing hereof, but are
knit altogether to their lusts or to Antichrist; woe to such, they shall go on
the left hand. But snch as Christ finds in him, it must needs go well with
them, Christ will not judge them for whom he died, but shall set them on his
right hand for ever more.

VERSE. 9. Not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law.
IN these words and those following, the Apostle, lays down summarily his
desire; first negatively in these words, he desired not to be found in Christ
trusting to his own righteousness, implying a difference and distinction
between his righteousness by the Law, and that by Christ: the righteousness
by the Law he disclaimes (as any way meritorious) and that as well habitual,
wrought by God in him, or actual righteousness, consisting in the outward
works that he did, and that with good reason: for first man's righteousness is
but finite, and therefore unfit to work or deserve infinitely, and impossible
to deserve heaven and the joys thereof. Secondly, this righteousness is
imperfect and stained as a menstruous cloth and unable to quiet or satisfy our
own consciences, much less God, who is greater than our own consciences: and
therefore the Saints prayed, Enter not into judgment with thy servants Lord,
for in thy sight shall no flesh be justified. But the Papists answer, the work
of God is perfect, but our righteousness is the work of God, and therefore
perfect. We say, that the works of God are within us or without us, the works
of God without us are perfect, but those that are within us are imperfect,
still savouring of our polution and corruption, by reason that the old man in
us perverteth all that is good in us, and therefore partus sequitur ventrem.
Secondly, it is true that the works of God within us are so far perfect, as
tend to the end he works them for in us, but our righteousness was never
ordained of God to that end, as to save us by them, and therefore they cannot
accomplish that end; but God works this righteousness in us, to convince us
of our own weakness, and to be a testimony of the presence of his spirit in
us: Paul therefore says not, I will not have mine own righteousness, but I
desire not to be found in my righteousness; so as to merit salvation thereby.

VERSE. 9. But that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith, that I may know him and the power of his Resurrection.
THat is, that righteousness which is in Christ, but laid hold on of me, and
apprehended by faith, and all that righteousness that he had, both active and
passive as Mediator, but especially his passive, for he was born obedience,
lived and dyed for us: and this is that which St. Paul desired to be found in,
and this is that which we must trust to.

But how can this righteousness performed wholly by him, be mine?

I answer, by faith its made ours, for if Christ be ours, all his
righteousness must consequently be made ours.

But how can this righteousness performed by Christ be sufficient for us?

I answer, first because God ordained it to that purpose: 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ
by God is made to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption:
and to this end, God the father sealed him, Ioh. 6.27.

Secondly, I say Christ is a second Adam, and a public person, and became
ours, we then being in his loins, so the righteousness of Christ is made
ours, we being borne in Christ by faith, and found in him: he being our head,
we have a spiritual life descending upon us; he being our husband, all his
goods are ours also. This point is the soul of the Church, and the golden key
which opens heaven for us: if we join any other thing to it, it opens hell to
us, as God will reveal at that great day. Its true the Papists do acknowledge
now that their good works are not of themselves, but from God: but thus did
the Pharisee, he thanked God that he was not as other men, nor as the Publican;
but the poor Publican disclaiming all such goodness, went away justified
rather than the other: let it be our wisdom therefore to rely only on
Christ, whose obedience and righteousness is so all-sufficient, as nothing may
be added thereto, and say with the Apostle, not I, but the grace of God in me.

VERSE. 10. And the fellowship of his Sufferings.
THe Apostle having showed his desire of Christ's righteousness, now comes to
show his desire also of having communion with Christ in his sufferings; showing
that whosoever brags of justification, he must show it in his sanctification:
he must show that he has his part in the fellowship of his sufferings, if he
means to show he has his part in the power of his resurrection, water is not
alone, but water and blood must go together. Now Christ's sufferings are either
for us as mediator, or with us, as being our head, and we his members: As
mediator he suffered death, which was only for our good, we can have no trust
in our death, as to deserve any thing thereby as he did: for by his death he
appeased Gods wrath, and got his favor to us which we lost, and by it he
sanctifies our sufferings, and pulls out the sting of all our afflictions* as it
is with the Unicorn, who having put his horn into the water, discharges all
poison thereout, so as the beasts may freely drink without hurt: so it is with
us we may suffer and endure afflictions without hurt, seeing Christ has
purged them of all poisonous nature that was in them.

But there are other sufferings, that we and Christ suffer jointly, he as our
head suffering with us his members; for as if the foot be grieved, the head is
grieved, so the Christians sufferings are called Christ's sufferings: and a
Christian must look to suffer, if he be a lively member of the body of Christ.
Yet is not every suffering of affliction Christ's suffering, for a man may
suffer justly for his deserts, notwithstanding even then when a man suffers for
his faults, after repentance Christ may be said to suffer with him: and
therefore the Fathers called the death of the repentant Thief, a martyrdom.
For in all our sufferings Christ is in us, teaching and helping us to bear
them with patience, and as a sanctifier of all of them to a blessed end, and as
one that frames us to bear all of them, even as he himself did.

Use. 1.
This ought to teach us to conceive aright of the estate of a Christian, that
he is not alone when he seems to be alone: Christ leaves them not in
misery, no for in misery he is most near and present. It is therefore a good
estate (though misery in it self be not desirable) for Christ desired to die,
and not to die; and so we in several respects may do: for if we regard death
as a destroyer of nature, so is it not to be desired, but considering it as the
will of God my father, so are we to desire it, and yield our selves to it: and
accordingly we desire not afflictions for their proper natural good, yet in
regard they are a means to prepare and fit us for heaven, we say with David
its good for us to be afflicted.

In the second place, this will teach us that we; because there are more with
us than against us. Joseph in the dungeon, Israel in Egypt, Daniel among the
Lions, the three children in the fire, Paul in prison, feared not danger: for
what cared they, so long as they knew God was with them, and therefore they
rejoiced; if we have Christ we have all, if we want Christ we want all.

Thirdly, this may serve to daunt Christ's enemies,

Fourthly, this should teach us to take part Moses chose the better part, that
did choose to be with the afflicted people of God, before the Court of Pharaoh;
wicked men may bite and kick, but they can do no hurt, lingua malorum est
lima bonorum.

VERSE. 10. Being made conformable to his death.
THis conformity here meant, is not in regard of the end, that as Christ dyed
for sin, so should we; but in the manner of suffering as he did suffer and
die, so must we suffer and desire death. Secondly, as he died patiently and
meekely, so must we suffer patiently and meekely. Thirdly, as he had, so must
we have sweet comforts to sustain and support us, and Fourthly, as he had, so
must we endeavor to obtain the same issue of our afflictions, that is,
eternal glory; briefly, we are to be conformable to Christ in grace, in
suffering, and in glory, all these are unevitably linked together, and our
head having led us an example, we are to follow. Every Christian must therefore
die to sin, as Christ died for sin.

But how shall we know whether we die to sin or not?

Signs of mortification.
A dead man does no harm, has no power; contrarily are we strong to commit
sin, and do we earnestly intend it? surely we are not mortified. Secondly,
dead men's senses are not delighted with fair and sinful objects, if we be
dead with Christ, let the sinful objects be never so delightful, they will
not move us or affect us one whit, nay, they will be distasteful to us. Most
are of a contrary mind, offer them good discourse and occasions, they cannot
away with them; offer any fleshly pleasure, (like tinder) they are soon set on
fire, such as these, as they have no heart to suffer for righteousness, so if
for vain glory they would: neither would God honor them so much as to suffer
them. For grounds of this doctrine:

First, its honorable to be like Christ our Captain, our head, our husband.

Secondly, its not proportionable for the head to be crowned with thorns, and
the members to be clad delicately: that the natural son in whom is no
blemish should suffer, and the adopted sons who are the causes of all offense
should go free. It is equity that we having taken Christ for our husband, he
should be accompanied by us in sickness and in health, in dishonor as in
honor.

Thirdly, it is long ago decreed of God, and predestined: and therefore
cannot be avoided. Romans 8.^.9. Whom he did foreknow, them he predestined
to be conformed to the Image of his Son.

Fourthly, its equal that if he were conformed to us, we should be
conformable to him: now he was conformed to us, in that he suffered that which
we should have suffered, and did that for us which we were to do and could
not: he having drunk deep of the cup prepared for us, let us therefore at the
least taste of it. Yea, let us suffer any thing with an undaunted courage, when
we are called thereto for Christ he will come with comforts, he is not empty,
he will make us like him, he will prepare us hereby for glory, fear not
therefore, God will turn all thy troubles to thy good. And thus we do fill up
the measures of the afflictions of Christ in our flesh. Col. 1.24. And are made
partakers of Christ's sufferings. 1 Pet. 4.13. We have the like exhortations
hereunto, 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 Pet. 3.14. to 18. Thus did Paul 2 Cor. 4.10. he
carried the dying of Christ about with him. Let no Christian therefore promise
to himself immunitie from crosses, he that will be a Christian, must be
conformable to Christ, and he that will be like to him in glory, he must be
like to him in drinking the Cup he drank of, while he was here in the flesh.

VERSE. 10. If by any means I might attain to the Resurrection of the dead.
BY Resurrection of the dead, he means the glorious estate after this life,
whereas the resurrection is but the beginning: and the words sound as much in
effect, as if the Apostle had said; I know I shall be happy at length, but
between this time and that, I know I shall meet with troubles, with many
crosses; yet let the way be never so difficult, I pass not by any means to
come to such an excellent end, as the resurrection of the dead is: in which
words we will

First, consider that there is a happy estate reserved which begins with the
resurrection of the body, whereby we are far more happy than the Angels
that fell, and also more happy than we were in our first estate in Adam, which
we lost: and therefore our hearts should be enlarged with thanks to God, that
respects us above the Angels whom he has left without hope of recoverie.

In the next place, consider that the beginning which is called the day of
restoring of all things, and a time of refreshing, Acts 3.19. Its a day when
all good shall be perfected, and all evil shall cease, all grief of mind,
all trouble of body, and death it self, shall be swallowed up into victory.

But why are we not happy before our resurrection? Quest.


I answer, Answ.
because our bodies and souls are partakers of misery and sin here, and
therefore cannot partake of fullness of happiness, before they be united
together again. God will have us to stay while all his family of blessed
Saints shall meet together, as well us that are now alive, as our seed and
posterity after us.

In the third place observe, that the Apostle establishing thereby an order,
that there must be means to the resurrection, and then the resurrection it
self. Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into his
glory: Math. 28. And if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him: the
second resurrection must begin with the first, we are sons and Saints
hereafter, but so we must also be here, only a difference there will be in
degree of holiness: this resurrection does not follow every manner of life,
although men ordinarily expect a crown without crosses, and never look for
justification and sanctification, but think they shall be in heaven at an
instant without them. But we must suffer with Christ in Mount Calvarie, before
we come with him to the Mount Olivet.

its hard to come to heaven: because of this order established by God, not in
comparison of the end, for that surmounteth in excellency the hardness of the
means, but in respect of the means, some by fair death, with many crosses in
their life, some not by many outward crosses, yet have store of inward troubles
of the mind, by reason of their inward corruption that does trouble them:
others by violent deaths and by martyrdom: the ways are so many, and the
means so diverse, as there is no certainty which way we shall pass. As St.
Paul knew not the means, so he cared not what the means were, for he was
content to go thither by any means: let the cup of affliction be never so
bitter, the glory ensuing will sweeten all.

Away therefore with all idle and secure thoughts of sparing our selves: Pity
thy self, said Peter to Christ, but was answered sharply, get thee behind me
satan: no, the way is very hard, we must come to health by physic, the end is
so amiable, as it will sweeten all sour means, and therefore its good for us
to be afflicted; crosses bring at length the sweetest comforts. Deny we our
selves therefore, in Christ's cause, know no body, look upon God and Christ's
promises, and promise we ourselves no more than God promises, its beyond our
knowledge what God will do with us, he promises no immunitie from crosses.

Nay, the Saints and the Apostles chose crosses and afflictions, rather than
the pleasures of sin, who were wise, and had trial of both kinds, and yet
accounts these momentanie afflictions, not worthy of comparison with the glory
that shall be revealed, they were but light; 2 Cor. 4.17. Romans 8.18. And if
we would truly believe this, it would be easy for us to be resolved as St.
Paul was, to come to heaven by all assurances, and to come to all manner of
assurances, by any means: for no worldly thing can bring content, like these
heavenly assurances, of the presence of the light of Gods love, which the
children of God will by no means lose.

Secondly, in all crosses let us not look into the state we are in, so much as
that we are going into: we are going to a Palace, let us not be dejected in
the consideration of the narrowness of the way that leads thereto. God will
not suffer this fiery trial to consume any thing but dross, and therefore
let us with Christ suffer the cross, and despise the shame, Heb. 12.

Thirdly, labor for a right esteem of the things of this world: they are but
momentarie and fading, yea our lives they are given to us by God, what if we
part with them, if it be for his cause, he will bring us to a better life,
which shall not be taken away from us, and this life we must part with ere
long: and thus we ought to work on our selves by often meditating of them, as
the Saints have done.

In the fourth place, we are to labor to strengthen three graces in us
especially: Faith, to assure us that we are the children of God, and that we
have heaven and all things belonging thereto, laid up for us; and we are to
labor to see more and more into the value of them: and then we are to
strengthen our Hope, which makes us cheerfully to undergo, and do any thing
for Gods cause, through our expectation of that which faith believes. Lastly,
let us cherish our love of Christ; this made St. Paul desire to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ: which was best of all. And this love comes from Faith
and Hope, and these together will breed a largeness of heart, that cares for
no worldly thing, and will be daunted with no affliction or crosses what ever.

But how far are we here from? did St. Paul part with life? It pertaines not
to us, no not to leave a new fangled fashion, nor an oath whereby we tear
Gods name daily: alas, where is faith, what corruption is here overcome, which
of us will ever be of Paul or David's mind, to become vile or base for Gods
cause? where is he that will endure a scoff or scorn for religion? let us beg
of God this large spirit, and large affections, the children of heaven have a
free spirit, basely esteeming all worldly things: Zacheus when he is called
cares not for his goods, nor Paul for his privileges. The Stoics commend this
resolution in men, to be willing and ready to die: alas, crosses and
afflictions Paul esteemed not, so as he might attain to the resurrection of
the dead: these are the things that the Stoics feared most, and it was the
fear of these made them so willing and ready to die, together with a base
servitude to pride: but a Christian heart is more noble, it not only fears not
these, but it contemnes them; yea cares not for life without afflictions, but
with joy can undergo all manner of torments.

Let us therefore take heed how we quiet our selves in our earthly dwellings
here, supposing our estate to be happy, surely it is the maine ground of
Apostacy; we shall never come to see the price of religion, nor the
excellency of a peaceable conscience, nor the vanity of these things, so long
as we bless our selves in them. And contrarily, let us exercise our graces in
the daily trials we meet with here: does favor of great men, does pleasure,
profit, or honor, cross and oppose thy conscience, let the peace thereof be
preferred above all evermore; else shall thou never come to Paul's holy
resolution. And dream not of a vain empty faith, thou have no more than thou
do practice, its not Lord, Lord, that will prevail at the day of judgment,
but Christ will be ashamed of them at the day of judgment, that made no more
account of him while they lived, than to prefer every vain, idle, wanton
delight and pleasure, before his honor.

VERSE. 12. Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect.
IT is a correction of the Apostle; he formerly spoke of his desire, choice,
and esteem of Christ's death and resurrection, and the force thereof he found
in him: Now lest secret insinuating proud conceits might arise, either in
himself or in them, concerning his holiness, he crosses them with a Not as,
showing that the best estate of Gods children in this world is imperfect: there
is ever some thing to do or suffer, some lust to conquer, or some grace to
strengthen.

There is no absolute perfection but only in God himself, yet in Christians
there is a kind of derivative spiritual perfection, which consists chiefly
in the parts: a Christian has this perfection, he has all grace in some
measure; we have no other perfection, no not so much as perfectio viae, though
the Papists say they have it, indeed we are so far from it, that never could
Christian keep the rules of nature; much less can we attain to the
perfection of obedience to the law, for by it we are all cursed: nay in Christ
none attaines to evangelicall perfection of grace so as thereby we can be
justified, as by a work of our own, for our righteousness is but in part;
and this perfectio viae, which they boast of so much, differs not from their
perfectio finis, no more than love to a man raised by good report of him,
differs from love caused by the good I find in him, by personal
communicating with him; and this is only in degrees in nature, they are the
same love.

But why, or how is it that there is no perfection of grace in this life?

Because, there is and ever shall be in us, during this life, a perpetual
combat between the flesh and spirit, so as one weakens and hinders the other.
Paul at the best found a law in his members warring against the law of his
mind, Romans 7.23. the flesh continually lusting against the spirit. Gal. 5.23.
Hindering us from doing good, or in doing good, or in doing thereof, from doing
it in a right manner.

Obj. 1.
But the Papists object, love is the fulfilling of the law, we may love: ergo,
we may fulfill the law, and consequently be perfect.

I answer, love, in the abstract being perfect, is the fulfilling of the law,
but in this or that subject its not perfect: Paul's love, nor Peter's love was
not the fulfilling of the law.

Obj. 2.
They urge further, all Gods works are perfect: ergo, the grace that is in us.

Its true Gods works are perfect, but in their times when they are finished;
grace at length shall be perfect in us.

Secondly, all Gods works without us are perfect, as justification and
glorification they are perfect, for we are perfectly justified even now, but
his works within us, such as are his sanctifying graces, are not perfected
till our time of glorification: for he suffers the old Adam to be within us for
diverse reasons, so long as we live in this earthly Tabernacle.

For use hereof, observe this as a ground for justification by faith. Paul,
Romans 5.9. proves, that even now he was justified, and in this place he denies
and disclaims absolute perfection, and therefore could not be justified by it;
and therefore must needs be justified by faith: if it were his case, it is much
more ours, who come not to that measure of the fullness of grace that he
attained to.

Secondly, this may serve to comfort Christians that find themselves burdened
with diverse wants, with dullness and frowardness of spirit, and with manifold
corruptions, and are induced thereby to call in question their Christian
estate, let them look upon a better pattern than themselves, they may be
grown Christians, and yet complain with Paul of corruptions. Nay, the most
strong Christians see most deeply and clearly into their corruptions, and
find most opposition. There is in all men by nature, a spring of Popery, they
would feign deserve heaven by a perfect and holy life, without blot; and God to
humble them, suffers corruption to check them, and to keep them under, who
else would be lifted up through good conceit and esteem of themselves.

Thirdly, it may serve as a caution to many, who being reproved justly for
their faults, what (say they) we are not Angels: you have your own
imperfections as well as I. And stir them up to any good duty, they are
presently so good, as those that are better than they, are too precise and too
nice: St. Paul contrarily rests in no degree of goodness, but strives on to
perfection: and its the devils sophistry to turn that to a plea for
negligence, which should stir us up to be more diligent, watchful, and
careful.

VERSE. 12. But I follow after, if that I may apprehend that, for which I also
an apprehended of Christ Jesus.
THe word that is translated, I follow after, signifies properly to labor with
earnest intention of the heart and affections: and the lesson that we may hence
learn is, That the life of a Christian is a laborious and painful life: for
in what proportion the things we labor for, are more excellent than these
worldly things, so much greater our desire and labor should be in the
obtaining of them, than in the obtaining this worlds goods: and to this end,
the Scripture ever inforceth this duty with words suitable to our work; Labor
for the meat that perishes not, strive to enter in at the straight gate, give
all diligence to make your calling and election sure.

Those that will take no pains, its a sure sign they find no sweetness in
the thing, and therefore in such there can be no true goodness; and hence we
may observe a difference between the desires of men, some are effectual, some
uneffectuall; those that are uneffectuall commonly desire and delight in the
thing they desire, but will none of the means: let me die the death of the
righteous, says the wicked man, glory and happiness is excellent, but the
gate is narrow, the way is tedious and full of trouble, he will none of that;
we will laugh at one that shall wish his work and jorney were done, when as he
will sit down and never go about it; why should we not much more laugh at
such sluggards that wish daily, O that they might be saved, when as they do
not only not further, but hinder their salvation. But where true desire of
grace is, there will will be joined thereto an endeavor, with jealousy over
our corruptions, with grief and shame for them, and for our backwardness and
want of goodness, for else hell itself is full of good wishes and desires: if
we mean to be better, we must use all means, undertake all pains and
travail with vehemency, even as those that pursue gains with delight, they
follow through thick and thin, especially if the gain be in the eye, and
those that go for company, they are soon tired; and thus did Paul, he went
through fire and water, through all manner of dangers, good and ill report, his
gain is still in his eye, he looks not after the way, if by any means he
may attain his desired mark.

But how shall we come to this grace?

I answer, get first Faith, for by it the weak are made strong, Heb. 11. Get
assurance that Heaven is thine, and God has promised thee grace sufficient,
and this is Paul's argument; be ye constant and unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, knowing you labor shall not be in vain: where hope
of reward is in the use of the means, it will stir us up to a constant use of
the means 1 Cor. 15. last. Secondly, get a fervent love, for it is a strong
affection if lust so prevail with us, as we will omit no means to accomplish
it; then a love in it self is much more powerful, nothing being too hard for
it, it has an enlarging knitting and communicating power: it makes a man
bestow all, and rejoice more in doing good, by much then in receiving. Its a
grace co^prehends a number under it, and therefore Christ comprehended all the
law under love of God, and our neighbor. Thirdly, cut off all superfluities,
men think they are happy, when they have much to do, when indeed they were
happy if they had less to do then they have. Satan he does as Cyrus did
with the waters of Babylon, he diverts and separates our affections, that he
might pass over. As Nurses, they hurt themselves and the children too, when
they keep over many: so do men hurt themselves with overmuch business. The
Lord has not made us all for the world, but has reserved one day in Seven for
his service. For shame lets show we have some respect of Religion and
goodness, seeing God requires but one in seven; let us not be so unjust, as
to deny him his service on that day.

Well, let those that profess themselves of another world, by all means
pursue it. In Nature, every thing tends to his center and place, heavy things
go downward, light things ascend upward, in handicrafts and arts every one
looks after excellency, shall it be thus with them, shall mediocritie in
other arts merit dispraise, and is it only praiseworthy in Religion? The
wicked they labor for hell, venturing loss of credit, strength, and estate,
and is there not better gain in goodness? have we such rich promises and do
we esteem of them no more, are not the afflictions we shall meet with many
and great, and do we think to undergo them with ordinary grace, gotten
without labor and watchfulness? But lets go on to the next words;

That I may apprehend. Whence we may observe, that the maine scope of a
Christian is to apprehend Christ here by revellation, that we may apprehend him
hereafter by vision: many there are that may follow good things, and use good
means, yet wanting these apprehending graces of faith and love, (which makes
us have communion with Christ) they perish notwithstanding: humane knowledge is
commendable, yet is it no other than as a scaffold in this building, it helps,
but the building once done, its for little use; apprehend we therefore him by
knowledge of his truth, rely on him by faith, and embrace him by love: and
then if we be chased by him, we may as Ioab, lay hold on the horns of the
Altar Christ Jesus, and there live and die, and as we have daily breaches, even
so get more and more hold on him, and this will make us desire with Simeon;
Lord let me now depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Let us
therefore daily learn to see our own foulness, and go to him the rock of
our refuge.

Ob.
O but some will say, Christ is in heaven, and we on earth, we cannot go to
him when we please.

Answ.
I answer, yes; for the arms of faith are large, it takes hold of things past
and to come, no height is out of the reach thereof: and besides, Christ he is
present with us, he is in his word, in the Sacraments, in the Communion of
Saints; where two or three are gathered together in my name, I will be in the
midst of of them, its his own promise.

For which I am apprehended of Christ: Christ he apprehends us, and that in
several degrees.

First, as he is God: In his eternal love we had a being before we had any
being here, God conceived us in his eternal affection, and embraced us.
Secondly, Christ apprehends us in his effectual calling of us: Paul he was
posting another way, when Christ called him, Saul, Saul; others he calls from
their mothers womb, some by afflictions and powerful crosses, as he did the
Iaylor, others by more gentle means, as Lydia.

Thirdly, there is an apprehending in all our actions, courses, and estates,
directing us continually in them, never leaving us; none can pluck us out of
his hands, he is stronger than our corruptions, he will not let us go till he
has drawn us up to heaven, and placed us with himself; for the use of this
doctrine more shall be said in the next doctrine, which is taken from the order.

Christ he first apprehends us, Doctrine.
then we apprehend him: he apprehends us that we may apprehend him, and because
he has apprehended us, therefore is it that we apprehend him: for in him it
is that we live, and move, and have our being; and therefore much more our best
being: he it is that gives us the will and the deed, to us it is given by him
to believe, and suffer with him.

For use hereof, Use. 1.
it would teach us in all our actions to beg ability and strength of him, and
get a persuasion that his spirit does apprehend us in love, and that he will
direct us, and remove all impediments, and stand by us in all our crosses, that
we are able to do nothing but by reflection from him, that though we are
naturally dead and dull, yet he will quicken us by shining on our hearts with
the sunshine of his grace.

Secondly, give him the praise of all the good thou do, for the deed is his:
those that do not, do apprehend, and are apprehended of themselves: and
therefore it may serve as a mark to discern of our estate, whither do we
run? and what do we apprehend in our trouble? is it Christ who is our
present help in time of trouble? then there is a blessed change in us, but do
we seek to our own devices, to our own policies and inventions? surely we
have not apprehended Christ as we ought to do, and therefore we are to
stir up the graces in us, and beg increase of grace from him that is the
fountain of all grace.

In the next place, it should comfort us, by the consideration of the
certainty of our estate, without falling away, if we hold fast unto the end:
if it were ourselves that did apprehend us we could not long continue, but it
being Christ that holds us, our comfort is he will not forsake us; its the
mother that holds the child, the child cannot lay hold on the mother, but is
subject to falling every hour: Christ he holding us, has promised to love us
to the end, and to put his fear in our hearts, that we shall not fall or
depart from him: this being daily considered, will greatly comfort a weak
Christian, Christ may seem to let him fall by suffering him to fall into some
great sin, but it is only to humble him, and to teach him not to trust to
his own strength, which will soon fail him, but upon his mercy and grace:
And therefore,

In the next place, it teaches us to hold fast unto him, and rely on him, and
to pray to him that he would hold us fast. and then we fall not from God, but
to God, he has delivered us, and will deliver us and keep us to his heavenly
kingdom: if we fall into sin, let us repent and go to God, there is mercy
in Israel concerning this and with him is plenteous redemption, his right hand
is under us ever to hold us up, that we cannot fall so deeply but he will lift
us up again.

In the next place, this may be a comfort to us in all our troubles and
afflictions of this life: Are troubles near? God is not far off ( Psalm. 22.
and Psalm. 118.) But full of comforts for such: we have an invisible wall about
us, the wall of Angels, and God fights for us, there is more with us than
against us, God will not suffer us to be tried above that we are able to bear:
let us therefore pray, forsake me not Lord, lest I forsake thee: if we pray to
him he will be found of us. Paul prayed for this. Christ also that knew he was
apprehended, yet prayed all night; and this are we to do: he has promised, to
hear us. And therefore let us go in faith and assurance to him, in all our
troubles.

VERSE. 13. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended.
THe holy Apostle dwells upon the point, that he might press it the more, and
its good to press matter of weight: the Apostle showing that conceit of
perfection to be dangerous, again tells the Philippians, that he had not that
which they boasted of. This pride of our selves, and conceit, is a sin that
climbes up to heaven, and enters on Gods prerogative, and a sin that God does
directly set himself against: of this compellation, Brethren, I have formerly
spoken.

I might also touch that doctrine, that the Kingdom of heaven is not perfected
in us here, but that it grows by degrees: its at the first, as a grain of
mustard seed, there are babes in Christianity, and old men grown Christians.
And the ground hereof, may be partly in the subject, partly in the object.

In regard of the subject, for that graces are imperfect in us, the more the
soul has, the more it desires.

In regard of the object, for that Christ is so full, that we are not able to
receive all his fullness: so as there is imperfection in us, and superabundant
perfection in him. Paul had a large affection, yet came far short, this
possibility of the soul to receive more will be in us, till we be in heaven,
where we shall be full; and therefore while we are here, we pray still, thy
will be done, on earth as it is in heaven, and thy Kingdom come, more and
more: its a strange conceit therefore, for any to think he may be too good,
yet do these daily (or should do) pray for more and more perfection here on
earth, although they say they know not what. And another reason why we
apprehend Christ not so fully here as we shall do hereafter, is, because the
manner of making Christ known to us, is by revelation. 1 Cor 13. We behold him
here but as it were in a glass, in the glass of his Word and Sacraments,
which cannot represent him to our understanding so clearly, as hereafter we
shall behold him in the beatificall vision.

Take heed therefore of a self conceit of perfection: when we begin to be
unwilling to grow better, we begin to wax worse, there is no stay in
Christianity. It is the sight of our imperfection, that makes us strive to
perfection, and the more we see into our misery, the more earnestly we strive
on to be freed from it.

VERSE. 13. But this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth to those things that are before.
SEe what is the Apostles unum necessarium, to grow more and more to the
fullness of the knowledge of Christ. All other things he counts as dung and
loss. So as we may hence observe, that the spirit of God in a Christian heart,
subjects all things to one Christ.

One thing have I desired of the Lord (said David) Make this therefore a rule
to difference our estates by. What is the thing we intend chiefly, is it
riches, or pleasures, or honors? this one thing will be the utter overthrow of
all religion in us; Christ will be supreme, or he will not be: He that loves
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me, says Christ of himself.
There is none so wicked but would be religious, till religion comes to cross
that one thing, their darling sin. And thus have they base limitations, which
must needs prejudice their grow^h in religion, for where religion is, it will
cross their base affections and lusts.

Therefore, whosoever we are that intend to be true Christians indeed, resolve
first to prefer the peace of conscience and the fruit of of religion above
all, and resolve to abhor all things that will cross this one thing of St.
Paul.

VERSE. 14. I press toward the mark.
BEhold an excellent description of a Christian course, borrowed from the
exercise of running a race, being a man-like and commendable exercise, fitting
men and inabling them for war. The very heathen herein condemn us, whose
ordinary chief exercises, what are they but good company (as we call them)
continual lying at T^vernes, to the impoverishing of our estates, and weakening
our bodies: the kind I condemn not, but the excess is such, as the Heathen
would be ashamed of, for which they shall even rise up in judgment against us,
and condemn us.

But from the similie, we may gather thus much; That Christianity is a race,
the beginning of this race is at the beginning of our conversion, it should
begin at our baptism: the first thing we should know ought to be God, the
race is the performance of good duties, concerning our general calling, and
concerning our particular. For the length of our races, some are longer, some
shorter, but the end of every man's race is the end of his life: some men's ways
are plainer, some rougher, the prize is fullness of joy; the lookers on, are
heaven, earth, and hell, God is the instituter of this race, and the rewarder;
the helpers, are Christ, good Angels, and the Church, which helps by prayer;
the hinderers are the devil and his instruments, who hinder us by slanders,
persecutions, and the like. For ground of this race in us, we are to know that
man is created with understanding, directing him to do things to a good end
and scope, other creatures are carried to their end, as the shaft out of a bow,
only man foreseeing his end, apprehends means thereto: his end is to receive
reconciliation and union with God, to which he aims by doing some things,
suffering others, and resisting others.

And this race is also ordered by laws, for every runner is not crowned, there
is a running ill, that shall never procure the prize. The laws hereof concern
either preparation, or the action it self; for preparation,

1. Direct.
First we are to know, that there is a dieting requisite, as those that run in
a race, have a care hereof, to use such diet as did strengthen not cloy, and
such apparel as might cover them, not clog them; so ought it to be in our
spiritual race, we must cast aside all heavy loads, every weight and sin,
which does so easily beset us; as it is Heb. 12.1. If God cast on us any place
or riches, let us use them for a good end, but not make them our end, and
therefore with them take up daily examination of our selves, how we behave our
selves toward these worldly things. It were a madness in a runner, in his
race to take up a burden, and not to think it will be a sore trouble to him,
and why do we not think thus in our spiritual race? Cast we off therefore
original corruption, and the corruption of our place, time, and calling, which
in time will grow unsupportable to us. Let us desire no more than God gives,
and what afflictions God sends us, let us take, assuring our selves they are
for our good.

2.
A second law is, to consider the ways that we are to run in, what dangers
we are like to meet with, forecast and resolve against the worst, and withal
promise we our selves Gods assured protection in our worst estate, the want of
this is the seminary and ground of all Apostacy, when men promise to
themselves in Christianity, such things as God never promised. Christ
therefore promises, and shows the worst first: but the devil to deceive us
keeps the worst out of our eyes, and shows a sort of vain delights and
pleasures, but the sting of them (through his subtlety and craft) he suffers
us to feel before we see it.

A third law is, that we enter the race betimes, its the devils trick to put
off the care of this, 3.
telling us, we need not yet enter, we are but young and have many years to
live, as they did that hindered the building of the Temple, but consider we
the uncertainty of our life, that we may die suddenly, and that its just with
God to take us away after that manner, if we neglect our selves and him; and
we must know also, we shall lose no pleasure nor delight, but we shall find
such sweet delights in those ways, as we shall with St. Augustine be greeved
that we enjoyed them no sooner. And besides, those that begin betimes get a
great advantage of others, and through continual custom, come at length to a
habit of Religion.

In the next place, we are to take heed of hindrances of us in our
preparation* as

First of all, hope of long life, whereby we are besotted, thinking life and
death is in our command that we shall have time enough, and need not so soon
enter upon good duties.

2. Hind.
Secondly, a conceit that when we have once given up our names to Christ, that
presently we bid adieu to all delight, mirth, and pleasure, when alas we are
far deceived; God denies not pleasure to us, but will give us whatsoever is
good for us, we shall delight and rejoice, but with a joy spiritual, and we
shall see nothing in this world, that may any way deserve our delight therein.

3. Hind.
A third hinderance, is a despair of ever going through this race; this settles
upon some strangely making them cast away all care, and desperately trust to
Christ's mercy. This made Cyprian to complain of his corruptions, saying, they
were bred and brought up with him, and therefore feared they would hardly give
place to grace, being but a stranger; while men consider how great and
powerful their corruption is, they with the Israelites despair of ever
entering into the land of Canaan, these sons of Anak do so terrify them.

But consider we withal, that God is above all our corruptions, that he can
make of a Lion a Lamb, and that if we will trust upon him, in his time he
will help us, and we shall overcome these Giant-like corruptions, Christ he
has conquered them already, and though while we live we cannot wholly
overco^e them, yet David's house shall grow stronger and stronger, and Saul's
house weaker, we shall have grace sufficient for us: God will sweeten Religion
to us, that we shall delight therein, and Christ will not lead us into
temptation, till he has fitted us to it by his grace, and then we shall
rejoice as the Apostles did Acts 5. that we are accounted worthy to suffer.

Contrary to this humor, some think it so easy a matter to run this race,
as they think they cannot be out of it, or tired therein, when as indeed they
never set foot therein; let such look to themselves if they be in this race,
they shall find it no easy matter.

But thus much concerning rules or laws for preparation to this race, now
there are laws to be observed of those that are in the race, as

First, Direct. 1.
they must resolve to hold on without discontinuance of their course of good
duties, for some by omitting good duties, now and then upon slight occasions,
do come through Gods just sufferance to leave them off, and never take them up
again, and thereby whiles they are not getting ground by continuing their
course, they do lose thereby, even as watermen rowing against the stream, if
they do not row but rest never so little, the stream carries them back
again, and they cannot recover themselves, but with great difficulty: so it
is in this Christian race, a little interruption of duty, causes thrice so
much pains to recover our former estate; therefore we are to take up a holy
resolution, not to be interrupted in good duties.

The next law is, that we must look to gain ground still to grow from grace
to grace. Its the Apostles aim still to grow better than himself, contrary to
this many forsake their first love, they think themselves wise but are fools,
such as the Lord will spew out of his mouth, as he threatens the Church of
Laodicea. And indeed the most men at the best are but civil, and do but
provide for their own ease, and can endure any mixture of religion or company,
and the ground of this coldness is a self-conceit, whereby men think well of
themselves, and their estate; Paul he was of another spirit, ever pressing
forward.

A third law is, that we do things with all our might, that we run this race
with all our earnest endeavor, there is no bodily exercise that profits, but
it must be with putting forth of our strength; so our Christian actions should
show even outwardly, that we do things as if we intended thereby to honor God
indeed, and to this end we are to depend on God by prayer, that he would give
us strength, and minds to put forth our strength, for gaining most honor to
his Majesty, and this will bring great assurance and comfort to us in time of
need.

A fourth rule is, that we are to run this race with a cheerful and speedy
course: a dead performance of duties, is no part of our race, yea as many go
to hell by ill performance of good duties, as by committing sins that are
scandalously evil; for this resting in the work done, is the cause of
hardness of heart, and there by of despair, and at the best never brings any
sound comfort at all to us: and therefore we are enjoined to do good duties,
and to do them in a good manner, Let a man examine himself and so let him
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, and so run that you may obtain.
Its no lingering, we know not how long we shall live, how soon we shall die,
and therefore let us make haste to do our work, before God takes away time
from us, by taking us out of the world. And those especially are to look to
this, that have lived long in their own courses, and are but lately reclaimed,
they are much behind, and had need make haste, the journey is long, their time
but short. And to this end, look we not what we have done, and how far we
have gone, but look what remains to be done, and know we have done nothing,
till we have done all.

But it will be asked, Quest.
what may we not think of duties that are past?

I answer, Answ.
we may think of them by way of defense, and to give God the glory, and also
to encourage us on, but not to rest, or solace our selves on them till we have
done all.

But men may say, Quest.
what is there no pause, is there no Sabbath?

I answer, Answ.
yes when we are dead. Blessed are the dead in the Lord, its they that rest
from their labors, heaven is a sufficient reward for all the pains we can any
way take here, besides the comforts that we have here are many, which none
knows but them that enjoy them. And God has promised the continual
assistance of his blessed spirit, that shall encourage us and lead us into all
truth, alas what comfort have we of all that we have done, if we continue not,
but sit down and take up our rests here? what good got they that came out of
Egypt and died in the wilderness, it may be even in the border of the land of
promise, yet never saw it? It will assuredly fall out with us, as it did with
them, if we harbor any infidelity in our hearts, we shall be cast out, that
we shall never see this good land, the spiritual Canaan.

In the next place, take we heed of such hindrances, as may make us either
slack, or intermit this race of ours.

1.
As first, we must take heed of idle scruples and temptations: these are no
other than as dust cast in the eyes of the runners, and as stones that gaul
their feet, interpret them to be the subtilties of the devil, and therefore
shake them off, and intend thy duty thou art about, and pray for wisdom to
discern aright of things; regard not the golden apples of the profits and
pleasures of this life, that lie in thy way to divert thy steps, and sweep off
evermore the dirt of these worldly cares, which we gather in our race, and by
little and little grow to clog us.

2.
In the second place, beware of sins against conscience: they take away joy,
and make our hearts dead, there are many that seeing diverse of their sins
before them, concerning which they find no peace in themselves, are soon out
of breath, and quite out of heart, and so by little and little run into
despair, and without hope ever to attain the price.

Thirdly, 3. Hind.
take we heed of ill and dull company, that are cold in religion, that cannot
away with good religious duties; for as it is in our ordinary travels good
company makes time and way pass away speedily and with comfort, so is it in
this race, good and gracious company by exhortation and example, do
wonderfully encourage us, and ill company contrarily do dishearten us,
dissuade us, and clog us, and draw us back from every good duty we take in
hand. But many men's conceits are, they need not all this ado, they are well
enough though they be not thus holy, all cannot come to the high pitch of
mortification* surely there is hardly any beginning of grace in such, who allow
themselves in a dead course, for where the love of God is, it will constrain
men to show their thankful and loving hearts to him, in walking before the
Lord with all their might.

In the fourth place, 4. Hind.
take heed how we suffer our minds to wander in this race: let us not look at
the lookers on; the world, and the devil, and wicked men, pass not for their
censures, we may assure our selves before we enter this race, we shall have no
applause from them, let a slow dull jade come by (like Dogs) they let him
pass, none regards, but if another comes by a pace, every man runs barking,
and slandering, and backbiting after him, and if they can, they will bite too;
shall a man care for such as these? no we must resolve before hand to have the
world, the devil, and all the enemies he can make to be against us, let us
therefore set our eyes only on him that has our reward in his hand, that
observes us and is ready to crown us, and let us beg courage and strength from
him, and spiritual wisdom; how we should perform every action, with what
intention or remission of heart and affection, how to sanctify his name in the
performance of the duties of our callings, how to make every action, yea our
recreations, a furtherance in this our Christian race.

Secondly, let us daily search and try our hearts and ways, see how we profit
or go back, how we grow like or unlike Christ: particularly, examine we how the
pomp of the world seems to us? whether base and contemptible? if so, then the
further we are run in this Christian race: for as in objects of sight, the
further we are from them, the less they seem to us, and the nearer we are to
them, they appear the greater; so it is in the object of our minds: does
heaven appear full and beautiful to us, its a sign we are near to it, and
we are come a good way in our race: but contrarily, if it be mean and of no
esteem or account, its far from us, we are at the most but coming toward it.

Secondly, examine what does take up daily the powers of our souls and
affections: do we delight in the best things? and with Marie choose the better
part, which shall not be taken away from us? or contrarily, are our delights
here below, and our rest set up here, then we have our reward here, and the
price is not prepared for us, but God will spew us out for our coldness: and
therefore, if we find coldness creeping on us, let us take heed of it, it is
a dangerous estate, God cannot endure it; for while we allow of good things,
but show not intention of spirit in the performance of them, we do even judge
them, and tell the world they be things not worthy of our pains and
endeavors: let us therefore not allow of this coldness, though it be in us,
b^t strive against it, meditate of such things as may inflame us, and pray
against it.

VERSE. 14. For the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
I Press forth. Its a word of vehemency, signifying to set forth his utmost
bent and endeavor, both of the inward man and of the outward and all is to
heaven, so as a Christians aim is always to Jerusalem, his looks is that
way, his tongue speaks the language thereof, his carriage will tell he seeks
another City, Heb. 11. But for these words, observe there is first a price.
Secondly, its a price of a calling. Thirdly, this calling is high. Fourthly,
this calling we have here in part.

Concerning this word price, its a metaphor taken from the reward of victory,
gotten in some exercise. Doctrine.
God hereby brings heaven down to us. Because we cannot go to it, he
insinuates into our affections by pleasing things, and teaches faith by sense.

Use.
And therefore, we must not rest in these borrowed words, but ever know that the
thing that is described, goes beyond the description by any earthly similitude.

Doct.
From the thing observe, that God has reserved a happy estate for such
Christians as are elected to run in this race, that are fitted to it, and
that are preserved to it.

Use. 2.
And this should teach us, to magnify Gods goodness: that whereas by nature,
death with his pale horse, and hell should follow us, now the course is
altered; a holy life in Gods commandments is given to us here, and then glory
shall be heaped upon us. God has begotten us to a lively hope, but has passed
by the Angels, and left them without hope of recoverie.

Doctr.
Secondly observe, this happy price is to be given, after running: God keeps
this order, to exercise his graces in us, that we might be a means to gain
others, and that we might value happiness the more. If we did not suffer
here, we could not taste heaven so sweetly after labor, sleep and rest is
sweet. And its fitting that we should be followers of Christ, to fill up the
measure of his sufferings; he did first run, and then was crowned, and this
order we must keep, if we mean ever to be with him.

And let us be comforted herein, Use.
though the race be long and painful, yet there is an end: it will not
continue for ever, and with the end, there comes a price. The world runs in a
mase here and there, they have their reward, and their happiness will end
soon, but a Christians happiness will never end.

In the next place observe, Doctr.
that it is expedient and useful to have an eye to this price^: it made Paul,
and it will make us run cheerfully, and God tells us of it, to the end we
may fix the eyes of our minds upon it, Colos. 3.23. Whatsoever we do, do it
heartily, as to the Lord, knowing of the Lord we shall receive the reward of
the inheritance.

But some may say, Quest.
if it be an inheritance to us, how is it then propounded as a price to us?

I answer, Answ.
its both a reward, and an inheritance, its an inheritance because its given to
adopted sons, its a reward after labor, not for labor; so as running is the
way to a crown, not the cause of it.

Quest.
But the Papists say, we have it by faith, why then is it a price or reward? why
or how can it be a price or reward, and yet ours by belief?

Answ.
I answer, encouragement and this price are not given to works, as works, but
as works by faith, for by it we run and overcome all trials and troubles:
reward is due to perseverance, but perseverance cannot be without faith.

But for the matter in hand; I say its expedient to look to the price; that we
be not carried away with temptations on the right hand, or on the left, and
therefore let us not look on them. Moses eye was so fixed on this price, as he
set light by all the pleasures of this life; the eye of faith in a Christian,
is stronger than that of sense, yet let us take these cautions. First, that we
know ourselves sons, and that we come to this price by inheritance. And
secondly, that we love not God so much for his goodness to us, as for that
goodness which is in him: for a Christian aims first at Gods glory, then at
his own good; and so he loves God for being goodness it self, then for
being good to him. And yet a Christian in order, comes first to see Gods
goodness to him, and therefore loves him, and then he arises higher to the
love of God, even for that he is goodness, and thenceforth admires and adores
his fullness, for else to love God because God loves us, is mercenarie.

We are therefore to think of this happy estate: Use. 1.
and as children, though at the first we know not what belongs to inheritances
and rewards, yet the elder we grow in Christianity, the more let us search
into these things, and see what is laid up for us. It is an unvaluable price
that will free us from all evil, of company of enemies, of Satan's anoyances,
of hindrances, of sin, from all occasions without us, and inclinations
within us, from sickness of body and troubles of mind: its a Saboth after
six days work. It is beyond all earthly crowns, the runners have envy not
one another, nay they help and further one another, and are glad of one
another forwardness: all are heirs, all happy, all shall be crowned, and
with an incorruptible crown, an inheritance that fades not, but is undefiled;
and such an one as is kept for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. Its not like the crowns of
leaves that soon fade; no, we shall ever be in the presence of the son of
Righteousness, where we shall have a continual spring.

But to proceed in the next place, this is a price of calling, we must be
called to it: who can means, and inward work of the spirit, this calling is a
powerful calling, inabling them to come that are called.

And hereby we may try, whether we have any title to heaven or not;

1, Sign.
For first, if we be effectually called, it supposes we are chosen, called and
singled out from others of the world: and therefore all swearers, and those
that are given to drunkenness and profaneness, they are not called nor
singled, they remain as they were, for this singling out, is the first part of
the execution of Gods decree of election. And whom God calls, he qualifies,
Princes they may call men to places, but they cannot qualify them. But God
when he calls Saul to be a King, he gives him a Kings heart, so if we be
called to this heavenly kingdom, we shall have holy and Kingly hearts and
minds given us.

2. Sign.
Secondly, men's tongues will show what calling they are of, in their discourse.
A Christian will remember he is a Christian, and will walk worthy of his
calling, and with Nehemiah he will reason, shall such a man as I do thus?
speak thus? think such vile sinful thoughts? and those that are not of this
carriage, show no great religion in them. And just it is with God, to give such
over to a great measure in sin.

3. Sign.
Thirdly, this calling is to glory; and therefore he that is called, he will
think of heaven, and magnify and admire Gods goodness to him, what thing is
man Lord, that thou should be mindful of him? and therefore those that
admire the pomp and glory of this world, its a sign their calling is worldly,
and that they are called by the world.

Fourthly; 4. Sign.
if a man be called by God, he shall find a spiritual answering within
himself to Gods call. If God say, thou art my son, the heart answers, thou
art my God. Behold I come quickly, (says Christ) even so come Lord Jesus,
says the Christian heart. And therefore a rebellious disposition, shows that
Gods spirit is not there.

Thirdly, this calling of ours is a high calling: its from heaven, to heaven;
its from a heavenly spirit, by spiritual means to Christ in heaven, to
Saints, to spiritual employments and privileges.

Hence therefore we may learn who are the greatest men: sensual men think
those in outward place the greatest men of all other* alas they are nothing to
a Prince of heaven, he is a spouse to Christ, shall judge all the world, and
triumph over Satan. All other callings end in the dust with our bodies; Kings
shall rise as Pesants, and it may be in a worse estate than many of the
meanest, there is no difference in death. All other callings are by men, from
men, to men, to earthly purposes; let us make therefore a difference, and know
whence our calling is, that we may be thankful, and whether it is, that we may
be joyful.

Use 2.
We may also in the next place hence gather, who are of the highest spirits? its
a Christian and only he, he overlookes all these base things, his way, his
mind, is ever upwards, and with Paul, he thinks ^ll dross and dung that is
here. It is the disposition of the world to mind high matters, here in
religion are the true aspiring thoughts; as if men will be covetous of honor,
here is the right honor and these are the honorable persons. Who honor me, I
will honor, (says God) only a Christian is partaker of his desire, other men
desire high matters, God knows to what end, but they leave them in the dust;
but when a Christian dies, he is then partaker of his desires in fullness.

Quest.
But it will be questioned, does a Christian ever know he is called?.

Answ.
I answer, sometimes a Christian staggers a little, either being not an
experienced Christian, or through sight of corruptions and temptations: but
setting these aside, a Christian knows his calling, and will live by his
rules, for it is not only a calling, but it works a dis^position; and
therefore if we find it not, attend we on the means of the Gospel, which is
called the Kingdom of heaven, and it will bring us into a good estate, and
show us our estate also, which being once made known to us, we may assure our
selves it will remain with us for ever, which also may be gathered from this,
that its a high calling, for nothing can break any one link of that chain
made by God, and demonstrated in the 8. of the Romans

But to proceed, this is the calling of God* for by nature we are dead, and it
can be none but God that revives the dead; God together with the voice of his
Ministers, sends his quickening spirit, giving ears to hear, and
understandings to understand.

Again, we are not only dead, but in thraldom under the devil: it must
needs be one that is stronger than this strong man, that must dispossess us
of him. This calling is Gods calling in Christ, and that is first as our head:
God looks on us as we are in him, and he elects us as in Christ. For from
eternity he appointed so many to be members of Christ, as he meant to save: we
are called, and justified in Christ, he must be ours, before his obedience be
ours: we are sanctified in Christ, we mu^^ be in him as branches in the vine,
partaking in the quickening sap and juice of his grace, and when we are
glorified, we must be glorified as being of his members. Then we are called by
Christ, who is the Author of this holy calling: and lastly, we are called
through Christ as our mediator; and thus chiefly is it meant here, not through
works, as the Papists will have it: no, Christ is the author and finisher of
our faith, in him are we crown^d, as the body i^ said to be crowned when the
head is; let us therefore che^ish this communion with Christ, by all means,
for thereby we shall communicate with him of his fullness.

VERSE. 15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded.
ST. Paul he proceeds to others; If any of you be perfect as I am, be you
also thus minded as I am; perfection in this place, is not meant of that
perfection we shall have hereafter, or should have now, or legal perfection;
but he is said to be perfect, that is in his growing estate, increasing more
in grace, righteousness, and sincerity, or it may be meant of perfection in
regard of degrees comparatively, whereby one out-goes another that is but a
novice in Religion: such are those that can rule their affections, and can live
in a settled course of holiness, called in Heb. 5.14. men of full age: for
there are children in Religion, new entered into Christsschoole, then those
that are come to full age, surely are exercised to discern good and evil, and
then those that are come to their full pitch in heaven; between whom and the
former, there is no more comparison, than is between the Sun and a star
for light, so as in regard of the Saints in heaven, the best here are
imperfect, yet in regard of the beginners, they may be said to be perfect:
however, we may safely gather this.

That in Christianity there are degrees of holiness: Doctrine.
diverse grounds, some bring 30. fold, some 60.

Let this comfort those, that discomfort themselves in regard of their
imperfections, grace must be at the first as a grain of mustard seed, and
therefore let such with patience attend the means, and trust God for the issue.

Secondly, Doct.
we may observe, that there is a kind of perfection attainable in this life:
which we ought to strive to, the reason is, that in all things God has
ordained a set pitch, beyond which they cannot come, and to which they all
tend; and as its in nature, so in grace, though he has appointed to every one
his several portion and measure of grace here, yet a pitch he also has set to
all, which we are to aim at, to grow better still, though in this life we
cannot attain to it, and the reason is because we know not how God will exercise
us: he does exercise all his children, but some with greater trials than
others; besides we have a perfect God, and a perfect word, that is able to
make the man of God perfect to every good work: and these are not given to us
for naught, and therefore its a shame for a Christian to sit down at any
degree, upon pretense of imperfection: we see plants in nature desire growth,
that they may be able to stand in, and withstand storms. And where this
spiritual nature is, and this new creature, there will be endeavor to
increase in strength, to undergo and overcome all temptations and hindrances
whatsoever

And to know whether we have this perfection or not.

1. Sign.
There will ever be a base esteem of these outward earthly privileges and
honors: nay of the good indowments of our minds, counting them loss in
comparison of Christ, and this will work a sure settled hope in Christ evermore.

2, Sign.
Again, there will be a perfection of holiness a neglect of things passed, and
an earnest endeavoring to things before, to press to the price.

3. Sign.
Thirdly, a perfect Christian desires the coming of Christ: but the weak one
ever cries, let me O Lord recover my self before I go from hence, he has not
that assurance of his good estate, that a well grown Christian has.

4. Sign.
Fourthly, a perfect Christian has sweet communion with Christ, and can go to
God with boldness, without fear of judgment, or terror of his presence,
where as the weakest are driven to God by fear, others by hope, this man comes
to God, being moved by a sweet disposition of love.

5. Sign.
Fifthly, a strong Christian is not moved with any change, either of prosperity
or adversity: weak brains are soon overturned with strong waters, so weak
Christians are soon drunken with prosperity. But a strong Christian in any
prosperity, is pliable and fit for any thing: David in the midst of all his
royalty, saw a greater blessedness than honor, and riches; Blessed is the man
to whom the Lord imputes not sin, and in whose lips is no guile. Psalm. 32.
In adversity also, a sound Christian will not shrink, knowing God cannot be
changed, though his estate may alter, and therefore he can want, as well as
abound; growing strong in patience as in other Christian graces. But it is
contrary with the weak Christian, for every cross strikes at his heart, and
at the foundation of his faith, making him presently doubt of Gods love and
favor to him.

Sixthly, 6. Sign.
A grown Christian he is experienced to find out Satan's devises and plots:
and can put a difference between the motions of the flesh and the spirit, and
therefore knows what corruption to weaken, and what grace to strengthen; when
as new beginners, for want of practice and experience, sees not these things,
and therefore ere he is aware, runs into many offenses, and looks for no
remedy.

Seventhly, 7. Sign.
A well grounded Christian can withstand the bitter blasts and oppositions of
this world: nothing could move Paul nor separate him from the love of God, but
a weak Christian either is blown away, or at the least shaken, with every
blast; as it is in young trees newly planted.

Eighthly, A grounded Christian bears with the infirmities he sees in others he
pities them, and helps them if he can; but judges not of them as those that
are weak, who for the most part are captious; you that are spiritual must
restore (says the Apostle) those that are weak with the spirit of meekness.
Gal. 6.1. So as it is the weak ones that are scandalized, and as they are
soon offended, so do they soon give occasion of offense to others, by their
ill example; but the grown Christian endeavors to live free from offense, in
the least things he is watchful against Satan's wiles.

9, Sign.
Ninthly, a perfect man does most of all others see into his particular wants,
and looks hence after a further degree of grace: and therefore the Apostle
bids such as are perfect, to forget things past, not to look on those that are
behind, but to see what is yet before, to be attained unto, and to press
forward thereunto.

10. Sign.
Tenthly, A strong Christian is of ability and endeavor, still to beget other
Christians: Its the property of a grown creature, to beget its like, a weak
Christian has enough to do to look to himself; there may be many more
signs named, but these will suffice. Lets come to the means whereby we may
grow to this strength and perfection. Means unto perfection.


we must know there must be an order; we are to grow in fundamental graces in
the first place, for we water not the leaves but the root of our plants, and
the graces that are the foundation of all works being gotten, and diligently
cherished, the works, which are but as leaves, will soon put forth. The maine
fundamental grace of all is faith: which we are principally to look after.

First, in getting assurance of our salvation; to this end walk holily, for
many live in sins against conscience, and so can have no assurance of the
pardon of their sins, and how dead and blockish are they? David, though a man
after Gods own heart, yet losing the comfortable assurance (by his sinning
against conscience) of the pardon of sin, thought Gods holy spirit had quite
forsaken him, therefore he prays; Take not thy holy spirit from me, Psalm.
51.11. Therefore labor for assurance of pardon of sin, for where the soul
is wounded with the guilt of sin, it cannot enlarge it self in love, but is
possessed with a fearful expectation of judgment, but when the soul is assured
of the pardon of its sins, it breeds love to Christ; and there its said of
Marie, she loved much for many sins were forgiven her.

In the next place, we are to labor for faith in the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, and Gods goodness to us: that he will give grace and
glory, and that we shall want nothing, this will put courage into us.

And as we are to labor for faith, so also for love: which is cherished by
meditation of Gods mercies, and his love to us, and this will set us on fire in
all good works, and so much of this grace as we have in us, with so much
strength and intention of spirit shall we endeavor to please God in all
things: and this argument the Apostle used to stir up the Corinthians, 1 Cor:
7.1. Having these promises, lets cleanse our selves from all filthiness,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

Whatsoever we do, lets labor to do it with the best advantage: laboring
to practice and exercise as much grace, and as many as we can; as in giving,
give in zeal to Gods honor, in love to mercy toward our brother that is in
need, and in regard of justice, we owe it to him; God has commanded us to give
him, and he will reward it, for we lend to the Lord, when we give to the
poor. If we are to abstain from any evil, we are to abstain from it with a
perfect hatred thereof, and consider how it will offend, it will break peace
of conscience, and dishonor religion, scandalize those that are weak,
dishonor God, and bring shame to our selves: yea, we must remember that the
talents that God gives us do increase, in the use of them, the more we strive
to do things exactly, the more perfection we shall attain to, in the use of
performances.

Let us not neglect little things either ingood or ill: omit no occasion of
doing good, and take heed of the least beginnings of ill, abst^ine from all
occasions and appearance of evil, for though in comparison they seem small,
they are of great consequence.

Fourthly, We must keep our affections to holy for God works by means;
neglect none, for so much perfection thou losest thereby, and consider what
means will fit our disposition when we are indisposed; are we dull in prayer?
then read; if that will not be endured, then use the communion of Saints,
Motives to the use of the means, and unto perfection.
and still remember that we be not wearied with prayer, for God sends not his
away empty, and that those things may be the more effectual, observe some
motives to stir us up.

And to this end, consider the privilege of He is as Mount Sion, which cannot
be moved: if we tell him of death, its his hearts desire, tell him of
afflictions he is resolute, he looks for them, he knows he lives Gods child,
and so he shall die: when a weak professor, fears afflictions, fears ill
tidings, fears death, and when it comes, seeks for comfort, and hardly finds
it.

Secondly, a perfect Christian is a beautiful he is thoroughly exercised and
practiced: the weakling is scandalous, makes men offended at Religion, soon
takes offense, soon stumbles, and gets many knockes, so as his life is bitter.

Thirdly, the perfect man honors God, and by hearing* reading, praying, and
such duties; now as parents love those children best that are most like unto
them, so those whom the Lord finds like unto him, he will make them more
nee^e to him in likeness.

perfecter a man is, the more near communion he has with Christ, and has the
greater fruit of Christ's love, and finds peace of conscience, and joy in the
holy spirit: to such as these, Christ has promised to come and sup, and feast,
and refresh with his graces, for even to this end Christ came, to make us holy
and pure, that he might present us to himself a glorious Church, Ephesians.
5.26.27. and therefore that Christ may attain to his end in us, let us
endeavor unto perfection.

our estate hereafter should move us hereunto: we look for a new heaven, and a
new earth, and we desire to be ever with the Lord, in that heaven wherein
dwells righteousness, and therefore we ought to be diligent that we may be
found in him in peace, without spot and blameless. It is the Apostle Peter's
argument, 2 Pet. 3.13.14. and therefore as many of us as be perfect, let us be
thus minded, that we cannot go far enough, we must strive still on to
perfection.

VERSE. 15. And if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you.
ST. Panl aims at the comfort of those that are weak, implying that every
Christian stood not in this pitch of disposition with the Apostle, and yet they
were not to be discouraged, God will reveal the same mind to them also in his
time.

In which words we may observe; first, that some Christians see not so far as
others, neither at some times so well as at other times: but are like the man
in the Gospel, they see at the first men walk like trees, and after see
things more plainly. The way of the righteous shines more and more, unto the
perfect day as the light does: (says the Wise man, Prove. 4.18.) And as the
Church grew to knowledge by degrees, so do we, for we first know things in
general; at the first, Peter knew not that the Gentiles should be called, Acts
10. And the Disciples were at the first weak, and subject to many infirmities,
and therefore we must take heed of judging and censuring others, and also that
we discourage not our selves, by reason of our weakness, God willin his time
strengthen us, and it may be call them.

Secondly, observe it is God reveals this unto such. It is God that must take
away the veil first, the veil of the thing, opening our understandings by
reading and hearing, and thus the thing it self is made fit to be known, then
he opens the veil of the heart and affections, to embrace and love the things.
Its God that opened the heart of Lydia, let us therefore bear with the
ignorant, though Gods time is not yet come, it may hereafter.

Secondly, Ministers when they come to preach, must pray that God would take
away the veil from the peoples ears and hearts: and people when they come,
let them pray that God would open their hearts: and not come in the strength of
their own wit, knowing that God opens and shuts, none can open or shut
till he does it.

In the third place, we may observe, that God in mercy will do this for us:
he will open our hearts; he will reveal, though not every particular truth,
yet all necessary truths according to our estates: some stand in need of more
than others, as Ministers ought to have more than people, and Governors are to
have a larger spirit than other inferiors, yet all shall have sufficient.

Therefore for our necessities, let us go to God, he has promised to lead
us, and with David pray; Lord open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonders
of thy Law: he has promised to anoint our eyes with eye salve, and its his
office to guide us, he is our Prophet to instruct us.

In the next place, observe that if any man belong to God, he must at one time
or other be thus minded as Paul was: to hate all things as vain, to strive on
to perfection, to make conscience of the least offenses, yea, of idle thoughts
and words, of loose wanton behavior, to know he is not perfect enough,
vigilant enough, to look how far he is short of that pitch of perfection he
ought to attain unto, not to content himself that he has out-gone others:
these things they shall know either here in time of trial and temptation, or
at the hour of death, when no man ever repented of his goodness or
forwardness in Religion, nor of his care or constancy in good courses.

And therefore let us be stirred up to be of the same mind now, and if any
man shall think with himself, because God will reveal this, therefore he will
neglect means, and stay till God inspires this mind into him; let such take
heed, if they love goodness, they will set about it presently, but if they
quench the good motions of Gods spirit, God will take his spirit from such. Beg
that God would now change thee, for thou art not master of thy thoughts: if we
now put off God till we die, its just with God to suffer us to forget our
selves: let us be well affected for the present, and though we see not so
clearly as we should do, let us attend the means, and though we cannot grow
in religion, yet let us not think it a shame, but allow and uphold such
courses, else is our estate desperate.

Observe further, this speech as its a discovery of a moderate spirit in the
Apostle, there are some graces that seem in show to cross one another, as
zeal and moderation, but they do not, for zeal when it meets with a fit
subject for moderation, can be moderate: Paul condemns not, but hopes; and
its an example for our imitation, love bears all, and hopes all: whiles God
suffers, why should not we suffer? Christ's spirit will not break the bruised
reed, in whomsoever it is: God has a time for such as we condemn, even as he
had a time for us, and therefore we must use all means, waiting if at any
time God will give us repentance. 2 Timothy 2.25. Ministers must not be harsh with
weak Christians, its Gods work to bow affections, and not man's.

And secondly, when we have used all the means we can, we must depend on
Gods providence: and therefore we are to fetch grounds of toleration and
patience toward others, from Gods love and wisdom, who reveals the seed
sometimes long after.

The Papists, they check us for want of means to reduce men into unity, and
to compound controversies, they brag of the Popes power this way, but its but a
brag, for why do they not conclude their own?

They are far more happy than the Church was in Christ's time; he says,
offenses must come. Paul sees there must be errors, he could not compose all,
God must reveal it in his time.

But how do they compose differences? by excommunication, imprisonment, and
death, and this by the censure of an ignorant man perhaps, which is brutish and
unfit for the Church of God. For our part, we want no means, but the effect or
success we must leave to God, we are not to force men tyrannically to our
opinions in lesser matters, but leave them to Gods time of revelation.

And lastly, as this hope of revelation is promised, so are we to expect it
and wait for it: for to him that has, more shall be given; and therefore let
them that have beginnings of grace, be comforted to walk on, and for those
that are not entered, let them not be discouraged, God will reveal: But upon
what condition, it follows:

VERSE. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule.
THe word Nevertheless, some read it Only, as if it were a condition; but it
implies both a precept and a condition, showing that those that look for
revelation of further knowledge and goodness, they must walk according to
that measure of knowledge they have. The word Rule, implies in general the
Scripture; more particularly, a company of sound truths, concerning faith,
love, and hope There is a great Bible which is the whole Word of God, the
little Bible is the grounds of Religion, and these are not only to be
understood in the Book, but comprehended and invested in our understanding and
affections, and according to these we must walk. Truth is no guide to us being
only in the Book, but as it is seated in the heart.

Doctrine.
But lets come to some observations; first, we may learn that God out of his
goodness, has left to his Church a rule of faith and manners: there is a rule
whereby men must walk, otherwise should we be in a labarinth of errors
continually, having no other light but this torch-light of Nature, to guide us
in this thick darkness, wherein we are by nature.

The properties of this rule are diverse; First, its a fixed and unchangeable
rule, and therefore we must bring all to it, not it to all.

Secondly, this rule is a perspicuous and clear rule, thy word is a lantern
to my steps, and a light to my paths.

Thirdly, this rule is homogeneall: all things therein are spiritual, all
holy, all pure, and therefore when the question is about Religion, we must have
recourse thereto, as the only absolute complete rule. And therefore we must
know this rule, and then be led by it, for the word Rule implies, that there
must be a thing to be ruled, else what needs rule, or to what use should it
serve? an instrument is in vain without use: its true, many men make religion
and Scripture, but a mere object of discourse. But their example ought to be
no rule to us, if we look to be saved, it must be by walking according to this
rule, and therefore a Christian life is no licentious life, though he be freed
from the law, yet must he serve God day and night: therefore it is that the
Christian prospers not, nor thrives in this world, because he will not lie, nor
swear, nor have a broad conscience, as the children of this world have, that
take all occasion and scope to be rich: but a Christian lives by rule, he has
little, and it is blessed to him, for he looks at riches and profits of another
kind.

In the second place, we may observe that a Christian walks by this rule: he
thinks it not sufficient to take a step, but keeps a right course steadfastly
onward.

But how may this be done? How to walk according to the Rule.
may some men say.

I answer, let us use the means; as first, let let us get the rule within us,
get the articles of faith, and assurance of the promises: and let this be
betimes whiles we are young: its the ordinary cry the Scriptures are hard, they
cannot understand them. But what is the reason? they are bred up in earthly
businesses, and are stuffed with them, so as they find no place for the Word,
and its a miracle to see men thus brought up, to live by this rule.

Secondly, when we have once treasured up we must learn to apply them upon
several occasions: for where no practice is, there knowledge is idle, and
makes us worthy of more stripes, many have general truths in their minds,
but coming to apply them, they find a great want. David knew adultery was a
sin, and Peter knew it was dangerous for a man to rely on himself, yet how
foulely did they fall?

let us compare our experience with our rule, we shall find there is nothing
therein but is fulfilled, that there is no suffering but for some sin or
other, and that besides heaven hereafter, God rewards particular obedience
here, with particular rewards, and particular sin with particular corrections,
we shall know that his judgments are not scarcrowes, the work of the wicked
is accursed, but it shall go well with the righteous* and by this means we
shall be encouraged to good, and scared from bad courses.

Fourthly, be inquisitive and watchful over take and hear admonitions and
instructions, and be inquisitive after them; those that are otherwise minded,
no marvel if they (like libertines) spurn against all instruction and
advice, and accordingly feel the smart of their ways before they see it.

Fifthly, get a wonderful jealousy over our we often offend in thoughts and
desires, which God the searcher of the heart looks into, and we must therefore
be jealous of idle thoughts and words, not only of oaths, for so an hypocrite
may be.

But loose persons will say, Ob.
O this is an unpleasant course, we must bid all joy farewell, when we come to
this.

I answer no, the ways of wisdom are ways of comfort and pleasure, Answ.
God approves of them, and our consciences will tell us so, and thereby will
fit us for life or death, and will so settle us, that no estate shall be
unwelcome to us: and as Psalm. 50.23. To such as order their conversation
aright, God will show his salvation: and as in the text foregoing, God will
reveal himself more and more, so as if we be faithful and conscionable in
little, we shall have greater matters revealed to us; and and contrarily, if
we be unfaithfully and careless, God will take from us the key of knowledge,
and the use thereof, and will give us up to foul vices, even sins against
nature, as he punished the Gentiles, and to believe lies, as Paul says 2 These.
2.11. And will answer us as he did the Idolaters, even according to their
multitude of Idols, Ezekiel. 14.4. So as would we have favor in our sins, and
teachers that shall bolster us up in them, and not cross our vain courses?
God will let us have our hearts desire, but we must know this is an unevitable
way to a desperate estate, and therefore marvel not so much at the loose
liver because of his good breeding, for as they desire the ill, so they have
and are justly punished therewith.

VERSE. 16. Let us mind the same thing.
OBserve here, that we are not only to walk suitable to others, but we must
mind the same thing that others of our profession do: Doct.
So as this is a direction to concord, showing that a Christian is a member of
Christ as his head, and of the mystical body the Church: faith ties him to
Christ, love ties him to the body, so as he must walk with Christ, and also
with the body, he must look to himself first, and then to the body: the
ground of this union is laid down here, to be first an union of mind and
affection, and this must be in good, or else we are brethren in evil. Its no
marvel the world complains of want of love, when there is no agreement in the
rule of our love; when there is no agreement in the objects of our love, its
not riotous fellowship, but fellowship in the gospel that unites us, let us
mind this same thing, and then we shall affect one another; and because our
knowledge does not extend to every particular alike, let us agree in the maine
points, and let not less things break us off one from another. If we did
walk according to our measure of knowledge in those things wherein we agree,
between us and the Lutherans, would not be that bitterness of spirit that
there is, all censures and distempers would cease, and its a ^ault in many
Christians, though bred up well in knowledge, yet being of a harsh spirit and
nature, while he walks not according to the same rule, and minds not the
same things in the maine as he should do, he grows to be bitter, as for
those that would be sincere, they must endeavor to be united in one, as they
have one God, one faith, one baptism, for a Christian loves not to go to
heaven alone; and when he is there, he knows he shall be one with Christ, and
one with the holy Saints, and therefore will endeavor to be in perfect unity
here, considering there is no good he has, but he injoyes it as being a member
of the body of Christ, he knows its a horrible thing, that members of the same
body should fall out one with another, and therefore what shall separate or
divide us? shall infirmities? Alas, we are all sick of this disease, veniam
petimus damusque: are they too hot, we are too cold, why should we not stoop
and yield? Christ he stooped from heaven to us. Shall errors? why the time will
come, God will reveal himself more fully. Shall sin? We know what the
Apostle says, Gal. 6.1. those that are spiri^uall must restore such with the
spirit of meekness, we must not cut off members for every sore. Shall
injuries? Its the honor of a man to pass by such, do we look Christ should
forgive us, when we will not forgive others? consider it is the practice of
all holy men; Paul became all things to all men, if by any means he might
win some. Peter received reproof of him, yet fell not out with him: some
there are of such a perverse spirit, as if they see in any one any infirmity,
presently they break out into these or the like words. I will not be of that
man's profession; thus forsaking all the good in the holy profession, because of
some weakness in the professors.

If they will needs be separating, let them separate from the world, from
scandalous, careless, riotous persons* else Satan rules in division, he
knows he is best able to deal with them that are alone, and therefore draws
Eve from Adam, and one Christian from another, and so quickly overcomes them.
If in company one fall, another may help him up, if he be cold, another may
warm him by exhortation and example.

Consider therefore who are best minded, and mind the best things with them:
if we find we have attained to a greater degree in grace than others,
endeavor to bring them to us, the Communion of Saints is an Article of our
faith, every one believes it, but few knows what it means, and therefore no
marvel they desire it not.

VERSE. 17. Brethren be followers together of me.
THese words contain another exhortation, with a friendly compellation, which
I pass over, having heretofore had often occasion to speak of it: the
exhortation is to imitation of the Apostle, follow me. And because I cannot
ever be with you, therefore follow those among you, that walk as I do.

Whence we lear^^, that together with the rules of religion, we must propound
Gods graces in us, as examples for others to imitate: and this arises not from
pride, but from confidence of truth and holiness in our own hearts, and
conversations, and religion makes this a virtue and duty, without which it
were boasting: and so it does make many things (of themselves not seemly) very
fitting. David's dance was in worldly esteem counted but folly, yet having
respect to Gods glory is commendable; and therefore we must not be captious,
when we see such things in others, that men ordinarily count indiscretion, but
mark their ground, and by it esteem of them, and accordingly follow such. Be
ye followers of me, says St. Paul, that is, observe what my doctrine is, and
what I do and acknowledge, follow and imitate me. The Apostles doctrine
consists chiefly of three heads; whereof the first, concerns our natural
condition, as Romans 1, 2, 3. chapters, and Ephesians. 2. And the second, concerns
our remedy by Christ Jesus, God and man being King, Priest, and Prophet, as in
the Heb. And the third, the manner how Christ is become ours by imputation, and
is laid hold on by faith, which is given to us by God, who being unchangeable
and true, we persevere in this rule and course of obedience, by the mercies of
God, though with many combatings and strivings, even to fullness of glory. The
Apostles example see in part in this chapter, in holiness of life, and death
(...) sin, and esteem of the goods of this world as base. In the Acts see
his pains in the Ministry, his calling, his heavenly and holy mind in the
next verse.

And therefore, let us read these often, and consider them: they are an
excellent glass, that will transform us into an holy form and fashion; many
things there are in him that are extraordinary, and not immitable, he wrought
in another calling for his living, he was an Apostle, had extraordinary gifts
by revelation, and indeed not so much by study, as the Miniters of the Gospel
now, to whom God gives gifts, but in the faithful and painful use of the
means, and therefore are they not bound to imitate the Apostle in this thing,
as in other things which he did as an Apostle.

But to proceed to particulars; Wherein imitation consists.
imitation implies four things: First, a doing that which another does.
Second, a doing it in the same manner. Third, a doing thereof grounded upon the
same affections: not as in a stage play, where he that acts the person of a
King, is often a varlet, but it implies such an imitation as is in a child,
that indeavoureth to be like the father in disposition, as well of mind as of
body. Fourth, it implies a doing, studio imitandi, with an earnest desire to
be like him, for he that does that which God commands, and not as expressing
his desire of imitation, he is no follower, and therefore in all our actions
we ought to desire to be like God, and endeavor to express in action, what
we desire, and to this end we are to search for examples and patterns in the
Scripture, for those that are more excellent; for the most excellent in all
kinds, are the best rules for others: and because in many things we offend
all, let us follow the examples of men no further than they follow Christ, 1
Cor. 11.1. And it was one end of Christ's incarnation, that he might be an
example unto us. As I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, so ye ought
to wash one another feet, Why examples are laid down in Scripture.
and learn of me, for I am meek.


Hence we may gather, the ground why we have not only rules in Scripture to
live by, but also examples. For first, they show that the things commanded are
possible to be done. Then they show us the way and means more plainly, how to
do them. Thirdly, they show how graceful and acceptable they are when they
are done. So as the Scriptures are not penned altogether in a commanding
fashion, but have mingled sweet alluring examples: for there are four ways of
teaching; rule, reason, similitudes, and examples. The two former injoynes, but
works not on the affections, similitudes are but slight, only examples
conformes us in a most sweet alluring manner.

Use. 1.
And therefore we ought to be exemplarie, as to follow others, and especially
those that are above other: they should be burning and shining lights, as
stars giving light to passengers in the darkness of this world; to this end
observe some means. And

1. Dir.
First, reverence not only the eye of God, but of weak Christians, Maxima
debetur puero reverentia. We are to be awful of our carriage, that we may give
no ill example to them: and to this end we are to know that we shall give
account for those sins, that we either cause or suffer others to fall into,
if we may hinder them; give therefore no offense or scandal to the little
ones.

2. Dir.
Secondly, Labor to deny our selves in liberties: especially when we are in
the presence of such as will take scandal, and to this end labor for the
grace of love, which will cause us to endure much, and put up many things which
we count injuries.

Thirdly, 3. Dir.
in our carriage we are so to demean our selves, that we show we value,
esteem, and respect those with whom we converse: for else our actions being
visible to others, they will seem to be done out of a self respect, and so
will not affect or work on them. Grace will teach us to honor the meanest, as
those that may be dearly beloved of God, who also may excel us in many
excellent qualities, and in some kind of grace may also go beyond us.

Secondly, Use. 2.
if we be bound to give good example, then woe to the world for offenses; what
shall become of those who wound and vex continually the hearts of those with
whom they converse? Many are in hell, propter alienum peccatum. In the eyes of
God, who knows the heart and intentions, sin is committed before it be
acted: and therefore its all one, whether thou committest it or not. But its
not thus before men, for when it is committed it turns to scandal, and opens
the enemies mouths, and grieves the spirit of God in his children, the
Prophets complain hereof, and we may observe God correct his children most,
to keep them from scand^lizing others, and that others may beware of scandal:
so David's sin was pardoned, yet because he gave scandal the child died.

Use 3.
Thirdly, as we must give good example, so we must endeavor to take good from
others example: and to this end;

we must eye them, and pry into their actions; for this end has God left us
a continual succession of examples.



Paul says else where, Brethren follow me, as I follow Christ: propounding to
himself the most excellent pattern of all, Christ Jesus. Contrariwise he
blames the Corinthians, because they measured themselves by themselves, 2 Cor.
10.12.

Fourthly, we must learn truths before we for the best have their
blemishes: so that we must learn to know how to avoid them. The Papists urge
us with the succession and universalitie of their Church. No say we, it is the
doctrine that must try the Church, whether it be true or false; for men are
Mensura mensurata, its the doctrine is Mensura mensurans, the measure
measuring, whereby our actions ought to be squared and framed aright. The
Papists urge us with an implicit faith. Alas, what example? what imitation can
there be, when they know not what to imitate? they know not what the Church
believes, and and yet they must believe as the Church believes.

Fifthly, we must labor to have soft hearts,

Sixthly, we are to look to every one that as those that delight in gardens,
where they hear of any choice flowers, they will have a slip for their own
garden: thus it should be with us, where we see any flower of any grace, get
that and place it in our own gardens; in every Christian there is something
immitable, and something that may further us: and therefore this Apostle longed
to see the Romans, that he might be comforted by their faith, 1 Romans 12. It is
with the Church as with the firmament, ever some are rising and some are
fitting, let us look to the stars of our time, and walk by their light. Its
not enough that we can commend the Martyrs, for that is ordinary, as it was
with the Jews in Matthew. 23.29. though they builded the sepulchers of the
Prophets, if they had been alive, together with them, they would have
persecuted them, and therefore Christ says, they killed the Prophets. And the
ground of it is, because its a dishonor to God, not to take notice of his
goodness and glorious graces in others, and therefore if the stars do
praise him, surely these stars must much more set forth his glory, that
being of themselves sinful wretched men, by his power are made glorious lights
for others to walk by.

there is no certain rule to direct us, we ought to imitate the example and
custom of the most holy and sober sort. As in apparel much question is what
sort, what fashion is most to be imitated, let the most sober and moderate of
thine own rank be guide unto thee. Its singularity to differ from such, with
a desire to be noted, and it savours of pride, and such shall be condemned by
their examples, even as Noah condemned the old world.

Use.
For use of all this, learn hence what is the best succession, that is the best
and surest note of succession, which is both in doctrine and example; local
succession is nothing, they are the children of Abraham, that do the works of
Abraham; they are Jews which are Jews inwardly in the spirit: the Papists
they cry out against us we have no succession; but it is they have no
succession, their doctrine every where crosses the doctrine of the ancient
Church of Rome, their practice is without president, what president have they
for rebellion? for their equivocation? and the like; they follow indeed, but as
corruption does generation.

VERSE. 18. For many walk, of whom I have told you often.
THese wo^^s contain, a reason of Paul's exhortation; and from the connection
we may observe, that where truth is, error is: where wheat is, there are
tares; walk as I do, for there are many with whom ye converse, that walk as
enemies to the cross of Christ. Our enemies tell us, because of our errors we
are not the true Church, they may better conclude contrarily, that because we
have some few errors, therefore there is a true Church amongst us, where truth
is there will be opposers; and therefore we are not to be scandalized hereat:
the skill and courage of a Christian, is seen most where truth is in danger, as
the goodness of a Pilate is seen specially in a tempest.

The Papists will not have the Word read in the vulgar tongue. why? because
they say many errors will thence arise, while the common people understand it
not. They may as well argue, because there is much deceit, therefore I will
not buy nor sell. St. Paul was of another mind, he would preach at Ephesus,
for a great door and effectual was opened, though he knew there were many
adversaries. 1 Cor. 16.9.

In the next place, observe he says many there were, meaning of the better and
more eminent sort, that is of teachers: a pitiful thing, that in the golden
times of the Church, the chief leaders of the Church should be mislead, and
therefore we are not to wonder that we should find it thus, and therefore we
must not be scandalized by the multitude, one Micaiah is better than 400.
false Prophets, and therefore we must not number the followers, but weigh them
aright,

To proceed; he says there are many, he names none in particular, yet no
doubt but noted scandalous persons, may and ought to be particularly named,
that others may take notice and heed of them; yet this must be warily done.
The Apostle curses the Copper-smith, but only names Demas. Those that are
weak, must be gently touched, those that are obstinate and scandalous, must
be plainly made known, and this draws some of our writers particularly to
lay open the vices and falsehoods of those that are obdurate, and therefore we
must not take scandal thereat, it arising from a zealous care of Gods Church,
not of malice.

In the next place, he says he told them often, the Apostle was affectionately
bent for their good* and therefore to write the same things often to them, it
was not greevous to him, seeing to them it was safe; for the nature of man is
very dull in conceiving of things that belong to salvation, and their memories
are but brittle. If therefore we do often inculcate and lay open the danger of
that whorish Religion, long since condemned, it must be well taken in these
times, especially wherein men are so secure, daring to venture on any thing, yea
to go to their Masses, upon pretense of their strength, that they c^n come
away without being defiled.

VERSE. 18. And now tell you weeping.
AS if he should have said, if nothing else will make you beware, yet let my
tears move, my tears proceeding from grief, and compassion of the miserable
estate of such Teachers, and of such as are led by them.

Affections therefore are lawful, yea necessary in Gods children: all actions
in Gods worship are esteemed according to the affections that they are done
with: we are as we love, not as we know, what is the life of a Christian, but
the performance of things with courage, delight and joy? and therefore the
strongest Christians have strongest affections; for Religion does not harden
the heart, but molifies it, and regeneration does not take affections away but
restores them sanctified and pure.

But to come particularly to the matter here; he is compassionate, and so
compassionate, as his natural constitution will admit, he expresses this
with tears: which arises from grief for something within our selves, or by
reason of sympathy with others, for some danger that they are in, or like to
fall into.

Reason. 1.
The reasons hereof are, because they are led by the spirit of Christ, who was
all made of compassion: for he wept for his friends, for Lazarus, and for his
enemies. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you, and you
would not: he was tender in bearing the infirmities of his weak Disciples,
and of weak women, his compassion was such, as drew him to the lowest degree of
humiliation to free us from danger.

Reason. 2.
Secondly, the Saints have clear sanctified judgments, to apprehend true
causes of remorse: they know what danger is, as Paul saw here that the Sheep
were in danger of wolves, and saw the danger so much the greater, by how much
they saw not the danger they were in.

Thirdly, Reason. 3.
the Saints have their hearts broken with sense and feeling of Christ's
compassion in their hearts, and so are molified, expressing it outwardly
toward their brethren: contrarily, the wicked never felt any remorse or pity
of Christ in them, and therefore know not what compassion means, so as their
mercies are cruelties. Use this as a note, whereby we may discern of our
Christian estate, for surely where there is no compassion, there can be no
excellent estate.

Again, from the Apostles object of compassion and weeping, observe; that
spiritual evil and danger is the most proper object of Christian compassion.
Paul he pities not himself because of his fetters he was in, but it was the
bonds of sin made him cry, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? and good reason, for these spiritual evils of
error in judgment, hardness of heart, security, seared conscience, and the
like, they lead us the assured way to damnation, as it is said in the words
following, whose end is damnation. Contrarily, outward crosses being sanctified
to us, they bring us to heaven, as it is 1 Cor. 11.32. We are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. For those crosses are
occasions of good affections, purging the heart from deadness and fleshly
trust, they draw us to God; and therefore spiritual danger, is the proper
object of pity. It is otherwise with us, we lament Christian bloodshed; but
how many souls are carried into error daily, turned to Popery, and no
remorse, no pity. There is great need thereof both in the Magistrate and the
Minister, that they should be moved to provide remedies against such
mischiefs.

And let us be far from envying such as are in ill courses, let their outward
pomp be never so great, rather lament their misery: alas poor souls, how
are they hurried, nay do willingly run to destruction, while they are
blinded with those idle shows of vanity.

But much more miserable is their estate that draw on others to mischief, that
are brethren in evil: what other end can they look for, but to be as tares
bound up, and cast into the depth of hell, being guilty of as many men's
deaths, as they are of ill examples in their passed life?

But for our selves, let not our souls come into their secrets, lets mourn at
the lewdness of some, and the danger of all: and to this end, let us consider
duly of the afflictions of Joseph, taking heed of sensuality, which as Hosea
says, takes away the heart. Hos. 4.11. Moses saw the misery of his brethren,
and pitied them; so should we consider of the danger of Popery, of Schism and
rebellion, and this will break our hearts, and cause us with Jeremy to mourn
in secret for the sins of the times. Ier. 13.17.

VERSE. 18. They are the enemies of the Cross of Christ.
IN these and the following words, is a description of these in ordinate
walkers, which the Apostle speaks of, they are described by their
disposition: First outwardly, that they are enemies to Christ's death. Then
inwardly, their belly is their God, they glory in their shame, and they mind
earthly things. Then by their end, which is damnation. They are pointed out and
described to us, to the end we might take notice of them: by the Cross is not
meant the sign of the cross, as the Papists fondly imagine, but Christ's death
on the cross, whereby was made satisfaction, Who were enemies to Christ's cross
and redemption, and reconciliation.

The enemies of this cross are; first, such as

Secondly, such as are carnal, denying the

Thirdly, such as could not endure, of suffer for the testmonie of Christ's
crucifying, and they pressed circumcision with Christ, and so were enemies to
his cross: Gal. 6.12. Such were the enemies thereof then, and such have we
now of the Papists, let them brag never so much of their esteem and reverence
they give to the sign thereof, while they seem to kiss it, they betray it
Judas* like. For while they teach merits, satisfaction in purgatory,
indulgences, and the like; they make the cross of Christ of none effect, whic
his only and wholly sufficient in it self.

And whereas they say they do add, they take nothing from the sufficiency of
Christ;

I answer, circumcision was added here by these, who are notwithstanding
condemned: for as to join poison with wholesome meat takes away the
nourishment of the meat, so if we be circumcised, Christ shall profitus
nothing, and grace is no grace, where there is merit. Romans 11.6. Again,
consider the equity thereof in natural reason; can it be thought likely, that
God should become man, to do any thing which lies in the power of man to patch
up and make good or else its unsufficient? shall finite corrupt man be able to
make an infinite work perfect? no, God will not give his glory to another,
and will he part with his glory in this great work? which propounds his
glory as the maine end thereof? Ephesians. the 1.6. and 12. verses.

Fourthly, there are another sort of enemies, those whose consciences were
never convict of sin: abundance there are, who glory in their proud
presumptious swaggering courses, showing that they are either blind or stark
mad; they wilfully run to perdition, they will not hear nor be controuled.
Others that see their fore-passed life how wicked it has bin, they are so far
from casting themselves on Christ's merits, as they despair, and grow more and
more obstinate therein, even to their own destruction, either by not seeing the
merits of Christ, or through want of confidence on the^, though they see his
righteousness to be above their sins: and some are so detestably wicked, as
because they see no salve for them, they run desperately into a custom of sin,
and continue therein to their death. As we would desite to avoid this fearful
estate and condition, so let us take heed of custom of sinning, for that will
make us senseless, and will move God to give us over. And therefore let us
take heed that we receive no the grace of God in vain, it being so freely
proffered to us. And to this end, know that so far as we suffer our lusts to
over rule us and we not crucify them so far we are enemies. Gal. 5.4.
For while we know and consider Christ, as crucified for our sins, it will make
us (if we have any grace) think of sin as of a thing that deserves to be
crucified, and hate that, that caused the death of our dear Savious, for they
were the cruel tormenters of Christ. And if we embrace Christ, we shall have
the same affection to sin that Christ had, for Christ will not lodge but in a
heart humbled for sin. And the estate of those men is miserable, that are so
far from crucifying lusts, as they thrust themselves upon all occasions of
temptation and sin, and esteem them as their only enemies, that tell them
of their unchristian courses: Surely, however they may daube for a time, yet
their outward profession will never administer sound comfort to them, but they
shall find bitterness at their latter end.

another sort of enemies; namely, such as will endure nothing for Christ: who
notwithstanding bore his cross, and bids us take up our cross of reproach for
religion: some will endure any pain, travail, danger and watchings for riches
or ambition, but dare not speak a word, or appear in Christ's cause, are not
these enemies? Shall Christ out of his love come from heaven to the basest
abasement for us, and shall not we endure for a while here, seeing it is also
for our own good, and we are gainers thereby, and considering that Christ
called us to suffer? for while we live here, and embrace true religion, there
will ever be a cross and shame in the world, accompanying the profession
thereof, if it be sincere.

Preachers therefore that preach not Christ plainly, and boldly, and hearers
that come to the hearing of the Word rather for Rhetorical flourishes, witty
sentences fit only for discourse sake, even thus far they are enemies. For
if Christ be not preached mainly and chiefly to this end, to amend the lives
of men, to win souls to Christ. And if men (coming to hear) come not even
for this end mainly, to be bettered in their salvation, to be strengthened in
grace, they shall be damned as enemies for this; that the means of salvation
they profane and despise.

And therefore, let us abase our selves for our sins, and magnify Gods
goodness, in affording means of salvation. Labor also to show how we profit
by suffering for the Gospel, and count it an honor, and rejoice that we are
worthy to suffer for Christ, labor to overcome the world and our lusts, and
to honor Christ even in his meanest children: If the love of Christ will not
constrain us, no motives will draw us.

VERSE. 19. Whose end is destruction.
THe word signifies a rew^rd, and is translated, and taken often for an end;
because reward is given at the end of the work: and thus is salvation called a
reward for goodness, because it is given at the end of a holy life. The other
word signifies damnation or destruction, which implies all things tending to,
or accompanying the punishment of a wicked life: and the connection of these
words with the former, may be thus framed; he that is an enemy to the cause
of life, is an enemy to life, but those that are enemies to the cross of
Christ, are enemies to the cause of life, and to that which saves them; and
therefore they must needs be destroyed: this made the Apostle judge of them
thus, and withal be saw they were void of grace, and were incorrigible: and
from hence we may inferie,

That we may in some sort judge of the spiritual estate of men, even while
they are alive* for as Astronomers can judge of eclipses, and statesmen of the
continuance or danger of the state, and Physicians of the event of diseases, by
the course of natural causes; so in religion, there are predictions on good
grounds, what will follow of ill courses, tending to dam nation.

A threefold judgment.
But more particularly, there is a threefold judgment.

by their fruits shall you know them, says Christ. same now that it was then.
Indeed, when we judge men in things indifferent this is rash, and condemned by
the Apostle. Romans 14.
For Use hereof, let us learn to judge our selves, and know if we break
wilfully the known rules of salvation, we are in a fearful estate. And we
should also submit to the judgment of Gods ministers while we are here, and
amend, for else look assuredly for the sentence of death hereafter, from God
himself, when there will be no revoking thereof. For though punishment may be
deferred a while, yet assuredly it shall not go well with the wicked ( Eccles.
8.13.) at the last.

In the next place observe, There is an end to every way: for it is taken for
granted that they have an end, and surely we will not, nor cannot be always
as we are, we are laborers, and there is a time of payment of our wages. And
therefore we should look whether our ways do tend, there will be an end of
this life, but damnation shall be without end. We should also be inquisitive
to see if we be out of this way, that we may be reformed, for these worldly
pleasures must end in eternal vengeance, and this life is but a way to that
end.

And in the third place learn to be patient, when we see the wicked run on
in a broad high way, what though they be admired here, and lifted up, they are
but condemned persons: and therefore envy them not, seeing we would be loath,
upon serious deliberation, to change estates with them. Observe we further
from these words, that God will judge eternally, not only for gross
scandalous sins, in the course of our life, but even for errors in judgment.
For we must judge aright, as well as affect aright, and God has no service
from corrupt judgments. Those that join man's merits with Christ's merits, they
cannot rely on God alone, neither can they rejoice in Christ, Christ has but
half of them: therefore let us keep the virginity of our judgments,
prostitute them not to lies, but reserve them chaste and pure to Christ.

And secondly, take we heed how we converse with such as are of corrupt
judgments, they are Gods, and Christ's enemies, and will labor to bring us
into their ways, and then assuredly let us look for their end. Its reason
that those with whom we converse here, we should converse withal hereafter.

VERSE. 19. Whose God is their belly.
THese words, do partly show the inward disposition of these m^n, by Belly,
in this place he means in general all contentments, and worldly pleasures,
whereof these Teachers being satisfied, they lived at large, and at ease.

But how may they be said, Quest.
to make their belly their God?

I answer we may be said to make any thing our God. Answ.
First, when we count it one, as some of the Papists have esteemed of the Pope,
as of an essence between man and God, and some Emperors have required
themselves to be so esteemed, and adored as a Dietie.

Secondly, when we give such affections to it, as are only due and proper to
God, as to trust in it, to repose content in it, to joy in it, and so is that
sentence true, amor tuus, Deus tuus.

Thirdly, when we use actions of invocation and thus the Papists make Saints
their God, attributing such power in working to them, as is only proper to God.

Fourthly, when we bestow all labor to giv^ for explication, these men gave
the intention of their most inward affections, to procure content to their
lusts, all their labor was to this end, and so quieted themselves in the
enjoyment of them, and as they made their belly their God, so their belly
acted the part of a god, in giving them laws, bidding them to do, project,
devise this or that, undermine such, and grounding them in this first
fundamental law. Thou can not live long, neither will thou live well
therefore while thou live live for thy pleasure, take thy ease, and from
thence inioynes them to use all means thereto, take all acquaintance,
undermine all that cross thee: and all to this end, that thou may have thy
ease.

As it was then, so now is it with the Papists their successors: all the
differences in Religion between them and us, are by them grounded on the
belly, that is the Monarchy of the Pope, and worldly pomp, and Masses
invented for idle Priests, latin prayers, little or no preaching, only that
the people being ignorant, they might more easily command them. If their errors
were not invested in gain, we should soon accord, their worship, especially
the manner thereof, only to delight the sense.

And among our selves, many are not wanting that make profession of religion,
but deny the power thereof: so long as religion and outward content do meet,
and when Religion brings preferment, all will be religious, for they live by no
rules. but those that their lusts prescribes, morning and evening taking care
for the flesh, how to be rich, how to live at ease, and for this will sell
their birthright in happiness, refusing the Word, refusing good company, yea
heaven it self. And this justly comes as a judgment for man's first rebellion,
when men will not serve God as they should, they are justly given over to the
service of those that are no Gods.

Quest.
But it may be asked, may we not seek to content our flesh?

Answ.
I answer, we may respect our bodies, and there is a due honor that belongs to
the outward man, but we must so seek for them, as in the first place and
principally we seek the Kingdom of heaven, and is righteousness, and then
God has promised to cast these things upon us. But when we break order and
measure, being first and principally careful for our lusts, the devil knowing
our haunts offers baits fitting for our humors, and we like filthi^ swine
devour our own destruction.

And therefore to avoid this, let us set the fear of God and damnation before
our eyes, and if we use not these things moderatly and soberly, let that in
Romans 8.13. be as a flaming sword to keep us from the way to destruction. If we
live according to the lusts of the flesh, we shall die: and therefore, as
strangers and Pilgrims let us abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against
the soul: against our comfort here, and our happy estate hereafter.

Secondly, let us avoid the company of condemned persons, but look on them
with a kind of horror, and detestation of them, and and pass not for their
wicked censures, their end is damnation, and their belly is their God.

But because the best are drawn away by these pleasures, let us observe some
directions;

And first, let us see the reasons why we are thus inveagled with them.

First, Reason. 1.
these earthly contentments are present to our sense: the other only are
present to faith, which the carnal man looks not after, neither cares for.
we nusle up our selves in an opinion of the necessity of these things, seeing
the present use of them, and we see no present use of those better things.
things are bred up with us, and we are acquainted with them from our infancy:
and so they plead prescription, and when we are thus taken up before, Religion
comes after, and very hard it must needs be, to keep our minds lifted up, and
yet is it most necessary to be, for lusts do drown men in perdition, Helps.
1 Timothy 6.9.
with due consideration, the nature, dignity, and excellency of the soul:
that it is a spirit of an excellent beauty, adorned with understanding and
judgment, not made to cast off the crown, submitting it self to the rule of
every base lust, which indeed is the only happiness of the beasts, nay if
happiness consist in pleasing the senses, beasts are more happy than we, for
they have neither s^^me without, nor conscience within, to disquiet them in the
enjoyment of their pleasures.

And know also that this body of ours, being of that excellent temper, is a
fabric which was not made only for to be a strainer for meat to pass
through: The quality of the brain in man, the structure of the eve, do
testify man was made for divine meditation, to contemplate of the works of
God, which it does behold with the eye, as through a glass.

Secondly, we must know, by giving our affections: for the soul is placed in
the midst, as it were between heaven and earth, and as it affects the one or
the other, so is it fashioned; if we love the flesh we are flesh, if we follow
the spirit, we are transformed to its likeness.

Thirdly, consider that God is better than Scripture puts them in mind of the
last day of judgment, and tells them that they are made for heaven: and such
are therefore to set their minds on things which are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God; Col. 3.1. and when they begin to grow
worldly, and to follow their belly, it calls them back with a but know for
all this, God will bring thee to judgment: which duly pondered, cannot but be
as a hook in our jaws, to bring us back to a more diligent watch over our
ways.

VERSE. 19. And whose glory is in their shame.
A Second part of the inward disposition showing, that they glory in that
which brought shame to them for circumcision was a ceremony given to the
Church when it was but in the infancy, and for them that were borne in the
strength of the Church, being well grown, to glory in such beggarly rudiments
was shameful; in the words, first consider the affection, second the object or
end: for the word implies both: and in the first consider the sin, then the
cure.

The sin that is reproved in them, is vainglory; that is, glorying in a
thing not to be gloried in, and it is grounded upon pride, which is a desire
of excellency in vain things, and it is for the most part in vain
injuditious men, who ordinarily do glory in things that tend to shame. These
Philippians saw that Paul was now committed, the doctrine he taught they
thought was not good enough, they would be wiser than he, and of deeper reach.

And thus even within the p^le of the Church, what a scandal is it that men
should glory in a graceless grace of swearing? filling up rotten discourse,
with new devised oaths. And others glory in their foolish (conceipted) gallant
apparel, which was for no other end, but principally to cover shame, is not
this to glory in shame? And much more those, that blaming (as it were God) for
making them no fairer, will mend the workmanship of God by painting: these
while they seek to keep outward blemishes from the eyes of men, do discover
to the whole world, that they have a spotted rotten heart within them.

And indeed, its too common for men illbred up, to think admirably of
themselves, when all their courses are mere vanity: He is the only man of
account, that cannot put up a cross word without blood: is not this to glory
in shame? when as its the glory of a man to pass by an offense, and they are
the best men, that can overcome themselves. And as helpers on of this vain
boasting, we have a generation of ignorant unsettled understandings, that admire
at such shameless boasters, and so are causes of strengthening such in their
vainglory, such are flatterers of great men: let them remember what is
denounced against such, woe be to them that call evil good, and good evil.

In the next place, shame is not only the object of vain glory, but the end:
they that are vainglorious, shall be brought to shame at length: thus is it
said of Babylon in Esaias, and mystical Babylon in the Revelations: Though she
say I sit as a Queen, and shall seen^ mourning, yet stall her plagues come in
one day, death, and destruction, and mournlng. Isa. 47.9. and 51.19. Revel.
18.8.

For God has knit vainglory and shame, a punishment proportionable and
fitting to the sin, and striking the offender most near even to the heart
and thus did God meet with Achitophel, Absalom and Haman they sought
vainglory, and their ends were shameful, and such shall be the end of all
such, as boast that they can do mischief like Doeg: Psa. 52. And the
righteous shall see, and fear, and laugh at them.

For use to our selves, therefore let us take heed of this sin. For by
nature, the best of us are subject to it, we are all inclinable either to glory
in such things as we should not, or to receive glory from such things as we
ought not, or else to glory after an inordinate manner, and in that measure we
glory amiss, in that measure we consult shame to our selves: glory we may,
but it must be well grounded, and in a right manner.

And to the attaining thereto, we must first labor for a sound knowledge of
God, and for a sound dependence upon him in all things, and also labor for to
see our own estate, and our many wants. for wanting this knowledge, men glory
in merits while they live, but when they die they grow ashamed of their
courses, and blind judgment, for while they live, they judge of themselves by
their own conceit of themselves, which is grounded either by comparing of
themselves with those that are worse than themselves, as the Pharisee, that
thanked God he was not as the Publican: or else upon the conceit that shallow
persons have of them.

But these are not rules for us to follow, Remedies against vainglory.
look rather what says the humbled conscience, what says Gods Word and his
Justice, and who is made to us wisdom, sanctification, and redemption. 1 Cor.
30.31. Rejoice that our names are written in heaven. Luke 10.20. Rejoice that
we understand and know God to be ^ust and merciful. Ier. 9.23.24. Glory in
the testimony of a good conscience, that we are true Christians, though but
weak: 2 Cor. 1.12.

Secondly, we should be content with the judgment and care not for the
censures of the world.

Thirdly, take we heed of the first beginnings at the first they are ever
modest, the worst man that ever was, was not shameless in sin at the
beginning, but giving way to sin by little and little, loses all shame, and
causes at last corruption in judgment, and justifying a man's self in wicked
courses; pleasures, riches, and such things, they are like a vizard, only an
outside of beauty, or like one that vaunteth himself he can act the person
of a King, but is in himself a bondslave: they act their parts here on this
worldly Stage for an hour, and leave all their followers in eternal bondage
forever. Therefore let us not be ashamed for Christ's cause, but stand out,
labor for sincerity now, and we shall have glory hereafter, which as the
light, shall increase, when as the candle of the wicked shall be put out.

VERSE. 19. Who mind earthly things.
TO Mind, in this place is taken largely, to think upon, remember, desire,
joy, and to have all the soul exercised. Earthly things, that is lusts of the
flesh, lusts of the eyes, pride of life, pleasures, and profits, and honors:
which are therefore called earthly, because they are conversant about earthly
things, and because they make their followers earthly minded: and lastly, they
are called earthly, in opposition to those that are heavenly: and thus in
particular, those that mind honor are ambitious; those that mind riches are
covetous, if pleasure then they are voluptuous, and all of them are earthly.
For as the Ocean is but one, and yet diverse parts thereof have several names,
so worldliness is but one sin, yet having many kinds, it has also diverse
names.

The observation that hence we may gather, is, that the earthly disposition and
mind, is the temper of that man, who is in the estate of damnation: for the
mind of such do show a dead soul, estranged from the life of God: to be
carnally minded is death, says the Apostle, Romans 8.6. For a man lives as he
minds and loves.

Secondly, earthly disposition is opposite to God, so Romans 8.7. The carnal
mind is enmity against God.

Observe we further, the Apostle describes not these by any notorious gross
scandalous sin, but by the inward disposition of the heart* for outward
actions are only effects and rivers flowing from the spring of corruption in
our hearts.

Whence we may note, that God looks to the inward frame of the soul in men:
and therefore though in the eyes of men, a man may be without spot, yet is his
corruption that is within, open and manifest to the all-seeing eye of God.

And therefore, from hence we are to be stirred up, to humble our selves before
God, by examining our hearts, and laying open our most secret corruptions.

And secondly, this ought to comfort us, that though in our daily practice we
often fall, yet God in his goodness looks at the inward frame of the soul,
and accepts of it.

Thirdly, this justly lays open the folly of men's censures: if a man break
not out into open outrageous sins, they esteem and commend such for good
men, though it may be his soul is full stuffed with Atheism, revenge, and
all manner of villainy.

Fourthly, this should teach us to condemn our selves, even for our sinful
thoughts: for know, though thou live without danger of man's law, thou may
have a rebellious mind opposite to the divine law of God, by which thou shall
be judged.

Yet seeing for this present life, we stand in need of earthly things, and are
not to cast off all care of them, let us hearken to some directions in the use
of them: For riches and other necessaries, God sends them unto us to be as
means to sweeten our pilgrimage here.

Rules.
In the using them, take heed they do not possess This the Apostle blames in
these men, he saw they made religion to be subordinate, and to give place to
their worldly lusts, and that as he cared not, if by any means he could
attain to the resurrection of the dead: so they contrarily cared not, if by
any means, through any cross or loss whatsoever, they could attain to
riches, honor, or the like; yea, if religion stood in their way, though it
were with the loss of Religion and a good conscience.

these earthly things so, as to draw good out of them, and to employ them to
good; labor we to see God in pleasure, in rich^s, and in our abundance,
knowing and esteeming of them, as a beam of the bright Sunshine of Gods
favor to us, and thus to be lifted up, to admire and praise his goodness.

Thirdly, make them instruments of mercy its an excellent way to further our
accounts, so receive the good as we avoid the snare, the way is not to hide
our talents in a napkin, to enter into a Monastery, to live idle; but to
occupy, use, and employ them in the service of God, and of our neighbors.

To conclude, let us so use them, as they be helpers: for we are in an estate
between two, in a warring and conflicting estate, even as a piece of iron
between two loadstones, and know not which way to lean, and yet may offend in
the excess of either side.

And therefore let us observe some signs, whereby we may know whether we be
right or not.

And first of all, Signs.
this affection of love being the primarie and principal part, is known by If
therefore our love be set on the world, we shall greeve and vex our selves
for worldly losses, and fret and be chafed when we are crossed in them: and
this made Ahab so lumpish, as nothing could comfort him but Naboths vineyard.

Secondly, let us observe whether our labors: what we talk of most, what
think we or meditate we on, first and last, morning and evening, if we
observe our carriage, it will discover our mind.

Such, are also opposite to any religious good course: he that is rich,
bitterly opposes goodness, and therefore it is that Christ said, Ye cannot
serve God, and Mammon, and concludes; It is harder for a rich man to get into
heaven, than for a Camel to pass through a needles eye.

But to cure this sore, Let us fetch arguments from the nature of the soul of
man, and the nature of these things, and consider the incongruitie between the
soul, a pure heavenly spiritual essence, and base earthly corrupt things,
dust was made meat for the serpent by a curse, and not for man.

And remember, The God of truth has threatened vengeance against his dearest
children, that do not mortify their carnal lusts. Abhor we therefore, the
first thoughts of this sin, and divert our souls to higher thoughts, and be
humbled, shaming our selves for debasing our souls in that manner, else will
God take us in hand, for he will not suffer his children to surfeit on the
world, but will bring them back, that they shall see and know, all is but
vanity and vexation of spirit.

VERSE. 20. For our conversation is in Heaven.
The word translated here For, in the former translation is But, and so it
depends on the fore going words, some walk as enemies to the cross of Christ,
etc. But our conversation is in heaven. If it be as it is here translated, For,
then does it follow the 17. ver. Mark them that walk as ye have us for an
example, for our conversation is in heaven: Showing the reason why he was so
confident in propounding his example to be imitated: which way it be taken it
is not much material, only from the opposition between those examples he
speaks of immediately going before, and is propounded in this verse.

Note that in the Church, there are always men of diverse dispositions* some
ever go with the current into Mare mortuum, and others ever against the
stream, like the stars that are carried with a secret motion of their own:
notwithstanding that in this world, they seem to be carried by the violent
motion of the common course of men.

And this was first, in Gods eternal decree, that their should be perpetual
enmity between the seed of the woman, and of the serpent.

There is a difference in calling* some only outwardly, some inwardly by his
spirit. Many are called, but few are chosen.

they differ in their rulers: one are governed by the Devil, and led captive
to do his will, others by God.

Fourthly, in regard of their conversation:

Fifthly, their ends are different: the way of

But to come to the words; The Apostle says, not my conversation, but our
conversation; implying, that those that mean not to be of the number of those
that have their end in damnation, they must be of the number of those of a
holy conversation. The word in the original, signifies most properly a
freedom, or a Burgership: So as from the metaphour, we may gather thus much.

That Heaven is a City, and all true Christians are Citizens, Doctr.
and inhabitants of this City: for as it is in the City of this world, so may
it be said comparatively of this City and the inhabitants.

First, its under a governor, who is the Lord Christ.

Secondly, its governed by law, which is Gods law.

Thirdly, it has a storehouse of all good things, as of food, and of other of
the like sort, which is heaven, for it has bread of life, it has rich and
plenteous treasure.

Fourthly, it has liberties, they are free from Satan's tyranny, free from
the laws curse, and condemning power, and are all Kings, and shall all reign,
they shall be free from all weakness, from ill comp^nie, from temptation, the
lamb shall be all in all, glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God.

Fifthly, they speak one language, the language of Canaan, the language of the
beast they abhor.

And lastly, their carriage is alike: grave like Citizens of heaven, their
faces are still as they were going to Jerusalem, their continuing and abiding
City, for while they are in this life, they are still as it were in the
Suburbs.

Hence, we may gather diverse grounds, that while we live in this world, a
Christian is but a Pilgrim and stranger: heaven is his home, and this life is
but a way, and he a passenger. And thus David accompt^d of himself, though a
King, yet but a stranger, both himself and his fathers: and therefore, as a
passenger, he provides for his journey, he stands not for ill usage, cares not
to look after delights in the way, but uses them as advantageous to his
journey.

And secondly, he is inquisitive after the way: fearing he should go amiss,
and furnishes himself with cordials, to cheer him and strengthen him in his
journey, he inquires after the guide of Gods spirit, to be as the pillar of
fire to guide him in the darkness of this world.

Thirdly, He is well provided of weapons, against such enemies as he shall
meet with in the way: he has the shield of faith, and the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God.

is that a Christians endeavors are of a high nature: his look is high, his
soul and mind are ever upward, casting all burdens of earthly cares and
delights from him, that he may freely mount up in the presence of his maker.

of a Christian is not by fits, but it is his trade, his conversation, and
course of life, in all things he looks to heaven, his course is by rule, and
by law: whatsoever he does, he does as in obedience to God chiefly, with all
his power, as approving himself to God, in whose sight he ever sets himself:
briefly, he does all things as a Citizen of heaven.

a Christian may have his conversation in heaven, even while he is here alive:
for he is borne anew, having received the life of grace, God requires not
impossibilities, but always gives ability to the discharge of that which he
injoynes.

Quest.
But in particular, how may a Christian be said to be in heaven, or to have his
conversation in heaven.

I answer, Answ.
a Christian may be said to be in heaven; first, as in his head Christ Jesus,
who is

Secondly, he is there by faith: which makes Abraham saw Christ's day, and was
glad; and therefore is faith called, The evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.

Thirdly, a Christian is in heaven by his

Fourthly, he is there by his desires, animus

Fifthly, a Christian is in heaven, when as: when his thoughts are thereon
continually busied, as St. Paul was, when in admiration of those joys he
cries out, O the depth both of the riches and wisdom of God! Romans 11.33.

Sixthly, he is there, when by continual

Fifthly, hence we may gather, that the glorious estate in heaven, is of the
same kind with both estates are free; there only a freedom of glory, here a
freedom of grace, both are estates of redemption: there we are redeemed from
sin, and death, and the devil, here we are only redeemed from the power of
them; there have we the full harvest, here we have the first fruits, here we
are heirs by faith, there by full possession; to all of us Christ is all in
all, only there he rules immediately, here he rules by means, by his
deputies. There they have communion with the Saints, here we also have
communion, though we live amongst the wicked. There they praise God
continually, here we endeavor it continually. There they have communion with
the beatificall vision, here we have communion with the ordinances which will
bring us to it.

And therefore, let such as intend to be Saints hereafter, be Saints here, and
live by the laws that are given us from heaven, and that they live by in
heaven: for the kingdom is in such sort one and the same, the kingdom of
grace, the preaching of the word, is called the kingdom of heaven, as well as
the kingdom of glory; and men do think in vain ever to enter into glory,
without coming in at the gates of grace, as appears out of the Apostles
argument, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. Give diligence to make your calling and election
sure, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And to this end, amongst many other, observe with me these following
directions.

1. Dir.
First, for a preparation, hear the word of God, for by this we are in heaven
in part already, for where the word is preached, there is the presence of the
blessed Trinity, and the holy Angels bringing down heaven it self to us,
teaching us in the laws of that Kingdom. Use reading also, for even thereby
we talk with the Saints, who wrote those things for our instruction, and that
spirit that guided them in writing, will also guide thee in reading. Receive
the Sacraments often, for these ordinances are the heavenly Manna to us, and
and strengthen us in our way, to the spiritual Canaan.

Secondly, 2. Dir.
Rejoice in often communicating with the Saints: these earth moles that are
delighted in Coeno, not in Coelo, all company is alike to them, but a
Christian will here converse with such, as he shall be with hereafter, and the
Saints have found much help this way, even Saul in the company of Prophets,
became a Prophet, and the most earthly man that is amongst good men, in good
discourse, will suit himself to them, and indeed good discourse is of much
avail this way, if it be frequent as it should be. I enforce it not as a
duty to be done at all times, but it should be oftener than it is.

Thirdly, Use such means as are of force to subdue the hindrances of this
disposition: 3. Dir.
such as are lusts of youth, which ought to be tamed by fasts, and such
watchfulness that may make us at the length wise, for so ^acre as we overcome
our lusts, so far we have our conversation in heaven, and therefore we must
often in private watch, and in private pray; as the Scripture says, we must
watch unto prayer.

4. Direct.
Fourthly, Use much meditation: be ever setting our minds something to this
end, that our affections may be wrought upon, to forsake the world with
detestation, and to love and embrace heaven, and for this duty we ought to
redeem some time continually. Thus principally Enoch walked with God, and
David, though a King, meditated in Gods law day and night.

5. Dir.
And from this duty, let us be brought to a holy use of soliloquies: checking
and shaming our selves for following these pleasures, for unthankfulness, and
want of cheerfulness, as David why art thou cast down O my soul, why art
thou so disquieted? By these recollections a Christian is indeed himself, and
for the present, even seated in heaven.

6. Dir.
In the last place besides ejaculations, use daily a set prayer: for thereby we
ascend into heaven, and are fitted thereby to be more and more heavenly, its
the trade of Citizens that make them rich, this is our trade, to trade by
prayer, with that heavenly City, where our treasure is, and by it we shall
grow daily in riches. Thus is our soul strengthened, and our affections
stirred up to converse with God, and thus come we to set our faith in heaven,
together with our love, where our father is, where Angels and Saints, our
City, and eternal happiness is, thus is our hope strengthened, which carries
us through all afflictions undauntedly, and so is a heaven to us before
hea^ven: and thus are our ^esires in heaven, to be at rest, to be with Christ,
which is best of all.

But some will say, Obj.
we cannot always intend such things as these, we have our callings, and are
busied about earthly matters and cares?

I answer true it is, Answ.
yet in the use of these things, we may be heavenly minded, for God in mercy
appoints us callings, to busy our minds about, which else would be delving
in the idle pleasures of sin, only he requires, that we in the first place
seek for heaven, we shall not continue here, but we are traveling still, and
therefore it is good for us ever to redeem some time for heaven, that we may
come with more speed to our journeyes end.

Secondly, as a help to us, he has left us his Saboths, in pity to our
souls, which else would altogether be rooting in the earth: Let us have a care
of the well spending of them: for by this we pay homage to heaven, and are put
in mind thereof.

Thirdly, every day redeem sometime for meditation of the vanity of this
world, hereby will our untunable souls be still set in tune, and for our
callings, every day sanctify them by prayer, and then all is clean.

Fourthly, go about them as in obedience to God, knowing that God has placed
us in these callings, and he looks for service in employing those talents
bestowed on us, and in our serving one another. And let us endeavor to show
what our religion is, in avoiding the corruptions of our callings. Labor also
to see God in every thing, in crossing us, in encouraging and assisting us, and
this will stir us up accordingly to pray continually, and in all things to
give thanks, and it will make us fear always, for the same care and love of
God that brings us to heaven, does guide us in our particular actions and
callings. And in other matters use our selves so, as we by these things raise
our minds on high, for there is a double use of the creatures. First,
temporal, and from thence a spiritual use is raised; thus did Christ, by
considering water, he was raised to think of spiritual regeneration and
washing: and thus we should do, labor to see God in his creatures, and thus
shall we help our souls by our bodies, God will have it thus; and therefore
sets down heavenly things in earthly comparisons.

7. Dir.
Lastly, we must endeavor to make a spiritual use of all things as God does:
does God send crosses on us? then before they leave us beg a blessing, that
they may work his intended effect in bettering us. Does God bless us with
prosperity? pray that God would sanctify it to encourage us on to good
duties: so as in all estates we may have our conversation in heaven. Let no
man therefore make pretense that he is poor, that he has no time for this;
no, grace works matter out of every thing, poor Paul, nay Paul a prisoner,
see how he is busied. And the truth is, that worldly prosperity is the
greatest enemy to a heavenly mind that can be.

But the weak Christian will complain, Ob.
that he cannot find this in him, but he is still carried away with worldly
matters, though he strive against it never so much, yet the world goes away
with him.

To such I answer, Answ.
strength of grace this way is not in every Christian, neither is it at the
first. Paul had his destractions, Romans 7. from 15. to 24. yet must our labors
and endeavors be that way: the sin that is in us cannot hurt us, if we strive
against it. God suffers his children to see their weakness, as he did deal
with Solomon, to humble us, and make us learn his lesson, that all is vanity
and vexation of spirit. Let not such therefore be discouraged, but cheerfully
go on in a good course, wherein the more we labor and strive, the more we
beautify Religion, and credit our City, and draw on others to be fellow
Citizens with us.

And thus shall we free our selves from terrors of conscience, and from the
snares of the devil, even as birds when they soar aloft need fear no snares.
Thus also shall we get a portion here, for its the promise of the God of
truth, that if we first seek the Kingdom of heaven, al these things shall be
cast upon us. Thus also shall we be sure of Gods gracious and faithful
protection: who has said he will keep us in our ways.

And lastly, thus shall we end our days with comfort, woe be to him that
dies not to the world, before he goes hence: but to him that has his soul in
heaven, even while it is in his body, this life is but a pilgrimage, and death
is advantage.

VERSE. 20. From whence we also look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.
THese words lay down such an estate of a Christian, as is both a cause, and a
sign, of heavenly conversation, and in them we may consider: First, that
Christ is in heaven. Secondly, that there is a second coming of Christ.
Thirdly, that Christians expect it. Fourthly, that this expectation is a cause
of heavenly carriage.

For the first, that Christ is in heaven, we have the Scripture to warrant it:
but the text is pregnant herein, we look for him from heaven, ergo, he is in
heaven.

And therefore its a gross conceit of the Papists, that dream that his body
is every where in the bread, or with the bread, as the Lutherans would h^ve it:
the scripture determines that the heavens must contain him, that he sits now
on the right hand of God, that he shall hereafter come to judge, and therefore
he is not now here; nay because he is not here, he sent us the comforter, the
spirit, that shall lead us into all truth, as he himself expressly says

Secondly, hence we may observe, that there is another coming of Christ,
which yet is not fulfilled; there is a twofold coming of christ, one whereby
he comes in the flesh, this was his first coming: the second coming is in
triumph, when he shall perfect our salvation. This appears by the desires of
the creature, Romans 8. Secondly, by the faithful desires of his children, which
cannot be in vain. Thirdly, to this end he took our flesh to draw us after
him. Fourthly, to this end he left his spirit with us to testify it. Lastly,
he has left us his promises, and prophecies thereof, witnessed by the Angels,
Acts 1. This Jesus shall so come, even as you have seen him go into heaven.

Thirdly, that Christians do expect this coming of Christ, is evident out of
the words from whence we look for the Savior, says the Text: the word look
signifies an earnest expectation, implying faith, hope, and patience; faith is
a ground of hope, supposing the promises which are grounded on an almighty God
of truth; now patience comes from hope, so as the word implies thus much: we
hope, we believe, we patiently wait for the second coming of Christ. This is
the disposition of every sound Christian, and it begins with the beginning of
our new birth: for so (1 Pet. 1.3.) it is said, we are begotten to a lively
hope: and ( Titus 2.13.) the grace of God once appearing, teaches to look for
the blessed hope.

Reason. 1.
For as in nature, the seed desires growth, every thing desires perfection, so
much more in grace; where once it is settled, it continually desires a more
perfect estate, until the coming of Christ, when it comes to the top and
pitch thereof.

Reason. 2.
Secondly, there is such a relation betwixt Christ and us, we being contracted
to him here, as there is a continual longing for the consummation of this
marriage, even as the time between the contract and the marriage is a
continual longing.

Reason. 3.
Thirdly, our estate here is a warring and laborious estate, and a painful
service, and therefore what marvel if a Saboth, a peaceable, victorious, and
triumphant estate be sweet, and to be desired.

Vs^:
Hence we may learn, that the estate of the children of God here is imperfect,
for they are under hope of a better estate; before Christ's time, they expected
the first coming of Christ: so it is said of Abraham, that he longed to see
Christ's day. Now after Christ's first coming, we look after his second coming
when we shall be perfected; and thus the souls in heaven, are in expectation
of a further happiness.

And this is the reason of the contrarieties of He rejoices because he is
under hope, but he sorrows because he has not already obtained the thing he
hops for; he rejoices because of his assurance, but sorroweth because of the
crosses he daily meets with; rejoices in the communion of Saints, but woe is
me that I dwell in Meshek. We are Kings, but over rebels; Prophets, but have
much ignorance, for we see but in part; Priests, but daily polluted with the
soil of this world, and therefore do stand in need of continual washing.

Thirdly, this expectation is not only a

This lastly, may serve for a trial of our good Christians, think with Peter
it is good being here, its good for them to be in this world, they fear the
coming of Christ, the very thought thereof destroys all their mirth, it is to
them like the hand writing on the wall to Balthazar. The child of God is of
another disposition, he is begotten to this hope, his desire is accordingly,
his endeavor and labor is by any means to attain to the resurrection of the
dead.

Object.
But it will be said, that its often seen that good Christians do not always
desire the coming of Christ.

Answ.
To which I answer, it is true; but it is caused by their careless carriage,
and yet ever there is a spirit in them, to endeavor to do something that may
prepare for his coming: but a strong Christian has ever this desire, and if
he be a mortified and growing Christian he never wants this hope, and
comfort, and earnest longing, and therefore his prayer ever is; Come Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, we may observe out of the words; where this hope is, and this
expectation, it stirs up and quickens the soul to a holy conversation, it is
propounded here as a ground of the Apostles holy conversation.

For it stirs us up to be pure, even as he is pure, as it is (1 Ioh. 3.3.)
For we are a holy Spouse, and there will shortly come the marriage day, and
fitting it is that we prepare our selves fitting for such a husband. Thus it
was with the concubines of Akashuerosh, though a temporal and earthly King,
yet the custom was, they should be twelve months before they came to the
King: and much more should it be our duty, ever more to be prepared to come
into the presence of our eternal heavenly King to meet with the bridegroom,
because we know not how soon it may be, that he will come and send his Angels
for us, to appear before him in glory, to call us to the wedding.

Secondly, this hope will stir us up to do all good duties, and to right
performance of good duties, And therefore not only the duty of preaching is
urged upon Timothy, but the manner, 2 Timothy 4. Who is charged by the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge all at his appearing, that he should preach the Word,
be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long
sufferance. And the Apostle Peter having declared the second coming of Christ,
thence inferres; what manner of men ought we to be in all godly conversation?
2 Pet. 3.11.) And indeed, meditation of the principles of Religion, will
inform us well in the manner of our duties, as in the nature of them, and thus
shall we be fruitful in particulars, according as our meditations are directed
though the principle matters and objects of our meditation are but few.

Thirdly, this hope and expectation will stir us up to pray for the
consummation and bringing to pass the performance of all those promises which
are to be performed before the coming of Christ: as that the Gospel should
be preached in all places, that the conversion of the Jews might be hastened,
and the downfall of Antichrist might speedily come to pass. And this hope
will also encourage us and put us forward, that in our several callings and
standings, we should help on the performance of them, as much as is in our
power to perform, by helping on the building of the Church, and the
enlargement of Christ's kingdom, and the confusion of his enemies.

Lastly, this hope will work in us a sweet and comfortable carriage in all
estates and conditions, carrying us through all impediments with courage. For
yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, and
he will come full handed. My reward is with me, (says Christ) and lest we
should think it long before he comes, he told us long ago, that those were
the latter days, and that the ends of the world were then come upon them. Do
men then molest us, persecute and vex us? let us be comforted, he comes that
will tread all our enemies under our feet. Do we find that we have but short
spirits, that our graces are but weak? let us not dishearten our selves, he
that keeps heaven for us, will give us necessary graces to bring us thither:
if we want, go to the God of faith and love, he has promised to give us his
spirit, to make all grace abound in us, never to leave us nor forsake us, till
he has perfected his work, in setting us with him in glory.

But to proceed to the object of this expectation, it is Christ who is
described unto us by the Savior, whom he calls also Jesus, which signifies a
Savior: and this he does, to impresse it the deeper into his affections.

But some may say, Quest.
Christ has saved us already, what need is there therefore of his second
coming?

I answer, Answ.
it is to perfect our salvation: for redemption of our bodies, and glorious
liberty are reserved to his second coming, we look not that he should die
any more, but appear as a Lord of glory in glory, without humiliation for
sin, having already gotten victory of it.

The observation is, Doctrine.
that Christ is a Savior, and the Savior by way of excellency: he saves all
that are of his mystical body, from all evil, and preserves them to all good,
he saves their bodies and their souls now from the power of all evil, and
hereafter he will free them from all evil, he is the everlasting Savior,
while we live here his blood runs continually, this is the fountain opened
for the house of Judah, for sin and uncleanness, in it are we cleansed from
the guilt and damnation of sin, what would we have more? We are kept by
faith to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Let this raise up our souls Are we swallowed
up with the sense of any misery? Let us know that we trust a Savior that is
every way absolute, that invites those that are sick with sin, to come unto
him: and how can we escape, if we neglect so great salvation. Heb. 2.3. Away
therefore with all ^opish conceits of meriting by our works. All glory must
be given only to his mercy, all that he did for us was to the glory of his
grace, Ephesians. 1.6.

Lastly, this should comfort us when we think of the last day, to think
withal, that he shall be our judge that is our Savior, and therefore should
cast away all terror from us, knowing that our head will not destroy his
members, but that he our husband being a great King, will also crown us his
spouse with a glorious crown, therefore when we see the foregoing signs
come to pass, let us lift up our heads, knowing our redemption draws near.

To go on in the next place, Christ is not only our Savior, but he is our
Lord: wherein we may see the Apostles Christian wisdom, he uses such titles
as may most of all strengthen his faith and affection of the present
meditation, which being a point of the resurrection, a thing seeming contrary
to reason, to flesh and blood: he strengthens himself in this consideration,
that he is the Lord, who ha^h all power and authority committed to him, Math.
28.18.

Secondly, he is Lord by title of redemption* so as we are no more our own but
his, for he has bought us with a price.

Thirdly, he is Lord of the world, and of the devil by conquest, Heb. 2.14.

Fourthly, he is Lord over his Church by marriage, he is our husband,
governing his Church with sweetness and love.

He is also the Lord by way of excellency above others, depending on no
creature, he is Lord of Lords.

Secondly, he is Lord of body and soul, and conscience, punishing with terrors
here, and damnation hereafter.

Thirdly, he is Lord eternal, he indures for ever and cannot die.

Fourthly, he is such a Lord, as cannot abuse his authority, he cannot
tyrannize, his grace and virtue, are of equal extent with his power.

Fifthly, he is a holy Lord, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, that is
Lord of hosts.

In all these, he is far above any earthly man, yea above all creatures. And
therefore, its a sweet estate, to be under government and rule. They then that
are Lords here on earth, must consider though they rule and are above others,
yet are they under the Lord: thus did Joseph. Therefore they must rule, but in
the Lord, it is his will, that must rule their wills.

Secondly, this should comfort Christians: that they have such a Lord, as is
Lord of Angels, at whom the devils tremble: whom storms, winds, seas,
sickness, death, and all creatures do obey. Yet we cannot challenge this
comfort, but upon condition of our obedience: the Apostle joins Lord and
Savior together, to show that he is a Savior only to those that take him for
their Lord, to govern and rule them; as he is our Priest, he must also be our
King, he comes by water to purge and wash us, as well as by blood to suffer for
us. The wicked they will not have this man rule over them, but they shall not
say nay, God will be a Lord over them, ruling by his power, with a rod of iron
he will bruise them in pieces, none shall deliver them. If we will avoid this
miserable estate, let us make him Lord in us: thus shall we crown him, and
then he will crown us with himself.

VERSE. 21. Who shall change our vile body.
THe words are plain, and shall need no exposition: therefore we will briefly
come to the doctrines.

And first, we may observe hence That our bodies are base: and thus are the
bodies not only of wicked profane men, Doctr. 1.
but of the servants and dearest children of God, all are vile, and that in
these respects.

First, in life our original is base, we are dust, and to dust we must
return, and our continuance is full of change, subject to diversity of
estates, sickness, health, pain, ease, hunger, fullness. And base we are,
because we are upheld by inferior creatures. We enter into the world by one
way, but go out by diverse deaths, some violent, some more natural, and by
diverse sicknesses loathsome to the eyes, to the nosthrils, and especially when
we are nearest our end, when as our countenance is pale, our members tremble,
all our beauty is gone. But after we are departed, so loathsome is this our
carcass, it must be had out of sight: yea though it be the body of the
Patriarch Abraham, Genesis 23.4. For as the body of man is the best temper, so
the corruption thereof is the most vile, the best countenances of the greatest
personages are the most ugly ghastly objects of all others, by so much the more,
by how much they were the more excellent, so much the greater is their change.
And yet are we not to conceive of this body, so as though there were no
glory belonging to it: for first, its Gods workmanship, therefore excellent,
and so excellent, as the heathen man Galen being stricken into admiration at
the admirable frame thereof, breaks out into a hymn in praise of the maker.
And David could not express it, but says, I am wonderfully made. God made
this his last work, as an Epitomie of all the rest.

Secondly, we are told that we owe glory to our bodies: and therefore we are
bidden that we should not wrong our bodies, and the Scripture speaks
infamously of selfe-murtherers, as of Judas, Saul, Achitophel, they are branded
with a note of shame and reproach. And God to show the respect we owe to our
bodies, has provided to every sense pleasing recreations, as flowers for the
smell, light for the eyes, music for the ear, to be brief, he made all
things for the bodily use of man.

Thirdly, these bodies of ours are members of Christ, redeemed and sanctified
Temples of the holy Ghost, as well as our souls: And therefore we must take
heed when we read of the base terms that are given to the body, that we do
not mistake. For it is true, in regard it keeps the soul from heaven, it is
the grave of the soul, but indeed it is the house, the temple and instrument
of the soul, but being misused it proves an unto ward dark house, an unweldie
instrument.

We are to take heed therefore, of the error of those who afflict it by
writing and declaiming against it, or by whipping of it, when alas it is the
sin of the soul, the unruly lusts and affections that are the causes of all
rebellions in us, and if the body does rebel, as often it does come to pass
since the fall, this proceeds from the corruption of the soul, yielding to the
body aid to serve the lusts, and God has appointed a religious abstinence as
a means to tame such lusts and weaken them, which it were to be wished were
used oftener than it is.

But it will be said, Quest.
are the bodies of Christians base, for whom Christ shed his most precious
blood?

I answer, while we live here we are in no better condition than others, Answ.
as concerning our bodies. Hezekiah is sick, Lazarus has his sores, David and
Job troubled with loathsome diseases, and thus its fitting it should fare with
us.

For first, Christ laid us this example, he took our base ragged nature on
him, he hungered and thirsted, was pained, and death had a little power over
him, and shall we desire a better estate than our master, our head had? or do
we ever think to partake with him in happiness, that will not partake with
him in his mean estate? the decree of God is, that to dust we must, as all the
rest of our fellow Saints and servants shall.

Secondly, hereby God does exercise our faith and hope: causing us to look and
expect a better resurrection, and by this means are our desires edged to a
better life, for else would we set up our rest here, and make this our Paradise.

Thirdly, as yet there is sin in us, from the danger whereof though we be
delivered, yet there is a corruption that remains behind in us, and by this
he will teach us the contagion of sin, and teach us to see how the devil
has deceived us, by the effects thereof bringing pain, torment, and
lothsomnesse.

Forthly, it shows Gods wisdom in vanquishing sin by death, which is the
child of sin, for by it shall we be purged from sin, from corruption both
of body and mind, and thus is our base estate made a way to our excellent
estate hereafter.

We must therefore moderate our affections to the best things of this life:
health is changeable and will not continue, beauty is a flower of a stalk,
the flower quickly fades away and perishes, the stalk that is more base
continues longest, flesh is grass either cut down by violent deart, or if by
age, the longer it lives the baser it is, and increases continually therein
till death, when as it is most base.

It is therefore foolish for any to swell because of beauty or strength, which
at the best, are but curious excellencies of a base body: and far more
sottish are they, that think to resist old age and Gods decree, by trimming up
and painting a withered stock, this is not the way to conquer vileness. But
if we will be rid thereof, labor for the meat that perishes not, Ioh. 6.27.
But that which makes us endure to everlasting life, is with Marie to choose the
better part, that shall not be taken away: meat for the belly, and the belly
for meat, but God shall destroy both the one and the other.

And let this be as a cooler, to quench the base wildfire of love, and
con^ider what is it we so affect, its but beautiful dust, a painted
sepulcher, a body that after death will be vileness it self, that while it
breathes its full of rottenness, the matter of worms, supported it may be, by
a carrion soul, that whether it wills or nilleth, must leave it and go into
a far worse place.

And contrarily, in the last place, it should teach us to be at a point,
cheerfully to honor God by sacrificing our selves to him when he calls for
us: count it no shame with David to be vile in the eyes of men for Gods cause,
if the worst could be imagined (which cannot be) we had as good perish with
usage aswith rust. But this is the only way to be glorious, to avoid
vileness, even to sacrifice our bodies and all in a good cause: what though
the world esteem vilely of us, as good for nothing but the shambles, Romans 8.36.
shall we fear them? no, fear him that can destroy both body and soul: its
better to go to heaven without a limb, than to go to hell with a sound
healthful body, therefore men temptation of the world do begin to provoke
thee, say to thy flesh with Bernard, stay thy time: (the time is not yet to be
happy.)

And therefore conclude, our soul is but a stranger here, we must entertain
it well into this house of our body: its but a guest, use it not basely, its
no ill guest, it gives us sight, taste, speech, motion, when it goes away, our
body is but a dumb, dull, base lump of earth. Nay, when it is gone whilst the
body is in the ground the soul having a most vehement and earnest desire to be
knit to it again, puts God continually in mind of raising it up at the last
day of the general resurrection, and of glorifying it

Secondly, out of the words we may observe; That these vile bodies of ours
shall be changed: this we receive as anarticle of our faith, and yet were it
believed truly as it ought, it would work a strange alteration in the minds
and manners of men, contrary to that they are now, and howsoever it is not
embraced, yet it remains a grounded truth, that these bodies of ours sown in
corruption, shall rise incorruptible, 1 Cor. 1.15. It was foretold in way of
consequence in Paradise, for the head of the serpent could not be broken but
by conquering death, which is the last enemy: it was figured out unto us in
Aarons dead sear rod that budded, and Ionahs deliverance out of the belly of
the fish, where he had been 3. days and three nights. It was believed of all
the fathers, Heb. 12. And for security before the flood Enoch, and after the
flood Elias, were taken up in their bodies.

And besides, it is not contrary to reason, (I do not say that reason can
reach unto it) for Christ he is alive still, the dust whereof we are made, and
whether we go is preserved, it is not annihilated, and why cannot Christ raise
a body out of the dust, as at the first make it out of dust? why should he not
be as able to quicken dust now as at the first? and especially, seeing the
soul is reserved in heaven to this end, till the day of his second coming.

Nay it is not contrary to the course of nature: we see every year summer
comes out of winter, day out of night, youth out of infancy, man's age out of
youth: And the Apostle in the Corinthians, Thou fool, the corn is not
quickened, except it die: nay we see what strange changes are daily wrought by
Art, and shall we think Gods almighty power cannot work far more strange
effects?

The use therefore, Use.
is to instruct us if we believe that Christ shall change these vile bodies,
Then sure the same bodies shall rise that died, for change is of qualities, it
abolisheth not substances: and therefore Jobs confidence herein is remarkable,
Job. 19. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, speaking of
Christ, so is it, 2 Cor. 15.53. This corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality, and the ancient Creeds had, credore
surrectionem carnis hujus.

Secondly, its very unequal that one body should honor or defile it self,
and another body should be honored or damned: its comfortable therefore to us
that love our bodies and honor them, that they shall rise again, and we shall
enjoy them for ever.

Thirdly, Christ our surety he raised the same body that was crucified, and
therefore the same bodies here that fulfill the measure of the sufferings of
Christ here, shall partake of his fullness in glory.

A second use is for comfort; is this a life of changes, let it not daunt us,
but know they are all to end in glory, and they all tend to bring us thither,
we ever change for the better, and the last change of all is the best of all,
and therefore let us endure these changes with a light heart.

In the third place, who is the Author of this change in us, the Text says
that Christ shall change us, Job. 6.39. and 40. I will raise them up at the
last day, says Christ of those that know him and believe on him: He is
furthermore our head, now we know the body must be conformable to the head, if
it be crowned the body is crowned: and therefore ( Romans 8.11.) the Apostle
says, that if the spirit dwell in us that did dwell in him, the spirit that
raised him up, will raise us up also.

Thirdly, Christ is a whole Savior, he therefore will raise up our bodies as
well our souls, for he is the Savior of both, he has delivered both from
hell, he will raise up both to heaven.

Fourthly, he is the second Adam, as we did bear the image of the first Adam
in corruption, so must we bear the image of the second Adam in glory.

Fifthly, he is the seed of the wowan: that must break the serpents head, and
therefore he must work this change.

Sixthly, Christ changed his own body, being burdened with all our sins,
and therefore as an exemplarie cause, shall much more raise us up, for sin
being once overcome, which is the sting of death, what can keep us in the
grave?

Let this strengthen our faith, Use. 1.
in the consideration that we have such a strong Savior, that nothing shall
be able to separate us from his love, nor to take us out of his hand.

Secondly, Use. 2.
make it a ground how to direct us how to honor our bodies, not making them
instruments of sin against him, but so to use them, that we may with comfort
and joy expect and desire his coming, to change these our vile bodies.

Thirdly, Use. 3.
let us labor to assure our selves of our parts in this change, in this
resurrection. This we shall know if we find Christ's spirit in us, the same
spirit that raised up him, if it be in us, will raise us up also. Romans 8. for
the first resurrection is an argument of the second, and he that finds his
understanding in lightened, his will pliable, his affections set upon right
objects, will easily believe the second resurrection of his body.

Secondly, if we hope for this change, and so hope that we are stirred up
thereby to fit our selves for it, to cleanse our selves.

Thirdly, if we grow in grace, 2 Pet. 1.11. it is a si^ne that we have an
entrance into Christ's kingdom, for God does ever honor growth, with assurance
of a blessed estate.

this should comfort us in time of death, considering we lose nothing but
baseness, and our bodies are but sown in the earth, and this depositum which
God commits to the fire, air, earth, and the water, they must render up
again pure and changed by Christ, and therefore it was a foolish conceit of
the heathen, to burn the Martyrs bodies, and to cast their ashes into the
water, thereby to put them out of hope of their resurrection, not knowing God
is as able to raise them out of fire and water, as out of earth.

Fifthly, this ought to administer comfort to These. 4.18.

And lastly, pray to God to teach us to number our days, so as we may apply
our hearts to wisdom. But when is the time of this blessed change? It is not
laid down, only it is employed by the word ( Shall) that the time is to come,
but out of all question it is meant at the last day and not before.

First, because all are to be gathered together, even those that were baried
4000. years agone, must stay till the number be fulfilled, and it will make
for Gods glory that we should all meet together to attend on him, with
multitude of Angels, so as they cannot be perfected without or before us, and
we shall not prevent those that are asleep.

Secondly, it is for the comfort of Christians that are weak, that the Martyrs
and constant professors of Christ, should be pledges of their rising, who
continually cry, how long Lord?

Thirdly, God wills that things should now be carried as in a cloud: and that
the last day should be a day of revelation, which could not be, Use.
if before there should be this change.

For use, this must teach us to desire that day, and pray for the hastening
thereof* till when, the souls in heaven are not perfectly happy, for all must
be brought in, before they can be made perfect: and therefore they desire and
hope for, and pray for to be united to those bodies again, that they lived
withal, and so dearly loved.

But who are these that shall be thus changed? The Text says, our bodies, that
is our bodies that have had our conversation in heaven: and therefore those
that have had no part in the first resurrection, they shall have no p^rt in the
second: the Baker and Butler of Pharaoh all shall arise and be lifted out of
prison, but some to the resurrection of life, and others to the resurrection of
condemnation: But to proceed.

VERSE. 21. That we may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.
SO that Christ shall be the exemplary cause, as well as the efficient cause of
our resurrection, for he is our head and our husband, and it is reason we
should be suitable to him, and be ruled by him, he came not to make himself
like us, but us like him; he first must be a King, blessed and anointed, and a
son, the head makes us like to him, Kings, blessed and glorious, and sons:
Enoch and Elias, though before his real incarnation, yet they ascended by
virtue of his resurrection, and so shall we, they are glorious like to him, so
shall we in his good time and pleasure. Qu^st.


Answ.
But how?

I answer, in these particulars:

First, as he is immortal never to die again, so shall we, we shall be freed
from all sin, and so consequently from all mortality.

Secondly, we shall be uncorruptible, we shall have no corruption whithin us
or without us; as it is 1 Cor. 15.53. We shall be embalmed with the spirit,
that shall cause us to remain for ever incorruptible.

Thirdly, we shall be unchangeable: always the same, without sickness of
body, or indisposednesse of mind.

Then in the fourth place, we shall be in perfect strength, here we contract
to our selves weakness by every little thing, as alteration of ^ire, study,
and the like; there the body shall be enabled to every thing, but here we are
weak unfit, and soon weary of any duty, soon tired in prayer, weary of
hearing, so as even Moses his arms must be supported.

Fifthly, we shall have beauty and comeliness, the most lovely complexion and
proportion of parts, there shall be no dregs in our body, all shall be spent
by death, far better than after Physic, which notwithstanding brings the
body into a quiet repose, all wants shall be supplied, what is misplaced shall
be reduced into right order: and therefore, what though we lose limbs for
Christ's ^ake, he will not be indepted to us, none shall go thither maimed.

But some will say, Obj.
Christ himself retained wounds after his resurrection, and therefore much
more shall we be imperfect.

I answer, Answ.
this was a voluntary dispensation, he suffered them to appear for the faith
of Thomas, not of necessity.

Sixthly, these bodies of ours shall be spiritual, as it is 1 Cor. 15. a
natural body is upheld by natural means, as meat, drink, Physic, but
then shall there be no need of such things, Christ shall be al in all to us;
and again, our body shall obey the spirit, now the body keeps the spirit in
slavery, but the^ shall it readily ye^ld to every motion of the spirit. The
Vbiquitaries when they speak of the spiritualitie of Christ's body, they would
have it in all places. But they may as well conclude, because we shall have
spiritual bodies, therefore our bodies also shall be in all places like to
Christ's body. The ground of the glory of these our bodies, shall be the
beatificall vision, and our union with Christ: if our beholding him here in his
ordinances be of such a power as to transform us from glory to glory, 2 Cor.
3.18. What a change shall be wrought in us, when we shall see him as he is? and
if his first coming had that power to make all things new (2 Cor. 5.17.) much
more when he comes the second time in glory, shall he make all things new
and glorious.

Use. 1.
This therefore in the first place, should encourage us, in all causes of dismay
and trouble, rather than we will offend God to lose our bodies, knowing that
we give them to God, and shall receive them again with advantage.

Use. 2.
Secondly, labor we to make our bodies instruments of his honor, that honors
us, and let us honor our bodies wherein are the seeds of immortality, and
glory in so using them, as that they be carried to the grave with honor.

Use. 3.
Let us also honor the bodies of the deceased Saints of God, and the places of
their sepulture: as Cabinets wherein the precions dust of the holy Saints are
laid up in keeping.

Use. 4.
And let us not be like them without faith, that think the bodies are lost for
ever, that are cast into the grave; like children that seeing the silver cast
into the furnace, think it utterly cast away, till they see it come out again
a pure vessel. And when we die, let us not trouble our minds with the
discomfortable thoughts of worms, Use: 5.
rottenness, darkness, and the like; but with the eye of faith let us look
beyond these, on the haven whether we are going, this made Job though covered
all over with ulcers, to say with a cheerful heart, My redeemer lives, Use. 6.
though after my skin, worms consume this flesh. If we want limbs to our
bodies, comfort our selves, the resurrection will restore all things.

Furthermore, Use. 7.
let us serve here with our best endeavors, it is but a while and it shall not
be in vain: is it not better thus to do and partake of this blessed change,
than to spare this vile body, and pamper it by sacrificing all, or to employ
all our time in the serving and pleasing others, and to that end not to care to
prostitute our selves to all manner of filthiness? what shall we get by these
courses? but at the resurrection of the just when we should lift up our heads
because our redemption draws nigh, then shall we be overcome with shame,
grief, terror, and horror of conscience. But happy are we therefore, if in a
good course we can so resign up our selves, so as to be resolute with
Hester, If I perish I perish, if I live I live to Christ, if I die I die to
him:: what I have committed to him, he will keep I am assured thereof, and
therefore I will not offend him for any pleasure or profit whatsoever: these
resolutions had the Patriarchs, and Gods Saints, and these made them die with
comfort.

VERSE. 21. According to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all
things to Himself.
THe word that is translated working, may and does signify power, and so it
was translated heretofore, and is to be meant. But the words being plain, we
will come to some observations.

Doctrine. 1.
And first of all observe, That Christ has a power able to subdue all things to
himself: and this he has by virtue of his office of Mediatorship, and this
in respect of God to reconcile and appease him. Secondly, in respect of
opposite powers to overcome all of them. Thirdly in respect of the persons to
be saved, that he might free them from all ill, and raise them to all
happiness, and these things requires a power, that must be above all created
powers, for God could not be appeased but by an infinite price, the blood of
one that is God: and we could not be defended from sin and hell (whose
power is the greatest of all finite power) but by a power beyond it, and such a
power as must regenerate and renew us notwithstanding the opposite power of the
devil, and our corruptions within us, which is a greater work than the work
of our creation. And all this he has done, he has subdued him that had the
power of death, the Devil. Heb. 2.14. He has subdued diseases and winds with
a word, and with a word he smote his enemies to the ground, he has subdued all
ill of the body and mind, forgiving sins, opening our hearts, subduing our
corruptions, and death has yielded to his power. O death, I will be thy death.

In the next place, as Christ has this power, and this he will do, because
what ever Christ is, he is for the good of his Church, he is powerful,
merciful and loving, for his Churches sake.

And secondly, because our bodies do require it: for it must be an infinite
power that makes the body of dust: and therefore though Christ was the son of
God, declared from the beginning, yet it was said he was mightily declared to
be the son of God by his resurrection from the dead, for from a privation to a
habit, there can be no regression by a natural course, and therefore for our
bodies to return from dust, must be by a supernatural infinite power of one
that is God. Let those that are enemies to Christ his members consider this,
against whom do ye strive? even against the Almighty, who in his humiliation,
was able with a word to strike his enemies to the ground, and now being in
glory, how fearful and terrible should his power be to such? who should learn
betimes to kiss the son, before they perish in the midway. And for his
children, let them comfort themselves that are under the government of so
powerful a majesty, for he will bruise all their enemies under them. Nay they
are already all conquered, and let them consider of all his promises, and apply
them to his power. It is a powerful Savior that said, Come to me all you that
are heavy laden, I will raise you up, it is he that is able to subdue all
things to himself, that promises my grace shall be sufficient for you, he is a
Prophet to instruct fully, a Priest to satisfy Gods wrath to the utmost, a
King to subdue all their corruptions.

let this encourage us to set our selves against our corruptions: some there
are that having a little strove with their lusts, and finding not that they
have gotten any sensible ground against them, they as out of hope and heart,
sit down with this opinion, as good never a whit as not the better; and so
yield up the bucklers: what a distrustful incredulous estate is this? is not
he God that has promised? is he not truth it self? has he said, and shall
it not come to pass? fear not these Anakims nor Cananites, depend on God in
the use of the means, and let him alone with the performance of his promises.

despair of none though never so weak, so long as they use the means, for
Christ has created all by his word, he will raise us up by his word, and will
change us by his word, and by this word he is able to change others, though
never so obstinate; for so long as they are under the word and means, they are
under the arms of an almighty power, and therefore if any be in our power, or
if we wish well to any, we should persuade them to prize the word, and to use
the means.

In the next place, this is a ground of trial of would we know whether we are
of the number of those that shall be raised up hereafter and changed, then
examine whether we have found this power changing us, and bringing us to grace
here, for Ephesians. 1.19, 20. the same power works in us to believe, that raised
up Christ, do we then find our understandings enlightened, our wills
conformable to his will? do we find the strong holds of sin in us rased, and
new spirits, new thoughts, new desires in us? O these are blessed evidences of
Christ's almighty power in us, that will raise us up at the last day.

By this means also we may try our profession: rule our members contrary to
our lusts, and contrary to occasions, then stronger is he that rules in us,
than he that rules in the world, 1 Ioh. 4.4. it is easy to resist a
temptation where none is, the mighty power of Christ is seen, when being
environed with temptations, we are enabled to resist: I pray says Christ, that
thou should keep them from evil in the world, and not that thou should take
them out of the world, Ioh, 17.15. If we be under crosses, if this spirit and
power of Christ be in us, it will enable us to bear all patiently, it will
keep us from murmuring and fretting. It will also convince us of our natural
estate, so as we shall see evident necessity of Gods almighty power to change
us; this made the Apostle Paul and the Iaylor to look about them for help,
Lord what would thou have me to do? and thus it will make us never to give
God rest, nor Christ respite, till that power that shall raise up our bodies,
do raise up also our souls, and he shine in us by his spirit, that did bring
light out of darkness, and fashion us as in his wisdom shall be most meet.

teach us not to be dejected or cast down, at the reports of the afflicted
state of the Church abroad, it should bring us rather to God, to rely upon his
goodness and power, for God is ever God almighty, and the same merciful God
that ever he was, and therefore we should pray for the Church the more
instantly, that God would give them beauty instead of ashes, we should urge
him with his promise of building up and defending of his Church, and destroying
of Antichrist, and let us make the resurrection of the body a ground to
strengthen us in the belief thereof, as the return of the children of Israel
from Babylon, was sealed by the resurrection of the dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. as
also the Apostle from the resurrection of the dead, gathers that God by that
power, has and will deliver him. 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.

Furthermore, when we are oppressed with any knowing that he that raised us
out of dust, will not suffer us to be buried in misery, but will with the
trial give us a gracious issue at the last, by raising up our bodies at the
last day by his almighty power, which made also the Patriarch Abraham to hope
above hope: what though our helps be few? its no matter what the instrument
is, so as Christ is the chief worker.

In the next place, This should encourage us, to; do not think with our selves,
alas I am but one, and a weak silly man; what can I do against a multitude?
let not such thoughts discourage thee: think of Luther a poor Monk, who
alone set himself against the whole world, and wrought that effect, that we
have all cause at this day to honor the memory of him: it is not thou, but
God in thee, that is able to confound all thine enemies, and therefore with
Moses, behold him that is invisible.

this should be observed by a Christian, as a ground of his perseverance to
the end: for when we know we are Christians, what can bereave us of our
blessings? what can make our faith fail? its Gods power that will keep us to
salvation, and he that believes shall have life, and shall not come into
condemnation, Ioh. 6.39, 40.44.47. and many other places; and Christ by his
almighty power swayes all our life, to our building up to salvation, and
therefore in contraries we should believe contraries, that death will work
life, misery happiness, corruption incorruption, and this vileness glory;
for its Gods order to work by contraries, that his power might the more
appear.

at the hour of death then behold him that is thus able and all-sufficient;
that shall presently glorify our soul, and at length will raise up our body
also, and unite it to our soul, to partake with it in glory and happiness,
that will then quit us of all sin, corruption, death, change, all our enemies
shall be trodden under our foot, and all this by his almighty power, whereby
he is able to do far above that we are able to think; and therefore let us
with a holy admiration thereof, say with the Apostle, ( Ephesians. 3.20.) To him be
glory for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

