THE FIRST AND CHIEF GROVNDES OF ARCHITECTVRE used in all the ancient and
famous monymentes: with a farther and more ample discouse upon the same, than
hitherto has been set out by any other.

PVBLISHED BY Ihon Shute, Paynter and Archytecte.

IMPRINTED AT London in Fletestrete nere to Saint Dunstans church by Thomas
Marshe.

1563.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK briefly collected and set out for the help of the
Reader.
THe discourse from time to time how this science of Architecture has
increased. Folio. i. What the office and duty is, of him that will be a
perfect Architecte or master of buildinges. Folio. iii. The first pillar that
was found out by the Ionians, upon the simetrie of a strong man, being 6 times
the length of his foot in height, was renewed again by the Tuscanes, and of
them takes his name to be called TVSCANA. Folio. iiii. The second pillar
called DORICA builded to his perfection in Greece, by Dorus, and of him takes
his name whose height is 7 times his thiknes which thicknes is called the
diameter. Folio. vii. The third pillar called Ionica was set in the temple of
Apollo, and Diana finished and builded by the Ionians, whose height is 8 times
his thicknes. Folio. ix. The fourth pillar called Cor^nthia, found in the city
of Corinthe by Calimachus the excellent Architect, whose height is 9.
diameters. Folio. xi. The fifth pillar named Composita or Italica made to his
perfection in the time of Vaspasian by the ancient Romans, whose height is
10. diameters. Folio. xiiii. Of another ancient pillar, necessary to the
before named pillars found out to his perfection by the Atheniens called
Atticurga or Atica. Folio. xvi. The placing of the five orders, namely,
AREOSTYLOS, DIASTYLOS, EVSTYLOS, SISTYLOS, and PICNOSTYLOS. Folio. xvii. A rule
of Vitruuius given for these three pillars, Dorica, Ionica, Corinthia, for the
placinge or displacing of them one above an other. Folio. xviii. A rule for the
diminishing of the pillar under the Capital. eodem. An example to be observed
for the increase of the height of Epistilium. eodem.
Faults escaped in the printing are thus to be corected.
In folio. ii. line. i. a. for Forence read Florence.

In folio. vii. line. xxxiiii b. for Trochitus, read Trochilus.

In folio. xi. line. ii a. for Calimachius, read Calimachus.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND EXCELLENT Princes Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, defendor of the faith. etc.
IT is both rightly and excellently affermed of Marcus Tullius Cicero, in his
first book de officijs (right Excellent Princes and my most gracious
sovereign Lady) that no man is borne into this wolrd for his private and
singular weal, because our Country chiefly, partly our parents, and partly
our kinsfolk do require as it were a duty of us, and recompense for that the
which we have received and like as the members of man's body be diverse in
number, and have according to their diversity diverse and peculier properties
so is it in a good and well setteled common weal: in which there is no office
so base, or handie work so simple which, is not necessary and profitable for
the same. And as the members of the body doing without impedimentes their
natural duties, ye whole body is in an helthful hermonye, and able to
perform all that belongs to the same. So is it in a public weal when all
men in their calling, do labor not only for their own gain, but also for
the profit and commodity of their Country* which things when I according to
my small Capacity did way with my self, I was as it were stirred forward to
do my duty unto this my Country wherein I live and am a member. And so much
the rather, for that being servant unto the Right honorable Duke of
Northu^berla^d. 1550. It pleased his grace for my forther knowledge to mai^taine
me in Italy there to co^fer with the doi^ges of ye skilful masters in
architectur, and also to view such au^cie^t Monumentes hereof as are yet
extant* whereupon at my return, presenting his grace with the fruits of my
travails, it pleased the same to show them unto that noble king Edward the
vi. your majesty's most dear brother of famous memory, whose delectation and
pleasure was to se it, and such like. And having the said trikes and devises
as well of sculture and painting as also of Architecture, yet in my keeping, I
thought it good at this time to set fourth some part of the same for the profit
of others, especially touching Architecture: wherein I do follow not only the
writings of learned men, but also do ground my self on my own experience and
practice, gathered by the sight of ye Monumentes in Italy. And because all the
members of the body have cheflye and principally a duty to the head, as
governor of the whole, and without which, all the other can not live. So my
duty inforseth me most sovereign lady (the perfect and natural head next unto
God of this our common weal,) to show a token of the same unto your highness,
in presenting these my poor and simple labors whereunto I am the rather
boldned considering your highness delight in all kind of good learning, and
parfect skill in the tongues and sciences Most humble beseching your royal
majesty to vouchsafe to let this my small travail and work pass under your
noble protection and defense: and I according to my bound and duty shall pray
to God for your long life and prosperous Raygne, with peace and tranquillity to
his honor and glory. Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient subject. John Shute.

JOHN SHVTE PAINTER AND Architecte: unto the Loving and freindly R^aders.
Amongst al other things (gentel and loving reader) wherewith ye divine
providence of almighty God has most liberally, and plentifully endewed
mankind: there is nothing either for the dignity and worthiness of the thing
self, or for the wonderful estimation and price which in all times it has
been in, more excellent, precious, and comendable then learning knowledge and
science, the which alone causes mortal men to be most like immortal Gods:
and as it takes out of their minds that rude and uncomely admiration wherewith
through ignorance the simple in most vain trifles are wonderfullye occupied.
Jo to the wise be monumentes and works skilfully practiced and carfullie left
both commendable and merueilous: yea and such, as neither the injuries of any
storms and tempest can clean wast and consume, no nor (as it seems) the
envy of man or spoil of enemies deface and overthrow, neither that which is
greatiste of all, time it self can deface or cast out of mind. And amongst
all other studies there is none in my simple judgment of this sort that
diserueth greater praise, then that which is of the greeks named
Architectonica, and of the latins Architectura (I think not altogether vnfite
nor vnaptlie by me termed in English, the art and trade to raise up and make
excellent edifices and buildinges) the which like as in all other ages before
has been in marvelous accoumpte and estimation, as full well appears by diverse
learned Philosophors and famous princes that embraced ye same, as Plato,
Aristotel, Plini, who were excellent therein as their works will witness.
Allexander Magnus. Julius. Caesar, Vespasian, Adrian with many other ancient
greckes and Romans which labored to advance their name thereby who left
many arguments of their virtue, high intentes and doings by ye same with many
other famous, of which Plini, makes mention. Vitruuius and Frontyne, of later
days men praise worthy very studious and painful therein So in us seems it
not only to crave the wonted commendation, but also to be most necessary and
profitable as well by the condition of the time as necessity of the thing it
self. And surely such is the amplitude and largnes (I may well say
perfection) of this faculty, that without sum acquaintance with many other
arts ye shall not enter into ye deep secrets: for it has a natural society
and as it were by a sertaine kindred and affinity is knit unto all the
Mathematicalles which sciences and knowledges are friends and a maintayner of
diverse rational arts: so that without a mean aquaintance or understanding in
the^ neither paynters, massons, Gold smythes, enbroderers, Caruers, Ioynars,
Glassyers, Grauers, in all manner of metalles and diverse others more can obtain
any worthy praise at all Now all these being branches of that foresaid
foundation, stock, or science shall bring forth the fruits of it to their
great profits, and Commodity of the Realm, which continuing and through lie
practiced in the same) by time shall increse riches, worship, and same.
Considering with my self the manyfold commodities and profits that should
redownde to a great many lovers of the same, and contrary wise what alosse and
hinderaunce it has been to them that lack the langwages and learning who of
necessity has remained in ignorance to their great loss and discomodity of
the Realm. Notwithstanding I know well there has been a multitude and at this
time be very many learned men who has (through travail received) the full
perfection of the prudent lady Scientia, of whom so depely learned I crave
pardon for my rude rashness that I having but tasted a certain swetenes of her
excellency and liberality, wherefore natural love has drawn me to advance
her reputation and honor, according to my poor ability and good will, the
thing nothing garnished as it ought to be but most briefly and playnelye with
such demonstrations that it might edify them which of a long time have
desired and reached at it to attain Also for the encoraging of those which
ernestly studied and favored it. I thought it therefore good to set out and
commit to writing in our native language, part of those things which (both
by great labor and travail, at the first for my private commodity I searched
out and for my own pleasure out of diverse as well latin and Italian, as french
and dowche writers) I have diligenly gathered. As also passed many countries
and regions to see, both in Rome amongst the antiquities and in the most
notable places of Italy, where are most excellent buildinges, and intending to
write of Architecture or buildinges: I thought it best neither with the
lightest or least profitable part thereof to begin, nor altogether after the
most slender sort to handell that which I purposed to entreat upon. I have
therefore taken my first enteraunce into the writing of this art, at the five
antique pillars or Columns, co^monly-named of the places and persons partly
where and of whom they were invented, and partly of their virtues and
properties of those that they were likned unto, which pillars names are these as
follows. Tuscana, Dorica, Ionica, Corinthia and, Co^posita, The treatise of
these pillars, as it has in it most delectation and pleasure in the beawtie
and comlines of the workmanship appertayning unto them so though at the
beginning, it be mingled with a littell asperitie and as it were bitterness (for
the dificultie and hardness wherewith as both principalles and also other things
of any excellencye at the first are coustomed to be, it is somewhat Comberous)
yet it is both so necessary and profitable, that neither without it any man may
attain to any estimable part of the rest of this science, and with it as by a
klew of thread or plain path way a man may most eassely pearse and lightely
pasouer the most dark and unknown corners of the whole process thereof. But
to speak of the worethines of this part of Architecture: it seems almost
altogether superfluous, wherefore taking these to suffice in the part to be
said, I will now show what trade and order I do follow in the declaration of
the measures, proportions, and garnishmentes of these before mentioned pillars.
For so much therefore as in teaching of all arts three things are chiefly to be
considered that is to say diligence in giving ye precepts, aptnes in chosying
plain and euidente examples, and last of all practice and experience of the
teacher. I have for the first part taken for my author chieflye to be followed
the noble and excellent writer Vitruuius one of the most parfaictest of all the
Antiques, and for that, neither any one man in what art so ever it be is
absolute, and that other singular men of the Antiques and he in many poinctes
do disagre and differ (which Sebastianus Serlius, a marvelous conning artificer
in our time) in many places of his works learnedly does declare. I have added
unto him upon what soever in any thing seemed nedfull the opinion and meaning of
the said expert writer Sebastianus, here and there also where I thought meet
I have joined the mind and judgment of one Gulielmus Philander a notable man
which about the year of our lord. 15.6. wrote unto the french king
Anotacions upon Vitruuius, concerning this matter or such like. Now for
examples which are necessarily required to the opening of such dark matters, I
have every where through the whole procese of this present treatise after the
precepts to the lightning of them set both demonstrtion and figure, and as
for practice and experience of these things which I teach, I assure the
most gentle reader and all other that shall be readers fo this my littel work
that I have put no title in any part thereof concerning ye proportion and
simetry to use the accustomed term of the art of the fornamed columbes,
which I have not as well seen and measured in Italy, from whence they came
first unto us amongst the Antique works as read and studied in England in
the Antentique writers, that I might with so much more perfection write of
them as both the reading of the thing and saying it in deed is more then only
bare reding of it. This small and simple treatise of mine I can not tell
whither with like felicity brought to his parfection as with no small labor
and study for this time ended, I thought meet as the first fruits of my
poor attemptes and endeavors to leave as a duetye and debt of me to be paid,
and that well received of all men, I shall think my self most happy, and if
not of all persons, yet at the least wise of such as be honest estemers and
accepters of other men's diligence and studies. The which if it come to pass,
both I shall be glad of my labors in these things bestowed and for the love of
my natural Countrymen be furthermore encouraged hereafter to attempt greater
things. Thus almighty God preserve the in godly excercices to his pleasure
for ever Amen.

The discourse from time, to TIME HOW THIS SCIENCE of Architecture increased.
IN the beginning of the world, Nature by necessity did first invent strange
manner of couertures or houses for the people to inhabyte in. But of all such
order and form of buyldinges as were before Noes fludde, it shall not need to
make rehersall. But after the fludde of Noe, the people again, when they were
increased and multiplied, did daily more and more, seek for their commodity
to be defended from the heat of the Sun, and coldenesse of the air: some
succored the^ selves under the shadow of trees, and other taking occasion
thereby, devised to set up forked stakes, with the forkes up wards, and there
upon laid bows. Afterward they still devised and daily did practice more
and more in that kind. And in time, they perceiving the use of cutting with
iron, did set upright trees as they had before, with theyrstakes being done
with their hands, and because they should not cleave witth the heaviness of
their burdens above at the top, they compassed them about with ringes of
Iron, and called them Pillars or Columns. The form and shape of which
Pillars, they did imitate, fashioning them of stone. And then they calling to
their remembrance the fludde of Noe, which had drowned all the world, devised
to build the to wre of Babylon. So they added in steed of the ring above at
the top of their pillars, these, which our author Vitrinius calls
Astragali, and Apophigis. So in process of time, diverse witty men ever addinge
some thing thereto, at the last it came to some perfection. Then did they
begin to devise and practice after diverse fashions, and builded a great part
of the tower. In which buylding came the division of tounges, or languages,
whereby these buylders were parted and scattered abroad upon the face of the
earth, and inhabited many strange countries, and began to build in Egipte,
and after that in many other places, as seems by the works, which Belus,
Ninus, and Semiramis builded, which were spread so far, as some men do suppose
that Trier in low Doutcheland should have been builded of the brother of Ninus
as ye may perceive by Berosus, Herodotus, and many other that are writers and
witnesses of the same. Yea, shortly after was made Memphis, the which now is
named Alkayre, the which was builded by a king of Egipte, having in compass
round about, one hundred and fiftye stades, or as some interpretate it, so many
furlonges, and in like manner the ancient city of Thebes in Greece, besides
many other cities, which were made before and after. In the which it is to be
supposed, that there were sumptuous temples and Palaces. So, that they were
expert and began in the science to come to more perfection. And immediately
after a witty man named Dorus (the son of Helemer and Optix the Nymphe)
invented and made the first pillar drawn to perfection, and called it Dorica,
after his own name. Shortly after him, there was Ion, son of Xuthus, that
was made governor of a part of Caria, which he had won, he in that country
builded these cities following, Priem, Samum, Teorem, Colophonem, Nachiu^,
Erithren, Phoceam, Clazomenas, Lebedum, Melyten, of the which, the citizeins
afterward drove out of that country the Caryans, and called it Ionia, after
their kings name, and then they made their churches and Temples of their
Gods, and first began with Appollo his Temple, as they had seen it in Grecia
before. And they not knowing any measure of pillours considered how to make a
just Symetrie, that it might be comely and also strong, took their mesure by
the foot of a strong fashioned manne, findinge him to be in height six
times, the length of his foot, and so by that mesure finished all the parts
of that pillar, and called it Dorica, because they had seen it in the works
of Dorus, and so therewith finished the temple of Appollo, after that they
devised to make a temple to the goddess Diana, wherein they did devise an
other Symetrie, for that temple, as they had done for the temple of Appollo,
and fashioned it after the just measure of a woman, to the end and purpose,
it should be more beautiful and sklender, making it eighte Diameters, in
height, and called it Ionica, after their country, adding thereunto in the
stead of her shoowe, that which Vitruuius, names Spira, and in the Capitel,
was set Voluta, in the stead of her hear, which trussed up with a lace, on
either side of her head, for an ornature and garnishment of the Capitell They
also fashioned the body of the pilloure, and filled it with Canalicoli, and
Striges, as though it were the plates of her garments. Then they being more
delighted with the beautifulnes of the height thereof added also an other
Diameter, unto the forsaid Dorica, and made it seven Diameters, in heght. After
that in the city of Corinthe, was buried a certain maiden, after whose burial
her nourishe (who lamented much her death) knowing her delights to have been
in pretye cups and such like conceytes in her life time, with many other
proper things appertayninge only to the pleasure of the eye, took them, and
brake them, and put them into a littell preatie baskette, and did set the
basket on her grave, and covered the basket with a square pauinge stone. That
done, with weping tears she said Let pleasure go with pleasure, and so the
nourishe departed. It chanced that the basket was set upon a certain root of
an herb called Acanthus, in french Branckursine, or bearefote with us, now in
the spring time of the year, when every root spreads fourth his leaves, in
the increasing they did run up by the sides of the basket, until they could
rise no higher for the stone, that covered the basket, which being square and
castinge his sour corners over the sides of the round basket, constrained the
branches of the herb to draw downwardes again with a sertaine compass, and
so grew to the fashion that Vitruuius, calls Voluta. So is there also other
smaller that come out of the Caules, and stalks, and are named in greek
Helices, and the basket being hydden underneath with a multitude of leaves. In
this city one Calimachus, an excellent Architectur, passing or goinge thereby,
regardinge the beawtifull work of nature, afterward using then the measures
of the forsayde Pillours, making the pillour Ionycke, upon the which pillor
or Scapus thereof, he set the Capitell, the which he had seen upon the tomb
of the maiden, the which garnished beatifully the whole pillor, which
Capitell, was in height the thicknes of the pillor, and named it Corinthia,
because it was made in the city of Corinthe, by thandes of Calimachus, who for
the excellence of that art was named Catatechnos, and after that this work
growing more and more to perfection came to the Romans, and so through out
all Italy, and many other places, yea, and was throughlye practiced by them.
Then the Tuscanes, beginning to build, having knowlaige of the pillor, which
was first invented by the Ionians, upon the Symetrie, of a strong manne
invented to build stronglye after the manner aforsayde, yea, and to garnishe
also their cities and towns beautifullye with a pillour of their own devise
which yet at this present time, remains wholle in the city of Forence and
in the countries there about they fourmed and fashioned that pillor, which to
this day is named after the said country Tuscana. The Romans, then well
practiced in their measures of all the rest of their Columes, and also desirous
to encreace so noble an art, by some noble accession, beholding and regardinge
the beautifulnes of these foresaid pillors, that is to say. Tuscana, Dorica,
Ionica, Corinthia, gathered out of each of the same pillars, that, which they
thought most fair, and made a pillar of pleasure or triumph, after the most
excellent manner that ever was before. This pillar was first builded to his
perfection in the time of Titus, Vespasianus, who set it at his triumph in
the higheste place of his arche triumphall, and called it Composita, or as some
do name her Italica. These pillars, partelye for their beautye and comlines,
partelye for their fortitude and strength, the writers of them, have resembled
and lykned to sertain feyned Gods and Goddesses. As namely Tuscana, is
applied unto Atlas, the king of Mauritania: Dorica, unto Hercules and the god
Mars: Ionica to Diana, or Appollo. Corinthia unto Vesta or some like virgin,
and Composita, to Pandora, of Hesiodus, the which he faineth to have been
endewed with diverse of those graces and coninge, wherewith the beforenamed
Gods and Goddesses were indewed, so that it seems by the ancient writers
and Authors, which have made rehersall of these things, that they have been
had in great estimation and prise, as ye may well parceyue by Ysis, which
builded a temple in Egipte for her father Jupiter, because her husband Osiris,
and she were in great estimation, and also for their beautiful inventions and
wisdom, were honored as gods. This may well be gathered by their pillars
and ornaments, that belong thereunto, the which were noted and marked with He
brewe letters, and also by the Sepulcres of Amasis, which was made more, then.
M. D years before the birthe of Christ, in the which one of the Pyramides was
CCClx. thousand men's works, the space of twentye years, the which remains
in Egipte to be seen at this present day, and many other beautiful
buildinges of that nation. Read. Diado. Sic. li. 1.2. Also it seems by many
other writers, that after Babell decayed, incontinently the Hebrews most
triumphantlye flourished in this point. Thus we may perceive that the Hebrews,
received their knowlage of the Babilonians, and the Greeks, received it of the
Hebrews, in like case the Latins, and the Italians received their, from the
Greeks, the which our Author Vitruuius, does not deny, in making
demonstrations to a Latin work with Greek letters as upon the invention of
the Greeks, which concerning his science in Architectura, in the which thing
Vitruuius, seems much to be commended, as one, that did not disdain to
acknowledge the authors and writers, out of whom he received his knowledge. In
so much, as in his seuenthe book of Architecture, he affirms (by naming the
notablest of the^) that they which have left these things in writing, are to
be commended, whose names also I thought not altogyther the metest to be
omitted, and therefore do rebers these. Theodorus, which wrote of the Dorica.
Etesiphon and Metageues, who wrote of the Ionica, which was set in the temple
of Diana, at Ephesis. The^ Hermogenes, has written of Diana in Magnesia, after
Argelius, which made the rehearsal of the Corinthes. Fistly Sathirus, and
Pitheus, who did speak of Ma^solea, in Halicarnasso, last both Cares, Briaxes,
Scopas, Praxiteles and many other, as Nexaria, Theosides, Philemon, Demophilos,
Pollis, Leonides. Silamon, Mela^pus, Sarnacus, Euphranor, all the which verly,
are to be thanked and commended thoroughly For by them we know and perceive (as
though we saw in a loking glass) the things, that have been seen, done and
made long before. Nevertheless, it has been withdrawn and hidden (as almost al
other knowlages, for a long season has hene) through ignorance, for so it
came to pass by the injury of time, that all sciences and learning have been
kept secret and not spoken of, in so much that at this day, there are many
which name this order of building to be of the new facion. But it can not he
new, that has so many ancient Authors and masters thereof, whom, namely the
Noble writer or Author Pliny, has in so great estimation, that for their sake
he blames al them greatly, that have written and wrought any thing, and have
not named the authors and masters, of whom they took their invention
especially of such great and unspeakable work, of which the honor and fame,
has been as much unto the maker thereof, as it was unto them that caused those
things to be made. But now of thie things we have spoken enough, let us
therefore speak some what of the worthynes of this science, and of the office
of an Architect.

What the Office and Duty is of him that will be a Perfect Architecte or
Master of buyldings.
ARchitectur (by the common consent of many notable men) as Cesarius says, is
of all arts, the most noble and excellent, Containing in it sundry sciences
and knowlaiges wherwyth it is furnished and adourned, as full well Vitruuius
does affirm and declare by his writing. For says he, an Architecte must be
sharp of understanding and both quick and apt to conceive the true
Instructions and meaninges of them that have written thereof: and must also be a
perfect distributor of the great mysteries, that he has perceued and
experymented, that plainly and briefly he may discuss and open
demonstrations of that which shall be done or mete to those persons, that shall be
the fownders of any noble works wherefore he ought first to be a very good
Gra^marian, then to have expert knowladg in drawing and protracting the
thing, which he has conceived, Next he must have a good sight in Geometry,
Consequently in Opticke and in such like sciences he must have good
perceuerance. Likewise in Arithmeticke he must be very parfiact, and in
histories singulerly well seen. He must also have a good sight in Musycke,
and some knowlaige in Physic, not altogether ignorant in Astronomy, he must
also besides all thise ben Philosophy, very expert. The causes why al thise
sciences before named, ought to be in him that is a parfaict Architect and
master of buildinges be of Vitruuius in this sort rehearsed. If he have (says
he) learning he shall strengthen his memory, with all written books, and
through drawing utter his fantasy and show the trike or fascion of the thing
that he goes about to make And Geometry teaches us the order of rules,
Compasses, Squiers, Quadrantes, and Just waterleueles with many other
knowlaiges that proceeds thereof as Euclide, and other authors and also
Sebastian Serli, in his first Chapter reherseth, Opticke shows us how and
by what means the lights should be set into the House, And how they should
be brought from place to place, as to serve the hole house, and every place
therein, which Optica, is properly called perspectiue, and is of a further
speculacion, then therein can or needs to be expressed: which of Sebastian
Serlius, in his second book first second and third Chapter is partly
declared. Arithmeticke, teaches us innumerable poinctes most necessarily
required to the parfaicte knowlaige of this art* for without yt, we can neither
know or yet discuss the measures and hard sentences or questions of Symetrie,
neither how to account the Cost and charges of our labores. An Architecte
also must have a knowlaige in hystories, There be moreover multitude of causes
in buildinges, and very many ornatures and garnishinges of which he must needs
give answer, from whence they come, and for what purpose they are made, As for
an example, If a master workman should make images, figured like women,
clothed and garnished after a beautiful soarte, which are named Cariatides,
and set them in his work for pillars and make over their head Mutilos, and
Coronas, if yt were demanded of him to what purpose those images were made,
then be should answer that Caria, a town in Peloponeso, traitorously conspired
with the Persians, against the Greeks: But the greeks getting the victory over
their enemies, agreed with one accord, and besieged Caria, and wan the city,
killed the men and took the women, carieng them as bond women not suffering
them to put of their Rich ornaments and Iewelles to the intent, that the
show of their triumph, might be thereby the more glorious. So they subdued,
wear brought into bondage. For this cause and other such like, the chief
masters of Architecture made in their common places and palaces such women
to bear up the burden of their buildinges, the which was a remembrance and
memorial of their punishments for their malice against the Greeks, sustained
by the Cariatides, that is to say, by the women of Caria. In like case did the
Lacedaemonians, when they with so littell a power overcame such a great host of
the Percians, and slew them. After which conquest in their triumph, they
builded a gallery which should remain unto them for a perpetual and
everlasting token of victory and did set therein the figures, and counterfeites
of the Percians, which before were their prisoners, in their straung apparaill,
standing in their palaces, supporting their galleries, wherefore they were
feared of their enemies thereby, and also yet encouraged the hearts of the
Citizens, against their other enemies and back friends. Upon this example
Pausanias, did afterward make the counterfeates of the same Persia^s, and upon
their heddes, he laid Epistilia, and Coronas, setting betwixt them Zophorus,
the which was garnished and figured with the Ieweles, that they had taken from
them being their enemies, As Cups, gobletes, cheines, girdelles, and such
like other Iewelles, which were plentiful among the Persians, and under their
fete was set Stylobata, wherein were written their titles, Many such Histories
an Architecte, ought of necessitye to know. Next unto this does follow Music,
which also is very necessary for an Architecte, for these causes must he have,
as it were a foresight in it, that thereby the principal chambers of the house,
should with such order be made, that the voice or noise of musical
Instruments, should have their perfaict Echo, resounding pleasauntly to the
ears of those that shall be hears thereof, as also the Romans, used in all
their palaces and for many other necessities thereunto belonging, of the which
Vitruuius, makes further demonstration, as the refreshing of the Melancolicke
minds, which are always travailing for further knowlaige. But now consequently
follows the cause why he should have sight in Physic, which through the
knowledge of Astronomy, parfaictly does declare the mouings of the heavens, and
where unto by their natural inclinations they be disposed, as also the
understanding of the plages or Coasts of the word, which the Greeks call
Climata, to thyntent that he may show what ground plottes stand in the most
bolsom air to build upon. And which also be the swet and wholesome waters, the
most fertile and fruitful places, as namely for those plottes that stand
contrary to this order are not mete or necessary to build upon. This bolsome
ground so found whereon Ye shall build, yemust furst have knowlaige how to cast
your ground plotte, wherein you must divide all your several places of offices
appartayning to the furniture of your house, your principal chambers of rest
and libraries, and such other like must receive their lights from the East,
for that the son by natural heat at his rising draws to him all corupte
humors and evil vapors of the earth and quickneth the spirittes of man and
beast, and if ye will cast therein baynes or hot houses, with winter Cha^bers
and parlors they shall receive light from the west. For that side is defendid
from the south winds which are grievous and contagious and also great wasters
of all kind of buildinges, as may welbe parceuyd by old Edifices. Your study
places, were you would write, draw or devise, or the places where your Sellers
should be cast, ought to receive their light from the north, by cause in that
part are the lights, which are steadfast, As for lights other ways appointed I
refer to the builders of those works. But Vitruuius, makes no further
mention thereof. Now also it belongs to an Architecte, to have the knowlaige
of Astronomy, whereby he should directly know the four principal places, which
are East, west, north, and south, with that, which they call Equinoctium, and
Solsticium, and the mouings of the sterres, for without this knowlaige none can
attain unto the making of horologes, quadrantes, Clockes dialles, in the son
necessary to be set in goodly Edyficies. It belongs also to an Architect, to
have sight in Philosophy, which teaching to be of a noble courage as Vitruuius
says, and also gentil, curtious, faithful and modest, not given to avarice
and filthy lucre, as not to be troubled or corrupted with rewards or gifts,
but with gravity and Sagenes to co^ceine al honor and dignity in all things
conseruinge his good name and estimation. Let him also take a charge of works
in hand, being desired and not desirous of works. He, which would be an expert
Architecte, ought to have all these sciences and knowlaiges, To him that has
any science or knowlaige and judgment therewith conceived, it is most evident
and plain. Nevertheless it will sound straungely to some that a man should
learn so many sciences for the atteining of one, and keep all them in memory
for the practice of the same: yet it is necessary and also mete, that although
he be not parfaict in them or every of them, yet he should have some knowlaig
in them and so it behooves, neither it is requisite that he should be so
parfaict a Gramaria^, as was Aristarchus, and yet not altogether with out it.
Nor in Music like unto Aristoxenis, neither in painting like Apelles nor
Plastes, or Stattuary like unto Miron or Policrates, neither in Phisike like to
Hippocrates, but yet in this and other not altogether ignorant. But if a man
might be parfaict in all these sciences as were Aristarchus, Samrius, Plulolaus,
Architas, Tarentinus, Apollonius, Pergeus, Eratosthenes, Sireneus, Archimedes,
Scopinas, (for all these were stro^gely weaponed with all these sciences before
rehearsed) he should be able to answer to all questiones thereto apertaining. But
I may pray as Vitruuius does, saying, I pray O Caesar, and all other that read
this my writings, if there be any thing disagreing to any of these sciences
bear with me for I confess my self (says he) not to be parfaict in any of
the other sciences. But he names him self to be an Architect, wherein he
thinks him self parfait, But I the setter forth of this treatise in
English, acknolage myself not to be a parfaict Architecte, (as he says) nor
yet Gramaria^, and though I have put my self in prease, it is not through the
deep knowlaige above rehearsed, but I do it for to put in ure an entrau^ce or
beginning to them which be therein Ignorant, and desire further knowledge in
these things, as hereafter appears by the declaration hereof.

diagram and illustration of Tuscan column THVSCANA.
TVSCANA.
THe manner and form of the five principal pillors, and their proper names
with all their compoundes thereto belonging and, their setting in their just
places by the order and rule of Symetria, and marked with the letters A. B. C.
whereunto is made this pillar Tuscana, as it is figured, invented and made by
the Ionians, upon the Simetrie of a strong man. Renewed and found again by the
Tuscanes and o them takes his name.

THVSCANA.

whose mark is K^th Proiecture or ha^ging over shall be so much as the pillor
is diminished on each side, the which is correspondent to the thicknes of
Scapus beneth. Thus writes Sebastian Serlias, of the proiecture of this
Capital. Nevertheless I have seen in some places in Italy that the Proiecture,
have been like to their height, by cause the pillor is so much dyminished it
should be therefore the more co^mely to have the greater Proiecture, and yet
shall those two ways not differ much one from the other. But yet of these two
ways let us take the most fair I have also seen this pillor so placed that
it has been. 7 Dyameters in heigthe, where as he supported no other pillors
but his own Trabiacions. So ends the form and measures of the Capitulum.

EPISTILIVM.
Upon the Capital shall be laid or set Epistilium, named also Trabes called in
our English tongue the Architraue the which is marked with Land is a modulus in
height. The which height ye shall divide into 6. parts whereof Tenia, to be the
sixte part, and the other.5 parts is for Trabs. So done: upon the Epistilium
you shall set Zophorus being also a Modulus, in height and is marked with M.
upon Zophorus, shall be set Coronix being in height also a Modulus, and that
height you shall deuid into.4 parts give one part unto Cimatiu^ under Corona
marked with N. but the other side of it is called Tenia, and give likewise 2
part unto Corona marked with O. and the fourth part which remains give unto
Cymatiu^ over Corona which is marked with P. In Corona, ye shall make Denticulos,
the which are made like teethe and their Proiectures, shall be like unto their
heightes, saving only Corona which hangs his height and half his height
over. And thus ends the mesures of the pillor called Tuscana. Now ye shall
understand, that the pillor which stands in the myddell is your ground
plotte, but the other which stands by him, is made upon the self same
measure but that it is otherwise garnished which garnishmentes bring other
measures for them. And as touching this pillor, I shall begin from the lowest
part of the Pedestall being Tenia inferior, dividing his height into.8.
parts. Give.3. pa^tes unto Plinthus and.4. parts give also to Sima reuersa,
and the eighte part remains for the small edge upon Sima. upon the which is
set the body of the Pedestale, also the upper Tenia ye shall divide his
height into 5 parts give. 2 parts unto Hypotrachelium, and also.2. parts
unto Cymatium, and the fifth. part give unto his edge at the top of the
Pedestale, now Basis, or Base, belonging to the said pillor is the height of
a Modulus, or half the thicknes of the pillor, whose height ye shall divide
into.2. parts. Give Plinthus one part, and the second part divide you into.3.
parts Give.2. parts unto Torus, and the third part divide also into.3.
parts. Give.2. parts to Sima and the third part ye shall give the edge under
Sima So ends the mesures of the Basis or Base, upon the which Base shall be set
Scapus, or the body of the pillor, made after the manner and order as before is
me^cioned upon the which shall be set the Capital the one Capital, is like to ye
other saving that it has upon Echinus a littel edge, which seteth forth
Plinthus with a more beautiful Proiecture. As co^serning ye Architraue or
Epistiliu^, that is, as before reherced a Modulus in height, which height ye
shall divide into.6. parts. Tenia, occupies ye sixth part, ye other.5. parts
ye shall deuid into.2. parts. Give one part unto ye half of Trochilus, the
other part is left for ye flat square, that rests upon the Capital and so
ends ye Epistiliu^. Now as touching ye fries or Zophorus, being also a
Modulus in height, as is before rehearsed of the other, is like unto it but that
this swellet houte the fourth part of a round compass, that is drawn above and
square being the height and breadth of a modulus wherewith ends Zophorus, upon
the which shall be set Coronix, the one side is like unto the other in the
mesures, but that in this side Cymatium, is set under Corona, and upon the
other side Tenia is set under Corona, being of one heighte. This done and
finished according to this rule so ends the mesures and garnishmente of the
first pillar called Tuscana.

Now for as much as that you have understanding bow all the parts of this
pillar and the rest of the pillors that shall be, has their mesures, ornatures,
and names finished out of Icnographia or ground plot vpwardes to the very top
of the same work, wherefore I thought it good for the more perfection and
exercises of the gentest reader to make a Rehersall of all the parts and
passelles downwardes again endyng in Ichnographia where I began first* these
be the names TRABEATIONIS. Cymatium, mar. P. Corona, mar. O. Tenia. mar. N.
Zophorus, mar. M. Tenia in Epistylium, mar. L. CAPITVLI. Plinthus mar. K.
Echinus, Et Annullus mar. I, Hypotrachelium mar. H. COLVMNA mar. F. Astragalus
marked. G, Apophiges superior and inferior, SPIRA sine BASIS. Torus mar. E.
Plinthus mar. D. STYLOBATAE. Tenia pro Coronice mar. C. Tenia pro Basis mar. B.
Ichnographia mar. A. being the parfecte square or ground plot the beginning and
foundation of this work.

diagram and illustration of Doric (?) column DORICA.
HERE FOLLOWS THE MANNER AND FORM of the second pillor called Dorica, being
ascribed to Hercules and Mars, for his strength, according to the rule
aforesaid.
THis pillor called Dorica, shall be.7. Diameters in height, with the Base, and
Capital Now if ye will set Stylobata, or Pedestal, under your pillor, thus ye
shall begin. First you shall make a four square, which shall be your ground, the
which is in my figure marked with A. and then draw a line overthwart from the
one corner to the other, which line is called Dyagonalis, and is marked with B.
and that line being directly upright set, one end shall be the^ height of the
square or body of the Pedestall marked with C. measure and divide that height
into 5. parts the which height of the Base of the Pedestall, shall be as much,
as one of the.5. parts which is marked with D. and admit also as much unto
the Coronix of the Pedestalle marked with E. so that the Pedestale is.7. such
parts in height like unto the pillor, which is 7. Dyameters, in height. The
height of the Basis of the Pedestale which is marked with D. shall be divided
into.2. parts the lowest part is for Plinthus, marked with F. the second part
divide into.5. parts. Three of those parts give unto Torus, marked with G.
the other.2. parts shall be divided into.3. parts, give.2. parts unto
Astragalus, marked with H. the third part is left for the edge which
Vitruuius calls Regula, the Proiecture, of each side of the Base, of the
Pedestall as Vitruuius says shall be half a Modulus, but the antiques have
made their Proiectures like unto their heightes. Then divide the height of
Coronix marked with E into.3. parts give one unto Astragalus, with his Regula,
marked with I. the other.2. parts divide into.3. parts admiting.2. of those
parts to Cymatium, marked with K. and the third part thereof is left for
Regula, whose mark is L. the Proiectures of the same is like unto their
heightes. Thus ends the Pedestale or Stylobata.

SPIRA SIVE BASIS.
Upon the Pedestale, you shall set Spiram which is the foot or Base of the
pillor and is marked with M. being a Modulus in height. that height divide
into.3. parts one of those parts is for Plinthus marked with N. the other.2.
parts divide into. 4. parts. one of them shall be for Torus, above marked with
O. The other.3. parts that remains divide into 2 parts, one of them give
unto Torus, under marked with P. the rest is admitted unto Trochitus, marked
with Q. and each of his rules to be either of them in height the seventh part
of that hole measure or part. The Proiectures of the whole Basis, shall be half
a Modulus, on each side, and thus ends the mesures of the Basis.

SCAPVS SIVE COLVMNA.
Upon Spira, or Base of the pillor ye shall set Scapus, marked with R. being the
tronike or body of the pillor the which is in height.6. Diameters. The thicknes
of the pillor at the foot is divided into.6. parts: and under the Capital, it
is diminished one of the.6. parts that is half a part on either side, and
the.5. parts which remaigne, be for the thicknes of the pillor under the
Capitale. From the which thicknes ye shall draw down perpendiculerly unto
the third part of the height of Scapus, whereupon is made the half compass the
which.2. lines shall make.2. crosses on each side of the half compass one. Then
mesure from the cross by the side of the half compass unto the lowest part of
the half compass and divide the same into.6. parts, drawinge them ouerthwarte
the half compass from the one side of the pillor unto the other marking the
ends of the lines with.1.2.3.4.5.6. then measure from the ouerthwarte line
under the half compass, dividing vpwardes to the highest of Scapus into.6.
parts The which shall be drawn ouerthwarte the pillor, the highest ouerthwarte
line at the top of Scapus, marking that line with 1. on and so the other
downewardes with 2.3.4.5.6. Then the strike marked with.1. one under the
Capital, is drawn down on both the sides unto the line that ledeth to the
half compass, which is also marked with one. Then draw down right from the
strike.2. which is drawin ouerthwarte the pillor at the top unto the other
line, which leads to the half compass.2. and so downwardes from.3. perpendy
culerly to the other line or cross marked with.3. and so directly downwardes
from.4. to.4. from 5. to.5. and so likewise from. 6. to. 6. That done, take a
rule, and draw from the 2. strikes which are the thicknes of the pillor under
the Capital to the end of the upright line marked.2. which stays that line
which is drawn overthwart the pillor marked also.2 and draw from.2. to the
end of the upright line marked.3. and so likewise from.3. to.4. downewardes: and
so from.4. to.5. and from.5 to.6. So done, ye have closed up the sides with the
diminishinge of your pillor as ye may perceive by your ground plot, the other
side is left unclosed, wherein ye may perceue, where the lines do stop,
which be drawn vpwardes out of the half compass. The other side of the pillor
I have closed because ye should see it and the better understand thereby how to
close and finish the diminishing of the pillors. At the top of Scapus, or
Pillor, right under the Capital, is made Astragalus, with his Regula being in
height the sixte part of Modulus. The which Regula, shall be half so much in
height as the height of Astragalus, marked with S. whose Proiectures, shall be
so much as the pillor is diminished on each side a like. If your pillor shall
have Canaliculos, there must be of those.20. round about Scapus, so done make a
square so great, as one of those.20. parts, then draw from corner to corner
overthwart the square, making a cross in the mydell of that square. Then take
a pair of compasses and set the one end of your compasses in the middell of
the cross, and draw with the other poincte of your co^passes al a long by the
side of your square from the one corner to the other, compassing the same
quarter as more plainly does appear by your ground plot marked with A. the
which ar the right Canalicoli, Beneth at the foot of Scapus, lies Regula,
being of the same height that Astragalus is of at the top, and so ends
Scapus.

CAPITAL.
Upon the top of Scapus, you shall set the Capital or hedde of the pillor
marked with T. and is in height a just Modulus, that height divide into.3.
parts Give one part unto Hypotrachelium marked with V. and the second part
divide into.3. parts.2. of those shall be for Echinus, marked with.X. the rest
is left for the.3. kings which be called Apophiges, or. Anuli, Now the third
and higheste part, deuyde you also into.3 parts whereof.2 of those parts
shall be given to Plinthus marked with. Y. the third part, which remains,
give to Cymatium, and his rule or Regula, which Regula, shall be the third part
of that, which remains and lies at the top of the Capitale. The Proiecture
of this Capitale, shall be correspondent with the proiecture of the Plinthus, at
the foot of the pillor, and is marked with N the which Proiecture, is
observed of the Antiques, in the said pillor, which is already finished and
stands by. Howbeit Vitruuius writes it to be made after this sort, to wit,
that the Proiecture of the Capitale shall be the twelueth and sixte part of a
Modulus. Thus is finished the Capitale with all his Proiectures.

EPISTYLIVM.
Upon the Capitale, shall be set Epistylium marked with A. the height thereof
shall be a Modulus that height ye shall divide into. 7. parts. Give Tenia,
marked with B. the seventh part, and give Subtenia, and Gutta, pendante marked
with C. the sixte part of a modulus to their height and that part divide
unto.4. parts, Give.3. unto Gutta pendant being.6. in number, the fourth part
shall be for the edge or Regula, in Epistylia under Tenia.

ZOPHORVS.
Upon Epistylium, shall be set Triglyphi, marked with D. whose height must be a
Modulus and a half. Also the breadth thereof shall be a Modulus, and that breadth
you shall divide into.12. parts Give 1. of those. unto each one of the
Semicanalicoli, the which stand on either side of the Triclyphi, so remain
yet.10. parts and.6. of those shall be for Strie, or the flath which are marked
with E. the other 4 parts are left for the Canalicoli, standing upright within
the Triglyphi, where upon ye shall set his Capitale, which also is called Tenia,
being in height the sixte part of. Modulus and marked with F. Bitwixte the.2.
Triglyphos, you shall set Methopa, marked with G. being square so high as it is
broad: and in that square shall be made a bulls bed, his horns bound about with
rybandes: garnished with branches flowers and Iewelles, hanging at the ends of
the Ribandes In every second Methopa, ought to be made a fair basone or flat
peace, the which inwardely: should be garnished but I am not hable to set fourth
the bewtye thereof in so small a figure.

The highest part of TRABEATIONIS, called in English a Cornishe.
VItruuius teaches us that the height of it should be a Modulus, and that you
shall divide into 2. parts the lowest part divide into.5. parts, Give.1. to
Cymatium under Corona also.1. other unto Cymatium, above Corona, the other.3
parts give unto Corona, whose mark is H, that second part which remains of
the Modulus ye shall give unto Syma, marked with I. Then add the eight part of
a Modulus, to be the height for his edge or Regula, above Sima the proiectures
to be like to their heightes, saving that the Proiecture of Corona, must be
twice his height by cause in it must be made, the order of Gutta, being right
over Triglyphi, they shall be,.18. in number.6. the one way and.3. the other.
Right over Methopa, the Antiques used to cut in Corona Jupiters mark of the
thunder bolte. Thus ends the opinion of Vitruu^ius in these things.
Nevertheless as ye may perseue by the muller or Coronicis, of the antiques that
stands on the right side whereunto they have added Echinus, and Denticuli,
with Apophigis or rule and garnished it after many beautiful facions bringing
their work to a great height, the which height causes a fairer Proiecture,
which was for ye further setting fourth of their work^ and was pleasant to the
beholders thereof. If it be a gate house or gallery of pleasure having Ionica,
or Corinthia, of him supported or standing by him: then ought he to be richly
garnished But if he stand in the gate of a city or castle by force or
strength, then ought he to be made with those strong measures, which are
ascribed unto him standing in the place of Mars, and Hercules wha^ he stands
with the other pillors he is like unto Minerua, and therefore have respect unto
his place.

THus having finished all the measures ending now at the highest of
TRABEATIONIS. I shall name all the parts and parssels with their marks whereby
is known the thing that is wrighten or spoken of to the clearnes or opening of
matters, and an exercise for the reader to know the names by, I have more at
large spoken of this matter in the ending of the Tuscan pillar, therefore I
shall begine in TRABEATIONIS: REGVLA. and Sima, marked with I. Cymatiu^, and
Corona, marked with H. Cymatiu^ inferior (Echinus Regula, Denticulos) added
Tenia, marked with F. Triglyphi, marked with D. Methopa, marked with G. Tenia,
marked with B. Regula and Gutta, marked with C. CAPITVLI, marked with T. Regula
Cymatium Plinthus, marked with Y. Echinus marked with X. Annulitres.
Hipotrachelium, marked with V. COLVMNA or SCAPVS. Apophiges Superior and
Apophiges inferior, marked with R. SPIRA or BASIS, marked with M. Torus
superior, marked with O. Regula. Scotia, marked with Q. Regula Torus Inferior,
marked with P. Plinthus, marked with N. STYLOBATA. Coronix marked E. Regula,
marked with L. Cymatium, marked with K. Astragalus, marked with I. to the
antike pillor is added Corona, Regula, and Sima, Quadratum, Diagonium, marked
with C. the diagonall line marked B. Ichnographia, or ground plot marked with
A. BASIS, marked with D. Regula, Astragalus, marked with H. Torus, marked G.
Plinthus marked F. in the finished pillor or BASIS, is as follows Regula
Cymatium reuersa. Regula Sima. Reuersa Regula, Plinthus, which makes an end
for this pillar.

diagram and illustration of Ionic column IONICA
IONICA.
THE MANNER FORM AND ORDER of the Symetria, or measure of Ionica, which was
devised by the Ionians and set in the temple of Diana.
STylobata, or Pedestale of Ionica, you shall make the boddy thereof after this
sort. The flat stone, which is marked with A. shall be a square and a half in
height, and that height you shall divide into.6. parts, and add thereto such an
other part for the height of the Base of this Pedestale which is marked with B
and set also such an other like part for the height of the Coronix of this
Pedestale marked with C. So done, ye Pedestale is.8. parts in height, ye
height of the base marked with B. ye shall divide into.5. parts. Give.1. part unto
Astragalus and his Regula, marked with D. the which Regula, occupies the third
part of that one part. Give also to Sima reuersa, with his edge marked with.
E, one part, whereof his Edge occupies the third part. Then ye shall give an
other part unto Torus, marked with F. and the other.2. parts you shall give
unto Plinthus, marked with G. The Proiecture of them shall be like unto their
heightes. Now the height of Coronix, marked with C. ye shall deuid into 10.
parts, whereof you shall give.3. unto Cymatium, and his Edge marked with H. and
also give.3. parts unto Corona, marked with Land also give.3. unto Syma,
marked with K. the tenth part is left, for the Astragalus and his edge marked
with L. The Proiectures be like unto their heightes but that Corona, does sail
over twice his height. Though this pillor and al other pillors if it were so
that they had double Plinthus, it should not be without good cause, for the
antiques have made three Plinthus, one above an other, the occasion whereof is
this, that the earth should not over grow the Base of the Pedestale, and so
hyde the chief thing whereupon do rest the whole ordenaunces yea and in many
other places, they are necessary the which al Architectes, and masters of
buildinges ought to know, and many moo of those and such other ought to be
known of them of necessity. The occasion or cause for the which I have
begone this order or rule, first with the Pedestale, (the which rule differs
from Vitruuius, for he begins first with the pillor, nevertheless they come
to one purpose in the parfection) is for this, that first in my Pedestale, I
have drawn the ground plotte, which the Greeks call Ichnographia. For that
same house or building cannot stand or endure which has no good foundation.
So this is the foundation through the which we know and find all the
measures and vprightes belonging to the pillor. In it is also found the
Trabiations, the height of the Pedestale, and the breadth thereof, also the
height of his Base and Coronices, and the Diameter and the thicknes of the
pillor above under the Capitalle, and likewise the heighte of Spira, or Base of
the pillor: and the height of Scapus, and also the height of his Capitale, with
all the whole Proiectures, and measures which issues out of this
Ichnographia. Now to come to the right understanding of these measures before
rehearsed, ye shall begin thus. The breadth of the square, which is the
bredthe of the Pedestale, marked with A. you shall divide into.11. parts
whereof.8. shall be the Diameter, or thicknes of the pillor the which pillor in
height shall be.8. Diameters, with the Base and Capitalle, the which heighte of
the Capitale, occupies the third part of the Diameter, and the Basis marked
with M. shall be half the thicknes of the pillor in height, thus writes
Vitruuius, in his third book and third Chapter.

BASIS.
THe Basis, or foot of the pillor shall be a Modulus in height: which is marked
with M. that height you shall divide into.3. parts, give one part unto Plinthus
marked with. N that which remains divide into.7. parts give.3. unto Torus,
marked with..O. the other.4. parts divide into.16 parts, give Trochilus
superior with his Astragali, and rules.8. of those parts, whereof Trochilus,
occupies.6 parts, unto the highest Astragalus, and his edge shall be given a
part and half a part, and unto the little edge under Torus give also half a
part, which makes up the rest of the.8. parts. The other.8. parts give unto
Trochilus inferior, and divide them also as is before rehearsed. The Proiecture,
of the Plinthus, must be the eighte and the sixtenth part of the thicknes of
the pillar which is the sailing out on each side of the Base of the pillor and
does answer unto the breadth of the body of the Pedestale, and is agreabel with
the forsaid ground plot. The Antiques have made also a base, which differs
not far from the declaration of Vitruuius and after this facion they have
ordained their Base ye height thereof to be a Modulus, and that height divide
into.2. parts, whereof give Plinthus one part, as before is taught by
Vitruuius. Then that, which remains divide also into.3. parts, whereof the
highest part shall be given to Torus, the other.2 parts which remain, divide
either of the^ into.6. parts whereof the highest Astragalus and his rule
occupies.1. part, the which rule is half the height of Astragalus, also the
edge, that lies under Torus shall be half a part in height, and that which
remains is for Trochilus superior, wherewith finisheth the first.6. parts.
Now give also.1. part to the lower Astragalus, and his Edge The lowest edge
that stands upon Plinthus shall be in height half a part, the.4. parts and a
half that remain, shall be lest for the Trochilus inferior. The Proiecture of
the Plinthus, is before rehearsed, but because this Torus is sklenderer then
that, the which Vitruuius speaks of, it brings a more bewtifulnes to the
Proiecture, which can not be here expressed as any man of knowlaige will
confess.

SCAPVS.
Upon the base you shall set Scapus, marked with R. being.7. Diameters in height
and thereto adding the sixte part of the Diameter The which height of Scapus ye
shall divide into.3. parts upon the third part make half a compass, then
divide the thicnes of the pillor beneth into.6. parts.5. of those parts
shall be the thiknes of the pillor or Scapus, at the top, that is half a part
diminished, one either side of Scapus, from thence draw down right one both
sides unto the third part of the pillor upon the which is made the half
compass The which.2. lines makes.2. crosses upon the half compass, Then
measure from the cross downewardes even a long by the side of the half
compass, that stands upon the third part of the pillor dividing it into.6.
parts and draw these lines overthwart the half compass and mark the upper
line with.1. and so mark downewardes the next with.2. and so with the rest as
follows.3. 4. 5. 6. then divide from the lowest of the half compass vpwardes
unto the top of the pillor under the Capital, also into.6. parts drawing
them ouerthwarte the pillor and mark them also downewardes with.1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6. or divide it into so many parts, as you will, the moo, the better, and the
parfaicter you shall diminishe your pillor. Then shall ye begine after this
manner and draw from the strike.2. downwardes unto the strike and cross, which
is drawn ouerthwarte the half compass, and is also marked with.2. and draw
also from the strike.3. ye which has also a cross made upon the half co^pas,
drawing vpwardes unto ye strike marked with.3. the which is drawn overthwart
the pillor above, and so draw from.4. to.4. from 5. to.5. and from.6. to.6.
The line under the Capital, at the top of the pillor marked with.1. from
thence draw with a rule downewardes to the end of the vprighte line, which
staieth at the overthwart line marked.2. closing up the side of the pillor, and
from.2. unto 3, downewardes, and also from.3. unto 4 from.4. unto.5. and
from.5. unto.6. Then is that side full finished and made upright. At the foot
of Scapus, is a littell small edge, standing upon Torus whose height shall be
the ninthe part of Modulus, whereof his Proiecture shall be of like height. Also
at the top of the pillor lies Astragalus, and his fillet being half so high
as the Astragalus, and also above the Astragalus, is a littel Edge, the which
belongs to the Capital: The measure of his Astragalus, and his Edge, which
belongs unto Scapus is found out be the litel co^pas, which is the eye of
Voluta, whose mark is.X. if the pillor shall be garnished with Canalicoli there
shall be in number.24. round about the pillor or Scapus, and every of them
divide into.5. parts.4. of those parts is the breadth of Canalicoli, and the
fifth part is for Striae, which are also called Femora. The ground plotte
thereof stands besid the pillor which is marked with.S. wherein ye may see the
manner or making of Canalicoli, being half a compass inwardes, the which,
differs far from the order of Dorica, as it appears by your ground plotte.
Thus ends the manner and making of Scapus, with his mesures.

CAPITAL.
DIrectly and right upon the top of Scapus you shall set this Capital
following, which is marked with.T. being in height the third part of a
Diameter, the breadth of the Abacus marked with V is a Diameter, and thereto also
add, the eighteneth part of a Diameter. That same part divide into 2. parts
The which.2. parts shall be set one part on either side of the Abacus, the
which shall aid the Proiectures: so done Abacus is the in bredthe.19. parts,
then tell from the uttermost part of Abacus inwardes, one part and a half of
those.19. parts and there draw a strike down right perpendiculerly, as ye
may perceue by your figure here expressed which on both sides of the
Capital, hangs a line with a plommett at each end. Then divide the hanging
line from the highest of the Abacus, downewardes into 6. parts a and half of
such measure as is before rehearsed, whereof the height of ye Abacus is one and
a half, of the which remains yet.8. parts on the hanging line, the which
parts shall serve for Voluta, marked with.X. and those parts shall be thus divided.
Betwixt the Abacus and the litell round Co^pas, shall be.4. parts and beneth the
litel co^pas is.3. parts and the compass it self is also.1. part. That part,
which is the litell co^pas ye shall deuid his height into.6. parts Then take a
pair of compasses and set the one poincte of the compasses in the top of the
small compass which I have marked with.1. and the other foot of the co^pas ye
shall set upon ye line under the Abacus, and then turn the compass about and
draw downewardes unto the lowest of those.8. parts belonging to Voluta, until
ye come to the line where at the plomet does hang and there stay with that
poinct of the co^pas, and bring the other poinct of the co^pas down upon ye
lowest strike of ye little co^pas, which is marked with.2. The^ turn upwards ye
lowest poinct of the co^pas until ye come to ye ha^ging line, where ye shall
stay. The other foot ye shall set upon the strike marked.3. being within ye
little co^pas. The^ co^passing about with ye highest part of the co^pas downwards
until ye come again to the ha^ging line and so remove the highest part of the
compass setting it on the strike.4. within the little compass, and draw vpwardes
with the other poincte of the co^pas until ye come to the perpendiculer line,
staing again there, and then set the other foot of the compass right upon the
strike marked with.5. also being within the little compass, and draw down
wards again unto the forsayde line, and so set the highest poinct of the
compass upon the strike marked with.6. being also within the little compass. Then
draw with the other poinct of the compass vpwardes again which does enclose the
little compass. In the which co^pas may be made a rose or some other flower. Then
shall ye perceue that the Astragalus, and his.2. edges are Just the height of
the little compass, which is the eye of Voluta, and then shall the height of
Echinus be.2. of those part that Voluta was made with, the which Echinus is
marked with Y. also that space that lies between Echinus, and Abacus shall be.2.
of those parts in height. So done ye have ye true height and bredthe of ye
forfront and face of the Capital. It is also needful to know how to form and
facion the side of the Capital, The manner and facion thereof stands betwixt
the.2. pillars. The Abacus, that lies upon Voluta, is just.4. square flat like
to a trencher, the Proiecture is as much as one of the.19, parts on each side
of the Abacus, from the which ye shall draw down the.2. sides of Voluta, which
is 8. of those parts, the.2. Edges that stand on each end of the Roll or
Voluta shall have.1. part betwixt them both. The^ take a pair of compass and
set the one poinct of the compass at the lowest and inner part of the little
edge marked with.1. and bring the other poinct of the compass into the innermost
corner of the other edge which is marked with.2. draw from thence downewardes
to the figure 3. then set the poinct again in the place marked with.2. and
draw with the other poinct of the co^pas down to this figure.3. again, and
it shall make a cross, upon that cross, set the one poinct of the compass,
and with ye other poinct of the compass draw from the strike marked with.1. unto
the other strike marked with.2. and it will show you the diminishing of Voluta
in the middel, through which diminishing you shall perceue the ends of the
Canaliculi. So done the side of the Capital, is twice so broad as it is in
height, the Proiecture of Echinus, is like and equal with the Proiecture of
Regula at the foot of Scapus, and so end the Proiectures, and mesures of this
Capital also the. Antiques in diverse of their edifices, has made Echinus, to
be in Proiecture like unto Abacus.

EPISTILIVM.
OVer the Capital or head of the pillar ye shall set Epistilium, or Architraue
whose mark is A. the height thereof shall be a Modulus, and that height ye shall
divide into.7. parts, one of those ye shall give unto Cymatium marked with B.
his proiecture is like unto his height. The other.6. parts ye shall divide
into.12. parts give.3. unto the lowest Fascia marked with C give.4. unto the
second Fascia marked with D. and also give unto the third Fascia the.5. parts
which remains, the which is marked with E. whose Proiecture or hanging over
shall be right and Equal with the thicknes of the pillar bynethe above the Base.
Now understand that the Proiecture of these.2. highest Fascias shall be so much
as the pillar is diminished upon the one side under the Capital the which is
the twelfthe part of the diameter, the which part you shall divide into.9.
parts, give.5. unto the highest Fascia, marked with E. for his Proiecture, the
other.4. parts shall serve for the Proiecture of the middle most Fascia marked
with D. the lowest Fascia, finds his own Proiecture as before is rehearsed.

ZOPHORVS.
Upon the Epistiliu^, ye shall set Zophorus, which is called in our English
tongue the frize. If any thing shall be therein graven or cut, then it ought to be
ye fourth part higher the^ the Epistiliu^. If nothing shall be wrought win ye
Frize the^ shall ye frise be the^ fourth part smaller then the Epistilium, Then
divide the Frize marked with F. into.7. parts, one such part add thereto for
Cymatium, marked with G. let his Proiecture be also as much as his height. That
done ye shall begin with the Coronix, marked with H. the which is the highest
part of the Trabeation. Over Cimatium, shall be set Denticuli, marked with. I.
whose height shall be so much as the height of the myddlemost Fascia, and his
fillet to be the sixth part of De^ticuli, and above Denticuli, ye shall set
Corona marked with K. and the height thereof shall be also like unto the mydell
Fascia That height divide into.4. parts, one of those parts admit unto
Cymatium above Corona, the Proiecture of the Denticuli and Corona with
Cymatium, hangs over so much as the frize is in height, if the frize be the
fourth part diminished. Thus writes our Author Vitruuius. Over Corona shall be
set Sima, marked with L. whose height shall be the eight part higher then Corona,
with his Cimatiu^ and his Edge at the top to be the Sixte part of Sima added
thereto, the Proiecture to be like unto his height and so ends the measures of
Ionica.

THus have ye endid at ye hiest part of Trabeationis whose mark is H. Regula
the edge of Sima marked L. Cymatium, Corona, marked K. added over the woman
Mutilos, and his Capital, Denticulus, marked I. Zophorus, marked. F Cimatiu^
marked G. EPISTYLIVM marked A. Cimatiu^ marked B. Fascia prima, marked C.
Fascia Secu^da marked D. Fascia Tertia marked E. CAPITVLI, marked T. Cymatium.
Abacus, marked V. Frons Voluta, marked X. Astragalus. COLVMNA, upon the pillor
noted Scapus, marked R Apophigis superior. Apophigis Inferior. BASIS, marked M.
Torus marked O. Regula, Scotia, Superior, marked P. Regula, Astragalus Primus,
Astragalus Secundus marked Q Regula, Scotia, Inferior, Regula. Plinthus, marked
N. Coronix, marked C. Regula. Cimatium marked H. Corona, marked I. Regula, in
the finished pillar is added Echinus, Regula Sima, marked K Astragalus marked L
Regula. Quadratum. Sesquialtera. BASIS, of the pedestalle marked B. Regula,
Cimatium inuersa addid Regula Astragalus marked D. Sima Reuersa marked E.
Regula, Torrilus, marked. F. Plinthus Primus marked G. Astragalus, Regula,
Plinthus inferior being added unto the Base of the pedestall for to increase
his height and also for an other purpos most nesseseary if the pillor stand on
the ground and no stepes under the pedestall in the which body of the
pedestall is demonstrated Ichnographia, where in I begane and also make an end

CORYNTHIA diagram and illustration of Corinthian column CORYNTHIA

HERE BEGINETH THE PILLOR that was found in Corinthia, by Callimachius the
excellent Architect of Corinthe.
TO begin with the Pedestal of Corinthia, ye shall enter thus, The flat stone
or body of the Pedestal shall be a square and.2. third parts in height the which
is marked with A. whose height ye shall divide into.7. parts, add such a part
unto the Base of the Pedestall, marked with B, and as much for the Coronix,
whose mark is C. Then divide the Base of the Pedestall marked with B. into.7.
parts, Give one unto Cymatium, marked with D. and one unto Astragalus, with
his Regula, marked with E. Then give.2. unto Syma reuersa marked with F. with
his fillet, Then give one part unto Torus, marked with G. the other.2. parts
admit unto the highest Plinthus, marked with H. the Proiecture, of this Base
is like unto his height The other Plinthus, is added thereunto, the cause
whereof, is mentioned and declared before in Ionica, The^ divide Coronix, marked
with C. into.10. parts Give unto Cymatium above marked with. I.3. parts of
the which his fillet shall have.1. part Then admit also.2. parts to Corona,
marked with K. and also.2. parts unto Syma and his fillet or edge marked with
L. the other.2. parts give unto Cymatium with his edge marked with M. and the
tenth part admit unto Astragalus and Regula, marked with N. under Cymatium,
the Proiecture ye shall make like unto their height saving only Corona, which
ought to hang over.2. third parts more then his height the which is a beauty
unto the whole Coronix and so ends the measures and Proiectures, thereunto
belonging.

BASIS.
NOw ye shall find the measures of the thicknes of the pillor, which is the
Diameter, as does follow, divide the bredthe of the boddye of the Pedestal into
6. parts, whereof the diameter or thicknes of the pillar shall be.4. such parts
and ye height of the pillor shall be 9. Diameters, whereof the Capital shall
have.1. Diameter, for his height, and also the height of the Base shall be half
a Diameter, which base is marked with O whole height ye shall divide into.4.
parts whereof the Plinthus, marked with P. occupies.1. part. The other.3.
parts divide into 5. parts. Give unto Torus, above which is marked with Q. one
part, and the Torus, beneth shall be ye forth part greater the^ the Torus above,
and is marked with R. that which remains between the.2. Torus divide into.2.
parts, of the highest part ye shall make Trochilus, marked with S. whereof the
Astragalus, shall be the sixte part, and his edge shall be half his height, the
other edge that lies under the high Torus, shall be in height the third part
more the^ the height of the other edge. The second part that remains is for
the nethermost Trochilus or Scotia, marked with T. whose Astragali, shall also
be in height the sixte part of Trochilus, and his edge shall be half his height,
the other edge that lies on the nether most Torus, shall be in height.2. third
parts of the height of Astragali, the Proiecture of this base is thus. If this
pillor stand upon any other pillor, then shall the Proiecture thereof be like
unto ye Proiecture of ye Base of Ionica, and if this pillar stand upon ye
ground, or being alone by himself the^ shall this Proiecture of the Base be like
ye Proiecture, of the Base of Dorica, and thus ends the Base of Corinthia.

SCAPVS.
Upon the Base or foot of the pillar ye shall set Scapus, marked with V.
whose height is.7. Diameters and a half, whose thicknes is diminished the
sixte part of the top of Scapus, upon either side half a part as is before
said upon the third part of the height of Scapus, ye shall make the half
compass, through the which ye may find a fair diminishing as I have said
before in Thuscana, Dorica, and Ionica. If this pillar be garnished and filled
with Canaliculi, and Striges, which Vitruuius calls Femora, there shall be.28.
in number round about the pillor. The mesures of them I have before rehearsed
in the Ionica, saving only from the third part of the pillor downewardes,
Astraguli be made and set upright round about the pillar within the
Canaliculi, the manner thereof you shall find in the ground plot, the which
stands here between the.2. pillars and is marked with X. The Proiecture, of
Them does answer justly with the thicknes of the pillor: at the top of the
pillar shall be made Astragalus and his edge, the which shall be the twelfte part
of a Diameter in height. The Proiecture thereof is somuche, as the pillar is
diminished on either side, and thus finisheth Scapus.

CAPITAL.
OF this Capital, Vitruuius makes mention in his fourth book and first
chapter upon the said Scapus, which is the body of the pillar, ye shall set
the Capital being a Diameter in height, and is marked with Y. that height
divide into.7 parts, admit one unto Abacus, marked with A. the which part ye
shall divide into.3 parts give.1. unto Cimatium and his edge, the other.2.
parts give unto Plinthus, the other.6. parts that remained from the Abacus
downewardes, divide into.3. parts, give one part unto the shortest leaves and
also one other to the height of the myddle leaves The third part is left for
the height of Clauiculi, Vitruuius calls it in the making of the Capitale of
Ionica, Voluta, and is in this Capital marked with B. being that which goes
out of Caulis, and turns to ye 4 Corners of the Abacus and they be in
number.8. round about the Capital, the which closes together at the.4.
corners of the Capital, also there be other smaller, that are called Helices,
the which spring out of that which is the budde or Caules, and grow vpwardes
right under the Abacus and have but half the height of the other greater
Helices, or Volutas and also.8 of them be round about growinge also.2. and.2.
togithers under the.4 forefronts of the Abacus, over the which stands the
flower or Rose in the myddell of the Abacus whose height is equal with the
thiknes or height of Abacus, being.4. roses or flowers in number in the.4.
frontes of the Abacus. Also under the Abacus is a certain square edge named
Tenia, whose height is half somuche, as the Abacus is in height, his Proiecture
answers to the thicknes of the pillor or Scapus, beneth: the which is the
Diameter, Concerning the other Proiectures, they begin thus. The Proiecture
of the Abacus answers and is like unto the Proiecture of the Plinthus of the
Base or foot of the pillar, and sailleth over some what more then the
Plinthus. Now to know how much the Abacus hangs over more then the
Plinthus of the Base of the pillor, the which is showed in the ground plotte
named Ichnographia, and is marked with C. which ground is to be made thus.
Make you a round compass being of the thicknes of the pillar then make a
square without that compass and also make an other compass, so grate as may be,
touching the.4. corner: of the said square, also set that co^pas within an
other square, touching the.4. sides of the great compass. So done we shall come
to the right ground and fascion of the Abacus, the which lies on the vasse or
basket, that was found on the maidens to^be in Corinthe, as before is
rehearsed. Now let us finishe and end the ground plotte of the Capital That
space which is left bitwene ye two squares right in the myddell of one of the
sides, deuyde you into.4 parts Then take a pair of compass, setting the one
poinct of the compass right in the Corner of the great square being marked
with.5. and the other poincte of the compass bring unto the other corner of that
square marked with.6. and so draw downewardes toward.7. then bring that
poincte of the compass, up again and set it in the place that it came from,
and bring down the other poincte of the compass, from.5. unto.7. and there it
shall make a cross. Then set the poinct of the compass, in the mids of the
cross and the other poinct of the compass set upon the strike between the 2.
squares, the which is marked with.3. and so draw with the compass from.3 to.5.
and again from.3. to.6. and use all the other sides in like manner, and so
through it ye shall know the true Proiecture. Now to know whither this
ground be vprighte or not, ye shall make a strike ouerthwarte the great
square from corner to corner, that line is named Diagonus, whose mark is C.
being in lenght.2. Diameters So done is the ground plotte of this Capital,
upright and true, the which brings with it, his true Proiecture. Also ye
shall perceive in this Capital, marked with Y. that from the uttermost of the
Abacus, marked with A. is drawn a line by the side of the Capital, downewardes
unto the Astragali, that lies under the Capital, whose Proiecture, is so
much as the pillor is diminished on the one side. Then shall the Proiecture of
the Voluta or great Helices, marked with B touch the line that is drawn by
the side of the Capital. The long leaves also under the Voluta, shall touch
that line and in like case the short leaves. So done you have your right and
parfaicte ground and the true vprighte measures of this Capital with all his
Proiectures. Touching this pillor that stands on the other side, the which
is Antique: it stands, in an Arch triumphale, whose height is.29. modernelles
and.15. minutes, the length of which elle, contains.22. inches and a half.
In Pantheon within Rome, and diverse other places in Italy are these pillars
found standing in good estate. For this cause have I set this Antique pillor
here beside that ye should perceive the beawtie which is in it, the which
differs littell from the first invention of Vitruuius. The body of this
said pillor is garnished with Canaliculi, and the number of the^ is.26. or 28.
whose Capital, is a Diameter, in height beside the Abacus, and the Abacus added
thereto is the seventh part of a Diameter, his height to maintain: the
Antiques affirm that the first Author has mente it thus the Capital to be a
Diameter in height beside the Abacus, the height thereof is before rehearsed:
also as much as they have added unto the Capital, somuche have they diminished
of the height of Scapus, So that the pillor remains yet.9. Diameters in
height, yea and some has added the seventh part thereto. Nevertheless it is
beawtifull that they have made, the other I do leave to the disresciones of
them which are or will be masters in this worthy science, of Architecture. And
thus finisheth the order of this Capital.

ARCHITRAVE, FRISE, AND CORNISHE.
AS touching the Architraue, frise, and Cornish, bilo^ging to Corinthia,
Vitruuius, makes no great mention thereof, Nevertheless he does describe the
beginning of Mutuli to be necessary in all Mullers to be made as ye may
perceive by the antique works or buildings. But this Architraue, frise, and
Cornishe, shall be like unto that which was made for the Ionica, but unto this
Cornishe, is added Echinus, marked with G. standing betwixt Denticuli and
Corona, being in height like unto the undermost Fascia, marked with D. the
Proiecture of the Cornish, is increased somuche as Echinus is in height also
unto the Architraue is added under the second Fascia, marked with E.
Astragalus, being in height the eight part of that Fascia, make also that
Astragalus, to be in height the eight part of the highest Fascia, marked with F
the which Astragalus, shall be as it were certain round beryes and the other
Astragalus, that lies under the myddle Fascia, shall be wrothonne like a wreath:
as concerning the Frise, it is to be ordered as before is mentioned in the
measures of the Ionica, the proiecture of the foresaid Architraue, is before
rehearsed in Ionica.

Now it behooves to make mention of an other order and common rule that the
antiques heretofore have used in their time of buildinges appertaining to the
whole Trabeations of the Corinthe, the measures is as hereafter follows.
Divide the height of the pillor with the Base and Capital, into.4. parts, the
which whole Trabeationes, shall be in height as much as.1. of the.4. parts of
the height of the pillor, and that height divide into.10. parts, whereof ye
shall give.3. unto the height of Epistilium, the which we call Architraue,
marked with.I. and also give.3. unto the height of Zophorus, which we call ye
frese, marked with K. those.4. which remaigne give unto ye Cornish, which
Vitruuius called Coronices, marked with L. Concerning these.4. parts that are
given unto Coronix, divide you into.9. parts give.1. unto Cymatium marked with.
M. and give also 2. parts unto Echinus, with his edge whose mark is N. and
also give 2. such parts unto Mutili, which is also named Modiglions, with his
Cymatium marked with O also give.2. of those parts unto Corona, and his
Cymatium, which is the forth part of Corona, and is marked with P. and the
other.2 parts give unto Syma, and his edge at the top which is the eight part
of the whole Syma, which is marked with Q. The Proiecture, shall be as before is
rehearsed saving only that Mutili, shall hang over so far as ye may
conveniently not hyddinge or shadowing his Cymatium the which does answer
right to the Proiecture of Corona. Vitruuius declares also the whole height of
the Trabeationes, to be the fifthe part of the length of the pillor, and so he
writteth that it was made in Theatrum, whereof he makes mention in his fifth
book and seventh chapter, this Trabeatione, is of that height the which he
spoke of and is marked with H. Now as touching the other side that stands
over ye garnished pillor, that is also antique, it is enriched beawtifull^e
having in it Denticuli, Echinus, and also Mutuli, the which Vitruuius, does
not allow saing in his forth book and second Chapter, that Denticuli, and
Mutili ought not to stand, or be made in one Cornishe or Coronix as ye may
perceue by the other Coronices for that which stands in the mids has
Mutili, and Echinus, and has not Denticuli, also the other Coronices that
stands over the Image has in it Denticuli, and Echinus, but not Mutuli. So
that which has Mutili has not Denticuli, and likewise that, which has
Denticuli must not have Mutili, So that both these Coronices, have their
alteracio^ ye both observe the Rule of Vitruuius, To the third Coronix, that
the antiques, have devised in their buildinges they have added Mutilos or
Denticul^^^ according to their wills and have garn^^^ it most triumphantly, as
is manifest in diverse of their doings. For the which they ought
(...)commended. For Vitruuius says, that Mutili shall be a necessary thing in
all Coronices, as (...)teaches also, that Denticuli should be observed in
Ionica, seeing that it may be suffered i^ ^^nica, it is necessary to be
observed in Corinthia, and is made in Italy to their commend^^^^ and fame,
whose Proiecture thereby does more abound in beawtie. Thus end the measure
(...) the making of Corinthia.

Nevertheless I think it good to make a brief rehesall, retourning to the
place (...) I began at, and also for that her is added diverse things, in
the.3. chaunges of ye Tr^^^^^^tions in inglishe called architraue, frise, and
Cornishe, the first and higest is R^^^^^ Sima marked. Q. C. matium Corona
marked P. Cymatium Mutili marked O. Regula Ec^^^^ marked G. Astragalus and
Apophiges Denticuli Cymatium marked M ZOPHO^^^ marked K. EPISTYLIVM marked I.
Cymatium Fascia marked F. with his Ast^^^^lus. Fascia secunda marked E.
Astragalus Fascia tertia marked D. CAPITVLI m^^^^^ Y. Abacus marked A. Flos
Voluta Maiores marked B. Voluta Minores. Folia Minorae ^^^^lis Folia media.
Folia ima, COLVMNA marked V. Astragalus Apophigis Superior (...) ^^ferior.
BASIS marked O. Torus Superior marked Q. Regula, Scotia superior. mar^^^ Regula
Astragalus Primus, Astragalus Secundus Regula, Trochilus marked T. R. (...)
Torus inferior marked R. Plinthus marked P. STYLOBATA, Coronicis ma^^^^ C.
Cymatium marked I. Corona marked K Sima marked L. Cymatium marked Astragalus et
Apophigis marked N. Quadratum Proportionis super Bipartient^ Tertia marked A.
BASIS. to the same marked B. Cymatium Reuersa marked D. Astragalus marked E.
Sima Reuersa marked F. Torulus marked G. Plinthus marked H. Astragalus et
Regula, Plinthus inferior, last of all ICHNOGRAPHIA the ground plotte and
foundation where with this work began and also ends.

COMPOSITA diagram and illustration of Composite or Italic column COMPOSITA, OR
ITALICA

COMPOSITA OR ITALICA THE TRYVMPHANT pillor, devised by the Romans, and
setcheth his compoundes out of all the other before rehearsed and written.
THis pillor named Composita shall be.10. Diameters in height, the which
Dyameters are drawn overthwart the pillor, whereof the Capital. is a wholle
Dyameter in height, and Spira or Base is half a Diameter in height. Now as
concerning ye measures of the Pedestal, the breadth of the square stone which is
the body of the Pedestall shall be doubled in the height, which Philander
names the quadrante of the double proportio which is marked with A whose
height shall be divided into.8. parts, one such part ye shall add to the
height of his Coronix, marked with B. as much you shall add unto his Base
marked with C the other measures therein belonging shall be as before is rehearsed
in the Corinthia, but in this Base is added Cymatium which lies between
Astragalus, and the square of the pedestall. Also Coronix is to be made as
before is rehearsed in Corinthia, but that in this, they have added Denticulos,
the which he between Cymatium and Echinus, through the which it mounteth to a
forther Proiecture, the which the Romans have done for the more pleasure of
the eye. As touching the body of the Pedestall they have garnished it
beautifully after diverse sorts as by these finished figures, ye may perceive.
Now as the other Pedestalles before mentioned, were parted and divided into so
many parts as the pillors were Diameters in height, so is this Pedestall 10.
parts in height of the which, the Base occupies the lowest part, which is
marked with C. Also ye double square occupies eight parts to his height, and
the tenth part is admitted to Coronix, marked with B.

BASIS or SPIRA.
RIght and directely upon the middell of the Pedestall shall be set Spira or the
Base of the pillor marked with D. whose height shall be a Modulus, or half the
thiknesof the pillor, ye which height ye shall deuid into.6. parts give one
part unto Torus above marked with E. ye other.5, parts shall be divided into.3
parts give one part unto Plinthus marked with F. the other.2. parts you shall
divide into.12 parts whereof ye shall give.5. parts unto Torus the lower marked
with G. give also.2. parts to the two Astragali with their Rute whose mark
is. H. the which edge or regula, is in height ye one half of.1. Astragalus,
give also.1 part unto that, which is marked with I. some name it Echinus, but
the garnishing thereof is not like Echinus, which lies under the higher Torus,
whose edge shall be half a part. So that the highest Torus, and Scotia, marked
with K (the which ye greeks call Trochelon) be very nigh of one height. The
Proiectures of this Base are as before is rehearsed in Corinthia.

SCAPVS.
THe body of ye pillor shall be.8. Diameters in height, ye which are drawn
overthwart the pillor Now as touching the diminishing of the pillor above ye
shall begin thus upon the third Diameter there ye shall try the middle of the
pillor under the Capital. Then deuid the thicknes of your pillor into.6. parts
that is.3. on each side of ye middle of the pillor and ye shall set.5. such
parts for the thicknes of the pillor under the Capital, which shall be.2. and a
half on each side of the pillors myddel, from the which thiknes of the pillor
under the Capital draw both the sides down wards perpendiculerly upon the
third Diameter whereon ye shall make a half cyrcle so great as it may be
within the Diameter or thiknes of the pillor and it shall make on each side a
cross over the perpendiculer line, measure from the crosses downewardes even
upon the strike of the half cyrcle or compass to the overthwart strike upon the
third Diameter and divide it into.6. parts, making.6. lines crossing over the
half cyrcle. And ye shall begin to draw from the line marked.2. in the half
cyrcle unto the overthwart line at the top of the pillor marked with.2. and
also from the line of the half cyrcle.3. draw vpwardes perpendiculerly to the
ouerthwarte strike marked with.3. and so draw vpwardes from 4. to the
ouerthwarte line marked.4. and so from.5. to.5. and also perpendiculerly draw
from 6. to.6. Then take a rule and draw from Diameter unto Diameter
downewardes, closing up ye side of the pillor as you may perceue by your
figure, for I have drawn and closed the one side of the pillor, and the other
side I have left open that ye should plainly perceive the working thereof, the
height of the Diameter, under the Capital. ye shall divide into 12. parts the
higest part shall be divided into.3 equal parts, whereof ye shall give.2. unto
Astragalus, marked with L. and the third part shall be given to the edge or
Senta, which is marked with M. Also an other little square edge, which lies
upon the Base being at the lowest part of Scapus shall be in height like unto
Astragalus, at the top of Scapus. Concerning the garnishing of the body of the
pillor or Scapus, which our author calls Canaliculi and Striges, the
antiques have devised so many sundry sorts, that herin the beawtye of them
cannot be expressed. But among all other in Pantheon, is a pillor thus
divided. There be Canaliculi, round abought the pillor.24. in number, and each
of them in divided into 9. parts, of the which parts.4. is given unto that,
which our authore names Stryges, upon the which are made upright in the
middle thereof Astragali, whose bredthe is.2. of those.4. parts, the other.2.
parts are left for Stryges. So that upon each side of the Astragali, is left
one part. The other.5. parts are left for Canaliculi, the which are hollow
inwardes. There is an other pillor, the which stands in Basilia del foro
transitorio, in Rome, the which is made much after one fashion but that the
Architect has made his Canaliculi, somewhat biggar or largar. And that measure
is thus. The pillor round about shall be divided into.28. or.32. parts The
occasion wherefore the number of those does differ, is for the placinge of the
pillor standing far or nighe unto the eye, for if this pillar stand far
from the eye, there shall be in number.24. and at the most but.26. And if the
pillor stands nigh unto the eye, there shall be in number.28. or.30. and at the
most, they made 32. round about the pillor. Now each of those parts shall be
divided into.3. parts, let.2. of those parts be given to Canaliculi, the
third part ye shall divide into.4. parts whereof give.2. unto Astragalus, and
the other.2. that remain, give unto the Strigeus, that stand on each side of
the Astragalus, the bredthe of each of them is a part, as ye may perceive by
this Ichnographia the which figure is and stands here between your 2.
pillors being your parfaicte ground of the body of the pillor or Scapus,
which is marked with N. Thus finishinge the measures, the Prouctures shall be as
is before declared in making of the other pillors.

CAPITAL.
ON the top of Scapus, or pillor shall be set the Capital, whose height
shall be a Diameter, in the which Capital Abacus with his long and short
leaves, and his Caules out of the which spring the smaller Helices, be a
portion taken from Corinthia. Also they have brought to pas in this Capital,
Voluta and Echinus and Astragalus, with his rule, which is and are portiones of
Ionica. The measures of this Capital are thus. From the pillor vpwardes to the
top of the Capital, that is marked with O whose height is a Diameter shall be
divided into.7 parts, whereof one shall be given to Abacus, lung at the top of
the Capital, which is marked with P. the which parts, some Architecles have
added to the height of the Capital, so that they have made it to be in height
a Diameter, and the seventh part of a Diameter, as before is rehearsed in the
Capital of Corinthia, but so much as they have added to the height of the
Capital, somuche have they abated from the height of Scapus. Now of the
forsaid.7. parts, do remaygne yet 6. the which shall be reduced into.3 parts,
the one shall be given unto the short leaves for their height, the second part
shall be added unto the height of the myddle leaves, and the third part unto
Voluta, marked with Q. as for the height of Echinus, marked with R. shall be
found in the making of Voluta, as before is mentioned in Ionica. The
Proiecture of this Abacus, whose mark is P. shall be even so much as is the
Proiecture of the Plinthus, the which is the lowest part of the Bases, of the
pillor even as it is before said in the ground plot of Corinthia, This done
draw from the utter most of the Abacus, downewardes along by the side of the
Capital, unto the uttermost of the Astragali lienge under the Capital, whose
Proiecture, shall be so much as it is in height This done you shall cause Voluta
to touch the strike that you have drawn by the side of the Capital, and also
the myddell and long leaves under Voluta, shall have their Proiecture to
touch that line, and also the shorts leaves shall touch the same. This done
ye have the true measures and proiectures of this Capital, but there be
diverse other beawtifull Capitalls, belonging to this pillor which hereafter
more plainlye shall appear.

EPISTYLIVM.
THe height of this Epistilium, or Architraue marked with. S. shall be the
thiknes of the pillor above under the Capital, but if this pillor shall stand
nighe unto the eye then make the height thereof, as before is rehearsed in the
other pillors, which height shall be divided into.7 parts whereof one shall be given
unto Cimatiu^ marked with T. the other.6. parts, divided into.12. parts,
give.3. of them to the first Fascia, marked with V. also give.4. to the second
Fascia, marked with X and give 5. unto the thira Fascia, marked with Y. under
the second and third Fascia, shall be added Astragali with Apophigis, to the
garnishing thereof, the Proiectures, and measures shall be as is before rehearsed
in Corinthia. Upon the Epistiliu^, ye shall sete Zophorus or Frese marked A.
wherein Mutili does stand being in height like to Epistiliu^, the Mutili shall
stand right over the pillor, their breadth shall be the fifte part less then
the thicknes is of the pillor under the Capital, and they be marked with B.
whose height shall be divided into.6. parts, Cimatium occupies somuche as one
of the.6. parts added for that which is the Capital unto the Mutili, and is
marked with C. the space between the.2. Mutili, shall be somuche, as twyse the
breadth of Mutili, the Proiectures of Mutilos shall be as much as the wholle
Mutili is in height. As touching the Coronices, the one side differs from the
other, both being fair, take of them which pleases your mind best, their
heightes shall be like unto ye height of Mutilos. Then ye shall divide that side
over the pillor into.7. parts. Give.4. unto Corona, marked with D. also
give.2. unto Cymatium, marked with E. the seventh part is left for
Supercilium or Regula, marked with F. The Proiecture thereof shall be like their
heightes the other side of the Coronix, over ye maiden which is marked with G.
shall be divided into.2. equal parts, the lowest part shall be given unto Corona,
the second part shall be divided into.5. parts, give one unto that with his
edge which is like to Echinus, give.3. unto Cimatiu^. and the fifthe part,
give unto Supercilium. The Proiectures of Mutilus with the Coronix shall be
somuche as they be both in height, Mutilus standing in Zophorus, the antiques
have devised for a commodity and a beawtie to their edifices. But the cause
why they were set in Zophorus with diverse other monuments thereto belonging
herafter shall be declared as time shall serve. Thus have I finished for this
time the figures, garnishementes, and measures, of these five pilleres before
specified.

OF AN OTHER AVTENTIKE PILLAR AND A nescessarie Companion to the before named
pillars made by the Athenieus to his perfection named ATTICVRCA.
diagram of Attic column ATICA
OF this pillar Plinius makes rehersall and as he says is a corner pillor,
being four square, whose Diameter marked with A. (says he) is like unto the
round pillars, which he stands by but in ye Diagonall line marked B. he is
thicker then the round pillars. It is that pillar which Vitruuius names
Atticurga or Attica, made by, ye Atheniens, the which nation used also ye
mesures of Corinthia in their pillars. So that the Capital of this foresaid
pillar, is much like to ye Capital of Corinthia. The Spira, or Base of the
said Attica, wherewith also they used to garnish Corinthia, Vitruuius, also,
witnesses of such a pillor, declaring and says, that Spira attica should be
like unto Spira or Base Ionica. Thus have you all the manner and measures of
pillars that any notable masters of Architecture or Authors thereof have
written. As in order do follow. Tuscana contains in height.6. Diameters
Dorica.7. Diameters in height. Ionica.8. Diameters in height, Corinthia.9.
Diameters in height, and Composita, contaigneth.10. Diameters in height, Now
of this forsayde pillor Atticurga, I find no mention made of his height. But
of the multitude of his Canaliculi, which be.7. on either side of the pillor.
And as touching his height, whereof no mention is made, it is to be thought
that he must bear such height as the rest of the pillors for Vitruuius says
that ye highest pillor passes not.10 Diameters, in height so that his height
may be agreeable to the height of those round pillors that are Joined with him,
whither they be Composita or Corinthia, which I my self have seen in Rome in
the arc triumphant of Seuerus, being joined with Composita, also in Pantheon
where his three sides plainly are seen, the fourth standing in the wall, the
Capital and base is like to the round pillars, wherewith he stands being
Corinthia. The Proiecture of his base was like unto Spira attica, the which is
half a Modulus, on either side of the Base, the which Vitruuius more plainly
at large declares.

THE CHAVNGE OF THE FIVE PILLARS ORDERLY to be used each of them in his kind
which order of buildinges be named of Vitruuius as follows PICNOSTYLOS,
SISTYLOS, DIASTYLOS, ARIOSTYLOS, EVSTYLOS, whose pictures insew^th demonstrated
in order.
Now for somuche as I have rehearsed the beginning and the Institution of this
art of Architecture, naming the writers and authors of the said science, and
declared the measures geometrycall thereto belonging in their simetries, with
all their garnishementes: it is therefore also requisite to rehearse and to let
you understand, by what means the order of the before named pillars shall be
altered in their standing, adding, or abating to or fro, every of them
accordingly as they shall be placed, by which knowledge or like knowledges many
may come to the right perfection, upon which occasion it shall be declared what
mention Vitruuius does make in the third book and second Chapter and also the
opinion of Sebastianus Serlius and other upon the same, how far and how nere
the pillars shall be set a sunder: Saying that this order of Picnostylos ought
thus to be made, that which is the space between the.2. pillars shall be a
Diameter and a half the pillar being in height.10. Diameters. Sistylos is that
which has.2. Diameters betwixt the.2 pillars, whose height shall be 9. Diameters
and a half. Diastylos shall thus be made, the pillars shall stand.3. Diameters
one from an other, whose height shall be.8. Diameters and a half. Ariostylos is
that, which has the space or breadth between the pillars.4. 5. or.6. Diameters,
and at the furdest.7. Diameters, the which pillars commonly are.8. Diameters in
height: but in the Eustylos the authors differ. the one says that his measure
is like Diastyli, and the other says that it ought to be like Sistyli, and so
because Diastyli is.8. Diameters and a half and Sistyli.9. and a half,
therefore our authoure has made between them both an uniformity, and causes
Eustylos to be.9. Diameters in height. This done Areostyli is.8. Diameters in
height. Diastyli.8. Diameters and a half. Eustylos 9. Diameters. Sistyli.9.
and a half, and Picnostyli.10. Diameters. Now like as Tuscana, Dorica,
Ionica, Corinthia, and Composita, increase their heightes by Diameters, so do
these.5. here before rehearsed increase their heightes by Modulus or half
Diameters, and you shall also garnish and fashion them according to their
lengthes, as I have by their lenght showed before their similitude and
strength, which you shall see and perceive more plainly in the demonstrations
followinge.

AREOSTYLOS.
diagram showing Araeostyle (light-columned) spacing AREOSTYLOS
BEginning with this first being Areostylos, as Cesarianus says, ought to be
in height.8. Diameters, and the distaunce between the.2. pillors to be 4. 5.
or.6. Diameters as is before rehearsed, which pillar for his strength is likned
or to be sembled unto Tuscana necessary for all foundations and fortifications
both to withstand great forse, and supporte wayghtie burdens, as ye master
builder can use him, which is to be seen in diverse places in Italy, calling it
Rusticke or Rughe hewed stone, and in other places to be otherwise garnished.

DIASTYLOS.
diagram showing Diastyle (board-columned) spacing DIASTYLOS
THe second order as I have placed it, is that which Vitruuius calls
Diastylos, whose height (says he) is.8 Diameters and a half, and the
distaunce between the.2. pillars ought to be.3. Diameters or.4. at ye furdest.
which pillor is likned unto Dorica made to his perfection in the temple of
Mars. which also is a pillar to garnishe cities and gates somewhat pleasant and
strong as is to be seen in diverse places, as also gates of palaces with the
utter galleries.

EVSTYLOS.
diagram showing Eustyle (well-columned) spacing EVSTYLOS.
THe third order is that which Vitruuius calls Eustylos, the which our
Author has brought to a uniformity, saying the pillar to be in height.9.
Diameters, and the distau^ce between the.2. pillars to be.2. Diameters and a
quarter, as Guliheline Philander affirms, but at the furdest.2. Diameters and
a half or.3. which pillar is likned unto Ionica builded to his parfection in
the temple of Diana and Apollo and to be used in many mean edifices to be
garnished accordinglye.

SISTYLOS.
diagram showing Systyle (close-columned) spacing SISTYLOS.
THe fourth order is that which Vitruuius calls Sistylos, whose height
(says he, is).9. diameters and a half, whose pillars stands distant one
from the other.2. Diameters, or.2. and a half at the fourdest and after this
manner it was made in the temple of Fortune, which pillar is likned unto
Corinthia, whose measures are slender and serves to garnish princes palaces
and for diverse other things necessary which multitude needs not to be
rehearsed, but as time shall serve they may be practiced and brought in ure to
diverse uses most necessary.

PICNOSTYLOS.
diagram showing Pyknostyle (tight-columned) spacing PICNOSTYLOS
THe first and last order is that which Vitruuius, calls Picnostylos whose
height says he is.10 Diameters whose pillars stands distant from each other
a Diameter, and a half or.2. at ye furdest and thus was it made in the temple
of Venus which pillar is sembled or to be compared unto Composita having in it
the full beawtie of all the forsaide measures and garnishments, for all excellent
artificers, beawtifully to set forth whether it be in gold or silver or other
rich stone or fine woods in marketrey or imbosinge or caruing as shall be
thought pleasant and necessary for noble and mighty princes or for diverse
other estates lovers of excellency or co^ninge.

AN OTHER RVLE GEVEN BY VITRVVIVS for these three orders of pillars Dorica,
Ionica, Corinthia, to be used as folowith.
HOw if you will begin with the order of Dorica, you shall divide his height
with the Base and Capital into.15. parts, one of those parts shall be the
height of the Base and as much unto the height of the Capital, which shall be
the Modulus of the work. If it shall be the order of Ionica, you shall divide
the height of Scapus, with the Base and Capital into.8. parts and a half,
and one of those parts shall be the Diameter of the whole work, whose Base
shall be a Modulus in height, his Capital shall be as before is rehearsed in Ionica*
also if you will make an order of Corinthia, ye shall make it as I have now
rehearsed of this last pillar, saving only that in the stead of the Capital
of Ionica, ye shall set the Capital of Corinthia, which is a dyameter in
height. Now ye shall understand that Vitruuius does not will Dorica, Ionica,
and Corinthia, to stand one upon an other but he wills the Edifice to be all
of Dorica, orels all of Ionica, or all of Corinthia, and they to stand one
upon an other, always d minishinge, so that the higher they stand, the lesser
or sklenderer they must be, for, as he says, a tree is no where so great as
at the ground, and so grows smaller and smaller vpwardes unto the top.
likewise, he wills the lowest pillor to be strongest made upon the measure,
as before is said, and the second pillor, that stands over him, both in
height and bredthe shall diminishe his fourth part. And his Architraue, frese
or Cornish shall be in height the fiueth part of the height of that pillar, and
so settinge the one upon the other, diminishinge after this said order. Some
of the antiques aforsaid have observed these orders and measures, as
Sebastianus, does witness in his third book and fourth Capiter that there are
many edifices of the antiques wherein all the orders of these pillars have been
set one upon an other: garnishing them accordinglye as it is yet to be seen
in the Amphitiatrum named Collosseum in Rome whose excellent and praise worthy
doing shall be more plainly set fourth hereafter.

HERE IS AN OTHER NECESSARY Rule appointed of Vitruutus for the diminishing of
Scapus, under the Capital by the increasing of his height.
table with ornate border fotes diam pairt 15 6 5 20 6 5 30 7 6 40 7 6 50 8 7
60 8 7 70 9 8 80 9 8 90 10 9 100 10 9 110 11 10

VItruuius, in his third book and third Chapter; sainth thus if Scapus
amounte in heighte from.15. foot unto.20. the Diameter is to be divided into.6.
parts and a half, and ye thicknes of the pillor under the Capital, shall be.5.
and a half. And if Scapus, Amounte from.20. unto.30. foot then shall the
Diameter be divided into.7. parts, whereof.6. parts shall be the thicknes of the
pillor under the Capital and so augmenting and diminishing after this order
until Scapus, if it were possible, should amounte to the number of 110. foot
which is the end of this table that stands here beside wherein ye may
perceive in every.10. foot increassinge in height does show the thicknes of
Scapus under the Capital, so that the 110. foot in height of Scapus, the
Diameter to be divided into.11. parts, then shall be the thicknes of Scapus,
under the Capital.10. of those.11. parts, and so forth if need shall require.

AN OTHER EXAMPLE TO BE observed very necessary for the master builder or
Architecte that is for the enlarging of the Epistilium, when the pillor
amounts to certain heightes.
table with ornate border 15 1/13 20 1/13 25 1/12 30 1/12 35 1/11 40 1/11 45
1/10 50 1/10 55 1/9 60 1/9

VItruuius in the latter end of his tird book declaring when the pillar that
is to say Base Scapus, and Capital amounts from.15 foot to.20. foot in
height, then shall the height of the wholle pillor be divided into.13. parts,
on such a part shall be the height of the Epistilium, also if the pillor do
increase from 20. to.25 foot then shall the pillar be divided into 12. parts
and a half whereof the height of the Epistilium shall occupy one such part,
also if the pillar surmount from.25. to.30. the height of the pillor must be
divided into.12 parts whereof the height of the Epistilium, shall occupy one
such part and so forth as the colume increases in height so increases the
height of Epistilium, as in this table is euidenly discussed the increasing
from.15. to.60. foot increased by.5 at ones the which pillor of.60. foot in
height shall be divided into.9. parts, where of the Epistiliu^ occupies for his
height one such part, and so passing forward as necessity shall require in
order as is before mentioned.

Therbe also diverse other orders of measures and example that the Antiques
always used in their times, which should be to tedious for the hearer, and to
long for the Reader, having no figures out of the which springs both desire
and also encouragment to the same. Thus ending this treaty of the Introduction
and measures of these foresaid pillars, which are the original first grounds
and entering into this noble science of Architecture, practiced and allowed by
right mighty and worthy potentates, and Emperors for perpetual memory of
their victorious and triumphant feats, the Elegance thereof, of all antiquity
has been and yet presentely is as a parfaicte example and a myrroure to
behold, learn and take true measures, as well to all such, as delight in
durable Edifices and buildinges, as also to all noble parsonages and
Architectures, which do or shall take pleasure to erecte and build the like
to any beawte and perfection accord nge to the devise and minds of the forsaid
Authors Vitruuius, and Sebastianus Serlius, to whom undoubtedly, the praise
and commendation is chiefly to be attrybuted and geu n. I submyt my travel,
unto allother that in any part be or shall be of more parfaict and deper
learning, knowledge and experience, and of like well wylling affection,
wherwthi I do offer this my poor atemptes and small travails.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN Fletestrete nere to Saint Dunstans church by Thomas
Marshe.


