

BOWELS OPENED, OR, A DISCOVERY OF THE Near and dear Love, Union and
Communion betwixt Christ and the Church, and consequently betwixt Him and every
believing soul.

Delivered in diverse Sermons on the Fourth Fifth and Sixth Chapters of the
CANTICLES.

By that Reverend and Faithful Minister of the Word, DOCTOR SIBS, late
Preacher unto the Honorable Society of Grayes Inn, and Master of Katharine
Hall in Cambridge.

Being in part finished by his own pen in his life time, and the rest of them
perused and corrected by those whom he entrusted with the publishing of his
works.

CANT. 4. 10. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse: thou have
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, and with one chain of thy neck.

LONDON. Printed by G. M. for George Edwards in the Old Baily in Greene-Arbour
at the sign of the Angel, MDCXXXIX.

HONORATISSIMO DOMINO, DOMINO EDVARDO VICE-COMITI MANDEVILLE QVEM, VT VERAE
NOBILITATIS DELICIAS CANDORIS NIVEM, IN RES CHRISTI, ET ALIORVM COMMODA
EFFVSISSIMVM SUSPICIMUS, COLIMUS; VNAQVE CONCIONES HAS IN CANTICA POSTHVMAS IN
AMORIS GRATIAM QVO AVTHOREM IPSE COMPLEXUS EST NOSTRAEQVE IN DNEM ILLIVS
MERITISSIMAE OBSERVANTI^E TESTIMONIVM

D. D.

THOMAS GOODWIN. PHILIPPUS NIGH.
(...) both to the understanding of that dark and most divine Scrip ure, and
also to kindle in the heart all heavenly affections unto Jesus Christ.

It is well known how backward I am, and ever have been to cumber the Pr^sse,
but yet ^ would not be guilty in depriving the dear children of God of the
spiritual and sweet consolations, which are here very plentifully offered
unto them.

An the whole frame of all these Sermons, is carried with such Wisdom,
Gravity, Piety, Judgment and Experience, that it commends it self unto all that
are godly wise: and I doubt not but that they shall find their temptations
answered, their fainting spirits revived, their understandings enlightened, and
their graces confirmed, so as they shall have cause to praise God for the
worthy Authors godly and painful labors. And thus desiring the Father of all
mercies, and the God of all comfort, to bless this work to the consolation and
edification of those that seek his favor and desire to fear his holy Nam^,
^rest

Thine in Jesus Christ I. Dod.
A Table of the chief heads and Contents of the following Sermons in this
Book.
THE Introduction, page 1. There is the same regard of the whole Church and of
every particular member, in regard of the chiefest privileges and graces that
accompany Salvation, page 5. All creatures stand in obedience to Christ, page
7. The courses that Christ takes with his Church may seem contrary, but by a
wise ordering all agree in the wholesome issue, page 8. In what respects the
Spirit of God is compared to wind, pa. 9. In what respects we need the blowing
of the Spirit, page 12. In what respects the Church is compared to a Garden,
page 13. Christians should walk as men of a fevered condition from the world,
page 16. Christians planted in Gods Garden should be fruitful, page 17. God
cares for and protecteth his Church, page 13. We need not only grace to put
life into us at the first, but likewise grace to quicken and draw forth that
life we have, page 19. It is not enough to be good our selves but our goodness
must flow out, page 20, Where once God begins he goes on, and adds
inc^uragement to encouragement, to mantaine new setters up in Religion, pa. 21.
Wheresoever grace is truly begun there is still a further desire of Christ's
presence, page 22. Why the Church is so earnest in desiring the presence of
Christ, page 22. A gracious heart is privy to its own grace when it is in a
right temper: and so far as it is privy, is bold with Christ in a sweet and
reverend manner, p. 24. It is the duty and disposition of the Church of Christ
to please her husband, p. 25. The Church gives all to Christ, page 26. Comfort
in the wants and blemishes of our performances, page ^7. The resolution of the
whole fifth Chapter of Canticles, page 28. The order of Gods hearing his Church,
page 31. God makes us good, stirrs up holy desires in us, and then answers the
desires of his Spirit in us, page 31. Why G^d hears our Prayers, pa. 32. Cases
wherein one is unfit to pray, page 35. How to know when God hears our Prayers,
page 37. Christ vouchsafes his gracious presence to his children upon their
desire of it, page 38. The Church is carried from desire to desire after the
presence of Christ, page ^9. How to know that Christ is present in us, page 40.
Where Christ is present, there Heaven is in some degree, page 41. Having
Christ's presence we need fear nothing, p. 42. Christ is our Brother, page 44.
The Churches royal descent, page 46. The Church is the Spouse of Christ. page
47. Resemblances betwixt the temporal and spiritual marriage, page 48. The
comfort of Christ being our husband, page 50. Christians being the Spouse of
Christ should labor for chaste judgments and affections, page 51. Our
affections are as their objects, page 51. How to know whether we be espoused to
Christ or not, page 52. Encouragement and direction to those who are not yet in
Christ, page 53. God accepts of the graces of his children and delights in
them, page 55. Encouragement to be much in holy duties, page, 57. Our care must
be to preserve our selves in a good estate free from the guilt of any sin,
page 58. Christ when he comes to a soul comes not empty, page 59. Exhortation
to have communion with Christ, pa. 60. We ought to rejoice in the comforts and
graces of others, and of our selves, page 61. There is a mutual feas^ing
betwixt Christ and his Church, page 67. Resemblances betwixt corporal feasts
and the feast Christ makes us of himself, page 68. What we should bring with
us to the feast Christ makes us, page 73. The means to procure an appetite to
Christ, p. 74. All kinds and degrees of friendship meet in Christ toward his
Church, page 79. All the requisits to make up true friendship are found in
Christ, page 79. Friendship of Christ is sweet and constant, p. 81. The state
of the Church and every Christian is subject to spiritual alterations, page
82. Where corruption is not thoroughly purged and a careful watch kept over the
soul, there after a recovery will follow a more dangerous distemper, pa. 83. It
is the disposition of Gods chil^ren to be ingenious in opening their state to
God, page 84. A gracious soul is abased for lesser d^fects, p. 86. What meant
by the sleep of the Church, page 88. The resemblances between bodily and
spiritual sleep in their causes, effects, and dang^rs, page 88. Security and
sleepiness of the Church in Constantines time, page 93. (...) ^udgements of
best men cannot always be sa^ely r^l^ed on, page 94. (...) of the Church in
these latter ages, p. 95. (...) of a sleepy estate, page 96. Motives against
sleepines, page 99. A Christian may know how it is with himself, though he be
mixed with flesh and Spirit, page 106. We should as well acknowledge that which
is good, as that which is evil in our hearts, page 10^. The good that the
Church retained in her sleepy condition, page 108. Gods children never totally
fall from grace, p. 111. A Christian is what his heart and inward man is, page
14. Difference between a Christian and an Hypocrite, page 115. A waking state
is a blessed state, page 116. Means how to preserve our souls in a waking
condition in drowsy times, page 116. Christians must especially be watchful in
the use of liberty and such things (...) in themselves are lawful, page 124.
The excellency of a wak^ng Christian, page 125. True Christians are discerned
by a spiritual taste in hearing Gods Word, page 130. Papists objection, How
shall we know that the Word is the Word of God, answered, page 132. Why so many
Apostatize, page 133. A Christian is sensible of all blessed helps he has to
salvation, page 134. The difference between the sleep of a Christian and dead
sleep of natural men, page 134. Christ still desires a further and further
communion with his Church, page 1^6. The cause of Christ's strangeness to us is
in our selves, page 137. Christ takes not advantage from the sins of the
Church to leave them altogether, but makes further and further love to them,
page 138. How Christ is said to kn^cke at our hearts, p 140. Why Christ knocks
when he has power to open to himself, page 147. The heart of a Christian is
the house and Temple of God, page 149. How Christ can come into the soul, page
150. How we may know whether Christ dwells in our hearts, page 151. We are to
cherish all the good conceits we can of Christ, page 152. The woeful estate of
those who entertain not Christ knocking at the door of their hearts, page
153. That Christ has used all kinds of knockings to this nation, page 155.
Considerations enforcing us to entertain Christ, page 157. That Christ's
knocking is especially by the Ministry of the Word, page 160. There are none
in the Church but have been allured at some time or other to come in, page 162.
Encouragement to pray for the Church, page 164. Christ has never enough of his
Church till he has it in Heaven, page 165. The sufferings of Christ in
himself and Ministers, page 167. Christ's patience to us should make us patient
under Gods corrections, and in our dealing with others, p. 169. The Church of
God is Christ's Sister and Spouse, page 1^0. The grounds of Christ's special
love to his Church and children, p^g 172. No saving love out of the Church,
page 174. Properties of Christ's love to his Church, page 175. Whether Christ
cannot see matter of weakness and sinnefulnesse in his Church, page 175. How to
know Christ loves us in a peculiar manner, p^g. 178 Reproof of those who love
not Gods children, p. 180. Why Christ calls his Church his love, page 183. An
argument to prove the stability of the Saints and the souls immortality, page
186. How trasc^ndent majesty and infinite love dwelt together in Christ, p^g.
186. Why the Holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a Dove at Christ's Baptism,
page 188. Church why compared to a Dove, page 189. Properties of a Dove
resembled to the Church, p. 189 What defense Gods Church has when it is
persecuted, p. 194. That Gods Church has always a refuge in God in the worst
times, page 195. How the Church is said to be undefiled, page 196. How Christ's
righteousness not being in the Church may yet be said to be the Churches, page
197. How we being sinners may yet be said to be undefiled, page 198. Christ's
love to us should make us love him again, page 20^ Direction how affl^cted in
conscience are to judge of themselves, page 204. Christians are not to wrong
themselves with false judging of their estates, page 206. It is not an easy
thing to bring the soul and Christ together into ^eare fellowship, page 209.
False reasons, excuses, and pretenses hinder communion with Christ, page ^10.
Excuses of the flesh to hinder our communion with Christ, answered, page 211.
Excuses of worldlings to hinder their communion with Christ, answered, page
213. Causes of the false pretenses and excuses which hinder many from holy
duties, page 216. Helps to keep us from putting off and delaying holy duties by
false reasons and excuses, p. 222. That Christ does use sometimes to leave his
Church and children, p. 245. Ends why Christ leaves his children, p. 246.
Christians wanting comfort are not to be censured p. 2^0. We are to prepare for
desertion, p. 251. The cause of Christ's with drawing comfort from us rests in
our selves, p. 251. Christ never altogether leaves the Church, page 254.
Christ's grace is the cause of our grace, page 255. We find experience of the
grace of Christ especially when we stir up our selves to endeavor, p. 256.
Gods graces are sweet, p. 257. Outward means without the Spirit of Christ are
ineffectuall, p. 259. Christ always leaves some grace before he offers to
depart, p. 260. Sins of omission bring grief and shame, p. 264. Christ has
our affections in his government, pa. 266. Christ is wonderful in his Saints
and in his goodness toward them, p. 268. Truth of affection will discover it
self in outward expressions, p. 271. The Word of Christ though for the present
it be not effectual, yet afterward it will be, page 273. Christ so leaves
his children sometimes that their hearts fail them for want of his presence,
page 274 Causes of the fainting of Christian souls, page 275. The difference
between the true child of God and others, p. 277. Christ is many times present
with the Church when she finds and feels it not, p. 281. How we are to judge of
our selves in a dead estate, page 283. We should depend upon Christ when he
seems absent from us, page 283. How to know God hears our prayers, page 28^.
Directions how to carry our selves when we pray without success or in any
state of desertion, pa. 288. It is no easy thing to be a sound Christian, page
292. Governors of the Church and state compared to Watchmen, pa. 293. Reasons
why God uses Watchmen, page ^9^. How the Church was wounded by the Watchmen,
p^g. 295. How the Churches veil is taken away, page 295. Why the Watchmen are
the wounders of the Church, page 296. We are not to think the worse of any for
the disgraces of the time, page 298. True grace grows up with difficulties,
page 303. If we find not comfort in one means we must have recourse to another,
page 30^. Resemblances between Jerusalem and the Church, page 305. How to
know we are daughters of Jerusalem, pa. 306. We are to desire the prayers of
ot^ers, page 309. ^ove^ sick what it is, page 3^0. How to know we are sick of
love to Christ, p. 31^. How is the Church said to be the fairest among women,
page 322. In what respects the Church calls her self black, p. 324. There is a
wondrous force in the examples of Christians to stir up one another, p. 328.
The excellent use of holy conference, p. 331. Christians should be ^n^uisitive,
p. 334. Whence comes the Churches fairness under such seeming foulness and
disgrace, page 339. How we are to judge of Gods people under seeming disgraces,
page 340. Christians are to improove the gifts of others by Questions, page
342. Our endeavors must be to make Religion lovely, 343. There is no envy in
spiritual things, page 344. Christ is a most beautiful person, pa. 34^.
Christ as he is beautiful and good, so he is beyond all comparison good, page
348. Christ only was King, Priest, and Prophet, page 350. Christ's transcendent
excellencies serve to draw those that are not yet in Christ unto him and to
comfort those that are in Christ, p. 357. The desperate f^lly of most men who
choose base transitory things and refuse Christ, p. 358. Christians ought to
make Christ the rule of their choice in other things, p. 363. Means to enable
us rightly to value Christ and highly to esteem of him, page 364. There is
somewhat of God in every creature, page 372. Why the Church is so exact in
particularising her Beloved, page 374. Why Christ is set out by an head of
gold, p. 378. Christians should be suitable to Christ their head, page 379. Why
Christ is said to have Doves eyes, page 381. The manifestation of Christ to his
children by his Spirit in any of his ordinances is a sweet and delightful
manifestation, p. 384. Christ's doctrine is sweet and sound, page 388. All
Christ's actions are precious, page 389. The best discovery of our state in
grace is by our affection to the Word of Christ, page 392. Christ every way
considered is altogether lovely, p. 396. Christ in his lowest abasements for us
was most lovely, page 397. We are to rest upon Christ's obedience and
righteousness, page 398. Our best affections ought to be set upon Christ, p.
399. How to know whether we love Christ, page 401. Means whereby we may be
enabled to love and highly esteem of Christ, page 40^. Ends why the Church in
general and particular sets forth the excellencies of Christ, page 413. Grace
though it be never so small at the first yet it is growing still, page 422.
Usually God works with the means, page 424. How to be happy instruments to
convert others, p. 426. That which most stirs up holy affections to search
after Christ, is the large explications of his excellencies, page 428. In what
respects Christians are compared to Lillies, page 432. Comfort to Gods people
against all their ill censures and wants, page 434. Christ will not be long
absent from his Church, p. 438. We are to wait and never to give ^ver seeking
of Christ, page 439. There mus^ be union of persons to Christ before there can
be communion with him, page 443. From the union of our persons to Christ comes
communion of all other things, page 444. What these words imply, I am my
Beloveds and my Beloved is m^ne, page 446. Causes why God absents himself from
his children, page 45^. When usually Christ returns after desertion, pa. 452.
How Christ comes to be ours, page 454. The riches of a Christian that has
Christ to be his portion, page 4^4. Christians having Christ for their portion
should be content^d with their outward condition what soever it is, page 455.
Why sometimes we want outward things being in Christ, page 456. How we are
Christ's Beloved, page 457. Sufferings of the Church are to conform her to
Christ her Husband, page 459. The sweetest communion with Christ is under the
greatest crosses, page 460. Our giving our selves to Christ is a sure evidence
that we are Christ's, p. 461. How (...) answer Satan when he tempts us to sin or
despair, page 463. Reasons why Christ must be given to us before we can give
our selv^s to him, pa. 466. D^rection how to be enabled to say, ^ am my
Beloveds and my B^lo^ed is mine, page 472. The excellency of a Christian
walking in divine light above ^ther men, page 478. Exhortation and
encouragement for those who are not yet in Christ to come in, page 478. Those
who have given themselves up to Christ ought not to b^ discouraged for their
infirmities, pa. 4^0. We must labor to comprehend the love of Christ to us
which will enable us to suffer willingly and cheerfully, page 481. Christ
feeds his Church and people in fat pas^ures, page 482. Christ feeds as well as
breeds, page 485. Reasons of the necessity of our continual feeding in
Christianity, 486. Christ feeds his people plentifully and sweetly, p. 487.
Happiness of these times wherein there is such plenty of spiritual food, page
488. The sweetness of our lives is not lost by becoming religious. page 489.
How to get hungry appetites to the Sacrament, pa. 494.
SERMON I.
CANT. V. I. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have eaten my
honey-combe with my honey: I have drunk my wine with my milk; eat O friends,
Drink, yea drink abundantly, O Beloved!
OTher books of Solomon lie more obvious and open to common understanding;
Introduction.
but, as none entered into the Holy of Holies, Levit.
but the High Priest, so none can enter into the mystery of this Song of Songs,
but such as have more near Communion with Christ. Songs, and specially
Mariage-Songs, serve to express men's own Joys, and others praises. So, this
Book contains

The Mutual Joys, and Mutual Praises betwixt Christ and his Church.
And as Christ and his Church, are the greatest persons that partake of humane
nature, so whatsoever is excellent in the whole world, is borrowed to set out
the excellencies of these two great Lovers.

It is called Salomons Song, who next unto Christ, was the greatest Son of
wisdom that ever the Church bred: whose understanding, as it was large as the
sand of the Sea, so his Affections, especially that of Love, was as large: as
we may see by his many wives, and by the delight he sought to take in
whatsoever nature could afford. Which affection of Love in him misplaced, had
been his undoing, but that he was one beloved of God; who by his Spirit raised
his soul to lovely Objects of a higher Nature. Here in this argument there is
no danger for the deepest wit, or the largest affection (yea of a Solomon) to
overreach: for the knowledge of the love of Christ to his Church, is above all
knowledge, The Angels themselves may admire it, Ephesians 3. 19.
though they cannot comprehend it. It may well therefore be called the Song of
Solomon; The most excellent Song, of a man of the highest conceit, and deepest
apprehension, and of the highest matters, The Intercourse betwixt Christ the
Highest Lord of Lords, and his best beloved contracted Spouse.

There are diverse things in this Song, that a corrupt heart (unto which all
things are defiled) may take offense; But, To the pure all things are pure.
Such a sinful abuse of this Heavenly Book is far from the intention of the
Holy Ghost in it, which is by stouping low to us, to take advantage to raise us
higher unto him; that by taking advantage of the sweetest passage of our life,
( Marriage) and the most delightful affection ( Love) in the sweetest manner of
Expression ( by a Song) he might carry up the Soul to things of a Heavenly
Nature. Simile.
We see in Summer, that one heat weakens another: and a great light being near
a little one, draws away and obscures the flame of the other: Simile.
so it is when the affections are taken up higher to their fit Object, they die
unto all earthly things, whilst that heavenly flame consumes and wastes all base
affections and earthly desires. Two especial ways of Mortification.
Amongst other ways of Mortification, there be two remarkable, 1. By
imbittering all earthly things unto us, whereby the Affections are deaded to
them. 2. By showing more noble, excellent, and fit Objects.
That the soul issuing more largely and strongly into them, may be diverted;
and so by degrees die unto other things. The holy Spirit has chosen this way
in this Song; by elevating and raising our affections and love, to take it off
from other things, that so it might run in its right Channel. It is pity
that a sweet stream should not rather run into a Garden, than into a puddle:
what a shame is it, that man having in him such excellent affections as Love,
Joy, Delight, should cleave to dirty base things that are worse than himself,
so becoming debased like them? Therefore the Spirit of God, our of mercy and
pity to man, would raise up his affections, by taking comparison from earthly
things leading to higher matters, that only deserve Love, Joy, Delight, and
Admiration. Let Gods stouping to us, occasion our rising up unto him; for, here
the greatest things, The Mystery of Mysteries, the Communion betwixt Christ's
and his Church, is set out in the familiar comparison of a Marriage: that so we
might the better see it in the glass of a comparison, which we cannot so
directly conceive of, as we may see the sun in water, Simile.
whose beams we cannot so directly look upon: Only our care must be, not to
look so much on the colors, as the Picture: and not so much on the Picture,
as on the Person it self represented: that we look not so much to the
resemblance, as to the Person resembled.

Some would have Solomon by a Spirit of Prophecy, to take a view here of all
the time, from his Age to the second coming of Christ: and in this Song, as in
an abridgement, to set down the several Passages and Periods of the Church,
in several ages, as containing diverse things which are more correspondent to
one age of the Church than another. But howsoever this Song may contain (we
deny not) A story of the Church in several ages: yet this hinders not, but
that most passages of it agrees to the Spiritual estate of the Church in every
age: as most Interpreters have thought. In this Song there is 1. A strong
desire of the Church of nearer Communion with Christ: and then 2. Some
declining again in affection. 3. After this we have Her recovery and regaining
again of Love: after which 4. The Church falls again into a declining of
Affection, whereupon follows a further strangeness of Christ to her, than
before: which continues, until 5. That the Church perceiving of Christ's
constant affection unto her, notwithstanding her unkind dealing, recovers and
cleaves faster to Christ, than ever before. Chap. 3.


These passages agree to the Experience of the best Christians in the state of
their own lives. This Observation must carry strength through this whole
Song, An Observation for the whole Song.
That, there is the same regard of the whole Church, and of every particular
member in regard of the chiefest Privileges and Graces that accompany
salvation. There is the same reason of every drop of water, as of the whole
Ocean all is water; and of every spark of fire, as of the whole Element of
fire, all is fire: of those Homogeneall bodies, as we call them, there is the
same respect of the part and of the whole. And therefore as the whole Church is
the Spouse of Christ, so is every particular Christian: and as the whole Church
desires still nearer Communion with Christ, so does every particular member.
But to come to the words.

I am come into my Garden, etc.
This Chapter is not so well broken and divided from the former as it might
have been; for, it were better and more consequent, that the last Verse of the
former Chapter were added to the beginning of this.

CANT. IV. XVI. Awake, O North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden,
that the Spices thereof may flow out; let my Beloved come into his Garden, and
eat his pleasant fruits.
And therefore, by reason of connection of this Chapter with the former Verse,
we will first speak somewhat of it briefly, only to make way for that which
follows. The words contain 1. A turning of Christ's speech to the winds to
blow upon his Garden: with the End, why? That the Spices there of may flow out.
2. We have an invitation of Christ by the Church, to come into his Garden, with
the End, To eat his pleasant fruits.


It may be a Question, whether this Command be the words of Christ, Quest.
or, the desire of his Spouse. The words are spoken by Christ, Answ.
because he calls it ( My Garden) and the Church after, invites him to eat of
(His) pleasant fruits, not of (Hers) yet the words may be likewise, an answer,
to a former secret desire of the Church; whereof the order is this. The Church
being sensible of some deadness of Spirit; secretly desires some further
quickening. Christ then answers those desires, by commanding the winds to blow
upon her. For, ordinarily Christ first stirs up desires, and then, answers
the desires of his own Spirit, by further increase, as here.

Awake, thou North Wind, and come thou South, and blow upon my Garden, etc.
For the first Point named, we see here, that Christ sends forth his Spirit,
with Command to all means, under the name of North and South wind, to further
the fruitfulness of his Church. The wind is natures fan, what winds are to
the Garden, that the Spirit of Christ, in the use of means, is to the soul.
From Comparison fetched from Christ's commanding the winds; We may in general
observe, Observation from Christ's commanding the winds.
That, All Creatures stand in obedience to Christ, as ready at a word,
whenever he speaks to them. They are all as it were asleep until he awakes
them. He can call for the wind out of his treasures when he pleases, he holds
them in his fist.

Which may comfort all those that are Christ's, Use.
that they are under one that has all creatures at his beck under him, to do
them service, and at his check to do them no harm. This drew the Disciples in
admiration to say, What manner of man is this, Mat. 8. 27.
that even the winds and the seas obey him? And cannot the same power still the
winds and waves of the Churches and States, and cause a sudden clame, if (as
the Disciples) we awake him with our Prayers.

Secondly, we see here, that Christ speaks to winds contrary one to another,
both in regard of the coasts from whence they blow, and in their quality: but
both agree in this, that both are necessary for the Garden: where we see, That,
The courses that Christ takes, Observation from the contrary blasts of winds.
and the means that he uses with his Church, may seem contrary, but by a wi^e
ordering all agree in the wholesome issue. A prosperous and an afflicted
condition are contrary, a mild and a sharp course may seem to cross one
another. Yet, sweetly they agree in this, that as the Church needs both, so
Christ uses both for the Churches good. The North is a nipping wind, and the
South a cherishing wind, therefore the Southwind is the welcomer and sweeter
after the Northwind has blown. But howsoever, all things are ours, Paul,
Apollos, Cephas, things present and to come, 1 Cor. ^ 21.
life, death, etc. all things work together for good to us, Romans 8. 28.
being in Christ.

Hence it is that the manifold wisdom of Chirst makes use of such variety of
conditions, Use 1.
and hence it is that the Spirit of Christ is mild in some men's Ministeries,
and sharp in others. Nay, in the very same Minister, as the state of the soul
they have to deal with all requires.

the people of God need purging and sometimes refreshing, whereupon the Spirit
of God caries it selfesutably to both conditions, and the Spirit in the godly
themselves draws good out of every condition, sure they are that all winds
blow them good, and were it not for their good, no winds should blow upon them.
But in regard that these times of ours, by long peace and plenty, grow cold,
heavy, and secure, we need therefore all kinds of winds to blow upon us, and
all little enough. Time was when we were more quick and lively, but now the
heat of our spirits are abated; we must therefore take heed of it, and quicken
those things that are ready to die, Revel.
or else in stead of the North and South Wind, God will send an East Wind that
shall dri^ up all, as it is, Hos. 13. 15.

Again, if Christ can raise or lay, bind up or winds at his pleasure, then if
means be wanting or fruitless; It is he that says to the clouds, drop not;
and to the winds, blow not. Therefore, we must acknowledge him in want or
plenty of means. The Spirit of Christ in the use of means is a free agent,
sometimes blows strongly, sometimes more mildly, sometimes not at all, no
creature has these winds in a bag at command, and theresore it is wisdom to
y^eld to the gales of the Spirit, though in some other things (as Solomon
observes) it may hinder to observe the winds, Eccles. 11, 4.
yet here it is necessary and profitable to observe the winds of the Spirit.

Now for the clear understanding of what we are to speak of, let us first
observe 1. Why the Spirit of God in the use of the means is compared to wind.
And then, 2. Why the Church is c^mpared to a Garden: which shall be handled in
the proper place. In what Respects the Spirit of God is compared to wind.



But first for the wind.

1 The wind blows where it lis^^th, as it is Job. 3. 8. So the Spirit of God
blows freely, and opens the heart of some, and powers grace plentifully in
them. 2 The wind (especially the North Wind) has a cleansing force; so the
Spirit of God purges our hearts from dead works to serve the living God;
making us partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 3 The wind disperseth and
Scatters clouds, and makes a serenity in the air. So does the Spirit
disperse such clouds as corruption and Satan raise up in the soul, that we may
clearly see the face of God in Jesus Christ. 4 The wind has a cooling and a
tempering quality, and tempers the distemper of nature: as in some hot
countries there be yearly Anniversarie winds which blow at certain times in
Summer, tempering the heat. So the Spirit of God allayeth the unnatural heats
of the soul in fiery Tentations, and brings it into a good temper. 5 The
wind being subtle searches into every corner and ^ranie. So the Spirit
likewise is of a searching nature, and discerns betwixt the joints and the
marrow, betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, etc. searching those hidden
corruptions, that nature could never have found out. 6 The wind has a
cherishing and a fructifying force. So the Spirit is a quickening and a
cherishing Spirit, and makes the heart which is as a barren wilderness, to be
fruitful. 7 The wind has a conveying power of sweet smells in the air, to
carry them from one to another. So the Spirit in the Word conveyeth the seeds
of Grace and comfort from one to another, it draws out what sweetness is in
the spirits of men, and makes them fragrant and delightful to others. 8 The
wind again bears down all before it, beats down houses, and trees like the
Cedars in Lebanon, turns them up by the roots, and lays all flat. So the
Spirit is mighty in operation, there is no standing before it: It brings down
mountains, and every high thing that exalts it self, and lays them level:
nay, the Roman and those other mighty Empires could not stand before it.
For these respects and the like the blowing of the Spirit is compared to wind.
For which end Christ here commands the winds to

Blow upon his Garden.
[ To blow, etc.] See here the order, linking and concatination of things one
under another, to the prospering of a poor flower or plant in a Garden; not
only soil is needful, but air and wind also, and the influence of Heaven:
and God commanding all, as here, the winds to Blow upon his Garden. To this end
as a wonderful mercy to his people, it is said Hos. 2. 22. And it shall come
to pass in that day, I will hear says the Lord, I will hear the Heavens,
and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, the wine,
and the oil; and they shall hear Iezreel. As the Creatures are from God, so
the order and dependence of creatures one from another: to teach us, not only
what to pray for, but also what to pray fitly for. Not only to pray for the
deaw of heaven, but also for seasonable and cherishing winds. It is not the
soil, Non ager sed annus facit (...)
but the season that makes fruitful; and that from seasonable winds and
influences. So, In spiritual things there is a Chain of Causes and Effects;
Prayer comes from Faith, Romans 10. 14. Faith from the Hearing of the Word,
Hearing from a Preacher; by whom God by his Spirit blows upon the heart: and a
Preacher from Gods sending. If the God of Nature should but hinder and take
away one link of natures chain, the whole frame would be disturbed. Well,
That which Christ commands here, is for the winds to

Blow upon his Garden.
And we need blowing, In what Respects we need the blowing of the Spirit.
our spirits will be becalmed else, and stand at a stay, and Satan will be sure
by himself and such as are his bellows, to blow up the seeds of sinful lusts
in us. For, there are two spirits in the Church, the one always blowing
against the other. Therefore, the best had need to be stirred up, Exodus 17. 12.
otherwise with Moses, their hands will be ready to fall down, and abate in
their affection. Therefore we need Blowing,

1. In regard of our natural inhability. 2. In regard of our dullness and
heavines cleaving to nature occasionally. 3. In regard of contrary winds from
without, Satan has his bellows filled with his spirit, hinders the work of
grace all they can, so that we need not only Christ's blowing, but also his
stopping other contrary winds, that they blow not, Rev. 7. 1. 4. In regard of
the estate and condition of the new convenant, wherein all beginning, growth,
and ending, is from Grace, and nothing but Grace. 5. Because old Grace, without
a fresh supply, will not hold against new crosses and tentations.
Therefore when Christ draws let us run after him, Use.
when he blows, let us open unto him, It may be the last blast that ever we
shall have from him. And let us set upon Duties with this Encouragement, that
Christ will blow upon us, not only to prevent us, but also to maintain his
own Graces in us. But O! where is this stirring up of our selves, and one
another upon these grounds?

But, Quest.
Why is the Church compared to a Garden? Christ herein takes all manner of
terms to express himself and the state of the Church, Answ.
as it is to him, to show us that wheresoever we are, we may have occasion of
heavenly thoughts, to raise up our thoughts to higher matters. His Church is
his Temple, when we are in the Temple, it is a field when we are there; A
Garden, if we walk in a Garden: It is also a Spouse and a Sister; etc. But
more particularly the Church is resembled to a Garden, In what respects the
Church is compared to a garden.


1. Because a Garden is taken out of the common wast ground, to be appropriated
to a more particular use; so the Church of Christ is taken out of the
wilderness of this wast world, to a particular use. Exodus 9. 26.
It is in respect of the rest, as Goshen to Egypt, wherein light was, when all
else was in darkness. And indeed wherein does the Church differ from other
grounds, but that Christ has taken it in? It is the same soil as other
grounds are; but, he dresseth and fits it to bear spices and herbs.

In a garden nothing comes up naturally of it self, but as it is planted and
set; so nothing is good in the heart, but as it is planted and set by the
heavenly Husbandman. John 15. 22.
We need not sow the wilderness, for the seeds of weeds prosper naturally, the
earth is a mother to weeds, but a stepmother to herbs. So weeds and passions
grow too rank naturally, but nothing grows in the Church of it self, but as it
is set by the hand of Christ, who is the Author, Dresser, and Pruner of this
Garden.

In a Garden nothing uses to be planted but what is useful and delightful, so
there is no grace in the heart of a Christian, but it useful (as occasion
serves) both to God and man.

In a garden there are variety of flowers and spices; especially in those hot
Countries; so in a Christian, there is somewhat of every grace: as some cannot
hear of a curious flower, but they will have it in their Garden, so a
Christicannot hear of any Grace; Simile.
but he labors to obtain it, they labor for graces for all seasons, and
occasions. They have for Prosperity, temperance and sobriety; for Adversity,
patience and hope to sustain them. For those that are above them, they have
Respect and Obedience; and for those under them, suitable usage in all
conditions of Christianity. For the Spirit of God in them is a seminary of
spiritual good things; Reason.
as in the corruption of nature, before the Spirit of God came to us, there was
the seminary of all ill weeds in us, so when there is a new quality and new
principles put in us, there with comes the seeds of all graces.

Again, of all other Places, we most delight in our and take care thereof, for
fencing, weeding, watering, and planting. So Christ's chief care and delight is
for his Church: he walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes: Revel.
2. 1.
and if he defend and protect States, it is that they may be a harbor to his
Church.

And then again, as in Gardens there had Fountains and streams which run
through their Gardens: as Paradise had four streams which ran through it. So
the Church is Christ's Paradise, and his Spirit is a spring in the midst of it,
to refresh the souls of his upon all their faintings, and so the soul of a
Christian becomes as a watered Garden.

So also, Their Fountains were sealed up; so the Church and particular
Christians, Cant. 4. 12.
are as it were sealed up; A stranger (it is said) shall not meddle with this
joy of the Church. Pro. 14. 10.


Lastly, A garden stands always in need of weeding continual labor and cost
must be bestowed upon it; sometimes planting, pruning and weeding, etc. So in
the Church and hearts of Christians, Christ has always somewhat to do, we
would else soon be over-growne and turn wild: In all which, and the like
respects, Christ calls upon the winds to blow upon his Garden.

If then the Church be a severed portion, then, Use 1.
We should walk as men of a severed condition from the world, not as men of
the world, but as Christians, to make good that we are so, by feeling the
graces of Gods Spirit in some comfortable measure, that so Christ may have
something in us, that he may delight to dwell with us, so to be subject to his
pruning and dressing. For, It is so far from being an ill sign, that Christ is
at cost with us, in following us with afflictions, that it is rather a sure
sign of his love. For, the care of this blessed Husbandman is to prune us so,
as to make us fruitful. Men care not for heath and wilderness whereupon they
bestow no cost. So when God prunes us by crosses and afflictions, and sowes
good seed in us, it is a sign, he means to dwell with us, and delight in us.

And then also, we should not strive so much Garden.

And then, let us learn hence, not to despise any nation or person, seeing God
can take out of the wast wilderness whom he will, and make the Desert an Eden.

Again, let us bless God for our selves, that to be planted in the Church the
place of Gods delight.

And this also should move us, to be fruitful, for Dignity should mind us of
duty. It is strange to be fruitless and barren in this place that we live in,
being watered with the deaw of Heaven, under the sweet influence of the means.
This fruitless estate being often watered from heaven, how fearfully is it
threatened by the Holy Ghost? Heb. 6. 8.
that it is near unto cursing and burning. For in this case, visible Churches,
if they prosper not, God will remove the hedge, and lay them wast, having a
Garden elsewhere. Sometimes Gods plants prosper better in Babylon, than in
Judea. It is to be feared God may complain of us, as he does of his people,
Ier. 2. 21. I have planted thee a noble vine, how art thou then come to be
degenerated? If in this case we regard iniquity in our heart, the Lord will not
regard the best thing that comes from us, as our prayers, Heb. 12. 18. Heb. 13.
We must then learn of himself, how and wherein to please him, obedience from
a broken heart is the best sacrifice. Mark in Scriptures what he abhors, what
he delights in: we use to say of our friends, would God I knew how to please
them: Heb. 11. 6.
Christ teaches us, that without faith it is impossible to please him. Let us
then strive and labor to be fruitful in our Places and Callings: for it is
the greatest honor in this world, for God to dignifie us with such a
condition, Hos. 10. 1.
as to make us fruitful. We must not bring forth fruit to our selves, as GOD
complains of Ephraim. Honor, Riches, and the like, are but secondary things,
arbitrary at Gods pleasure to cast in: but, to have an active heart fruitful
from this ground, that God has planted us for this purpose, that we may do
good to mankind, this is an excellent consideration not to pro^ane our calling.
The blessed man is said to be, a tree planted by the water side, that brings
forth fruit in due season; but it is not every fruit: not that fruit which
Moses complains of, Deuteronomy. 32. 32. The wine of Dragons, and the Gall of Alps:
but good fruit, as John speaks: Every tree that brings not forth good fruit,
is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Mat. ^. 10.


Lastly, in that the Church is called Christ's Garden, this may strengthen our
faith in Gods care and protection. The Church may seem to lie open to all
incursions, but it has an invisible hedge about it, a wall without it, and a
well within it. Zach. 2. 5.
God himself is a wall of fire about it, and his Spirit a well of living
waters running through it to refresh and comfort it. Rev. 22. 1.
As it was said of Canaan, so it may be said of the Church; The eye of the Lord
is upon it all the year long, and he waters it continually. From which
especial care of Gods over it, this is a good plea for us to God, I am thine,
save me, I am a plant of thine own setting, nothing is in me but what is
thine, therefore cherish what is thine. So, for the whole Church the plea is
good; the Church is thine, fence it, water it, defend it, keep the wild bore
out of it. Therefore the enemies thereof shall one day know what it is to make
a breach upon Gods vineyard. In the mean time, let us labor to keep our
hearts as a Garden, that nothing that defiles may enter. In which respects the
Church is compared to a Garden, upon which Christ commands the North and
South Wind (all the means of Grace) to blow.

But to what end must these winds blow upon the Garden?

That the Spices thereof may flow out.

The End of this blowing is you see, That the Spices thereof may flow out; good
things in us lie dead and bound up, unless the Spirit let them out. We ebb and
flow, open and shut, as the Spirit blows upon us; without blowing, no flowing.
There were gracious good things in the Church, but they wanted blowing up and
further spreading, whence we may observe, That,

We need not only grace to put life into us at the first, Observe.
but likewise grace to quicken and draw forth that grace that we have. This is
the difference betwixt man's blowing and the Spirits; man when he blows (if
grace be not there before) spends all his labor upon a dead coal, which he
cannot make take fire. But the Spirit first kindles a holy fire, and then
increases the flame. Christ had in the use of means wrought on the Church
before, and now further promoteth his own work. We must first take in, and
then send out; first be cisternes to contain; and then, conduits to convey.
The wind first blows, and then the Spices of the Church flow out; we are first
sweet in our selves, and then sweet to others.

Whence we see further, Observe.
That, It is not enough to be good in our selves, but our goodness must slow
out: that is, grow more strong, useful to continue and stream forth for the
good of others. We must labor to be (as was said of John) burning and shining
Christians: for Christ is not like a box of ointment shut up and not opened,
but like that box of ointment that Mary powered out, which perfumes all the
whole house with the sweetness thereof. For, the Spirit is herein like wind:
it carries the sweet ^avour of grace to others. A Christian so soon as he
finds any rooting in God, is of a spreading disposition, and makes the places
he lives in the better for him. The whole body is the better for every good
member; Philem. 10.
as we see in Onesimus. The meanest persons when they become good, are useful
and profitable; of briers become flowers, the very naming of a good man casts a
sweet favor as presenting some grace to the heart of the hearer. For, then we
have what we have to purpose; when others have occasion to bless God for us,
for conveying comfort to them by us. And for our furtherance herein, therefore,
the winds are called upon to awake and blow upon Christ's Garden,

That the Spices thereof may flow out.
Hence we see also, Observe.
That, Where once God begins, he goes on, and delights to add encouragement to
encouragement, Observe.
to maintain new setters up in Religion: and does not only give them a stock
of grace at the beginning, but also helps them to trade; He is not only
Alpha, Rev. 1. 8.
but Omega unto them: The Beginning and the Ending. He does not only plant
graces, but also waters and cherishes them; where the Spirit of Christ's, it
is an encouraging Spirit. For, not only it infuseth grace, but also stirs
sit up, that we may be ready prepared for every good work, otherwise, we
cannot do that which we are able to do, the Spirit must bring all into
exercise, else, the habits of grace will lie asleep; we need a present Spirit to
do every good: not only the power to will, but the will it self: and not only
the will, but the deed is from the Spirit. Which should stir us up to go to
Christ, that he may stir up his own graces in us, that they may flow out.

Let us labor then in our selves to be full of goodness, Use.
that so we may be fitted to do good to all: as God is good and does good to
all, so must we strive to be as like him as may be. In which case for others
sakes, we must pray, that God would make the winds to blow out f^lly upon us,
That our spices may flow out for their good. For a Christian in his right
temper thinks, that he has nothing good to purpose, but that which does good
to others. Thus far of Christ's Command to the North and South Wind to awake
and blow upon, his Garden, That the spices thereof may flow out. In the next
place we have

2. Christ's Invitation by the Church to come into his Garden. With the End
thereof, To eat his pleasant Fruits.

Which words show, The Churches further desire sire of Christ's presence to
delight in the graces of his own Spirit in her. She invites him to come and
take delight in the Graces of his own Spirit. And she calls him Beloved,
because all her love is, or should be imparted and spent on Christ, who gave
himself to a cursed death for her. Our love should run in strength no oterr
way, therefore the Church calls Christ her Beloved. Christ was there before, but
she desires a further presence of him; whence we may observe, That,

Wheresoever grace is truly begun and stirred up, there is still a further
desire of Christ's presence, Observe.
and approaching daily more and more near to the soul, the Church thinks him
never near enough to her, until she be in heaven with him. The true Spouse
and the Bride always (unless in desertion and temptation) cries, Come Lord
Jesus, Rev. 22. 17
Come quickly. Now these degrees of Christ's approaches to the soul until his
Second Coming are that he may manifest himself more and more in defending,
comforting and inabling his Church with Grace* every further manifestation of
his presence, is a further Coming.

But why is the Church thus earnest?

First, Reas. 1.
because grace helps to see our need of Christ, and so helps us to prize him
the more; which high esteem breeds an hungring earneste desire after him, and
a desire of further likeness and sutablenesse to him.

Secondly, because the Church well knows, Christ comes to the soul, he comes
not alone, but with his Spirit, and his Spirit with abundance of peace and
comfort. This she knows what need she has of his Presence, that without him
there is no comfortable living. For, wheresoever he is, he makes the soul a
kind of Heaven, and all conditions of life comfortable.

Hence we may see that those that do not desire the presence of Christ in his
Ordinances, Use.
are (it is to be feared) such as the wind of the Holy Ghost never blew upon.
There are some of such a disposition, as they cannot endure the presence of
Christ: such as Antichrist and his limms, whom the presence of Christ in his
Ordinances blasts and consumes. Such are not only profane and wordly persons,
but proud hypocrites who glory in something of their own, and therefore their
hearts rise against Christ and his Ordinances, as laying open and shaming their
emptiness and carnalnesse. The Spirit in the Spouse is always saying to
Christ, come. It has never enough of him, he was now in a sort present; But
the Church (after it is once blown upon) is not satisfied without further
presence. It is from the Spirit, that we desire more of the Spirit, and from
the presence of Christ, that we desire a further Presence and Communion with
Him. Now

The end and Reason why Christ is desired by the Church to come into his
Garden, Is,
To eat his pleasant fruits.] that is, to give him contentment. And is it not
fit that Christ should eat fruit of his own vine, have comfort of his own
Garden, to taste of his own fruits? The only delight Christ has in the world,
is in his Garden: and that he might take the more delight in it, he makes it
fruitful, and those fruits are precious fruits, as growing from plants set by
his own hand, relishing of his own Spirit, and so fitted for his taste. Now
the Church knowing what fitted Christ's taste best, and knowing the fruits of
grace in her heart: desires that Christ would delight in his own graces in
her, and kindly accept of what she presented him with. Whence we see, That,

A gracious heart is privy to its own grace and sincerity, Observe.
when it is in a right temper: and so far as it is privy, is bold with Christ
in a sweet (...) reverend manner. So much sincerity, so much confidence, If our
heart condemn us not of unsincerity, we may in a reverend manner speak boldly
to Christ: It is not fit there should be strangeness betwixt Christ and his
Spouse; neither indeed will there be, when Christ has blown upon her, and
when she is on the growing hand.

But mark the Order.
First, Christ blows, and then the Church says, Come: Christ begins in love,
then love draws love; Cant. 1. 4.
Christ draws the Church, and she runs after him* The fire of love melts more
than the fire of affliction.

Again, we may see here in the Church a carfulness to please Christ; as it
is the duty, so it is the disposition of the Church of Christ to please her
Husband.

The Reason is, Reason 1.
First, our happiness stands in his contentment, and all cannot but be well in
that house, where the husband and the wife delight in, and make much of each
other.

And again, after that the Church has denied Christ, we put him off with any
thing: If he likes it, so it is; if not, it is the best that he is like to have.

O let us take the Apostles counsel, Coloss. 1. 1. To labor to walk worthy of
the Lord, etc. unto all well-pleasing, increasing in knowledge, Coloss. 1. 9,
10*
and fruitfulness in every good work. And this knowledge must not only be a
general wisdom in knowing truths, but a special understanding of his good
will to us, and our special duties again to him*

Again, that we may please Christ the better, Psalmist desiring that the words
of his mouth and the meditations of his heart might be acceptable before God,
Psalm. 19. 12.
first begs cleansing from his secret sins.

And still we must remember that he himself The upright are his delight. It
cannot but please him when we desire grace, for this end that we may please
him. If we study to please men in whom there is but little good; should we not
much more study to please Christ the fountain of goodness? Labor therefore
to be spiritual, Romans 8. 6.
for to be carnally minded is death, and those that are in the flesh cannot
please God.

The Church desires Christ to come into his Garden, to eat his pleasant fruits.
Where we see, The Church gives all to Christ: Observe.
The Garden is his, the Fruit his, the pleasantuesse and preciousnesse of the
Fruit is his. And as the fruits please him, so the humble acknowledgement that
they come from him, does exceedingly please him. It is enough for us to have
the comfort, let him have the glory. It came from a good Spirit in David, when
he said, 2 Chronicles.
Of thine own Lord I give thee, etc. God accounts the works and fruits that
comes from us to be ours, because the judgment and resolution of will, whereby
we do them is ours. This he does to encourage us, but because the grace whereby
we judge and will aright comes from God, it is our duty to ascribe whatsoever
is good in us, or comes from us, unto him: so God shall lose no praise, and we
lose no encouragement. The imperfections in well-doing are only ours, and
those Christ will pardon, as knowing how to bear with the infirmities of his
Spouse, being the weaker vessel.

This therefore should cheer up our spirits, Use.
in the wants and blemishes of our performances. They are notwithstanding,
precious fruits in Christ's acceptance, so that we desire to please him above
all things, and to have nearer communion with him: fruitfulness unto
pleasingnes may stand with imperfections, so that we be sensible of them, and
ashamed for them. Although the fruit be little, yet it is precious, there is a
blessing in it. Imperfections help us against tentations to pride, not to be
matter of discouragement, which Satan aims at. And as Christ commands the
North and South Wind to blow for cherishing, so Satan labors to stir up an
East pinching wind, to take either from endeavor, or to make us heartlesse in
endeavor. Why should we think basely of that which Christ thinks precious? Why
should we think that offensive which he counts as incense? We must not give
false witness of the work of grace in our hearts, but bless God that he will
work any thing in such polluted hearts as ours. What though as they come from
us they have a relish of the old man, seeing he takes them from us, Rev. 8. 3.
and perfumes them with his own sweet odors, to presents them unto God. He is
our High Priest which makes all acceptable, both Persons, Prayers, and
Performances, Heb. 9. 13.
sprinkling them all with his blood.

To conclude this Point, let it be our study to be in such a condition wherein
we may please Christ; and whereas we are daily prone to offend him, let us
daily renew our covenant with Him, and in him: and fetch encouragements of
well-doing from this, that what we do, is not only well-pleasing unto him, but
rewarded of him. And to this end desire him, that he would give command to
North and South, to all sort of means, to be effectual, for making us more
fruitful, that he may delight in us as his pleasant Gardens; and then what is
in the world, that we need much care for, or fear?

Now upon the Churches Invitation for Christ to come into his Garden, follows
His gracious Answer unto the Churches Desire, in the first Verse of this fifth
Chapter.

CANT. V. I. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have gathered my
myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honey-combe with my honey, I have drunk
my wine with my milk; eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.
Which words contain in them

An answer to the Desire of the Church, in the latter part of the Verse
formerly handled: Awake thou North Wind, and comes thou South, etc.

Then Verse. 2. is set forth The secure estate of the Church at this time, I
sleep, but my heart waketh, in setting down whereof the Holy Ghost here by
Solomon shows likewise

The loving Intercourse betwixt Christ and the Church one with another.

Now Christ upon the secure estate and condition of the Church desires her, To
open unto him, Ver. 2. Which desire and waiting of Christ's is put off and
slighted with poor and slender excuses, Verse 3. I have put off my coat, how
shall I put it on, etc.

The success of which excuses is, that Christ seems to go away from her (and
indeed to her sight and sense departs) Ver. 6. I opened to my Beloved, but my
Beloved had withdrawn himself, etc. whereupon she lays about her, is
restless, and inquires after Christ from the watchmen, who misuse, wound her,
and take away her veil from her, Verse* 7.

Another Intercourse in this Chapter here is, That the Church for all this
gives not over searching after Christ: But asks the Daughters of Jerusalem,
what was become of her Beloved, Vere 8. and withal, in a few words, but full
of large expression, she relates her case unto them; That she was sick of
love: and so charge them to tell her beloved; if they find him. Where upon a
Question moved by them, touching her Beloved, Ver. 9. What is thy Beloved more
than another Beloved? She takes occasion (being full of love) which is glad of
all occasions to speak of the Beloved, to burst forth into his Praises, by many
elegant Expressions, Verse. 10, 11, 12, etc. 1. In general; setting him at a
large distance, beyond comparison from all others, to be The chiefest of ten
thousand, Verse. 10. 2. In particulars, Ver* 11, etc. His head is as most fine
gold, etc.


The Issue whereof was; That, The Daughters of Jerusalem become likewise
inamoured* with him, Chap. 6. 1. and thereupon enquire also after him: Whether
is thy Beloved gone, O thou fairest among women, etc. Unto which demand the
Church makes Answer, Chap. 6. 2. and so Ver. 3 of that Chapter, makes a
confident triumphant close unto all these grand passages forenamed. I am my
Beloveds and my Beloved is mine, etc. all which will better appear in the
Particulars themselves.

The first thing then which offers it self to our consideration, is, Christ's
Answer to the Churches Invitation, Chap. 4. 16.

I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with
my spice; I have eaten my honey-combe with my honey; I have drunk my wine with
my milk; Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly O beloved. In which Verse
we have, 1. Christ's Answer to the Churches Petition; [ I am come into my
Garden.] 2. A Compellation, or Description of the Church, [ My Sister, my
Spouse.] 3. Christ's acceptance of what he had gotten there, [ I have gathered
my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honey-combe with my honey.] 4. There
is, An Invitation of all Christ's friends to a magnifique abundant feast, [ Eat
O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.]


For the first then, in that Christ makes such a real Answer unto the Churchs
Invitation, I am come into my Garden, etc. We see, That Christ comes into his
Garden: It Is much that he that has heaven to delight in, will delight to dwell
among the sons of sinful men: but this he does for us, and so takes notice of
the Churches Petition.

Let my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruit. The right
speech of the Church that gives all to Christ, who when she has made such a
petition, hears it. The Order is this.

First of all, God makes his Church lovely, planteth good things therein, The
Order of God^is hearing his Church.
and then stirs up in her good desires: both fitness to pray from an inward
gracious disposition: and holy desires: after which, Christ hearing the voice
of his own Spirit in her, and regarding his own preparations, he answers them
graciously. Whence, in the first place we may observe, That,

God makes us good, Observe.
stirs up holy desires in us, and then answers the desires of his holy Spirit
in us.

A notable place for this we have Psalm. 10. 17. How the heart is prepared to
prayer.
which shows how God first prepares the heart to pray, and then hears these
desires of the soul stirred up by his own Spirit, Lord, thou have heard the
desires of the humble, none are fit to pray but the humble, such as discern
their own wants: Thou will prepare their hearts, thou will make thine ear to
hear. So Romans 8. 26. It is said, Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities; for, we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered. Thus the Spirit not only stirs up our heart to pray: but also
prepares our hearts unto it Especially this is necessary for us, when our
thoughts are confused with trouble, grief, and Passions, not knowing what to
pray. In this case the Spirit dictates the words of prayer, or else, in a
confusion of thoughts sums up all in a volie of sighs and unexpressible
groans. Thus it is true, that our hearts can neither be lifted up to Prayer,
nor rightly prepared for it, in any frame fitting, but by Gods own Spirit.
Nothing is accepted of God toward heaven and happiness, but that which is
spiritual: all saving and sanctifying good comes from above. Therefore God
must prepare the heart, stir up holy desires, dictate prayer: must do all in
all, being our Alpha and Omega. Rev. 1. 6.


Now, God hears our Prayers, First, Because the Materials of these holy
desires are good in themselves, Why God hears our Prayers.
and from the Person from whence they come, his beloved Spouse, Reason 1.
as it is Cant. 2. 14. where Christ desiring to hear the voice of his Church,
says, Let me see thy Countenance, and let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely. Thus the voice of the Spouse is sweet,
because it is stirred up by his own Spirit, which burns the Incense, and
whence all comes which is savingly good. This offering up of our prayers in the
name of Christ, is that which with his sweet odors perfumes all our Sacrifices
and Prayers; Rev. 8. 3.
because being in the Covenant of Grace, God respects whatsoever comes from us,
as we do the desires of our near friends.

And then again, God hears our Prayers, Because he looks upon us as we are
in election, and choice of God the Father, who has given us to him. Not only
as in the near bond of marriage, husband and wife, but also as he has given
us to Christ: which is his plea unto the Father, Ioh. 17. 6. Thine they were,
thou gave them me, etc. The desires of the Church please him, because they
are stirred up by his Spirit, and proceed from her that is his: whose voice he
delights to hear, and the prayers of others for his Church are accepted,
because they are for her that is his Beloved.

To confirm this further, see Isa. 58. 9. Thou then shall cry, and the Lord
shall answer; thou shall call, and presently he shall say, Here I am, etc. so
as soon as Daniel had ended that excellent prayer, the Angel tells him, At
the beginning of thy supplications the decree came forth, etc. So because he
knows what to put into our hearts, Dan. 9. 23.
he knows our desires and thoughts. And therefore accepts of our prayers and
hears us; because he loves the voice of his own Spirit in us. So it is said,
He fulfils the desires of them that fear him; and he is near to all that call
upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. Cant. 2. 14.
And our Savior he says; Ask and ye shall receive, Psalm. 145. 18.
etc. So we have it, 1 Ioh. 5. 14. And we know if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us. M^t. 7. 7.


Let it therefore be a singular comfort to us, that in all wants, Use 1.
so in that of friends, when we have none to go to, yet we have God to whom we
may freely power out our hearts, there being no place in the world that can
restrain us from his presence, or his Spirit from us, he can hear us and help
us in all places. What a blessed estate is this? None can hinder us from
driving this trade with Christ in heaven.

And let us make another use of it likewise, to be a means to stir up our
hearts, to make use of our privileges. Use 2.
What a prerogative is it for a favorite to have the Ear of his Prince, him
we account happy: surely he is much more happy, that has Gods ^are, ^im to be
his Father in the covenant of grace: Him reconciled, upon all occasions to
power out his heart before Him, who is merciful and faithful, wise and most
able to help us. Why are we discouraged therefore; and why are we cast down,
when we have such a powerful and such a gracious God to go to in all our
extremities? Psalm. 42. ult.
He that can pray can never be much uncomfortable.

So likewise, Use 3.
it should stir us up to keep our peace with God, that so we may always have
access unto him, and communion with him. What a pitiful case is it to lose
other comforts, and therewith also to be in such a state, that we cannot go to
God with any boldness? It is the greatest loss of all, The greatest loss of
all.
when we have lost the spirit of Prayer. For, if we lose other things, we may
recover them by Prayer. But when we have lost this boldness to go to God, and
are afraid to look him in the face (as malefactors the Judge) this is a woeful
estate.

Now there are diverse cases wherein the soul is not in a state fit for
Prayer. Cases wherein one is unfit to pray.
As that first, Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will
not If a man has a naughty heart, that purposes to live in any sin against
God, he takes him for an enemy, and therefore will not regard his Prayer.
Therefore we must come with a resolute purpose, to break off all sinful
courses, and to give up our selves to the guidance of Gods Spirit. A strong
motive to sanctification.
And this will be a forcible Reason to move us thereunto, because so long as we
live in any known sin unrepented of: God neither regards us nor our prayers.
What a fearful estate is this, that when we have such need of Gods favor in
all estates; in sickness, the hour of death, and in spiritual temptation, to
be in such a condition, as that we dare not go to God? Though our lives be
civil, yet if we have false hearts that feed themselves with evil
imaginations, and with a purpose of sinning (though we act it not) the Lord
will not regard the prayers of such a one, they are abominable ( The very
sacrifice of the wicked is abominable)

Another case is, Pro. 13.
when we will not forgive others. We know it is directly set down in the Lords
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
there is further added Verse. 15. Mat. 6. 12.
If you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father
forgive you. If our hearts tell us we have no disposition to pardon, be at
peace and agreement, then we do but take Gods Name in vain, when we ask him to
forgive our sins, and we continue in envy and malice. In this case God will
not regard our prayers, as it is said; I care not for your Prayers, or for any
service you perform to me: why? Isa, 1.
For your hands are full of blood: you are un^mercifull, Isa. 66.
of a cruel fierce disposition, which cannot appear before God rightly, nor
humble it self in Prayer. If it does; its own bloody and cruel disposition
will be objected against the Prayers, which are not mingled with faith and love,
but with wrath and bitterness. Shall I look for mercy that have no merciful
heart my self? Can I hope to find that of God, that others cannot find from
me? An unbroken disposition which counts Pride an ornament, that is cruel and
fierce, it cannot go to God in Prayer. For, whosoever would prevail with God
in prayer, must be humble: for our supplications must come from a loving
peaceable disposition, where there is a resolution against all sin. Psalm. 73.
Neither is it sufficient to avoid grudging and malice against these, but we
must look that others have not cause to grudge against us, as it is commanded.
Matthew. 5. 23. If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that
thy Brother has ought against thee: leave there thy gift before the altar, and
go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother: and then come and offer thy
gift. So that if we do not seek reconciliation with men unto whom we have
done wrong, God will not be reconciled to us, nor accept any service from us.

If then we would have our Prayers, and our Persons accepted, or respected, let
us make conscience of that which has been said, and not loose such a blessed
privilege as this is, that God may regard our prayers. But here may be asked.

How shall I know whether God regard my prayers or not? Quest.


First, Answ. 1
When he grants the thing prayed for, or inlargeth our hearts to pray still.
How to know when God hears our prayers.
It is a greater gift

When he answers us in a better and higher kind, as Paul when he prayed for
the taking away

When again, He gives us inward peace, though as Phil. 4. 7. In nothing be
careful, but in all things let your requests be made to God, with prayer and
thankesgiving. Object.


But sometime he does not answer our requests. Answ.


It is true he does not, but the peace of God which passes al under standing
guards our hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God. So though he
answers not our prayers in particular; yet he vouchsafes inward peace unto us;
assuring us that it shall go well with us, though not in that particular we
beg. And thus in not hearing their prayers, yet they have their hearts desire,
when Gods will is made known. Is not this sufficient for a Christian, either to
have the thing, or to have inward peace, with assurance that it shall go better
with them, then if they had it: with a spirit enlarged to pray, till they have
the thing prayed for? If any of these be; God respects our prayers.

Again, In that Christ is thus ready to come unto his Garden upon the Churches
Invitation, we may further observe; That

Christ vouchsafes his gracious Presence to his Children, Observe.
upon their desire of it.

The point is clear, from the beginning of the world, the Church has had the
presence of Christ always. For, either he has been present in Sacrifices, or
in some other things, signs of his presence, Exodus 3. 2.
as in the Bush, or some more glorious manifestation of his presence, Exodus 25.
22.
the Arc, and in the Cloud, Exodus 13. 21.
and Pillar of fire, and after that more gloriously in the Temple: he has ever
been present with his Church in some sign or evidence of his presence, he
delighted to be with the children of men. Sometimes before that, sometimes he
assumed a body and afterward laid it down again until he came indeed to
take our nature upon him never to leave it again. But, here is meant, a
spiritual presence most of all; which the Church in some sort ever had: now
desires, and he offers: Psalm. 65. 2.
as being a God hearing prayer. And to instance in one place for all to see how
ready Christ has always been to show his presence to the Church upon their
desire. What else is the burden of the 107. Psalm; but a repetition of Gods
readiness to show his presence in the Church, upon their seeking unto him, and
unfeigned desire of it: notwithstanding all their manifold provocations of him
to anger: which is well summed up, Psalm. 106. 43. Many times did he deliver
them, but they provoked him with their counsel, and were brought low for their
iniquity. Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction when he heard their cry.

It does not content the Church, That the Church is carried from desire to
desire.
to have a kind of spiritual presence of Christ; but, It is carried from
desire to desire, till the whole desire be accomplished. For, as their are
graduall presences of Christ, so their are suitable desires in the Church which
rise by degrees. Christ was present 1 by his gracious Spirit. And then 2 more
graciously present in his Incarnation, the sweetest time that ever the Church
had from the beginning of the world until then. It being the desire of
nations: for the description of those who lived before his coming, is from,
the waiting for the consolation of Israel, that is, for the first coming of
Christ. And then there is a third and more glorious presence of Christ, that
all of us wait for, whereby we are described to be such, as wait for the
coming of Christ: for the soul of a Christian is never satisfied until it
enjoy the highest desire of Christ's presence, which the Church knew well enough
must follow in time. Therefore she especially desires this spiritual presence,
in a larger and fuller measure, which she in some measure already had. So
then, Christ is graciously present in his Church, by his holy Spirit. Matthew. 28.
I will be with you (says he) unto the end of the world. It is his promise,
when I am gone my self; I will not leave you comfortless, but leave with you
my Vicar-Generall; John 16.
(the Holy Spirit the Comforter) who shall be always with you. But

How shall we know that Christ is present in us? Quest.


To know this we shall not need to pull him from heaven, Answ.
we may know it in the Word and Sacraments and in the Communion of Saints; How
to know that Christ is present in us.
for, these are the conveyances whereby he manifests himself, together with the
work of his own gracious Spirit in us: for, as we need not take the Sun from
Heaven to know whether or not it be up, or be day: which may be known by the
light, heat, and fruitfullnes of the creature, and as in the Spring, we need
not look to the Heaven to see whether the Sun be come near us or not; for
looking on the Earth we may see all green, fresh, lively strong and vigorous.
So it is with the presence of Christ, we may know he is present, by that light
which is in the soul, convincing us of better courses to be taken, of a
spiritual life, to know heavenly things, and the difference of them from
earthly and to set a price upon them. When there is together with light, a
heat above nature. The affections are kindled to love the belt things, and to
joy in them.

And when together with heat, there is strength and vigor, to carry us to
spiritual duties, framing us to a holy communion with God, and one with
another.

And likewise when there is every way cheerefullnes and enlargement of spirit;
as it is with the creature when the Sun approaches. For these causes, the
Church desires Christ, that she may have more light, life, heat, vigor,
strength, and that she may be more cheerful and fruitful in duties. The
soul when it is once made spiritual, does still desire, a further and further
presence of Christ, to be made better and better.

What a comfort is this to Christians, that they have the presence of Christ so
far forth, as shall make them happy, and as the earth will afford. Nothing
but Heaven (or rather Christ in Heaven) it self, will content the child of
God. In the mean time his presence in the Congregation, makes their souls (as
it were) Heaven. If the Kings presence, who carries the Court with him, makes
all places where he is a Court. That where Christ is present, there Heaven is
in some degrees.
So Christ he carries a kind of Heaven with him, whersoever he is, his
presence has with it, life, light, comfort, strength and all. For one beam of
his countenance, will scatter all the clouds of grief whatsoever. It is no
matter where we be, so Christ be with us. If with the 3 Children in a fiery
furnace; it is no matter, if a fourth be there also. Da^. 3.
So, if Christ be with us, the flames nor nothing shall hurt us. If in a
dungeon as Paul and Sylas were, if Christ's presence be there, Act, 15. 52
by his spirit to enlarge our souls; all is comfortable whatsoever. It
changes the nature of all things, sweetneth every thing, besides that
sweetness which it brings unto the soul, by the presence of the spirit, as we
see in the Acts, when they had received the Holy Ghost more abundantly, they
cared not what they suffered; regarded not whipping, nay were glad that they
were accounted worthy to suffer anything for Christ. Act. 5. 41.
Whence came this fortitude? from the presence of Christ, and the Comforter
which he had formerly promised?

So, let us have the spirit of Christ that comes from him; That having Christ's
presence we need fear nothing.
then it is no matter what our condition be in the world: upon this ground let
us fear nothing that shall befall us in Gods cause, whatsoever it is. We shall
have a spirit of prayer at the worst. God never takes away the spirit of
Supplication from his children, but leaves them that, until at length he
possess them fully of their desires. In all Christ's delays, let us look unto
the Cause; and to our Carriage therein: Renew our Repentance, that we may be in
a fit state to go to God, and God to come to us. Desire him to fit us for
prayer and holy communion with him, that we may never doubt of his presence.

THE SECOND SERMON.
CANT. V. I. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse: I have gathered my
Myrre with my Spice, I have gathered my hony-combe with my honey, I have drunk
my wine with my milk: eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O
Beloved!
THIS Song is a mirror of Christ's love, a discovery of which we have in part
in this verse. Wherein Christ accepts of the invitation of the Church, and
comes into his Garden: and he entertaines her with the terms of Sister and
Spouse. SERMON. II.
Herein observe the description of the Church, and the sweet Compellation, [ My
Sister, my Spouse.] Where there is both Affinity and Consanguinity, all the
bonds that may tie us to Christ and Christ to us. 1. His Sister, by Blood. 2.
His Spouse, by Marriage.


Christ is our Brother, and the Church and every particular true member thereof
is his Sister. I go faith Christ, John 20. 17.
To my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God. Go (says he) and
tell my Brethren this was after his resurrection, his advancement did not
change his disposition. Go tell my brethren that left me so unkindly, go tell
Peter that was most unkind of all, and most cast ^owne with the sense of it.
He became our Brother by Incarnation: For, all our union is from the first
union of two natures in one person Christ became bone of our bone, and flesh of
our flesh; to make us spiritually bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.

Therefore let us labor to be like to him, who for that purpose became like to
us Immanuell God with us, Isa 7. 14. 2. Pet. 1. 4.
that we might be like him, and and partake of the divine Nature. Whom should
we rather desire to be like then one so great so gracious so loving?

Again, Christ was not ashamed to call us Brethren, nor abhorred the Virgins
womb, to be shut up in those dark cells and streites: but took our base
nature, when it was at the worst, and not only our nature, but our miserable
condition and cur^e (...) unto us. Was not he ashamed of us, and shall we be
ashamed to own him and his cause? Against this Cowardice it is a thunderbolt,
which our Savior Christ pronounces. Mark. 8. 38.
He that is ashamed of me before men, him will I be ashamed of before my
Father, and all the holy Angels. It argues a base disposition, either for
frown or favor to desert a good cause in evil times.

Again, It is a point of comfort to know that we have a Brother, who is a
favorite in Heaven, who though he abased himself for us, is yet Lord over
all. Unless he had been our Brother, he could not have been our husband, for
Husband and Wife should be of one nature. That he might marie us, therefore he
came, and took our nature, so to be fitted to fulfill the work of our
Redemption. But now he is in Heaven, set down at the right hand of God: the
true Joseph, the high Steward of Heaven, he has all power committed unto him,
he rules all. What a comfort is this to a poor soul that has no friends in
the world, that yet he has a friend in Heaven, that will own him for his
Brother, in, and through whom he may go to the Throne of Grace boldly and
power out his soul. Heb. 4. 15, 16.
What a comfort was it to Joseph's brethren that their brother was the second
person in the kingdom?

Again, It should be a Motive to have good Christians in high estimation, and
to take heed how we wrong them, for their Brother will take their part. Saul
Saul why persecutest thou me? ^aith the head in Heaven, Acts 9. 4
when his members were trodden on upon earrh. It is more to wrong a Christian,
then the world takes it for; for Christ takes it as done to himself. Absalom
was a man wicked, and unnatural, yet he could not endure the wrong that was
done to his sister Thamar. Jacobs sons took it as a high indignity, that
their sister should be so abused. Has Christ no affections now he is in
Heaven, to her that is so near him as the Church is? howsoever he suffer men
to tiranize over her for a while, yet it will appear ere long, that he will
take the Churches part, for, he is her Brother.

My Sister, my Spouse.
The Church is the Daughter of a King, begotten of God, The Churches Royal
descent.
the Sister, and Spouse of a King, because she is the Sister, and Spouse of
Christ, and the Mother of all that are spiritual Kings; the Church of Christ
is every way Royal. Therefore, we are Kings, because we are Christians. Hence
the Holy Ghost does add here to Sister, Spouse: indeed taking the advantage of
such Relations as are most comfortable to set out the excellent, and
transcendent Relation, that is between Christ, and his Church, all other are
not what they are termed so much as glasses to see better things. Riches,
Beauty, Marriage, Nobility, etc. are scarce worthy of their names; these are
but Titles, and empty things, though our base nature make great matters of
them, yet the reality and substance of all these are in Heavenly things. True
Riches, are the heavenly Graces, true Nobility is to be borne of God, to be the
Sister and Spouse of Christ, True pleasures are those of the Spirit, which
endure for ever, and will stand by us, when all outward comforts will vanish.
W^y the variety of Christ's love to the Church, is so diversely expressed
That mystical union and sweet communion is set down with such variety of
expressions, to show, that whatsoever is scattered in the Creature severally,
is in Him entirely. He is both a friend, and a Brother, a Head, and a Husband
to us, therefore he takes the names of all, whence we may observe further,

That The Church is the Spouse of Christ. Observe.
It springs out of him, even as Eve taken out of Adams Rib; (so the Spouse of
Christ) was taken out of his side (when it was pierced) the Church rose out of
his Blood, and Death; for he Redeemed it, by satisfying divine justice: we
being in such a Condition, that Christ must Redeem us, before he could wed us.
First, he must be incarnate in our Nature, before he could be a fit husband;
and then, because we were in Bondage and Captivity, we must be Redeemed before
he could marry us: he purchased his Church with his own blood. Act. 20. 28.
Christ has right to us, he bought us dearly.

Again, another foundation of this Marriage between Christ and us, is
Consent; he works us by his Spirit to yield to him, there must be consent on
our part, which is not in us by nature, but wrought by his spirit, etc. We
yield to take him upon his own terms; that is, How Christ must be taken of
us.
that we shall leave our fathers house, all our former carnal acquaintance,
when he has wrought our consent, then the marriage between him and us is
struck up.

The Husband takes his wife under his own name, she loosing her own name is
called by his. So we are Christ. 2. The Wife is taken with all her debt, and
made partaker of the honors, and Riches of her Husband. Whatsoever he has is
hers, and he stands answerable for all her debts, so it is here, we have not
only the name of Christ upon us, but we partake his honors, Revel. 1. 5, 6.
and are Kings, Priests, and Heirs with him. Whatsoever he has, he has taken
us into the fellowship of it; so that his Riches, are ours, and likewise,
whatsoever is ours, that is ill, he has taken it upon him, even the wrath due
to us, for he came between that and us, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
when he was made sin, and a curse for us; so There is a blessed change
between Christ and us; his honors and Riches are ours; We have nothing to
bestow on him, but our Beggary, sins, and miseries, which he took upon him.

Those that bring together these two different parties, are the friends of the
Bride; that is, the Ministers, as it is John 3. 23. They are the paranymphi the
friends of the Bride, The duty of Ministers.
that learn of Christ what to report to his Spouse, and so they woo for
Christ; and open the Riches, Beauty, honor, and all that is lovely in him,
which is indeed the especial duty of Ministers, to lay open his unsearchable
Riches, that the Church may know what a Husband she is like to have, if she
cleave to him, and what an one she leaves, if she forsake him. It was well said
in the Counsel of Basil out of Bernard, Nemo committit sponsam suam Vicario;
nemo enim Ecclesiae sponsus est; None commits his wife to a Vicar, for none is
the husband of the Church. To be Husband of the Church is one of the
incommunicable titles of Christ, yet usurped by the Pope. Innocent the third
was the first that wronged Christ's bed by challenging the title of Sponsus,
Husband of the Church. Bernard forbids his scholar Eugenius this title, Epist.
237. ad Eugenium. It is enough for Ministers to be friends of the Bride. Let us
yield him to be Husband of the Church that has given himself to sanctify it
with washing of water and blood, Ephesians. 5. 26. we are a wife of blood to him.

In this sweet Conjunction we must know, that by nature, we are clean
otherwaises then Spouses for what was Salomons wife Pharoahs daughter? a
Heathen, till she came to be Salomons Spouse. And as we read in Moses the
strange woman must have her hair cut off, and her nails pared, before she
should be taken into the Church, there must be an alteration; so before the
Church (which is not Hesthenish, but indeed Hellish by nature, and led by the
spirit of the world) be fit to be the Spouse of Christ, Isa. 11. 7, 8.
there must be an alteration and a change of nature; John 3. 3.
Christ must alter, renew, Purge, and fit us for himself, the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 5. 16, it was the end of his death, not only to take us to Heaven, but
to sanctify us on Earth, and prepare us that we might be fit Spouses for
himself.

Let us often think of this nearenesse between Christ and us Use. 1.
(if we have once given our names to him) and not be discouraged for any sin,
Consolation.
or unworthiness in us. Vxori (...) non intenditur.
Who sues a wife for debt, when she is married? Therefore answer all
accusations Thus; Go to Christ; if you have any thing to say to me, go to my
husband; God is just, but he will not have his justice twice satisfied, seeing
whatsoever is due thereunto, is satisfied by Christ our Husband? What a comfort
is this to a distressed Conscience; if sin cannot dismay us, which is the ill
of ills and cause of all evil, what other ill can dismay us? He that exhorts
us to bear with the infirmities one of another, and has enjoined the husband
to bear with the wife ( as the weaker vessel) will not he bear with his
Church (as the 1 Pet. 3. 7.
weaker vessel) performing the duty of an husband in all our infirmities?

Again, His desire is to make her better, and not to cast her away for that
which is amiss. And for Outward ills, they are but to refine, and make us more
conformable to Christ our Husband, to fit us for heaven, the same way that he
went. They have a blessing in them all, for he takes away all that is hurtful,
he pitties, and keeps us as the apple of his eye. Zach. 2. 8.
Therefore, let us often think of this, since he has vouchsafed to take us so
near to himself. Let us not loose the comfort that this meditation will yield
us. We love for goodness, beauty, riches, but Christ loves us to make us so,
and then loves us because we are so in all estates whatsoever.

And if Christ be so near us, Use 3.
Let us labor for chaste judgments, that we do not defile them with errors,
seeing the whole soul is espoused to Christ, Verit^s est spo^s^ intellectu^
Truth is the Spouse of our understandings it is not left to us to be wanton in
opinions to take up what conceit we will of things, so we ought to have chaste
affections not cleaving to base things, it has been often times seen, that one
husband has had many wives, but never from the beginning of the world, that
one wife has had many husbands. God promises to betroth his Church to him in
righteousness and faithfullness, that is, as he will be faithful to her, so she
shall by his grace be faithful to him, faithfullnes shall be mutual, the
Church shall not be false to Christ; so there is no Christian ^oule must think
to have many husbands; for Christ in this case is a jealous husband. Take heed
therefore of spiritual harlotrie of heart, for our affections are for Christ,
and cannot be better bestowed. In other things we loose our love, and the
things loved; but here we loose not our love, but this is a perfecting love,
which draws us to love that which is better, then our selves. We are, as we
affect, our affections are, as their Objects be, if they be set upon better
things, That our affections are like their objects.
then our selves, they are bettered by it, they are never rightly bestowed, but
when they are set upon Christ; and upon other things as they answer, and stand
with the love of Christ. For, the prime love, when it is rightly bestowed, it
orders, and regulates all other loves whatsoever. No man knows how to use
earthly things, but a Christian, that has first pitched his love on Christ,
then seeing all things in him, and in all them a beam of that love of his,
intending happiness to him, so he knows how to use every thing in order.
Therefore let us keep our Communion with Christ, and esteem nothing more,
then his love, because he esteems nothing more then ours.

But how shall we know, whether we be espoused to Christ, or not? Quest.


Our hearts can tell us, whether we yield consent to him, or not. Answ. 1
In particular, whether we have received him, How to know if we ^e espoused to
Christ or not
as he will be received, as a right Husband, that is, Whether we receive him to
be ruled by him, to make him our Head. For the wife, when she yields to be
married, therewith also surrenders up her own will to be ruled by her husband;
so far she has denied her own will, she has no will of her own. Christ
has wisdom enough for us, and himself too, whose wisdom, and will must be
ours; To be led by divine Truths so far, as they are discovered unto us, and
to submit our selves thereunto, is a sign of a gracious heart, that is married
to Christ.

a willingness to follow Christ in all conditions as he is discovered in the
Word. The right disposition of the Spouse of Christ
To suffer Christ to have the sovereignty in our affections, above all other
things and persons in the world. This is the right disposition of a true
Spouse. For as it was at the first institution, there must be a leaving of
Father, and Mother, and all, to cleave to the husband: so here, when any thing
and Christ cannot stand together, or else we shall never have the comfort of
this sweet Name. Many men will be glad to own Christ to be great by him, (but
as S Austin complains in his his time) Christ Jesus is not loved for Jesus his
own sake, Vix diligitur Jesus propter Iesum.
but for other things, that he brings with him, peace, plenty, etc. as far as
it stands with these contentments; if Christ and the world part once, it will
be known which we followed. In times of peace this is hardly discerned. If he
will pay men's debts, so as they may have the credit and glory of the name to be
called Christians, if he will redeem them from the danger of sin, all is
well; but only such have the comfort of this Communion, as love him for
himself. Let us not so much trouble our selves about signs as be careful to
do our duty to Christ, and then will Christ discover his love clearly unto us.

Now, they that are not brought so near to this happy condition by Christ, may
yet have this encouragement, Use 4.
there is yet place of grace for them, Encouragement and direction for such as
are not yet in Christ
let them therefore consider but these three things.

1. The excellency of Christ, and of the state of the Church, when it is so
near him. 2. The necessity of this to be so near him. 3. That there is hope
of it.
There is in Christ whatsoever may commend a Husband, birth, comeliness,
riches, friends, wisdom, authority, etc.

The Excellency of this condition to be one with Christ, is that all things
are ours. For he is the King, and the Church the Queen of all, all things are
serviceable to us, it is a wond^ro^s nearenesse to be nearer to Christ, hen the
Angels, who are not his body, but servants that atend upon the Church: the
Bride is nearer to him, Heb. 2. 16.
then the Angels, for, he is the Head, and Husband thereof, and not of the
Angels. What an excellent condition is this for poor flesh and blood, (that
creeps up and down the earth here despised.)

If we consider the Necessity of it, we are all indebted for more then we are
worth; to divine justice we owe a debt of obedience, and in want of that we owe
a debt of punishment and we cannot answer one for a thousand. What will become
of us if we have not a husband to discharge all our debts but to be imprisoned
for ever?

A person that is a stranger to Christ though he were an Achitophel for his
brain, a Judas for his Profession, a Saul for his place. Yet if his sins be
set before him he will be swallowed up of despair, fearing to be shut up
eternally under Gods wrath; therefore if nothing else move, yet let necessity
compel us to take Christ.

suffer our selves to be won. But more of this in another place. The next
Branch is

3. Christ's Acceptance, Christ's acceptance.
I have gathered my Myrrh with my Spice, etc. So that together with Christ's
presence, here is a Gracious acceptance of the provision of the Church, with a
delight in it; and withal, a bringing of more with Him. The Church had a
double desire, 1 That Christ would come to accept of what she had for him of
his own Grace, which he had wrought in her soul. And 2 she was also verily
persuaded, that he would not come empty handed, only to accept of what was
there, but also would bring abundance of Grace and comfort with him. Therefore,
she desires, Acceptance and Increase: both which desires He answers. He comes
to his Garden, shows his acceptance, and withal he brings more. I have
gathered my Myrrh with my Spice, I have eaten my honey-combe with my honey: I
have drunk my wine with my milk, etc. Whence we observe,

That God accepts of the Graces of his Children, Observe.
and delights in them.

First, Because they are the fruits that come from love of the person wins
acceptance of that which is presented from the person. What comes from love is
lovingly taken.

They are the Graces of his Spirit. If we have any Christ our Husband, and then
in us. Psalm. 133.
As the Ointment was first powered on Aarons head, and then ran down upon his
rich Garments: so all comes from Christ to us. Saint Paul calls the wife the
Glory of her Husband, because (as in a glass) she resembles the Graces of her
husband, who may see his own Graces in her, so it is with Christ and the
Church; face answers to face (as Solomon ^aith in another case) Christ sees
his own face, beauty, glory in his Church, she reflects his Beams, he looks
in love upon her, and always with his looks conveyes Grace, and comfort; and
the Church does reflect back again his Grace; Therefore Christ loves but the
reflection of his own Graces in his Children, and therefore accepts them.

3. His kindness is such as he takes all in good part, Christ is love and
kindness it self. Why does he give unto her the name of Spouse, and Sister
but that he would be kind, and loving, and that we should conceave so of him?
We see then the Graces of Christ accepting of us and what we do in his
strength. Both we our selves are sacrifices, and what we offer is a sacrifice
acceptable to God thorough him that offered himself as a sacrifice of sweet
smelling savor, from which God smells a savor of rest. God accepts of Christ
first and then of us, and what comes from us in him. We may bouldly pray as
Psalm. 20. 3. Lord remember all our offerings and accept all our sacrifices. The
blessed Apostle Saint Paul does will us, Romans 12. 1.
to offer up our selves a holy and acceptable Sacrifice to God, when we are
once in Christ. In the Old Testament we have diverse manifestations of this
acceptance. He accepted the Sacrifice of Abel (as it is thought) by fire from
Heaven; and so Eliahs sacrifice, and Salomons by fire. 1 King. 18. 18.
So in the New Testament, 1 Chronicles. 21. 2.
he showed his acceptance of the Disciples meeting together, Acts 2. 1.
by a mighty wind and then filling them with the Holy Ghost. But now the
declaration of the acceptance of our Persons, Graces, and Sacrifice, that we
offer to him, is most in peace of conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost, and
from a holy fire of love kindled by the spirit whereby our sacrifices are
burned. In the incense of prayer how many sweet spices are burned together by
this fire of faith working by love, as humility, and patience in submitting to
Gods will, hope of a gracious answer, holiness, love to others, etc.

If so be, Use 1.
that God accepts the performances and Graces (especially the Prayers of his
Children) Let it be an Argument to encourage us, to be much in all holy
duties. It would dead the heart of any man, to perform service, where it
should not be accepted, and the eye turned aside, not vouchsafing a gracious
look upon it; this would be a killing of all comfortable endeavors. But when
all that is good is accepted, and what is amiss is pardoned, when a broken
desire, a cup of cold water shall not go unrespected nay unrewarded, what can
we desire more? It is infidelity which is dishonorable to God and uncomfortable
to our selves that makes us so barren and cold in duties.

Only let our care be to approve our hearts unto Christ. Use 2.
When our hearts are right, we cannot, but think comfortably of Christ. Those
that have offended some great Persons, are afraid* when they hear from them,
because they think, they are in a state displeasing to them; So a soul, that
is under the guilt of any sin, is so far from thinking that God accepts of
it, that it looks to hear nothing from him, but some message of anger, and
displeasure. But one that preserves acquaintance, due distance, and respect to
a great person, hears from him with comfort before he breaks open a letter,
or sees any thing, he supposes it comes from a friend, one that loves him. So
as we would desire to hear nothing but good news from Heaven, and acceptance
of all that we do, let us be careful to preserve our selves in a good estate,
or else our souls will tremble upon any discovery of Gods wrath. The discourse
of a guilty conscience.
The guilty conscience argues, what can God show to me, being such a wretch.
The heart of such an one cannot but misgive, as where peace is made it will
speak comfort. It is said of Daniel, that he was a man of Gods desires; and of
Saint John, that Christ so loved him, that he leaned on his breast. Every one
cannot be a Daniel, nor one that leanes on Christ's bosom, there are degrees
of favor, and love: but there is no child of God, but he is beloved and
accepted of him in some degree, but something of this before in the former
Chapter.

I have gathered my Myrrh with my Spice; I have eaten my honey-combe with my
honey, etc.

That is, I have taken Contentment in thy Graces together with acceptance,
there is a delight, and God not only accepts, but he delights in ^he Graces of
his Children. All my delight (says David) is in those that are excellent, but
this is not all, Christ comes with an enlargement of what he finds.

Christ comes, and comes not empty; whenever he comes, but with abundance of
Grace. If Saint Paul (who was but Christ's instrument) could tell the Romans,
Romans 15. 29.
I hope to come to you in abundance of Grace and comfort, because he was a
blessed instrument to convey good from Christ to the people of God, as a
Conduit-pipe? How much more shall Christ himself, where he is present, come
with Graces and comfort? Those that have communion with Christ therefore, have
a comfortable communion, being sure to have it inlarge^, Mat. 25. 29.
for To him that has shall be given. It is not only true of his last coming
(when he shall come to judge the quick and the dead) I come, and my reward is
with me; Revel. 22. 12.
but also of all his intermediate commings, that are between, when he comes to
the soul, he comes not only to accept what is there, but still with his
reward with him, the increase of Grace, to recompense all that is good with the
increase thereof. This made his presence so desired in the Gospel with those
that had gracious hearts; They knew all was the better for Christ, the company
the better, for he never left any house, or table where he was, but there was
an increase of comfort, and of Grace. And as it was in his Personal, so it is
in his Spiritual presence, he never comes* but he increases Grace and Comfort.
Exhortation to have Communion with Christ.


Therefore, let us be stirred up to have communion with Christ (by this motive)
that thus w^e shall have an increase of a further measure of grace. Let us
labor to be such, as Christ may delight in, for our Graces are Honey and
Spices to him, and where he tastes sweetness, he will bring more with him. To
him that overcommeth, he promises the hidden Mannah; they had Mannah before,
but he means they shall have more abundant communion with me, Revel. 2. 17.
who am the hidden Mannah. There is abundance in him to be had, as the soul is
capable of abundance. Therefore we may most fruitfully and comfortably be
conversant in holy exercises, and communion with Christ, because our souls are
fit to be enlarged more and more, till they have their fulness in heaven, and
still there is more Grace and Comfort to be had in Christ, the more we have to
deal with him.

But to come to show what is meant by Honey and Wine, etc. W^y Grace is set
forth by Honey and Wine.
not to take uncertain grounds from these words, but that which may be a
foundation for us to build comfort and instruction on; we will not show in
particular what is meant by Wine and Honey, for that is not intended by the
Holy Ghost; but show in general how acceptable the Graces of the Spirit of
Christ are to him, that they feed him, and delight him, as honey and honey do
us, because in the covenant of grace, he fills us by his Spirit of grace, to
have comfort in us as we have in him. For, except there be a mutual joy in one
another, there is not communion. Therefore Christ furnishes his Church with so
much Grace, as is necessary for a state of absence here, that may fit her for
communion with him for ever in heaven. Ge^. 2^. 22.
As Isaac sent Rebe^^ah before the marriage Jewels, and ornaments to wear,
that she might be more lovely when they met. So our blessed Savior he sends to
his Spouse from heaven, Jewels, and ornaments (that is) Graces wherewith
adorned, he may delight in her more and more till the marriage be fulfilled.
Therefore in this Book, the Church is brought in delighting in Christ, and he
in the Church. Thy love (says the Church to him) is sweeter then wine. Cant.
1. 2.
Christ says to the Church again, Thy love is sweeter then wine. Whatsoever
Christ says to the Church, the Church says back again to Christ, and he
back again to the Church; so there is a mutual contentment, and joy one in
another.

Eat O friends, Drink, etc.
Here is an Invitation; That all are stirred up to rejoice in the Graces of
the Church.
when he comes stored with more Grace, and comfort, he stirs them up; both the
Church, others, and all that bear good will to his People that they would
delight in the Graces, and comforts of his Church. Whence observe, That

We ought to rejoice in the Comforts and Graces of others, Observe.
and of our selves.

He stirs up the Church here as well as others, for he speaks to all, both
to the Church, and the friends of it, he had need to stir her up to enjoy the
comfort of her own Grace; for They are two distinct benefits, to have Grace;
and to know that we have it, though one spirit work both. 1 Cor. 2, 12.
The spirit works Grace, and shows us the things that God has given us, yet
sometimes it does the one, and not the other. In the time of desertion, and of
Temptation we have Grace, but we know it not; right to comfort, but we feel it
not. There is no comfort of a secret unknown treasure: but so it is with the
Church, she does not always take notice of her own Graces, and the right she
has to Comfort.

We have need to have Christ's spirit to help us to know what good is in us.
And indeed a Christian should not only examine his heart for the evil that is
in him, to be humbled, but what good there is, that he may joy and be
thankful. And since Christ accepts the very first fruits, the earnest, and
delights in them, we should know what he delights in, that we may go boldly to
him, considering, that it is not of our selves, but of Christ, whatsoever is
graciously good. Therefore we ought to know our own Graces, for Christ, when
he will have us comfortable indeed, will discover to us what Cause we have to
rejoice, and show us, what is the work of his own Spirit, and our right to
all comfort.

And so, for others, we should not only joy in our selves, That we ought to
rejoice in the graces of others.
and in our own Condition, and Lot, but also in the happy condition of every
good Christian. There is joy in heaven at the conversion of one sinner. Luke
15, 10.^
God the Father joys to have a new Son. God the Son to see the fruit of
his own Redemption, that one is pulled out of the state of damnation. And God
the Holy Ghost, that he has a new Temple to dwell in. The Angels, that they
have a new charge to look to, that they had not before, to join with them to
praise God, so there is joy in heaven, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost with
the Angels joy at it: And all True hearted Christians joy in the graces one of
another.

For God, Christ, Reason 1.
and the Holy Ghost have glory by it, and the Church has 2 comfort by the
increase The prayer of a Christian adds new Church: what a happy condition is
it when Gods glory, the Churches comfort and strength, and our own joy meet
together? So that we should all take notice of the Grace of God in others.

We ought to take notice of the works of God in creation and providence; when
we see plants, stars, and such like, or else we dishonor God. What then
should we do for his gifts and Graces in his children, that are above these in
dignity, should we not take notice of what is graciously good, and praise-God
for it? Thus they did for Paul's conversion, They glorified God; for when they
saw, Gal. 1. 24.
that Paul of a Woolfe, was become not only a sheep, but a Shepherd and leader
of Gods flock, they glorified God.

So the believing Jews, when the Gentiles were converted they glorified God,
that he had taken the Gentiles to be his Garden, and People. Act 11. 18
When Paul and others had planted the Gospel, and God gave the increase, the
godly Jews rejoiced at that good. So we that are Gentiles should rejoice, to
hear of the conversion of the Jews, and pray for it, for, then there will be
a general joy when that is. Want of joy shows want of grace. There is not a
surer Character of a Satanicall, and Cainish disposition, then to look on the
Graces of Gods children with a malignant eye: as Caine, who hated his Brother,
because his works were better then his. Those that deprave the Graces of God
in others, and cloud them with disgraces, that they may not shine, and will not
have the sweet ointment of their good names to spread, but cast dead flies into
it, show that they are of his disposition that is the accuser of the Brethren,
it is a sign of the child of the devil, all that have Grace in them, are of
Christ's and of the Angels disposition, They joy at the Conversion, and growth
of any Christians: Here such as they are styled friends and Beloved, and indeed
none but friends and beloved can love as Christ loves, and delight as Christ
delights.

THE THIRD SERMON. SERMON. III.

CANT. V. 1, 2. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse: I have gathered
my Myrre with my Spice, I have eaten my hony-combe with my honey, I have drunk
my wine with my milk: eat O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O
Beloved!

I sleep, but my heart waketh,etc.


IT has been showed how Christ and the Church were feasting together. She
entreated his company to come into his Garden and eat his pleasant fruits: He
according to her desire, was come, and not only feasted on the Churches
provision, but also brought more with him. Christ taking walks in his Garden
(that is, his Church, and every particular soul, which is as a sweet Paradise
for him to delight in) is much refreshed: and in wi^nesse of acceptance brings
increase. What greater encouragement can we wish, then that we being by nature
as the earth, since the fall accursed; should be the soil of Christ's delight,
planted and watered by him, and that what we yield, should be so well taken of
him. We are under so gracious a covenant, that all our services are accepted:
not only our honey, but hony-combe, not only our wine, but our milk, our
weak services as well as our strong: because the spirit which we have from him
sweetneth all. As in Nature there is one common influence from heaven, but yet
variety of flowers, Violets, Roses, Gill^flowers, Spices, all sweet in their
several kind with a different kind of sweetness: so all graces have their
beginning from the common influence of Christ's spirit, though they differ one
from another, and are all accepted of the Father of lights from whence they
come. James 1. 17.
Christ wonders at his own grace, Luke 15. 28.
O woman great is thy faith, and Cant. 3. 6. Who is this that comes out of
the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,
with all powders of the Merchant?

Let not the weakest of all others be discouraged; Christ looks not to what he
brings so much as out of what store; that which is least in quantity, Luke 21.
3.
may be most in proportion, as the Widows mite was more in acceptance then
richer offerings. Levit. 5. 7.
A pair of turtle doves was accepted in the Law, Exodus 35. 6.
and those that brought but goats hair to the building of the Tabernacle.

The particulars here specified that Christ took delight in, and inviteth
others to a further degree of delight in, are

Myrrh and Spice, honey and hony-combe, milk Which show,
1. The Sweetness 2. The variety 3. The use of grace and Spiritual comfort.


Myrrh and Spices, I refresh the spirits, and 2 preserve from putrefaction:
which are therefore used in embalming. If the soul be not embalmed with grace,
it is a noisome carrion soul, and as it is in it self, so whatsoever comes
from it is abominable.

Milk and honey nourish and strengthen, and Wine increases spirits; and
thereupon incourageth, and allayeth sorrow and cares. Pro. 31. 6.
Give wine to him that is ready to die. The sense of the love of Christ is
sweeter then wine, it banisheth fears and sorrow and care.

From this mutual delight between Christ and his Spouse we observe next that,

There is a mutual feasting betwixt Christ and his Church, The Church brings
what she has of his Spirit, and Christ comes with more plenty.

For there being so near a covenant between him and us, we are by his grace
to perform all offices on our part, we invite him, and he inviteth us. There
is not the meanest Christian in whom there is not somewhat to welcome Christ
withal, but Christ's sends his provision before, and comes (as we say) to his
own cost; he sends a spirit of faith, a spirit of love, a spirit of obedience.
Some are content to invite others but are loath to go to others, as if it were
against state: they would have wherewith to entertain Christ, but are
unwilling to be beholding to Christ. 2. Some are content to have benefit by
Christ, as his righteousness to cover them, etc. but they desire not grace to
entertain Christ: but a heart truly gracious desires both to delight in
Christ, and that Christ may delight in it; it desires grace together with
mercy, holiness with happiness. Christ could not delight in his love to us,
if we by his grace had not a love planted in our hearts to him. But to come to
speak of this Feast.

We see it pleases Christ to veil heavenly matters with comparisons fetched
from earthly things that so he may enter into our souls the better by our
senses.

Christ makes us a feast, a marriage feast, a marriage feast with the Kings
son, of all feasts the most magnificent. A feast first in regard of the
choice rarities we have in Christ. We have the best and the best of the best.
Fat things and the marrow of fatness, Isa. 25. 6.
wine, and wine on the lees, refined that preserves the strength. The comfor^s
we have from Christ, are the best comforts, the peace, the best peace, the
privileges the highest privileges. His flesh crucified for us, to satisfy
divine justice, is meat indeed, his blood shed for us, Ioh, 6. 55.
is drink indeed, that is the best, the only meat and drink to refresh our
souls: because these feed our souls, and that to eternal life. The love of
God the Father in giving Christ's to death, and Christ's love in giving himself
together with full contentment to divine justice: this gift it is that the
soul especially feeds on, what could Christ give better then himself to feed
on, he thought nothing else worthy for the soul to feed on, and this it daily
feeds on, as daily guilt rises from the breakings out of the remainder of
corruption. Other dainties are from this, from hence we have the Spirit, and
graces of the Spirit. If he gives himself will he not give all things with
himself?

As Christ makes a feast of choice things for 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Christ is made to us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, that we should not be too much cast down with thought of our own
folly, guilt, unholinesse and misery. There is that in Christ which answers
to all our wants, and an all sufficiency for all degrees of happiness.
Therefore he has terms from whatsoever is glorious, and comfortable in heaven
and earth. Christ is all marrow all sweetness; all the several graces, and
comforts we have, and the several promises whereby they are made over and
conveyed unto us, are but Christ dished out in several manners, as the need of
every Christian shall require. Christ himself is the Occan, issuing into
several streams, to refresh the city of God. We can be in no condition, but
we have a promise to feed on, and all promises are yea and Amen made to us in
Christ 2. Col. 1. 20.
and performed to us for Christ.

Christ a feast for variety, so for sufficiency of all good. No man goes
hungry from a feast. It was never heard for any to famish at a feast. In Christ
there is not only abundance, but redundance, a diffusive and a spreading
goodness. As in breasts to give milk, in clouds to drop down showers, in the
sun to send forth beams: as Christ is full of grace and truth, so he fully
discharges all his offices. There is an overflowing of all that is good for
our good. He that could multiply bread for the body, he can multiply grace for
our soul. Ioh. 10. 10.
If he gives life, he gives it in abundance. If he gives water of life, Ioh.
7. 38.
he gives rivers, not small streams. If he gives peace and joy, he gives it
in abundance, his scope is to fill up our joy to the full. As he is able, so is
he willing to do for us far more abundantly then we are able to think or
speak. Ephesians. 3. 20.
Where Christ is present he brings plenty with him. If wine be wanting at the
first, he will rather turn water into wine, then there should be a fail.

Christ to come with us.

There is no envy in spiritual things, wherein whatsoever the one has the
other has not the less.

In a feast because it is intended for rejoicing there is music, and what
music like to the Christ and the soul, and between the soul and it self
in inward peace and joy of the Holy Ghost, shedding the love of Christ in the
soul. We do not only joy but glory under hope of glory, Romans 6. 5. 2. 3. 10.
and in afflictions, and in God now as ours, in whom now by Christ we have an
interest. When we come sorrowful to this feast, we depart cheerful. This as
David's harp stills all passions and distempers of spirit.

The founder and master of the feast is Christ himself, and withal is both
guest and and banquet and all. All graces and comforts are the fruits of his
Spirit, and he alone that infused the soul, can satisfy the soul, he that is
above the conscience can only quiet the conscience, he is that wisdom that
sends forth maids, Pro. 9. 3.
his Ministers to invite to his feast. It is he that cheereth up his guests as
here. Those that invited others brought oin^ment and powered it out upon them,
to show their welcome, and to cheer them up: Luke 7. 44.
as may appear by our Saviors speech to the Pharisee that invited him. So we
have from Christ both the oil of grace and oil of gladness, he creates the
fruits of the lips to be peace, Isa. 57. 19.
speaking that peace and joy to the heart that others do to the ear. Ier. 3.
15.
He raises Pastors according to his own heart, to feed his sheep.

The vessels wherein Christ conveyeth his dainties are, the ministry of the
Word and Sacraments, by the Word and Sacraments we come to enjoy Christ, and
his comforts and graces, and by this feast of grace we come at length to the
feast of feasts, that feast of glory, when we shall be satisfied with the image
of God, and enjoy fulness of pleasures for ^vermore, and which adds to the
fulness we shall fully know that it shall be a never interrupted joy.

We see then that we cannot please Christ better then in showing our selves
welcome by cheerful taking part of his rich provision It is an honor to his
bounty to fall too, and it is the temper of spirit that a Christian aims at,
to rejoice always in the Lord, Phil. 4 4.
and that from enjoying our privileges in him. We are not bidden to mourn
always, but to rejoice always, and that upon good advisement, rejoice and I
say again (says Saint Paul) rejoice. Phil. 4. 4.
Indeed we have causes of mourning, but it is that the seed of joy should be
sown in mourning, and we can never be in so forlorn a condition, wherein if
we understand Christ and our selves we have not cause of joy. In me (says
Christ) ye shall have peace. The world will feed us with bread of affliction.
Ioh. 16. 33.
If the world can help it we shall have sorrow enough, and Christ knows that
well enough, and stirs us up to a cheerful feeding on that he has procured
for us. He has both will and skill and power and authority to feed us to
everlasting life; for the Father sent him forth and sealed him to that purpose.
All the springs of our joy are from him.

Our duty is to accept of Christ's inviting of us, what will we do for him if
we will not feast with him, we will not suffer with him, if we will not feast
with him, we will not suffer with him, if we will not joy with him and in him.
Happy are they that come, though compelled by crosses and other sharp ways. If
we rudely and churlishly refuse his feast here, we are like never to taste of
his feast hereafter. Nothing provokes so deeply as kindness despised. It was
the cause of the Jews rejection. Heb. 2. 3.
How shall we escape, not if we persecute, but if we do but neglect so great
salvation.

That which we should labor to bring with us, is a taste of these dainties,
and an appetite to them. The soul has a taste of its own, and as all
creatures that have life, have a taste to relish and distinguish of that which
is good for them, from that which is offensive: so wheresoever spiritual life
is, there is likewise a taste suitable to the sweet relish that is in spiritual
things. God should loose the glory of many excellent creatures, if there were
not several senses to discern of several goodness in them: so if there were
not a taste in the soul we could never delight in God, and his rich goodness
in Christ.

Taste is the most necessary sense for the preservation of the creature, because
there is nearest application in taste, and that we should not be deceived in
taste, we hear, see and smell before, and if these senses give a good report
of the object, Omnis vite gustu ducitur.
then we taste of it and digest it and turn it into fit nourishment: so the
spirit of man after judgment of the fitness of what is presented, tastes of
it, delights in it, and is nourished by it. Ther^ is an attractive drawing
power in the soul whereby every member sucks that out of the food that is
convenient for it: so the soul draws out what is well digested by judgment,
and makes it its own for several uses.

The chief thing that Christ requires is a good stomach to these dainties.

Christ crucified relisheth best to a soul affected with bitterness of sin:
whilst men are rich in their own conceit, they go empty away; the duties and
performances they trust too, are but husks, windy empty chafe; swelling is not
kind nourishment.

Isa. 55.
Why should we lay out our money, spend our time, our wits, our endeavor so
much about them; this makes so many starvelings in Religion.

Besides there be other noisome affections to be purged, as 1 Pet. 2. 1. which
breed a distaste and disaffection to spiritual things; as malice and guile,
etc. How can Christ be sweet to that soul unto which revenge is sweet.

Exercise quickens appetite. Those that ex^ercise

Company likewise of such as labor for that provokes to fall too as the rest
do, Ioh 6. 27.
especially if they be equal or go beyond us in parts: for we will reason
with our selves, have not I as much need as they, if these things be good for
them then they are good for me?

Thus Saint Paul foretells that the example of the Gentiles should provoke
the Jews to come in, Romans 11. 1.
and taste of the Banquet Christ has provided for both. Especially this should
stir us up earnestly to take our part in that Christ has provided; because
we know not how soon the table may be taken away: when men see the dishes in
removing, though before they have discoursed away much time of their supper,
yet then they will fall fresh to it. We know not how long wisdom will be
inviting of us, it will be our wisdom to take our time, least we put off so
long, as wisdom her self laughs at our destruction, and a famine be sent, of
all famines the most miserable; a famine of the Word, and then we may pine away
eternally without comfort. Christ will not always stand inviting of us, if we
will none of his cheer, others will, and shall, when we shall starve.

Let this draw us on that we see here Christ's hearty and free welcome, the
gracious look that we are like to have from him. He counts it an honor since
he has made such rich provision, for us to take part, and for our part show
our unwillingnesse, that such free kindness should be refused. We cannot
honor his bounty more then to feed liberally of that he liberally sets before
us. We are glad to perceive our friends upon invitation to think themselves
welcome. Let us open our mouth wide since Christ is so ready to fill it, we
are not straightened in his love but in our own hearts. The widows oil
failed not till her vessels failed. 2 King. 4. 6.
We are bidden to delight in the Lord, and in whom should we delight, but where
all fulness is to be had to delight in? Our spirits are not so large as those
blessed comforts are which we are called to the enjoyment of. If the capacity
of our souls were a thousand times larger, yet there is so large a sea of
comfort in Christ, as they are not able to comprehend it, a taste of these good
things breed joy unspeakable, and peace that passes understanding; Phil. 4. 7.
what will the fulness do? This taste we feel in the ordinances will bring
us to that fulness hereafter. O let us keep our appetites for these things
which are so delightful, so suitable to the soul. How great is that goodness
which he both lays up for hereafter, and lays out for his, even here in this
life.

In some ages of the Church the feasts that Christ has made have been more
solemn and sumptuous then in other, thereafter as Christ has been more or
less clearly and generally manifested. At Christ's first coming there was a
greater feast then before: because the riches of Gods love in Christ were then
laid open, and the pale of the Church was i^larged by the coming in of the
Gentiles: so will there be a royal feast, when the Jews shall be converted.
Rev. 19. 9.
Blessed then shall those be that shall be called to the supper of the Lamb.
Suppers are in the end of the day, and this supper shall be furnished toward
the end of the world.

But then will be the true magnificent supper, when all that belong to Gods
election shall meet together, and feed upon that heavenly Manna for ever: then
there will be nothing but marrow it self, and wine without all dregs; in all
our contentments here there is some mixture of the contrary; then nothing but
pure quintessence. In the mean time he lets fall some Manna in this our
wilderness, he lets us relish that now; it will not putrify as the other
Manna did, but endure and make us endure for ever. Its the true bread of life.

Mark how Christ draws his Spouse on to drink, and drink abundantly: there
is no danger of taking too much: where the spring is infinite, we can never
draw these wells dry, never suck these breasts of consolation too much, and
the more strong and cheerful we are, the better service we shall perform,
and the more accepted: delight is as sugar, sweet in it self, and it sweetens
all things else. The joy of the Lord is our strength. Duties come of more
gracefully, and religion is made more lovely in the eyes of all, when it comes
forth in strength and cherfulness, Christ housekeeping is credited hereby.
In our Fathers house is plenty enough. When the Martyrs had drunk largely of
this wine, it made them forget friends, riches, honors, life it self: the joy
stirred up by it, carried them through all torments.

If any be hindered by conceit of unworthiness, if affected deeply with it,
let them consider what kind of men were compelled to the banquet, the blind,
the lame. See a lively picture of Gods mercy in the example of the Prodigal,
he fears sharp chiding, and the Father provides a rich banquet, Luke 15.
he goes to his Father, but the Father runs to meet him. Did Christ ever
turn back any that came unto him, if they came out of a true sense of their
wants?

Eat O friends.
Christ out of the largeness of his affections multiplieth new titles and
compellations [ Beloved and friends] Christ provides a banquet, and invites his
friends not his enemies. Those good things that neither eye has seen, 1 Cor.
2. 9.
nor care has heard, that are above our conceit to apprehend, these are
provided for those that love him, not that hate him: Psalm. 75. 8.
he mingles an other cup for them, a cup of wrath, and they are to drink up
the very dregs of it. Friendship is the sweetness, intimatenesse and strength
of love. In our friends our love dwells and rests it self. Conjugall
friendship is the sweetest friendship. All the kinds and degrees of friendship
meet in Christ toward his Spouse: it is the friendship of a husband, of a
brother, and if there be any relation in the world wherein friendship is, all
is too little to express the love of Christ.

In friendship there is mutual consent, an union of judgment and affections,
there is a mutual sympathy in the good and ill one of another, as if there
were one soul in two bodies: there be mutual friends and mutual enemies.
Psalm. 139. 21.
Do I not hate them (says David) that hate thee. There is mutual love of one
another for their own sakes; in flattery men love themselves most; in
semblance love others but all is in reflection to themselves.

There is liberty which is the life of friendship, there is a free intercourse
between friends, a free opening of secrets: so here Christ opens his
secrets to us, and we to him, we acquaint him with the most hidden thoughts of
our hearts, and we lay open all our cares and desires before him: thus Abraham
was called Gods friend, and the Disciples Christ's friends. It is the office of
the Spirit to reveal the secrets of Christ heart to us, concerning our own
salvation; he does not reveal himself to the world.

In friendship there is mutual solace and comfort one in another. Christ
delights himself in his love to his Church, and his Church delights her
self in her love to Christ. Christ's delight was to be with the sons of men,
and ours is to be with him.

In friendship there is a mutual honor and respect one of another; but here
is some difference in this friendship, for though Christ calls us friends, and
therein in some sort brings himself down to us, yet we must remember that
this is a friendship of unequalls: Christ's honoring of us is his putting
honor upon us: our honoring of him, is the giving him the honor due to his
name. This friendship must be maintained by due respect on our parts. As he is
our friend, so he is our King, and knows how to correct us if we forget our
distance. If he here seem to use us hardly, it is that he may use us the more
kindly after: he suffers much for us, therefore we may well allow him the
liberty of seasonable correcting of us.

He that inspireth friendship into others, will undoubtedly keep the laws of
friendship himself, will count our enemies his enemies. The enemies of the
Church shall one day know that the Church is not friendlesse.

And as his friendship is sweet, so constant in all conditions; he uses not
his friends as we do flowers, regard them only when they are fresh: but he
breeds that in us, that may make us such as he may still delight in us; if
other friends fail (as friends may fail) yet this friend will never fail us:
if we be not ashamed of him, he will never be ashamed of us. How comfortable
would our life be, if we could draw out the comfort that this title of friend
affords: It is a comfortable, a fruitful, an eternal friendship.

I sleep, but my heart waketh.
Here the Church expresses a changeable passage of her spiritual condition
after she had recovered her self out of a former desertion; expressed in the
beginning of the third Chapter and enjoyed a comfortable intercourse with
Christ; now she falls into a deeper desertion and temptation, from the
remainder of corruption getting strength. The Church now falls asleep, then
was awake in the night and sought

Before we come to the words, observe in general,

That the state of the Church and every Christian is subject to spiritual
alternations. Observe. 1.
The Church is always beloved, a spouse, a friend; but in this one state there
falls out variety of changes. No creature subject to so many changes as man;
from a state of innocence he fell into a state of corruption, from that he by
grace is restored to a state of grace, and from grace to glory, where his
condition shall be as Christ's now is, and as heaven the place is, altogether
unchangeable. And in that state of grace how many intercourses be there, the
foundation of Gods love to us, and grace in us always remaining the same, once
beloved, for ever beloved.

We see here after a feast the Church falls asleep, see it in Abraham,
sometimes strong in faith, sometimes fearful. David sometimes standing,
sometimes falling, sometimes recovering himself and standing faster, sometimes
triumphing, the Lord is the light of my countenance, Psalm. 27. 1.
whom shall I fear; sometimes again, I shall one day fall by the hands of
Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1. Psalm. 6.
in the very same Psalm he begins with Rebuke me not in thy wrath, and ends
with Away ye wicked. Elias, though zealous, yet after flies for his life. So
Job, Peter, sometimes resolute and valiant, otherwhile sinks for fear.

The ground is by reason of variety of outward occurrences working upon the
diversity of principles in us nature and grace, The Reason.
both nature and grace are always active in us in some degree, when corruption
gets strength, then we find a sick state creeping upon us, and lose our former
frame. It Is with the soul as with the body, in a certain period of time it
gathers ill humors which break out into aguish distempers at length: so the
relics of a spiritual disease not carried away, will ripen and gather to a
head. This should teach us when we are well to study to keep an even course,
and to watch over the first stirrings: and likewise if we see some unevenness
in our ways, not to censure our selves or others over harshly. Exact evennesse
is to be striven after here, but to be enjoyed in another world.

2. Observe. 2.
We see by comparing the state of the Church here with the state of it in the
third Chapter, that where corruption is not thoroughly purged, and a careful
watch kept over the soul, there after a recovery will follow a more dangerous
distemper, corruption will not only strive for life, but for rule. If there
had been a through reformation in the Church after her former trouble, and a
through closing with Christ, she would not thus have fallen into a more
dangerous condition. We see David in his later times falls to numbering of the
people; and Samson after he had done great services for the Church, at length
shamefully betrays his strength; and he that had ruled others, submits to be
ruled by a base strumpet. Jonas for not thorough repenting for his running from
his calling, falls after to quarrel with God himself. It is the best
therefore to deal thoroughly with our hearts, else flesh unsubdued will owe us a
greater shame, and we shall dishonor our own beginnings. Yet this is the
comfort, that this will occasion deeper humility; and hatred of sin in those
that are Gods, and a faster cleaving to God than ever before, as we see in the
Church here: afterward grace will have the better at last.

3. 3. Observe.
We may observe the ingenuity of the Church in laying open her own state. It
is the disposition of Gods people to be ingenuous in opening their state to
God, as in David, Nehemiah, Ezra, etc.

The reason is thus.

1. By a free and full confession we give God the honor of his wisdom in
knowing of our own condition secret and open, we give him the honor of mercy
that will not take advantage against us, the honor of power and authority over
us, if he should show his strength against us. We yield unto him the glory of
all his chief prerogatives, whereupon Joshua mooveth Achan to a free
confession, My son, give glory to God.

2. We shame Satan, who first takes away shame of sinning, and then takes away
shame for sin, he tempts us not to be ashamed to do that we are ashamed to
confess; so we by silence keep Satan's counsel against our own souls. If we
accuse our selves, we put him out of office, who is the accuser of the brethren.

3. We prevent likewise malicious imputations from the world, Austin answered
roundly and well when he was upbraided with the sins of his former age: Quae
tu reprehendi^ e^o damnavi.
what, thou (says he) find fault with, I have condemned in my self before.

4. This ingenuous dealing eases the soul, giving vent to the grief of it:
whiles the arrows head sticks in the wound, it will not heal: Ferrum in
vulnere.
Sin unconfessed is like a broken piece of rusty iron in the body, it must be
gotten out, else it will by rankling and festring cause more danger. It is like
poison in the stomach, if it be not presently cast up, it will infect the whole
body. Is it not better to take shame to our selves now, than to be shamed
hereafter before Angels, Devils and Men? How careful is God of us, by this
private way to prevent future shame?

5. This faithful dealing with our selves is often a means of present delivery
out of any trouble. David in the 32 Psalm 4. was in a great distemper both of
body and spirit; his moisture was turned into the drought of summer. It is
thought he made this Psalm between the time of his sin and his pardon. What
course takes he? I said (says he) that is, I resolved to confess my sin,
and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Upon a free and full, a faithful,
and ingenuous confession, without all guile of spirit, he found ease presently
both in soul and body. The cause of Gods severe dealing with us is that we
should deal severely with our selves, the best trial of Religion in us is by
those actions whereby we reflect on our selves by judging and condemning of our
selves: for this argues a spirit without guile. Sin and shifting came into the
world together. The subtilty of proud nature, especially in eminency, is such,
that sins may pass for virtues; because sin and Satan are alike in this,
they cannot endure to appear in their own color and habit; and so those that
oppose it shall be accounted opposers of good. This guile of spirit has no
blessedness belonging to it, take heed of it.

4. Mark further one sign of a gracious soul, to be abased for lesser
defects, sleepiness and indisposition to good. One would think drowsinesse
were no such great matter; O but the Church had such sweet acquaintance with
Christ, that every little indisposition that hindered any degree of communion
was grievous to her. You shall have a Judas, a Saul, an enormious offender
confess great falls that gripe his conscience; all shall be cast up, that the
conscience being disburdened may feel a little ease: but how few have you
humbled for dullness of spirit, want of love, of zeal, and cheerfulness in
duty: This accompanied with strife against it, argues a good spirit indeed.

A carnal man is not more humbled for gross sins, than a gracious Christian
for wants in good actions, when it is not with him as it has been, and as he
would. The reason is, where there is a clear and heavenly light, there lesser
mo^es are discernable: and spiritual life is sensible of any obstruction and
hinderance. This goes in the world for unnecessary nicety: the world straineth
not at these gnats: But those, upon whose hearts the Sun of righteousness has
shined, have both a clear sight and a tender heart.

To come to the words; [ I sleep] The Church fetches a comparison from the
body to express the state of the soul. It is one use of our body to help us
in spiritual expressions. Whilst the soul dwells in the body, it depends
much in the conceiving of things upon the fantasy, and the fantasy upon the
senses. We come to conceive of spiritual sleep by sleep of the body, which we
are well enough acquainted with.

The Church, as she consists of a double principle, flesh and spirit mingled
together in all parts, as darkness and light in the twilight and dawning of
the day, so here she expresses her condition in regard of either part, so
far as she was carnal, she slept, so far as she was spiritual, she was
awake.

In this mixed condition the flesh for the present prevailed, yet so as the
spirit had its working, she slept, but her heart waked.

The words contain a confession, I sleep, and a correction, but my heart
waketh. She has a double aspect, one to the ill, her sleeping: the other to
her good, her heart in some degree awaked. The Spirit of God is a discerning
spirit, it discovers what is flesh and what is spirit.

So that we must not conceive this sleep to be that dead sleep all men are in
by nature, nor to be that judicial sleep, that spirit of slumber which is a
further degree of that natural sleep to which God gives up some as a seal of
their desperate condition, but here is meant that sleep that arises out of
the remainder of corruption unsubdued, and now is here in the Church prevailing
over the better part. Flesh and Spirit have both their intercourse in us as
Moses and Amalek had, unless we stand upon our guard, the flesh will get the
upper ground, as we see here. The best are no further safe than they are
watchful.

For the clear understanding of this observe some correspondency in the
resemblance, wherein too much curiosity is loathsome and postill-like, and
calls the mind too much from the kernel to the shell.

Bodily and spiritual sleep resemble each the other in the causes, The
resemblance between bodily and spirit^^ll sleep,
in the effects, and in the dangerous issue.

Luke 21. 34.
lusts bring the soul a bed: Prosperity is a strong vapor, if it overcome not
the brain, yet it weakeneth it, as strong waters do. See it in Solomon
himself. The Disciples fell asleep in the garden when

Sleep arises often from weariness, and want of matters, upon impertinencies
that concern not the best state of the soul.

Some are brought asleep by music, so many

Sleep arises from want of exercise, when

Sleep arises often from cold diseases, as Lethargies; from cold gross
humors; cold,

Sometimes sleep is caused by some kind of poison, especially the poison of
Aspes which





They that sleep in the night. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7.
Asa, otherwise a good King, shut up ^he Prophet in prisoa for doing his duty:
Much of the anger that men bear against the word laid open to them is because
it will not suffer them to sleep quietly in their sins. Such as will suffer
them to live quietly in their sins; they are the quiet and honest men. There
cannot be a worse sign than when men will not endure wholesome words, it is a
sign they are in an ill league with that they should above all wage war
against.

In sleep fantasy rules, and dreams in fantasy; men in sleep dream of
false good,

Many cherish golden dreams, dream of meat, Esa. 29. 8.
and when they awake, their soul is empty. Vain hopes are the dreams of
waking men, as vain dreams are all the waking of sleeping and carnal men,
whose life is but a dream.

In sleep there is no exercise of senses or motion: as then men are not
sensible of good or ill, they move neither to good or ill: Motion follows
sensiblenesse: what good we are not sensible of, we move not unto: Hence sleep
is of kin to death, for the time depriving us of the use of all senses; and a
secure professor in appearance differs little from a dead professor; both of
them are unactive in good; and what they do they do it without delight, in an
uncomly and unacceptable manner, unbeseeming the state of a Christian. It is
all one to have no senses, and not to use them; we may say of men in this
sleepy temper, as the Scripture speaks of idols, they have eyes and see not,
ears and hear not, etc* Psalm. 115. 5.


So likewise they are alike in danger, in sleep the preciousest thing men carry
about them is taken away without resistance: and they are ready to let loose
what they held fast before; were it never so rich a jewel. And it is so in
spiritual sleepines; men suffer the profession of the truth to be wrung from
them without much with-standing, and with letting fall their watch, let fall
likewise, if not their grace, yet the exercise of their graces, and are in
danger to be robbed of all.

There is no danger but a man in sleep is fair for, and exposed unto: Sisera
was slain asleep, 2 Samuel 4. 7.
and Ishbosheth at noone day, and there is no temptation, no sin, no
judgment, but a secure drowzy Christian is open for; which is the ground of so
often enforcing watchfulness by the Spirit of God in the Scriptures. As
spiritual deadness of spirit is a cause of other sin, so likewise it is a
punishment of them; God powers a spirit of dead sleep upon men, Esa. 29. 10.
and closes up their eyes, till some heavy judgment falls upon them, and
how many carnal men never awake in this world, till they awake in hell! No
wonder therefore that Satan labors to cast men into a dead sleep all that he
can, and deludes them with dreams of a false good, that their estate is good,
and like so to continue, that to morrow shall be as to day, that no danger is
near, though Gods wrath hangs over their head, ready to be revealed from
heaven

Thus we see how the resemblance holds. Some apply this to Constantines time
about three hundred years after Christ, when the Church upon peace and plenty
grew secure, and suffered Ecclesia^ticall abuses to creep in. Religion begat
plenty, and the daughter devoured the mother. Theodoret. lib. 5.
This made the Writers of the Ecclesiastical Stories to qu^stion, August, ad
Ianuar. Epist. 119.
whether the Church has more hurt by open persecution, or peace, when one
Christian unde^mineth, and rages against another. Tol^rabilior ^u^aeorum
cond^tio quam nostra.
Humane inventions were so multiplied, that not long after in Augustines time,
he complained that the condition of the Jews was more tolerable than theirs,
for though the Jews were under burdens, yet they were such as were imposed by
God himself, and not humane presumptions. But Gerson many hundred years after
increases his complaint. Si tuo tempore hec dicebas (O sapiens Au^us^ine) quid
nostra tempestate d^xisses? Gers^n de vit. spiritual.
If (O Augustine) thou said thus in thy time, what would thou have said if
thou had lived now, when men (as a toy takes them in the head) will multiply
burdens? And he was not afraid to say, that the number of humane constitutions
was such, that if they were observed in rigor, Si tenerentur in suo rigore,
maxima pars Ecclesiae damnaretur
the greatest part of the Church would be damned. Thus whilst the husbandmen
slept, the envious man Satan slept not, but few his tares. Thus Popery grew up
by degrees, till it overspread the Church. Whilst the watchmen that should have
kept others awake, fell asleep themselves. And thus we answer the Papists, when
they quarrel with us about the beginning of their errors. They ask of us when
such and such an heresy began: we answer, that those that should have observed
them, were asleep. Popery is a mystery that crept into the Church by degrees
under glorious pretenses. Their errors had modest beginnings. Worshipping of
images arose from reserving the pictures of friends; and after that were
brought into the Church. Invocation of Saints arose from some of the Fathers
figurative turning of their speech to some that were dead. Transubstantiation
had rise from some transcendent unwary phrases of the Fathers. The Papacy it
self from some titles of the Romish Church and Bishop. Nothing in Popery so
gross, but had some small beginnings, which being neglected by those that
should have watched over the Church, grew at length unsufferable. No wonder if
the Papists be cast into a dead sleep, they have drunk too deep of the whores
cup. They that worship Images, are (as the Scripture says) like unto them,
they have eyes and see not, etc. They cannot discern of their errors, though
they be never so ridiculous and senseless, as prayer in an unknown tongue, and
such like.

And upon this state of the Church let us add this caution.

If the best men be so prone to sleep, then we cannot safely at all times build
upon their judgment. A Caution.
The Fathers of the Church were not always awake. There be few of them, but in
some things we may appeal from themselves sleeping, to themselves waking. The
best having some darkness left in their understandings, and some lusts
unsubdued in their affections, may write and speak sometimes out of the worst
part and principle that is in them, as well as out of the best, when they keep
not close to the rule.

When our adversaries press us with the authority of Fathers, we appeal to
them where they speak advisedly and of purpose. When they were not awaked by
heretics, they speak sometimes unworthily, and give advantages to heretics
that followed. Patres in maxiusis sunt nostri, in multi^ varij, in minimis
vestri. Wh.
It is the manner of our adversaries to make the unwarrantable practice of the
ancienter time a rule of their practice, and the doubtful opinions of the
ancients their own grand tenets. Wherein in both they deal unsafely for
themselves, and injuriously toward us, when we upon grounds in some things
dissent, which liberty (often when they should not) they will take to themselves.

But howsoever this sleepy condition agrees to the former times of the Church,
yet I wish there were not cause to apply it to our selves, in this latter age
of the Church, wherein many of the ancient heresies are revived; and besides,
the evils that accompany long peace, take hold of us, and will prevail too
far if we do not rowze up our selves. The Church is in the commonwealth, and
usually they flowrish and fall together. When there is a sleep of the Church,
for the most part there is a sleep of the State. A civil sleep is, when in
grounds of danger there is no apprehension of ^anger, and this sleep is a
punishment of spiritual sleep, Isa. 7. 9.
when with Ephraim a State has gray hairs and knows it not, when judgments
abroad will not awake men. When noise and pinching will not awake, the sleep
must needs be deep. The whole world almost is in combustion round about us, and
many countries thought themselves as safe a little before their troubles, as we
now think our selves. If fear of outward dangers will not awake, then
spiritual dangers will not, as being more secret and not obvious to sense. No
wonder then if few will believe our report of the fearful condition of wicked
men in the world to come. A man may be startled and awaked with outward dangers
that is spi^itually fottish, but he that is careless of outward danger, will
be regardlesse of what we say in spiritual dangers. The fear of danger may be
the greater, when (as it was amongst the Jews) those that should be watchful
themselves, and awake others, instead of awaking rock the cradle, and cry
peace, peace, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, yet we must never
forget to be mindful with thankfulness for peace and the Gospel of peace
which yet by Gods blessing we enjoy, always suspecting the readiness of
nature to grow secure under the abundance of favors, and so to bless our
selves in that condition.

1. Signs of a sleepy state.
Now we know that sleep is creeping upon us, by comparing our present condition
with our former, when we were in a more wakefull frame. When the graces of Gods
Spirit were in exercise in us. If we differ from that we were, then all is not
well.

2. Compare our selves again with that state and frame that a Christian should
be in: for sometimes a Christian goes under an uncomfortable condition, all
the days of his life, so that he is not fit to make himself his pattern.
The true rule is, that description that is in the word of a waking and living
Christian, what should a man be, take him at the best, the varying from that is
a sleepie estate; as for instance, Acts 9. 39.
A Christian should walk in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost, live and walk by
faith, he should depend upon God, and resist temptations. Faith should work
by love, and love to our selves should move us to honor our selves as members
of Christ, to disdain to defile our selves by sin, our hope if it be waking
will purge us and make us suitable to the condition we hope for in Heaven, and
the Company we hope to have fellowship with there.

3. Again, look to the examples of others that are more gracious, I have as
many encouragements to be thankful to God, and fruitful, they enjoy no more
means then I, and yet they abound in assurance, are comfortable in all
conditions, J am down in a little trouble, subject to passion, to barrenness,
and distrust, as if there were no promises of God made to sowing in
righteousness, thus a man may discern he is a sleep by comparing himself
with others that are better then himself.

4. Again, it is evident that we are growing on to a sleepie condition by this,
when we find a backwardness to spiritual duties, as to prayer,
thankesgiving, and spiritual conference, it should be the joy of a Christian,
(as it is his prerogative) to come into the presence of Christ and to be
enabled to do that, that is above himself. When what is spiritual in a duty
will not down with us, it is a sign our souls are in a sleepie temper, there
is not a proportion between the soul and the business in heavenly duties,
whom do we speak to but God, whom do we hear speak in the Word but God,
what should be the temper of those that speak to God, and hear him speak to
them, it should be regardfull, reverent, observant, those that are watchful to
the eye of a Prince, what observance they show, when they are to receive any
thing from him or to put up any request to him, Mal. 1. 8.
Offer this to thy King, says the Lord by Malachy, when a man comes drowsily
to God, to sacrifice, to hear, to pray, etc. offer this carriage to man, will
he take it at thy hands. Oh the mercy of our patient God, that will endure
such services as we most frequently perform! by this indisposednesse to duty
more or less, may we discover our sleepiness.

5. When the soul begins to admire outward excellencies, when it awakes much
to profits, pleasures, and honors, when men admire great men, rich men, great
places, the strength and fat of the soul are consumed by feeding on these
things, so that when it comes to spiritual things it must needs be faint and
drowsy. By these and the like signs, let us labor to search the state of our
souls.

1. Motives against sleepiness.
And to (...) us up the more, Consider the danger of a secure sleepie estate,
there is no sin but a man is exposed unto in a secure estate,

There is no man that comes to gross sins suddenly, but he falls by little
and little, first to slumber, and from slumber to sleep, and from sleep to
security, and to from one degree to another: it is the inlet to all sins, and
the beginning of all danger, therefore the Lord takes a contrary course with
his, when he would preserve a state or person he plants in them first a spirit
of faith to believe that there is such a danger, or such agood to be
apprehended, upon watching and going on in a course befitting that condition,
and then faith (if it be a matter of threatening) stirs up fear which makes
up care and diligence, this is Gods method, when he intends the preservation
of any.

2. A man in his sleep is fit to loose all, a sleepie hand lets any thing go
with ease. A man has grace and comfort, he lets it go in his spiritual
sleepiness, grace in a great measure, and the sense and comfort of it
altogether. A Christian has always the divine nature in him that works in
some degree, yet notwithstanding in regard of his present temper and feeling,
he may be in such a case, that he shall differ nothing from a reprobate, nay
he may come to feel more then any ordinary wicked man feels whiles he lives
in the world; as diverse good Christians do. And all this, through their
carelessness, that they suffer themselves to be robbed of first beginnings, by
yielding to delights, company and contentments; feeding their conceits with
carnal excellencies, so favoring corruptions, and flattering that that is
naught in them, they loose the comfort of all that is good: who would do this
for the gaining of a little broken sleep, I say broken sleep, for the better
a man is, the more unquietly shall he sleep in such a state, he shall feel
startlings and frights in the midst of his carnal delights if he belong to
God.

3. Besides, God meets them with some crosses in this world, that they shall
gain nothing by it. There is none of Gods children, that ever gained by
yielding to any corruption, or drowsinesse; though God saved their souls. It
is always true, a secure state is a sure forerunner of some great cross, or
of some great sin. God cannot endure such a temper of soul, livelesse and
unfeeling performances and sacrifices, to him that has given us such
encouragements; It must needs be distasteful to God when we go drowsily and
heavily about His work. Jer. 48. 10.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, if it were to sheath
his sword in the bowels of his enemy, to which man is exceedingly prone, yet if
it be not done with diligence and an eye to God, a man is cursed in it.

4. And it is an odious temper to God; for Luke 1. 74.


5. It is a state not only odious to God, but irksome to our own spirits, the
Conscience is never fully at peace in a drowsy state or in drowsy
performances.

Likewise it is not graceful to others, it breeds not love in them to good
things, but dislike. Carnal men, let them see a Christian not carry himself
waking as he should, though they be a thousand times worse themselves, yet
notwithstanding they think it should not be so, such a course does not suit
with so much knowledge and so much grace.

Let a man consider, wherefore God has given the powers of the soul and the
graces of the Spirit, are they not given for exercise and to be employed about
their proper objects? a man is not a man, a Christian is not a Christian when
he is not waking, he so far degenerates from himself, as he yields unto any
unbeseeming carriage; wherefore has God given us understanding, but to
conceive the best things, wherefore have we Judgment, but to judge aright
between the things of Heaven and Earth, wherefore have we love planted in us,
but to set it on lovely objects, wherefore faith, but to trust God over all,
wherefore hatred, but to fly ill, wherefore have we affections, but for
spiritual things; when therefore our affections are dull, and loose their edge
to these things, being quick only to earthly things, what a temper is this,
how does a man answer his Creation, the state of a new Creature, wherefore are
all graces planted in the soul, as faith and love, and hope and patience, but
to be in exercise, and waking; to have these and to let them sleep and lie
unexercised, so far a Christian forgets himself, and is not himself, a
Christian as a Christian, that is, in his right temper should be in the act
and exercise of what is good in him, upon all occasions, as we say of God, he
is a pure Act, because he is allwaies in working, the Spirit of God is a pure
act, in whom is no suffering but all action, about that that is fit for so
glorious a nature; So it is with the spirit of a man, that has the Spirit of
God, he is in act, in exercise, in operation, as the Spirit is more or less
in him, so he is more or less in operation, more or less fruitful, what a
world of good might Christians do, if they were in a right temper, what a
deal of ill might they escape and avoid that they lie in, if they would rouse
up their souls to be as Christians should be, and as their soul and
Conscience tells them, they ought and might be, did they rightly improve the
means they have.

THE FOVRTH SERMON. SER. IIII.

CANT. V. VER. II. I sleep but my heart wakes, etc.
THE words as it has been showed contain a Confession, I sleep, and a
Correction, my heart waketh. The confession has been handled, now something of
the correction or exception.

My heart waketh.
The word heart you know includes the whole soul, for the understanding is the
heart, an understanding heart. To lay things up in our hearts, there it is
memory, and to cleave in heart is to cleave in will. To rejoice in heart, that
is in the affection, so that all the powers of the soul, the Inward man, (as
Paul calls it) is the heart.

I sleep but my heart waketh.
Indeed, the Church might have said, my heart sleeps, but my heart waketh:
for it is the same faculty, the same power of the soul, both in the state of
Corruption, and of grace, in which the soul is, as in the twy-light, we
cannot say, this is light, and that is darkness, because there is such a
mixture. In all the powers of the soul, there is something good, and something
ill, something flesh, and something spirit. The heart was asleep, and likewise
was awake. I sleep but my heart waketh; Obser. 1.
you see here then first of all in this correction; That a Christian has two
principles in him, that which is good, and that which is evil, whence issues
the weakness of his actions, and affections, They are all mixed, as are the
principles from which they come forth, we may observe further, that a
Christian man may know how it is with himself, Obser. 2.
though he be mixed of flesh, and spirit, he has a distinguishing knowledge
and judgment whereby he knows both the good, and evil in himself. In a
dungeon where is nothing but darkness both on the eye that should see, and on
that which should be seen, he can see nothing: but where there is a
supernatural principle, where there is this mixture, there the light of the
spirit searches the dark corners of the heart; A man that has the spirit
knows both, he knows himself and his own heart. The Spirit has a light
of its own, even as Reason has, how does Reason know what it does; By a
reflect act Inbred in the soul, shall a man that is natural reflect upon his
state, and know what he knows, what he thinks, what he does, and may not
the soul that is raised to an higher estate know as much? undoubtedly it may.
Besides we have the Spirit of God, which is light, and selfe-evidencing, it
shows unto us, where it is, and what it is* The work of the Spirit may
sometimes be hindered, How the discerning work of the Spirit comes to be so
interrupted.
as in times of temptation, then I confess a man may look wholly upon
corruption, and so mistake himself, in judging by that which he sees present
in himself, and not by the other principle which is concealed for a time from
him. But a Christian, when he is not in such a temptation, he knows his own
estate, and can distinguish between the principles in him of the flesh and
spirit, grace and nature.

Again we see here in, that the Church says, but my heart waketh, that she
does acknowledge there is good as well as evil; As the Church is ingenious to
confess that which is amiss, I sleep, so she is as true in confessing that
which is good in her self; but my heart waketh, which yields us another
observation.

We should as well acknowledge that which is good, Obser. 3.
as that which is evil in our hearts.

Because we must not bear false witness (as not against others) much less
against our selves. Many help Satan the accuser and plead his cause against
the Spirit their Comforter; in refusing to see what God sees in them. We must
make conscience of this, to know the good as well as the evil, though it be
never so little.

To come in particular, what is that good the Church here confesses, What the
Church acknowledges in her heart waking though asleep.
when she says, that her heart waketh? She in her sleepie estate, first has
her judgment sound in that which is truth of persons, things, and courses.
Christians are not so benighted when they sleep, or given up to such a
reprobate judgment, as that they discern not differences: they can discern
that such are in a good way, and such are not; that such means are good, and
such are not; a Christian often times is forced to do work out of judgment, in
case his affections are asleep or distracted, and such works are approved of
God, as they come from a right judgment and conviction, though the evil of
them be chastised.

But all is not in the judgment. A choice of good remains in the will.
The child of God asleep has a working in the will, choosing the better part
which he will cleave too, he has a general purpose to please God in all
things, and no settled purpose in particular for to sleep thus: answerable to
his judgment therefore he chooses the better part, and side, he ownes God,
and his cause, even in evil times, cleaving in resolution of heart to the best
ways, though with weakness.

Take David in his sleepie time between his repentance, and his foul sin,
if one should have asked him what he thought of the ways of God, and of the
contrary, he would have given you an answer out of sound judgment thus and
thus, If you should have asked him what course he would have followed in his
choice resolution, and purpose, he would have answered savourly.

Again there remains affection answerable They retain affection answerable
to their judgment.
which though they find, and feel it not for a time, it being perhaps
scattered, yet there is a secret love to Christ, and to his cause, and side,
joined with joy in the welfare of the Church and people of God, rejoicing in
the prosperity of the righteous, with a secret grief for the contiarie. The
pulses will beat this way, and good affections will discover themselves, take
him in his sleepie estate, the judgment is sound in the maine, the will, the
affections, the joy, the delight, the sorrow, this is an evidence his heart is
awake.

The Conscience likewise is awake; the heart Conscience.
a good Conscience (called a merry heart) is a continual seast; Now the
conscience of Gods children is never so sleepie, Prove* 15. 15.
but it awaketh in some comfortable measure, though perhaps it may be deaded in
a particular act, yet notwithstanding there is so much life in it, How the
Conscience in a sleepie tempe^ is known to be awake.
as upon speech, or cenference, etc. there will be an opening of it and a
yielding at the length to the strength (...) spiritual reason, his conscience
is not ^eared; Dav^d was but a little rowsed by Nathan, yet you see how h^
presently confessed ingeniously that he had sinned; So when he had numbered the
people, 2 Samuel 24.
his conscience presently smote him, and when he resolved to kill Naball and
all his family, 1 Samuel 23.
which was a wicked, and carnal passion, in which there was nothing but flesh,
yet when he was stopped by the advice, and the discreet counsel of Abigall, we
see how presently he yielded. There is a kind of perpetual tenderness of
conscience in Gods people, all the difference is; of more, or less.

And answerable to these inward powers is So they retain also a course of
obedience.
in their sleepie estate, they go on in a course of obedience, though deadly
and coldly, and not with that glory that may give others good example, or
yield themselves comfort, yet there is a course of good duties, his ordinary
way is good, howsoever he may step aside, his fits may be sleepie when his
estate is waking. We must distinguish betvveene a state and a fit, That we
must dist^nguish between states and fits.
a man may have an Aguish fit in a sound body; The state of a Christian is a
waking state in the Inward man, the by courses he falle^h into are but fits
out of which he recovers himself.

Whence for use let us magnif^e the goodness of God, Use. 1.
that will remain by his Spirit, and let it stay to preserve life in such
hearts as ours are, so prone to security, and sleepiness, let it put us in
mind of other like merciful and gracious doings of our God for us: that he
gave his Spirit to us when we had nothing good in us, when it met with nothing,
but enmity, rebellion, and indisposednesse; Nay consider how he debased
himself and became man, in being united to our frail flesh after an admirable
neerenesse, and all out of mercy to save us.

If so be that Satan shall tempt us in such occasions, Use. 2.
let us enter into our own souls, and search the truth of Grace, our
judgment, our wills, our constant course of obedience, and the inward
principle whence it comes; that we may be able to stand in the time of
temptation. What upheld the Church, but this reflect act by the help of the
Spirit, that she was able to judge of the good, as well as of the ill, thus
David; The desires of our soul are toward thee, and though all this have
befallen us, yet have we not forgotten thy Name, Psalm. 44. 20. this will ^nable
us to appeal to God as Peter, Lord thou know I love thee, it is an evidence
of a good estate.

My heart waketh.
Gods children never totally fall from grace, Obser.
though they sleep yet their heart is awake. The prophet Esaias speaking of the
Church and children of God, Esa. 6. 13. says, It shall be as a tree, as an
oak whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves. Though you see
neither fruit, nor leaves, yet there is life in the root, The seed remains in
them, there is allway a seed remaining, it is an immotall seed that we are
begotten by. Peter when he denied his Master, was like an Oak, 1 Pet. 1.
that was weather-beaten, yet there was life still in the root. Matthew. 26.
For questionless Peter loved Christ from his heart. Sometimes a Christian may
be in such a poor case as the spiritual life runs all to the heart, and
the outward man is left destitute, as in wars, when the enemy has conquered
the field, the people run into the City; and if they be beaten out of the
City they run into the Castle: the grace of God sometimes fails in the
outward action, in the field, when yet it retireth to the heart, in which fort
it is impregnable, My heart waketh.

When the outward man sleeps, and there are weak dull performances, and
perhaps actions amiss too, yet notwithstanding the heart waketh; As we see in
a swoond or great scares, the blood spirits and life, though they leave the
face and hands, etc. yet they are in the heart. It is said in the Scripture of
Eutichus, his life is in him still, Simile.
though he seemed to be dead. As Christ said of Lazarus, Acts. 20. 9. Ioh 11,
So a man may say of a Christian, in his worst state, his life is in him still,
he is not dead, but sleeps, his heart waketh.

This is a sound Doctrine and comfortable, Obser.
agreeable to Scripture, and the experience of Gods people, we must not loose
it therefore: but make use of it against the time of temptation. There are some
pulses that discover life in the sickest man, so are there some breathings and
spiritual motions of heart, that will comfort in such times. These two never
fail on Gods part, his love which is unchangiable, and his grace a fruit of
his love; And two on our part, the impression of that love, and the gracious
work of the new creature. Christ never dies (says the Apostle) as he never
dies in himself (after his Resurrection) so he never dies in his Children,
there is always spiritual life.

The heart waketh.
This is a secret of Gods Sanctuary, only belonging to Gods people, Use for
Comfort.
others have nothing to do with it, They shall ever love God and God will ever
love them. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 8. says, Love never fails. Gifts you know
shall be abolished, because the manner of knowing we now use shall cease, we
see through a glass, etc. but love abides. Does our love to God abide for
ever; and does not his love to us whence it comes? ours is but a reflection
of Gods love. Let us comfort our selves therefore in this for the time to come,
that in all the uncertainty of things in this life, we have to day, and loose
to morrow, as we see in Job, there is somewhat a Saint may build on that is
constant and unmovable. I am the Lord I change not, therefore you sons of I
acob are not consumed. God should deny himself (as it were) which he cannot
do, and his own constant Nature, if he should vary this way.

A Christian is what his heart, and inward man is, It is a true speech of
Divines God and nature begin there. Art beginns with the face and outward
lyniaments, as hypocrisy, outward painting, and expressions: But grace at the
Center, and from thence goes to the Circumference; And therefore the Church
values her self here by the disposition, and temper of her heart. Thus I am
for my outward carriage, etc. I sleep, but my heart that waketh.

Therefore let us enter into our consciences and souls for the trial of our
estates, how it is with our judgments, Do we allow of the ways of God, and
of the Law of the inward man? How is it with our affections, and bent to good
things? How with our hatred, our zeal? Is it not more for outward things, then
for inward? We know what I^hu said to Ionadab, when he would have him into his
Chariot, Is thine heart as mine, then come to me? So says Christ, is thine
heart as mine, then give me thy hand, but first God must have our hearts, and
then our hands; A man otherwise is but a ghost in Religion, which goes up and
down without a spirit of its own, but a picture, that has an outside, and is
nothing within. Therefore especially, let us look to our hearts, Oh that th^re
were such an heart in this people (says God to Moses) to fear (...), for
their good; This is it, that Gods children desire, that their hearts may be
aright se^. Wash thy heart O (...) (says the Prophet) from thy wickedness,
etc. Indeed all the outward man depends upon this; Therefore Satan, if he can
get this fort, he is safe, Heb. 11.
and so Satan's vicar. It was a watchword, that was in Gregory. 13. his time,
in Queen Elizabeth's days, My Son, give methy heart, dissemble, go to
Church, and do what you will, but Da mihi cor, be in heart a Papist, and go
where you will. God is not content with the heart alone, (the Devil knows if
he have the heart, he has all, But God, as he made all, both soul, and body
he will have all) but yet in times of temptation, the chief trial is in the
heart.

And from hence, we may have a maine difference between one Christian and
another. A sound Christian does what he does from the heart, he begins the
workethere. What good he does, he loves in his heart first, judges it to be
good, and then he does it.

An Hypocrite does that he does outwardly, and allows not inwardly of that
good he does; he would do ill, and not good, if it were in his choice. The
good that he does is for by ends, for correspondence, or dependence upon
others, or conformity with the times, to cover his designs under formalitie
of Religion, that he may not be know he outwardly, as he is inwardly, an
Atheist, and an Hypocrite. So he has false aims, his heart is not directed to
a right mark; But it is otherwise with Gods child, Whatsoever good he does, it
is in his heart first, Whatsoever ill he abstaines from, he does it from his
heart, judging it to be naught: therefore he hates it, and will not do it.
Here is a maine difference of the Church from all others, It wakes in the
heart, though the outward man sleeps. But other men's hearts sleep, when they
wake, as you know some men will walk and do many things in their sleep. An
Hypocrite is such a kind of man, He walks and goes up and down, but his heart
is asleep, he knows not what he does, nor does he the thing out of judgment,
or love, but as one asleep (as it were) he has no inward affection unto the
things he does. A Christian is the contrary, his heart is awake, When he is
asleep.

Another difference from the words you may have thus. A Christian by the power
of Gods Spirit in him, is sensible of the contrarieties in him, complains, and
is ashamed for the same: but an Hypocrite is not so, he is not sensible of his
sleepiness, I sleep (says the Church) so much as the Church says she
slept; So much she did not sleep: for a man that is asleep, cannot say he is
asleep, nor a dead man, that he is dead, So far, as he says he is
asleep, he is awake. Now the Church confesses that she was asleep by that
part, that was awake in her, other men do not complain, are not sensible of
their sleepiness, and slumbring, but compose themselves to slumber, and seek
darkness, which is a friend of sleep, they would willingly be ignorant, to
keep their Conscience dull, and dumb as much as they can, that it may not
upbraid them. This is the disposition of a Carnal man, he is not sensible of
his estate as here the Church is.

A waking state is a blessed state. Obser.

The Church you see supports and comforts her self that she was waking in her
inward man, that she was happy in that respect. How shall we do to keep and
preserve our souls in this waking condition, Quest.
especially in these drowsietimes?

1. Propound unto them waking considerations, What causes our sleeps, Answ.
but want of matters of more serious observation? 1. Means Is to propound
waking considerations.
None will sleep when a thing is presented of excellency more then ordinary.
To see and know and think of what a state we are now advanced unto in Christ,
what we shall be ere long, yet the fearful estate we should be in, if God
leave us to our selves? A state of astonishment, miserable and wretched, beyond
speech, nay beyond conceit. Thus did the blessed souls in former times
exercise their thoughts, raise and stir them up by meditation, that so they
might hold their souls in a high esteem of the best things, and not suffer
them to sleep. We never fall to sleep in earthly and carnal delights, till
the soul let its hold go of the best things, and cease to think of, and
to wonder at them. What made Moses to fall from the delights of Egypt? he saw
the basest things in Religion, were greater, then the greatest things in the
Court, yea in the World. Heb. 11.
He esteemed the reproach of Christ better then the greatest treasures of
Egypt.

Make the heart think of the shortness, and vanity of this life, 2.
Consideration.
with the uncertainty of the time of our death; and of what wondrous consequent
it is to be in the state of Grace before we die. The uncertainty of the gales
of Grace, that there may be a good hour, Luke 19. 42.
Mat. 23 37.
which if we pass, we may never have the like again. As the Angel descended
at a certain hour into the poole of Bethesda, John. 5.
when those that entered not immediately after, went away sick as they came. So
there are certain good hours, which let us not neglect, this will help to
keep us waking. The Necessity of Grace, 3. Consideration.
and then the free dispensing of it in Gods good time, and withal the terror
of the Lords day, ^ Cos. 5. 11.
Remembering (says St. Paul) the terror of the Lord, I labor to stir up all
men, etc. Indeed it should make us stir up our hearts, when we consider the
terror of the Lord, to think, that ere long, we shall be all drawn to an
exact account, before a strict, precise Judge; And shall our eyes then be
sleeping and careless? These and such like considerations out of spiritual
wisdom we should propound to our selves, that so we might have waking souls,
and preserve them in a right temper.

The soul is as the object is that is presented to it, 2. Meaness To keep
Faith waking.
and as the certainty of the apprehension is of that object. It conduces much
therefore to the awakening of the soul to keep faith awake. It Is not the
greatness alone, but the presence of great things that stirs us; now it is
the nature of faith to make things powerfully present to the soul: for it sets
things before us in the word of Iebovah, that made all things of nothing, and
is Lord of his word, Heb. 11.
to give a being to whatsoever he has spoken. Faith is an awakening Grace,
keep that awake, and it will keep all other graces waking.

When a man believes, that all these things shall be on fire ere long, that
Heaven and Earth shall fall in pieces, that we shall be called to give an
account; before that time we may be taken away. Is it not a wonder we stand so
long, when Cities, stone walls fall, and Kingdoms come to sudden periods?
When faith apprehends, and setts this to the eye of the soul, it affects the
same marvellously: Therefore let faith set before the soul some present
thoughts according to its temper, sometimes terrible things to awaken it out of
its dullness: Sometimes glorious things, Promises, and Mercies, to waken it out
of its sadness, etc. When we are in a prosperous estate let faith make present
all the sins and temptations that usually accompany such an estate, as Pride,
security, selfe-applause and the like: if in adversity, think also of what
sins may beset us there, this will awaken up such graces in us, as are
suitable to such an estate for the preventing of such sins and temptations,
and so keep our hea^^s in exercise to godliness: then which, nothing will
more prevent sleeping.

And withal, 3. Means To labor for a great measure of the Spirit of God.
labor for abundance of the Spirit of God, for what makes men sleepie, and
drowsy? the want of spirits, we are dull, and overloaden with gross humors,
whereby the strength sinkes and fails? Christians should know, that there is
a necessity, if they will keep themselves waking, to keep themselves
spiritual. Pray for the Spirit above all things, it is the life of our life,
the soul of our soul. What is the body without the soul, or the soul
without the Spirit of God, even a dead lump. And let us keep our selves in
such good ways, as we may expect the presence of the Spirit to be about us,
which will keep us awake.

We must keep our selves in as much light as may be, 4. Means To keep our
selves in the light.
for all sleepiness comes with darkness, let us keep our souls in a
perpetual light, when any doubt or dark thought arises, upon yielding
thereunto comes a sleepie temper, sleepiness in the affections arises from
darkness of judgment, the more we labor to increase our knowledge, and the
more the spiritual light and beams of it shine in at our windovves, the
better it will be for us, and the more shall we be able to keep awake. What
makes men in their corruptions to avoid the Ministry of the Word, or any thing
that may awake their consciences? It is the desire they have to sleep, they
know, the more they know, the more they must practice, or else they must have
a galled conscience. They see Religion will not stand with their ends, rich
they must be, and great they will be, but if they suffer the light to grow
upon them, that will tell them they must not rise, and be great, by these and
such courses. A gracious heart will be desirous of spiritual knowledge
especially, and not care how near the Word comes: because they ingeniously and
freely desire to be spiritually better, they make all things in the world yield
to the inward man: they desire to know their own corruptions and evils
more and more, and therefore love the light as children of the light, and of
the day. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Sleep is a work of darkness, men therefore of dark
and drovvsie hearts desire darkness for that very end that their consciences
may sleep.

Labor to preserve the soul in the fear of God; because fear is a waking
affection, 5. Means
yea one of the vvakefullest; For, Naturally we are more moved with dangers,
then stirred with hopes: Therefore, that affection, that is most conversant
about danger, is the most rowzing and waking affection. Preserve therefore the
fear of God by all means. It is one character of a Christian, who, when he
has lost almost all Grace (to his feeling) yet the fear of God is always
left with him; he fears sin, and the reward of it, and therefore God makes that
awethe Bond of the New Covenant. I will put my fear into their hearts, that
they shall never depart from me* One Christian is better then another, by how
much more he wakes, Ier 32. 39.
and fears more then another. Of all Christians, Who are the ^est Christians
mark those are most gracious, spiritual and heavenly, that are the most
awful, and careful of their speeches, courses, and demeanours: tender, even
of offending God in little things. You shall not have light, and common oaths
come from them, nor unsavory speeches. Sometimes a good Christian may in a
state of sleepiness be faulty some way. But he grows in the knowledge of
the greatness of God, and the experience of his own infirmities, as he
grows in the sense of the love of God. He is afraid to loose that svveet
Com^munion any way, or to grieve the Spirit of God: Therefore, always as a ^an
grows in grace, he grows in avvfulnesse, and in jealousy of his own
corruptions. Therefore let us preserve by all means this awefull affection,
the fear of God; Let us then often search the state of our own souls, our
going backward or forward, how it is between God and our souls; how fit we
are to die, and to suffer; how fit for the times that may befall us? Let us
examine the state of our own souls which will preserve us in a waking estate,
especially examine our selves in regard of the sins of the place, and the
times where we live, of the sins of our own inclination, how we stand
affected and byased in all those respects, and see how jealous we are of
dangers in this kind. Those that will keep waking souls, must consider the
danger of the place where they live, and the times; what sins reign, what
sins such a company as they converse with, are subject unto, and their own
weakness to be led away with such temptations. This jealousy is a Branch of
that fear, that we spoke of before, arising from the searching of our own
hearts, and dispositions. It is a notable means to keep us awake when we keep
our hearts in fear of such sins as either by calling, custom, company, or the
time we live in; or by our own disposition we are most prone to.

There is no Christian, but he has some special sin to which he is more
prone then to an other, one way or other, either by course of life, or
complexion, here now is the care and vvatchfulnesse of a Christian spirit,
that knowing by examination, and trial of his own heart, his weakness, he
does especially fence against that, which he is most inclined to; and is able
to speak most against that sin of all others, and to bring the strongest
arguments to dishearten others from practice of it.

In the last place it is a thing of no small consequence, 6. Means The
Communion of Saints.
that we keep company with waking and faithful Christians, such as neither
sleep themselves or do willingly suffer any to sleep that are near them.

It is a report, and a true one of the sweating sickness, that they that were
kept awake by those that were with them escaped, but the sickness was
deadly if they were suffered to sleep. It is one of the best fruits of the
Communion of Saints and of our spiritual good acquaintance to keep one
another awake. Its an unpleasing work on both sides. But we shall one day
cry out against all them that have pleased themselves and us, in rocking us
asleep, and thank those that have pulled us with fear out of the fire,
though against our wills.

Let us labor upon our own hearts in the Conscionable use of all these
means, in their several times and seasons, that we may keep our hearts
waking, and the more earnest ought we to be from consideration of the present
age and season in which we live.

Certainly a drowsy temper is the most ordinary temper in the World. For would
men suffer idle words, yea filthy and rotten talk to come from their mouths if
they were awake? Would a waking man run into a pit? or upon a swords point? A
man that is asleep may do any thing. What do men mean when they fear not
to lie, dissemble, and rush upon the pikes of Gods displeasure? When they say
one thing and do another, are they not dead? or take them at the best, are
they not asleep? Were they awake, would they ever do thus? Will not a foul
that has wings, avoyde the snare? or will a beast run into a pit when it
sees it? There is a snare laid in your Play Houses, gaming houses, Common
houses that Gentlemen frequent that generally profess Religion, and take the
Communion. If the eye of their souls were awake, would they run into these
snares, that their own Consciences tells them are so? If there be any
goodness in their souls, it is wondrous sleepie; There is no man (even the
best) but may complain something, that they are overtaken in the contagion of
these infectious times, they catch drovvsie tempers (as our Savior says) of
those latter times. For the abundance of iniquity, the love of many shall wax
cold. A chill temper, grows ever from the coldness of the times that we live
in, wherein the best may complain of coldness, but there is great difference.
The life of many, we see, is a continual sleep.

Let us especially watch over ourselves, in the use of liberty and such things
as are in themselves lawful. It is a blessed state, when a Christian carries
himself so in his liberty, that his heart condemns him not for the abuse of
that which it allows and justly in a moderate use. Recreations are lawful,
who denies it? To refresh a man's self, is not only lawful, but necessary.
God knew it well enough: Therefore has allott^d time for sleep, and the like.
But we must not turn Recreation into a Calling, to spend too much time in it.

Where there is least fear, there is most danger always. Now because in
lawful things there is least fear, we are there in most danger. It is true
for the most part, Licit is perimus omnes, more men perish in the Church of God
by the abuse of lawful things, then by unlawful, more by meat, then by
poison; Because every man takes heed of poison, being he knows the venom of
it, but how many men surfeit, and dye by meat? So many men, die by lawful
things, they eternally perish in the abuse of their liberties, more then in
gross sins. Therefore let us keep awake, that we may carry our selves so in
our liberties, that we condemn not our selves in the use of them. We will
conclude this point with the Meditation of the Excellency of a waking
Christian, The Excellency of a waking Christian.
when he is in his right temper, he is an excellent person, fit for all
assaies, he is then impregnable, Satan has nothing to do with him, for he (as
it is said) is then a wise man and has his eyes in his head; he knows
himself, his state, his enemies, and adversaries, the snares of Prosperity,
and Adversity, and of all conditions, etc. Therefore, he being awake, is not
overcome of the evil of any condition, and is ready for the good of any
estate. He that has a waking soul, he sees all the advantages of good, Mark.
13. 37.
and all the snares that might draw him to ill. What a blessed estate is this?
In all things therefore watch: in all estates, in all times, and in all
actions. There is a danger in every thing without watchfulness. There is a
scorpion under every stone (as the Proverb is) a snare under every blessing of
God, and in every condition, which Satan uses as a weapon to hurt us.
Adversity to discourage us, Prosperity to puff us up. When, if a Christian
has not a waking soul, Satan has him in his snare; In Prosperity to be
proud, and secure; In Adversity to murmr, repine, be dejected, and call
Gods providence into question. When a Christian has a heart, and grace to
awake, then his Love, his Patience, his Faith is awake, as it should be, he
is fit for all Conditions to do good in them, and to take good by them.

Let us therefore labor to preserve watchful and waking hearts continually,
that so we may be fit to live, to die, and to appear before the judgment
seat of God; to do what we should do, and suffer what we should suffer,
being squared for all estates whatsoever.

The end of the Fourth Sermon.
THE FIFTH SERMON
CANT. V. VER. II. It is the voice of my Beloved that knocks, saying, Open to
me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled; For my bead is filled with dew,
and my locks with the dropps of the ^ight.
HItherto by Gods assistance, we have heard largely both of the Churches
sleeping, and Heart-waking, What this sleeping, and Heart-waking is; How it
comes, the trials of these opposite dispositions; of the danger of sleeping,
and excellency of Heartwaking; and of the helps, and means both to shun the
one, and preserve the other. Now the church having so freely and ingeniously
confessed what she could against her self, proceeds yet further to acquaint
us with the particulars in her heart-waking disposition, Which were twofold,
she heard and discerned the voice of her Beloved, who for all her sleep, was
her Beloved still, and more then that, she remembers all his sweet words and
allurements, whereby he pressed her to open unto him, Saying, open to me my
love, my dove, my undefiled, which is set out, and amplified with a further
mooving argument of those inconveniences Christ had suffered in his waiting for
entertainment in her heart. For my head is filled with dew, and my locks with
the dropps of the night. All which aggravates her offense, and his rare
goodness, and patience toward miserable sinners, so to wait from time to
time for admission into our wretched souls, that he may rule, and govern them
by his holy Spirit. Therefore we had great need to shun this sleepie
distemper of soul, which for the present so locks up the everlasting gates of
our soul, that the King of glory cannot enter in; Psalm. 24.
and to strive for this blessed heart-waking disposition, which may help us at
all times to see our dangers, and by Gods blessing recover us out of them, as
here the Church does at length, though first smarting and well beaten by the
watchmen, in a world of perplexities, ere she can recover the sense of her
former union, and Communion with Christ.

And surely, we find by experience, what a woeful thing it is for the soul,
which has once tasted how gracious the Lord is, to be long without a sense of
Gods love, For when it looks upon sin as the cause of this separation; this
is for the time, as so many deaths unto it. Therefore the Churches experience
must be our warning-peece to take heed how we grieve the Spirit, and so fall
into this spiritual sleep: Wherein yet this is a good sign, that yet we are
not in a desperate dead sleep, when we can with her say,

It is the voice of my Beloved that knocks, saying, open unto me, etc.

In which words you have, 1. The Churches acknowledgment of Christ's voice. 2.
Of his carriage toward her.


1. Her acknowledgment is set down here, It is the voice of my Beloved. 2.
His caraiage, He knockes, etc. wherein
1. His Patience in suffering things unworthy and utterly unbeseeming for him.
He does not only knock, but he continues knocking, till his head was filled
with dew, and his locks with the dropps of the night. 2. His friendly
Commpellation, open to me my love, my dove, my undefiled. Lo here are sweet
actions, sweet words, and all to melt the heart of the Spouse.
First, the Churches acknowledgement is to be considered, Confessing, It is the
voce of her Beloved. The first thing to be observed in this acknowledgement is,
That the Church however sleepie and drowsy she was, yet notwithstanding her
heart was so far awake, as to know the voice of her husband. The point is
this,

That a Christian ^oule does know and may discer^e the voice of Christ, Obser.
yea and that even in a lazy, sleepie estate.

But much more when in a good and lively frame. Gods Believers are Christ's
sheep, John. 10.
Now my sheep (says Christ) hear my voice. It is the ear mark (as it were)
of a Christian, one of the characters of the new man, Job. 12. 11
To ^as^e words by the ear, (as Job says) he has a spiritual taste, a
discerning relish in his ear, because he has the Spirit of God, and
therefore relisheth what is connaturall, and suitable to the Spirit. Now the
voice of Christ without in the ministry, and the Spirit of Christ within in
the heart are connaturall and suitable each to other.

And surely so it is, That this is one way to discern a true Christian from an
other, even by a taste in hearing. Difference of christians by a spiritual
taste in bearing.
For those that have a spiritual relish, they can hear with some delight
things that are most spiritual. As the Heathen man said of a meadow, that some
creatures come to eat one sort of herbs: others an other, all that which is
fit for them; Men, to walk therein for delight; All for ends suitable to their
nature. So in coming to hear the Word of God; some come to observe the
elegancy of words and phrases, some to catch advantage (perhaps) against the
speaker, men of a divelish temper, and some to conform themselves to the
custom of the places they live in, or to satisfy the clamours of a troubled
conscience, that will have some divine duty performed, else it goes on with
much vexaction. But every true Christian comes, and relisheth what is
spiritual; And when outward things can convey in similituds spiritual things
aptly to the mind, he relisheth this not as elegant and pleasing his fancy so
much, as for conveying the voice of Christ unto his soul. So that a man may
much be helped to know his state in Grace, and what he is by his ear: Itching
ears usually are such as are led with lust, as the Apostle says, and they
must be clawed. They are sick and nothing will down with them, they quarrel
with every thing that is wholesome (as they did with Manna) no sermons will
please them, no bread is fine and white enough. Whereas indeed, it is their
own distemper is in fault. As those that go in a ship upon the Sea; it is
not the tossing, but the stomach, that causes a sickness, the choler within,
and not the waves without. So the disquiet of these men that nothing will
down with them, is from their own distemper. If Christ himself were here
a preaching, they would be sure to cavil at something, as then men did, when
he preached in his own person; Because they labor of lusts, which they
resolve to feed and cherish.

And again, Observe it against our Adversaries: What say they? How shall we
know that the Word is the Word of God? For this heretic says thus, and this
interprets it thus. This is the common Objection of the great Rabbis amongst
them in their vvritings, how we can know the Word to be Gods, considering
there are such heresies in the Churches, and such contrariety of opinions
concerning the Scriptures read in the Churches.

Even thus to object and ask, is an argument, and testimony, that these men
have not the Spirit of Christ, John. 10.
for His sheep know his voice; who howsoever they cannot interpret all
places of Scripture, yet they can discern in the Scripture what is suitable
food for them, or in the unfolding of the Scriptures, in preaching, they can
discern agreeable food for them, having a faculty to reject that which is
not fit for nourishment, to let it go. As there is in nature passages fit for
concoction, and digestion, and for rejection; so there is in the soul to
work out of the Word, even out of that which is hard, yet wholesome, what
is fit for the soul, and Spirit. If it be cast down, it feeds upon the
promises for direction, and consolation, and what is not fit nourishment, that
it rejects, that is, if it be of a contrary nature, heterogeniall. Therefore
we answer them thus: That Gods sheep hear his voice, John. 2. 20.
That his Word left in the Church (when it is unfolded) his Spirit goes
together with it, breeding a relish of the Word in the hearts of people,
whereby they are able to taste and relish it, and it has a supernatural power
and Majesty in it, which carries its own evidence with it. How shall we know
light to be light? It carries evidence in it self, that it is light. How know
we that the fire is hot? because it carries evidence in it^ self, that it is
so. So if you ask, How we know the Word of God to be the Word of God? it
carries in it self inbred Arguments, and Characters, that the soul can say
none but this Word can be the Word of God, it has such a majesty and power to
cast down, and raise up, 1 Cor. 14. 25.
and to comfort, and to direct with such power, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
and majesty, that it carries with it its own evidence, and it is argument
enough for it. And thus we answer them; which they can answer no way, but by
cavills. Gods sheep hear the voice of Christ, He speaks, and the Church
understands him, and a strangers voice they will not hear. Ioh. 10. 5.

And indeed, this is the only sure way of understanding the word to be of God
from an inbred Principle of the majesty in the word, and a powerful work
thereof on the soul it self, and an assent so grounded is that which makes a
sound Christian. If we should ask what is the reason there be so many, that
Apostatize, fall away, grow profane, Why so many aposta^ize.
and are so unfruitful under the Gospel? notwithstanding they hear so much
as they do; the answer is, their souls were never founded, and bottomed upon
this, that it is the Word of God, and Divine truth, so as to be able to say, I
have felt it by experience, that it is the voice of Christ. Therefore they so
soon Apostatize, let Jesuits, or seducers set upon them, They were never
persuaded from inbred Arguments, that the voice of Christ is the word of God:
others from strictness grow profane, because they were never convinced by the
power and majesty of the truth in it self; and then in the end they despair
notwithstanding all the promises, because they were never convinced of the
truth of them, they cannot say Amen to all the promises. But the Church can say
confidently upon sound experience, It is the voice of my Beloved, etc.

Again, Whereas the Church says here, It is the voice of my Beloved, etc. and
knows this voice of her Beloved, we may note,

That the Church of God, and every Christian takes notice of the means that
God uses for their salvation.

Obser.
A Christian is sensible of all the blessed helps he has to salvation. To a
dead heart, it is all one, whether they have means, or no means, but a
Christian soul takes notice of all the means. It is the voice of my beloved
that knocks, it sees Christ in all.

And mark what the Church says moreover It is the voice of my Beloved, A
dictinction betwixt sleep in diverse Christians, even at the worst, and
deadness in a natural man.
she acknowledges Christ to be beloved of her; though she were asleep. So
then here is a distinction, between the sleep of a Christian, and the dead
sleep of another natural man, The one when he sleeps, His heart does not
only wake, but it is awake to discern the voice of Christ, it can relish in
reading what is spiritual and good, what is savourie, and what not. And
likewise take a Christian at the worst, when he is asleep, he loves Christ,
he will do nothing against him. I can do nothing (^aith Paul) against the
truth, but for the truth; 1 Co. 13. 8.
he will do nothing against the cause of Religion, there is a new Nature in
him, that he cannot do otherwise, he cannot but love, he cannot sin with a
full purpose, nor speak against a good cause, because he has a new nature,
that leads him another way, Christ is her Belovsds still though she sleep.

Take a Christian at the lowest, his heart yearnes after Christ. Obser.


Acknowledging him to be his Beloved, There is a conjugall chastity in the
soul of a Christian, holding firm to the covenant and marriage between
Christ and it, he keeps that unviolable, though he may be untoward, sleepie,
and drowsy, yet there is always a conjugall spouselike affection. It is the
voice of my Beloved, etc.

Now leaving the Churches notice of the voice of Christ, We come to Christ's
carriage toward her. 1. He knocks, and then we have, 2. His Patience in
that Carriage.
My head is filled with dew, and my locks with the dropps of the night, etc.
Here is Patience, and Mercy to endure this indignity at the Churches hand, to
stand at her courtesy to come in, besides 3. the Compellation, afterward to
be spoken of, The general observation from Christ's carriage, is this,

That Christ still desires a further and further communion with his Church.
Obser.


Even as the true soul, that is touched with the Spirit desires nearer and
nearer communion with Christ. So he seeks nearer and nearer communion with
his Spouse, by all sanctified means; Christ has never enough of the soul; he
would have them more and more open to him, our hearts are for Christ, who has
the heaven of heavens, and the soul of a believing Christian for himself to
dwell in, he contents not himself to be in heaven alone, but he will have our
hearts. He knocks here, waits, speaks friendly and lovingly with such
sweet words, My Love, my Dove, etc. We had a blessed Communion in the state
of innocence, and shall have a glorious communion in heaven, when the marriage
shall be consummated; but now the time of this life is but as the time of the
contract, during which there are yet many mutual passages of love between him
and his Spouse, a desire of mutual communion of either side. Christ desires
further entertainment in his Churches heart and affection, that he might
lodge, and dwell there: And likewise there is the like desire in the Church,
(when she is in a right temper,) So that if any strangeness be between
Christ, and any man's soul, that has tasted how good the Lord is, let him not
blame Christ for it, for he delights not in strangeness; He that knockes and
stands knocking, while his locks are ^edewed with the dropps of the night? Does
he delight in strangeness, that makes all this Love to a Christians soul?
Certainly No.

Therefore look for the cause of his strangeness at any time in thine own
self; That the cause of Christ's strangeness to the Church is in our selves.
As, Whether we cast our selves imprudently into company, that are not fit to
be consulted withal, in whom the Spirit is not, and who cannot do us any
good, or they cast themselves to us. Evil company is a great dampning, whereby
a Christian loses his comfort much, especially that intimate communion with
God, whence we may fall into security.

Again, Discontinuing of Religious exercises does wonderfully cause Christ to
withdraw himself; He makes no more love to our souls, when we neglect the
means, and discontinue holy exercises, and religious company, when we stir
not up the graces of Gods Spirit; being this way negligent, it is no wonder
that Christ makes no more love to our souls, when we prize and value not the
communion that should be between the soul, and Christ, as we should. Whom
have I in heaven, but thee? Psalm. 73. 25.
Thy loving kindness is better then life. (says the Psalmist) when we prize
not this, it is just with Christ to make himself strange. Psalm. 63. 3.
Where love is not valued, and esteemed, it is estranged, and for a while hides
it self. So that these with other courses, and failings, we may find to be
the ground, and reason of the strangeness between Christ and the soul, for
certainly the cause is not in him: for we see here, Lament 3.
he uses all means to be entertained by a Christian soul, he knockes.

You know what he says to the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand
at the door, and knock, So here, It is the voice of my Beloved that knocks,
therefore in such a case, search your own hearts, where if there be
deadness, and disertion of Spirit; lay the blame upon your selves, and enter
into a search of your own vvayes, and see what may be the cause.

Now to come more particularly to Christ's carriage here knocking at the heart
of the sleepie Church; That Christ takes not the advantage and forfeiture of
the sins of his Church.
We see, that Christ takes not the advantage, and forfeiture of the sins of
his Church, to leave them altogether, but makes further and further love to
them, though the Church be sleepie, Christ continues knocking. The Church of
Laodicea was a luke-vvarme, Rev. 3. ^0.
proud, hypocritical Church, yet Behold, (says Christ) I stand at the door
and knock, and it was such a Church as was vaineglorious, and conceited. I
am rich and want nothing, when she was poor, blind, and naked. And here he
does not only stand knocking, but he with all suffers indignities, the dew
to fall upon him, which we shall speak more of hereafter. Christ therefore
refuses not vveake sinners, he that commands, that we should receive him that
is weak in the faith, and not cast him off from our fellowship, and company,
will he reject him that is weak, and sleepie? No, what Father will pass by,
or neglect his Child for some failings, and weaknesses, Nature will move him
to respect him as his Child.

Now Christ is merciful both by his office, and by his nature; our nature he
took upon him, that he might be a merciful redeemer, Heb. 2. 17.
And then as God also he is love, 1 John 4 16.
God is love, that is, whatsoever God shows himself to his Church, he does it
in love, If he be angry in correcting, it is out of love, if Merciful, it is
out of love, if he be Powerful in defending his Church, and revenging himself
on her Enemies, all is love, God is love (says John) that is, 1 Ioh. 4. 8.
he shows himself only in ways, expressions and characters of love to his
Church; So Christ, as God, is all love to the Church. And we see the Scriptures
also to set out God as love, both in his essence, and in his relations, 1. in
Relations of love to his Church; He is a Father, Psalm. 103.
As a Father pittieth his child, so the Lord pitties them that fear him, and
2. also in those sweet Attributes of love, which are his essence, as we see,
Ex^d. 34. 6. When God describes himself to Moses after his desire to know him,
in the former Chapter, Thou can not see me and live; yet he would make him
know him, as was fit for him to be known, Jehovah, Exodus 34. 6.
Jehovah, Strong, Merciful, Gracious, Longsuffering, etc. Thus God will be
known in these Attributes of Consolation. So Christ as God, is all love, and
mercy, Likewise Christ as man, he was man for this end to be all love, and
mercy, Take him in his office as Jesus to be a Savior, he carries salvation
in his wings, as it is Mal. 4. 2. both by Office, and by Nature.

And here how excellently is the expression of Christ's mercy, love, and
patience set out? He knockes, my Beloved knocks, etc. saying, He knockes for
further entrance (as was showed before) some he had already, but he would have
further, As you know we have diverse rooms, and places in our houses; There is
the court, the hall, the parlour, and closset. The hall for common persons, the
parlour for those of better fashion, the closset for a man's self, and those
that are intimate friends; So a Christian has room in his heart forworldly
thoughts, but his closset, his inmost affections, are kept for his inmost
friend Christ, who is not content with the hall, but will come into the very
closset* he knocks that we should open, and let him come into our hearts, into
our more intimate affections, and love* nothing will content him, but
intimatenesse, for he deserves it, as we shall see, How Christ is said to
kno^ke at our ^earts.
he knockes for this end. But how does he knock?

By a voice.
in this kind (God condescending to speak to us in our own language) Sometimes
you know There is a knocking or calling for entrance by voice, when a voice may
serve, and then there needs no further knocking. Sometimes both by voice and
knocking.


Sometimes both by voice, and knocking, If voice will not serve, knocking comes
after. So it is here, Christ does knock, and speak, uses a voice of his
Word, and knocks by his works, and both together sometimes, whether by works
of mercy or of judgment, he labors to enter into the soul, to raise the
sleepie soul that way; he beginns with mercy usually. 1. By mercies, All the
creatures, and blessings of God carry in them (as it were) a voice of God to
the soul, that it would entertain his love, There goes a voice of love with
every blessing. And the love, the mercy, and the goodness of God in the
creature, is better then the creature it self. As we say of gifts, The love of
the giver is better then the gift it self. So the love of God in all his
sweet benefits, is better then the thing it self, and so in that we have,
There is a voice (as it were) entreating us to entertain God, and Christ in
all his mercies, yea every creature (as one says) and benefit speaks as it
were thus to us; We serve thee, that thou may serve him, that made thee and
us. There is a speech (as it were) in every favor, which mercies, if they
cannot prevail, then come corrections, which are the voice of God also, Mica.
6. ^.
Hear the rodd, and him that smites; but has the rodd a voice?

Yes, for what do corrections speak^, but By the rodd which has a voice in
corrections.
so we must hear the rodd, all corrections tend to this purpose, they are as
knockings, that we should open to God and Christ. And because corrections of
themselves will not amend us. God to this kind of knocking adds a voice, he
teaches, and corrects together, Happy is that man that thou correctest, Psalm.
94. 10.
and tea^hest out of thy Law, (says the Psalmist) Correction without teaching
is to little purpose, Therefore God adds instruction to correction. He opens
the conscience, so that it tells us it is for this that you are corrected, and
together with conscience, gives his Spirit to tell us, it is for this, or that
you are corrected: you are too blame in this; this you have done, that you
should not have done; So that Corrections are knockings, but then especially
when they have instruction thus with them. They are messengers from God, Lev.
26. 24.
both Blessings and Corrections, they will not away (especially corrections)
till they have an answer, for they are sent of God, who will add seven times
more; and if the first be not answered, then he sends after them, he will be
sure to have an answer, either in our Conversion, or Confusion, when he
beginns once.

God knocks by the good examples of others.
The examples of those we live among that are good, they call upon us, The
patterns of their holy life. Luke 13. ^ 3.
The examples of Gods justice upon others, 1 Cor. 10.
are speeches to us, God knocks at our door then, He intends our correction,
when he visits another, when if we amend by that, he needs not take us in hand.

By his Ministerial knocking.
there is a more near knocking, that Christ uses to the Church, His
ministerial knocking, when he was here in the days of his flesh, he was a
Preacher and Prophet himself, and now he is ascended into heaven, Ephesians. 4.
he has given gifts to men, and men to the Church, whom he speaks by to the
end of the world, they are Christ's mouth, as we said of the penmen of holy
Scripture; they were but the hand to write, Christ was the head to indite. So
in preaching and unfolding the Word, they are but Christ's mouth and his voice,
(as it is said of John,) Now he is in heaven, Luke 10. 17.
he speaks by them; He that hears you, hears me, he that despises you
despises me. Christ is either received or rejected in his Ministers, as it is
said of Noah's time, The Spirit of Christ preached in the days of Noah to the
souls now in prison, etc. Christ as God did preach before he was incarnate by
Noah to the old world, which is now in prison, in hell, because they refused to
hear Christ speak to them by Noah: Much more now after the days of his
flesh, that he is in heaven, he speaks, and preaches to us, which if we
regard not, we are like to be in prison, as those souls are now in prison for
neglecting the preaching of Noah, 1 Pet. 3. 19. So the Ministers are Christ's
mouth, when they speak he speaks by them, and they are as Ambassadors of
Christ, (whom they should imitate in mildness) We therefore as Ambassadors
beseech and entreat you, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
as if Christ by us should speak to you; so we entreat you to be reconciled
unto God. And you know what heartbreaking words the Apostle uses in all his
Epistles (especially when he writes to Christians in a good sta^e) as to the
Philippians, Phil. 1. 2.
If there be any bowels of mercy, if there be any consolation in Christ, then
regard what I say, be of one mind. And among the Thessalonians, 1 These. ^. 19.
He was as a Nurse to them, So Christ speaks by them, and puts his own
affections into them, that as he is tender, and full of bowels himself, so he
has put the same bowels into those that are his true Ministers.

He speaks by them, and they use all kind of means that Christ may be
entertained into their hearts. They moove all stones (as it were) sometimes
threatenings; sometimes entreaties, sometimes they come as sons of thunder,
sometimes with the still voice of sweet promises; And because one man is not
so fit as another for all varieties of conditions and Spirits, therefore God
gives variety of gifts to his Ministers, that they may knock at the heart of
every man by their several gifts. For some have more rouzing, some more
insinuating gifts, some more lagall, some more evangelicall spirits, yet all
for the Churches good. John Baptist by a more thundering way of preaching, to
make way for Christ to come, threatens judgment. But Christ then he comes
with a Blessed are the poor in Spirit, Mat. 5. 3.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for Righteo^snesse, etc. All kind of
means have been used in the ministry from the beginning of the world.

And because of it self this ministry it is a dead letter, Therefore he
joins that with the By the Spirit.
which knockes at the heart together with the Word, not severed from it, but is
the life of it, Oh the Spirit is the life, and soul of the Word, and when the
inward word, or voice of the Spirit, and the outward word or Ministry go
together, then Christ does more effectually knock, and stir up the heart.

Now this Spirit with sweet inspirations knockes, mooves the heart, lightens
the understanding, quickens the dull affections, and stirrs them up to duty,
as it is, Isay. 30. 21. And thine ears shall hear a voice behind thee saying,
This is the way, walk in it. The Spirit mooves us sweetly agreeable to our
own nature, it offers not violence to us; But so as in Hosea. 11. 4. I drew
them by the cords of a man. That is, by reasons and motives befitting the
nature of man, motives of love. So the Spirit together with the word, works
upon us, as we are men by rational motives, setting good before us, If we will
let Christ in to govern, and rule us; and by the danger on the contrary, so
mooving, and stirring up our affections, These be the cords of a man.

And besides his Spirit, God has planted in Conscience to call upon us, The
Conscience also knockes.
to be his Vicar, a little god in us to do his office, to call upon us, direct
us, check, and condemn us, which in great mercy he has placed in us.

Thus we see what means Christ uses here; His voice, Works, and Word, works
of Mercy and of Correction, his Word together with his Spirit, and the
Conscience, that he has planted to be (as it were) a God in us, which together
with his Spirit may moove us to duty. This Austine speaks of when he says,
In ^is Confessions.
Deus in me, etc. God spoke in me often, and I knew it not; He means it of
Conscience together with the Spirit, stirring up motives to leave his sinful
courses. God knocked in me, and I considered it not. J cried, modo and modo,
sine modo. I put of God, now I will, and now I will, but I had no moderation, I
knew no limits. And whilst Christ thus knocks, all the three Persons may be
said to do it. For as it is said else where, that God was and is in Christ
reconciling the world, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
etc. For whatsoever Christ did, he did it as anointed, and by office, And
therefore God does it in Christ, Acts. ^0. 26.
and by Christ, and so in some sort God died in his humane nature, when Christ
died. So here the Father beseeches, when Christ beseeches, because he
beseeches that is sent from him, and anointed of the Father. And God the
Father stoopes to us, when Christ stoopes, because he is sent of the Father,
and does all by his Fathers command, John. 5.
and commission. So besides his own bowels, there is the Father and the
Spirit with Christ, who does all by his Spirit, and from his Father, from whom
he has commission. Therefore God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost knock at
the heart. Open to me, my love, my dove, my undefiled, but Christ especially by
his Spirit, because it is his office.

But some may object, Object.
Christ can open to himself, why does he not take the key and open, and make
way for himself? Who will knock, when he has the key himself? and who will
knock, when there is none within to open? Christ can open to himself, and we
have no free will, nor power to open?

Bellarmine makes this Objection, and speaks very rudely, that he is an unwise
man to knock, where there is no man within to open; and that if Christ knock,
and we cannot open, it is a delusion to exhort to open, and that therefore
there must needs be free will in us to open?

The Answer is; First, Christ speaks to the Spouse here, Answ.
and so many such exhortations are given to them that have the Spirit of God
already, Why Christ knockes though he has power to open to himself: and bid^
us open* wh^ want power to do it.
who could by the help thereof open. For good, and gracious men, are moved
first by the Spirit, and then they moove; they are Moti moventes, and Acti
Agentes. They are acted first by the Spirit, and then they do act He knocks at
their hearts, and opens together with his speech, Then there goes a power that
they shall open, for his words are operative words; as it was in the
Creation, Let there be light, it was an operative word, Genesis 1. 3.
and there was light. Let there be such a Creature, it was an operative
working word, and there was such a Creature presently; So he opens together
with that word. With that invitation, and command there goes an almighty power
to enable the soul to open; Were it not a wise reason to say, When Christ
called to Lazarus to come forth, Ioh. 11. 43.
that we should reason he had life to yield to Christ, when he bad him come
forth? no, he was rotten in his grave almost; but with Christ's speaking to
Lazarus, there went an almighty power, that gave life to him, by which life he
heard what Christ said, Arise Lazarus. So Christ by his Spirit clothes his word
in the Ministry, when he speaks to people with a mighty power: as the
Minister speaks to the ear, Christ speaks, opens, and unlocks the heart at
the same time, and gives it power to open, not from it self, but from Christ.
Paul speaks to Lydias ear, Christ to her heart, Acts. 16. 13.
and opened it, as the Text says, whereby she believes, so Christ opens the
heart;

But Why does he thus work? Quest.


Because he will preserve Nature, Answ.
and the principles thereof, and so he deals with us, working accordingly; the
manner of working of the reasonable creature, is to work freely by a sweet
inclination, not by violence. Therefore when he works the work of Conversion,
he does it in a sweet manner, though it be mighty for the E^ficaciousnes of
it, he admonishes us with entreaty, and persuasion, as if we did it our
selves. But though the manner be thus sweet, yet with this manner there goes
an almighty power. Therefore he does it strongly as coming from himself, and
sweetly, as the speaking is to us preserving our Nature, so the Action is from
him, which has an almighty power with it. Bernard.
As Holy Bernard says Thou dealest sweetly with my soul in regard of my
self, (That is, thou workest upon me, as a man with the words of love,) yet
strongly in regard of thy self. For except he add strength with sweetness,
the work will not follow; but when there are both, an almighty work is
wrought in the soul of a Christian; and so wrought, as the manner of man's
working is preserved in a sweet and free manner, whilst he is changed from
contrary to contrary; And it is also with the greatest reason that can be, In
that now he sees more reason to be good, then in the days of darkness he did
to be naught, God works so sweetly. God speaks to us after the manner of men,
but he works in us as the great God; he speaks to us as a man in our own
language, sweetly; but he works in us almightily, after a powerful manner,
as God; so we must understand such phrases as these, I knock, open to me, my
Love, my Dove, etc. we may take further notice,

That the heart of a Christian, Observe.
is the House, and Temple of Christ.

He has but two houses to dwell in; the Heavens, Ia. ^7. 13.
and the heart of an humble broken hearted sinner;

How can Christ come into the soul? Quest.


He comes into the heart by his Spirit, Answ.
It is a special entertainment that he looks for: open thine ears that
thou may hear my word: thy love, that thou^ may love me more: thy joy,
that thou may delight in me more: open thy whole soul that I may dwell in
it. A Christian should be Gods house, and a true Christian is the true Temple
of God. He left the other two Temples therefore, but his own body, and his
Church he never leaves: for a house is for a man to solace himself in, and to
rest in, and to lay up whatsoever is precious to him. So with Christ, a man
will repair his house, so Christ will repair our souls, and make them
better, and make them more holy, and spiritual, and every way fit for such a
guest as he is.

How shall we know whether Christ dwells in our hearts or not.

We may know by the servants what Master dwells in an house, If Christ be in
the soul there comes out of the house good speeches, and we watch the senses,
so as there comes nothing into defile the soul, and disturb Christ, and
nothing goes out to offend God. When we hear men full of gracious sweet
speeches, It is a sign Christ dwells there. If we hear the contrary, It
shows Christ dwells not there, for Christ would move the whole man to do that
which might edify and comfort.

Again, where Christ comes, Assistance comes there. When Christ was borne, all
Jerusalem was in an uproare, so when Christ is borne in the soul, there is an
uproare, corruption arms it self against Grace, there is a combat betwixt
flesh and Spirit, but Christ subdues the flesh by little and little. Gods image
is stamped upon the soul where Christ is, and if we have opened unto the Lord
of Glory, he will make us glorious.

Christ has never enough of us, nor we have never enough of him, till we be in
heaven, and therefore we pray, Thy Kingdom come, and till Christ comes in his
Kingdom, he desires his Kingdom should come to us, Open (says he) Stupenda
dignatio, etc. (as he cries out) it is a stupendous condescending, when he
that has Heaven to hold him, Angels to attend him, those glorious creatures;
he that has the command of every Creature, that do yield presently homage
when he commands, the Froggs, and Lice, and all the Host of Heaven are ready
to do his will! for him to condescend, and to entreat us to be good to our
own souls, and to beseech us to be reconciled to him, as if he had offended
us, who have done the vvrong and not he, or as if that we had power, and
riches to do him good; Here Greatness beseeches Meanness, Riches Poverty,
Alsufficiencie Want, and life in self, comes to dead drowsy souls. What a
vvondrous condiscending is this? Yet notvvithstanding, Christ vouchsafes to
make the heart of a sinful, sleepie man to be his House, his Temple. He
knocks, and knocks here, saying, Open to me, etc.

This is useful many vvayes Use.
, as first, cherish all the good conceits we can of Christ; Time will come,
that the Devil will set upon us with sharp temptations, fiery darts,
temptations to despair, and present Christ amiss, as if Christ were not
vvilling to receive us, when as you see he knockes at our hearts to open to
him, uses Mercies, and Judgments, the Ministry of his Spirit, and
Conscience, and all; Will not he then entertain us, when we come to him,
that seeks this entertainment at our hands? Certainly he will; Therefore
let us labor to cherish good conceits of Christ. This is the finisher and
beginning of the conversion of a poor sinful soul, even to consider the
infinite love, and condescending of Christ Jesus for the good of our souls?
We need not vvonder at this his willingness to receive us, when we first
know, that God became man, happiness became misery, Gel. 3 13.
and life it self, came to d^e, and to be a curse for us. He has done the
greater and will he not do the less? Therefore think not strange, that he
uses all these means, considering how love hev descended into the womb of
the Virgin for us. Ephesians. 4. 9.

Now such considerations as these being mixed with the Spirit and set on by
him, are effectual for the conversion of poor souls. Is there such love in
God, to become man, and to be a Suitor to vvoe me for my love? Surely thinks the
soul then, he desires my Salvation, and Conversion; And to what kind of
persons does he come? None can Object unvvorthinesse, I am poor; Isa. 61* 1.
he comes to the poor. I am laden, Mat 11. 28.
and vvretched? Come unto me all ye that are weary, and laden. I have
nothing; Come and buy honey, Isa. 55. 1.
milk, and wine, though you have nothing. He takes away all Objections. But I
am stung with the sense of my sinnses? Mat. 5. 3, 5.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst, etc. But I am empty of all? Blessed
are the poor in Spirit. You can object nothing, but it is taken away by the
Holy Ghost, vvisely preventing all the Objections of a sinful soul. This is
the beginning of Conversion, these very conceits; and when we are converted,
these thoughts entertained with admiration of Christ's condescending, are
effectual to give Christ further entrance into the soul, whereby a more
happy communion is wrought still more and more betvveen Christ, and the soul
of a Christian.

Oh, Use. 2.
but take heed that these make not any secure. For if we give not entrance to
Christ, all this will be a further aggravation of our Damnation. How will
this justify the sentence upon us hereafter, when Christ shall set us on the
left hand, Mat. 25.
and say Depart from me, for I invited you to come to me, I knocked at the
door of your hearts, and you would give me no entrance, Depart from us said
you, therefore now Depart you from me. What do profane persons in the
Church? but bid Christ depart from them, especially in the motions of his
Spirit, they entertain him in the outward room, the brain; they know a
little of Christ, but in the heart, the secret room, he must not, come there
to rule. Is it not equal, that he should bid us, Mat. 23. 41.
Depart ye cursed I know you not? you would not give entrance to me, I will
not now to you; as to the foolish Virgins he speaks, and Prove. 1. 28. Wisdom
knockes, and has no entrance, therefore in times of danger, they call upon
Her, but she rejoices at their destruction; Where God magnifies his mercy in
this kind in sweet allurements, and inviting by Judgments, Mercies,
Ministry, and Spirit, he will magnify his Judgment after. Those that have
neglected Heaven with the Prerogatives, and advantages in this kind, they shall
be cast into Hell. Mat. 11. 21.
Woe to thee Chorazin, etc. as you know in the Gospel. This is one thing that
may humble us of this place and nation, that Christ has no further entrance,
nor better entertainment after so long knocking? for the entertaining of his
word, is the welcomming of himself, as it is, Colloss. 3. 16. Let the word of
God dwell plentifully in you. And let Christ dwell in your hearts by faith.
Ephesians. 3. 17. Compare those places, let the word dwell plenteously in you by
wisdom, and let Christ dwell in your hearts by faith. For then does Christ
dwell in the heart, when the truth dwells in us. Therefore what entertainment
we give to his truth, we give to himself. Now what means of knocking has
he not used among us a long time? For works of all sorts; he has drawn us
by the cords of a man, by all kind of favors. For Mercies, How many
deliverances have we had (No Nation the like, we are a Miracle of the Christian
World,) from foreign invasion, and Domestical conspiracies at home? How many
mercies do we enjoy? Abundance together with long peace, and plenty. Besides,
if this would not do, God has added Corrections with all these, in every
Eliment, in every manner, Infection in the air, Judgments in inundations; We
have had remours of wars, etc. threatenings, shakings of the rod only, but
such as might have awaked us, And then he has knocked at our hearts by the
example of other Nations. By what he has done to them, he has showed us what
he might justly have done to us, we are no better then they.

As for his Ministerial knocking; above threescore years we have lived under
the Ministry of the Gospel, this Land has been Goshen, a land of light,
when many other places are in darkness, especially we that live in this
Goshen, this place, and such like, where the light shines in a more abundant
measure. Ministers have been sent, and variety of gifts, there has been
piping, and mourning (as Christ complains in his time) that they were like
froward Children, that neither sweet piping, nor doleful mourning would moove
to be tractable to their fellows Mat. 11. 17.
they had John who came mourning, and Christ comforting with blessing in his
mouth, all kind of means have been used.

And for the Motions of his Spirit, who are there at this time, who thus live
in the Church under the Ministry, who cannot say that God thereby has smote
their hearts, those hard rocks again and again, and awaked their
consciences, partly with corrections public and personal, and partly with
benefits: yet notwithstanding what little way is given to Christ? Many are
indifferent, and lukewarm either way, but rather incline to the worst.

Let us then consider of it, The greater means, the greater judgment
afterward, if we be not won by them. Therefore let us labor to hold Christ,
to entertain him, let him have the best room in our souls, to dwell in our
hearts, let us give up the keys to him, and desire him to rule our
understandings, to know nothing but him, and what may stand with his truth, Not
to yield to any error, or corruption; let us desire that he would rule in our
wills, and affections, sway all, give all to him; for that is his meaning; when
he says, Open to me, so that I may rule, as in mine own house, as the
husband rules in his family, and a King in his Kingdom, he will have all
yielded up to him, And he comes to beat down all whatsoever is exalted
against him, and that is the reason men are so loath to open unto him. They
know if they open to the Spirit of God, he will turn them out of their fools
Paradise, and make them resolve upon other courses of life, which because they
will not turn unto, they repel the sweet motions of the Spirit of Christ, and
pull away his Graces, building bullwarkes against Christ, 2 Cor. 10.
as lusts, strange imaginations, and resolutions. Let the Ministers say what
they will, and the Spirit moove as he will, thus they live, and thus they will
live. Let us take notice therefore of all the means that God uses to the
state, and to us in particular, and every one labor to amend one. Every soul
is the Temple, the House Christ should dwell in, let every soul therefore
among us consider what means Christ uses to come into his soul to dwell with
him, and to rule there.

And what shall we loose by it? Con^iderations enforcing us to entertain
Christ.
Do we entertain Christ to our loss? Does he come empty? Noe, he comes
with all Grace, his Goodness is a Communicative, diffusive goodness; He
comes to spread his Treasures, to enrich the heart with all Grace and strength
to bear all afflictions, to encounter all dangers, to bring peace of
Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; he comes (indeed) to make our hearts (as
it were) a heaven. Do but consider this, he comes not for his own ends; but
to empty his goodness into our hearts, as a breast that desires to empty it
self; when it is full. So this fountain, has the fullness of a fountain,
which strives to empty his goodness into our souls; he comes out of love to
us; Let these considerations melt our hearts for our unkindnesse, that we
suffer him to stand so long at the door knocking, as it is said here.

If we find not our suits answered so soon as we would; Remember, we have
made him also wait for us; perhaps to humble us, and after that to encourage
us, he will make us wait, for we have made him wait. Let us not give over,
for certainly he that desires us to open, that he may power out his Graces
upon us, he will not reject us when we come to him, Math. 7. 7.
, If he answers us not at first, Habak. 2. 3.
yet he will at last, Let us go on, and wait, seeing there is no one duty
pressed more in Scripture then this. And we see it is equity, He waits for
us, Isa. 30. 18.
it is good reason we should wait for him, if we have not comfort presently,
when we desire it, let us attend upon Christ, as he has attended upon us, for
when he comes, he comes with advantage; Isa. 60. 16.
so that when we wait, Isa. 64. 3.
we loose nothing thereby, but are gainers by it, increasing our patience.
James. 1. 4.
The longer we wait, he comes with the more abundant Grace and comfort in
the end, Isa. 40.
and shows himself rich, and bountiful to them that wait upon him.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
THE SIXTH SERMON. SERMON. VI.

CANT. V. II. It is the voice of my Beloved that knocks, saying, open unto
me, my love, my dove, my undefiled, etc.
IN the first part of this verse, has been handled the Churches own condition
which she was in, after some blessed feelings that she had of the love of
Christ.

Now in the next words the Church sets down an acknowledgement of the carriage
of Christ to her in this her sleepie condition. It is the voice of my Beloved
that knocks, saying, Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, etc. She
acknowledges Christ's voice in her sleepie estate, and sets down his carriage
thus, how he knockes, and then also speaks, Open to me, And then sets down
what he suffered for her, My head is filled with dew, and my locks with the
dropps of the night. And that nothing might be wanting that might moove her
heart to respect this his carriage toward her, he uses sweet titles, a
loving compellation, Open to me (says he,) my Sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled, as so many cords of love to draw her, so here wants neither loving
carriage, sweet words, nor patience; It is the voice of my Beloved that
knocks.

The Church as she takes notice of the voice of Christ, so she does also of
the means he uses, and sees his love in them all. It is the voice of my
Beloved that knocks, saying, open to me, etc. Here is also an other
distinguishing note of a sound Christian from an unsound, A sanctified spirit
sees Christ in the means, this is, says the heart, the word of Christ, and
this the, mercy of Christ to take such pains with my soul, to send his
Ministers, to provide his ordinances, Ephesians. 4. 12.
to give gifts to men, and men to the Church. It is the voice of my Beloved
that knocks.

But we must especially understand it of the Ministerial voice, That Christ's
knocking is especially by the Ministry of the Word.
whereby Christ does chiefly make way for himself into the heart, and that by
all kind of ways dispensed therein: as gifts of all so^ts, some rougher, some
milder, all kind of Methods and ways in the Ministry to make way for
himself, First of all by the threatenings of the Law, and by terrors, as John
was sent before Christ, and as the storm, went before the still and calm
voice, 1 King. 19. 12.
wherein God came to Elias, so he uses all kind of courses in the Ministry;
and Ministers by the direction of the Spirit turn themselves, as it were, into
all shapes and fashions both of speech and Spirit to win people to God, in so
much that God appeals to them, What could I have done more for my Church, Isa.
5. 1.
that I have not done?

Therefore let us take notice of this voice of Christ in the word, Use.
and not think as good Samuel thought, 1 Samuel 3. 5.
that Eli spoke, when God spoke; let us think that God speaks to us in the
Ministry, that Christ comes to woe us, and win us thereby.

And we Ministers are the friends of the Bridegroom, who are to hear what
Christ says and would have said to the Church, and we must pray to him, that
he would teach us what to teach others. We are to procure the contract, and to
perfect it till the marriage be in heaven, that is our work.

And you that are hearers if you do not regard Christ's sweet voice in the
Ministry, which God has appointed for the government of the world, know,
that there is a voice that you cannot shake of. That peremptory voice at the
day of judgment, Mat. 25.
when he will say, Go ye cursed into hell sire, etc. And that God who
delights to be styled a God hearing prayer, will not hear thee, but says Such
a one as turns his care away from hearing the Law, Prove. 28. 9.
his prayer is abominable. It is a doleful t hing, that he that made us, and
allureth us in the Ministry, that follows us with all evidences of his love,
and adds together with the Ministry many sweet motions of his Spirit, that he
should delight in the destruction of his creatures, and not endure the sight of
them, Depart away from me ye cursed into hell fire, etc. There are scarce any
in the Church, but Christ has allured at one time or other to come in, and in
many he opens their understandings in a great measure, and knocks upon their
hearts, that they (as it were) half open unto Christ, like Agrippa that said
to Paul, Thou almost perswadest me to be a Christian. Act. 26. 28.
So Herod did many things, and he heard gladly. Mark. 6. 20.
They are half open, seem to open, but are not effectually converted, but at
last they see, that further yielding will not stand with that which they
resolve not to part with; their lusts, their present condition that they make
their God, and their heaven, whereupon they shut the door again, when they
have opened it a little to the motions of Gods Spirit, they dare give no
further way, because they cannot learn the first lesson in Christ's school, to
deny themselves, and take up their cross.

This is an undoubted conclusion, our blessed Savior gives such means and
motions of his Spirit to the vil^st persons in the Church, that their own
hea^ts tell them, they have more means and ^^ecter motions, then they yield
to, and that the sentence of c^nd^mnation is not pronounced upon them for
merely not knowing of Christ, but upon some grounds of rebellion, in that they
go not so far as they are provoked, and put on by the Spirit of God, they
resist the holy Spirit. Acts. 7 31.
There can be no resistance where there is not a going beyond the desire and
will of him whom he resists. A man does not resist, when he gives way as
far as he is moved. There is no wicked man in the Church, that gives so much
way as he is moved and stirred to by the Spirit and word of God.

Away then with these impudent, ungracious Objections about Gods Decree for
matter of Election, let us make it sure, and for any ill conceits that may rise
in our hearts about that other of reprobation let this dampe them all, that in
the Church of God, he offers unto the vilest wretch so much means with the
motions of his Spirit, as he resisting, proves inexcusable, his own rebellion
therefore being the cause of his rejection. Let men cease from cavilling, God
has that in their own breast, in the heart of every carnal man, which will
speak for God against him, and stop his mouth that he shall be silent, Mar.
^2. 12.
, and speechless at the day of judgment.

Thus we see that Christ does condescend so low as to account it almost a part
of his happiness to have our souls for a Temple to dwell in, to rule there.
Therefore he makes all this earnest suit, with strong expressions what he
suffers.

And since Christ bears this great and large affection to his poor Church, It
may encourage us to pray heartily for the same, and to spread before God the
state thereof. Why Lord? it is that part of the world that is thy Sister, thy
Love, thy Dove, thy undefiled: the Communion with whom thou livst above all the
world besides. It is a strong argument to prevail with God. Therefore let us
commend the state of the Church at this time, or at any time with this
confidence. Lord, it is the Church that thou love. They thought they
prevailed much with Christ when thy labored to bring him to Lazarus, Ioh. 11.
3.
saying, Lord, He whom thou love is sick. So say we, Simile.
The Church whom thou love, that is thy only love, In whom thy love is
concenterate (as it were) and gathered to abead, (as though thou had no other
love in the world but thy Church) this thy love is in this state and condition.
It is good to think of prevailing arguments, not to moove God so much, as our
own hearts, to strengthen our faith to prevail with God, which is much,
fortified with the confideration of Christ's wondrous loving expression to his
poor Church. Then, come to Christ, offer thy self, and he will meet thee. Are
not two loving well-wishers well met? When th^^ offerest thy self to him, and
he seeks thy love, will he reject thee when thou ^^mmest to him that seeks
thy love, and seeks it in this passionate, affectionate manner, as he does?
Therefore, be of good comfort. He is more willing to entertain us then we are
to come to him.

And for those that have relapsed any kind of way, That the Relapsed need no^
desp^rately to be discouraged*
let them not be discouraged to return again to Christ; the Church here was
in a drowsy sleepie estate, and used him unkindly, yet he is so patient, that
he waits her leisure as it were and says, Open to me my Sister, my love,
etc. Thomas was so untoward, that he would not believe, Unless he did see
the print of the na^es, etc. in Christ's body. Yet Christ was so gracious as
he condescendeth to poor Thomas, so to Peter after he was fallen, and to the
Church after backsliding.

Open to me my Sister, etc.
Hence Observe further,

That Christ has never enough of his Church till he has it in Heaven, Obs^rv.
where are indeed the kisses of the Spouse, and of Christ, In the mean while
Open, Open still. Christ had the heart of the Spouse in some measure already,
but yet there were some corners of the heart that were not so filled with
Christ as they should be, he was not so much in her understanding, will, joy,
delight, and love, as he would be: therefore, Open thy understanding more and
more to embrace me, and divine truths that are offered thee; open thy love to
solace me more and more. For God in Christ having condescended to the terms
of friendsh^p nay to intimate terms of friendship in marriage with us.
Therefore as the Church in her right temper, has never enough of Christ, but
desires further union, and communion still, It being the defcription of the
people of God, that they love the appearance of Christ, as they loved his first
appearance, 2 Timothy 4. 18.
and waited for the consolation of Israel; Revel. 21. 20.
so they love his second appearing, and are never quiet, till he comes again
in the flesh, to consummate the marriage begun here: so Christ also he is as
desirous of them, yea they are his desires that breed their desires; Open to
me my Sister, my love, my dove, etc. Again his Love and pity mooves him to
desire further to come into us: Christ knows what is in our hearts, if he be
not there, there is that, that should not be there. What is in the brain
where Christ is not? a deal of worldly projects nothing worth. What is in our
joy, if Christ be not there? worldly joy, which cleaves to things worse then
it self. If a man were anatomized, and seen into, he would be ashamed of
himself, if he did see himself, Christ therefore out of pity to our
souls, would not have the Devil there; Christ knows it is good for our
souls to give way to him, therefore he uses all sweet allurements, Open to
me my Sister, my love, etc. Christ has never his fill, till he close with the
soul perfectly, so that nothing be in the soul above him, nothing equal to
him, therefore Open, Open, still.

Again, He sets down to moove the Church the more to open to him the
inconveniences that he endured, My head is filled with dew, etc. wherein he
shows what he suffered, which sufferings are of two sorts. In himself. In his
Ministers. In himself and in his own blessed person, what did he endure? what
patience had he in enduring the refractorie spirits of men when he was here?
how many indignities did he digest in his Desciples after their conversion?
Toward his latter end, his Head was not only filled with the dropps, but his
body filled with drops of blood. Drops of blood came from him, because of the
anguish of his Spirit, and the sense of Gods wrath for our sins. Upon the
Cross, what did he endure there? that sense of Gods anger there was only for
our sins. Mat. 27.
My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? What should we speak of his going
up and down doing good, preaching in his own person, setting whole nights
apart for prayer; And then for what he suffers in his Minister? there he
knocks, and says, Open in them. And how was he used in the Apostles that were
after him, and in the Ministers of the Church ever since, What have they
endured? for he put a spirit of patience upon them. And what indignities
endured they in the Primitive Church, that were the publishers, of the Gospel,
those sweet publishers thereof, drawing men to open to Christ, were killed for
preaching. So cruel is the heart, that it offers violence to them, that love
them most, that love their souls. And what greater love, then the love of the
soul? yet this is the Satanicall temper and disposition of men's hearts, they
hate those men most, that deal this way most truly and lovingly with them. It
is not that the Gospel is such an hard message. It is the word of
Reconciliation, and the word of life, but the heart hates it, because it would
draw men from their present condition, and Therefore Condemnation is come into
the world, in that men hate the light, John. 3. 19.
because their works are evil. Is there any thing truly and cordially hated
but Grace? and are any persons heartily and cordially hated in the world so
much as the Promulgers and Publishers of Grace, and the Professors of it,
because it upbraids most of all, and meddles with the corruptions of men, that
are dearer to them then their own souls.

Now what patience is there in Christ to suffer himself in his messengers, and
his children to be thus used? Nor it is not strange to say that Christ stands
thus in his Ministers, for 1 Pet. 3. 19. It is said, That Christ by his Spirit
preached in the days of Noah to the souls now in prison, Christ preached in
Noah's time before he was Incarnate, much more does he preach now: and as he was
patient then to endure the old World, unto whom Noah preached a hundred and
twenty years, so he is patient now in his Ministers to preach still by the
same Spirit, Even to us still, and yet the enteatainement in many places is (as
Paul complains,) though the more I love you, 2 Cor. 12. 1^.
yet she less I am beloved of you.

Let these things moove us to be patient toward God and Christ, Use. 1.
if we be corrected in any kind, considering that Christ is so patient toward
us, and to wait upon him with patience. How long has he waited for our
conversion? how long does he still wait for the through giving up of our
souls to him? Shall we think much then to wait a little while for him?

And let this Spirit of Christ strengthen us likewise in our dealing with
others, Use. 2.
as to bear with evil men, and as it is. 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. To wait if God
will at any time give them repentance. Neither may we be so short spirited that
if we have not an answer presently to give over. We should imitate Christ
here, never give over as long as God continues life with any advantage and
opportunity to do good to any soul, wait, if God at any time will give them
Grace. Open to me my Sister, my love, etc.

Let this aga^ne work upon us, that our Savior Christ here would thus set
forth his love, and his patience in his love, in bearing with us thus under the
resemblance of a silly suitor that comes afar off and stands at the door,
and knocks, that Christ should stoop thus in seeking the good of our souls,
Let this winn, and quicken our hearts with all readiness, and thankfulness
to receive him when he comes to work in our souls, considering, that Christ
has such a care of us by himself, his Ministers, and the motions of his
Spirit, who joins with his Ministry; let not us therefore be careless of our
own souls; but let it moove our hearts to melt to him. The motives may be
seen more in the particular compellations, Open to me my Sister, my Love, etc.

My Sister.
This was spoken of before in the former verse. The Church of God is Christ's
Sister and Spouse, we are knit to him both by Consanguinitie, and by Affinity.
The nearest as^initie is Marriage: and the nearest Consanguinitie is Sister. So
that there are all Bonds to knit us to Christ; Whatsoever is strong in any
bond, he knits us to him by it. Is there any love in an Husband, Math. 12.
a Brother, a Mother, a Friend, in an Head to the members? in any thing in the
world? Is there any love scattered in any relation, gather it all into one, and
all that love, and a thousand times more then that, is in Christ in a more
eminent manner, therefore he styles himself in all these sweet relations, to
show that he has the love of all, will a Sister shut out a Brother, when the
Brother comes to visit her, and do her all good? is this unkindnesse even in
Nature to look strangely upon a man that is near a kin, that comes and says,
Open to me my Sister? If the Sister should shut out the Brother, were it not
most unnatural? And is it not monstrous in Grace? when our Brother comes for
our good, and in pity to our souls to let him stand without doors? Remember
that Christ has the same affections, to account us Brothers and Sisters now in
Heaven, as he had when he was upon the Earth, For after his resurrection
(says he to his Disiciples) I go to my God, Ioh. 20. 17.
and to your God, to my Father, and to your Father; he calls himself our
Brother, having one common Father in Heaven, and one Spirit, and one
inheritance, etc, This is a sweet relation, Christ being our Brother, his
heart cannot but melt toward us in any affliction. Joseph dissembled a while
out of politic wisdom, Genesis 42.
but because he had a Brothers heart to Benjamin, therefore at last he could
not hold, but melted into tears, though he made his countenance, as though
he had not regarded. So our Joseph now in Heaven, may seem to withdraw all
tokens, and signs of Brotherly love from us, and not to own us, but it is
only in show, he is our Brother still, his heart first or last, will melt
toward his Brethren to their wonderful comfort. My Sister, etc.

My Love.
That word we had not yet. It is worthy also a little standing on; for all
these four words be (as it were) the attractive cords to draw the Spouse, not
only by showing what he had suffered, but by sweet titles, My Love, My Dove.

What had Christ no love but his Spouse? did his love go out of his own heart
to her (as it were?) It is strange, yet true, Christ's love is so great to his
Church and Children, and so continual to it, that his Church and People and
every Chirstian soul is the seat of his love, That love in his own breast
being in them, Ioh. 17. ult.
they are his love, because he himself is there, and one with them.

He loves all his Creatures, they have all some beams of his goodness, Which
he must needs love, therefore he loves them as creatures, and as they be
more or less capable of a higher degree of goodness; but for his Church and
Children, they are his love indeed.

But what is the ground of such love?
loves them at he beholds them in his Fathers choice, as they are Elected of
God, and given unto himself in Election: Ioh. 17. 6.
Thine they are thou gave them me; Christ looking on us in Gods Election and
choice, loves us.

He loves us, because he sees his own Graces in us, he loves what is his in
us. Before we be actually his, he loves us with a love of good will, to wish
all good to us; But when we have any thing of his Spirit, that our natures are
altered and changed, he loves us with a love of the intimatest friendship; with
the love of an Head, Husband, Friend, and what we can imagine; he loves his
own Image. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. 7.
That the Wife is the glory of her Husband; because what soever is in a good
Husband, the Wife expresses it by reflection. So the Church is the glory of
Christ, she reflects his excellencies, though in a weak measure, they show
forth his Virtues or praises, as Peter speaks, thus he sees his own Image in
her, and the Holy Ghost in his Church, he loves her, and these in her: so as
whether we regard the Father, or himself, or his Spirit, the Church is his
Love.

If we consider also what he has done and suffered for her, we may well say
the Church is his love. Besides the former favors, (not to speak of Election,
he choosed us before we were) In time he did choose us by actual Election by
which he called us: we had an existence, but we resisted, he called us when we
resisted; and then also he justified us, and clothed us with his own
Righteousness, and after feeds us with his own Body. As the soul is the
most excellent thing in the world, so he has provided for it the most
excellent ornaments. It has food and ornaments proportionable. What love is
this, that he should feed our souls with his own Body, and cloathe us with
his own Righteousness. Gal. 2. 20.
He loved me (says Paul) what was the effect of his love? He gave himself
for me. He gave himself both that we might have a Righteousness to cloathe
us with in the sight of God, and he gave himself, that he might be the bread
of life, Joh. 6. 55.
My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. The guilty, the
self accusing soul feeds upon Christ dying for its sins. Again, Revel. 1.
6. you have his love set forth, He loved us, and how does he witness it? He
has washed us with his own blood, and has made us Kings, and Priests, etc.
the like you have, Ephesians. 5. He loved us, and gave himself a swee^e Sacrifice
to God for us. When this world is at an end, we shall see what his love is; he
is not satisfied, till we be all in one place. What does he pray for to his
Father, Ioh. 17. 24. Father I will, that those whom thou have given me be with
me where I am, etc. run through all the whole course of Salvation, Election,
Vocation, Justification, Glorification, you shall see his love in all of them.
But it were an infinite argument to follow, to show the love of Christ, which
is beyond all knowledge, Ephesians. 4. 16.
and it is too large for us to know all the dimensions of it, to see the
height, breadth, depth, and length of it, which we should ever think speak
and meditate of, because the soul is then in the most fit temper to serve,
love, and glorify God, when it is most apprehensive of his great love.

This phrase imports diverse things, Deductions out of the word Love.
That there is not saving love to any out of the Church, love. It is (as it
were) confined in the Chruch, as if all the beams of his love met in that
center, as we see when the beams of the Sun meet in a glass, they burn,
because many are there united. So in the Church all his love does meet.

that there is a Church so endowed, so graced, so full of the hope of glory,
it is out of his love.

And for the properties of it. Properties of it.
It is a free love, a pr^venting love; he loved us before ever we could love
him; he loved us when we resisted him, and were his enemies.

It is a most tender love, as you have it Isa. 49. etc. He has us in his heart,
in his eye, in his hand, in a mothers heart, Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
and beyond it; he has a tender eye and a powerful hand to maintain his
church.

It is a most transcendent, and careful love, all

And it is a most intimate invinsible love, that nothing could quench it, as we
se here the love of Christ, I sleep, but my heart waketh, yet Christ comes
with my love, my dove, etc.

But what cannot Christ see matter of weakness, Quest.
sinfullnesse, hatred, and dislike in the Chruch?

Oh yes, to pity, help, and heal it, Answ.
but not at all to diminish his love, but to manifest it so much the more. His
love is a tender love, sensible of all things wherewith we displease him, yet
it is so invincible and unconquerable, that it overcomes all. Again he sees
ill indeed in us, but he sees in us some good of his own also, which moves him
more to love, then that that is ill in us, moves him to hate, for what he sees
of ours, he sees with a purpose to vanquish, mortify, and ea^e it out; the
Spirit is as fire to consume it, He is as water to wash it, but what he sees of
his own, he sees with a purpose to increase it more and more, and to perfect
it, therefore he says my Love, notwithstanding that the Church was a sleep.

This therefore serves greatly for our comfort, Use.
to search what good Christ by his Spirit has wrought in our hearts, what
faith, what love, what sanctified judgment, what fire of ^oly affections to
him, and to the best things, O let us value our selves by that that is good,
that Christ has in us. We are Christ's love notwithstanding we are sleepie, if
we be displeased with this our state, that as Christ dislikes it, so if we by
the Spirit dislike i^, the matter is not what sin we have in us; but how we
are affected to it. Have we that ill in us, which is truly the grief of our
hearts and souls, which as Christ dislikes, so we abhor it, and would be
purged, and ridd of it; and it is the grief of our hearts and souls, that we
cannot be better, and more lovely in Christ's eye? then let us not be
discouraged. For Christ estemes of his Church highly, even as his very love,
even at that time when she was sleepie. And may ^each us in time of temptation
not to hearken to Satan, who then moves us to look altogether upon that which
is naught in us, thereby to abate ^ur love to Christ and our apprehension of
his to us; for he knows if we be sensible of the love of Christ to us, we
shall love him again. For love is a kind of fire, an active quality, which
will set us about glorifying God, and pulling down Satan's kingdom; As we say
in nature (fi^e does all) what work almost can a man work without fire, by
which all instruments are made and heated etc. So grace does all with love; God
first does manifest to our souls his love to us in Christ, and quicken us by
his Spirit, witnessing his love to us wherewith he warmes our hearts, kindles
and insta^^es them so with love, that we love him again, which love has a
constraining sweet violence to put us upon all duties, to suffer, to do, to
resist any thing. If a man be in love with Christ, what will be harsh to him in
the world? the devil knows this well enough, therefore one of his maine
engines, and temptations is to weaken our hearts in the sense of Gods love and
of Christ's. Therefore let us be as wise for our souls as he is subtle, and
politic against them; as watchful for ou^ own comfort, as he is to
discomfort us, and make us despair. Let us be wise ^o gather all the arguments
of Christ love, that we can.

But how shall we know that Christ loves us in this peculiar manner? Quest.


First, Answ.
Search what course he takes and has taken to draw thee nearer unto him; Heb.
12.
he chastises every one that he loves. Seasonable corrections sanctified is a
sign of Christ's love, when he will not suffer us to thrive in sin, when we
cannot speak nor do amiss; but either he lasheth us in our conscience for
it, and by his Spirit checks us, or else stirrs up others, one thing or other
to make us our of love with sin.

the Sun, of necess^ry must shine on it first, because it is nothing but cold
stone of it self. So if our hearts, that are naturally cold be heated with the
love of divine things, certainly we may say, Christ has shined here first:
for naturally our hearts are of a cold temper, there is no such thing as
spiritual love growing in our natures and hearts.

You have many poor souls helped with this, who cannot tell whether Christ
love them or not, but this helps them a little, they can find undoubted
arguments of their love to Christ, his Image and servants, and of relishing the
word, though they find much corruption; and this their love to divine things
tells them by demonstrations from the effects, that Christ loves them, because
there is no love to divine, and supernatural things without the love of Christ
first. And the graces in our hearts, they are love tokens given to the spouse.
Common favors he gives, as Abraham gifts to his servants and others, but
special gifts to his spouse, if therefore there be any grace, a tender and
soft heart, a prizing of heavenly things, love to Gods people and truth, then
we may comfortly conclude Christ loves us, not only because they are
reflections of Gods love, but because they are jewels and ornaments that Christ
only bestows upon his spouse, and not Ioh 15. 15.
such precious jewels as these. Psalm. ^5.


By discovering his secrets to us, for that is an argument of love. Does Christ
by his Spirit discover the secret love the has borne to us before all worlds?
does he discover the breast of his father, and his own heart to us? this
discovery of secret affections, of entire love shows our happiestate; for
that is one prerogative of freindship, and the cheifest discovery of secrets,
when he gives us a particular right to truths, as our own, that we can go
challenge them, these are mine, these belong to me, these promises are mine,
this discovery of the secret love of God, Use. 1.
and of the interest we have in the promises, is a sign that Christ loves us,
and that in a peculier manner we are his love.

Reproof*
that where we see any saving goodness in any let us love them: for should
not our love meet with our Saviors love. Shall the Church of God be the love
of Christ, and shall it be our hatred? Shall a good christian be Chists love,
and shall he be the object of my hatred and scorn? can we imitate a better
pattern? O let us never think our estate to be good, excepet every child of
God be our love as he is Christ's love. Can I love Christ, and cannot I love
him in whom I see Christ? It is a sign that I hate himself, when I hate his
Image. It is to be wondered at that the Devil has prevailed with any so
much, as to think they should be in a good Reproof.
when they have hearts rising against the best people, and who as they grow in
grace, so they grow in there dislike of them. Is here the Spirit of Christ?
And let them likewise be here reproved, that are glad to see any Christian
hault, slip, and go awry. The best Christians in the world have that in part,
which is wholly in another man; he has flesh in him. Shall we utterly distaste
a Christian for that? The Church was now in a sleepie condition, and yet
notwithstanding Christ takes not the advantage of the weakness of the Church
to casheere, and to hate her, but he pitties her the more, and takes a course
to bring her again into a good state and condition. Let us not therefore be
glad at the infirmities and failings of any, that discover any true goodness
in them; it may be our own case ere long, it casts them not out of Christ's
love, but they dwell in his love still, why should we then cast them out of our
love and affections? Let them be our love still, as they are the love of
Christ, notwithstanding their infirmities.

The end of the Sixth Sermon.
THE SEVENTH SERMON. SER. VII.

CANT. V. II. III. My Love, my Dove, my Undefiled: for my head is filled with
dew, and my locks with the dropps of the night.

I have put of my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?


Hat the life of a Christian is a perpetual conflicting, appears evidently in
this Book, the passages whereof joined with our own expe^iences, s^^fici^ntly
declare what combats, Trials, and temptations the Sa^^ts are subject unto
after their new birth and change of life, now up, now down, now full of good
resolutions, now again sluggish and slow not to be waked, nor brought forwards
by the voice of Christ, as it was with the Church here, she will not out of
her sleep to open unto Christ, though he call and knock, and stand waiting
for entrance. She is now desirous to pity her self, and needs no Peter to
stir her up unto it, the flesh of it self is prone enough to draw back, and
make excuses to hinder the power of grace from its due operation in us. She is
laid along (as it were) to rest her; yet is not she so asleep, but she
discernes the voice of Christ, but up and rise she will not

Thus we may see the truth of that speech of our Savior verified, Ioh. 3. 6.
That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the
Spirit is Spirit. The flesh pulls her back, the Spirit would raise her up to
open to Christ, he in the mean while makes her inexcusable, and prepares her
by his knocking, waiting and departing: as for a state of further Humiliation,
so for an estate of further Exaltation. But how lovingly does he speak to her?

Open unto me my Love,
He calls her my Love, Why my Love.
especially for two his love was settled upon her, it was in his own breast,
but it rested not there, but seated it self upon, and in the heart of his
spouse, so that she became Christ's love. We know the heart of a lover is more
where it loves, then where it lives, (as we use to speak) and indeed, there is
a kind of a going out (as it were) to the thing beloved with a heedlesnesse of
all other things, where the affection is in any excess, it carries the whole
soul with it.

But besides this, when Christ says my love, Church, so it is united to that,
and is not scattered to other objects. There are beams of Gods general love
scattered in the whole World, but this love, this exceeding love, is only
fastened upon the Church. And indeed there is no love comparable to this love
of Christ, which is above the love of Women, of Father, or Mother, If we
consider what course he takes to show it; For there could be nothing in the
world so great to discover his love, as this gift, and gift of himself, And
therefore he gave himself (the best thing in Heaven or in Earth) withal to
show his love, The Father gave him, when he was God equal with his Father, he
loved his Church, and gave himself for it; how could he discover his love
better, then to take our Nature to show how he loved us? how could he come
nearer to us, then by being incarnate, Ephesians. 5. 30.
so to be bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, and took our nature to
show how he loved it. Love draws things nearer wheresoever it is; It drew him
out of Heaven to the Womb of the Virgin, there to be incarnate, and after
that, when he was borne not only to be a man, but a miserable man, because we
could not be his spouse unless he purchased us by his death. We must be his
spouse by a satisfaction made to Divine Iustic^. God would not give us to him,
but with salving his Justice. What sweet love is it to heal us not by
searing, or lancing, but by making a plaster of his own blood, which he shed
for those that shed his in malice and hatred. What a wondrous love is it, that
he should power forth tears for those that shed his blood, Mat. 23. 37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. that he prayed for those that persecu^ed him? and
what wondrous love is it now that he sympathizeth with us in Heaven, accounting
the harm that is done to the least member he has, as done to himself? S^^l
S^^l why persecutest thou me? Acts. 9. 4.
and that he should take us into one Body with himself, 1 Cor. 12.
to make one Christ? and he does not content himself with any thing he can do
for us here, but his desire is that we may be one with him more and more, and
be for ever with him in the heavens, as you have it in that excellent prayer.
John. 17. 24.

Now this should stir us up to be fully persuaded of his love, that loves us
so much. Christ's love in us, is as the loadstone to the Iro^, our hea^ts are
heavy and downwards of themselves. We may especially know his love by this,
that it draws us upwards, and makes us heavenly minded, it makes us de^ir^
further and further communion with him, still there is a magneticall attractive
force in Christ's love, wheresoever it is, it draws the heart and affections
after it.

And we may know from hence one Argument to prove the stability of the Saints,
Use. 2.
and the immortality of the soul, because Christ calls the Church his love.
The want of love again (where it is entire, and in any great measure) is
amiserie. Christ therefore should suffer, if those he has planted his love
upon, whom he loves truly, either should fall away for ever, or should not be
immortal for ever. Christ will not loose his love; and as it is an argument of
persevering in Grace; So is it of an everlasting being that this soul of ours
has, because it is capable of the love of Christ, seeing there is a sweet
union, and communion between Christ and the soul. It should make Christ
miserable (as it were) in Heaven, the place of happiness, if there should not
be a meeting of him and his spouse, there must therefore be a meeting, Hos. 2.
which marriage is for ever, that both may be for ever happy one in an other.

Let us often warm our hearts with the consideration hereof, Use. 3.
because all our love is from this love of his. Oh the wonderful love of God,
that both such ^ranscendent Majesty, and such an infinite love should dwell
together. (We say) Majesty and love never dwell together, because, Love is an
(...) of the soul to all services. But herein it is false, for here Majesty
and L^ve dwell together in (...) heart of one Christ, which Majesty has
stooped as low, as his Almightiy power could give leave. Nay it was an Almigity
power, that he could stoop so low and yet be God keeping his Majesty still.
For God to become man, to hide his Majesty for a while, not to be know^e to be
God, and to hide so far in this nature, as to die forus. What an Almighty
power was this, that could go so low and yet preserve himself God still, yet
this we see in this our blessed Savior, the greatest Majesty met with the
greatest abasement that ever was, and all out of love to our poor souls.
There was no stooping, no abasement that was ever so low as Christ was abased
unto us, to want for a time even the comfort of the presence of his Father.
There was an union of Grace, but the union of solace, and comfort, that he had
from him was suspended for a time, out of love to us, for he had a right in his
own Person to be in Heaven presently. Now for him to live so long out of
Heaven, and often times, especially toward his suffering to be without that
solace (that he might be a sacrifice for our sins) to have it suspended for a
time, what a condescending was this? It is said, Psalm. 113. 6. that God stoopes
To behold the things done here below. It is indeed a wondrous condescending,
that God will look upon things below; but that he would become man, and out
of love to save us, suffer as he did here, this is wondrous humility to
astonishment. We think humility is not a proper grace, becoming the Majesty
of God; so it is not indeed, but there is some resemblance of that grace in
God, especially in Christ, that he should to reveal himself, veil himself
with flesh, and all out of love to us, The consideration of these things are
wondrous effectual, as to strengthen Faith, so to kindle Love. Let these be
for a taste to direct our meditations herein. It follows.

My Dove.
We know when Christ was baptized, the Holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a
Dove (as a symbol of his presence,) Math. 3.
to discover thus much, That Christ should have the property Dove, Mat. 11. 29.
And be meek and gentle. For indeed he became man for that end to be a
merciful Savior. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly. Mat. 12. 20.
And I will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, etc.
said he, and therefore the Spirit appeared upon him in the shape of a Dove. As
likewise, To Noah's Arc was sent out, and came home again to the Arc with an
Olive branch, to show that the waters were abated: So Christ was to preach
deliverance from the deluge of Gods anger, and to come with an Olive leaf of
peace in his mouth, and reconciliation, to show that Gods wrath was appeased.
When he was borne, Luke 2. 14.
the Angels sung, Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and good will toward
men: Now as Christ had the Spirit in the likeness of a Dove, So all that are
Christ's, the spouse of Christ, have the disposition of Christ, that Spirit that
framed him to be like a Dove, frames the Church to be a Dove, as the ointment
that was powered on Aarons head, Psalm. 133. 3.
it ran down upon the lowest skirts of his garments.

Now the Church is compared to a Dove; partly, for the disposition that is and
should be in the Church resembling that creature. And partly also, For that the
Church is in a mournful suffering cond^tion. 1. For the like disposition as is
found in a dove. There is some good in all creatures, That every Creature has
in it some beam of the Majesty of God.
there is no creature but it has a beam of Gods Majesty, of some Attribute,
but some more then others. There is an Image of virtue even in the inferior
creatures. Wherefore the Scripture sends us to them for many virtues, as the
sluggard to the Ant, and indeed we may see the true perfection of the first
Creation, the state of it more in the creatures then in our selves, for there
is no such degeneration in any creature as there is in man.

Now that which in a Dove the Scripture aims at, Properties of the Dov^.
We should resemble a Dove in, is his Meekness.
The Church is meek both to God and Man, not given to murmurings and
revengement; meek, that is, I held my tongue without murmuring (as it is in
the Psalm) I was dumb, etc. Psalm. 39. 2.
which is a grace that Gods Spirit frames in the heart of the Church, and every
particular Christian, even to be meek toward God by an holy silence; And
likewise toward men to put on the Bowels of meekness, as we are exhorted,
Collos. 3. 12. As the elect of God put on the Bowels of meekness, and
compassion, etc. Hereby we shall show our selves to be Christ's, and to have the
Spirit of Christ. And this grace disposes us to a nearer communion with God
then other graces: it is a grace, that God most delights in, and would have his
spouse to be adorned with, as is showed, 1. Pet. 3. 4. where the Apostle tells
women, it is the best Jewel and ornament that they can wear, and is with God
of great price. Moses we read, was a mighty man in prayer; Numb. 12. 3.
and a special means to help and fit him thereunto, was because he was the
meekest man on earth. And therefore, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
Zeph. 2. 1, 2. Seek the Lord seek meekness. And it fitts a man for
communion with God. For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the meek
and humble. It is a grace that empties the soul of self conceit, to think a
man's self unworthy of any thing, and so makes it capacious, low, and fit for
God to fill with a larger measure of his Spirit; it takes away the roughness
and swelling of the soul, that keeps out God and grace, therefore in that
grace we must especially be like this meek creature, which is no vindicative
creature, that has no way to revenge it self.

Again it is a simple creature without guile, it has no way to defend it
self, but only by flight. There is a simplicity that is sinful, when there
is no mixture of wisdom in it. There is a simplicity, that is a pure
simplicity, and so God is simple, which simplicity of God is the ground of many
other attributes. For t^er^po^ he is Eternal, because there is nothing
contrary in him, there is no mixture in him of any thing opposite, so that is
a good simplicity in us, when there is no mixture of fraud, no duplicity in
the soul; James 1. 8.
A double hearted man is inconstant and unstable in all his ways. Now
simplicity as it is a virtue, so we must im^tate the Dove in it, for there is a
sinful Dove-like sillyness. For Hosea. 7. 11. Ephra^m is said there to be
like a silly Dove without heart, they call t^ Egypt, they go to Assiria, There
is a fatal simplicity usually going before destruction, when we hate those
that defend us, and account them enemies, and rely more upon them that are
enemies indeed then upon friends. So it was with Ephraim before his
destruction, he was a silly Dove without heart, he called to Egypt and went to
Assyria (false friends) that were enemies to the Church of God; yet they
trusted them more then God or the Prophets. Men have a world of tricks to
unde^mine their friends, to ruin them, and to deserve ill of those that would
with all their hearts deserve well of them, when yet in the mean time they can
gratify the enemy, please them and hold correspondencie with them, as here
Ephraim did. Ephraim is a silly Dove, etc. This therefore is not that which we
must aim at, but to be simple and children concerning evil, but not in
ignorance and simplicity that way.

Again, this creature is a faithful creature, Faith ^ulnesse.
it is faithful to the mate, So the Christian soul by the Spirit of God, it
is made faithful to Christ, it keeps the judgment chaste, is not tainted with
errors and sins, he keeps his affections chaste likewise, sets nothing in
his heart above Christ, whom has he in Heaven but him, and what is there in
Earth he desires beside him. Psalm. 73. 25.
You know in the Revelation, the Spouse of Christ is brought in like a Virgin
contracted, but the Romish Church like a whore. Therefore the Church of God
must take heed of the Roman Church, for that is not a Dove, we must be
Virgins, who must keep chaste souls to Christ, as you have it Reve. 14. 4.
Those that follow the Lamb, Rev. 14. 4.
wheresoever he goes, they have not defiled themselves with women, the
meaning is spiritual, namely that they have not defiled themselves with
Idolatry and spiritual fornication: they have chaste hearts to Christ. So in
this respect they resemble the Dove; These therefore that draw away from the
love of religion to mixture, to be meretrices, and harlots in religion, they
are not Christ's doves, as far as they yield to this, it is an argument that
they have false hearts; Christ's Church is a Dove, she keeps close and
inviolate to him.

Again, Nea^^esse.
This creature is of a neat d^sposition, with stench, and annoyed that way,
and likewise feeds neately on pure grain, not upon carrion, as you see in the
Arc, when the Raven was sent out it lights upon carrion, of which there was
then plenty, and therefore never came into the Arc again. Genesis 8. 7.
But the Dove, when she went out would not light upon carrion, or dead things;
and so finding noe fit food came back again to the Arc. Simile.
So the Christian soul in this respect is like a Dove, that will not feed upon
worldly carrion, or sinful pleasures, but upon Christ and spiritual things.
The soul of a carnal, and a natural man uses to feed upon dust, earth and
earthly things, when the soul of a true Christian, that has the taste of
Grace, feeds n^atly, it will not feed on that which is base and earthly, but
upon heavenly and spiritual things.

Gregaria avis, a bird that loves commu^ion and fellowship, as the Prophet
speaks, Who are those that flock to the windows as Doves, Isa. 60. 8.
for so they use to flock to their houses by companies. So the children of God
love the communion and fellowship one of another, and keep severed from the
world, as soon as ever they are separated from it; delighting in all those of
the same nature. Doves will consort with Doves, Christians with Christians and
none els^, they can relish no other company, these and such like properties may
profitably be considered of the D^ve. The much standing upon these were to
wrong the intendment of the Spirit of God; to neglect them altogether, were as
much. Therefore we have touched upon some properties only.

Now For the sufferings of the Church it is like a Dove in this. The Dove is
molested by all the it being the common prey of all other ravenous birds. So
the poor Church of God is persecuted and molested, Oh that I had wings like a
Dove, etc (says holy David) It is an old speech, and is for ever true, That
Crows and such escape better then Doves. The punishment that should light on
Ravens often times it lights on Doves, thus Gods Dove, Gods Church is used.

But, What defense has Gods poor Church? why no defense. But

First, flight, even as the Dove has nothing but flight, it has no tallents
to wound, but it has flight, so we are to fly to God as to our mountain, fly
to the Arc that God may take us in. The Church of God has no other refuge but
to be housed in God and Christ, Prove. 18. 10.
he is our Arc.

Secondly, and to mourn as Hezekiah says of himself. Isay. ^8. He mourned
as a Dove, and chat^er^d like a Crane. The state of the Church of God is like
the Turtles, to mourn in all afflictions, desertions, and molestations of
wicked men, to mourn to God who hears the bemonings of his own Spirit in
them: and woe to all other birds, the birds of prey, when the Turtles do
mourn (because of their cruelty) it is a presage of ruin to them, when they
force the Turtle to sorrow, and mourning.

flight and mourning, which is to build high from v^rmin^ that would otherwise
molest them. Instinct teaches them thus to escape their enemies by building
high, and so to secure themselves. So there is in Gods childeren a gracious
instinct put, an Antipathie to the enemies of it, which tends to their safety,
in that they mingle not themselves with them. And likewise, God breeds in them
a familiarity with himself, and stirrs them to build in him as on a rock, to
be safe in him.

But you will object, Object.
If the Church of God be his Dove, why is it so with it as it is, that God
should suffer his love and his Dove, Psalm. 74. 19.
and his turtle thus (as it were) to be preyed upon. Give not the soul of the
Turtle to the beasts (says the Psalmist) If the Church were Gods Dove he would
esteem more of it then he does, and not suffer it to be persecuted thus?

God never forsakes his Dove, but is an Arc for it to fly to, a Rock for it
to build on, The Dove has always a refuge in God and in Christ in the worst
times; You have a notable place for this. Psalm. 68. 13. Though you have lain
among the po^s (that is) smeared, and sullied; yet they shall be as the wings
of a Dove covered with silver and her feathers with yellow gold, when ^he
almighty scattered Kings in it, it was white as the snow in Salmon. So though
the Church of God lies among the pots a while all smeared, and soiled, and
sullied with the ill usage of the world, yet as long as it keeps it self a
Dove, unspotted of the filth of the world and sin, though it be smeared with
the ill usage thereof, we see what God promises here; Yet shall they be as
the wings of a Dove covered with silver and her feathers with yellow gold. So
God will bring forth his Dove with glory out of all these abasements at length.
So much for the title of Dove. It follows

My Undefiled.
Undefiled is a high word to be applied to the Church of God here, for the
Church groaning under infirmities to be counted perfect and undefiled: but
Christ who judges aright of his Church, and knows best what she is; He yet
thus judges of her. But, How is that? The Church is Undefiled (especially) in
that it is the Spouse of Christ and clothed with the robes of his
Righteousness. For there is an exchange so soon as ever we are united to
Christ, our sins are upon him, and his Righteousness is made ours; and
therefore in Christ the Church is undefiled. Christ himself the second Person
is the first lovely thing next the Father, and in Christ all things as they
have relation to Him are loved, as they are in Him. Christ's humane Nature is
next loved to the second Person, it is United, and is first pure, holy, and
beloved, Then because the Church is Christ mystical, it is near to him (and
in a manner) as near as that sacred Body of his, both making up one Christ
mystical, And so is amiable, and beloved even of God himself, who has pure
eyes: yet in this respect looks upon the Church as Undefiled.

Christ and his Church are not to be considered as two, when we speak of this
undefilednesse, but as one. And the Church having Christ with all that is
Christ's, they have the field, and the pearl in the field together, and Christ
giving himself to the Church, he gives his Righteousness, his perfection, and
holiness, all is the Churches.

But how can it be the Churches, when it is not in the Church, but in Christ?

It is safe for the Church that it is in Christ who is perfect, and Undefiled;
for us to make us appear so: and so it is in Christ the second Adam for our
good: it is not in him as another person; but it is in him, as the Churches
Head, that make both one Christ. The hand and the foot see not; but both hand
and foot have benefit by the eye that sees for them. There is no member of the
body understands, but the head does all for them. Put the case we have not
absolute Righteousness, and undefilednesse in our own Natures and persons
inheering in us. Yet we have it in Christ that is one with us, who has it for
our good. It is ours; For all the comfort, and good that we may have by it, and
thereupon, The Church in Christ is undefiled: yea even then when it feels its
own defilements. And here arises that wondrous contradiction that is found in
a believers apprehension. The nature of faith is to apprehend Righteousness,
in the sense of sin, Happiness, in the sense of misery, and favor in the
sense of displeasure

And the ground of it is; Because that at the same time, the soul may be in
some measure defiled in it self, and yet notwithstanding be undefiled in her
head and husband Christ. Hence the guilty soul, when it feels corruption and
sin, yet notwithstanding does see it self holy, and clean in Christ the
head, and so at once there is a conscience of sin, and no more conscience of
sin, as the Apostle says, Heb. 10. 2. when we believe in Christ, and are
purged with his blood, that is, there is no more guilt of sin binding over to
eternal damnation, yet notwithstanding always there is a conscience of sin,
for we are guilty of infirmities, 1 John 1. 10.
And if we say we have no sin we lie and deceive our selves.

But, How can this be that there should be conscience of sin, and no
conscience of sin, Object.
a sinner, and yet a perfect Saint and undefiled?

The Conscience knows its own imperfection, so it is defiled, Answ. 1.
and accuses of sin: And as it looks to Christ so it sees it self pure,
and purged from all sin; Here is the conquest, fight, and the victory of
Faith in the deepest sense of sin, pollution and defilement in our selves; at
the same time to see an absolute, and perfect Righteousness in Jesus Christ.
Herein is even the triumph of Faith whereby it answers God. And Christ who sees
our imperfections, (but it is to purge and cleanse them away, not to damn us
for them;) at the same time he sees us in his own love, clothed with his
Righteousness, as one with himself endowed with whatsoever he has, his
satisfaction and obedience being ours, as verily as any thing in the world is.
Thus he looks on us, and thus faith looks upon him too, and together with
the sight, and sense of sin, at the same time, it apprehends Righteousness,
perfect Righteousness, and so is undefiled. This is the maine point in
Religion, and the comfort of Christians to see their perfection in Christ
Jesus, And to be lost in themselves (as it were) and to be only found in him,
not having their own Righteousness, but the Righteousness of God in him.
Phil. 3. 9.
This is a mystery which none knows but a believing soul; none see corruption
more, none see themselves freed more, they have an inward sight to see
corruption, and an inward faith to see God takes not advantage at it. And
surely there can be no greater honor to Christ then this, In the sense of sin,
of wants, imperfections, stains, and blemishes, yet to wrap our selves in the
righteousness of Christ Godman, and by faith being thus covered with that
absolute Righteousness of Christ, with boldness to go clothed in the
garments of this our elder Brother, to the throne of grace, This is an honor
to Christ, to attribute so much to his Righteousness, That being clothed
therewith, we can boldly break through the fire of Gods justice, and all those
terrible attributes, when we see them all (as it were) satisfied fully in
Christ. For Christ with his righteousness could go through the justice of
God, having satisfied it to the full for us. And we being clothed with this
his Righteousness and satisfaction may go through too.

But besides that there is another undefilednes in the Church, in respect to
which she is called undefiled, that is, in pur^ty of disposition, tending to
perfection. And God respects her according to her better part, and according to
what he will bring her in due time. For we are chosen un^o perfection, and to
be holy in his fight, and perfectly holy, undefiled and pure, we are not chosen
to weak beginnings.

In choosing us, what did God aim at? Did he aim at these imperfect
beginnings to rest there? No, we were elected and chosen to perfection; For as
it is in this natural life, God purposed that we should not only have all the
limbs of men, but grow from infancy to activenesse and perfection; As God at
first intended so much for our bodies, no question he intends as much also for
the soul, that we should not only have the lineaments of Christianity, a
sanctified judgment with affections in part renewed; But he has chosen us to
perfection by degrees. As the seed first lies rotting in the ground, then
grows to a stalk, and then to an ear; So Gods wisdom shines here by
bringing things by degrees to perfection, and undefilednesse. His Wisdom will
have it thus, or else his Power might have it otherwise, because he will have
us to live by Faith, to trust his mercy in Christ, and not to the
undefilednesse that is begun in us, but to admire that which we have in
Christ himself.

And indeed it is the character of a judicious believing Christian soul, that
he can set a price, and value the Righteousness of Christ out of himself,
laboring, living and dying to appear in that, and yet to comfort and sustain
himself during this Conflict and Sight between the flesh and the Spirit, that
in time this inherent Grace shall be brought to perfection.

And Christ he looks upon us as he means to perfect the work of Grace in us
by little and little, as he means to purge and cleanse us, as Ephesians. 5. 26,
27. The end of Redemption is, that he might purge his Church, and so never
leave it, till he have made it a glorious Spouse in Heaven. He looks upon us,
as we shall be ere long, and therefore we are said, To be dead to sin while
we are but dying to it. And (says he) You have cruc^fied the flesh with the
affections, and lusts thereof, when we are but crucifying it; Gal. 5. 24.
but it is said so, Because it is as sure to be done, as if it were done
already. As a man, when he is condemned, and going to his execution, he is a
dead man; So there is a sentence passed upon sin and corruption, it shall be
abolished and die. Therefore it is dead in sentence, and is dying in execution.
It is done, Gal. 5. 24.
They that are in Christ have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof. It is
as sure to faith as if it were done already. So we are said to fit in heavenly
places with Christ, we are with him already. Ephesians. 2. 6.
For Christ having taken us so near in affection to himself, he will never
leave us, till he have made us such, as he may have full contentment in, which
is in Heaven; when the contract between him and us shall be fulfilled in
consummation of the marriage. Thus faith looks, and Christ looks thus upon
us. Which should comfort us in weakness, that God regards us not in our
present imperfections, but as he means to make us ere long. In the mean time
that he may look upon us in love, he looks upon us in the obedience of his
son, in whom whatsoever is good shall be perfected at the last.

What should we do then, Use. 1.
if Christ does make his Church thus, his Love, his Dove, his Undefiled, by
making his love to meet in it as the center thereof, whereunto he does
confine all his love (as it were) we should confine our love to him again,
and have no love out of Christ, since he has no love out of us; There should
be an everlasting mutu^ll shining, and reflection between him and the soul.
We should lay open our souls to his love; (as indeed he desires especially
the communion of our affections,) we should reflect love to him again. This
perpetual everlasting intercourse between Christ and his Spouse, is her maine
happiness here, and her eternal happiness in heaven; In looking on him who
has done so much for us, he shines on us, and we look back again upon
him. Does Christ love us so intimately^, and so invincibly, that no indignities
nor sin could overcome his love, which made, that he endured that which he
hates most, to become sin for us, 1 Cor. 5. 2^.
nay the want of that, which was more to him, then all the world, the want of
the sense of the favor of God for a time, My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me^? Has Christ thus infinitely loved us, and shall not we back
again make him our love? In their degree the Saints of God have all done so.
It was a good speech of Ignatius the Martyr, My love Christ was crucified. So a
Christian should say, My love was crucified, my love dyed, my love is in
heaven; And for the things on earth I love them, as they have a beam of him in
them, as they lead me to him; But he is my love, there my love is pitched,
even upon him, this is the ground of these Scripture phrases, Phil. 3. 2^.
But our conversation is in heaven from whence we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Col. 3. 1.
and set your affections on the things that are above. Why? Christ our love is
there, the soul is more where it loves, then where its residence is. It dies
(as it were) to other things, and lives in the thing it loves, therefore our
thoughts and affections, our joy and delight should be drawn up to Christ,
for indeed his love has such a magneticall attractive force, that where it is,
it will draw up the heavy iron, the gross soul, and make it heavenly, for
there is a binding, a drawing force in this excellent affection of love.

My love, my Dove, etc.
There are all words of sweetness, Use. 2.
he lobours to express all the affection he can, for the conscience, is
subject to upbraid and to claimour much, so that there must be a great deal
of persuasion to still the accusing conscience of a sinner, to set it down,
make it quiet, and persuade it of Gods love. Therefore he uses all heavenly
Rhetoric to persuade and move the affections.

In this that the Church is undefiled in Christ, Use. 3.
Let us learn when afflicted in conscience not so much to judge of our selves
by what we feel in our selves as by what faith suggests. In Christ therefore
let us judge of our selves by what we are as in him: We are poor in our
selves, but have riches in him; we die in our selves in regard of this life,
but we have a life in him, an eternal l^fe, and we are sinners in our
selves, but we have a Righteousness in him whereby we are righteous in his
sight. We are foolish, 1 Cor. 5. 20.
unskillfull, and ignorant in our selves, but he is our wisdom in all
whatsoever is amiss in us. Let us labor to see a full supply of our wants
made up in Christ, this is to glorify God as much as if we could fulfill the
law perfectly. If we were as undefiled as Adam was, we could not glorify God
more, then when we find our selves, and our conscience guilty of sins, yet
thus by the Spirit of God to go out of our selves, and to see our selves in
Christ, and thus to cast our selves on him, embrace him, and take that gift of
God given us, Christ offered to us, because God so commands, Ioh. 4. 10.
we honor God more, then if we had the obedience that Adam had at first
before his fall. For now in the covenant of Grace, he will be glorified in
his mercy, in his forgiving, forbearing, rich transcendent mercy, and in going
beyond all our unworthiness and sins, by showing that there is a
Righteousness provided for us, the Righteousness of God^man, whose obedience
and satisfaction, is more then our disobedience, because it is the d^sobedience
of man only, but his Obed^ence and Righteousness is the Obedience, and
Righteousness of God-man, so it satisfies divine justice, and therefore ought
to satisfy Conscience to the full, our faith must answer Christ's carriage to
us, we must therefore account our selves in him undefiled, because he accounts
us so, not in our selves, but as we have a being in him, we are undefiled.

Again see here Christ accounts us (even in regard of habitual grace)
undefiled, though we have for the present many corruptions. Let us therefore
learn a lesson of moderation of so excellent a teacher* let us not be ashamed
to learn of our Savior. What spirit shall we think they have, that will
unchurch Churches, because they have some defilement and unbrotherly brethren,
accounting them no Churches, no Brethren, because they have some
imperfections. Why has not Christ a quarrel to the Church then? is he blind?
does his love make him blind? No, he sees corruption, but he sees better
things, somewhat of his own that makes him overlooke those imperfections,
because they are such as he means to mortify, subdue, wear away, and to
fire out by the power of his Spirit, which as fire shall wast all those
corruptions in time. So it is with the Church; put the case, she has some
corruptions, that it be not with her, as it should be, yet she is a Church
notwithstanding. 1. Cor. 1^.
The Church of Corinth (we see) Paul styles them Saints, and Brethren with all
those sweet names, notwithstanding they had many corruptions among them.

We have a company of malignant spirits worse then these a great deal, Use. 5.
Atheistical persons that have no Religion at all, who out of malice and envy
watch for the halting of good Christians, who can see nothing but defilement in
those that have any good in them, nothing but hypocrisy, mopishnesse, all that
is naught, who if they can devise any blemish, put it upon them, whereas Christ
sees a great deal of ill in the Church, but he sees it to pardon, subdue, and
to pity the Church for it, extolling and magnifying it is goodness. What
spirits are those of, that watch to see imperfections in others, (that their
hearts tell them are better then they,) that they may only disgrace them by
it: for goodness they will see none.

And lik^wise, Use. 6.
It should teach us not to wrong our selves with false judgment. We should
have a double eye, one eye to see that which is amiss in us, our own
imperfections, thereby to carry our selves in a perpetual humility: but an
other eye of Faith, to see what we have in Christ, our perfection in him, so to
account of our selves, and glory in this our best being, that in him we have
a glorious being, such an one whereby God esteems us perfect, and undefiled
in him only. The one of which sights, should enforce us to the other, which is
one end, why God in this world leaves corruption in his children. Oh, since I
am thus undefiled shall I rest in my self? Is there any harbor for me to rest
in mine own Righteousness? O no, it drives a man out of all harbor; Nay, I
will rest in that Righteousness, which God has wro^ght by Christ, who is
God-Man, That will endure the sight of God, being clothed with which, ^ can
endure the presence of God. So, this sight of our own unworthiness, and
wants, should not be a ground of discourageme^^t, but a ground to drive us
perfectly out of our selves, that by faith we might renew our title to that
Righteousness, wherein is our especial glory, Why should w^ not judge of our
selv^^ as Christ does? Can we see more in our selves, then he does? yet
notwithstanding all he sees, he accounts us as Undefiled.

Again, ^ince he accounts us undefiled, because he means to make us so,
Use. 7.
and now looks on us, as we shall be* In all our ^oyles, and infirmities, let
us comfort our selves, it shall not thus be always with us. O, this (...) of
mine shall fall and fall still, and shall d^^ay as Saul's house, and the Spirit
at the last shall conquer in all this. I am not chosen to this beginning, to
this conflicting course of life: I am chosen to triumph, to perfection of
Grace, this is my comfort. Thus we should comfort our selves, and set upon our
enemies, and conflict in this hope of victory, I shall (...) the (...) of my
self at the last. Jm^erfection should not discourage, but comfort us in this
world; we are chosen to perfection; Let us still re^oyce in that we are chosen
to Sanctification, which is a little begun, being an earnest of other
bl^ssings; let us not rest in the pledge or in the earnest, but labor for a
further pledge of more strength, and grace; For (...) have the Spirit of
Christ, will strive to be as much unspotted, and as heavenly as they can; To
fit themselves for that heavenly Condition as much as may be; when, because
they cannon be in heaven, yet they will converse there, as much as they can;
and because they cannot be with such company altogether, they will be as much
as may be, laboring as they (...) to be that which they shall be hereafter.
Imperfection contents them not; and therefo^re they pray still in the Lords
prayer, Thy kingdom come. While there is any imperfection, their hearts are
enlarged more and more, nothing contents them but perfection. And indeed God
accounts us thus u^spotted for this end, because he would encourage us, Where
he sees the will and endeavor he gives the title of the thing desired.

Verse. 3. I have put of my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet, how shall I defile them?

Here is an ingenious confession made by the Church of her own untowardnesse,
notwithstanding all Christ's heavenly Rhetoric and persuasion that he did use;
yet she draws back, and seems to have reason so to do. I have put my
coat, how shall I put it on again to let thee in, I have washed my feet,
etc. It is a phrase taken from the custom of those hot countries, wherein they
used to wash their feet. I have washed my feet, ^ow shall I defile them to
rise and open the door to thee? There is a spiritual meaning herein, as if
she had said, I have some ease by this sleepie profession, some freedom from
evil tongues, and some exemption, and immunity from some troubles I was in
before. I was then perhaps too indiscreete, now will thou call me again to
those troubles, that I have wisely avoided? No, I have put of my coat, how
shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? I affect
this estate very well; I am content to be as I am without further troubling of
my self; Thus the Church puts of Christ. This I take to be the meaning of the
words, Observe. 1.
That which is observiable is this: That it is not an easy matter to bring the
soul and Christ together into near fellowship. We see here how the Church
draws back, for, the flesh moves either not to yield at all to duty, or to be
cold, uncertain, and unsettled therein. The flesh knows that a near communion
with Christ cannot stand with favoring any corruption, and therefore the flesh
will do something, but not enough, it will yield to something, but not to that
that it should do, to that communion and fellowship that we ought to have with
Christ. To instance in some particulars, as a rule and measure to somewhat of
which we should be.

A Christian life should be nothing but a communion, and intercourse with
Christ. A walking in the Spirit; and to be spiritual, and to savor the things
of the Spirit altogether, he should study to adorn his profession by a
lively and cheerful performance of duty: Mat. 5. 16.
And be exemplarie to others; and should be in such a frame, Act. 9. ^9.
as he should walk continually in the comforts of the Holy Ghost undismayed,
and undaunted, And abound in the fruits of the Spirit, and do all the good he
can wheresoever he comes, Jam. 1. 27.
He should keep himself unspotted of the world, go against the stream, and
be-continually in such a temper, as it should be the joy of his heart to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. 2 Timothy 4. 8.
One might go on thus in a world of particulars, which would be too long. If we
could attain to this excellency, it were an happy life, a Heaven upon Earth,
this we should aim at. Will the flesh endure this, think you? No, it will
not; Which you shall see more particularly in this next Observation, which is,

That One way, Obser. 2.
whereby the unregenerate part in us hinders this communion with Christ, and
the shining of a believer in a christian course, Is by false pretenses, reasons
and excuses. I have washed my feet, I have put of my coat, etc.

The flesh never wants excuses and pretenses (there was never any yet came to
hell, but they had some seeming pretense for their coming thither) to shift
and shuf^^e off duties, there was never yet any careless sinful course but
it had the flesh to justify it with one reason or other; and therefore it is
good to understand the Sophysticall shifts of the flesh, and pretenses and
shows which it has, and as it is good to know the truth of God, and of Christ
revealed in his word, so is it to know the falsenesse and deceitfullnesse of
our own hearts, they are both mysteries almost alike, hard to be known.
Labor we then more and more to know the falsehood of our own disposition,
and to know the truth of God, To give instance in a f^w p^rticulars. You s^e in
the Church the difficulty of her comm^^^on with Christ comes from the idle
pretenses and excuses she has. Every one has his sev^^^ll pre^^xts, as his
state and condition is. We think we should be loosers, if we give our
selves to that degree of goodness which others do, whereas God does curse
those blessings which men get with neglect of duty to him. If we seek first
the Kingdom of Heaven, all other things that are good for us, shall be cast
upon us.

Thou shall loose the favor of such a one* Object.


Never care for that favor thou can not keep with Gods favor, Answ.
the favor of man is a snare, take heed of that favor that snares thee, thou
loosest their favor and company, but thou gainest the favor of Christ, and
company of Angels.

But they will rail on thee and reproach thee with thy old sins. Object.


Care not, Answ.
God will do thee good for that, as David said, when Shemai cursed him.

But I shall loose my pleasure? Object.


O but such pleasures end in death; Answ.
they are but pleasures of sin for a season, and thou shall not loose by the
change, the ways of wisdom are pleasant ways, one day religiously spent in
keeping of a good conscience, what a sweet farewell has it? Joy is in the
habitation of the Righteous. It becomes the Righteou^ to be j^yfull. How ever
outwardly it seems yet there is a Paradise within. Many such objections the
flesh makes, some take scandal at the prosperity of the wicked, and affliction
of the Saints, and from hence take occasion to ro^ in their dreggs of sin, Mat.
11. 6.
but what says Christ, Happy is the man who is not offended in m^e. As for the
prosperity of the wicked, envy them not, they stand in slippery places, and
flourish like a green bay tree, but presently they vanish. Take no offense at
them nor at the cross, look not at this, Mat. 5. 10.
but at the ensuing comfort. Blessed are they that suffer for Righteousness
sake, bind such words to your he^d as your crown, Go^ reserves the best
comforts to the worst times, his people never find it otherwise.

I but if I be thus precise, the times are so bad, Object.
I shall be alone.

Complain not of the times when thou make them worse, Answ.
thou should make the times better, the worse the times are, the better be
thou, Phil. 3 20.
for this is thy glory to be good in an evil generation. This was Lots glory.
Paul tells what ill times they were, But says he, Our conversation is in
Heaven, from whence we look for a Savior: What brings destruction on Gods
people, but their joining with the wicked. When they joined with the children
of men, then came the flood, these and the like pretenses, keep men altogether
from goodness, or else from such a measure, as may bring honor to God and
comfort to themselves.

Or if men be great, why this is not honorable to do thus, as you know what
Michall said to David, How glor^ous was the King of Israel this day? like a
fool, etc. To attend upon the word of God with reverence, to make conscience
of Religion, O it stands not with greatness etc. But the Spirit of God
answers this in him, I will yet be more vile for God. It is a man's honor
here to stand for God, and for good things, and it is our honor, that God
will honor us so much.

Those likewise that are worldly have excuses The excuses of worldlings.
alas I must tend my calling, and they have Scripture for it to. 1 Ti^. 4. 8.
He^ that provides not for his family is worse then an Infidel, as if God had
set up any callings to hinder the calling of Christianity, as if that were not
the greatest calling, and the best part that will abide with us forever, as if
it were not the part of a Christian to redeem time from his calling to the
duties of Christianity. Luke 10. 42.
I have no time (says the worldling) what will you have me to do? why what
time had David when he meditated on the Law of God day and night? Psalm. 1. 2.
he was a King, the King is bound to study the Scriptures. And yet whose
employment is greater, Deus. 17. 18, 19.
then the imploiment of the chief Magistrate?

And thus every one as their state and condition is, they have several
pretenses and excuses. Those that are young, their excuse is, we have time
enough for these things hereafter. Others as those that were negligent to build
the second Temple, Hag. 1. ^.
The time is not yet say they; when as the uncertainty of this life of ours,
the weightinesse of the business, the danger of the custom of sin, the
engaging of our hearts deeper and deeper into the world, makes it a more
difficult thing to be a Christian. It more and more darkens our understanding
the more we sin, and the more it estrangeth our affections from good things
the more we have run out in an evil course. Time is a special mercy, but
then thou have not time only but the means, good company, and good motions,
thou may never have such a gale again, thy heart may be heardned through
the deceitfulness of sin. Again, who would want the comforts of Religion
for the present, (as Austin says) I have wanted thy sweetness too long. What
folly is it to want the sweetness and comfort of Religion so long as we may
have it.

Some others pretend, The uncomfortablenesse of Religion, I shall want my
comforts, when as indeed there is no sound comfort without having our hearts in
a perfect communion with Christ, walking with God, and breaking of from our
evil courses. What is the reason of discomforts, unresolvednesse, and
unsetlednesse? when we know not where we are, whether we go, or what our
condition is, unsetlednesse breeds discomfort, and indeed there is no pleasure
so much, as the pleasure that the serving of God has with it. As the fire has
light and heat always in it, so there is no holy action that we perform
thoroughly, but as it has an increase of strength, so there is an increase of
comfort and joy annexed to it. There is a present reward annexed to all things
that are spiritually good: they carry with them present peace and joy, the
conscience has that present comfort, which consumes all discouragements
whatsoever, as is always found in the experience of that soul, that has
won so much of it self, as to break through discouragements to the practice
of holy duties. Believers have a joy and comfort, that others know not of: Rev.
2. 7.
an hidden kind of Manna, and contentment.

These, and a thousand such like discouragements men frame to themselves. My
health will not serve: I shall endanger my life; There is a Lion in the way,
Prove. 26. 13.
(says the sluggard) who with his excuses thinks himself wiser, Prove. 26. 16.
then the wisest in the City; There is none so wise as the sluggard; for belly
policy teaches him a great many excuses, which he thinks will go for
wisdom; because by them he thinks to sleep in a whole skin; He is but a
sluggard for all that, and though he plead Yet a little while, P^vertie, not
only outward, but spiritual poverty and barrenness of soul will come upon
him, as an armed man, and leave him destitute of grace and comfort, when he
shall see at the last what an evil course of life he has led, that he has
yielded so much to his lazy flesh to be drawn away by discouragements from
duties, that he was convinced were agreeable to the word. Now, what may be the
grounds and causes of these false Pre^^noes and Excuses, which hinder us from
holy duties. There be many causes.

First of all, one cause of this in us is this, Naturally so far as we are
not guided by a better spirit then our own, Causes of our delay^s, in putting
of Spiritual duties.
we are inclined to much to the earthly present things of this life, because
they are present, and pleasant; and we are Our inclination t^ earthly things.
and whatsoever pulls us from them is unwellcome to us, this is one ground.

Because our depraved wit naturally abounds in shifts.
the soul of man having lost wisdom to guide it to that which is truly good,
has wit enough left to devise untoward shifts, to excuse that which is evil.
In this fallen estate the former abilities to devise things thoroughly good, is
turned to a matter of untoward wit joined with shifting. ^ccles. 7. ^. 9.
God made man right but he has sought out many inventions. Carnal wit,
serves carnal will very well: and carnal lusts never want an advocate to
plead for them, namely carnal reason. From the bent therefore of the soul to
ill things, Pleasure, Ease, and Honor, (such a condition as pleases the
outward man since the fall) the bent and weight of the soul goes this way,
together with wit: having lost the Image of God in holy wisdom, there is
shifting. This is a ground also why delays are joined with shifts.

Because of corrupt natures li^enesse to the Devil.
there is another ground, that Corrupt Nature (in this like the Devil and
sin) which never appear in their own colors, sets a man on this way. Who
would not hate the devil if he should appear in his own likeness? or sin
if it should appear in his own colors? and therefore wit stretches it self
to find out shifts. For says the heart, unless there be some shifts and
pretenses to cover my shame, I shall be known to be what J am indeed, which J
would be loath were done: I would have the sweet, but not the shame of sin,
the credit of Religion, but not put my self to the cost which comes with
true Religion, to deny my self. Corrupt courses never appear in their own
colors, they are like the Devil for this.

And then again, Naturally there is a great Because of our ^^^ocrisie.
we may do duties to satisfy Conscience (for somewhat must be done,) to
hear now and then, read and come to prayer betwixt sleeping and waking
(yawning prayers) when we can do nothing else; somewhat must be done,
conscience else will cry out of us that we are Atheists, and shall be damned:
some slubbering service must be done therefore. Yet notwithstanding herein is
our hypocrisy, that we cannot bring our hearts to do it, as it should be done
to purpose, for though it be true that there is much imperfection in the best
actions, the best performances, yet this is hypocrisy when men do not do it
as God may accept it, and as it may yield themselves comfort. The heart draws
back: duties it will and must do, but yet will not do them as it shall have
comfort by them. This is inbred in the heart naturally, conscience forces to
do something, though the slesh and corruption pulls back. This is the
disposition of all men, till they have got the victory of their own
Atheistical hearts.

Because of a false conceit of God and of Christ.
Another ground may be this, a false conceit of God, and of Christ; that they
will take any thing at our hands, because we love our selves, and think that
we do very well, we think that God is such a one as we are, as it is Psalm.
50. 21. Thou thoughtest that I was like unto thee, etc. that God will be put
off with any thing, and any excuse will serve the turn. You have not a
swearer, a filthy careless person, But he thinks God is merciful, and
Christ dyed for sinners: and I was provoked to it, etc. still he thinks to
have some excuse for it, and that they will stand good with God. This Athe^sme
is in us naturally, and when we are palpably to blame in the judgment of
others and our selves in our sober wits* yet we put more ignorance and
carelessness on God then on our selves. Tush, God regards it not, it is the
times, I would be better: It is company whom I must yield unto etc. They
think God will accept these things from them

The scandals we meet withal in the world.
The scandalls that we meet withal in the world; which (indeed) is a ground,
because our own false hearts are willing to catch at any thing. You see (say
they) these men that make profession of Religion what they are (and then the
devil will thrust some Hypocrisy into the profssion of Religion) and they
judge all by one or too (and will be sure to do it) therein stands their
ingenuity, and if they can see any infirmity in them that are incomparably
better then themselves, Oh they are safe, here is warrant enough to dislike
Religion and all good courses; because some do so and so, as if the course of
Religion were the worse for that. Thus they wrap themselves in those excuses,
as men do there hands to defend them from pricks. This is the vile poison of
our hearts that will be naught, and yet notwithstanding will have reason to be
so. The speech is, wicked^esse never wanted pr^texts: which as it is true of
great wickedness, much more is it of that which goes in the world for drowsy
lukewarm profession, under which many sincke to Hell, before they are aware.
They never want reason and pretexts to cover their sin, there is a mint and
forge of them in the soul, It can coin them suddenly. Thus we see our wits
do serve us excellently well, to lay blocks in our own way to hinder us from
Heaven; we are dunces and dull to do any thing that is spiritually good,
whereof we are incapable. But if it be to lay blocks in our own way to Heaven,
to quarrel with God and his Ordinances, with the doctrine of salvation, with
the instruments, teachers and those that lead us a better way, that our wit
will serve for. But to take a course to do us good another day, to lay up
comforts in which we might end and close up our days, there we are
backwards, and have shift upon shift. This is added for the further explication
of it: because of the necessity of the poi^t. For, except our hearts be
discovered to us, we shall never know what Religion means, save to know so
much as may through the winding, turning, shifting, and falsehood of our own
Nature, bring us to hell: Wherein we are worse enemies to our selves then the
Devil is, who could not hurt us, unless we did betray our selves. But he
has factours in us to deal for him, our own carnal wit and affection, they
hold correspondencie with him, whence all the mischief that he does us, is by
that intercourse that our nature has with Satan, That is the Dalilah which
betrayeth all the Sampsons (sound worthy Christians in the world) to their
spiritual enemies. The refore, we can never be sufficiently instructed, what
a vile nature we have so opposite to Religion, as far as it is saving.
Corrupt nature does not oppose it so far as it is slubbered over, but so
far as may bring us to that state we should be in. vve^ have no worse
enemies then our own hearts. Therefore let us vvatch over our selves
continually, and use all blessed means appointed of God whereby we may escape
out of this dangerous sleepie disposition of soul, which cost the Church so
dear, as we shall hear (God vvilling) hereafter.

The end of the seventh Sermon.
THE EIGHTH SERMON. SER. VIII.

CANT. V. III. I have put of my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet, how shall I defile them?
WE are now by Gods assistance to speak of the remedies against the lazy
distempers we are prone unto in Spiritual things, where we left off the last
day.

What course should we take then to come forth from this distempered lasinesse,
Quest.
That we may attain a spiritual taste and relish of heavenly things, so as
not to loath religious exercises: or delay and put them off with excuses.

First of all, Answ.
Resolve not to consult with flesh and Resolve, not to consult with flesh and
blood.
For it always counsels us for ease, as Peter cou^selled Christ, Master pity
thy self. So we have a nature in us like unto Peter, spare, favor, pity thy
self. Like Hevah, Job 2.
and Jobs w^fe, we have a corrupt nature that is always soliciting from God,
and drawing us unto vanity. Take heed of cou^selling with flesh and blood; for
if men were in a city environed round about with enemies would they consult
with them what they should do for defense of the city? were it not a mad
part? and is it not a greater madness when Christians will consult with flesh
and blood what they should do in duties of obedience, which will always put us
upon terms of ease, the favor of men, content and the like, which if a man
yield to, he shall never enter into heaven. Take heed therefore of consulting
with our enemy, seeing Satan has all the correspondency he has by that
enemy which we harbor in our bossome. In which case the hurt he does us by
his sophistry comes by our selves, we betray our selves by our carnal reason,
whereby Satan mingleth himself with our imaginations and conceits. Let us
therefore beware we listen not to the counsel of flesh and blood, especially
when the matter comes to suffering once, for there of all other things flesh
and blood does draw back.* Every one has a Peter in himself, that says,
Spare thy self; Thou art indiscreet to vent^re thy self upon this and that
hazard. But where the judgment is convinced of the goodness of the cause,
whether it be Religion or Justice, ^or the first or for the second table that
matters not; If the judgment be convinced of the thing; then consult not with
flesh and blood what^oever the suffering be. It is not necessary, that we
should live in riches, honors, pleasures and estimation with the world. But it
is necessary we should live honest men, and good Christians. Therefore when
flesh and blood objecteth in this kind, consult not with it. First, Because it
is an enemy, and therefore is to be suspected and neglected; Secondly, Because
it is said, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven. And therefore we
should practice that first lesson in Religion, Heavenly wisdom; To aid us
wherein, Christ (knowing what an enemy we are to our selves in the ways of
God) says, Let a man deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me,
there is no following of Christ, considering that our flesh is so full of
cavills and excuses, unless we practice that heavenly lesson of Christ, to
deny our selves, our whole self, our wit and reason in the matters of God:
our will and affections. Say nay to all the sluggishnesse of the flesh; silence
all presently, as soon as ever they discourage thee from holy ways. Consider
whence they come? which is enough: from Gods and our enemy; and the worst
enemy we have that lies in our own bosom. And to enable us the better,
Romans 8.
mark what Paul says, We are no more debtors to the flesh, etc. We owe
nothing to it; I owe not such obedience, such subjection to the flesh and
carnal reason: I have renounced it long since. What am I abnoxious to a man
unto whom I owe no service. We owe the flesh no service or obedience, what
shall we yield to that which we have long since renounced.

To be resolute in spiritual undertakings.
In Spiritual courses, let us arm our selves with resolution: First, conclude
Is it so or not so, let our judgments be convinced; for, Resolution is a
disposition arising from the will immediately, but it is of the will, by sound
judgment convinced of the goodness of the thing, after which the will
resolves. Get resolution from soundness of conviction, that such things are
good, and that they are best for us, and best for us at this time, the sooner
the better: that there is an absolute necessity to have them, and that they
are everlastingly good: O these considerations will put us on amain to obtain
the same. It is our duty, and we shall sin against God, against our
Conscience, against the Spirit of God, and against others (that take like
liberty by our examples) Jf we yield to our base lusts and suggestions in this
kind.

And to help Resolution the more, A help to Resolution
let us have before our eyes, 2 Sa^. 23. 16.
the examples of Gods worthies, who (like unto David's worthies, who brake
through the Host of the Philistims for water) Have in all ages broken through
all discouragements, and made a conscience more to please God, to hold
communion and fellowship with Christ, then to hold any correspondencie with the
World, Look to Blessed Paul, Act. 21. 13.
What do ye vexing of me and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to go
to Jerusalem, but to die for Christ's sake. And look to Christ, how he shakes
of Peter, Mat. 16. 23.
Get thee behind me Sat^n, etc. Look to Moses, how he shook off all the
solicitations of a Court; Because he had an eye to the recompense of the
reward. Look to Joshua, Heb 11. 26.
I and mine house will serve the Lord. Josh. 24. 15.
Let others of the world do what they will: If others will go to the Devil
let them, for my self, I and my house, (those that I have charge of) will
serve the Lord. This was a noble resolution which was in good Nehemiah, Shall
such a man as I fly? Neh. 6. 1^.
what shall J fly? shall I do this; yield to this base discouragement? shall
J discourage others (like those spies of Canaan) by mine example? Hence it is
that Heb. 11. In that notable Chapter, That little book of martyrs, after the
catalogue of those worthies set down there, that which we are exhorted and
pointed to in the beginning of the next chapter, is unto the practice of the
like virtues, In imitation having before us, such a Cloud of witnesses, Heb.
12. 1.
wherewith being compassed, the exhortation is, Let us therefore shake off
every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on, etc. as
the Cloud was a guide to them to Canaan out of Egypt; so the Cloud of good
examples, is as it were a light to go before us to the heavenly Canaan.

In this case above all, let us look to Christ, Who is the author and finisher
of our Faith. Heb. 12. 2.
This will make us break through discouragements and resolve indeed. What
could hinder him? his love is so fiery, that nothing could hinder him to come
from Heaven to the Womb of the Virgin, from thence to the Cross, and so to
the grave, to be abased lower then ever any creature was. His love to us so
carried him through all discouragements and disgraces. Consider him, Heb. 12. 3.
who endured such speaking against of sinners. The consideration of Christ's
love, and example will carry us through all discouragements whatsoever.

To have good grounds and ^ound reasons ^or all we do.
Let us be able by sound reasons to justify the ways of God, and (...) answer
cavills, to give account of what we do to our selves and others, With reasons
why we sanctify the Sabbath, have such Communion with God in Prayer, Neglect
the fashions of the world, etc. To have reasons ready from Scripture, is an
excellent thing, when we are able to justify whatsoever we do by the Word,
against all the quarrels of our own hearts and others. When we are led to do
things only b^ the example of others, or by respects, then we are often times
put to it on the sudden by temptations: being not able to justify what we
do. Let us labor therefore to do things upon good grounds, and be able to
justify al^ the ways of Religion, as they are easily justified, for nothing
in this world stands with so much reason, as exactness in the ways of God,
There is so much Reason for nothing in the world, as to be not only
Christians, but exact Christians, as Paul ^aith to Agrippa, Acts 26. 29.
would to God you were not almost, but altogether as I am, saving these bonds.
To make conscience of all ways and courses, it stands with the most reason of
the world, so to justify Religion by reasons unanswerable, that may set down
corrupt nature, and stop the mouth of the devil himself: and herein let us
propound found and strong Questions to our selves To help on reason, we must
often propound strong Questions to our selves.
often; are those things (that I am moved to do) good? or are they not? If
they be good, why do I not do them? If they be bad, why do I do them at
all? If they be good, why do I stick at them? how do I prove them to be
good? have always ready some Scripture, or reason from thence which is as good.
The reasons of the word are most divinely strong, let them be ready against all
Objections whatsoever, Mat. 12.
as against slight oaths think of that of Christ, that we must give an
account for all idle words: how much more for Atheistical oaths: so against
grosser sins learn reason; a civil man, an Heathen would not do thus.

So also when the flesh mooveth us to any backwardness in religious courses,
let us have some Scripture ready, or Reasons deducted from it. As, From the
Dignity of our Profession, from And reason the matter, From the dignity of our
Profession.
how does this that I am moved to suite with my Hopes and expectation to come?
how furthers it my journey homewards? That no excuse will serve the turn at
the day of judgment, Consider, what excuses may be sufficient at the day of
judgment.
but such an one as arises from as invincible infirmity, or an unremoovable
impediment. such an excuse taken from an invincible infirmity, may then serve
the turn. As, when we cannot possibly do a thing, from impediments that all
the means in the world cannot remoove. As a poor man cannot be liberal, etc.
Excuses also fetched from impossible impediments, as from invincible weakness
may avail, if a man have an infirm body, that he cannot do that which
another man can: these excuses, with a gracious God will serve the turn; which
are not so much excuses, as a just plea. But otherwise, our untoward excuses
will not serve the turn. What hindered them in the Gospel who were invited to
the Supper? Luke 14.
Excuses from Oxen, Wives, etc. Was it not lawful to buy Oxen? and was it not
lawful for the married to take content in a wife? another had married a wife;
were not all these things lawful? very lawful; The Farm hurts not, if it
hinder not, no^ the Wife, Oxen nor any thing: but in this case when we regard
these things more then the invitation to come to the feast of holy things,
here is the malice of the devil, which brings that doleful message; They shall
never taste of my feast. There is such an infinite disproportion, between the
good of Religion, Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost here, and Heaven
and Happiness hereafter; and between any thing in this world, that to
allege any hinderance whereby we cannot keep a good conscience, and preserve
assurance of salvation, is most extreme folly and Atheism. I believe not a
better life (the disproportio^ being so great between the state of this life
and a better) if I fetch excuses from the things of this life, to keep me from
Religion, the Fear of God, and working out my salvation with fear and
trembling. These excuses will not serve the turn, not only with God at the
day of judgment: but also our own consciences will tell us, that we are
Hypocrites to make such or such a plea. Therefore when men become false,
thereby to provide for wife or children, and take corrupt courses to keep them
from Religion, with pretext of their callings (least they should loose one day
in ^eaven) this employment cannot prosper, which sleights over duties under
false pretenses. O! they can toil for the pelf of the world, but for matters
of their souls, they turn off all shamefully, as if there were not a God to
judge them, a Heaven to reward them, or a Hell to punish them. Will such
excuses serve the turn? O no, they cannot with conscience, much less with God
the Judge who is greater then our conscience. This is another way to cut off
these idle cavills, to consider that these excuses cannot serve the turn,
neither to comfort conscience in this world, nor to uphold us in our plea at
the day of judgment, Remember that.

To inure our selves to bear the yoke of Religion*
Let us inure our selves to bear the yoke of Religion from our youth, which
will make it easy afterward. It were an excellent thing if those who are
young (in the prime of their years) would inure themselves to the exercise of
Religion, this would make it easy unto them; to read the Word of God, to open
their spirits unto him in Prayer. It may please God hereby (though they be
negligent herein) yet they may be called to Religion. The danger of ignorant
old age.
But for an old man there is much work to do to read, to get any thing into
his brain, when his memory is pestered with other things, and corrupt nature
in him is armed with a world of excuses, that might have been prevented by a
timely and seasonable training up in a course of Religion. Profane young
persons know not what they do when they put off Religion. Have they excuses
now, That the longer we put off Religion, the more will be our excu^es.
they will have many more hereafter, when Satan and corruption will be much
stronger. O let them bear the yoke of Religion, that is enure themselves to
duties that become Christians, which may facilitate and make it easy and
pliable, that it may not be harsh to our nature. If a man do not hear, pray
and read, he can never have Faith, Grace, Knowledge, Mortification of
corruption (wherein Religion stands) but because these lead to duties that are
hard to nature, and harsh, it is wisdom to inure young ones thereto betimes,
that having used themselves to these preparing duties, they may be the more
fitted for the essential ones. That having things in the brain by reading and
hearing, Grace may be wrought in the heart, it being a more easy passage from
the brain to the heart. When a man is converted it is an easy matter to bring
it from the brain unto the heart, whereas a man that has been negligent in
his youth, must then be instructed in the Principles of Religion. Therefore, it
is a miserable case (though men be never so politic in the world) to have
been negligent herein till age. It breeds a great deal of difficulty to them
ere they can come to be in such a state as a Christian should be in. Remember
this therefore, to do as Paul advises Timothy a young man, 1 Timothy 6. 11.
to exercise himself in Godliness^, it is a good thing for all that are young
to exercise themselves to all duties of Religion, or else pretenses will grow
up with age, whereby they will be indisposed every day more then other.
Experience shows it generally, we may believe it: if we will not, we shall
find it hereafter too true by woeful experience.

To inure our selves to difficulty and hardship.
by little and little, not only to be enured to the yoke of Religion, but
likewise to endure difficulties, opposition and hardship; as the Apostle stands
upon it to Timothy, To endure hardship and afflictions from the beginning.
(...).
If the thing be good and warra^^able, neglect the speeches of the world: what
are the speeches of a company of men in the state of nature, in their miserable
condition, to regard them so as not to endure hardship, in such things, of the
goodness whereof we are convinced? But in these days men take up a delicate
profession of Religion, men will be Religious, but they will suffer nothing,
not a taunt or a scoff, they will part with nothing, be at no loss; suffer no
cross, be at no pains with Religion further then may stand with all earthly
content of this world. This delicate profession (if any thing among us)
threatens the remooving of the Gospel, and blessed truths we enjoy, because
we will not part with any pleasure now. How will they suffer afflictions for
the Gospel (if such times come) that will not part with a vain oath, a
corrupt fashion of life, a superfluity, that will not part with a rotten
unsavourie discourse, which discovers a rotten spirit and infecteth others.
Here is a profession of Religion indeed, that cannot have so much masterie of
the corrupt heart, as to deny and overcome it self in things that are
grossly ill. How will a man part with his blood and life, that will not part
with things that he should part withal, not only with something to the poor
and to good uses; but to part with some sinful course of life and wicked and
ungodly lusts that fight against the soul, who will not endure, not so much as
a check, who rather then they will go under that censure wherewith the world
is pleased to disgrace Religion, they will live and die like Atheists. This
extreme tenderness in the matters of God and of salvation, is the cause why
many eternally perish.

Again, To remember what we should all be, and what we should all aim at.
to cut of all vain excuses: let us a Christian that hopes of good of his
Religion, should live by faith, and depend upon God in the use of lawful
means. If he be as he should be, he ought to walk with God, keep his watch
with him, and do nothing unbeseeming the eye of God. When his corruption
draws him to be careless, then he is not as he should be, for in a right
temper, he ought to be fitted to every good work, ready for all opportunities
of doing any thing that is good: because the time of this life is the
feeds-time, the time of doing good, the time of reaping is in the world to
come; when therefore the heart is shut when any opportunity is offered of
doing good, he may conclude, certainly, I am cold and dull, pretend what I
will, I am not as I should be. A Christian ought to abound in the work of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 1^ 58.
especially having such abundance of encouragements as we have. What a world
of encouragements has a Christian? there are none to those of Religion, from
the inward content that it brings here at the hour of death, and in Glory
hereafter. When we are drawn to be scantie, niggardly, and base to things
that are good, surely, this is not as it should be, pretend what we will to the
contrary, this is a fault. A Christian should at all times be fit to yield and
to render up his soul unto God, because our life is uncertain. When
therefore, we are moved by corruption to live in a state that we cannot abide
to die in, because we are under the guilt of some sin: then certainly
pretend what we will, our state is so far naught, as far as there is
unfitness and unwillingnesse to die. Let us have in the eye of our soul
therefore, what a Christian should be, aim at it, and think that when we stop
at a lower measure and pitch; that (pretend what we will) all is but from
carnal wit and policy, the greatest enemy that Religion has.

We pray in the Lords Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as
it is in Heaven, great desires, and which should be the desires of all our
hearts. But herein we play the Hypocrites, whilst we pray thus that the
Kingdom of God may come, that Christ may rule in our hearts over lusts and
desires: yet notwithstanding we pretend this and that excuse, whereby we may be
led with this and that lust, we cross our own prayers: yet it shows what
pitch we should aspire to, To sanctify the Lord in our hearts, to delight in
him, and trust in him above all. When we do not this, we fall short of our
own prayers. And when we cannot bring our hearts to suffer, and to do what
God would have us to do, but are led away with our own wills, we are not as
we should be; our wills should be conformable to Christ's in all things, It is
our prayer, and therefore we should aim at it. Now, when flesh and blood sets
up a pitch of Religion, I am well enough: and yet prais, Hollowed be thy Name;
Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done, etc. Such a man is an hypocrite; for his
prayer leads him further and further still till he come to Heaven, where is
all perfection: until when, our life is a life of endeavor and progress.
Though we be never so perfect, yet Christ may more rule and set up his Kingdom
yet more in the heart, and further bring our will to his in all things: when
flesh and blood sets up cavills against this, we play the hypocrites with God
and cross our selves. Therefore, Let us justify a measure of Religion beyond
our present pitch whatsoever it is, justify it more and more still. Think we
are never as we should be till we be in Heaven; and never bless our selves,
but think that we should always be on the growing hand, and whatsoever
excuse comes to hinder us from zealousnesse and earnestness (though it carry a
show of reason in the profession of Religion:) account it to come from our
corrupt hearts.

Again, Remember to do all things to God, and To do all our works of
Religion, and our calling to God* and not to man.
and then whatsoever discouragement there is from men, we should not be
discouraged. We shall hear men continually complain of others, that they are
unthankful persons, and why should we do any thing for them. Why? do it to
God, If it fall within our callings let us do justice and show mercy: God will
accept, though men do not. It cutts of many discouragements in duties; It is
best to have Gods reward. In this world it is good to meet with naughty
unthankful persons, because else we should meet with all our reward here. It
is good to do somewhat for Gods sake, and for Religion, let people be as
unthankful as they will: to say, I did it not to you, but to God. If a man
regard the discouragement of the world, he shall never do that which is good,
people in the world are so unthankful and regardlesse to those that wish them
best, and that do best to them. But if a man do a thing to God, and do it
out of duty and conscience, he may hold on, have he never so many
discouragements in the world, he shall loose nothing, all shall be rewarded,
and is regarded.

To be persuaded that sin is the greatest evil, and grace the greatest good
in the world.
That sin is the greatest evil, and grace and goodness the best thing in
the world. Therefore, there is no excuse for sin, from any thing in the
world, for it is the worst thing in the world, which stains the soul, and
hinders it from comfort. And for grace and goodness in the inward man, it is
the best thing in the world, therefore, purchase this, though with
disadvantage. It is best to avoyde sin, though with enduring evil; yea to
avoid the least sin, by enduring the greatest evil. It is wisdom to do
good with disadvantage, when the disadvantage is bounded only in this life,
the thing that I do, being a thing which furthers my reckning at the day of
account. Therefore, have this always in consideration, whatsoever I suffer in
this world, I will not sin, this will cut off a world of excuses.

Therefore, 1 Pet. 4. 1.
let us labor to cut off all cavills, and to arm our selves. It is the
Apostle Peter's exhortation, as David's worthies brake through the pikes to fetch
him water from the well of Bethlehem: so all Christian worthies that look to
be Crowned, let them be armed inwardly with resolution for good things, take up
resolutions that they will do it. 2 Timothy 3. 10.
As Paul tells his scholar Timothy of his purpose. Thou know my purpose,
and manner of living: This is the manner of a Christian life: that this, Psalm.
119.
I will not break for all the world. So, there is a purpose of living
honestly, a manner of life, not by starts, now and then to speak a good word,
and to do a good deed. But there is a purpose and manner of life for it, he
resolves always for the best things.

And to this end beg of God his Spirit, which is above all impediments. The
more Spirit the more strength and courage against impediments. The more we
attend upon holy means, the more spiritual and heavenly light and life is set
up in the soul. The more Spiritual we are, the more we shall tread under
foot all those things that stand us and Heaven. Let us therefore labor more
and more for the Spirit, Mat. 11. 12.
and then we shall offer an holy violence unto good things; as it was said of
John Baptists time, The Kingdom of God suffered v^a^eace, men were so eager of
it, as that they surprised it as a Castle, by violence. There is no way to take
Heaven but by offering, violence to discouragement, corrupt on and whatsoever
stands in the way, The violent only takes Heaven by force. Now when we are
spiritual, we shall not pretend, That there is a lyo^ in the way, that there
are difficulties, as the sluggard does, that thinks himself wiser then many
men who can render a reason: but we shall go boldly and courageously on; and
know that there are more encouragements for good, and stronger, then the world
has allurements to be naught, which are but for the present life, But we
have inward ones, which will hold out in the hour of death and after.
Therefore, go on boldly and resolutely in good things, always remembering to
beg the Spirit of God, that may arm our Spirits with invincible courage.

Now the Spirit of God brings Faith with it, Heb. 11. 27.
which is a conquering victorious Grace over the world, Cant. 8. 6.
and sees him that is invisible* which brings love also which is strong as
death: wherewith the soul being warmed, It constrains us, to do duties in
spite of all impediments; the Spirit of God will strengthen our hope also of
Heaven, which stre^gthens us against all discouragements which stand in our
way; For this hope is on greater and better grounds then discouragements are:
and he that gives us this hope, will enable us to possess it.

Therefore labor First, to have a clear understanding of the things of God,
and of the excellency of them, for light will cause heat: Why did the Kingdom
of Heaven in John Baptists time suffer violence? why were men then so violent
to cleave unto Christ? because from that time the Gospel was more clearly
manifested. And heavenly truths the more they are discovered and laid open
(there is such an excellency in them) the more they work upon the heart and
affections. Therefore, The Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence And where are
people more earnest after good things, then in these places where the
Evangelicall Truths of God are laid open most, there they break through all
discouragements whatsoever.

And so, Labor for Faith to believe those truths: which is the most victorious
and conquering Grace, that will carry us through all discouragements
whatsoever, because it will set greater things before us, then the
discouragements are. Are we afraid of men? Faith it sets Hell before us. Are
we allured by the world? It sets Heaven before us. It conquers the world with
all the discouraging temptations thereof. Are the discouragements from
impossibilities? O, It is hard, I cannot do it. Phil. 4 13.
I but (says Paul) I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens
me. There is a kind of omnipotency in Faith, Math. 15.
O woeman be it unto thee as thou will. We have abundance of strength in
Christ, Faith is but an empty hand that goes to Christ to draw from him what
it has need of; In Christ I can do all things.

So, To have our hearts warmed with love to him; this Grace of the Spirit will
make us pass through all discouragements, for, it has a constraining power: 2
Cor. 5. 14.
The love of Christ constraines us (says the Apostle) If our hearts once be
warmed with the love of Christ, this will make us to think nothing too dear
for Christ, and will cut of all excuses and pretenses whatsoever, which come
from coldness of affection. Cant. 8
Love is strong as death as we have it in this Book, Much water cannot quench
it. All oppositions and discouragements whatsoever, all the water which the
Devil and the world has or uses, cannot quench the heavenly fire of love,
when it is kindled in any measure. What carried the blessed Saints and Martyrs
of God in all times through the pikes of all discouragements? The Spirit of
God, by the Spirit of love, from a spirit of Faith, and heavenly conviction of
the excellency and truth of the things: they saw such a light which wrought
upon their affections, and carried them amain against the stream, (contrary
to the stream of the times wherein they lived) that the worse the times were,
the better they were.

And let us consider again, The shortness of enjoying these helps.
That Christ will that we shall not always have these encouragements, such
truths and motions of Gods Spirit, as perhaps we feel now. Therefore, when
we feel any good motion stirred up toward Christ, entertain it presently,
happily we shall never hear of it again, the longer we defer and put it of,
the worse. As a man that is rowing in a boat, let him neglect his stroke, the
neglecting of one may make him tug at it five or six times after to overtake
those that are before him. So nothing is gotten by sloth and negligence, we
do but cast our selves back the more.

And let us help our selves with setting the By setting the glory to come
before us.
with Moses to have a Patriarks eye to him that is invisible, to see a Country
afar off, Now, Heb. 11.
we are nearer salvation then when we believed, let us help our backward
souls this way: that so, having still Glory in our eyes, it may help us to
go through all discouragements whatsoever they be. We know Zacheus, when he
was afraid that he should not see Christ, went before the multitude; and
getting up upon the top of a Tree, thus help^ himself. So does Grace help it
self by Glory. And so far is Grace from objecting and pretending lets, as it
makes supplies in Gods service: as David, who in this case, was pleased to be
accounted vile. Let us look unto the Recompense of the reward, not to the
present discouragements, but to the prize at the end of the race. What makes a
soldier to fight hard for the victory in the end? The sweetness of the
triumph. What makes a husbandman go through all discouragements? he hopes to
receive a croppe in the end. Consider the issue which follows after a
conscionable careful and Christian life, after a more near and perfect
walking with God, maintaining Communion with him. Let there be what
discouragements there will be in the world, Psalm. 37.
the end thereof is peace, The end of that man is peace. Upon this ground, the
Apostle exhorts us, to be fruitful, and abundant in the work of the Lord; 1
Cor. 15. 58.
knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

The end of the eighth Sermon.
THE NINTH SERMON. SERMON. IX.

CANT. V. VI. I rose to open to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn
himself, etc.
NAturally we are prone to delays in heavenly things, and then to cover all
with excuses. A man is a Sophister to himself, whom he first deceives, before
the Devil, or the World deceive him; Which is the reason why so often in
Scripture you have this mentined. Gal 6. 7.
B^e not deceived, God is not mocked. Be not deceived, neither Adulterer, nor
Covetous person, nor such and such, shall ever enter into the kingdom of
Heaven. Be not deceived. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 19.
Which is an intimation, that naturally we are very prone to be deceived in
points of the greatest consequence in the world, to flatter our selves (as the
Church does here) with false excuses. I have put of my coat, etc. But we
shall now see in this next verse, what becomes of all those excuses, and
backewardnesse of the Church whereby she puts of Christ.

My Beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, Verse. 4.
and my bowels were moved for him,

I rose to open to my Beloved, Verse. 5.
And my hands droopped with mirrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling mirrh
upon the hand'es of the lock.

I rose to open to my Beloved, Verse. 6.
but my Beloved had withdrawn himself, etc.

This comes of her sluggishnesse, and drowsiness, that Christ absented and
withdrew himself. There are 3. things here set down in these Verses now read.

1. Christ's withdrawing of himself. 2. His gracious dealing having withdrawn
himself.
He does not altogether leave his Church, but puts his finger into the hole of
the door, and then leaves some sweetenes behind him before he goes. After
which is set down,

3. The success of Christ's departure, and withdrawing of himself from her.

1. Her Bowels were moved in her, which were hard before.

2. She rose up out of her bed wherein for merly she had framed, and composed
her self to rest.

3. She seeks and calls after him.

But the Doctrinall points, which are to be observed out of these verses, are
these,

1. That Christ does sometimes use to leave his Children, Obser. 1.
as he did the Church here.

2. That the cause is from the Church her self, Obser. 2.
as we see how unkindly she had used Christ, to let him attend her leisure so
long. Therefore he taking a holy state upon him, leaves the Church; The cause
of his forsaking us, is in our selves, we may thank our selves for it.

3. That though Christ deal thus with us, Yet notwithstanding, Obser. 3.
he never leaves us wholly, without some footestepps of his saving grace, and
everlasting love, some remainders and prints he leaves upon the soul. So as
it lingers after him, and never rests till it find him, he always leaves
something. There is never a total desertion: as we see here in Christ's
dealing, he puts his finger into the hole of the doo^e, he stands at the
door, and leaves myrrh behind him, something in the heart that causes a
lingering, and restless affection in her toward Christ.

4. That the Church by reason of this gracious dealing of Christ (leaving
somewhat behind him) is sensible of her former unkindnesse, Obser. 4.
is restless and stirrs up her self to endeavor more and more, till she
have recovered her former communion, and sweet fellowship with Christ, which
she had before. She never gives over till Christ and she meet again in peace
(as we shall see in the prosecution,) These be the chief points considerable.

First, Obser. 1.
Christ does use sometimes to leave his Church, as here he does, My Beloved had
withdrawn himself, etc.

But what kind of leaving is it?

We must distinguish of Christ's leavings; and withdrawings of himself. They
are either in regard of outward or inward comforts and helps.

1. Outward, as Christ leaves his Church sometimes, by taking away the means
of Salvation, the Ministry, or by taking away outward comforts; which is a
withdrawing of his, especially if he accompany the taking of them away with
some signs of his displeasure, or sense of his anger, as usually it falls out.
This does imbitter all crosses, and losses, namely when they come from Christ,
as a Testimony of his anger for our former unkindnesse.

2. Sometimes his forsaking is more inward; and that is double, Either in
regard of peace, and joy, sweet inward comfort that the soul had wont to feel
in the holy Ordinances by the Spirit of Christ; Or in regard of strength, and
assistance. There is desertion in regard of Comfort and in regard of strength.
Sometimes he leaves them to themselves in regard of strength and supportation
to fall into some sin to cure some greater sin perhaps.

Now that Christ thus leaves his Church it is true of all, both of the body and
of each particular member of the Church.

It is true of the whole body of the Church, In the whole Body.
Isa. 49. 14. God has forgotten me. Can a mother forget her child? (says God
again) so Psalm. 44. 9. and in other places, the Church complains of
forsakings, The Scripture is full of complaints in this kind.

It is true of the sever all members and especially of the most eminent
members; as we see holy Job complains, Job. 7. 2.
as if God had set him (as it were) a but to shoot at, and had opposed himself
against him. So David complains ( Psalm. 88. 11. Psalm. 77. 9. and Psalm. 60. 1.
and in other Psalms) of Gods anger. Correct me not in thine anger. The
Psalms are full of this; so as it would be time unprofitably spent to be large
in a point so clear, that every one knows well enough, who reads and
understands the Psalms. Jonah. 2. 4, 5.
So Ionab likewise felt a kind of forsaking, when he was in the midst of the
sea, when the waves were without, and terrors within, when he was in the
midst of h^ll, (as it were) thus you see the instances clear the point*

The ends, To indeare former slighted presence.
that God has in it, are many, To indeare his presence the more to us, which
we slighted too much before. It is our corruption, the not valuing of things
till they be gone, we set not the true price upon them when we enjoy them.
When we enjoy good things, we look at the grievances which are mingled with
the good, and forget the good, which when it is gone then we remember the
good. Numb. 11. 5.
The Israelites could remember their onyons and garleeke, and forget their
slaverie. So because Manna was present, they despised Manna, and that upon one
inconvenience it had, It was ordinary with them. Thus the corrupt heart of man
is prone in the enjoying of favors, If it have any grievance, it murmures at
that, and it troubles and makes them forget all the goodness and sweetness
of what they enjoy. But on the contrary when God withdrawes those good things
from us, then we forget those former inconveniences, and begin to think what
good we had by them. This is the poison and corruption of our Nature.

Christ seems to forsake us, to try the truth of the Graces and affections in
us, To try the truth of our graces and affections.
whether they be true or not, and to cause us to make after him, when he
seems to forsake us, as undoubtedly we shall, where there is truth of grace
planted in the heart in any measure.

In regard of others, To teach us wisdom how to deal with others.
he does it to teach us heavenly wisdom how to deal with those in affliction,
It makes us wise, tender, and successful in dealing with others, when we
have felt the like particular grievance our selves, 2 Cor. 1. 4.
as Gal. 6. 1. Brethren if a man be overtaken in a fault, you that are
spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, least thou also be tempted, Experience of spiritual grief in this
kind, will make us fit, able and wise every way to deal with others.

This serves likewise To weane us from the To weane us from the world.
in the plenty and abundance of all earthly things; For take a Christian that
has no cross in the world, let him find some estrangement of Christ from his
spirit, that he finds not the comforts of the Holy Ghost, and that enlargement
which in former times he enjoyed, and all the wealth he has, the earthly
contentments he enjoyes please him not, nor can content that soul, which has
ever felt sweet communion with Christ. Again, how should we pray with
earnestness of affection, Thy Kingdom come (in the time of prosperity,)
except there were somewhat in this kind to raise up the soul to desire to be
gone? Now it is our subjection to these alterations, and changes, ebbings, and
flowings, sometimes to have the sense of Gods love in Christ, and sometimes to
want it, sometimes to feel his love, and sometimes again the fruits of his
anger and displeasure, which serves exceedingly to stir up men's desires of
Heaven.

5. In this place here, To correct our security.
the especial end was To correct the security, and ill carriage of the Church.

And likewise, To prepare the soul for a nearer communion with him.
To prepare the Church by this For indeed Christ did not forsake her, but to
her feeling, to bring her in the sequel, to have nearer communion and union
with himself then ever she had before, God forsakes, that he may ^ot forsake;
he seems strange, that he may be more friendly, this is Christ's usage, he
personates an adversary, when he intends to show the greatest effects of his
love, as we may see afterward in the passages following.

To make us to know thoroughly the bitterness of sin, That we may know
thoroughly what the bitterness of sin is.
that we may grow to a further hatred of that which deprives us of so sweet a
communion; We think sin a trifle, and never know it enough till the time of
temptation, that conscience be awakened and opened, that it appears in its
right colors.

That we may know what Christ suffered, That we may taste a little what
Christ suffered.
and underwent for us in the sense of Gods wrath, in the absence of his favor
for a time. This the humane Nature could never have suffered, if his divinity
had withdrawn it self. Now all of us must sip of that cup, whereof Christ
drank the dreggs, having a taste what it is to have God to forsake us, for the
most part, those believers who live any time, (especially those of great
parts,) God deals thus with, weaker Christians he is more indulgent unto; at
such times we know of what use a Mediator is, and how miserable our condition
were without such an one, both to have borne and overcome the wrath of God for
us, which burden he could never have undergone, but had sunk under it, but
for the Hypostaticall u^ on.

Let us not therefore censure any Christian, Use. 1.
when we find that their course has been good, Not to censure other
Christians wanting comfort.
and gracious, yet notwithstanding they seem to want comfort, let us not
wonder at them, as if God had utterly forsaken them, indeed sometimes they
think themselves forsaken, and the world thinks them so too, that God regards
them not, They are people of no respect either to God or to others, as you have
the Church in the Psalms complaining, Psalm. 44. 9.
as if God had forsaken them, so they think themselves forsaken, and the world
thinks them so too, and neglects them. Therefore in so doing we shall censure
the generation of the Righteous. It was thus with the Head of the Church, with
the whole Church, and with every particular member; neither is it fit we
should always enjoy the sense of Gods love. Christ by heavenly wisdom
dispenses of his sweetness, comforts and peace, as may stand with our souls
best good, and we should as much take heed of censuring our selves in that
condition, as if we were rejected and cast away of God. We must judge our
selves at such time by Faith, and not by feeling; looking to the promises and
Word of God, and not to our present sense and appreh^nsion. Use. 2.


Again if this be so, To prepare and look for desertion.
Learn to prepare and look for it before hand, and to get some grounds of
comfort, some promises out of the word, and to keep a good conscience. O it is
a heavy thing, when God shall seem to be angry with us, and our conscience at
the same time shall accuse us, when the Devil shall lay sins hard to our
charge, and some affliction at the same time lie heavy upon the sore and guilty
soul. If we have not somewhat laid up before hand, what will become of the
poor soul, when Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, and all shall seem to be
against it. There are few that come to Heaven, but they know what these things
mean. It is good therefore to look for them, and to prepare some comforts
before hand.

But what here should be the inward mooving cause: It is in the Church her
self, for mark the coherence; she had turned of Christ with excuse,
pretenses, and delatory answers, and now presently upon it Christ forsakes her
in regard of her feeling, and of the sweet comfort she formerly enjoyed, The
point is.

That the cause rests in our selves why Christ withdrawes comfort from our
souls. Obser. 2.


If we search our own hearts we shall find it so, Causes of desertion in our
selves.
and usually the causes in our selves are these, When we are unkind to Christ,
and repel the sweet motions of When we improove not the precious 5. When we
yield to carnal policy, and shifts to When we linger after earthly things and
comforts, and wrap our When we tremble not at Gods judgments, and threatenings,
and at the signs of them; with many such things. Where these dispositions are,
we need not wonder if we find not the comforts of Christ, and of the Holy
Ghost in us with the gracious presence of his Spirit; the cause is in our
selves. But security has been at large spoken of before, where the Churches
sleep was handled, therefore the point shall not be here enlarged, but only
some use made of it, as may serve for the present purpose.

If Christ should take away the comforts that we enjoy, Use. 1.
and remoove himself; and his dwelling from us, (for he is now yet among us
and knocks at our doors,) do we not give him just cause to depart? what a
spirit of slumber possesses us, which will be awaked with nothing to seek
after Christ? how few lay hold upon God, press upon him, wrestle with him by
prayer? to hide themselves before the evil day come, as they should do.
Therefore if Christ have absented himself a long time from the Church in
general, and withdrawn the comfort and presence of his ordinances and in
particular withheld the sweet comforts of our spirits, and our peace, so that
we see him in the contrary signs of his displeasure and anger, as if he did
not regard and respect us, we have given him just cause so to do. We see here
how the Church used Christ and so do we with the like security, and a spirit
of slumber, with unkindnesse, notwithstanding all the provocations that Christ
uses to win us; he leaves us not, until he be left first, for he desires
to have nearer acquaintance, communion and fellowship with the soul; as we
have seen in the former verse, My love, my dove, my undefiled, Open to me,
etc. Therefore if we do not enjoy more acquaintance with Christ then we do,
and walk more in the comforts of the Holy Ghost; Acts. 9. 39.
it is merely from our own indisposition and security. Therefore let us
censure our selves in this kind, The best way to recover spiritual (...).
and not call Christ an enemy, as if he had forgotten, and God had forsaken.
Take heed of such a spirit of murmuring, If such a state befall us, let us
labor to lay our hand upon our mouth, and to justify Christ. It is just with
thee thus to leave me, to give me over to this terror, to deal thus with me,
that have dealt so unkindly with thee; so to justify God, and accuse our
selves, is the best way to recover spiritual comfort.

Well, Obser. 3.
for the third Point. That howsoever Christ be provoked by the Churches (...)
drowsinesse, and careless carriage, (...) regard of her feeling, and of inward
comfort. (...) notwithstanding he is so gracious, (...) to leave some thing
behind him, that shows indeed, that he had not left the Church altogether,
but only in some regard. For howsoever Christ (in regard of some order of his
providence) leave it, yet in regard of another order of his providence, care
and mercy, he does not leave it, so as one way which he takes must sometimes
give place to another way of his working in ordering things. Sometimes he is
present in a way of comfort, that is one order of his dispensation: and when he
sees that that is neglected, then he withdrawes his comforts and hides his
gracious countenance, yet he is then present still in an other order and way,
though we discern it not, that is, in a way of humbling the soul, letting it
see its sin. So here howsoever Christ had withdrawn himself in regard of
this manner of his dealing, in respect of comfort, that the Church did not now
see his grace, favor, yet he left behind him a spirit of grace, to affect her
heart with grief, sorrow, and shame, and to stir up her endeavors to seek
after him, (as it is said here,) I rose to open to my Beloved and my hands
dropped myrrh, and my fingers sweet swelling myrrh, upon the handles of the
locks.

Here observe these three things which shall be briefly named because they
shall be touched elfe where.

Christ's grace is the cause of our grace, Obser.


He first leaves myrrh, and then her fingers drop myrrh: our oil is from his
oil, the head being (...), Psalm. 133. 2. and 36. 9.
the oil ran down to the skirts of (...) garments; Joh. 1. 16.
Out of his (...) we receive grace for grace, that is, our grace is answerable
to the grace of Christ, we have all from him, favor for his favor, because
he is beloved we are beloved, we have the grace of Sanctification from him, he
was Sanctified with the Spirit, therefore we are Sanctified, we have Grace of
privilege for his grace, he is the Son of God, therefore we are Sons: He
is the heir of Heaven, therefore we are heirs, so that of his grace it is we
receive all, whether we take grace for favor, or for the grace of
Sanctification, or the grace of Privilege and Prerogative, all our graces are
from his, our myrrh from his myrrh.

This should teach us, Use.
the necessity of dependence upon Christ for whatsoever we have or would have,
which dependence upon Christ is the life of our life, the soul of our souls.

Again observe from hence, that the Churches fingers dropped myrrh when she
opened the door, and stirred up her self to endeavor. When first her bowels
were moved, then she makes to the door, and then her hands dropped myrrh, so
that:

We find experience of the grace of Christ especially when we stir up our
selves to ind^avour. Arise and be do^ng and the Lord shall be with thee, Observe.
(says David to Solomon,) so let us rowse up our selves to endeavor, 1. Cron.
28. 20.
and we shall find a gracious presence of Christ, and a blessed assistance of
the Spirit of Christ, who will show himself in the midst of endeavors. To him
that has shall be given: what is that? To him that has (if he exercise and
stir up the grace of God in him) shall be given. Therefore let us stir up
the graces of God in us, Mat. 25. 29.
let us fall upon actions of obedience, second them with prayer, whatsoever we
pray for and desire set upon the practice thereof; we mock God else except we
endeavor for that we desire. There was myrrh left on the door, but she feels
it not till she arose opened the door, and laid her hand upon the lock.

I speak to any Christians experience, if in the midst of obedience they do
not find that comfort they looked for, and that it is meat and drink to do
Gods will. Therefore keep not off and say, I am dead and drowsy, therefore I
shall be still so; you are deceived, fall upon obedience and practicing of holy
duties, and in the midst thereof thou shall find the presence and assistance of
Gods Spirit, that will comfort thee.

The third thing observeable from hence is this: That Gods Graces are sweet.

Pleasant and sweet, Obser. 3.
compared here to myrrh which was an ingredient in the holy oil, grace makes
us sweet, prayers are sweet, as it is Rev. 8. 4. Christ mingleth them with his
own sweet odours, and so takes and offers them to God. Holy Obedience is sweet
and delightful to God and to the conscience, it brings peace and delight to
others, therefore they are called fruits; fruit does not only imply and show
the issuing of good things from the root. but there is also a pleasantness in
it, so there is a delightfulness in good works as there is in fruit to the
taste: Therefore if we would be sweet and delightful to God, let us labor to
have grace. It we would think of our selves with contentment, and have inward
sweetness, Let us labor for the graces of Gods Spirit, these are like myrrh.
Prove. 15. 8.
The wicked are an abomination unto the Lord, who abhors them and whatsoever is
in them. But, the righteous and sincere man is his delight. Therefore if we
would approve our selves to God, and feel that he has delight in us; labor
to be such as he may delight in.

Wherefore let the discouraged soul make this use of it; Use.
not to be afraid to do that which is good upon fear we should sin. Indeed
sin will cleave to that we do, but Christ will pardon the sin, and accept
that which is sweet of his own Spirit, Let us not esteem basely of that which
Christ esteems highly of; nor let that be vile in our eyes that is precious in
his; let us labor to bring our hearts to comfortable obedience, for it is a
sweet sacrifice to God.

Now whence came all this? from this that is mentioned, verse. 4. My Beloved
put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were (...) for him.
First for that expression, he put his finger in by the hole of the door. It
implies here that Christ before he departed left by his Spirit an impression on
the Churches heart which deeply affected her to seek after him.

The Fingers spoken of, are nothing but the power of his Spirit: as the usual
Scripture phrase is, Exodus ^. 19.
This is Gods finger, Gods mighty hand, without which all ordinances are
ineffectuall, Paul may plant and Apollos may water, 1. Cor. 3. 7.
but all is nothing without the working of the Spirit, The motions whereof are
most strong, being Gods finger, whereby he wrought all that affection in the
Church, which is here expressed. Christ before he leaves the Church, puts his
finger into the ^ole of the door, that is, he works somewhat in the soul by
his Spirit, which stirred up a constant endeavor to seek after him. For why
else follows it, her bowels were moved after him, which implies a work of
the Spirit upon her bowels, expressed in her grief for his absence, and shame
for her refusing his entrance, and whereby her heart was moved, and turned in
her to seek after him. From whence thus explained observe,

That outward means will do no good unless the finger of Christ come to do
all that is good. Obser.


The finger of Christ is the Spirit of Christ, that is, a kind of Divine power
goes from him in hearing and speaking the word of God, and in prayer, there is
more then a man's power in all this, if these work any effect Christ must put
his finger in, when (...) are unfolded to us in the Ministry of the word, all
is to no purpose, but the founding of a voice, unless the finger of Christ
open the heart and work in the soul.

Let us make this use of it therefore, not to rest in any means whatsoever,
Use. 1.
but desire the presence of Christ's finger to moov^, and to work upon our
hearts and souls; Many careless Christians go about the ordinances of God,
and never regard this power of Christ, this mighty power, the finger of Christ.
Thereupon they find nothing at all that is divine and spiritual wrought in
them. For as it required a God to redeem us, to take our nature, wherein he
might restore us; so likewise it requires the power of God to alter our
natures. We could not be brought into the state of grace without Divine
satisfaction, and we cannot be altered to a frame of grace without a Divine
finger, the finger of God working upon our hearts and souls. This should moove
us in all the ordinances of God that we attend upon, to lift up our hearts in
the midst of them: Lord, let me feel the finger of thy Spirit writing thy word
upon my heart. Turn us O Lord, and we shall be turned. Pray for this
quickening, and in livening; for this strengthening Spirit: all comes by it. 2.
From this that it is said here, That Christ puts his finger into the hole of
the door before he remooved it and withdrew himself, Observe.

How graciously Christ does deal with us, That he does always leave some
grace, Obser. 2.
before he does offer to depart? Let us therefore for the time to come, lay,
and store this up as a ground of comfort, that howsoever Christ may leave us,
yet notwithstanding he will never leave us wholly, but as he gave us his holy
Spirit at first, so he will continue him in us by some gracious work or other,
either by way of comfort, or of strength to uphold us. Perhaps we may need more
sorrow, more humility, then of any other grace. For, Winter is as good for the
growing of things as the Spring, because, were it not for this, where would be
the killing of weeds, and worms, and preparing of the ground, and land for
the spring; So it is as needful for Christians to find the presence of Christ
in the way of humiliation, and abasement, causing us to afflict our own
souls, as to feel his presence in Peace, Joy, and Comfort. In this life we
cannot be without this gracious dispensation. We may therefore comfort our
selves, that howsoever Christ leaves us, yet he will always leave somewhat
behind him, as here he left some myrrh after him upon the handle of the door;
some myrrh is left always behind him upon the soul, which keeps it in a
state and frame of grace, and sweetens it. Myrrh was one of the ingredients in
the holy oil, as it is Exodus 30. 30. and so this leaving of myrrh behind him,
signifies the oil of grace left upon the soul, that enabled the Church to do
all these things, which are after spoken of.

But you will say, Object.
How does this appear when in some desertion a Christian finds no grace,
strength, or comfort at all? that nothing is left?

It is answered, Answ.
they always do^. Take those who at any time have had experience of the love
of God, and of Christ formerly, take them at the worst, you shall find from
them some sparkles of grace, broken speeches of tried secret comfort, some
inward strength and struggling against corruptions, their spirits end eavouring
to recover themselves from sinking too low, and with something withstanding
both despair and corruption. Take a Christian at the worst, there will be a
discovery of the Spirit of Christ left in him, notwithstanding all desertion.
This is universally in all in some measure though perhaps it is not diceerned
to a Christian himself, but to those that are able to judge. Sometimes others
can read our evidences better then our selves. A Christian that is intemptation
cannot judge of his own estate, but others can; and so, at the very worst, he
has always somewhat left in him, where by he may be comforted, Christ never
leaves his Church and Children that are his wholly. Those that are wholly left,
they never had saving grace, as Achitophell, can, Sa^le and I^da^ were left to
themselves. But for the Children of God, if ever they found the power of
sanctifying grace, Christ whom he loves, Ioh. 13. 1.
he loves to the end; From whom he departs not, unless he leaves somewhat
behind him, that sets an edge upon the desires to seeks after him.

Make this 2. Use. 2.
use of it, To magnify the gracious love and mercy of Christ; that when we
de^erve the contrary to be left altogether, yet notwithstanding so graciously
he deals with us. Behold in this his dealing the mercy of Christ, he will not
suffer the Church to be in a state of security, but will rather (to cure her)
bring her to another opposite state of grief and sorrow, as we shall see in
the next point, How that which Christ left in the heart of the Church, so
afflicted her, That her bowels were turned in her. Whereupon she rises,
seeks, and inquires after Christ by the watchmen, and others. So she says of
her self.

My bowels were moved in me, etc.
What was that? My heart was affected full of sorrow and grief for my unkind
dealing with Christ. Hereby those affections were stirred up (that were before
sleepy and secure) to godly grief, sorrow, and shame: For, God has planted
affections in us, and joined them with conscience, as the executioners with the
judge. So that, when as conscience accuses of any sin, either of Omissi^^ or
Commission, affections are ready to be the execucutioners within us. Thus to
prevent eternal damnation, God has set up a throne in our own hearts to take
reveng^ and correction by our own affections, godly sorrow and mourning, as
here the Church says, My ^owels were (...), It was a shame and grief,
springing ou^ of love to Christ that had been so kind, patient and full of
forbea^ance to her. My (...) me, that is, sorrow and grief were upon me for
my unkind dealing.

The observation from hence is,

That security, and a cold dull state, produces a contrary temper: that is,
Observe.
those that are cold, dull, secure, and put of Christ, he suffers them to fall
into sharp so^rowes and griefs.

We usually say, cold diseases must have hot and sharp remedies; It is most
true spiritually, security, which is a kind of lethargy, (a cold disease)
forgetting of God, and our duty to him, must have a hot and sharp cure; And
the lethargy is best cured by a Burning Ague. So Christ deals here, he puts
his finger in at the hole of the door, and leaves grace behind to work upon
the bowels of the Church, to make her grieve and be ashamed for her unkind
dealing. Thus he cures security by sorrow. This is the best conclusion of sin.

And we may observe withal, Observe.
That even sins of omission they bring grief, shame, and sorrow, And in the
issue through Christ's sanctifying them, these which they breed, consume the
Parent, that is, sin brings forth sorrow, shame, and grief, which are a
means to cure sin. Securitys breeds this mooving of the bowe's; which
mooving helps security. Would we therefore prevent sorrow, shame, and grief,
Take heed then of security the cause that leads to them; yea of sins of
omission, wherein there is more danger, then in sins of commission. The
sins of carnal wicked men, are usually sins of commission, most which
break out outragiously, and thereby taynt themselves with open sins. But the
sins of Gods people (who are nearer to him) are for the most part sins of
omission, that is negligence, coldness, carelessenesse in duty, want of zeal,
and of care they should have in stirring up the graces of God in them, as the
Church here, which did not give way to Christ, nor shook of security.

Let us esteem as slightly as we will of sins of omission, Use.
and carelessenesse; they are enough to bring men to hell if God be not the
more merciful. It is not required only that we do no harm, and keep our
selves from outward evils, but we must do good in a good manner, and have a
care to be fruitful, and watchful, which if we do not, this temper will
bring grief, shame, and sorrow afterward; As here even for sinues of
omission, deadness, and dullness, we see the Church is left by Christ; and
her bowels are turned in her: For careless neglect, and omission of duty to
God, is a presage, and forerunner of some downfall and dejection. And commonly
it is true, when a man is in a secure and careless estate, a man may read his
destiny, (though he have been never so good) nay the rather, if he be good,
Such a one is in danger to fall into some sharp punishment, or into some
sin; for of all states and tempers, God will not suffer a Christian to be in
a secure, lazy, dead state, when he cannot perform things comfortably to God,
or himself, or to others, a dead secure estate is so hateful to him, (decay
in our first love, this lukewarm temper) that he will not endure it, it either
goes before some great sin, cross, affliction, or judgment.

My bowels were moved in me.

And good reason, it was a suitable correction, to the sin wherein she
offended. For Christ his bowels were turned toward her in love and pity, My
love, my dove, my ^nd^filed, in which case, she neglecting him, it was ^it
she should find moving of bowels in another sense (out of love too) but in
shame and mourning. Christ here leaves her to seek after him, that had waited
and attended her leisure before, as we shall see after.

The next thing we may hence observe, in that, That her bowels were (...) in
her from something left in the hole of the door by the Spirit of Christ, is,

That Christ has our affections in his gover^^ment. Obser.


He has our bowels in his rule and government, more then we our selves have.
We cannot of our selves rule our grief, shame, sorrow, or such affections as
these, The wisest man in the world cannot award grief, and sorrow, when God
will turn it upon his bowels, and make a man ashamed and confounded in
himself. All the wit and policy in the world cannot suppress those
affections. For Christ rules our hearts. The hears of Kings are in his hand,
Prove. 21. 1.
as the rivers of water, as well as the hearts of ordinary persons.

If he set any thing upon the soul to afflict it and cast it down, it shall
afflict it, if it be but a conceit, if he will take away the raines from the
soul, and leave it to its own passion, removing away its guard, (for he by
his Spirit guards our souls with peace, by commanding of tranquillity;) So as
let him but leave it to its self, and it will tear it self in sunder, 2 Samuel*
17. 23.
as Achitophell who being left to himself, did tear himself in pieces; Genesis
4.
C^in also being thus left, was disquicted, tormented, and wracked himself.
Mat* 27. ^, 4.
So Judas in this case, being divided in himself, you see what became of him;
Let Christ but leave us to our own passion of forrow; what will become of us
but misery? He has more rule therefore of our passions then we our selves
have, because we cannot rule them graciously, nor can we stay them when we
would.

Therefore this should strike an awe in us of God, Use.
with a care to please him: For, there is not the wisest man in the world, but
if he remove his guard from his soul, and leave him to himself; if there were
no Devil in hell, yet he would make him his own tormentor and executioner.
Therefore the Apostle makes this sweet promise, Phil. 4. 7. He bids them pray
to God; And the ^eace of God which (...) all (...) [guard] the^^ souls, etc.
So the word is in the original. It is a great matter for the ^eeping of Gods
people, to have their souls guarded.

Her bowels were turned in her. Obser.


Here again, as the conclusion of all this, we seeing this estate of the
Church, may wonder at Christ's carriage toward her in this world. 1 These 3.
Christ is wonderful in his Saints, and in his goodness toward them,
Sometimes alluring them, as we see Christ the Church here; wondrous in
patience, notwithstanding their provocation of him; wondrous in his desertions,
wondrous in leaving something behind him in desertions Those that are his he
will not leave them without grace, whereby they shall seek him again. Nay,
the falling out of lovers, shall be the renewing of fresh and new love, more
constant then ever the former was. Thus our blessed Savior goes beyond us in
our deserts, taking advantage (even) of our security (for our greater good)
making all work to good in the issue, Romans 8. 28.
which shall end in a more near and close communion between Christ and his
Church, then ever before. Carnal men feel not these changes, ebbings and
flowings; they are not acquainted with Gods forsakings. Indeed their whole life
is nothing but a forsaking of God, and Gods forsaking of them, who gives them
outward comforts, peace and friends in the world, wherein they sollace
themselves, but for inward communion with him, any strength to holy duties, or
against sin, for to be instruments for Gods honor, and service, to do any
good, they are careless. For they live here to serve their own turns,
leaving their state and inheritance behind them. The Scripture says, Psalm. 35.
19.
They have no changes, therefore they fear not God, and so they go down to
Hell quietly and securely. O but it is otherwise with Gods Children, they are
tossed up and down, God will not suffer them to prosper, or live long in a
secure, drowsy sinful state, the continuance wherein is a fearful evidence,
that such an one as yet has no saving grace, nor that he yet belongs to God,
seeing Christ hates such an estate, and will not suffer his to be long therein,
but will shift and remove them from vessel to vessel, from condition to
condition, till he have wrought in them that disposition of soul that they
shall regard and love him more and more, and have nearer, and nearer communion
with him.

The end of the ninth Sermon.
THE TENTH SERMON.
CANT. V. VI. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself,
and was gone: my soul failed when he spoke, I sought him but could not find
him, I called him but he gave no answer.
THus we see that the life of a SERMON. X.
Christian is trouble upon trouble as wave upon wave, God will not suffer us to
rest in security, but one way or other he will fire us out of our starting
holes, and make us to run after him, how much better were it for us then to
do our works cheerfully and joyfully, so to run as we may obtain, then to
be thus hurried up and down, and through our own default coming into
desertions and there receiving rebukes and blows and delays ere we have peace
again, as it fell out with the Church in the sequel, for this text is but the
beginning of her (seeming) misery. The watchmen after this, found her, and
wounded her, etc. But Heaven is more worth then all, now that her affections
are set on fire, from thence she bestirrs her self, is resolute to find out
her beloved, whom she highly values above all this world. How her affections
were stirred by Christ's putting in his finger at the hole of the door we have
heard. Now follows her action thereupon, for here is rising, opening, seeking,
calling and enquiring after Christ.

Action follows affection. After her bowels are moved she arises and
opens, from whence we may further observe,

That where truth of affection^^s, Obser.
it will discover it self in the outward man, one way or other. If there be
any affection of love and piety to God, there will be eyes lift up, knees
bended down, and hands stretched forth to Heaven. If there be any grief for
sin, there will be the face dejected, the eyes looking down, some expression
or other: If there be a desire there will be a making forth to the thing
desired. For, the outward-man is commanded by the inward, which has a kind of
sovereign commanding power over it; and says, do this and it does it, speak
this and it speaks it, therefore those whose courses of life are not gracious,
their affections and their hearts are not good, for where the affections are
good, the actions will be suitable. Her bowels were moved in her, and presently
she shows the truth of her affection, in that she makes after him. 1. Her
soul failed when he spoke. 2. She makes after him,


My scule failed when he spoke, I sought him but I could not find him.

Of Christ's withdrawing himself we spoke in general before, wherefore we will
leave that and proceed.

My soul failed when he spoke.
That is, her soul failed when she remembered what he had spoke, when he stood
at the door, and said, Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled,
for my head is wet with the dew, etc. Now when Gods Spirit had wrought upon
her, then she remembered what Christ had said: all those sweet allurements were
effectual now unto her, especially when she saw that after those sweet
allurements Christ had withdrawn himself, for that is the meaning of these
words: ( My soul failed when he spoke unto me) He did not speak now: but
her soul failed after he spoke; for so it should be read, that is, after she
remembered his speech to her: for, now when she opened he was not there,
therefore he could not speak to her.

The Word of Christ howsoever for the present it be not effectual, Obser.
yet afterward it will be in the remembrance of it.

To those that are gracious it will be effectual when the Holy Ghost comes to
seal it further upon their heart: Christ spoke many things to his Disciples
which they forgot, but when afterward the Holy Ghost the comforter was come,
his office was, Io^, 14. 26.
to bring all things to their remembrance that they had forgotten before. The
Holy Ghost taught them not new things, but brought former things to their
remembrance; for God will make the word effectual at one time or other,
perhaps the word we hear is not effectual for the present, it may afterward,
many years after, when God awakes our consciences.

And as this is true of Gods Children, the seed now sown in them perhaps will
not grow up till many years after, so it is true also of those that are not
Gods Children, they think they shall never hear again of those things they
hear, perhaps they will take order by sensuallity* heardning of their hearts
(and through Gods judgments withal concurring) that conscience shall not
awake in this world, but it shall awake one day; for it is put into the heart
to take Gods part and to witness against us for our sins. It shall have and
perform its office hereafter, use it as you will now, and it will preach over
those things again that you now hear. You shall hea^e again of them but it
shall be a (...) hearing. Now we may hear fruitfully to do us good, but
afterward we shall call to mind what we have heard and it shall cut us to the
heart. Dives (we know) had Moses and the Prophets to ins^ruct him, Luke 16. 25.
but he never heeded them in his life, until afterward to his torment. So men
never heed what they hear and read, they put of all and lay their consciences
(...), but God will bring them afterward to remembrance: but because it is a
point especially of comfort to the Church.

Labor we all of us to make this use of it, Use.
to be diligent and careful to hear and attend upon the ordinances of God, To
attend diligently upon the ordinances of God
for how soever that we hear is not effectual for the present but seems as
dead seed cast into the heart, yet God will give it a body after, 1 Cor. 15. 28.
as the Apostle speaks, at one time or other. And that which we hear now the
Holy Ghost will bring it to our remembrance when we stand in most need of it.

My soul failed when he spoke.
She was in a spiritual swoone and deliquium upon his withdrawing, whence the
point considerable is,

That Christ does leave his Church sometimes and bring it very low in their
own apprehensions, observe.
that their ^earts ^ayle them for want of his prefence. So it was with David,
Psalm. 38. 2, 3.
so with Jonah, so with the Church, Jonah. 2. 2.
Lam. 3. 1. we see it at large.

The necessity of our souls and of our estates requ^e this, Reason.
as sometimes a body may be so corrupt that it must be brought as low as
possible may be before there will be a spring of new and good blood and
spirits: so we may fall into such a state of security that nothing will bring
us to a right temper, but extreme purging. And usually God deals thus with
strong wits and parts (if they be holy) David and Solomon were men excellently
quallified, yet when they tasted of the pleasures and contentments of the world
too deep, answerably they had and so (usually) others shall have such
desertions as will make them smart for their sweetness, as was showed before;

But, upon what occasions does a Christian think especially, that God does
leave, forsake and fail him.

First, The heart sinks
This failing and fainting of the soul When God appears an enemy.
as if God and Christ were become enemies, as Job says, and as having set us
as a but to shoot at, but this is not all that a gracious and pure heart sinkes
for. Job. 7. 20.


When Christ's love is absent and not selt.
though it feel no anger. Even as to a loving Wife, her husband not looking
lovingly upon her as he used to do, is enough to cast her down and cause her
spirits to fail; Simile
so for God to look upon the soul; put the case not with an angry, yet with a
countenance withdrawn, it is sufficient to cast it down, for any one that has
dependence upon another to see their countenance withdrawn and not to show
their face as before, if there be but a sweet disposition in them it is enough
to daunt and dismay them.

Nay, Moreover when they find not that When they miss of forme^ a^sistance in
holy dut^es.
when they find that their hearts are shut up and they cannot pray as formerly
when they had the Spirit of God more fully, and when they find that they cannot
bear afflictions with wonted patience; certainly Christ has withdrawn
himself; (say they) This is first done when we hear the word of God not with
that delight and profit as we were wont, when they find how they come near to
God in holy communion and yet feel not that sweet taste and relish in the
ordinances of God as they were wont to do; they conclude certainly God has
hid his face, whereupon they are cast down, their spirits fail. And do not
wonder that it should be so, for it is so in nature; when the Sun hides it
self many days from the world it is an uncomfortable time, the spirits of the
creatures lower and wither, we see it so in the body, that the animal spirits
in the brain (which are the cause of motion and sense) if they be obstructed
there follows an Apoplexy and deadness. So it is between Christ and the
soul, he is the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4. 2.
by whose beams we are all comforted and cheared, which when they are
withheld then our spirits decay and are discouraged. Summer and Winter arise
from the presence and absence of the sun: what causes the Spring to be so
clothed withal those rich ornaments? the presence of the sun which comes
nearer then. So what makes the summer and winter in the soul but the absence
or presence of Christ, what makes some so vigorous beyond others, but the
presence of the Spirit? As it is in nature, so it is here, the presence of
Christ is the cause of all spiritual life and vigor; who when he withdrawes
his presence a little the soul fayles.

My soul failed when he spoke to me, I sought him but I could not find him, I
culled but he gave me no answer.

The Church redoubleth her complaint to show her passion, Obser.
A large heart has b^rge expressions: she took it to heart that Christ did
not show himself in mercy, therefore she never has done, I sought him but I
could no^ find him; I called but he gave me no answer.

Affection makes eloquent and large expressions,

But mainely observe from this ^ay ling of the Church. Obser.
The difference between the true children of God and others. The child of God
is cast down when he finds not the presence of God as he was wo^^t, his
spirits fail? A carnal man that never knew what this presence meant, regards
it not, can abide the want of it, he finds indeed a presence of God in the
creature which he thinks not of, there is a sweetness in Meat, drink,
rest, and a contentment in honor, preferment, and riches; And thus God is
present always with him. But other presence he cares not for. Nay, he
shunnes all other presence of God, laboring to avoid his spiritual presence.
For what is the reason that a carnal man shunnes the applying of the word and
the thinking of it, but because it brings God near to his heart, and makes him
present. What is the reason he shunnes his own conscience: that he is loath
to hear the just and unanswerable accusations that it would charge upon him?
but because he cannot abide the presence of God in his conscience. What is the
reason he shunnes the sight of holier and better menthen himself? they
present God to him being his image, 1 King. 17. 18.
and call his sins to memory, and upbraid his wicked life. Hence comes that
satanicall hatred more then humane in carnal vil emen, to those that are
better then themselves: because they hate all presence of God: both in the
word, ministry, and all Gods holy servants; all such presence of God they
hate, whereof one maine reason is, because they are melefactors, wicked
rebels, and intend to be so. And as a malefactor connot endure so much as the
thought of the judge, so they cannot think of God otherwife (in that course
they are in) then of a judge, whereupon they tremble and quake at the very
thought of him, and avoid his presence.

You know that great man Felix Paul spoke to in the Acts, when he spoke of the
judgment to come, Acts. 24. 25.
and those virtues, as Temperance, and Righteousness, which he was void of,
and guilty of the contrary vices: he quaked and could not endure to hear him
speak any longer. Wicked men love not to be arraigned, tormented, Mark. 5 7.
accused and condemned before their time, therefore whatsoever presents to them
their future terrible estate, they cannot abide it. It is an evidence of a man
in a cursed condition, thus not to endure the presence of God: but what shall
God and Christ say to them at the day of judgment? It was the desire of such
men not to have to do with the presence of God here, and it is just with
Christ to answer them there as they answer him now, Depart depart, Job 22. 17.
we will have none of thy ways (say they) depart ye cursed (says he) He does
but answer in their own language, Depart ye cursed with the Devil and his
angels.

But you see the Child of God is clean of another temper, he cannot be content
to be without the presence of God and of his Spirit inlightning, quickening,
strengthening and blessing of him in spirittuall respects. When he finds not
his presence helping him, when he finds Christ his life is absent from him, he
is presently discouraged. Col. 3. 4.
For, Christ is our life. Now when a man's life fayles all fayles, when
therefore a man finds his spiritual taste and comfort not as it was before,
then oh, the life of my life has withdrawn himself, and so is never quiet
till he have recovered his life again, Col. 3. 4.
for Christ is his life.

And because there is a presence of God and of Christ in the Word and
Sacraments a sweet presence: the godly soul he droopes and fails if he be
kept from these, he will not excommunicate himself as many do, that perhaps
are asleep when they should be at the ordinances of God; but if he be
excommunicated and banished, O how takes he it to heart! Psalm. 42. 1. As the
heart pants after the wa^er br^okes, so longs my soul after thee O God: the
whole 84. Psalm is to that purpose, O how aymiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord
of hosts? He finds a presence of God in his word and sacraments, and when he
does not taste a sweet presence of God therein he droopes and sinks.

A carnal man never heedes these things because he finds no sweetness in
them, but the godly finding Christ in them they droope in the want of them and
cannot live without them, Whither shall we goe^ (says Peter to Christ) thou
have the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6. 68.
I find my soul quickened with thy speaking. So a soul that feels the
quickening power of the ordinances, he will never be kept from the means of
salvation, but he droopes and is never well till he have recovered himself
again?

Again another difference may be observed. Carnal men when they find the
sense of Gods anger they seek not Gods favor but think of worse and worse
still, and so run from God till they be in hell. But those that are Gods
children, when they fail and find the sense of Gods displeasure they are
sencible of it, and give not over seeking to God, they run not further and
further from him.

The Church here though she found not Christ present with her yet she seeks
him still and never gives over.

Whence again we may observe, Observe.
That although the Church be said to fail and not to find Christ, yet he is
present then with her. For who enabled her to seek him. To explain this,
there is a double presence of Christ. That there is a double presence of Christ
^elt and not ^elt.


1. Felt. 2. Not Felt.
The presence felt, His presence ^elt.
is when Christ is graciously present and is withal pleased to let us know so
much, which is a Heaven upon Earth: the soul is in Paradise then, when she
feels the love of God shed abroad in the heart, and the favorable countenance
of God shining upon her, then she despises the world, the devil and all, and
walks as if she were half in Heaven already, for she finds a presence and a
manifestation of it, a more glorious state then the world can afford.

There is a presence of Christ that is secret, Christ unfelt secret presence.
when he seems to draw us one way, and to drive us another, that we are both
driven and drawn at once: when he seems to put us away and yet
notwithstanding draws us; when we find our souls go to Christ, there is a
drawing power and presence, but when we find him absent here is a driving away.
As we see here in the Church and in the Woeman of Canaan, Mat. 15.
we see what an answer she had from Christ, at first none, and then an
uncomfortable, and lastly a most unkind answer. We must not give the childrens
bread to d^ggs. Christ seemed to drive her away, but at the same time he by his
Spirit draws her to him and was thereby secretly present in her heart to
increase her faith. When Christ wrestled with Jacob though he contended with
him, Genesis 32.
yet the sametime he gave Jacob power to overcome him, to be Israel a prevailer
over him: so at the same time the Church seems to fail and faint, yet
notwithstanding there is a secret drawing power pulling her to Christ, whereby
she never gives over but seeks and calls still after him.

It is good to observe this kind of Christ's dealing, because it will keep us
that we be not discouraged when we find him absent. If still there be any grace
left mooving us to that which is good, if we find the Spirit of God moving us
to love the word and ordinances, to call upon him by prayer and to be more
instant, certainly we may gather there is a hidden, secret presence here that
draws us to these things. Nay more that the end of this seeming farsaking and
str^ng^nesse is to draw us nearer and nearer, and at length to draw us into
heaven to himself. Gods people are gainers by all their losses, (...) by all
their weaknesses, and the better for all their crosses whatsoever they are.
And you shall find that the Spirit of God is more (...) in them after a
strangeness, to (...) eagerly after Christ then before; as here the Church
does for her eagerness, constancy and instantnesse it grows as Christ's
withdrawing of himself grows.

Let us therefore learn hence how to judge o^ our selves, Use.
if we be in a dead livelesse state, How to judge of our selves in a dead
livelesse estate both in regard o^ comfort and holy performances.
both in regard of comfort and of holy performances, whether we be content to
be so. If we be not contented but make toward Christ more and more it is a
good sign that he has not forsaken us, that he will come again more
gloriously then ever before. As here we shall see after it was with the Church,
he seems strange but it is to draw the Church, to discover her affection and
to make her ashamed of her former unkindnesse, and to sit surer and hold faster
then she did before, all ends in a most sweet communion.

We should labor therefore to answer Christ's dealing in suitable apprehensions
of soul when he is thus present secretly, Use. 2.
though he seem in regard of some comforts and former experience of his love
to withdraw himself, We should depend upon Christ in a seeming absence.
It should teach us, to depend upon him, and to believe though we feel not
comfort, yea against comfort when we feel signs of displeasure. If he can
love and support me, and strengthen my soul, and show it a presence of that
which is fit for me. Certainly I should answer thus with my faith, I will
depend upon him (though he kill me) as Job did; our souls should never give
over seeking of Christ, praying and endeavoring, for there is true love where
he seems to forsake and leave; therefore I ought in these desertions to
cleave to him in life and in death.

The end of the tenth Sermon.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON. SERMON. XI.

CANT. V. VI. VII. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn
himself, and was gone: my soul failed when ^e spoke, I sought him but could
not find him, I called him but he gave me no answer. etc.
THE pride and secur^tie of the Spouse provokes the Lord her husband often to
bring her very low, they being incompatible with Christ's residence.

Pride is an affection contrary t^ his prerogative, for it sets up somewhat in
the soul higher then God the highest.

Security is a d^ll temper or rather distemper that m^kes the soul neglect her
watch and rely upon some outward privilege, where this ill co^ple is
entertained, there Christ uses to withdraw himself, even to the failing and
fainting of the soul.

The Spouse is here in her fainting fit yet she seeks after christ: still she
gives not over, so Jonas, Jonah. 2.
I am cast out of thy presence (says he) yet notwithstand^ng I will look
toward thy holy Temple. And David Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my have I am cast out
of thy sight, yet notwithstand^ng thou heardest the voice of my prayer. He
said it, but he said it in his haste. Gods children are surprised on the
sudden to think they are castaway, but it is in haste and so soon as may be
they recover themselves. I said it is my Infirmity, said David Psalm. 73. It is
but in a passion, here then is the difference between the children of God and
others in desertions, they arise, Isa. 13.
these lie still and despair. There is life in the substance of the Oak that
makes it lift up its head above ground though it be cut down to the stumpes.
Nay we see further here the Church is not taken off for any discourragements,
but her faith grows stronger, as the woman's of Canaan did. Mat. 15.


Faith looks to the Promise and to the nature of God not to his present
dealing.

yet notwithstanding) draws his children nearer and nearer to him by such his
d^aling. All this strangeness is but to mortify some former lust, or consume
some former drogs of security.

I sought him but I could not find him.
Here one of the greatest discouragements of all other is, when prayer (which
is left to the Church as a salve for all sores) has no answer. This is the
complaint, but indeed an error of the Church; for Christ did hear the Church
though he seemed to turn his back.

But how shall we know that God hears our Prayers?

Amongst many other things this is one: How to know that God hears our Prayers.
when he gives us inward peace, then he hears our prayers, for so is the
connection. Phil. 4. 6. 7.

Or secondly, If he therewith gives (...) peace.
If we find a spirit to pray still, a spirit to wait and to hold out, Phil. 4.
it is an argument that God either has or will hear those prayers.

And as it is an argument that God hears A spirit to hold out in prayer though
without peace.
so is it of the presence of Christ; for how could we pray but from his inward
presence? Christ was now present, and more present with the Church when he
seemed not to be found of her, then he was when she was secure, for whence
else comes this eagerness of desire, this spirit of prayer, this earnestness
of seeking.

I called but he gave no answer etc.
Directions how to carry our selves in such an estate. How shall we carry our
selves when it falls out that our hearts fail of that we seek for, when we
pray without succes and find not a present answer? or are in any such like
state of desertion.

1. We must believe against belief (as it were) hope against hope, and trust
in God, Romans 4.
Howsoever he shows himself to us as an opposite. It is no matter what his
present dealing with his Church and children here is, the nature of Faith is
to break through all opposition, to see the Sun behind a cloud, 2. Cor. 6.
nay to see one contrary in another, life in death, a clame in a storm etc.

2. Labor for an absolute dependancie upon Christ with a poverty of spirit in
our selves, this is the end of Christ's withdrawing himself, to purge us of
self confidence and pride.

3. Stir up your graces, for as nature joining with physic helps it to work
and carry away the malignant humors: so by the remainder of the Spirit that is
in us, let us set all our graces on work until we have carried away that
that offends and clogs the soul, and not sincke under the burden, for this is
a special time for the exercising of faith, hope, love, diligence, care,
watchfullnesse, and such like graces.

And let us know for our comfort, that eve^ this conflicting condition is a
good estate. In a sick body it is a sign of life and health approaching when
the humors are stirred, so as that a man complains that the physic works.
So when we take to heart our present condition, though we fail and find not
what we would, yet this will work to the subduing of corruption at length. It
is a sign of future victory when we are d^scontent with our present ill
estate. Grace will get the upper hand, as nature does when the humors are
disturbed.

4. Again when we are in such a seeming forlorn estate, Let us have recourse
to former experience. What is the reason that God vouchsafes his children for
the most part in the beginning of their conversion (in their first love)
experience of his love to ravishment? It is, that afterward they may have
recourse to that love of God then felt to support themselves, and withal to
stir up endeavors, and hope; that finding it not so well with them now as
formerly it has binn, Hose. 2* 7
by comparing state with state, desires may be stirred up to be as they were
or rather better.

And as the remembrance of former experiences serve to excite endeavor, so to
stir up Hope. I hope it shall be as it was, because God is Immutable. I
change but Christ alters not, the inferior elementary world changes, here is
fair weather and foul, but the Sun keeps his perpetual course; and as in
the gloomiest day that ever was there was light enough to make it day and to
distinguish it from night, (though the Sun did not shine) So in the most
disconsolate state of a Christian soul, there is light enough in the soul to
show that the Sun of Righteousness is there, and that Christ has shined
upon the soul, Psalm. 112. 4.
that it is day with the soul and not night.

5. And learn when we are in this condition to wait Gods leisure, for he
has waited ours. It is for our good, to prepare us for further blessings, to
mortify and subdue our corruptions, to enlarge the capacity of the soul that
the Lord absents himself, therefore Bernard says well, Tibi accidit etc.
Christ comes and goes away for our good, when he withdrawes the sense of his
love, the soul thereupon is stretched with desire, that it may be as it was
in former time, in the days of old. Thus much for that, I sought him but I
could not find him, I called but he gave me no answer.

Here we must answer one objection before we leave the words. Object.
This seems to contradict other Scriptures, which promise that those that
seek shall find. Matt. 7. 7.
It is true they that seek shall find but not presently. Answ.
Gods times are the best and fittest. They that seek shall find, if they seek
constantly with their whole heart in all the means. Some do not find, because
they seek in one means and not in another, they seek Christ in reading and
not in the ordinance of hearing, in private meditation, but not in the
communion of Saints; we must go through all means to seek Christ, not one
must be left. Thus if we will seek him, undoubtedly he will make good his
promise. Nay in some sort, he is found before he is sought, for he is in our
souls to stir up desire of seeking him, he prevents us with desires and
answers us in some sort before we pray, when he gives us a spirit of prayer,
it is a pledge to us, that he means to answer us. Isa ^3. 34.
Therefore it is a spiritual deceit when we think Christ is not in us and
we are neglected of him, because we have not all that we would have. Among
many other deceits that Christians deceive themselves with in this kind these
be two. Judging of grace by the quanti^y and not by the value


1. That they judge grace by the quantity and not by the value and price of it,
1. Pet. 1.
whereas the least measure of grace and comfort is to be esteemed, because it
is an immortal seed cast into the soul by an immortal God the Father of
Eternity.

2. Another deceit is, judging of ourselves by sense and ^eeling.
that We judge of our selves by sense and feeling and not by faith.

The watchmen that went about the city found me and smote me and took away
my veil from me.

Here the poor Church after the setting down of her own exercise in her
disertion now sets out some outward ill dealing she met with and that from
those that should have been her greatest comforters. The watchmen that went
about the city found me, they wounded me, the keepers of the walls took away
my veil from me.

Thus we see how trouble follows trouble, One depth calls upon another:
Inward desertion and outward affliction go many times together. The troubles
of the Church many times are like Iobes messengers they come fast one upon
another, because God means to perfect the work of Grace in their hearts, all
this is for their good. The sharper the winter the better the spring, learn
hence first of all therefore in general.

That, Observe.
It is no easy thing to be a sound Christian.

We see here when the Church had betrothed her self to Christ and
entertained him into her garden, there after she falls into a state of security
and sleep, whence Christ labors to rouse her up: then she uses him
unkindely, after which he withdrawes himself even so far that her heart
fails her; then (as if this were not enough) the watchmen that should have
looked to her, they smite her, wound her and take away her veil. See here the
variety of the usage of the Church and changes of a Christian, not long in one
state, he is ebbing and ^^owing.

Therefore let none distaste the way of Godliness for this, that it is such a
state as is subject to change and variety; whereas carnal men are upon their
lees and find no changes.

But you will say, Object.
All Christians are not thus tossed up and down, so deserted of God and
persecuted of others.

I answer, Indeed there is difference, Answ.
Whence comes that difference? from Gods liberty; it is a mystery of the
Sanctuary, which no man in the world can give a reason of, why of Christians
both equally beloved of God, Some should have a fairer passage to Heaven;
others rougher and more rugged; It is a mystery hid in Gods breast. It is
sufficient for us, if God will bring us any way to Heaven, as the blessed
Apostle says. Phil. 3. 11.
If by any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead, either
through thick or thin, if God will bring me to Heaven it is no matter. If I
by any means.

The Watchmen that went about the City smote me, etc.

By the Watchmen here are meant especially Governors of State and Church.

Why are they called Watchmen.

It is a borrowed speech taken from the custom of Cities that are beleagered,
for policies sake they have watchmen to descry the danger they are liable
unto, so Magistrates be watchmen of the State, Heb. 13. ^7.
Ministers are the watchmen for Souls, watching over our Souls for good.

Why does God use Watchmen. Quest.


Not for any defect of power in him, Answ. 1.
but for demonstration of his goodness* for he is the great Watchman, who
watches over our commonwealthes, Churches and persons, he has an eye that
never sleeps, Psalm. 124. 4.
He that watches Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps, yet notwithstanding he
has subordinate Watchmen, not for defect of power, but for demonstrotion of
goodness; he manifests his goodness in that he will use variety of
subordinate Watchers.

And likewise to show his power in using many instruments and his care for ^s
when he keeps us together with his own subordinate means.

And in this that God has set over us Watchers (Ministers especially) It
implies that our soul^s are in danger, and indeed there is nothing in the world
so beset as the soul of a poor Christian, who has so many and so bad enemies
as a Christian, and amongst them all, the worst and greatest enemy he has is
nearest to him, and converseth daily with him, even himself. Therefore there
must needs be Watchmen to discover the deceits of Satan and his instruments,
and of our own hearts, to discover the dangers of Jerusalem, and the errors
and sins of the times wherein we live. The Church is in danger, for God has
set Watchmen, now God and nature does nothing in vain or needlessely.

Again in that God takes such care for the soul, it shows the woundrous
worth of it, many arguments there be to show that the soul is a precious
thing, Arguments showing the pretiousnesse of the soul.
it was breathed by God at first, Christ gave his life to redeem it, but this
is an especial one that God has ordained and established a ministry and
Watchmen over it. And as God has set some men Watchmen over others, so has
he appointed every man to be a Watchman to himself. He has given every man
a city to watch over, that is his own estate and soul, therefore let us not
depend altogether on the watching of others. God has planted a conscience in
every of us, and uses as others to our good, so our own care, wisdom, and
foresight, these he elevateth and sanctifies.

The Wa^chmen that w^nt about the city found me, they smote me, they wounded
me, etc. Come we now to the carriage of these Watchmen, How the Church was
wounded by the Watchmen.
those that should have been defensive prove most offensive.

They smote the Church and wounded her many ways, (though it be not discovered
here in particular) as with their ill and scandolous life, and sometimes with
corrupt doctrine censures, as we see in the story of the 3 Ioh. 9.
especially the Romish Church, they have excommunicated Churches and Princes:
but not to speak of those Synagogues of Satan, come we nearer home and we
may se amongst our selves sometimes those that are Watchmen and should be for
encouragement, They smite and wound the Church, 3 Ioh. I0.
and take away her veil.

What is it to take away the veil.
You know in the times of the Old Testament a veil was that which covered
women for modesty, to show their subjection, and it was likewise an
honorable ornament, They took away the veil, that is that wherewith the
Church was covered, they took away that, that made the Church comely, and laid
her open and as it were naked.

Now both these ways, the Churches veil is taken away by false and naughty
Watchmen.

I. As the veil is a token of subjection, when by their false D^ctrines, They
took away the vail^ of (...) subjection.
they labor to draw people from Christ, and their subjection to him.

The Church is Christ's Spous^, the veil was a token of subjection, now they
that d^aw the people to themselves, as in Popish Churches, that desire to sit
high in the consciences of people, and so make the Church undutifull, They take
away the veil of subjection, and so force Christ to punish the Church, as we
see in former ages.

The vail^ of her honor and comeliness.
so they take away the veil of the Church, when they take away the credit and
esteem^ of the Church, when they lay open the infirmities and weaknesses of the
Church. This is strange that the Watchmen should do this, yet notwithstanding
oftentimes it falls out so that those that by place are Watchmen, are the
bitterest enemies of the Church Who were bitterer enemies of the poor Church
in Christ's time then the Scr^bes, Pharisees, and Priests.

And so in the time of the Prophets, who were the greatest enemies the Church
had, but false Pri^sts, and Prophets.

What is the ground of this, Quest.
that those men that by their stand^ng should be encouragers, are rather
dampers of the Churches ^eile in pursuit ^f it. Answ. Why the watchmen are the
wonders of the Church


There are man^ grounds of it.

Sometimes it falls out from a spirit of envy in them at the graces of Gods
people which are wanting in themselves, they would not have others better then
themselves.

Sometimes from Idleness which makes them hate all such as provoke them to
pains: they raise up the dignity of outward things too much, as we see in
Popery, they make every thing to confer grace, as if they had a special
virtue in them: but they neglect that wherewith God has joined an efficacy,
his own ordinances.

This should teach us, Use. I.
To be in love with Christ's government, and to see the vanity of all things
here below, though they be never so excellent in their ordinance. Such is the
poison of man's heart, and the malice of Satan that they turn the edge of the
best things against the good of the Church.

What is more excellent then Magistracy, yet many times the point of the sword
is directed the wrong way. I have said ye are Gods. Psalm. 82. 6. They should
govern, as God himself would govern, and ask with themselves, would God now
if he were a Watchman of the state do thus and thus, but I wish woeful
experience did not witness the contrary.

So (...) and should carry themselves even as Christ would do; 2. Cor. 5. 20.
they should strengthen the feeble knees and bind up the brok^n (...), E^^k.
I3. I8
nor di^courag^ and not ^ow pillow^s under the (...) of wicked and (...), but
alas (...) the edge of the ordinance is oftentimes turned another way by the
corrupt, proud, unbroken hearts of men and the malice of Satan.

Again, Use 2.
it should teach us, not to think the worse of any for the disgraces of the
times. The Watchmen here take away the veil of the Church, and her
forwardness is disgraced by them: take heed therefore we entertain not rash
conceits of others, upon the entertainment they find abroad in the world, or
among those that have a standing in the Church, for so we shall condemn
Christ himself, how was he judged of the Pri^sts, Scribes, and Pharisees in
his times? and this has been the lot of the Church in all ages, the true
members thereof were called Heretics and Schismatickes, the veil was taken
of. It is the poysonfull pride of man's heart that when it cannot raise it
self, by its own worth, it will endeavor to raise it self by the ruin of
others credit through lying slanders. The Devil was first a slanderer, and
liar, and then a murderer, he cannot murder without he slander first, the
credit of the Church must first be taken away, and then she is wounded,
otherwise as it is a usual proverb, Those that kill a dog make the world
believe, that he was mad first, so they always first traduced the Church to
the world, and then persecuted her. Truth has always a scratch't face.
Falsehood many times goes under better habits then its own which God suffers to
exercise our skill and wisdom that we might not depend upon the rash judgment
of others, but might consider what grounds they have; not what men do or whom
they oppose, but from what cause. Whether from a spirit of F^vie, Idleness,
Jealousy, and Pride, or from good grounds, else if Christ himself were on
earth again, we should condemn him, as now men do the generation of the just,
whom they smite and wound and take away their veil from them.

The end of the eleventh Sermon.
THE TWELFTH SERMON.
CANT. V. VII. The Watchmen that went about the city found me, they smote me,
they wounded me, the Keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.
THE Watchmen. (Those that by their place and standing should be, so) they
smote the Church (as Barnard complains, almost 500. years ago) alas, alas
says he, those that do see^ privileges in the Church, are the first in
persecuting it and (as his fashion is to speak in a kind of Rhetoric) they
were not pastors, but impost^rs. There be two ordinances without which the
world cannot stand.

1. Magistracy. 2. Ministry.
Magistrates are nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to the Church.

Ministers are Watchmen by their place and standing.

Now for Shepherds to become wolves, for Watchmen to become smiter^, what a
pitiful thing is it, but thus it is, the Church has been always persecuted
with these men, under pretense of Religion, which is the sharpest persecution
of all in the Church; it is a grievous thing to suffer of an enemy, but worse
of a country man, worse then that of a friend, and worst of all of the Church.
Notwithstanding (by the way) we must know, that the persecuted cause is not
always the best (as Austine was forced to speak in his time against the
Donatists) Sara^ was a tipe of the true, The perse^uted side is not always
the best.
and Hagar of the false Church. Now Sara^ she corrected Hagar, therefore it
follows not, that the suffering cause is allway the better, therefore we must
judge of things in these kind of passages by the cause, and not by the outward
carriage of things.

They took away my veil.
What shall we do in such cases, Quest.
if we suffer any indignity, if the veil be taken off. That is if our shame,
infirmities, and weaknesses, be laid open by false imputations.

In this case, Answ.
it is the innocence of the D^ve, that is to be labored for, and withal the
wisdom of the Serpent. If Innocence will not serve, labor for wisdom, as
indeed it will not alone; the wicked would then labor for subtilty to disgrace
righteous persons.

But what if that will not serve neither. object.
Christ was wisdom it self, yet he suffered most, Answ.
when Innocence and wisdom will not do it (because we must be conformable to
our head) then we must labor for patience, knowing that one hair of our
heads shall not fall to the ground without the providence of the Almighty.

Commend our case, as Christ did, by faith and prayer to God that judges.

I charge you, oh Daughters of Jerusalem, if you see my Beloved, that you tell
him, that I am sick of Love etc.

Here the Church, after her ill usage of the Watchmen, is forced to the
society of other Christians, not so well acquainted with Christ as her self: I
charge ye O Daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my Beloved etc. Tell him etc.
What shall they tell him.

Tell him I am sick of Love.

The Church is restles in her desire and pursuit after Christ, till she find
him, no opposition you see can take of her endeavor.

1. Christ seems t^ leave her inwardly. 2. Then she goes to the Watchmen,
they smite wound her. 3. Then she has recourse to the Daughters of
Jerusalem for h^lpe.

Generally before we come to the particulars, from the connection, we may
observe this.

That, Observe.
Love is a fire kindled from Heaven.

Nothing in the world will quench this Grace, Can. 8. 7.
no opposition, nay opposition rather whets and kindles endeavor.

The Church was nothing discouraged by the ill usage of the Watch^en, How sarre
we may be sensible of injuries.
only she complains she is not insensible. A Christian may without sin be
sensible of indignities, only it must be the mourning of Doves, Isa. 3 8.
and not the roaring of Bears. It must not be murmuring and impatiencie, but
a humble complaining to God, that he may take our caSe to heart, as the Church
does here: But as sensible as she was, she was not a whit discouraged, but
seeks after Christ still in other means, if she find him not in one, she
will try in an other: we see hear the nature of love, if it be in any
measure perfect, it casts out all fear of discouragements.

And indeed, The Nature of true Grace.
It is the nature of true Grace to grow up with difficulties, as the Arc rose
higher with the waters, so likewise the ^oule grows higher and higher, it
mounts up as discouragements and oppositions grow: Nay the soul takes vigor
and strength from discouragements, as the wind increases the flame. So the
Grace of God, the more the winds and waves of affliction oppose it, with so
much the more violence, it breaks through all oppositions, until it attain
the desired hope.

To apply it, A sign of coldness in Religion.
Those therefore that are soon discouraged, that pull in their homes
presently, it is a sign they are very cold, and have but little grace, for
where there is any strength of holy affection, they will not be discouraged,
nor their zeal be quenched, and damped. Therefore they subordinate Religion to
their own ends, as your temporary believers. Where is any love to Christ, the
love of Christ is of a violent nature, it swaies in the heart, as the Apostle
speaks, 2. Cor. 5. 2^.
The love of Christ constrains us.

If we find this inconquerable resolution in our selves, Use of encouragement
and trial.
notwithstanding all discouragements, to go on in a good cause, let us
acknowledge that fire to be from Heaven, let us not loose such an argument of
the state of Grace, as suffering of afflictions with joy. The more we suffer,
the more we should rejoice, if the cause be good, as the Apostles Act. 5. 4 1.
rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer any thing.

I charge you, Oh Daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my Beloved, that ye tell
him I am sick of Love.

She goes to the Daughters of Jerusalem for help, whence we may learn.

That, Obser.
If we find not comfort in one means, we must have recourse to another.

If we find not Christ present in one, seek him in another, and perhaps we
shall find him where we least thought of him: sometimes there is more comfort
in the society of poor Christians, then of the Watchmen themselves.

I charge you, O Daughters of Jerusalem, etc.



the Daughters of Jerusalem.

to tell him she is sick of Love.

The parties Charged, The prop^rtion between Jerusalem and the Church.
are the Daughters of Jerusalem, the Daughters of the Church, which is called
Jerusalem, from some resemblances between Jerusalem, and the Church; some
few shall be touched, to give light to the point.

Jerusalem was a City compact in it self, (as the Psalmist says) so is the
Church, Psalm. 1 22. 3.
the body of Christ.

Jerusalem was chosen from all places of the world, to be the seat of God,
so the Church is the seat of Christ, he dwells there in the hearts of his
children.

Jerusalem, they went up to Jerusalem, and down to Egypt, and other places:
So the Church is from above, Gal. 4 26.
The way of wisdom is on high. Pro. 1. 5. 24.
Religion is upward, Grace, Glory, and Comfort come from above, and draw our
minds up to have our conversation, and our desires above.

Jerusalem was the joy of the whole Earth* (...) so the Church of God, what
were the world without it, but a company of incarnate Devils.

In Jerusalem Records were kept of the names Psalm. 48. 3.
so all the true citizens of the Church, their names are written in the book
of life in Heaven. Heb. 12. 23.


The Daughters of Jerusalem therefore are the true members of the Church that
are both bred and fed in the Church. 1 Pet. 1. 20.
Let us take a trial of our selves, whether we be Daughters of Jerusalem or not. 1 Pet. 2, 2.
That we may make this trial of our selves.

1. If we find freedom in our conscience from terrors and fears. Observe.
If we find spiritual liberty How to know that we are Daughters of
Jerusalem. Gal. 4 26.
and freedom to serve God, it is a sign that we are Daughters of Jerusalem,
because Jerusalem was free.

2. Or if we mind things above, and things of the Church, if we take to heart
the cause of the truth, it is a sign we are true Daughters of Jerusalem.
Psalm. 137. 5. 6.
We know what the Psalmist ^aith, Let my right hand forget her cunning, if I
forget thee O Jerusalem, if I do not prefer Jerusalem before my chief
joy. If the cause of the Church go to our hearts, if we can joy in the
Churches joy, and mourn in the Churches abasement and suffering, it is a sign
we are true Daughters of Jerusalem and lively members of the body of Christ.
Otherwise, when we hear that the Church goes down, and that the adverse part
prevails, and we joy, it is a sign we are daughters of Bobylon and not of
Hi^rusalem.

Therefore lot us ask our affections what we are, as Austine writes
excellently in his book de Civitate Dei, ask thy heart of what city thou art.

But what ^aith the Church to the Daughters of Jerusalem in the first place.

I Charge you.
It is a kind of admiration supplied thus, I charge you as you love me your
sister, as you love Christ, as you tender my case, that am thus used, as you
will make it good that you are Daughters of Jerusalem and not of Babylon, tell
my Beloved, that I am sick of Love. It is a strong charge, a defective speech,
which yields us this observation.

That true Affections are serious in the things of God and of Religion. Observe


She lays a weight upon them, I charge you O Daughters of Jerusalem. True
impressions have strong expressions. A sign of unbelief and coldness.
Therefore are we cold in matters of Religion in our discourses, it is because
we want these inward impressions. The Church here was full, she could not
contain her self, in regard of the largeness of her affections. I charge you
O Daughters of Jerusalem. etc.

We may find the truth of Grace in the heart, by the discoveries and
expressions in the conversation in general.

I charge you, O Daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my Beloved* that ye tell
him, I am sick of Love.

The Church here speaks to others, meaner then her self, she would have the
Church tell Christ, (by Prayer, the surest intelligencer) how she was used,
how she languished, and was sick for him, and cannot be without him.

Why did not the Church tell Christ her self. Quest.


So she did as well as she could, Answ.
but she desired the help of the Church this way also. Sometimes it is so
with the Children of God that they cannot pray so well as they should, and as
they would do, because the waters of the soul are so troubled, that they can
do nothing but utter groans and sighs, especially in a state of desertion,
as Hezekiah could but chatter, and Moses could not utter a word at the red sea
though he did strive in his spirit, in such cases they must be behoulding to
the help of others.

Sometimes a man is in body sick, (as James says) If any man be sick let
him send for the Elders, and let them pray: Iam. 5. 14.
There may be such distemper of body and soul, that we are unfit to lay
open our estate to our own content. ^t is often so with the best of Gods
Children, not that God does not respect those broken sighs and desires, but
they give not content to the soul. Mar. 2. 2, 3.
The poor palsy man in the Gofpell not able to go himself was carried on
the shoulders of others, and let thorough the house to Christ: often times we
may be in such a palsy estate, that we cannot bring our selves to Christ,
but we must be content to be borne to him by others.

I charge you O Daughters of Jerusalem that ye tell my Beloved, I am sick of
Love.

Whence the point, that Idesie you would observe is.

That at such times as we find not our spirits enlarged from any cause outward
and inward to comfort and joy, Observe.
then is a time to desire the prayers and help of others.

It is good to have a stock going every where, and those thrive the best, that
have most prayers made for them, have a stock going in every country, this is
the happiness of the Saints. To enforce this instruction, to desire the prayers
of others, we must discover, that there is a wondrous force in the prayers of
Christians one for another. It is more then a complement, would it were thought
so.

The great Apostle Paul, se how he desires the Romans, that they would strive,
and contend with God after a holy violence, by their joint prayers for him,
Romans 15. 20.
so he desires the Thessalonians, that they would pray for him, 2. These. 3, 2.
That he might be delivered from unreasonable men. It is usual with him to
say Pray, Pray, and for us too, for such are gracious in the Court of Heaven.
Despise none in this case, a true down right experienced Christians prayers
are of much esteem with God. Mat. 26.
Our blessed Savior himself, when he was to go into the garden, though his
poor Disciples were sleepie, and very untoward, yet he would have their
society, and prayers.

I charge you O Daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my Beloved, that ye tell
him, I am sick of love.

To speak a little of the matter of the charge, I am sick of Love, I love
him, because I have found former comfort, strength and sweetness from him,
that I cannot be without him. To be Love sick then in the pre^ence of the
Church, Love sick what.
is to have strong affections to Christ, from which comes wondrous
disquietnesse of spirit in his absence, here is somewhat good, and somewhat
ill. This is first her virtue, that she did fervently love, this was her
infirmity, that she was so much distempered with her present want, these two
breeds this sickness of love, whence we observe.

Where the thing loved is not present answerable to the d^sires of the soul
that loves, There follows disquiet and distemper of affections: that is here
term^ned sickness of Love.

The Reason hereof is, Natural contentment is in union with the thing Loved.
The more excellent the thing is that is loved, the more contentment there is in
communion with it, and where it is in any degree or measure hindered there is
disquiet: answerable to the contentment in enjoying, is the grief, sorrow, and
sickness in parting. The happiness of the Church consisting in society with
Christ, therefore it is her misery and sickness, to be deprived of him, not to
enjoy him whom her soul so dearly loves. There are few in the world, sick
of this disease, I would there were more sick of the love of Christ; there are
many that surfit rather of fulness, who think we have too much of this
Manna, of this preaching, of this Gospel, there is too much of this knowledge,
of the ordinances, these are not sick of love.

Make a Use therefore of Trial, Use.
whether we be in the state of the Church or no, by valuing and prizing the
presence of Christ in his Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments.

There are many fond sicknesses in the world, there is Ammons sickness, 2. Sam
13. 2.
that was sick of love for his Sister Thamar, his countenance discovered it,
and Ahab he is sick in desiring his Neighbors vineyard, 1. King. 12. 4.
you have many strange sicknesses: many sick with fires kindled from the
flesh, from Hell, but few sick of this sickness here spoken of.

Love sick or not.

Ahabs or Amons sickness, or of any thing, take it as you will, That which the
soul is sick of in love, it thinks of daily: it dreams of it in the night.
What do our souls therefore think off? what do our meditations run after.
When we are in our advised and best thoughts, what do^ we most think off? if
of Christ, of the state of the Church here, of Grace and Glory all is well,
what makes us in the midst of all worldly discontentments to think all dung
and dross in comparison of Christ, but this sickness of love to Christ, if
our love be in such a degree, as it makes us sick of it, it makes us not to
hear what we hear, not to see, what we see, not to regard what is present:
the soul is in a kind of ecstasy, it is carried so strongly and taken up with
things of Heaven, it is deaded to other things, when our eyes are no more led
with vanity, then if we had none, and the flesh is so mortified, as if we
were dead men, by reason of the strength of our affections that run another
way to better things which are above.

Thus we see it is in love: Talk with a man The soul is more where is loves,
then where it dwells. Surely where love is in any strength, it draws up the
soul, so that a man often times in his calling and ordinary employments does
not heed them, but passes thorough the world as a man at random, he regards
not the things of the world* for Christ is gotten into his heart and draws all
the affections to himself. Where the affection of love is strong, it cares not
what it suffers for the party loved, nay it glories in it. As it is said of the
(...), when they were whipped, Act. 5. 41.
and scourged for preaching the Gospel, it was a matter of Glory to them. It
is not labor, but favor: it is not labor and vexation, but favor that is
taken where love is to the party loved, where the love of Christ is (which was
here in the Church) labor is no labor, suffering is no suffering, trouble is
no trouble.

It is the property of the party that is sick of this disease to take little
contentment in ^ther things. Tell a covetous worldling that is in love with the
world a discourse of learning, what cares he for learning; tell him of a good
bargain, of a matter of gain, and he will hearken to that. So it is with the
soul that has felt the love of Christ shed abroad in the heart, tell him of
the world, (especially if he want that which he desires, the peace and
strength that he found from Christ in former times) he relisheth not your
discourse.

Labor we therefore every day more and more to have larger and larger
affections to Christ. The soul that loves Christ, the nearer to Christ the
more joyful it is, when he thinks of those mutual embracings when Christ and
his soul shall meet together there: this happiness is there* where the soul
enjoyes the thing loved, but that is not here, but in Heaven Therefore in the
mean time with joy he thankfully frequents the places where Christ is present
in the Word and Sacrament, and that we may come to have this affection.

Let us see what our souls are without him mere dungeons of darkness and
confusion, nothing coming from us that is good, this will breed love to the
Ordinances, and then we shall relish Christ, both in the Word and Sacrament,
for he is food for thehungry soul, and requires nothing of us but good
appetites; and this will make us desire his love and presence.

The end of the twelfth Sermon.
THE THIRTEENTH SERMON. Ser. XIII.

CANT. V. VIII. IX. I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem if ye find my
Beloved that ye tell him I am sick of love.

What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved O thou fairest among women, etc.


THe soul as it is of an immortal substance, so in the right and true temper
thereof, aspireth toward immortality, unless when it is clouded and overprest
with that which presses downwards, Heb. 12. 1.
and the s^n which hang^th so fast on (as the Apostle speaks) which is the
reason of those many and diverse to^si^gs and turmoylings of the enlightened
soul, now up now down, now running amain homewards and now again sluggish,
idle and lasie, until rowsed up by extraordinary means it puts on again;
Simile.
as the fire mounteth upwards unto its proper place, and as the needle still
trembles till it stand at the North, so the soul once inflamed with an
heavenly fire, and acquainted with her first original, cannot be at rest
until it find it self in that comfortable way which certainly leads
homewards.

An instance whereof we have in the Church here, who having lost her sweet
communion with Christ, and so paid dearly for her former neglect and slighting
his kind invitations, (as being troubled, restless in mind, beaten and wounded
by the watchmen, bereft of her veil, etc.) Yet this heavenly fire of the
blessed spirit, this water of life so restlesly springing in her, makes her
sickness of love and ardent desire after Christ to be such, that she cannot
contain her self, John. 4.
but breaks forth in this passionate charge and request,

I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem if ye find my Beloved that ye tell him,
I am sick of love.

Thus we may see that the way to Heaven is full of changes, the strength of
corruption overclouds many times and damps our joys. How many several tempers
has the Church been in? Sometimes she is all compounded of joy vehemently
desiring kisses of her best beloved, she holds her beloved fast and will not
let him go, and sometimes again she is gone, has lost her beloved, is in a
sea of troubles, seeks and cannot find him, becomes sluggish, negligent,
overtaken with self-love, after which when she has smarted for her omissions
(as here again) she is all a fire after Christ (as we say) no ground will hold
her, away she flies after him, and is restless until she find him, where by
the way we see, That permanency and stability is for the life to to come; here
our portion is to expect changes, storms and tempests, therefore they must not
be strange to particular persons, since it is the portion of the whole Church,
which thus by sufferings and conformity to the head must enter into glory, 2
Cor. 4. 17.
whiles God makes his power perfect in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
overcomes Satan by unlikely means and so gets himself the glory, even out of
our greatest infirmities, temptations and abasements.

But God though he make all things work for good unto his children, even the
Devil, Romans 8. 28.
sin and death, desertions, afflictions and all, yet we must be warned
hereby not to tempt God, by neglecting the means appointed for our comfortable
passage: but open to Christ when he knockes, embrace him joyfully in his
ordinances, and let our hearts fly open unto him. For though (through his
Mercy) our wounds be cured; yet who would be wounded to try such dangerous
experiments, as here befell the Church in her desertions, for her sluggish
negligence, deadness and self-love.

So that we see there is nothing gotten by favoring our selvesin carnal
liberty, security, or by yielding to the flesh. The Church stood upon terms
with Christ when he would have come in to her, but what ensued hereupon? she
fell into a grievous des^rtion, and not only so but finds very hard usage
abroad, all which she might have prevented by watchfulness, carfulness and
opening to Christ knocking. It is a spiritual error to which we are all prone,
to think that much is gained by favoring our selves, but we shall find it
otherwise: see here ^gaine that God will bear with nothing though in his own,
but he will sharply punish them even for omissions, and that not only with
defertion, but sometimes they shall meet with oppositions in the world.

David cannot escape with a proud thought in numbering of the people, 1 Samuel 1.
but he must smart for it and his people also. God is wondrous careful of his
Children to correct them, Amos 3. 2.
when he lets strangers alone. It is a sign of love when he is at this cost
with us. And it should tie us to be careful of our behavior, not to presume
upon Gods indulgence, for the nearer we are to him the more careful he is over
us, he will be sanctified in all that come near him, Levit. 10 3.
we see the Corinthians because they came unreverently to the Lords table,
(though otherwise they were holy men) some of them are sick, 1 Cor. 11.
some weak, others sleep, that they might not be condemn^d with the world.

Let none therefore think the profession of Religion to imply an immunity, but
rather a straighter bond; for, I^dgement begins as the house of God, whatsoever
he suffers abroad he will not suffer disorders in his own house, as the
Prophet says, Amos. 3. 2.
You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore you shall
not go unpunished. The Church is near him, his spouse whom he loves, and
therefore he will correct her, not enduring any abatement, or decay of the
first love in her. And for this very cause he threatens the Church of
Ephesus, Rev. 2.
to remove her candlestick.

To proceed, the poor Church here is not discouraged, but discovers and
empties her self to the daughters of Jerusalem, as it is the nature of
Culinary fire not only to mount upwards, but also to bewray it self by light
and heat, Simile.
so of this heavenly fire when it is once kindled from above, not only to
aspire in its motion but to discover it self in affecting others with its
qualities, it could not contain it self here in the Church but that she must
go to the daught^rs of Jerusalem, I charge you O daughters of (...), if ye
find my Beloved that ye tell him that I am sick of love. Therefore they may
doubt that they have not this heavenly fire kindled in them, that express it
not seriously, for of all affections it will not be concealed. Psalm. 119.
David wonders at his own love, Oh how I love thy law, oh how aimeable are thy
Tabernacles?

Again we see here, A love sick soul stands not upon terms.
that where the (...) of love, it stands not upon any terms, but it humbles
and abaseth it self. We say that affection stands not with Majesty, therefore
Christ's love to us moved him to abase himself in taking our nature that he
might be one with us, love stood not upon terms of greatness, we see the
Church goes to those that were meaner proficients in religion then her self,
to power out her spirit to them, 1 These. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 13.
to the daughters of Jerusalem, She abaseth her self to any service, love
endures all things, anything to att^ine to the thing loved, Gen 34. 24.
as we see Hamor the son of Shichem he would endure painful circumcision
for the love he bore to Dinah. Act. 6.
So Acts. 5. 4 I. it is said they went away rejoicing after they were whipped,
because they loved Christ. The spirit of love made them rejoice when they were
most disgracefully used.

Sometimes where this affection of heavenly love is prevalent, That this
sickness of divine love works also upon the body Psalm. 3^3.
so that a man is sick of it, the distempers thereof redounds to the body and
reflects upon that, as we see in David, Psalm. 32. 4. That his moisture became
as the drought of summer, because there is a marriage and a simpathy between
the soul and the body, wherein the excessive affections of the one redound and
reflect upon the other.

Tell him that I am sick of love, here is a sickness but not unto death but
unto life, a sickness that never ends but in comfort and satisfaction, Math 5.
6.
blessed are those that hunger and thirst after Christ, they shall be
satisfied, as we shall see afterward more at large.

Knowledge gives not the denomination, for we may know ^ll and be good, and we
may know good and be evil, but it is the affection of the soul which cleaves
to the things known, It is not our knowledge that makes ^ good or evil, but
goodness^^ love ^ and cleaved to ^^akes us to be so.
the truth of our love is that gives the denomination of a state to be good or
ill, love is the weight and wing of the soul, which carries it where it goes,
which if it carry usto earth we are base and earthly, if to heaven, heavenly,
we should have especial care how we fix this affection; for thereafter as it
is, even so is our condition, Ask thy love of what City thou art whether of
Jerusalem or of Babylon, (as Austin says) Now the daughters of Jerusalem reply
unto the Church wondering at her earnestness.

What is thy Beloved more then another Belov^d, O tho^ fairest among woe^en,
what is thy Beloved more then another Beloved that thou do^^t so charge us:

In steed of giving satisfaction to her they reply with asking new Q^estions,
What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved, O thou fairest among women?
what is thy Beloved, etc. Wherein ye have a doubling of the Question, to show
the feriousnesse of it, of this their answer there are two parts.

1. A loving and sweet Compellation, O thou f^rest among women.

2. The Question doubled, what ^s thy Beloved morethen another Beloved. And
again, What is thy Beloved, etc. that thou do so charge us, as if they
should say, Thou layest a serious charge upon ^s, therefore there is some great
matter surely in thy Beloved that thou make such inquiry after him. Thus the
weaker Christians being stirred up by the example of the stronger, they make
this Question and are thus inquisitive, but to speak of them in their order.

O thou fairest among women, here is the Compellation, the Church is the
fairest among women in the judgment of Christ, so he calls her, Cant. 1. 8. O
(...) fairest among women, and here the fellow members of the Church tearm^
her so too, fair and the fa^rest, incomparably fair^.

But how com^^th ^hee to be thus fair? Quest.
Answ.


It is i^ reg^^d that she i^ cloath^^ with (...) robes, Rev. 12. there is a
woeman mentioned clothed with the Sun, The Church is fair in regard she is
clothe^ with Christ.
we were all ennobled with the image of God at the first, but after we had
sinned we were bereft of that image, therefore now all our beauty must be
clothing, which is not natural to man but artificial, fetched from other
things, our beauty now is borrowed, it is not connaturall with us, the beauty
of the Church now comes from the head of the Church Christ, she shines in the
beams of her husband: not only in Justification, but in Sanctification also.

The Church (...) lovely and fair again, as from Christ's imputative
righteausnesse, so from his (...) in her, the graces she has (...) him: for of
him, 2. In regard of the graces she ^at^ from Christ she shines.
we receive Grace for Grace, there is never a grace but it is beautiful and
fair: for what is grace but the beams of Christ the Son of Righteousness,
so that all must be fair tha^ (...) from the (...), all beautiful that comes
from the first beauty.

This beauty of grace whereby it makes the Church so fair springs from these
grounds.

First, In that it is from a divine principle and and therefore it raises the
soul above nature and makes the subjects wherein it is as far surpass all
other men as men do beasts.

Secondly, In regard of the continuance, it is All flesh is grass, Isay. 40. 6.
and as the flower of grass (says the Prophet,) and it is repeated in the New
Te^tament in diverse places. All worldly excellency is as the flower of grass:
1 Pet. 1. 24.
the grass with^^eth and the flower fade^^, but the word of the Lord, (that is
the grace that is imprinted in the soul by the Spirit with the word) that
abides for ever, and makes us abide likewise.

From this fairness of the Church let us take occasion to contemplate of the
excellency of Christ that puts this (...) of beauty upon the Church. Use.
Moses married a woeman that was not beautiful, but could not alter the
complexion and condition of his spouse. But Christ does, he takes us wallowing
in our blood, deformed and defiled, he is such a husband as can put his Church
into his own dispos^tion and tran^forme her into his own proportion. That
Christ is the most excellent husband.
He is such a Head as can quick^n his members, such a root as instills life
into all his branches; such a foundation as makes us living stones, there is a
ver^ue and power in this husband above (...).

But she is black?

She is so indeed and she confesses her self to be so, Object.
Cant. 1. 5. I am black but comely, Answ.
In what regard the Church calls her self black.


Black again, In regard of Scandalls, for the Devil hates the Church more
then all societies 1 Cor. ^.


She is black through the envy of the world that looks more at the Churches
faults then virtues. How the Churches state in this life comes to be s^ full of
scanda^^s.


The Church is black and unlovely nothing diff^ring from others, In regard of
Gods outward dealing. All falls alike to all, they are Eccles. 9. 2.
they have all things outwardly whatsoever is common with others.

In respect of her Infirmities and weaknesses, subject to weakness and
passions as other men, the beauty of the Church is inward and undiscerned to
the carnal eye altogether: the Scribes and Pharisees see no virtue in Christ
himself. It is said, that he came among his own, and his own could not
d^scerne of him: John. 1. 1. 1.
the darkness could not comprehend that light. Now as it was with Christ, so
it is much more with the Church, let this then be the use of it. Use. 1.


Oppose this state of the Church to the false judgment of the world: Oppose
Judgment to Judgment.
they see all black and nothing else that is good; Christ sees that which is
black too: but then his spirit in them (together with the ^ight of their
blackness) sees their beauty too. I am black but comely, etc. Be not
discouraged therefore at the censure of the world, blind men cannot judge of
colors. It is said of Christ, Isa. 53.
he had no form or beauty in him, when we shall see him. I. Not in outward
glory, ^Por in the view of the world. If we be therefore thought to be black,
we are no otherwise thought of then the Church and Christ has been before us.

Again, Use. 3.
Let us make this Use of it, against Satan in the time of temptation, To
remember Christ's judgment of the Church when we are under temptation.
does Christ think us fair for the good we have, does he not altogether value
us by our ill^ and shall we believe Satan, who joins with the distempers of
melancholy, or weakness we are in, which he uses as a weapon against the
soul, to make us think otherwise, Satan is not only a ^^ourtherer, but a
ly^r from the beginning. We must not believe an enemy, and a liar withal. But
consider how Christ and the Church judges, that have better discerning. And
let us beware we be not satan's to our selves: For if there were no Devil,
yet in the time of temptation and desertion we are subject to discouragement,
to give false witness against our selves, we are apt to look on the darkeside
of the Cloud. Exodus 14. 20.
The Cloud that went before the Israelites had a double aspect, one dark, the
other light; Simile.
In temptation we look on the dark side of the soul, and are witty in
pleading against our selves. Oh but consider what Christ judges of us, O thou
faires^ among women, and what those about us that are learned, who can read
our evidences better then we our selves, do judge of us, let us trust the
judgment of others in time of temptation more then our own.

Learn again here, Use. 3.
What to judge of the spirits of such kind of men, To see the bitterness of
their spirits that can or will see no go^^ in Go^s Children.
as are all in disgracing and defacing the poor Church, their table talk is
of the infirmities of Christians, they light upon them as flies do upon sore
places, and will see nothing that is good in them, Simile.
O where is the spirit of Christ, or of the Church of Christ in them that thus
bescratch the face of the Church ^ when yet (often times) their hearts tell them
these poor despised ones will be better then themselves one day, for grace
shall have the upper hand of all excellencies.

The Church is fa^re and fairest, That all other excellencies save grace are
but painted exc^llencies.
Grace is a transcendent good, all the excellency of civility and morallity is
nothing to this, this denominates the Church the fairest, she is not guilt,
but pure gold, not painted, but has at^ue natural complexion, all other
excellencies are but guilt, painted excellencies. The whore of Babylon she is
wondrous fair. But wherein does her beauty consist ^ In ornaments and
ceremonies to abuse silly people, that go no further then fancy, it is an
excellency that comes not to the judgment, but the excellency of the Church
is otherwise, she is The fairest among women, she has a natural fairness,
as gold is pure gold, so the Church is of a pure composition, glorious within.
It is for the ^alse whorish Church to be glorious without only, but the true
Church is glorious within. But that which we should especially observe is,
Observe.
That we should labor to answer this commendation, not only to be fair but
the fairest, to be transcendently singularly good, to do somewhat more then
others can, to have somewhat more in us then others have.

For it is answerable to the state of a Christian, That this strife for
eminency in Grace is suitable to a Christians calling.
is a Christian in an excellent rank above other men^ let him show it by a
carriage more gracious, more fruitful and plentiful in good works. There is
a kind of excellency affected in other things, much more should we de^i^e to
be excellent in that is good, that we may not be fair only but the fa^rest.
This the Apostle S. Paul excellently presses to Titus his s^holler, Tit. 2.
14. and to all of us in other places, that we should be, A peculiar people
Zealous of good works: not only to do them, but to be zealous of them, and
to go before others in them, standing as stander bearers. That it is a ^inf^ll
^^uggish fear to ^eare t^ be religious.
Therefore those that think they may go too far in Religion, that they may
be too fruitful, are not worthy the name of the spouse of Christ, for she is
fair, yea the fairest among women: The righteous is more excellen^ then his
(...), therefore we should excel in good works (as the Apostle exhorts us) to
labor after things that are excellent, 1 Cor. 12. 31.
as if he should say, Is there any thing better then other, ^. Pet. 1. 8.
labor for that. You have some so far from this disposition, that they cry
down the excellencies of others, least the fairness of others might discover
their blackenesse. Thus we leave the Compellat^on and come to the Question.

What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved? Quest.
and they double it, what is thy Beloved more then another Beloved that thou so
chargest us?

Questions are of diverse natures, we shall not stand upon them, this is not a
Question merely of ignorance (for they had some knowledge of Christ, though
weak) Nor was it a curious nor a catching Question, like those of the Scribes
and Pharisees unto Christ, to instance in that of Pilate, Joh. 18. 38.
What is truth? when Christ had told him the truth, What is truth, (says he)
in a scornful profane manner, as indeed profane spirits cannot hear savoury
words, but they turn them off with scorn, what is truth^. This here in the
text is not such, but a Question tending to further resolution and
satisfaction, What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved?

First of all observe, that these of the Church here were stirred up by the
examples of other members of the Church to be in quisitive after Christ, so to
be satisfied, Hence observe, That there is a wondrous force in the examples of
Christians to stir up one another. Observe.
We see here when the Church was sick of love, the other part of the members
began to think, what is the reason the Church is so earnest to seek after
Christ, there is some excellency sure in him; for, wise men do not use great
motions in little matters, great things are carried with great moovings; we use
not to stir up tragedies for trifles, to make mountains of molehills, the
endeavors and carriages of great persons that be wise, judicious and holy are
answerable to the nature of things. And indeed the Church judges aright in
this, then see the force of good example, any man that has his wits about him,
when he sees others serious, earnest and careful about a thing whereof for the
present he can see no reason (especially if they have parts equal, or superior
to himself) will reason thus presently.

What is the matter that such a one is so earnest, A reasoning up^on others
earnestness.
so careful, watchful laborious inquisitive? It is not for want of wit,
surely he has parts enough, he understands himself well. And then he begins
to think, sure I am too cold, hereupon comes competition, and corrivalitie:
surely I will be as good as he.

Let us labor therefore to be exemplary to others, Use.
and to express the graces of God; To be exemplary for good to others.
for thus we shall do more then we are aware, there is a secret influence in
good example, though a man say nothing (says one) there is a way to profit
from a good man though he hold his peace, his course of life speaks loud
enough, we owe this to all, even to them that are without to do them so much
good as to give them a good example, A deb^ to (...) that are without.
and we wrong them when we do not, and hinder their coming on by an evil, or
a dead example.

Let this be one motive to stir us up to it, That answerable to the good we
shall do to others, shall b^ our comfort i^ life and death.
that answerable to the good we shall do in this kind, shall be our comfort in
l^fe and death, and our reward after death. For the more spreading our good is
either in word, life, or conversation, the more our consciences shall be settled
in the consideration of good life well spent, our reward shall be answerable to
our communication and diffusion of good, and whereas otherwise it will lie
heavy on the conscience, not only in this life, but at the day of judgment
and after; when we shall think not only of the personal ill that we stand
guilty of, but exemplarie ill also.

It should moove those therefore of inferior sort to look to all good
examples, That we shall not only answe^ for our knowledge, but also for all
the good examples and helps we have bad and neglected.
as the Church here to the love of the other part of the Church. Wherefore are
examples among us, but that we should follow them ^ we shall not only be
answerable for abuse of knowledge, but also of good examples we have had and
neglected. Does God kindle lights for us and shall not we walk by their light
^ It is a sin not to consider the Sunn^, the Moon, the Stars, the Heav^ns,
and Works of Nature and Providence; much more not to consider the Worke^ of
Grace. But one place of Scripture shall close up all: which is, Romans 11. 11.
That the example of us Gentiles at length shall stir up and provoke the Jews
to believe. To those stiff necked Jews example shall be so forcible, that it
shall prevail with them to believe and to be converted. If example be of such
force as to convert the Jews that are so far off, how much more is it or
should it be to convert Christians, Simile.
wondrous is the force of good example. So we come to the Question it self.

What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved, etc.

We see there is excellent use of holy conference, the Church coming to the
daughters of Jerusalem, speaking of Christ her Beloved that she is sick of
love, etc. The daughters of Jerusalem are inquisitive to know Christ more and
more, here is the benefit of holy conference and good speeches, one thing
draws on another, and that draws on another, till at length the soul be
warmed and kindled with the consideration and meditation of heavenly things.
That that is little in the beginning may bring forth great matters. That in
de^ling and speaking of Heavenly things, a little thing is the beginning of
great matters.
This Question to the Church, and talking with her: I charge you if you find
my Beloved to tell him that I am sick of love, breeds Q^estions in others:
What is thy Bel^ved, etc. Whence upon the description of her Beloved, her heart
is kindled, she finds her Beloved, so that talking of holy and heavenly
things is good for others and our selves also. That holy conference is good for
others and our selves.
It is good for others, as it was good for the daughters of Jerusalem here, for
thereupon they are stirred up to be inquisitive after Christ, and it was good
for the Church her self, for, hereupon she took occasion to make a large
commendation of Christ; wherein she found much comfort.

Good conference then is good for our selves, for, we see a little seed brings
for that length a great tree, a little fire kindles much fuel, and great
things many times rise out of small despised beginnings. It was a little
occasion which Naaman the Assyrian had to effect his conversion. 2 King 5.
There was a poor banished woeman, a stranger, who was a Jewish maid servant,
she told her Lords servants that there was a Prophet in Jurie that could heal
him: whereupon he came thither, and was converted and healed. And Paul shows,
Philip. 1.
that the very report of his bonds did a great deal of good in Caesar's house.
Report and fame is a little matter, but little matters make way for the greater.

This may put us in mind to spend our time fruitfully in good conference,
Exhortation to fruitful conference.
when in discretion it is seasonable: we know not when we begin, where we may
make an end^; our souls may be carried up to Heaven before we are aware; for
the Spirit will enlarge it self from one thing to another. Math. 23.
To him that has shall be given more and more still. God graciously seconds
good beginnings. We see the poor Disciples, when they were in a dampe for the
loss of Christ, after he comes, meets them, and talks of holy things, Luke 24.
32.
In that very conference their hearts were warmed and kindled. For, next to
Heaven it self our meeting together here, it is a kind of Paradise, the
greatest pleasure in the world is to meet with those here, whom we shall ever
live with in Heaven. Those who are good should not spend such opportuni^ies
fruitlesly.

And to this end, labor for the graces of the Communion of Sain^s: That graces
suiting the communion of Saints is a great help to conference.
for there is such a state, we believe it as an Article of our Creed, how shall
we approove our selves to be such as have interest unto the communion of
Saints, unles we have spirits able to communicate good to others? pitiful and
loving spirits that we may speak a word in due season.

What a world of precious time is spent in idle conversing, as if the time were
a burden, and no improovement to be made of the good parts of others?
sometimes though we know that which we ask of others, as well as they do; yet
notwithstanding good speeches will draw us to know it better, by giving
occasion to speak more of it, wherewith the Spirit works more effectually and
imprints it deeper. So that it shall be a more rooted knowledge then before.
For that does good that is graciously known, and that is graciously known
that the Spirit seals upon our souls. Perhaps the knowledge I have is not yet
sealed sufficiently, it is not rooted by conference, though I hear the same
things again, yet I may hear them in a fresh manner, and so I may have it
sealed deeper then before, experience finds these things to be true.

Again, We should labor here to have our hearts inquisitive. That
Christians should be inquisitive.
The Heathen man accounted it a grace in his Scholar and a sign that he
would prove hopeful, because he was full of Questions: Christians should be
inquisitive of the ways of Righteousness; Inquifitive of the right path which
leads to Heaven, how to carry themselves in private in their families, how in
all estates, Inquisitive of the excellency of Christ: What is thy Beloved more
then another Beloved? Questions end usually in resolutions; for the soul will
not rest but in satisfaction. Rest is the happiness of the soul as it were:
when a Question is moved it will not be quiet till it have satisfaction.
Therefore doubting at the first, breeds resolution at the last. It is good
therefore to raise Questions of the practice of all necessary points, and to
improove the good parts and gifts of others that we converse with, to give
satisfaction. What an excellent improovement is this of communion and Company,
when nothing troubles our spirit, but we may have satisfaction from others
upon our proposing it. Perhaps God has laid up in the parts of others
satisfaction to our souls, and has so determined that we shall be perplexed
and vexed with scruples, till we have recourse to some whom he has appointed
to be helpefull to us in this kind. Many go mourning a great part of their
days in a kind of fullennesse this way, because that they do not open their
estate to others. You see here the contrary practice of the Church, she doubles
the Question; What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved, O thou fairest
among women, what is thy Beloved more then another Beloved, that thou do so
charge us?

The end of the thirteenth Sermon.
THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON. SER. XIV.

CANT. V.IX.X. What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved, O thou fairest
among women, what is thy Beloved more then another Beloved that thou do so
charge us?

My Beloved is white and ruddie the chiefest among ten thousand.


THE last time we met we left the Church sick of love: which strange affection
in her, together with her passionate charge to the daughters of Jerusalem,
moved them to make this Question unto her, What is thy Beloved more then
another Beloved, etc. To be in love is much: to conceal it is grievous, to
vent it with such fervencie and passion breeds astonishment, in these younger
Christians, who wonder what that is which can so draw away the Churches love,
and run away with her affections. They knew no such excellencies of the
person the Church so admired, and therefore they double the Question unto her,
What is thy Beloved, etc. what is thy Beloved, etc. Whereby we see the
excellency of the soul which aspires still toward perfection, not resting in
any state inferior to the most excellent. Therefore also is the Churches
sickness of love here, who desires a nearer union and communion with Christ
then she at this time had.

For there are degrees of spirittuall languishing, till we be in heaven we are
always under some degree of this sickness of love; though the soul have more
communion at one time then at another. Yea the Angels are under this wish to
see Christ together with his Church in full perfection, so that until we be in
Heaven where shall be a perfect reunion of soul and body, and of all the
members of the Church together; there is a kind of sickness attending upon
the Church and a languishing.

The Question asked is,

What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved, O thou fairest among women?

What! now fair when her veil was taken away? now fair when the Watchmen
abased her: now fair when she was disgraced? Yes, now fair and now fair, in
the sight of the daughters of Jerusalem, and in the sight of Christ that calls
her the fairest among women: So that under all disgraces, infirmities and
scandalls, under all the shame that rises in the soul upon sin, under all
these clouds there is an excellency of the Church, she is, The fairest among
women, notwithstanding all these: O thou fairest among women. Quest.


Whence comes this fairness under such seeming foulness and disgrace? Answ.


It comes from without, it is borrowed beauty as you have it, Ezekiel. 16. 1. 2.
By nature we lie in our blood, there must be a beauty put upon us, we are fair
with the beauty that we have out of Christ's wardrope. The Church shines in the
beams of Christ's Righteousness, That Grace only makes us lovely to Christ.
Psalm. 45.
she is not borne thus fair, but newborn fairer. The Church of Christ is all
glorious, Collos. 3.
but it is within, not seen of the world, she has a life, but it is a hidden
life, our glory and our life is hidden in Christ: It is hid sometimes from the
Church it self, who sees only her deformity and not her beauty, her death but
not her life: because, her life is hid: here is a mystery of Religion, The
Church is never more fair then when she judges herself to be most deformed;
That the Church is never more fair in Christ's eye, then when she sees and
complains most of her deformities. 2 Cor. 12.
Never more happy then when she judges herself to be miserable: never more
strong then when she feels her self to be weak, never more righteous then
when she feels herself to be most burdened with the guilt of her own
sins, because the sense of one contrary forces to another, That the sense of
(...) contrary forces another. 2 Cor. 12. 10.
the sense of ill forces us to the fountain of good, to have supply thence:
When I am weak then am I strong (says Paul) Grace and strength is perfect in
weakness.

This should teach us what to judge of the Church and people of God, Use.
even under their seeming disgraces, What to judge of the Church and Gods
people under seeming disgraces.
yet to judge of them as the excellentest people in the world, Psalm. 16. All
my delight is in those that are excellent: to join our selves to them:
especially this is here to be understood of the Church as it is the mystical
body of Christ, not as a mixed body, as a visible Church, Heb. 12. 22.
but as it is the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

The visible Church has terms of excellency put upon it sometimes, but it is
in regard of the better part. Simile.
As gold unrefined is called gold because gold is the better part: And a heap
of wheat unwinnowed is called wheat, though there be much chafe in it, the
body of Christ it self has always excellent terms given it, O thou fairest
among women.

Those that look upon the Church with the spectacles of malice can see no such
beauty in her, That the cause why wicked men see not this beauty is because
they look on Gods t^rough the spectacles of malice.
though to espy out faults, as the Devil could in Job, Job. 1.
to quarrel, to slander, they are quicksighted enough, but we see here the
Church in the judgment of the daughters of Jerusalem, that she is the fairest
among women.

The Papists have a painted beauty, for their Catholic Church, but here is no
such beauty It becomes a whore to be painted, to be as fair as her hands can
make her, with feighned beauty. But the Church of Christ has a beauty from her
husband, a real spiritual beauty not descerned of the world.

This should be of use to Gods children themselves, Use.
to help them in the upbraidings of conscience (as if they had no goodness in
them) because they have a great deal of ill. That Christians in the
upbraidings of conscience should look upon the good as on the ill in them.
Christians should have a double eye, one to set and fix upon that which is
ill in them, to humble them, and another upon that which is supernaturally
gracious in them, to encourage themselves, they should look upon themselves as
Christ looks upon them, and judge of themselves as he judges of them, by the
better part. He looks not so much what ill we have, for, that shall be wrought
out by little and little, and be abolished, it is condemned already, and it
shall be executed by little and little till it be wholly abolished. but he
looks upon us in regard of the better part, That we should look upon our
selves as Christ looks upon us.
so should we look upon our selves, though otherwhiles upon our black feet
(our infirmities) when we are tempted to pride and haughtiness, but always
let the mean thoughts we conceive of our selves, make us to fly to Christ.

What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved?

Here is a Question, and a Question answered with a Question: Questions they
breed knowledge (as the Greek Proverb is) doubtings breed resolution.
Whereupon the inquisitive soul (usually) prooves the most learned, judicious
and wise soul, therefore that great Philosopher counted it as a virtue amongst
his scholars, that they would be inquisitive. So the scholars of
Righteousness are inquisitive, they inquire the way to Canaan, Ier. 50.
and the way to Zion with their faces thitherwards.

It is aspeciall part of Christians wisdom to improove the excellency of
others by Questions, That is a special point of wisdom to improve the gifts
of other by questions.
to have a bucket to draw out of the deep wells of others (as Solomon says)
the heart of a wise man is as deep waters, but a man of understanding can tell
how to fetch those waters out: There be many men of deep and excellent parts
which are lost in the world, because men know not how to improove them.
Therefore it is good while we have men excellent in any kind, to make use of
them. It is an honor to God as well as a commodity to our selves. Does God
suffer lights to shine in the world that we should take no notice of them, It
is a wrong to our selves and a dishonor to God.

What is thy Beloved more then another Beloved, etc.

A further* point from hence is, Observe.
That if we would give encouragement to others to repair to us for any good,
we should labor to be so excellent as to adorn Religion.

O thou fairest among women, what is thy Beloved, etc. They enquire of her
because they have a good conceit of her: a world of good might be done if there
were bred a good conceit of men in others; we say in sickness, a good conceit
of the Physician is half the cure: so in teaching, a good conceit of the
teacher is half the learning: The daughters of Jerusalem had a good conceit
here in their Questioning of the Church: O thou fairest among women, what is
thy Beloved more then another Beloved?

Let us labor therefore to be such as may bring honor and credit to Religion,
That our endeavors must be to make Religion lovely.
and make it lovely, that what we do may make others think we do what we do
to great purpose: which is often times a special means and occasion of their
conversion. Though properly the cause of conversion be the Spirit of God in the
ordinances: yet the inducement (many times) and occasion, is the observation of
the course and carriage of those that excel and are known to be eminent in
parts and in graces, Emulation ads spurrs to to the soul. Do they take such
courses that are wiser then I, and shall not I take the like course too? Paul
says, Romans 11. 11.
the emulation of the Gentiles shall be a means of the conversion of the
Jews, when they shall see them embrace Christ, they will be encouraged to do
so also: what shall we think therefore of them that live so as that they bring
an evil report, scandal and reproach upon Religion? Great and fearful is
their wickedness, that by their ill conversation like Hophny and Phineas
discredit the ordinances of the Lord. 1 Samuel 2. 17.


Now the Church thus answers the former Question touching Christ, My Beloved is
white and ruddie, the chiefest of ten thousand. She is not afraid to set out
her Beloveds beauty. For, there is no envy in Spiritual things: That there is
no rivalty in Spiritual things where is abundance for all of love.
It is want of wisdom amongst men to commend a thing that is very lovely to
others, and so to set an edge upon their affections, when they cannot both
share; and the more one has, the less another has of all things here below.
But in Spirittuall things there is no envy at the sharing of others in that we
love our selves: because all may be loved alike, Christ has grace and
affection enough for all his: he has not (as Esaw speaks) but one blessing:
No, he can make all his happy. Therefore the Church stands not upon terms,
when the daughters of Jerusalem enquire about her Beloved, I tell you freely
says she what my Beloved is: First in general the answer is, My Beloved is
white and ruddie, the chiefest among ten thousand, then afterward there is a
specification of the particulars, she will not stand upon the gro^se, but
admires at every parcel in the thing beloved, every thing is lovely as we
shall see in particular afterward.

My Beloved is white and ruddie, the chiefest among ten thousand.

We will take that which is safe; because we will have sure footing (as near
as we can) in this mystical portion of Scripture, Quest.
what is that white and ruddie, why does the Church set forth the Spiritual
excellencies of Christ by that which is most outwardly excellent and most
beautiful.

Because of all complections the mixed complexion of these two colors white
and ruddie is the purest and the best, Answ.
therefore she sets out the beauty and the Spiritual excellency of Christ by
this white and ruddie, beauty arises of the mixture of these two. First she
sets out the beauty of Christ positively, and then by way of comparison, The
chiefest among ten thousand.

But what is this white and ruddie: What beauty is and wherein it con^isteth.
what is beauty?

To the making up of beauty there is required Proportion and ^eature.
so as the particulars have a due proportion, there must be a harmony of the
parts, one suiting with another, for comeliness stands in oneness, when many
things (as it were) are one. Uncomeliness is in diversity, when diverse things
are jumbled together, that belong to many heads; as we say it is uncomely to
have an old man's head on a young man's shoulders, but when all things are so
suited that they make one agreeing exactly there is beauty and comeliness.

Besides soundness of constitution and comeliness In the grace of color.
there is a grace of color that makes beauty, which arises out of the other,
so that soundness and goodness of constitution together with the exact
proportion of the variety of parts, having with it this gracefulness of color
and complexion makes up that which we call beauty. In a word, then this
carnation color, wh^te and ruddie, may be understood of that excellent and
sweet mixture that makes such a gracefulness in Christ, The strange and
admirable mixture in Christ.
in him there is wonderful purity and holiness, and yet a wonderful
weakness, there is God the great God and a piece of earth, of flesh in one
person, a bloody pierced, and a glorious shining body, humility and glory:
Justice, wonderful justice and yet exceeding love and mercy: Justice to his
enemies, Mercy to his Children.

Christ is a most beautiful Person. Observe.


Not as God only but as man, In what regard Christ was most beautiful.
the Mediator God and man, the Person of the Mediator is a beautiful Person;
as Psalm. 45. there is a notable description of Christ, and of his Church, Thou
art fairer then the Children of men, grace is powered into thy lips, etc.

But the loveliness and beauty of Christ is especially Spiritual, That the
lovelines and beauty of Christ must be spiritually considered.
in regard of the graces of his Spirit. A deformed person, man or woman, of a
homely complexion and constitution, yet notwithstanding when we discern them
by their conversation to be very wise and of a lovely and sweet spirit, very
able and withal wondrous willing to impart their abilities, being wondrous
useful: what a world of love does it breed, though we see in their outward man
nothing lovely. The consideration of what sufficiency is in Christ, wisdom,
power, goodness and love, that made him come from Heaven to Earth, to take our
nature upon him, to marry us and join our nature to his (that he might join
us to him in spiritual bonds) the consideration of his meekness and
g^ntlenesse how he never turned any back again that came to him, Mat. 1^. 22.
should make us highly prize him, indeed some went back of themselves (as the
young man in discontent) Christ turned them not back: nay he loved the
appearance of goodness in the young man and embraced him. He is of so sweet a
nature that he never upbraided those that followed him with their former
sins; as Peter with denial, and the like. He is of so gracious a nature that
he took not notice of petty infirmities in his Disciples, but tells them of
the danger of those sins that might hurt them: being of so sweet a nature
that he will not quench the smoking flax, Isa. 4^.
nor break the bruised reed, his whole life being nothing but a doing of good,
He did all things well (as the Gospel speaks) excellent well.

Now the consideration of what a gracious Spirit is in Christ, must needs be a
loadstone of love, and make him beautiful. Therefore Bernard says well, When
I think of Christ, I think at once of God, full of Majesty and Glory, and at
the same time of Man full of meekness, gentleness and sweetness. So, let us
consider of Christ as of the Mighty God, powerful, and withal consider of him
as a gentle and mild man; that came riding meekely on an Ass (as the Scripture
sets him out) He was for all comers and gave entertainment to all: Mat, ^1.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11. 2^.
etc. For the most weak and miserable person of all had the sweetest
entertainment of him, Luke 16. 10.
He came to seek, and to save that which was lost. Let us I say think of him
both as of the great God, and withal as of meek Man: the one to establish our
souls, that he is able to do great matters; the other to draw us to him
because he loves us. We are afraid to go to God a consuming fire, Heb. 12.
but now let us think we go to bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, to
our brother, to one that out of his goodness abased himself of purpose that
we might be one with him, who loved us more then his own life, and was
contented to carry the curse for us that we might be blessed of God for ever,
and to suffer a most painful and shameful death that so he might make us
heirs of everlasting life.

Christ is Spiritually lovely, the chiefest of ten thousand. The Church sets
him out by comparison, a standardbearer, a carrier of the banner of ten
thousand. Simile.
For, as the goodliest men use to carry the Ensign, the Banner, so he the
goodliest of all other is the standard bearer.

Whence we gather, Observe.
That Christ as he is beautiful and good, Psalm 45. 7.
so he is incomparably beyond all comparison good, In regard of the personal
union with the God head in our nature Christ is the chief of all. In regard
all our ^ulnes comes from Christ he is the chie^e of all
He is a standard bearer one among ten thousand, anointed with the Oil of
gladness above his fellows.

First, for that he is so near to God by the personal union.

And in regard likewise, That all others have all from him: of his fullness we
receive grace for grace, ours is but a derivative fullness, his glory and
shining is as the shining of the body of the Sun, Simile.
ours as the light of the Air, which is derived from the glory of the Sun,
ours is but the fullness of the stream, and of the vessel, but the fullness
of the fountain and of the spring is his: thereupon he is called the head of
the Church; Col. 1. 18.
the head is the tower of the body which has all the five senses in it, and
wisdom for the whole body. It sees, hears, understands, and does all for
the body; having influence into the other parts of it. So Christ is above all,
and has influence into all his Church, not only eminency, but influence.

What is excellent in the Heavens? That Christ is s^t ^orth by all earthly
excellencies.
the Sun: So Christ is the Sun of Righteousness: the Stars, He is the
bright morning Starr, the Light: M^l. 42.
He is the Light of the world. Come to all creatures, you have not any
excellent amongst them but Christ is styled from it. He is, the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, the Lilly and the Rose, and the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world, the Tree of life, etc. There is not a thing necessary
to nature, but you have a style from it given to Christ, to show, that he is as
necessary as Bread and Water, Jo^ 6.
and the food of life. Ioh. 4.
When we see Light therefore; think of the true Light: when the Sun, think
of the Sun of Righteousness: so remember the bread and water of life in our
common food, therefore the Sacraments were ordained, that as we go to the sea
by the conduct of rivers, so we might go to the sea of all excellency and
goodness by the conduct of these rivers of goodness to be led by every
excellency in the creature, Simile.
to that of our mediator Christ, who is the chiefest among ten thousand.

To come more particularly to speak of his excellencies, That Christ only was
King, Priest and Prophet.
omitting his two Natures in one Person God and Man; that we may consider his
Offices, a King, Priest and Prophet: he being the chief in all these, so all
good Kings before him were tipes of him, as also the Prophets and Priests, he
was all in one. Never any before him was King, Priest and Prophet, as he was
King, Priest and Prophet in one, so in every respect he was incomparable above
all. Such a King, as is King of Kings, and subdueth things unconquerable to all
other Kings, A King.
even the greatest enemies of all, such a King as conquered the World, Death,
Hell and Sin, all things that are terrible: Death you know is called the king
of fears, because it terrifieth even Kings themselves. Christ is such a King
as takes away these terrible greatest ills of all, such a King as rules over
the soul and conscience, (the best part of man) where he settles and
stablisheth peace, such a King as sets up his Kingdom in our very souls and
hearts, guides our thoughts, desires, actions and affections, setting up a
peaceable government there, so he is an incomparable King even in regard of
that Office; He is the chiefest of ten thousand, such a King as carries the
government upon his own shoulders, as it is Isa. 9. ^. He devolves not the
care to another to make it as he list and so be a cipher himself, but he
carries all upon his own shoulder, he needs not a Pope for his vicar.

Again, as a Priest A Priest.
such a High Priest as offered eternal Spirit: he as God offered up his
Manhood, such a Priest as has satisfied the wrath of God, and reconciled God
to man. All other Priests were but types of this Priest, who is such a Priest
as never dies, but lives for ever to make intercession for us in Heaven, by
virtue of that sacrifice which he offered in the days of his flesh: He was
both Priest and Sacrifice. Such a Priest as is touched with our infirmities, so
mild and gentle, full of pity and mercy. No Priest to this Priest, God only
smelt a sweet smell from this sacrifice.

And for his Prophetical Office, A Prophet.
he is a Prophet Luke 24.
the key of David which can open the soul: by his holy Spirit h^e can make the
very simple full of knowledge, Pro. 1.
such a Prophet as has his chair in the very heart of man, this great Bishop
of our souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. (...)
the Angel of the covenant, that (...), the messenger of the Father: so he is
the chief of ten thousand: consider him as King, as Priest or as Prophet.

The use of this is exceeding pregnant, comfortable and large, Use.
that we have such a Savior such an eminent person, so near so puculiar to
us. Our Beloved, my Beloved, If he were a Beloved the chief of ten thousand,
it were no great matter, but he is mine, he is thus excellent: excellent
considered with propriety in it, and a peculiar propriety, peculiarity and
propriety together with transcendent excellency makes happy if there be any
enjoying of it. Happiness what.
Therefore repent not your selves of your repentings, but think I have not
cast away my love, but have set it upon such an object as deserves it, for my
Beloved is the chiefest of ten thousand.

The end of the fourteenth Sermon.
THE FIFTEENTH SERMON. SER. XV.

CANT. V. X. My Beloved is white and ruddie the chiefest among ten thousand.
LOve is such a boundless affection that where it once breaks forth in
praises upon a good foundation, it knows no measure, as we see here in the
Church, who being provoked, and (as it were) exasperated by the daughters of
Jerusalem to explain the excellency of him she had with so much affection
incessantly sought after. That she might justify her choice (ere she descend
into Particulars) she breaks forth into this general description of her
Beloved, whereby she cuts of from all hopes of equalling him, My Beloved is
white and ruddie, (exceeding fair) nay, the chief among ten thousand, (none
like him) she would not have us think she had bestowed her love but on the
most excellent of all, the chief of ten thousand. Well were it for us that we
could do so in our love, that we might be able to justify our choice, not to
spend it on sinful, vain and unprofitable things, which cause repentance and
mourning in the conclusion, whereof the Church here worthily cleereth herself;
in that she had chosen the chief among ten thousand.

And most justly did she place her affections upon so excellent an object, who
was so full of all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Colos. 1. 11.
the life of our life, in whom dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, in
whom was a gracious mixture and compound of all heavenly graces, where
Greatness and Goodness, Justice and Mercy, God and Man meet in one Person.
Such in one who breaks no bru^sed reed, Mat. 12.
nor quenches the smoking flax, who refuses not sinners, but invites them unto
him: offering to heal all and cure all who come unto him: he is a King indeed;
but this also approoves her choice; Ioh. 5.
he rules all, commands all, judges all, what then can she want who has such a
friend, such a husband, whose government is so winning, mild and merciful?

He is not such a Monarch as loves to get authority by sternesse like Rehoboam.
But by those aimeable graces of gentleness and love, all the excellencies of
holiness, purity and righteousness, are sweetly tempered with love and
meekness in him: Luke 7. 44.
you may see for instance how he takes his Disciples part against the
Pharisees, That Christ takes part with the a^flicted side.
(and the poor woman's that came to wash his feet and kissed them,) against the
Pharisee that had invited him to dinner. The Church is a company of despised
people, that are scorned of Pharisaicall proud spirits, who perhaps have
morallity and strength of parts to praise them with. Now Christ takes part with
the broken spirits against all proud spirits, howsoever he be gone to Heaven
(where he is full of Majesty) yet he has not forgotten his meekness nor
changed his nature with change of honor. He is now more honored then he was,
for, he has a Name above all Names, Acts 9.
in Heaven or in Earth, yet he is pitiful still. Saul Saul why persecutest
thou me? He makes the Churches case his own still, together with beams of
glory there are bowels of pity in him, the same that he had here upon earth.
Which makes him so lovely to the truly broken hearted believing soul, My
Beloved is white and ruddy.

He is set out likewise by comparing him with all others whatsoever, he is the
chief of ten thousand, a certain number for an uncertain, that is, the
chief among all, in all things Christ has the pre-eminence: he is the first
borne from the dead, he is the first borne of every creature, he is the eldest
brother, he is the chief among all. For all Kings, Priests and Prophets before
were but types and shadows of him: He the body, the truth and the substance.
And (as was showed before) he is all three in one, King, Priest and Prophet,
the great Doctor and Prophet of his Church, that spoke by all the former
Prophets, and speaks by his ministers to the end of the world. The Angel of
the covenant, that (...) the word, that expresses his Fathers breast, that as
he came from the bosom of his Father so lays open his counsel to mankind. 1
Pet 3. 19.
It was he that spoke by Noah, and preached by his Spirit to the souls that
are now in prison, (as Peter speaks) so, he is the chief among all. But
especially in regard of his Righteousness; Phil. 3. 8.
for which Paul accounted all dung and dross to be found in Christ, not having
his own Righteousness, but the Righteousness that is in Christ: which is
more then the Righteousness of an Angel, being the Righteousness of God-Man,
and above all the Righteousness of the law. Quest.


But what is this to us or to the Church? Answ.
yes, for his beauty and excellency is the Churches, That peculiaritie of
interest (...) with the excellency of Christ is that which so (...) the Church.
because he is the Churches. My Beloved is white and ruddie, and my Beloved is
the chief among ten thousand. It is the peculiar interest that the Church has
in Christ that does relish her spirit, excellency with propriety in him: I am
my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine. The more excellent the husband is, the more
excellent is the wife, she only shines in his beams, therefore it is the
interest that we have in Christ that indeares Christ to us. But to come to
more particular application of it. Is Christ thus excellent, superexcellent,
thus transcendently excellent, white and ruddie, the chief of ten thousand
this serves,

To draw those that are not yet in Christ unto

To comfort those that are in Christ.

First, Use. 1.
those that are not yet in Christ, not contracted to him to draw them; That
supereminent excellencies in Christ ought to draw those to him who are not yet
drawn to him.
what can prevail more then that which is in Christ? Beauty and excellencies,
greatness and goodness. And indeed one maine end of our calling the ministry
is, to lay open and unfold the unsearchable riches of Christ, to digg up the
mine, thereby to draw the affections of those that belong to God to Christ.

But it is not enough to know that there are excellencies in Christ to draw us
to him, That with a sight of Christ's excellency, we must see our own debt,
beggary and misery to draw us unto Christ.
but, there must be a sight of our misery, what beggars we are and how
indebted. Before we are in Christ we are not our own, the Devil lays claim
to us that we are his, death lays claim to us, we are under sin, we cannot
satisfy one of a thousand, therefore this inforceth to make out to join with
him that can discharge all our debts, answer all our suits, and non-suite
Satan in the Court of Heaven. When once we are married to the Lord of Heaven
and Earth all is ours, 1 Cor. 3. 2^.
we have a large Charter, All things are yours, Quest.
and you are Christ's and Christ's is Gods

Why are all things ours? Answ.


Because we are married to Christ who is Lord of all. That seeing the en^ of
our misery is to woe us to come unto Christ, we should not be d^scouraged to
come unto him.
It is the end of our calling to sue for a marriage between Christ and every
soul, we are the friends of the Bride, to bring the Church to him, and the
friends of the Church to bring Christ to them: It is the end of our ministry to
bring the soul and Christ together, and let no debts, no sins hinder, for
especially he invites such as are sensible of their sins, Romans 3. 20.
where sin abounds, grace abounds much more. Mat 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden. Luke 19. 20.
And, he came to seek and to save that which was lost. He requires no more,
but that we be sensible of our debts and miseries, which sense he works
likewise by his holy Spirit.

Again, For those in the state of grace to see what an excellent person they
have entertained.
for those that have entertained Christ, let them see what an excellent
gracious Person they have entertained, who is the chief of ten thousand. The
world thinks them a company of silly mean people that make choice of Christ,
Religion, the Word, and such things, but here is a justification of their
choice, they choose him that is the chief of ten thousand, Let him kiss me
with the kisses of his mouth (says the Spouse, Cant* 1.
) for thy love is better then wine, nay then life it self: Luk 10. 41.
A Christian may justify the choice that he has made with Mary of the good
part; against all those that shall disparage his choice. Let the world account
Christians what they will; that they are a company of deluded besotted persons,
fools and madmen. The Christian is the only wise man: Wisdom is seen in
choice especially; and here is the choice of that which is excellent and most
excellent of all, the chief of ten thousand.

So also, Use. 3.
We may see here the desperate and base f^lly of all whatsoever (save true
Christians) what do they make choice of to join to, The desperate miserable
choice of most men.
that which is base, the condemned world, vain transitory things, and refuse
Christ^? Are they in their right wits who refuse a Husband that is noble for
birth, Simile.
rich for estate, mighty for power, abundant in kindness and love it self,
every way excellent? and take a base, ignoble, beggarly person? this is the
choice of the world. Psalm. 81.
God complains Israel would none of me, etc. What shall we judge therefore
of those that will none of Christ when he woes and sues them, but prefer with
Esaw a mess of portage before their eternal birthright, with Adam an apple
before Paradise, and with Judas thirty pieces of silver before Christ himself,
this is the state of many men. To be married to Christ is to take him for an
husband, What it is to be married to Christ.
to be ruled by him in all things. Now when we prefer base commodities and
contentments before peace of conscience and the enjoying of his love; what is
it, but for pelf and commodity, thirty pieces of silver (perhaps for six
pence a thing of nothing) to refuse Christ, yet this is the condition of base
worldlings that live by sense and not by faith. So then as it serves to comfort
those that have made a true choice, so it serves to show the madness and folly
of all others, which one day will feel their hearts full of horror and
confusion, and their faces of shame, when they shall think, what has Christ
made such suit to my heart to win my love? has he ordained a ministry for
to bring me in? made such large promises, is he so excellent? and was this
discovered to me and yet would I none of him? what did I choose, and what did I
leave? I left Christ with all his riches, and made choice of the pleasures and
profits of sin, Heb. 11.
which are but for a season. When the conscience is once thoroughly awaked this
will torment it, the punishment of loss, not of loss simply, as the loss of
Christ and the loss of Heaven, That the greatest loss of all is Christ
discovered in his excellency.
but, the loss of Christ and of Heaven so discovered and opened: therefore
there is no condition in the world so terrible as of those that live in the
Church, and he are those things of Christ crucified unfolded to them before
their eyes, as Paul speaks of the ministry, Gal. 3.
it makes Christ's cross so open to them as if he had been crucified before
their eyes, yet notwithstanding yield to their base hearts desires and
affections before these excellencies, which if they had a spirit of faith would
draw their hearts to him.

Therefore let us consider how we hear those things, To take heed how we ^eare.
it concerns us nearly: on the one side we see what we get if we join with
Christ, we have him and his: on the contrary we loose him; and not only so,
but we gain eternal misery, and perish eternally. O what baseness of mind
possesses us, Christ left all things in love to us, and we leave Christ for
any paultry thing in the world, almost to please and content the humors of
sinful men, to attain a few empty titles, to get a little wealth, enjoy a
little pleasure. You see then the equity of that terrible commination that you
have, 1 Cor. 16. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema
maranatha. Let him be accursed for ever that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ,
if any man sin there is a remedy to discharge his sin in Jesus Christ, if
he will marry him and take him: but when Christ is offered and we will have
none of him, we sin against the Gospel; and then there is no remedy, there
is nothing but Anathema, and maranatha; therefore the most dangerous sins of
all, are those against the light of the Gospel: when yet we choose rather to
live as we list, then to join our selves to Christ. To this purpose Heb. 2. S.
Paul makes an use of the first chapter, wherein he sets out the excellency of
Christ whom the Angels adore, he is so beautiful, so lovely that God the
Father is in love with him, Mat. 3. 17.
and pronounces this is my Beloved son: In the beginning of the second
chapter, Wherefore (says he) how shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation, Heb. 2.
for, If they escaped not that despised Moses law, etc. How shall we escape if
we neglect so great salvation? he says not, if we oppose Christ: but if we
neglect him, if we do not love so great salvation, as 2 These. 1. 8. it is
said, Christ will come in flaming fire to take vengeance of all those that do
not know God, and obey not the Gospel of Christ, though they do not per^ecute
it.

Therefore this reprooves all civil morrall persons that think they have
riches enough, not only debauched persons, but selfe-sufficient persons, that
think they have any Righteousness of their own, let them know, that Christ
shall come in flaming fire, to take vengence of such: This is the scope of the
second Psalm, which ye know sets out the excellency of Christ, Psalm. 2.
I have set my King upon Zion, God the Father there annoints Christ King of the
Church: To what end? That we should kiss the Sun, kiss him with the kiss
of subjection (as subject^s do their Prince:) with the kiss of love, What it
is to kiss the Sun.
as the Spouse does her Husband, and with the kiss of faith. But what if we
do not kiss him, and subject our selves to him; love him and believe in him?
If his wrath be once kindled happy are all those that trust in him: He is a
Lamb, but such a one as can be angry, as Rev. 6. It is said, The Kings and
great persons of the world, fly from the wrath of the Lamb, he that is so
sweet mild and gentle, if we join with him, on the contrary, if we come not
unto him, we shall find the wrath of the Lamb, a terrible wrath, which the
greatest Potentates in the world shall desire to be hid from. If his wrath be
once kindled, blessed are all those that trust in him, and woe be to them that
do not receive him.

For us that profess our selves to be in Christ, Use. 2.
and to be joined to him that is thus excellent, For those who are in Christ to
make him the rule of our choice in other things. In friendship.
let us make this use, to make him the rule of our choice in other things. In
the choice of friends, choose such as are friends to Christ, take heed of
society with Idolaters, or with profane wretched persons. If you will be
joined to Christ, and profess your selves to be so, then let us join to none
but those that we can enjoy and Christ too. In Marriage.
So in marriage let the rule of choice be, the love of Christ; and likewise let
the measure of our respect to all things be, the respect to Christ, In all
things whatsoever love all with reference to Christ.
let us measure our love to wife and children, to kindred, friends, and to all
creatures whatsoever, as it may stand with love to Christ. Obey in the Lord,
Marry in the Lord, do all things in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 39.
so as may stand with the love and allowance of the Lord.

Make also, Use. 3.
a Use of Direction, How to come to value Christ thus: For direction.
as to keep an high esteem of him, for this follows infallibly and
undeniably: If Christ be, the chief of ten thousand, he must have the chief
of our affections, above ten thousand: for, as he is in excellency, he must
have place in our hearts answerable thereunto; for, then our souls are as they
should be, when they judge of, and affect things as they are in themselves.

First, Let us enter into a serious consideration of the need we have of
Christ, Answ. 1.
of our misery without him, By a deep consideration of our necessity with out
him.
of our happiness if we be joined with him, the soul being thus convinced,
the affections must needs follow the sanctified judgment.

What will come of it, That exa^ting Christ high in the heart is a strong
prefervative against sin.
If Christ be set in the highest place in our heart, If we crown him there,
and make him King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in a hearty submitting of all the
affections of the soul to him; while the soul continues in that frame, it
cannot be drawn to sin, discomfort, and despair. The honors pleasures and
profits that are got by base engagements to the humors of men, what are these
to Christ? when the soul is rightly possessed of Christ and of his excellency,
It disdaines that any thing should come in competition with him.

Again, It stands firm against all discouragements whatsoever: for, it sets
Christ against all, who is the chief of ten thousand. The soul in this case
will set Christ against the anger and wrath of God, against Satan and all our
spiritual enemies. Christ is the Angel of the covenant: Satan is a Lion, a
roaring Lion: Christ the Lion of the tribe of Juda: Satan a Serpent, a Dragon:
But Christ the true Brazen Serpent, the very looking upon whom will take away
all the stings and fiery darts of Satan whatsoever: wherefore it is said, I
John. 5. that Faith is that that overcommeth the world. How does Faith overcome
the world? Because it overcomes all things in the world, as on the right hand
pleasures and profits and honors, and on the left hand threatenings, pains,
losses and disgraces, by setting Christ against all.

Again, We must labor to weane our hearts from other things.
if we would have a right judgment Let us labor to weane our affections as
much as may be from other things. Fleshly hearts that have run so deeply
into the world and vanities of this present life, It is in a sort an
extraordinary task for them to be drawn away, and pulled from the world (as a
child from a full breast) which they have sucked so long. Now for sweet
affections that are tender, it is an excellent advantage they have to consider
betimes that there is that in Religion and in the Gospel which is worth their
best and prime affections, the flower and marrow of them, Tim. 3. 15.
let them begin with young Timothy, Daniell and Joseph to love Christ from
their childhood. The danger of delaying to seek Christ late in our old age.
It is a desperate folly on the other hand to put off the regard of good things
till after when we shall be less fit, when the understanding will be darkened,
and the affections blunted, when we shall not have that edge, nature being
decayed and the world having taken such possession of the soul, that we shall
not value this excellency. Therefore let us begin betimes to make up the
marriage between Christ and the soul, no time indeed is too late, but it were
to be wished that those that are young would be thus wise for their souls
betimes.

Besides if we would highly value Christ, To value Christ we must beg of God a
spirit to judge aright of our corruptions.
(beg of God a spirit that we may judge aright of our corruptions,) for, In
what measure we can discern the height, and breadth, and depth of our corrupt
nature, In that measure shall we judge of the height, and breadth, and depth of
the excellency of Christ. The sweetest souls are the most humble souls, those
that love Christ most, are those that have been stung most with the sense of
their sins, Romans 5.
where sin most abounds in the sense and feeling of it, grace much more
abounds in the sense and feeling of that. Did ever soul love Christ more then
that woeman that had so many Devils cast out of her? Luk 7.
And, Paul that had such great sins forgiven. Does any man so love his
creditor as he that has much debt forgiven him? It is our Savior Christ's own
reason, therefore these two go always with the true Church. Two attendants of
the true Church.
1. The true knowledge of the corruption of nature, and misery by reason of it.
And 2. The true sense and feeling of it, with true and hearty sorrow for it,
etc. In Popery they slight Original sin, Why sin is so ^l^ghted in Popery.
that mother breeding sin, Actual sins be venial, and many sins no sins.
And therefore they esteem so slightly of Christ, that they join Saints, the
Pope, Works and Satisfaction with him, because they know not the depth of the
malady, how black sin is, what a cursed estate we are in by nature: they
have slight, shallow and weak conceits of sin, therefore they have
answerable weak, and shallow conceits of Christ and of his Righteousness and
excellency. Therefore the conviction of our sins goes before the conviction
of righteousness in Christ, (as it is said, Ioh. 16.) The Holy Ghost shall
convince the world of sin and then of righteousness: for except the soul be
convinced of sin and of ill in it self, it will never be truly convinced
of good and of righteousness in Christ.

The Passover was always eaten with sour herbs, Why the Passover was eaten
with sour herbs.
because it should ad a relish to the feast. So Christ the true Passover we
never relish truly without sower herbs, the consideration of sin with the
desert of it. Christ savours otherwise to a man humbled for his sins, then he
does to another man not touched therewith: otherwise to a poor man then he
does to a rich: otherwise to a man that the world goes not well on his side,
then to a prosperous man. One savoury discourse of Christ relisheth more to an
afflicted soul, the seven discourses with such as are drunk with prosperity,
not having a brain strong enough to conceive, nor an appetite to relish
heavenly things.

Therefore why do we murmr at the cross, That it is our great ^^lly to
murmr at the cross which recovers our spiritual taste and r^llish.
when all is to recover our spiritual taste and relish? Solomon had lost his
taste and relish of Christ, he never made his song of songs when he was in his
Idolatrous way, nor was so in love with Christ and his excellencies when he
doted so much upon his wives: no, but when he had recovered his spirits taste
and relish of heavenly things once, then made he the Book of the Preacher.
When he had run through variety of things, and saw all to be nothing but
vexation of spirit, and besides that, vanity: then he passes his verdict upon
all things, that they were vanity. So it is with us, we can hardly prize Christ
without some afflictions, some cross or other: therefore here the Church is
feign to endure a spiritual desertion, to set an edge upon her affections? Now
when she is thus in her disertions, Christ is white and ruddie, the chief of
ten thousand.

We* Want makes us value things the more.
value more, and set a higher prize on things in the want of them (such is our
corruption) then in the enjoying of them. And if God remember us not with
affliction, then let us afflict, humble and judge our selves: enter into our
own souls to view how we stand affected to Christ, to Heaven, and to heavenly
things: how do I relish and esteem them? if (...) have lost my esteem and
valuing, where have I lost it, consider in what sin, in what pleasure, in
what company J lost it; and converse no more with such as dull our affections
to heavenly things.

To esteem Christ highly using our infirmities to this and looking upon them.
Isa. 64. 6.
Let us make use likewise of our infirmities and sins to this purpose, to set
an high prize on the excellencies of Christ, we carry about us always
infirmities and corruptions, what use shall we make of them? not to trust to
our own righteousness, which is as a defiled cloth: But fly to Christ's
Righteousness, which is the Righteousness of God-man, all being as dung and
dross in regard of that: Often think with thy self what am I, a poor
sinful creature, but I have a Righteousness in Christ that answers all, I am
weak in my self, but Christ is strong, and I am strong in him. J am foolish
in my self, but I am wise in him, what I want in my self, I have in him: he
is mine, and his Righteousness is mine, which is the Righteousness of
God-man, being clothed with this I stand safe, against Conscience, Hell, wrath
and whatsoever. Though I have daily experience of my sins, yet there is more
Righteousness in Christ who is mine, and who is the chief of ten thousand,
then there is sin in me. When thus we shall know Christ, then we shall know
him to purpose.

The end of the fifteenth Sermon.
THE SIXTEENTH SERMON. SER. XVI.

CANT. V. X, XI, XII, XIII. My Beloved is white and ruddie the chiefest among
ten thousand.

His head is as fine gold, his locks are bushie and black as a raven.

His eyes are as the eyes of doves, by the rivers of waters, washed with milk
and fitly set, etc.


HEnce likewise we may answersome doubts that may arise, Object.
as why the death of one man ( Christ) should be of value for satisfaction for
the sins of the whole world? How one man's satisfaction shall satisfy for the
sin^ of all.
how can this be? O But what kind of man was he? Answ.
the chief among ten thousand, especially considering that his excellency
arises from the grace of his Personal Union of God and Man. The first Adam
tainted thousands, and would have tainted a world of men more if there had
been more, but he was mere man that did this, and shall not Christ God and
Man the second Adam advance the world, and ten thousand worlds if there had
been more, he is chief among ten thousand.

His head is as most fine gold, his locks are bushie and black as a raven,
etc.

1. Positively, He is white and ruddie. 2. Comparatively, He is the chiefest
of ten thousand.

The Church does not think it sufficient in general to set out Christ thus,
but she descends into a particular description of him by all the parts of a
body that are conspicuous. First in general observe hence, Love is ever
industious to set out the praises of the beloved.
That it is the nature of love upon all occasions to reflect upon the thing
loved. As the Church here, from things that are excellent in the world,
borrowes phrases and comparisons to set out the excellency of Christ, exalting
him above any other thing. Whatsoever the soul of a Christian sees in Heaven
or Earth, it takes occasion thence to think of Christ.

Again, The diverse relations God takes upon him shows the beams of his
excellency in the creatures.
In general observe from hence, seeing the Church fetches comparison from
doves eyes, from the body of a man and other things, That there are some beams
of excellency in every creature. There is somewhat of God in every creature,
this makes the meditation of the creature to be useful, there is none, even
the meanest but it has a being, and thereby in a sort sets out the being of
God. Why does God style himself a Shield, a Rock, a Buckler, a Shadow, and
the like. But to show that there is something of him in these, and therefore to
teach us to rise from them to him, in whom all those excellencies that are
scattered in them are united.

In innocence we knew God, and in him we had knowledge of the creature, but now
we are feign to help our selves from the knowledge of the creature to rise to
the knowledge of God.

His head is as fine gold.
A little in general, That nothing can dishearten the Church from commending
Christ.
see the boldness and largeness of the Churches affections, who though she
had been ill entreated by the Watchmen and others, yet is she not disheartened
for all this? no, she goes on and sets out particular commendations of her
Beloved. Where love has any strength, no water can quench it. You see the
Church here found but cold intertainement from the Watchmen and others that
should have been better.

Nay, Her inward desertions discourage her not.
She was in desertion, yet she was not discouraged, nay not from the desertion
that Christ left her in; but she seeks after him whom her soul loved. Oh,
this is the sign of a true sanctified soul touched from Heaven, never to give
over seeking of Christ, nor setting out his praises, no though it thinks it
self not beloved of Christ. Ask such ones do you love God, his Children, and
his Word? Oh you shall have them eloquent, no words are enough to set out their
affections.

And this is one reason, Reason of the first loves ^agernesse.
which we may note by the way, why God plants in his children, at their first
conversion, a sweet love, which we call, the first love, that when desertions
come they may call to mind what they felt from Christ, and what they bore to
him; and thereupon the Church concludes, Hos. ^.
Hose. 2. I will return to my first love, for then was I better then now. The
Church here from what does she commend her Beloved? but from some what that
was left in her soul, some inward taste of the love of Christ in her, she
called to mind how it was with her before in the former part of this, and in
the latter end of the former chapter, what an excellent estate she had been
in, this helped her to recover her self.

Now you may say, Why the Church is so exact in particularising her Beloved.
Why is she so exact in reckoning up so many particulars of her Beloved, his
Head, Locks, Eyes, Lips, and such like?

Because a large heart has unsatisfied affections.
It is from largeness of affection. A large heart has always large
expressions, when we are barren in expressions toward Christ, and of good
things, whence comes this but Because Christ has not one but many excellencies
in him.
therefore she had suitable expressions.

And then she is thus particular, because Christ has not one but many
excellencies; every thing in him is excellent: inward and outward, as his head,
etc. Beauty whering it consists.
For indeed beauty consists not in sweetness of color only, but in affinity
and proportion of all parts. Now there is all sweet proportion in Christ, so it
should be with Christians; they should not have one excellency, but many: those
that receive Grace for Grace from Christ: Ioh. 1.
have not only Head, Eyes, Hands, and Feet good; but all lovely, Grace for
Grace, answerable to the variety of Graces in Jesus Christ, In whom all things
jointly, and everything severally are lovely.

Then she shows her particular care and Because she had seriously and
exact^y studied Christ to purpose.
to be exact in this knowledge of Christ, to rip him up and anotomize him thus
from Head to foot, it argues she had studied Christ well ere she could
attain this excellency: so it should be the study and care of every
Christian, to study the excellencies of Christ, not only in the gross, to say
as much as you have in the Creed; he was borne for us of the Virgin Mary, was
crucified, dead and buried, etc. which every child can say, but to be able to
particularize the high perfections and excellencies of Christ, as the Church
here, to study his Nature, Offices, the State he was in, and how he carried
himself in his humiliation and exaltation: what good we have by both states,
Redemption by his abasement; application of it by his advancement. What he did
for us on Earth, what he does in Heaven: what in Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, and in the glory to come. Study every thing and warm the heart
with the meditation of them.

This particular spreading and laying open the excellencies of Christ is a
thing worthy of a Christian. That al humane eloquence comes short of the
excellencies of Christ.
We make slight work of Religion, we can be particular and eloquent enough in
other things, but in that wherein all eloquence is too little; how barren are
we, how shamefaced to speak of Christ and his excellencies in base company, as
if it were a dishonor. Let us therefore learn this from the Church here, to
be much in thoughts and meditations of the excellencies of Christ, and so our
expressions will be answerable to our meditations. So the holy Fathers that
were godly (till another kind of Divinity came into the world of Querkes and
subtilties) there was none of them but was excellent this way. Paul admirable,
accounting all dung and dross in comparison of Christ. In speaking of him when
he begins, he goes on from one thing to another, as if he were ravished; and
knew not how nor where to end.

The soul has sights of Christ that God shows to it, That the soul has
peculiar sights of its own.
and which the soul presents to it self by the help of the Spirit. The
sights that God in this kind shows, are to those in affliction especially, as
Daniell and Isay saw Christ in his glory in a vision, so Ezechiell had a vision
and John, Rev. 1. where Christ was presented to him gloriously. So there is a
glorious description of Christ present to the Church^ Rev. 4. 5.

And as there are sights let down from God into the soul, Sights of ^aith
which the soul frames of Christ.
so there are sights that the soul frames of Christ, such as the Church here
conceives of him by faith: Thus Moses saw him before he was incarnate, John 8.
and Abraham saw his day and rejoiced: so should we now have spiritual sights,
Ideas of Christ framed to our souls, this is to bestow our souls as we should
do. So much for general, now we come to some particulars. His Head is as fine
gold, his locke^ are bushie and black as a raven.

His Head is as fine gold.
He begins to set out the excellency of the chief part the Head. The Head of
Christ is God, as it is 1 Cor. 11. 3. He is above all, and God only is above
him. All is yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. ^2, 23.
but that is not so much intended here, as to show Christ's head-ship over the
Church as God and Man, his head is as fine gold, that is, his government and
head-ship is a most sweet and golden government.

Daniel. 2. That a head of gold sets ^orth Christ's government.
You have an image of the Monarchies, the first whereof had a golden head,
which was the Chaldean, the best Monarchy is set out by the best metal gold,
Simile.
so Christ the head of the Church is a precious head, a head of Gold.

A Head has an eminency above all others, an influence and motion above all
other parts, it is the seat of the senses, so this golden head is more eminent
then all, governes the whole Church and has influence into all; in him we
live, Acts. 17.
and move, and have our being.

Why is Christ as King thus resembled to an head of gold? Quest.


Because Gold is the chief, Why Christ is set out by an head of gold.
the most precious, Answ.
durable metal of all others. Christ is a King for ever and has an
everlasting government. Gold is also the most pliable metal, you may beat it
out to leaves more then any other metal whatsoever. Christ is all gold
indeed, his love has beat himself out as low as may be, all for our good.
What abasement like to Christ's. That which is most precious is most
communicating, as the Sun a glorious creature, what does so much good as it?
so Christ as he is the most excellent of all, the chief of ten thousand, so is
he also the most communicative, what good to the good that Christ did, he was
beaten out of love to mankind to lowest abasement for us, though this be not
mainely aimed at here, yet (by the way) speaking of gold, we may present to our
selves such comfortable meditations.

Well then is Christ such an excellent head, Use. 1.
a golden head, That there is no golden head o^ the Church but Christ.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom to govern his Church, what need
we then go to that triple crown, having such a golden head, the Apostacy of
the Church has found out another golden head, is not Christ precious enough.
Let us take heed of leaving the head Christ, as it is Col. 2. 19. It is a
damnable thing to forsake him. Let the Apostaticall Church alone with her
Antichrist.

Again, if Christ be a golden head, We must be suitable to Christ our head.
let us Simile.
even to the snuffers, to show that in the Church every thing is excellent. The
Tabernacle was gold most of it, though it was covered with Badgers-skins. The
Church indeed has a poor covering as of Badgers-skins, not gilded as
hypocrites, but it is precious within; Again, Christ as he is gold, so he is
fine gold, whole gold, he has not only the crown on him, but his head is
gold it self. Other Kings their crowns are of gold, but their heads are not
so: but there is such a precious treasure of wisdom in him that his head is
gold; so let the Church and every Christian labor, not to be guilt but gold,
to be thoroughly good, to have the inside as good as the outside, the heart as
good as the conversation, the Church is glorious within, Psalm. 45. Beloved, Is
Christ an excellent golden head and shall he have a base body? Is he fit to be
united to a golden head that is a common drunkard, a swearer, that is a beast
in his life and conversation, is this suitable?

To know that all our excellencies come from a golden head. Rev. 4. 10.
Is our head so golden, and whatsoever excellency we have is it from our head,
therefore as the Church in the Revelation, let us cast all our crowns at his
feet. Have we crowns of gold, any thing that is excellent within, any grace,
any comfort, let us lay it down at his feet, for all is from him. Natural men
have golden images of their own, Israel would have golden calves,
Nebuchadnezzar sets up a golden image, and all must worship it, so in the
declining times of the Church, they framed golden images, that is, a golden
whorish religion, gilded, and painted, framed by their own brain, whereunto
all must stoop. But the true gold is that we must respect and submit our
selves unto and admire, others are but golden dreams and images (as
Nebuchadnezzars was) Christ's head alone is of fine gold:

All must be fine gold that comes from this head, his word is gold, sometimes
purged in the fire: Psalm. 19. 10*
his ordinances gold, in the scripture phrase, the city, the new Jerusalem
which signifies the state of the Church in this world, when it shall be refined
to the utmost, all is of gold, the walls of precious stones, the gates of
pearl, Rev. 21. 21.
and the pavement of the streets of pure gold, to show the excellency of
reformation, which golden times are yet to come, in the mean time let us go
on and wait for them. Rev* 21*


His locks are bushie and black as a raven.

I think this is but complementall to fill up the other, it is nothing but a
commendation of his freshness, a foil to beauty, therefore not particularly
to be stood upon.

His eyes are as doves eyes by the rivers of waters, etc.

His eyes are as doves eyes, and such eyes as are by the rivers of waters,
where they are cleansed and washed with milk that they may be the clearer, and
fitly set, neither gogle eyes, nor sunk into the head, but fitly set, as a
jewel in a ring, neither too much in, nor too much out, to set out the
comeliness of this part the eye which is the glory of the face.

Why is Christ said to have the eyes of doves? Quest.


The dove has many enemies especially the white dove is a fair mark for the
birds of prey, Answ.
therefore God has given that creature a quick sight, that she might discern
her enemies, thus the Scripture helps us to conceive of the quickness of
Christ's eye, Rev. 5. 6. there are seven horns and seven eyes which are the
seven spirits of God, here Christ the lamb has seven eyes and seven horns:
what be these? Christ has not only horns of power as the enemies have,
horns of violence, he has horn against horn; but seven eyes, that is, a
quick sight to see all the danger the Church is in, and seven eyes; seven is a
word of perfection, that is, he has many eyes, an accurate sight, he has not
only an eye of providence over the whole world, but an eye of grace and
favor, lively, and lovely in regard of his Church. All things are naked and
open before his eyes, as it is, Heb. 4. he can see through us, he knows our
very hearts and raines, which he must do ex Officio, because he must be our
judge. He that is judge of all had need to have eyes that will pierce through
all. It had need be a quick eye that must judge of the heart and affections:
but what may we learn hence, That we have a Savior that has doves eyes, that
is, clear eyes able to discern.

Take it as a point first, Use. 1.
of all comfort to the Church, All comfort to the Church. Ioh 22.
that when we have any imputation lies upon us, that we are thus and thus,
Christ has quick eyes he knows our hearts, thou know (says Peter) Lord
that I love thee, in all false imputations rest in the eye sight of Christ, he
knows it is otherwise with us.

Then again in all abasement know, Use. 2.
that there is an eye that sees all, It is both comfort and terror.
he sees with his eye and pitties with his heart, as he has a quick eye, so
he has a tender heart, though he seems to sleep and to wink, it is but that
we may wake him with our prayers, which when we have done we shall see that
Christ has seen all this while, and that the violence the enemies of God have
offered to his Church the Spouse has been in his sight, and that they shall
know at length to their cost.

Likewise it is a point of terror to all hypocrites and others that think to
blindfold Christ again. Can they blindfold him in Heaven that has this sharp
eye? Noe he sees all their courses and projects what they are and what they
tend to, and as he sees them so he will spread them all open ere long.

And as it is a point of comfort and terror, Use. 3.
So it is a point of instruction to us all, Instruction to us all.
that we having to deal with a judge that sees all, to worship Christ in
spirit. If we had knowledge that such an eye of God is fixed upon us in all
places, in all our affections and actions, would we give liberty to base and
filthy thoughts, to cruel designs, and to treacherous aims and intents, to
hatch a hell (as it were) in our hearts, and to carry a fair show outwardly?
it could not be* Men are not afraid of their thoughts, affections, desires,
and inward delights of their soul; because there is no eye of justice upon
them; but if they did consider that the alseeing God did observe these inward
evils, and would call them to account one day for them, then they would be
as well afraid to think ill as to do ill.

His cheeks are as beds of spices, and as sweet flowers.

Cheeks are the grace of the face, they are used here to deno^e the presence
of Christ, which is sweet as spices and flowers; not only his presence is
glorious in Heaven, when we shall see that goodly person of Christ that became
man for us, that transforming sight that shall make us like himself, but the
spiritual presence of Christ in his ordinances which we are capable of here,
this is as spices and flowers.

But you will say, Object.
Cheeks, face, and presence presents colors to the eye, and not smells, as
spices and flowers which are the peculiar ob^ect of another sense?

Oh but Christ is the object of all the senses. Answ.
Beloved, he is not only beauty to the eye, but sweetness to the smell, and
to the taste; therefore faith has the name of all the senses, to see, hear,
taste, and smell, and does all, because it carries us to Christ, that is in
stead of all to us, but the point is,

That the manifestation of Christ to his Church and children by his Spirit in
any of his ordinances, Observe.
is a sweet man^festation, and delectable as spices and flowers. as it is, Cant
1. 3. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointment
powered out, therefore the Virgins love thee. The very name of Christ when he is
known and laid open by the ministry is a precious ointment, and the Virgins,
that is all chaste souls follow him by the smell of his ointments, all his
ordinances convay a sweetness to the soul; That all Christ's ordinances are
sweet and lovely, and whatsoever proceed* from them.
his sacraments are sweet, his word sweet, the communion of Saints sweet. The
presence of the ^unnel you know is known in the spring time, by the freshne^^e
of all things, which put forth the life, Simile.
and little livelines they have in them, some in blossoming, and some in
flowers, that which lay (as it were) dead in winter, it comes out when the
sun draws near: so when Christ comes and shows his presence and face to
the soul, he refreshes and delights it.

Hence we see they are enemies to Christ and to the souls of Gods people, that
hinder the manifestation of Christ, whereby his face might be seen, and his
lovely cheeks discerned? those that hate and undermine the ordinances of God,
they hinder the comforts of their own souls.

And they are enemies to Christ, for when has Christ glory but when the
Virgins follow him in the sent of his sweet ointment^, when the soul in the
sense of his sweetness follows him and cleave^ to him with joy, love, and
delight, this makes Christ Christ, and sets him up in the heart above all
others. This is the proper work of the ordinances. Those therefore that are
enemies to the ordinances of Christ are enemies to the souls of Gods people,
and to the glory and honor of Christ himself.

Thus far we may go safely upon comparison of this with other Scriptures.

The end of the sixteenth Sermon.
THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON. SER. XVIII

CANT. V. XIII. His lips are like lillies dropping sweet smelling mirrh, his
hands are as gold rings set with Berill, his belly is as bright Ivory overlaid
with Saphirs, his legs, etc.
In speaking of these particulars we are to be very wary, for we have not that
foundation as we have in other generals: for no doubt but the Spirit of God
here did more intend to set out the large affection that the Church had to
Christ, then to insinuate any great particularity in every one of these,
therefore let us only cull out, and take those things that are of more easy
explication.

His lips are as lillies dropping down sweet mirrh.

That is, his doctrine is as sweet as the lillies, and sound as the mirrh,
keeping from purrifaction, it being the nature of mirrh as it is sound its
self so to make other things sound. In like manner the speech of Christ makes
the soul sound that imbraceth it. What was ever more sweet then the truth of
Christ, Luke 4. 20.
when he spoke himself, they all hung upon his lips (as the Phrase is in the
Gospel) as a man hangs upon the lips of another whom he desires and delights
to hear speak, and they marvelled at the gracious words that came out of his
lips, Psalm. 45. Grace was in his lips, all was sweet that came from him, for it
came from the excellency of his Spirit, his words were died in these affections
of his heart. In the learned language, the same word signifies speech and
reason, to intimate that speech is but the current of reason from the heart the
seat of reason, therefore Christ's speeches were sweet, because his heart was
sweet, Mat. 12. 34, 35.
full of all love, grace, merc^, and goodness, his heart was a treasure, his
lips must needs then be sweet. Beloved therefore let us hence take a trial of
ourselves what our condition is, whether the words that come from Christ when
he speaks in his ministry to us be sweet or not.

The word (to ^^me kind of men) is like the Northe^n air which parcheth and
c^tteth, 1 King. 21.
Ahab could not endure the breath of Elias, Mark. 6. 16.
nor Heredias the breath of John Baptist, Acts. 2. 22.
nor the Pharisees the breath of Steeven and Paul. So too many now a days
cannot endure the breath of divine truth when it cuts and pierces. These
words are arrows that stick, if they stick not savingly, they stick to
killing, if we cannot endure Christ's breath we are not his Spouse nor have any
communion with him.

His lips are like lillies dropping sweet mirrh, etc.

This is one excellency of Christ and of his truth, that it preserves the soul
in a pure estate, it is pure it self and so it preserves the soul, mirrh is a
liqour that keeps from putrefaction, there is nothing that keeps the soul
but the word that indures for ever, whereas on the other side error is of a
putrefying nature, corrupting and defiling the soul.

His hands are as gold rings set with Berill, etc.

Hands are the instruments of actions, Christ's actions are precious, whatsoever
he does to the Church, nay even when he does use evil men to afflict and
exercise the Church, he has a hand there, a golden, a precious hand, in the
evil hand of wicked men God does all things by Christ, That all Christ's actions
whatsoever are precious.
he is as it were Gods hand which all things pass through. Heb. 1.
Joseph was the second man of Egypt through whose hands all things came to the
rest, Joh 5. 22.
so all things comes through Christ's hands to us, and whatsoever is his handy
work is good, even as it is said in the days of his flesh, he did all things
well, so still in the Church all his workmanship is exceeding well, though we
cannot see the excellency of it, it is all well both in the government of the
Church and his workmanship in our hearts, the new creature.

His Belly is as bright Ivory overlaid, etc.

His Belly that is his inward parts, In the hebrew it is used for the inward
affections, they are as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires, that is they are
pure, all the inside of Christ, all his affections that he bears are wondrous
good, his love, his desires, his joys, his hatred, all pure, like pure water
in a crystal glass, it may be stirred sometimes but still it is clear, there
are no dregs at the bottom, because there was no taint of sin in him.

His legs are as pillars of marble set on sockets of fine gold, etc.

That is, All christ's ways are constant etc firm.
all his passages and ways are constant and firm even as pillars of marble,
Heb. 13. 8.
his children are so likewise as far as they are endued with his Spirit.
Christ is yesterday, to day and the same for ever. In regard of his enemies,
Rev. 1. He is set out in another manner of similitude, as having legs of
brass to trample them all in pieces. But in respect of his constant truth and
ways of goodness to his Church his legs are as pillars of marble.

His Countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.

Lebanon was a goodly forest lying on the north side of Judea, wherein were
excellent plants of all kinds, especially Cedars. Christ his countenance is as
Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars, that is his presence is goodly, stately and
majesticall, so it is and will be when he shows himself indeed for the
vindicating of his Church, then the enemies thereof shall know that his
presence is as Lebanon, and excellent as the Cedars.

The Children of God are like to Cedars too, In what regard Christians are like
unto Cedars.
for they are Christ mystical. Other men are as shrubs to them, men of no
value, but they are Cedars, and grow as Cedars in Lebanon, from perfection to
perfection, bearing most fruit in their age. Wicked men sometimes are Cedars too
and are said to grow and flourish as the Cedars in Lebanon: How wicked men are
said also to be Cedars.
But look a while and you shall see their place no more, Psalm 37.
they have no good root, no good foundation, A Christian is a Cedar set in
Christ the chief Cedar, he is a plant that grows in him, he has an eternal
root and therefore he flourishes eternally.

His mouth is most sweet, he is altogether lovely. That the words of Christ
wher^by ^e manifests fatherly affection to us is of all things most sweet.


His mouth is most sweet, she doubles this commendation, she had said before
his lips are as Lillies dropping sweet mirrh, here she says again of his
mouth, it is most sweet, to show that that is the chief lovely thing in
Christ, the repetition argues the seriousness of the Churches affection to
Christ and of the excellency of that part, the maine lovely thing is that which
comes from his heart by his words and his lips, as indeed the most excellent
thing that we can think of is the expression of the heart of God in Christ,
and of Christ's love to us, His mouth is most sweet. And indeed the best
discovery of a true affection to Christ, and of a true estate in grace, is from
our affection to the word of Christ. Wheresoever there is interest into Christ,
there is a high respect to the word, my sheep hear my voice, John. 10. and
you know what Peter says, John. 6. Many of Christ's hearers and followers
forsook him (upon some hard speeches, as they thought that came from him)
says Christ to Peter, Will ye also leave me, Peter answered again, Whether
Lord shall we go, Ioh. 6. 68.
thou have the words of eternal life. The Apostles that had the Spirit of God
perceived an incredible gratiousnesse to sit on his lips, and therefore they
hung upon his lips, Whether shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life.
If we leave his speech we leave our comfort, we leave our life.

As a comment hereupon see Psalm. 19. Where we have a high commendation of Gods
excellency, first from the book of nature the works of God, the Heavens
declare the glory of God, then from the word of God, and herein the Psalmist is
wondrous large. The law of the Lord is perfect coverting the soul, the
testimonies of the Lord are sure making wise the simple, the statutes of the
Lord are right and rejoice the heart, the commandments of the Lord are sure,
and enlighten the eyes more to be desired then gold, yea then fine gold,
sweeter also then the honey or the honey comb.

But mark the order, Quest.
when is the word of God precious to us as gold When the word of God is
precious to us as gold
sweeter then the honey or the honey comb, but when the former commendation
takes place, Answ.
where the word is perfect converting the soul, and where it is sure, making
wise the simple, and where the fear of the Lord is clean, etc. There it is
more to be desired then fine gold, and sweeter then the honey comb. So the
Church here finding first of all the word to be a converting word, and giving
understanding to the simple, she cannot but speak of the sweetness of the
word of Christ, That our state in grace to the word may be discerned by our
relish to the word.
his lips are as Lillies dropping sweet smelling myrrh, his mouth is most
sweet. Thus a man may know his estate in grace by his relish of the word.

There is a divine and a heavenly relish in the word of God, as for instance
take the doctrine of his providence, Ron^. 2^. 8.
That all things shall work together for the best to them that love God. What
a sweet word is this, a whole kingdom is not worth this promise: that
whatsoever befalls a Christian in this world, there is an overruling
providence to sway all to good, to help forward his eternal good.

That Christ will be present with us in all conditions, Mat. 28.
what a sweet word and promise is this, Luke 11. 13.
That he will give his holy Spirit if we beg it, that he will not fail us nor
forsake us. That if we confess our sins and lay them open, 1 John 1. 9.
he is merciful to forgive them. That if our sins were as red as scarlet,
they shall all be white as woole. Isa. 1.
What kind of incredible sweetness is in these to a heart that is prepared
for these comforts, the doctrine of Reconciliation, of Adoption, of Glory to
come, of the offices of Christ and such like, how sweet are they, they relish
wondrously to a sanctified soul.

Let us therefore discern of our estate in grace by this, Exhortation to try
our ^^ate in grace by our relish of divine truths.
how do we relish divine truths? are they connaturall and suitable to us? do
we love them more then our appointed food? are they dearer unto us then
thousands of gold and silver? do we like them above all other truths
whatsoever? Psalm. 119. 127.
Every truth in its rank is lovely and is a beam of God, Psalm. 119. 72.
For truth is of God wheresoever we sinde it, but what are other truths to this
heavenly soul saving-truth, this Gospell-truth that is from Christ, his mouth
is most sweet.

In our nature there is a contrary disposition and Antipathy to divine truth.
That there is in our nature an Antipat^y to divine tru^^.
We love the Law better then the Gospel, and any truth better then the Law. We
love a story, any trisling baubling thing concerning our ordinary callings,
better then divine truth: In divine truth as things are more spiritual, So the
more remute they are naturally from our love and liking. Evangelicall truths
will not down with a natural heart, such an one had rather here a quaint
point of some vice or virtue finely stood upon then any thing in Christ,
because he was never truly convinced of his corrupt and miserable estate by
nature, but when the grace of God has altered him, and his eyes are open to
see his misery, then of all truths the truth of Christ savours best, those
truths that come out of the mouth of Christ and out of the ministry concerning
Christ they are most sweet of all. Oh how sweet are those words in the
Gospel to the poor man: thy sins are forgiven thee, do you think they
went not to his heart. So to the woman, Luke 7. her many sins are forgiven
her, for she loved much, Oh they were words that went to her soul. And to the
thief on the cross, Luke 23.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, how do you think those words
affected him. So it is with us if ever we have been abased in the sense of our
sins, O how sweet is a promise of mercy then. Job. ^3. 23.
He that brings it is as one of ten thousand, that comes to declare to man
his righteousness, to lay open the mercy that belongs to a distressed soul,
Romans 10, 15.
Oh the very feet of those that bring these glad tidings are beautiful; When
our blessed Savior after his refurrection spoke to Mary and called her by her
name, after that she had sought him and could not find him (Oh Raboni says
she) the words of Christ they melted her presently. Let Christ once call us by
our names, for he knows us by name, as he knew Moses, Exo. 34.
let him by his Spirit speak to us by name, Jsa. 43. 1.
and own us then we call him Raboni, we own him again, for what is our love
but the reflection of his back again. Therefore (says the Psalmist) Let me
hear the voice of joy and gladness that the bones that thou have broken may
rejoice. Psalm. 51.
Let me hear, that is, I long for thy word to hear it, not the bare
ministerial word, but the word of the Spirit, but the Church rests not here,
but says further,

He is altogether lovely.
Altogether desirable, as if she should say, what should ^ stand upon
particulars, he is altogether from top to toe aimiable, lovely and delectable.

He is altogether lovely.
Lovely to God, That Christ every way considered is altogether lovely.
to us, to the soul; lovely to him that can best judge of loveliness, the
judgment of God I hope will go current with us, and what does God the Father
judge of Christ, This is my beloved Son, he is the Son of Gods love, Colos.
1. 13. (as God cannot but love his own image) He is lovely also as man, for he
was pure and holy, lovely as Mediator by office, for he was anointed by God to
conveigh the Fathers love to us, He must needs be lovely in whom all others are
loved, this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, out of him I am well
pleased with no body. And indeed he was filled with all graces that might make
him lovely, all the treasures of wisdom are in him, and of his fullness we all
receive grace for grace, he is made a storehouse of all that is good for us.

He is lovely to God in whatsoever he did, he carried himself lovely and
pleased his Father in all his doings and sufferings. God loved him especially,
Phil. 2
Because he was obedient even unto the death of the cross, therefore God gave
him a name above all names, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow
both in Heaven and in Earth. As for the Angels they look upon him with
admiration, they attended him, and accounted it an honor to wait upon him, he
is lovely to all above us, and shall he not be lovely to us.

But you will say, was he lovely when he was nailed on the cross, Object.
hung between two thieves, when he wor^ a crown of thorns, was whipped, laid
grovelling on the ground, when he sweat water and blood, what loveliness was in
him when he was laid in his grave.

Oh yes then he was most lovely of all to us, Answ.
By how much the more he was abased for us, this makes him more lovely, that
out of love he would abase himself so low, when greatness and goodness meet
together how goodly is it. That Christ so great a Majesty should have such
bowels of compassion. Majesty alone is not lovely, but awefull and fearful,
but joined with such condescending grace is wondrous aimeable. How lovely a
^ight is it to see so great a person to be so meek and gentle: it was so
beyond comparison lovely in the eyes of the Disciples that they stood and
wondered to see him who was the eternal word of the Father condescend to talk
with a poor Samaritan woman, and what loveliness of carriage was in him to
Peter undeserving after he had denied and forsworn him, yet to restore him to
his former place that he had in his heart, loving him as much as ever he did
before. In a word, what sweetness, gentleness, bowels of meekness, pity
and compassion did he discover to those that were in misery, we cannot insist
upon particulars.

There is a remarkable passage in the story of Alphonsus the King (not very
well liked of some) when he saw a poor man pulling of his beast out of a
ditch he put to his hand to help him, aft^r which as it is recorded his
subjects ever loved him the better, it was a wonderful condescending, and is
it not as wonderful that the King of Heaven and Earth should ^toope so low as
to help us poor worms out of the ditch of hell and damnation, and that when
he has set us in a state of deliverance, he should not leave us there, but
advance us to such a state and condition as is above our admiration, which
neither heart can conceive nor tongue express, is not this wonderful
condescending.

That we may further improove this point, Use. 1.
Is Christ altogether lovely, That Christ is such a Mediator as can quit. ^is
office.
so lovely to us and so beloved of God the Father? Let us then rest upon his
obedience and righteousness, build upon it that God cannot refuse that
righteousness whose subject is altogether lovely. Let us come clothed in the
garments of our elder brother, and then doubt not of acceptance: for it is in
Christ that he loves us, in this well-beloved Son it is that God is
well-pleased with us, if we put on Christ's righteousness, we put on Gods
righteousness, and then how can God hate us, no more then he hates his own
Son, nay he loves us, John 17, 23.
and that with the same love wherewith he loves him, for he loves whole Christ
mystical, head and members. Let this strengthen our Faith, that if Christ be
so altogether lovely in himself and to the Father, then we may comfortably
come before the Father, clothed with the garments of him our elder brother, and
so rest our selves on the acceptance of his Mediation that is so beloved a
Mediator.

Again, Use. 2.
if Christ be so lovely (altogether lovely) then let us labor to be in him, To
labor to be in Christ that so we may be lovely before God.
that so we may be lovely to God, because he is the first aimiable thing in the
world, in whom we are all lovely, all our loveliness is in beloved Christ.

Again, Use. 3.
if Christ be so lovely, To see then how and whereupon to spend our best
affections.
here only we have whereupon to spend the marrow of our best affections. Is it
not pity we should loose so much of our affections as we do upon other
things, Christ is altogether lovely, why should we dote upon other things so
much, and set up Idols in our hearts above Christ, is he altogether lovely, and
shall not he have altogether our lovely affections, especially when we are
commanded under pain of a curse to love the Lord Jesus. Anathema Maranatha to
those that love not Christ. 1Cor. 16. 22.
Let us therefore labor to place all our sweet affections that are to be
exercised upon good, as love, joy, and delight, upon this object, this lovely
deserving object Christ, who is altogether lovely. When we suffer a pure
stream as it were to run through a dirty channel, our affections to run
after the things of the world, which are worse then our selves, we loose our
affections and our selves.

Let therefore the whole stream of our affections be carried unto Christ. The
way not to loose our affections.
Love him and whatsoever is his, for he being altogether lovely, all that comes
from him is lovely, his promises, his directions, his counsels, his children,
his sacraments are all, lovely. Whatsoever has the stamp of Christ upon it,
let us love it, we cannot bestow our hearts better, to loose our selves in the
love of Christ and to forget ourselves and the love of all, yea to hate all in
comparison of him, and to account all dung and dross compared with Christ, is
the only way to find our selves. And indeed we have a better condition in him
then in the world or in our selves: severed from him our condition is vain and
will come to nothing, but that we have in him is admirable and everlasting, we
cannot conceive the happiness which we poor wretches are advanced to in
Christ, and what excellent things abide for us which come from the love of God
to us in Christ, who is so altogether lovely. Therefore let us labor to kindle
in our hearts an affection toward Christ, all that we can, considering that
he is thus lovely.

And let us make an Use of Trial whether he be thus lovely to us, Use. 4.
or no, we may see hence whether we love Christ or no, Whether or no Christ he
thus lovely to us.
We may judge of our love by our esteem. How do we value Christ, what price
does the Church set He is the chief of ten thousand. By our esteem^ of
Christ.
What place then should he have in our hearts? If he be the chief of ten
thousand, let us rather offend ten thousand then offend him. Let us say with
David, Psalm. 73.
whom have I in Heaven but thee, etc. And when the soul can say to Christ or
any that is Christ's (for I speak of him in the latitude of his Truths,
Promises, Sacraments, and Communion with his children) What have I in Heaven
but thee, etc. then it is in a happy condition. If these things have the same
place in our esteem, as they have in respect of their own worth, then we may
say truly without Hypocrisy, He is altogether lovely to us, that we truly
love him.

In the next place, are we ready to suffer for By our sufferings for Christ.
we see the Church here endures any thing for Christ, she was mis-used of the
watchmen, they scorned her, and her veil is taken away, yet notwithstanding
she loves Christ still. Do we stand ready disposed to suffer for Christ, of the
world to be disgraced and censured, and yet are we resolved not to give over,
nay do we love Christ the more, and stick to his truth the faster? Certainly
where the love of Christ is, there is a spirit of Fortitude, as we may see in
the Church here, who is not discouraged from Christ by any means, he is still
the chief of ten thousand, when she was wronged for seeking after him, yet
he was altogether lovely, whereas on the other hand, you have some that for
frowns of greatness, fear of loss, or for hope of rising, will warpe their
conscience and do any thing. Where now is love to Christ and to Religion. He
that loves Christ, loves him the more for his cross, as the Holy Ghost has
recorded of some, that they rejoiced that they were thought worthy to suffer
for Christ. So the more we suffer for him, the more dear he will be to us. For
indeed he does present himself in love and comfort most to those that suffer
for his sake, therefore their love is increased.

Love enlarges the heart and tongue in the praises of Christ
which being enlarged enlarges the tongue also. The Church has never enough
of commending Christ, and of setting out his praise, the tongue is loosed,
because the heart is loosed. Love will alter a man's disposition, as we see in
experience, a man base of nature, Love will make him liberal, he that is
tongue-tied, it will make him eloquent, let a man love Christ, and though
before he could not speak a word in the commendation of Christ, and for a good
cause, yet (I say) if the love of Christ be in him, you shall have him speak
and labor earnestly in the praises of God. This hot affection, this heavenly
fire, will so mould and alter him, that he shall be clean another man, as we
see in the Church here, after that there was kindled a spirit of love in her,
she cannot have done with Christ, when she had spoke what she could, she adds,
he is altogether lovely. Those that cannot speak of Christ, or for Christ with
large hearts in defense of good causes (but are tongue-tied and cold in their
affections) where is their love? put any worldly man to a worldly theme that
he is exercised in, and speaks of daily, he has wit and words at will, but
put him to a theme of piety, you loose him, he is out of his theme, and out
of his element. But it is not so with those that have ever felt the love of God
in Christ, they have large affections, how full is Saint Paul, he cannot speak
of Christ but he is in the height, breadth, length, and depth of the love of God
in Christ, and the knowledge of God above all knowledge: thus we may discern
the truth of our love by the expressions of it here as in the Church.

Again, the Church here is never content True love is never at rest till we
find Christ.
whatsoever she had, nothing contents her, she wanted her beloved, as we see
here, she goes up and down inquis^itive after him till she find him, so it is
with a Christian, if he have lost (by his own fault) his former communion with
Christ, he will not rest nor be satisfied, but searches here and there in the
use of this and that means, he runs through all Gods Ordinances and means
till he find Christ, nothing in the world will content him, neither honor,
riches, place, or friends, till he find that which he once enjoyed, but has
now for a season lost, the comfort, and assurance of Gods love in Christ.

Now if we can sit down with other things and can want Christ and the
assurance of salvation, That contentment without Heavens sweet report of
comfort to the soul is a dangerous condition.
that sweet report of the Spirit, that we are his, and yet be contented well
enough, here is an ill sign, that a man is in an ill condition, the Church was
not so disposed here, she was never quiet nor gives over her inquisition and
speaking of Christ, that by speaking of the object, she might warm her
affections, until at the last she meets with Christ, these and the like signs
there are of the truth of the love of Christ. A sign of true flaming love to
Christ.
But where there is a flaming love of Christ, there is this degree further, a
desire of the appearance of Christ, a desire of his presence. For if Christ be
so lovely in his Ordinances. If we find such sweetness in the Word and
Sacraments, in the communion of Saints, in the motions of the Spirit. What is
the sweetness (think you) which the souls in Heaven enjoy, where they see
Christ face to face, see him as he is, hereupon the Spouse says Let him kiss
me with the kisses of his mouth: Oh that I might live in his presence, this is
the desire of a Christian soul. When the flame of love is kindled in any
strength, Oh that I might see him, and therefore it longs even for death, for
as far as a man is spiritual, he desires to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, as Simeon, when he saw him (though in his abasement) Now I have enough,
let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. The
presence of Christ (though it were but in the womb) When Mary the mother of
Christ came to Elizabeth, it caused the Babe that was in her womb to spring.
Such comfort there is in the presence of Christ (though he be but in the womb)
as it made John to spring. What then shall be his presence in Heaven, how would
it make the heart spring there think you? For that which is most lovely in
Christ is to come. Therefore the Saints that have any degree of grace in the
new Testament, they are set out by this description, they were such as loved
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: how can it be otherwise, if they love
Christ, they love the appearing of Christ, wherein we shall be made lovely, as
he is lovely.

Here we are not altogether lovely, That our many infirmities and sins should
make us lon^ for that time wherein we shall be altogether love^y.
for we have many dregs of sin, many infirmities, and stains, shall we not
then desire that time wherein as he is altogether lovely, so shall we be made a
fit spouse for so glorious a husband.

To conclude this point, To try our affections by the Churches affections.
let us try our affections by the Churches affections in this place, whether
Christ be so lovely to us or not, Isa. 5. 3. it is said there is no beauty in
him, when we shall see him, and he was despised of men, he was so in regard of
his cross, and sufferings to the eye of the world, and of carnal men. H^rod
scorned him, when Pilate sent him to him, made no body of him (as the word in
the Original is) they looked upon the outside of Christ in the flesh when he
was abased. There was no form nor beauty in him (says the Holy Ghost) that is
to the sight of carnal men, but those that had the sight of their sins with
spiritual eyes* they could otherwise judge of Christ. The poor Centurion, saw
an excellency in him, when he said, He was not worthy that he should come under
his roof. The poor thief saw the excellency of Christ upon the cross in
those torments: Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.

So those souls that were enlightened, that had the sight of their misery and
the sight of Gods love in Christ, had a high esteem of Christ in his greatest
abasement. Therefore if we have a mean esteem of the children of God as
contemptible persons, and of the Ordinances of God as mean things, and of the
government of Christ (such as he has left in his word) as base, it is an
argument of a sinful unworthy disposition in such a soul, Christ has never
been effectually by his Spirit, for every thing in him is lovely even the
bitterest thing of all. There is a majesty and excellency in all things of
Christ, the censures of the Church are excellent, when they proceed and issue
forth with judgment, as they should do, to deliver such a man over to Satan,
that he may be saved in the day of the Lord.

Now if the Ordinances of Christ, the Word and Sacraments, and the shutting
sinners out of the Church, if these things be vilified as powerless things, it
shows a degenerate wicked heart not acquainted with the ways of God. If we
have a mean esteem of men that suffer for Christ and stand out for him, if we
account them so and so, shall we think our selves Christians in the mean
time, when Christ is altogether lovely, shall they be unlovely that carry the
image of Christ, can we love him that begets and hate them that are begotten of
him, can we love Christ and hate Christians, it cannot be.

Now that we may get this affection and esteem of Christ, How to get and
esteem of Christ.
that is so lovely. Let us labor to make our sins bitter and loathsome, To
make sin bitter.


What is the reason we set no higher a price of Christ. Quest.


Because we judge not of ourselves, Ans.
as we are indeed, and want spiritual eye salve to see into our selves rightly.

And let us attend upon the me^nes of salvation To attend on the means of
salvation.
to hear the unsearchable riches of Christ: what makes any man lovely to us:
but when we hear of their riches, beauty and good intent to us. In the Word we
are made acquainted with the good intent of Christ toward us, the riches of
mercy in forgiving our sins, and riches of glory prepared for us, the more we
hear of him, of his riches and love to us, the more it will inflame our love
to Christ. Those that live where the Ordinances of Christ are held forth with
life and power, they have more heavenly and enlarged affections then others
have, as the experience of Christians will testify.

To join with such company as highly esteem of Christ.
let us join with company that highly esteem of Christ, and such as are
better then our selves. What deads the affections so much as carnal, worldly
company, who have nothing in them but civility, by converse with them who have
discourse of nothing but the world, if a man have heavenly affections, he shall
quickly dull them, and be in danger to loose them, they may be conversed with
in civil things, but when we would set to be heavenly, and holy minded, let us
converse with those that are of an heavenly bent, as we see here, The daughters
of Jerusalem are won to love Christ? by what? By conversing with the Church,
upon the discourse that the Church makes of his excellencies in particular,
they begin to ask where is Christ, as in the next Chapter, and so are all
brought to the love of Christ.

The end of the seventeenth Sermon.
THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON. SER. XVIII.

CANT. V. XVI. His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely, this is my
Beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. CANT. VI. I, II.
Whither is thy Beloved gone, O thou fairest among women, whither is thy
Beloved turned aside that we may seek him with thee.

My Beloved is gone down, etc.


BY this time the Church has well quit her self in that safe subject,
commending her beloved, first in general, and then in particular; she affirms
(in effect) there was none like him in general, which she after makes good in
all the particulars of her description, now she sums up all with a kind of
superaboundant expression. What shall I say more of him? if that which is said
be not enough, then know farther, he is altogether lovely, there were no end to
go through all his perfections, but look on him wholly, he is altogether
lovely, and therefore deserves my love, so that there is no cause why you
should wonder at the strength of my affections and care to find out this my
Beloved and this my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem. Thus we see how the
pitch of an enlightened soul is bent, it aspires to things suitable to its
self, to Godwards* to union and communion with Christ, to supernatural
objects, nothing here below is worthy the name of its beloved. It fastens not
on earthly base things, but this is my beloved, and this is my friend, this so
excellent a person, this Iedidiah, this beloved son, this judge of all, Lord
of all, this chief of ten thousand, here the Church pitches her affections
which she conceales not as ashamed thereof, but in a kind of triumphing,
boasting of her choice, she concludes all with a kind of resolute assurance,
that the object of this her choice is far beyond all comparison.

This is my Beloved and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

Which is the closing up of her commendations of Christ: This is my Beloved and
this my friend, etc. Which shall only be touched because we had occasion to
speak thereof before. She calls Christ her beloved, howsoever he had withdrawn
himself in regard of the comfort and communion she had with him before, yet he
is her beloved still.

That which is specially to be stood upon is, that the Church here does set out
not only in parcels, but in general her beloved Christ: this is my beloved,
she does as it were boast in her beloved, whence observe:

A Christian soul seems to glory as it were in Christ. Observe.


This is my beloved and this is my friend O ye daughters of Jerusalem: Diverse
ends why the Church thus in general and particular sets forth the excellency
of Christ.
but to unfold more fully this point, there be three or four ends why the
Church thus stands upon the expressing of the excellencies of Christ in
particular and in general.

The one, To show that it is most just that she should love and respect him in
whom there is all this To show how just it is to respect so excellent a person.
both in himself, in regard of his own excellencies so and in relation to us,
in regard of his merits and deserts.

Secondly, To justify her large affections before To justify her strong
affection to the stronger Christians.
For the world thinks, what mean these who are called Christians to haunt the
exercises of religion, to spend so much time in good things, they wonder at it
for want of better information; now the Church here to justify her large
expressions, says, this is my beloved, this is my friend, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem.

And not only to justify, but likewise to glory as you have it, Psalm. 44. ^.
the Church there boasts of God, To boast and glory in God.
I will make my boast of thee all the day long. So that Christians may not
only justify their course of life against enemies, but in some sort boast of
Christ, as Paul often does, and he shows the reason of it, that God hathy made
Christ to us all in all, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, that whosoever glories might glory in the Lord: for is it not a
matter of glorying in the Church when she has such a head and such a husband.
This is my beloved, the wife shines in the beams of her husband, therefore
this yields matter not only of justification but of glory.

To enlarge her own affections.
this is my beloved, To enlarge her own affections and to feed her own love.
For love feeds upon this fuel (as it were) upon expressions and meditations
of the person or thing loved. That love is wages to itself
Love is as it were wages of it self, the pains it takes is gain to it
self, to the Church here it is an argument pleasing, she dilates upon a
copious Theme. I may truly say there is no greater comfort to a Christian, nor
a readier way to enlarge the affections after Christ, then to speak often of the
excelleccies of Christ, to have his tongue as the pen of a ready writer
furnished this way, To aggravate her own shame and unkindnesie in so
sleighting Christ's love.
this is my beloved, etc.

In the fifth place another end of this may be to aggravate her own shame, as
indeed Gods children are much in this argument, that upon their second thoughts
of Christ's worthiness and therewithal reflecting upon their own
unworthiness and unkindnesse they may relish Christ the better. Therefore the
Church here that it might appear to her self for her humiliation how unkind
she had been to shut the door against Christ when he knocked, whereupon he
deservedly did withdraw himself and made her seek him so long sorrowing, I
tell you says she what a kind of beloved he is, thus and thus excellent. How
did the consideration of Gods kindness and love melt David's heart after that
horrible sin in the matter of vriah, and the sweet looks of Christ upon
Peter, that had been so unkind, melted him. So here the Church when she
considered how unkindc she had been to Christ her beloved, so incomparably
excellent above other beloveds, to let him stand at the door, till his locks
were wet with the Dew of the night. The consideration hereof made her ashamed
of her self, what so excellent, so deserving a person as my beloved is to me,
to be used of me so? what indignity is this? Thus to raise up the aggravation
of her unkindnesse, no question but the Church takes this course: for Gods
children are not as untoward worldlings and hypocrites afraid to search and to
understand themselves, the child of God loves to be well read in his own heart
and unworthy ways, therefore he lays all the blame he can upon himself every
way, he knows he loses nothing by this, for there is more mercy in Christ
then there is sin in him, and the more sin abounds in his own feeling, the
more grace shall abound, he knows the mystery of Gods carriage in this kind.
Therefore for this end (amongst the rest) she says, this is my beloved, and
this is my friend, whom I have so unkindly used.

And the last reason why the Church is thus large was, To wind up the
affections of her new beginning Christians.
To draw and wind up the affections of those well meaning Christians that were
comers on, who were inequisitive of the way to Syon. O ye daughters of
Jerusalem, that you may know that there is some cause to seek after Christ
more then you have done before, I tell you what an excellent person my beloved
is, to whet their affections more and more, and we see the success of this
excellent discourse in the beginning of the next Chapter, whether is thy
beloved gone, etc.

These and the like reasons there are of the large expressions of the Church of
the excelencies of Christ, this is my beloved, and this is my friend, Oh ye
daughters of Jerusalem. But we will single out of these reasons for use that
which I think fittest for us to make Use of.

Let us then often think of the excellencies of Christ for this end, to justify
our endeavors and pains we take in the exercises of religion and to justify
Gods people from the false imputations of the world, that they lay upon them,
as if they were negligent in other matters, and were too much busied in
spiritual things. You see how large the Church is in setting out the
excellencies of her beloved, and then she shuts up all (being able to say no
more) justifying our cause, This is my beloved, and this is my friend. Do you
wonder that I seek so much after him then: or wonder you at Christians, when
they take such pains to keep their communion with Christ in a holy walking
with, and depending upon God. These are no wonders, if you consider how
excellent Christ is, what he has done for us, and what he keeps for us in
another world, that he will preserve us to his heavenly kingdom, till he put
us into possession of that glorious condition that he has purchased. Le the
hearts of men dwell upon the consideration of these things, and then you shall
see that Gods children are rather to be blamed that they are no more careful,
watchful, and industrious, then to be taxed that they are so much. Our Savior
Christ said, Mat. 11. 19. Mat. 11. 19.
Wisdom is justified of all her children. If you will make good that you are
children of wisdom, you must be able to justify the wisdom of God every
way, to justify your reading, hearing, your communion of Saints, to justify
all the exercises of Religion from an experimental taste and sweetness of
them, (as the Church does here this is my beloved) What says Joshua, this
choice J have made, do you what you will it matters me not, (...).
but I and my house will serve the Lord. So Paul makes a voluntary profession
of his affection, Romans 1. 2. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
let the Gospel be entertained in the world as it will, and let others think
of me as they will, that I am forward in the preaching of it, I am not ashamed
of it, and good reason he had not to be ashamed, for it is the power of God to
salvation to all that believe, yea the saving power to us, and have not I cause
to stand in the defense of it, and so he says the 2 Timothy 1. 12. 2 Timothy 1. 12
I know whom I have believed, etc. I am not ashamed to suffer bonds for his
sake. Though the world thought him a mean person, J will not be scorned out of
my Faith and Religion by shallow empty persons, that know not what Christ and
Religion means. No, I know wh^m I have believed; he is able to keep that
that I have committed to him against that day. Let us therefore be able to
justify from a judicious apprehension sweet divine truths. You see what
justifications there are of the Church of God, wherefore should the Heathen
say, where is now their God, and Psalm 42. 10. Oh it went to David's heart,
when they said where is now their God, what was become of his God when he was
left in trouble, as the Church here, and what does she answer; does he let it
go with a question: Psalm. 113 3.
No says he our God is in Heaven and has done whatsoever he pleased.

And this justification of Religion, The justificatio religious ind^avours is
with disertion o^ opposite courses.
you may know by this sign, it is with the disertion of all discourses
opposite to Religion whatsoever, he that justifies the truth, he esteems
meanly of other courses and discourses. Therefore in the next verse the Church
vilifies the Idols, our God is in Heaven and does whatsoever he pleases: the
Idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands, they have eyes and see not,
ears and hear not. And the more we justify Christ the more we will be
against Antichrist and his religion, we may know the owning of the one truth
by the vilifying the other. Let us labor therefore to grow to such a
convincing knowledge of Christ, the good things in him, and the ways of God,
as we may be able to stand out against all opposition of the gates of hell
whatsoever.

And to this end proceed in the study of Christ, To grow to know Christ more
and his good things we must grow in admiration of them.
and to a deeper search of him, and of the excellencies and good things in him,
that we may say as Micah 7. Who is a God like to thee, that pardons sins and
iniquities, and as David Psalm 113. Who is a God like our God that humbles
himself to behold the things done here below.

And desire also to this purpose the Spirit of revelation, We must pray for the
Spirit of Revelation.
that which Paul prays for Ephesians. 1. and Cap 3 that we may know that knowledge
that is above all knowledge, the heig^h, depth, and breadth of Gods love in
Christ. So sweet is God in the greatest abasements of his children, that he
leaves such a taste in the soul of a Christian, that from thence he may be
able to say, this is my beloved, when his beloved seems not to care for him.
When the Church seemed to be disrespected and neglected of Christ, yet she
says, This is my Beloved, and this is my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem.

Shall rich men boast of their riches, That if worldly and wicked men boast of
earrhly things, much more ought we of our portion in Christ.
shall men that are in favor, boast of the favor of great persons, shall a
man that has large possessions boast and think himself as good and as great as
his estate is, shall a base minded worldling be able to boast: why boastest
thou thy self Oh mighty man? Psalm. 52. 1.
Nay you shall have malignan^ spirited men, boast of their malignant
destructive power, I can do this and that mischief, shall a man boast of
mischief, that he is able to do mischief? and has not a Christian more cause
to boast in God and in Salvation? Lord shine on me says David, Psalm. 4. 7.
let me enjoy the light of thy countenance, and that shall bring me more joy
then they have, when their corn and wine increases: know this, as he goes on
in the same Psalm, that God accepts the righteous man.

Therefore let us think we have much more cause to boast of God and of Christ
in a spiritual manner, That Christ recon^^led is the best portion.
then the worldling has of the world. Is not God and Christ our portion, and
having Christ, have we not all things with Christ, put case all things be took
from us; if a man have Christ, he is rich though he have nothing else, if he
have all without him, His plenty is (as a Father faith, and as it is in truth)
beggary. But whosoever has Christ may thus rejoice with David, Psalm. 16. 7.
The lot is fallen to me in pleasant places, ye I have a goodly Heritage. Would
we have more then God in Christ, a ring with a Dyamond very precious in it, Now
the Daughters of Jerusalem, hearing this large expression of affection, ask,

CHAP. VI. I.
Whither is thy Beloved gone O thou fairest among women? whither is thy Beloved
turned aside that we may seek him with thee?
Here is another Question, the first which the daughters of Jerusalem ask
is, what is thy beloved, whereupon the Church took occasion to express what
her beloved was, upon her expression closing up all with this general, This is
my Beloved and this is my friend.

Then the second Question is, That a discovery of Christ's excellency must
needs set us a work how to have him.
whither is thy Beloved gone? One question begets another, and indeed if this
question be well satisfied what is Christ above others, this will follow
again, where is he* how shall I get him? how shall I seek him? what is the
reason* this second question is seldom made? VVhither is he gone, how shall I
get Christ? Because the former question, namely, What is Christ? is so seldom
made. For if we did once know what Christ is, we would be sure with the
daughters of Jerusalem to ask whither is he gone, that we may seek him with
thee.

We see here is a growth in the desires of the Daughters of Jerusalem, whence
we learn,

That grace, Observe.
though it be in never so little proportion at the first, That grace begets
grace the flame once kind led will not out but be a burning and growing.
it is growing still.

From the first question, what is thy beloved, here is a second (upon better
information) Whither is thy beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee.
Nothing is less then grace at the first, nothing in the world so little in
proportion The Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a grain of mustard seed, Mat.
13.
that is, the work of grace in the heart, as well as in the preaching of the
Gospel, in the beginning is little. It is true of the work of grace, as well
as of the word of grace, that is like a grain of Mustard Seed at first, what
is thy beloved enquires the Church at first, but when she hears of the
excellency of Christ; then whither is thy beloved gone. Grace begets grace,
there is a connection and knitting together in Religion, good things beget good
things: it is a strange thing in Religion, how great a matter arises of a
little beginning. The woman of Samaria had but a small beginning of grace, and
yet she presently drew many of her neighbors to believe in Christ. So Andrew,
John 1. As soon as he was converted he find^ his brother Simon and tells him
that he had found the Messiah, and so brings him to Christ, and Philip as soon
as he had got a spark of Faith himself, he draws also Nathaniell to come to
Christ. Paul speaks of his bonds, Phil. 1. 13.
how the noise of them was in Caesar's Court, and many believed the very report,
which howsoever it is not a working cause, yet it may be a preparing, inducing,
leading cause to such things from one thing to another, till there follow this
change and full conversion. An error of the Papists, touching the efficacy of
grace in congrui^y.
You see here the daugh^^^s of Jerusalem growing, Therefore let us labor to
be under good means. Some of the Romists and others which are ill affected and
grounded in that point, they think that the efficacy of grace is, as we call
it from the congruity, fitness, and proportion of the means to the heart and
will of man, and thereupon God converts one and not another, because there is a
congruous and fit offering of means to him, when he is fitly disposed, and
another is not fitly disposed, therefore there follows not upon it effectual
calling, so that the virtue of the means offered depends upon sureablenesse
and fitnes in the party to whom the means are offered, and not upon the power
and blessing of God, verily this is plausible, and goes down very roundly with
many weak persons: That the means without a distinct consisting work^ can do
nothing.
but this is a false and a gross error: for unless God by his holy Spirit do
work by the means, no planting and watering will bring any increase and
change the heart and mind, though there were greater means in Christ's time,
when he wrought these miracles then any time before, yet all those could not
convert that froward generation: and it was Moses complaint in the wilderness,
where they had abundance of means: God has not given you a heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear until this day. Deuteronomy. 29. 4
When a man is planted under good means and frequents them, That usualy God
works with the means.
then ordinarily it pleases God by the inward workings of his own powerful
Spirit to work greater matters, and those that keep out of Gods reach, that
will not come into places where they may hear good things, there is no hope of
them, though there be many ill fish in the net, yet there is no hope to catch
them that are without the net. So those that are kept out of all opportunities
and occasions whereby Gods Spirit may work upon them, there is no hope of them.

Let us learn this heavenly wisdom to advantage our selves this way, by
improoving all good opportunities whatsoever whereby we may learn, for God
works by outward means: good company, and good discourse, these breed
excellent thoughts. As therefore we love our souls, take all advantages
wherein the Spirit of God works, we shall find incredible fruit thereof, more
then we would believe, but to come to the Question.

See here first of all in this Question, the blessed success of the Churches
inquiry after Christ in the daughters of Jerusalem; after they heard the large
explications of the excellencies of Christ, especially by the Church, whom they
had a good conceit off, for they call her, the fairest among women.

And seeing likewise the confidence of the Church, That demonstrative
affectionate confident explication of Christ, is never without wondrous
success.
she stands to it, this is my beloved, yea also eagerness in the Church, to
seek after him they would seek him with her, so that where these meet, a
large unfolding of the truth of God, and that by persons that are known to be
good, well accepted and conceited off, and where there is a large demonstration
of real affection, and the things are spoken off with confidence, as knowing
what they say, the word (I say) so managed it is never without wondrous
success.

For in the course of reason, what can I have

Then withal I see not only excellent persons

And to see them carried with a spirit of confidence, when they deliver this
(this is my Beloved) in particular, and then to shut up all in general, This
is my beloved, and this is my friend: I say, when there is grace and life in
the heart, and earnestness with confidence: this together with the explication
of the heavenly excellencies of Christ, and of Religion, it has admirable
success, as here in the Church, the fairest among women, the daughters of
Jerusalem, seeing the Church was so earnest, confident and so large in the
explication of the excellencies of Christ, see how it works, it draws out this
Question with resolution, they join with the Church in seeking Christ. Whither
is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whether is thy beloved turned
aside, that we may seek him with thee? Where by the way observe, as the Church
before doubles it, this is my beloved, and this is my friend: so they answer
with a double question, whether is thy beloved gone, How to be happy
instruments to convert others.
whether is he turned aside, O thou fairest among women, etc. from this
appellation note, If we would be happy instruments to convert others, being
converted our selves, (...) such as the world may think to be good and gratio^s.
labor to be such as the world may think^ to be good and gracious: O thou
fairest among women. Fair in the robes of Christ took out of his wardrop,
all the beauty and ornaments that the Church has, she has from Christ, let us
labor to be such as the world may conceit are good persons. We say of
Physicians, when the patient has a good conceit of them the cure is half
wrought: So the Doctrine is half persuaded, when there is a good conceit of
the speaker.

Again, To be earnest in those things we would enforce upon others.
labor to be earnest: if we would kindle, others, we must be warmed our
selves, if we would make others weep, we must weep our selves, naturalists
could observe this, the Church spoke this with large expressions, indeed more
then can be expressed: let us labor to be deeply affected with what we speak,
and speak with confidence, as if we knew what we spoke, as the Apostle John
does, in the beginning of his Epistle to bring others to be better persuaded of
his doctrine, he affirms that which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, 1. Ioh. 1. 1.
which we have seen with these our eyes, which we have looked upon, and these
hands of ours have handled of the Word of life he delivered to them.

For when we are confident from spiritual experience; it is wonderful how we
shall be instruments of God to gain upon others. So Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 16.
we followed not (says he) deceiveable fables, when we opened unto you the
power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but with our eyes we saw his
Majesty.

Do not think it belongs only to the ministry, there is an art of Conversion
that belongs to every one that is a grown Christian to win others.

VVhither is thy Beloved gone, O thou fairest among women.

The next observation out of the words (because it is the especial) which
works upon the daughters of Jerusalem, is from the large explication of
Christ, observe.


That which most of all stirrs up holy affections to search after Christ, is
the large explications of his excellencies.

Then be in love with the ministry of the Gospel, That we ought to be in love
with the ministry of the word, whereby the excellency of Christ is set forth.
and the communion of Saints, who have their tongues and their hearts taught of
God so speak excellently, their tongues are as refined silver, their hearts
are enriched to increase the communion of Saints. Mark this one excellency of
that excellent ordinance of God in Christ, Pro. 10. 20.
whereof Paul says, Ephesians. 3. To me is committed this excellent office to lay
open the unsearchable riches of Christ, such riches as may draw you to wonder,
such as eye has never seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of
man to conceive, 2 Cor. 5.
and so to draw the affections of people after them.

And because it is the special office of the ministry to lay him open, That
because the special of fice of the ministry is to un^old Christ, therefore
all our discourse should tend this way in some sort.
to hold up the tapistry, to unfold the hidden mysteries of Christ, labor we
therefore to be always speaking somewhat about Christ or tending that way, when
we speak of the Law, let it drive us to Christ, when of Morrall duties, to
teach us to walk^ worthy of Christ. Christ, or somewhat tending to Christ
should be our theme and mark to aim at.

Therefore what shall we judge of those that are hinderers of this glorious
ordinance of Christ in the Gospel, they are enemies of conversion and of the
calling of Gods people, enemies of their comfort: and what shall we think of
those wretched and miserable creatures, that like Caine are vagabonds, who
wander and will not submit themselves to any ordinance meekely, but keep
themselves out of this blessed opportunity of hearing the excellencies of
Christ, which might draw their hearts to him, we are made forever, if Christ
and we be one, if we have all the world without him it is nothing, if we have
nothing in the world but Christ, we are happy. Oh happy then when this match is
made between Christ and the soul, the friends of the Bride and of Christ,
they laying open the uns^archable riches of Christ to the Spouse, draw the
affections, work faith, and so bring the Bride and the Bridegroom together.

Thus far of the Q^estion: now we have the Churches answer to the daughters
of Jerusalem.

My Beloved is gone into his Garden, to the beds of Spices, to feed in the
gardens, and to gather Lillies.

The Question was not for a bare satisfaction, but from a desire the Church had
to seek Christ, whither is thy beloved gone that we may seek him. It was not
a curious question, but a question of inquisition tending to practice, many are
inquisitive, but when they know another man's meaning, it is all they desire:
now I know your meaning will they say, but I mean not to follow your counsel.
The daughters of Jerusalem had a more sincere intention, O thou fairest among
women, whither is thy beloved turned aside* that we may seek him with thee,
whereunto the Church answered,

My Beloved is gone into his Garden to the beds of spices, That there ^ught to
^ee (...) en^^y in spiritual ^hin^s which may in^solid^m be devi^ed (...)
to feed in the Gardens, Where we see,

The Church is not squemish, but directly answers to the question, for there is
no envy in spiri^uall things, because they may be divided in solidum, one may
have as much as another, and all alike. Envy is not in those things that are
not divisible in other things, the more one has, another has the less. But
there is no envy in grace and glory, because all may share alike, therefore
here is no envy in the answer, as if she deni^d the daughters of Jerusalem the
enjoying of her beloved; no if you will know (says she) I will tell you
directly whither my beloved is gone.

My Beloved is gone into his garden to the bed of spices, etc.

God has two gardens, the Church Catholic is his garden, and every particular
Church are gardens and beds of spices, in regard that many Christian^ are sown
there that Chri^ts soul delights in, as in sweet spices. This was spoken off
before at large in Chapter 5. 1. why the Church is called a garden being a
severed place from the wa^te: the Chruch is severed from the wilderness of the
world in Gods care and love, likewise he tends and weeds his Church and garden:
as for the waste of the world, he is content the wilderness should have barren
plants: but he will not endure such in his garden; therefore those that give
themselves liberty to be naught in the Church of God, he will have a time to
roo^e them out: Trees that are not for fruit, shall be for the fire, and above
all other Trees their doom shall be the heaviest that grow in Gods garden
without fruit: Luke 13.
that fig tree shall be cursed.

Men are pleased with answering the bill of accusation against them thus* are
we no^ baptized? and do we not come to Church? and^. what do you make of us,
The folly and madness of ^uch who plead they are spices and plants of Gods
garden whilst they live in all pro^anesse.
yet they are abominable swearers and filthy in their lives. To ^uch I say,
the more God has lift you up* and honored you in the use of the means, the
more just shall your damnation be, that you bring forth nothing but briers and
brambles, the grapes of Sodom and the vine of Gomorrah: Heb 6.
heavy will the doom be of many that live in the Churches bosom, D^ut. 32.
32.
to whom it had been better to have been borne in America, in Turkey, or in
the most barbarous parts in the world: they have a heavy account to make that
have been such ill proficients under abundance of means, therefore it ought
to be taken to heart.

My Beloved is gone into his garden to the beds of spices to feed in the
gardens and to gather Lillies.

That is having first planted them Lillies here, That Christ looks for Lillies
to plant them in his garden, delight in them, and transport them into Heaven.
to gather them, and to transport them out of the garden here, to the garden in
Heaven, where there shall be nothing but Lillies. For the Church of God has
two Gardens or Paradises since the first Paradise (whereof that was a
resemblance) the Paradise of the Chruch, and the Paradise of H^aven. Two
Paradises
As Christ says to the good thief, this day thou sh^le be with me in
Paradise. So those that are good plants in the Paradise of the Church, they
shall be glorious plants also in the Paradise of Heaven, we must not always be
here, we shall change our soil and be taken into Heaven: He is gone into h^s
garden to gather Lillies.

Christians are compared to Lillies for their purity and whiteness unspotted
in justification, In what respects Christians are compared to Lillies for
pur^y, whiteness, and unspotted^nesse.
and for their endeavors in sanctity and holiness, wherein also at length
they shall be wholly unspotted, it is the end, (Ephesians. 1. 4.) they are chosen
too, to be holy without blame, before him in love. God and Christ looks upon
them without blame, not as they are here defiled and spotted; but as they
intend by little and little to purge and purify themselves* by the Spirit that
is in them, that they may be altogether without blame. They are Lillies being
clothed with the white garments of Christ's righteousness, not having a
natural whiteness and purity: the whiteness and purity of Gods children is
borrowed, all their beauty and garments are taken out of another wardrope, the
Church is all glorious within: but she borrowes her glory, as the Moon
borrowes all her light from the Sun, the Churches excellency is borrowed, it
is her own but by gift, but being once her own it is her own for ever.

The Church before was likened to a garden culled out, an Eden, a Paradise, now
there you know were four streams, sweet and goodly rivers which watered
Paradise, the heads of which rivers were without it. So the Church of God, her
graces are her own, that is the Spirit of God comes through her nature,
purges and purifieth it, but the spring of those Because it is a tall goodly
plant.


And then the Lilly is a tall goodly plant, therefore the Church is compared to
them: other men are compared to thorns, not only for a noxious, hurtful
quality in them, but for their baseness likewise, what are thorns good for,
but to cumber the ground, to eat out the heart of it, to hide snakes, and for
the fire. Wicked men are not Lillies but thorns, they are base mean persons.
D^n. 11. 21.
Antiochus is said to be a vile person though he were a King, because he was a
naughty man. Wicked men though they be never so great being void of the grace
of God are vile persons, though we must respect them in regard of their places,
yet as they are in their qualification, they are vile and base thorns, but the
Church is not so, but as a Lilly among thorns, that is among vile and
abominable persons.

The Use is to comfort Gods children, Use. 1.
they have an excellency and glory in them, comfort Gods children.
which howsoever it is not from them, yet it is theirs by gift and eternally
theirs: therefore let them comfort themselves against all the censures of
sinful persons that labor to trample them under foore, and think basely
and meanly of them, as of the off-scowring of the world. Let the unworthy
world think of them as they will, they are Lillies in Gods esteem, and are so
indeed, glorious persons that have the Spirit of glory resting upon them, 1
Pet. 4.
and whom the world is not worthy off, Heb. 11.
though their glory be within: therefore let us glory in it, that God vouch
safeth saving-grace to us above any other privilege.

Again, Use. 2.
it comforts us in all our wants whatsoever, that God will take care for us:
Christ uses this argument: God says he, clotheth the lillies of the field
with an excellent beauty, he cares even for the meanest plants, and will he not
take care for you O ye of little faith? does he care for Lillies that are to
day and to morrow are cast into the oven: Man. 6. 29.
and shall he not care for the lillies of Paradise, the living lillies, those
holy reasonable lillies? u^doubtedly he will. Our Savior Christ's reason is
undeniable, he that puts such a beauty upon the poor plants that flourish to
day in the morning and wither before night, he that puts such a beauty upon the
grass of the field, will he not put more excellency upon his children, will he
not provide for them, feed them, undoubtedly he will: thus we have showed why
Gods children in the Chruch of God are compared to Lillies.

To gather Lillies.
Christ is said to gather these Lillies, That Christ's Lillies shall not lie
scattered but he will gather them together.
that is, he will gather them together, Christ will not have his lillies alone
scattered, though he leaves them often alone for a while, yet he will ga^her
them to Congregations and Churches: the name of a Church in the Original is
Ecclesia, it is nothing but a company gathered out of the world. Do we think
that we are lillies by nature; no we are thorns and briers, God makes us
lillies and then gathers us to other lillies, that one may strengthen another.
The Spirit of God in his children is not a Spirit of separation of Christians
from Christians, but a spirit of separation from the waste wild wilderness of
the world, as we say of fire, Congregat homogenea and disgregat heterogenea, it
congregates all homogeniall things, as gold, which it gathers, but disgregates
heterogeniall things, consumes dross; so the Spirit of God severs thorns and
gathers lillies, gathers Christians together in the Church and will gather them
for ever in Heaven.

Thus we see the answer of the Church to the daughters of Hierus^lem, That the
issue of fruit^ull conference is great at last, though ^^at and dull al
beginning.
what it was, with the occasion thereof: the question of the daughters of
Jerusalem whither is thy Beloved gone? so that the Church was beholding to the
daughters of Jerusalem for ministering such a question to give her occasion to
know better what her beloved was, indeed we many times gain by weaker
Christians, good questions, though from weak ones, minister suitable answers,
it is a greek Proverb, that doubting begets plenty and abundance, for
doubting at the first begets resolution at last. O that we could take occasion
hence, to think of this, what excellent virtue is in the communion of Saints,
when they meet about heavenly exercises, what a blessing follows, when though
at the entry, their affections may be flat and dull, yet they part not so,
Christ heates and in^^ames their hearts to do much good to one another. O
those that shall forever live together in Heaven should they not delight to
live more together on earth.

The end of the eighteenth Sermon.
THE NINETEENTH SERMON.
CANT. VI. II. I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine, he feeds among the
Lillies.
THese words are a kind of triumphant acclamation upon all the former
passages, as it were the foot of the Song, for when the Church had spoken
formerly of her ill dealing with Christ, and how he thereupon absented himself
from her, with many other passages, she shuts up all at last with this, I am
^^y Beloveds and my Beloved is mine

Now she begins to feel some comfort from Christ, who had estranged himself
from her, O, (says she) notwithstanding all my sufferings, desertions,
crosses, and the like, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine. Words
expressing the wondrous comfort, joy, and contentment, the Church now had in
Christ, having her heart inflamed with love unto him, upon his manifesting of
himself to her soul, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine, he ^cedeth
among the Lillies.

There is a mutual intercourse, and vicissit^de of claiming interest betwixt
Christ and his Church, I am Christ's and Christ is mine, ^ am my Beloveds and my
Beloved is mine.

From the dependence an^ order of the words, coming in after* desertion for a
while, observe,

That Christ will not be long from his Church. Observe.


The spiritual desertions (forsakings as we use to call them) howsoever they
be very irksome to the Church (that loves communion with Christ) and to aloving
soul, to be deprived of the sense of her beloved, yet notwithstanding they are
but short, Why Christ cannot be long abs^nt from his Church.
Christ will not be long from his Church, his love, and her desire will not let
him, they offer violence, why art thou absent (say they) why art thou so far
off, and hidest thy self? Joseph may conceal himself for a space, but he
will have much ado so to hold long, to be straightned to his brethren, passion
will break out. So Christ may seem hard to be intreeated, and to cross his
own sweet disposition, as to the woman of Caanan, but he will not long keep
at this distance, he is soon overcome, O woman great is thy Faith, have what
thou will, when she strove with him a little (as Faith is a striving grace) see
how she did win upon him. So the Angel and Iaacob may strive for a while,
but Iaac^b at the length prooves Israel, he prevails with God. So it is with
the Christian soul and Christ, howsoever there be desertion (for causes before
mentioned) because the Church was negligent (as we hear) and partly for the
time to come, that Christ by his estrangement might sweeten his coming again,
howsoever there may be strangeness for a time, yet Christ will return again
to his Spouse.

The Use should be, Use. 1.
not only for Comfort, to stay us in such times, c^ns^lation to support us in
de sertion.
but to teach us likewise to wait and never give ever, If the Church had given
over here she had not had such gracious manifestations of Christ to her: learn
hence therefore this use, to wait Gods leisure. God will wait to do good to
them that wait on him: if we wait his leisure, Isa. 30. ^8.
he will wait an opportunity of doing good to us, when God seems not to
answer our prayers, let us yet wait, we shall not loose by our tarrying, he
will wait to do us good.

In the next place observe after this temporary desertion, Christ visits his
Church with more abundant comfort then ever before.

Now the Church cannot hold, My Beloved is mine and I am his, That (...) loose
nothing by our largeness of affection to Christ for his return to ours is
exceeding ours.
and Christ cannot hold, but falls into a large commendation of his Spouse back
again; as she was large in his commendations, so he is large in hers, and more
large, he will have the last word, therefore learn by this experience: that
all things work together for the best to them that love God: all things. Romans
8. 28.
What evil? I evil; why even sin turns to their humiliation, yea and
disertion (those spiritual ills) turns to their good, for Christ seems to
forsake for a while that he may come after with more abundance of comfort,
when once he has enlarged the soul before with a spacious desire of his
coming, to say, O that he would come, when the soul is thus stretched with
desire in the sense of want, then he fills it again till it burst soorth, My
Beloved is mine and I am his* it was a good experiment of Bernard, and holy man
in ill times tibi accidit, etc. speaking of Christ's dealing with his Church, he
comes and he goes away for thy good, he comes for thy good to comfort thee,
after which is thou be not careful to mainetaine communion with him, then he
goes away for thy good to correct thy error, and to enlarge thy desire of him
again, to teach thee to lay sure and faster hold upon him when thou have him,
not to let him go again.

If you would see a parallel place to (...), That after seeking of Christ in
all his means we must wai^e for him
look in Cant. ^ where there is the like case ^t the ^pouse and Christ, By
night on my bed I sought him, the Church sought Christ not only by ^ay but by
night, I sought him whom my s^^le loved, though she wanted him, yet her soul
loved him constantly, though a Christians soul have not present communion with
Christ, yet he may truly say, my soul loves him, because she seeks him
diligently and constantly in the use of all the means, so we see the Church
before my text, calls him my beloved still though she wanted communion with him,
This is the surest token of our servent (...) to Christ.
well she goes on, I sought him, but I found him not, would the Church give
over there? no, then she rises and goes about the city and about the streets
and seeks him whom her soul loved, seeks him and will not give ove^. So I
sought him (but I wanted the issue of my seeking) ^ found him not, what comes
upon that, The Watchmen god about the City and find her, of whom, when by her
own seeking she could not find Christ, she inquires, Saw you him whom my s^^le
loves, she enquires of the Watchmen, the guides of Gods people, who could not
satisfy her fully, she could not find her beloved, yet what does she, she
shows Verse 4. It was but a li^^le that she stayed (after she had used all
means private and public, in her bed, out of her bed, by the Watchmen and
others: yet says she, it was but a little that I was past from them, she had
not an answer presently, though the Watchmen gave her some good counsel, it
was not presently, yet not long after. Christ will exercise us a while with
waiting It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
soul loved. After all our seeking there must be waiting, and then we shall
find him whom our soul loves: perhaps we have used all means private and
public, and yet find not that comfort we look for, O but wait a while, God
has a long time waited for thee, be thou content to wait a while for him, If
God wait long for us, it is equi^y to wait for him*
we shall not loose by it, for it follows in the next verse, after she had
found him whom her soul loved, I held him, I would not let him go, so this is
the issue of desertions, they stir up diligence and searching in the use of
means private and public, and exercise patience to wait Gods leisure, who
will not suffer a gracious soul to fail of its expectation, Psalm. 14^
at length he will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, and this comes
of their patience, grace grows greater and stronger, I held him and would not
let him go, until I had brought him unto my mothers house. Thus you see how
the Spirit expresses the sametruthin another state of the Church Compare place
with place. To go on, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine.

The words themselves are a passionate expression of long looked for
consolation. Affections have eloquence of their own beyond words fear has a
proper expression, love vents it self in broken words, and sighs, delighting
in a peculiar eloquence suitable to the height and pitch of the affection, that
no words can reach unto, so that here is more in the words breathed from such
an inflamed heart the^ in ordinary construction can be picked out ( I am my
Bel^veds, etc) coming from a full and large heart, expressing the union and
communion between Christ and the Church (especially after a desertion) I am my
Beloveds and my Beloved is mine. That there must be union of persons, before
union and communion of graces with Christ.


First, (I say) the union, viz. the union of persons which is before all
comfort and communion of graces, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine,
Christ's person is ours, and our persons are his: for as it is in marriage, if
the person of the husband be not the wives, his goods are not hers, nor his
titles of honor; for these come all to her, because his person is hers, he
having passed over the right of his own body and of his person to his wife, as
she has passed over all the right of her self to her husband so it is in this
mystical marriage that that intitles us to communion of graces is union of
persons between Christ and his Church, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved
himself is mine; And indeed nothing else will content a Christians heart, he
would not care so much for Heaven it self, if he had not Christ there* the
Sacrament, Word, and Comforts why does he esteem them, as they come from
Christ and as they lead to Christ, it is but an adulterous and base affection
to love any thing severed from Christ.

Now from this union of persons comes a communion of all other things
whatsoever, That from (...) of persons comes commu^nion of (...) things what
soev^r.
I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine, if Christ himself be mine, then all
is mine, what he has done, what he has suffered is mine, the benefit of all
is mine, what he has is mine, his prerogatives and privileges to be the Son
of God and heir of Heaven and the like, all is mine, why ^ himself is mine,
union is the foundation of communion. So it is here with the Church, I am my
Beloveds, my person is his, my life is his, to glorify him, and to lay it
down when he will, my goods are his, my reputation his, I am content to
sacrifice all for him, I am his, all mine is his: so you see there is union and
communion mutually between Christ and his Church. The Original and spring
hereof is Christ's uniting and communicating himself to his Church first, the
spring begins to the stream, what has the stream or cesterne in it, but what
is had from the spring; first we love him, 1 John 4. 19
because he loved us first. It was a true speech of Augustine, Quicquid bo^^^,
etc, whatsoever is good in the world or lovely it is either God or from God, it
is either Christ or from Christ, he begins it: it is said in nature, love
descends, the father and the mother love the child before the child can love
them, love indeed is of a fiery nature, only here is the dissimilitude, fire
ascends, love descends, it is stronger descending from the greater to the
less, then ascending up from the meaner to the greater, and that for this,
Amongst other reasons, Why the magnanimi^y of the greater stoopes in love to
the lesser.
Because the greater person looks upon the lesser as a piece of himself: sees
himself in it, the father and mother see themselves in their child: so God
loves us more then we can love him, because he sees his image in us; neither is
there only a priority of order, he loves us first, and then we love him, but
also of causality, he is the cause of our love, not by way of motive only, he
loves us, and therefore from an ingenious spirit we must love him again, but
he gives us his Spirit, Deuteronomy. 30.
circumciseth our hearts to love him: for all the motives or moral persuasions
in the world without the Spirit cannot make us love, 1 These. 4 9.
we are taught of God to love one another, our brethren whom we see daily,
says Paul, much more need we to be taught to love him whom we never saw, That
in the new covenant God works both parts.
so that his love kindles ours by way of reflection.

In the New Covenant, God works both parts, his own and our parts too, our
love to him, our fear of him, our faith in him, he works all, even as he
shows his own love to us.

If God love us thus, How to have our hearts warmed with the love of God.
what must we do? meditate upon his love, let our hearts be warmed with the
consideration of it, let us bring them to that fire of his love, ^sal. 39.
and then they will wax hot within us, and beg the Spirit, I^uk. ^^.
Lord thou have promised to give thy Spirit to them that ask it, and to
circumcise our hearts to love thee, and to love one another, give thy holy
Spirit as thou have promised. That this (...) of the Church implies


In a word these words, I am my Bel^veds and my Beloved is mine, to join them
both Propriety
and ^ in Christ peculiar propriety, Christ is mine, so as I have none in the
world so mine, whom have ^ in Heaven but Christ, and what is there in earth in
comparison of him, he is mine, and mine in a peculiar manner, and J am his in a
peculiar manner, there is propriety with peculiarity*

Love.
all is mutual in them, mutual propriety, mutual peculiarity and mutual
love, I love Christ so as I love nothing else, there is nothing above him in my
heart, as Christ loves me more then any thing else (says the Church) and every
Christian: he loves all, and gives outward benefits to all, but to me he has
given himself, so love I him. As the husband loves all in the family, his
cattle and his servants, but he gives himself to his Spouse. So Christ is
mine, himself is mine, and my self a^ Christ's, he has my soul, my
affections, my body, and all, he has a (...) in me and a peculiarity in me,
he has my affection and love to the uttermost, as I have his, for there is an
intercourse in these words.

F^miliarity.
Christ is familiar to my soul and I to Christ, he discovers himself to me in
the (...) of hi^ love, and I discover my self to him in prayer and meditation,
opening my soul to him upon all occasions. Gods children have a (...) of
prayer, which is a spirit of fellowship, and (...) (as it were) to God in
Christ; It is the language of a newborn Christian, he (...) to his Father,
there is a kind of familia^ity between him and his God in Christ, who gives
the entrance and access to God, so that where there is not a kind of
familiarity in prayer and opening of the soul to Christ upon all occasions,
there is not this holy communion. Those that are not given to prayer, they
cannot in truth speak these words, as the Church does here, I (...) my
Beloveds and my (...) is mine, for they imply sweet familiarity.

(...)
he is mine and I am his, the one is a glass to the other, Christ sees
himself in me, I see my self in him, for this is the issue of spiritual
love, especially that is breeds likeness and resemblance of the party loved in
the soul that loves: for love (...) the soul to the likeness of the party
loved, I am his, That love (...) the soul to the likeness of the (...) l^ved.
I resemble him, I am his, I have given my self to him, I carry his picture
and resemblance in my soul, for theyare words of mutual confor^ity. Christ
out of love became like me in all things, wherein I am not like the Devil
(that is (...) excepted) if he (...) like me, taking my nature that I might be
near him in the fellowship of grace, My Beloved is mine, I will be as like him
as possible I can, I am his, every Christian carries a character of Christ's
disposition as far as weakness will suffer, you may know Christ in every
Christian, for as the Kings coin carries the stamp of the King, C^sars coin
bears Caesar's superscription. So every Christian soul is Gods coin, and he
sets his own stamp upon it, if we be Christ's, there is a mutual
conformity betwixt him and us.

Now where you see a malicious, unclean, worldly spirit, know that is a stamp
of the Devil, none of Christ's, he that has not the Spirit of God is none of
his, now where the Spirit of Christ is, i^ stamps Christ's likeness upon the
soul, therefore we are exhorted, Phil. 2. 5. to be like minded to Christ.

Again, Mutual care of one another good.
these words, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine, imply a mutual care
that Christ and the soul have one of the good of another, of each others
honor and reputation, as Christ has a care of our good; so a Christian soul
(if it can say with truth and sincerity I am Christ's) it must needs have care
of Christ's good, What Christ bath to care for in the world.
of his children, Religion and Truth. What? will such a soul say, shall Christ
care for my body, soul and salvation, and stoop to come from Heaven to save
me, and shall I have no care for him and his glory? he has left his truth and
his Church behind him, and shall not I defend his truth and stand for the poor
Church to the utmost of my power against all contrary power? shall not J stand
for Religion? shall it be all one to me, what opinions are held? shall I
pretend he cares for me, and shall I not care for that I should care for; Is it
not an honor to me that he has trusted me to care for any thing that he will
be honored by my care, Beloved it is an honor for us that we may speak a
good word for Religion, for Christ's cause, for his Church against maligners and
opposers, and we shall know one day that Christ will be a rewarder of every
good word: where this is said in sincerity, that Christ is mine and I am
Christ's, there will be this mutual care.

Likewise there is employed a mutual complacency in these words, A (...)
complacency or resting love.
by a complacency I mean a resting, contenting love, Christ has a complacency
and resting in the Church, and the Church has a sweet resting contentment in
Christ; Christ in us and we in him. A true Christian soul that has yielded.
up its consent to Christ, when it is beaten in the world, vexed and turmoiled,
it can rely on this, I have yet a loving husband, yet I have Christ.

Let this put us upon a search into our selves, What we should retire to and do
in afflictions.
what we retire to when we meet with afflictions, those that have brutish and
beastly souls retire to carnal contentments, to good fellowship, forget,
besot, and fly away from themselves their own consciences and though^ of their
own trouble, whereas a soul that (...) any acquaintance with God in Christ or
any interest into Christ, so that it may say that Christ is mine and I am
Christ's there will be contentment and rest in such a soul, whatsoever it
meets with Is courage in owning Christ's cause with re^solution for the Church
is reso^lute


The last thing employed is courage, a branch of the former, say all against it
what they can, says the resolved soul, I will be Christ's, here is courage
with resolution, agreeable hereto is that, Isa 44. 5. One shall say I am the
Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Iaacob, another shall
subscribe and surname himself by the name of Israel. Where there is not this
resolution in good causes, there is not the Spirit of Christ, there is no (...)
into Christ, it is but a delusion and selfe-flattery to say I am Christ's, when
there is not resolution to stand to Christ, these words are the expression of a
resolved heart, I am, and J will be Christ's, I am not ashamed of my bargain,
of the consent I have given him, I am and I will be his. You have the like in
Micah 4. 5. Mica. 4* 5.
All people will walk every one in the name of his god, they will resolve on
that, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and for ever:
so that where these words are spoken in truth, that J am Christ's, there is
necessarily employed, I will own him and his cause for ever and ever. He has
married, me for ever and ever, therefore if J hope to have inte^^st in him for
comfort for ever and ever, I must be sure to yield my self to him for ever and
ever, and stand for his cause in all oppositions against all enemies
whatsoever. These and such like places in Scripture run parralell with this
in the text, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine, not only holding in the
person, but in the cause of Christ. Every man hopes his god will stand for him
against the Devil who accuses us daily: if we will have Christ to stand for
us and to be an advocate to plead our ca^se (as he does) in Heaven, we must
resolve to stand for him against all enemies, Heretics, Schismatics,
Persecutors whatsoever, that we will walk in the name of our God for ever and
ever.

But when the case is not thus with us, and that neither we can feel comfort
from Christ, Quest.
nor have this assurance of his love to us, what should we judge of such?

We should not wonder to see poor souls distempered when they are in
spiritual desertions, Sol.
considering how the Spouse cannot endure the absence of Christ, That we should
not wonder to see (...)
it is out of love, therefore in the deepest plunge she has this in her mouth,
my Beloved. Therefore let us not judge (...) of our selves or others, when we
are impatient in this kind.

But for a more full answer, in (...) of feeling of the love of Christ in
regard of that measure we would (for there is never altogether a want of
feeling) there is so much as keeps from despair always, yet if we carry a
constant love toward him, mourn to him and seek after him as the Church
here: if the desire of our souls be after him, that we make after him in the
use of means, and are willing to speak of him, as the Church here, feel or
feel not we are his, and he will at length discover himself to us.

Let such drooping spirits consider, that as he will not be long from us, nor
wholly: so it shall not be for our disadvantage that he retires at all, his
absence at length will end in a sweet discovery of himself more abundantly
then before, Causes; w^y God absents himself from his children.
he absents himself for our good, to make us more humble and watchful for the
time to come, more pitiful to others, more to prize our former condition, to
justify the ways of God more strictly, to walk with him, to regaine that
sweet communion which by our negligence and security we lost, when we are thus
prepared by his absence, there insues a more satisfying discovery of himself
then ever before.

But when is the time that he comes, When usually Christ returns after
desertion to the soul
compare this with the former Chapter, he comes after long waiting for him, the
Church waited for him, and waited in the use of all means, she runs to the
Watchmen, and then enquires after him of the daughters of Jerusalem, after this
she finds him. After we have waited and expected Christ in the use of means,
Christ at length will discover himself to us, and yet more immediately it was
after the Church had so deservedly exalted him in such lofty praises, This is
my Beloved, the chief of ten thousand, he is altogether lovely: When we set
our hearts to the high exaltation of Christ above all things in the world,
proclaiming him the chi^fe of ten thousand, this at the last breeds a
gracious discovery, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine, for Christ when he
sees us faithful and so loving that we will not endure his absence, and so
constantly loving, that we love him notwithstanding so^e discouragements, it
melts him at the last as, Joseph was melted by his brethren.

I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine.

In the words you see a mutual interest and owning between Christ and the
Church, That in order of nature Christ is ours first, though in order of
knowing it is not so.
howsoever in the order of words, the Church says, I am my Beloveds first, yet
in order of nature, Christ is ours first, though not in order of discovery,
there is one order of knowing and another order of causing, many things are
known by the effect, but they issue from a cause; I know he is mine, because J
am his, I have given my self to him, J know it is day, because the Sun is
up, there is a proof from the effect: so I know a man is alive, because he
walks, there is a proof of the cause by the effect, I am his, I have grace to
give my self up to him, therefore I know he loves me, he is mine, thus I say
in order of discovery, but in order of nature he is first mine, and then I am
his, My Beloved is mine and I am my Beloveds.

The Union and Communion betwixt us and Christ has been already spoken off.

Now to speak of the branches, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine. That
Christ is first ours, and then we are his because he is ours, and the wondrous
comfort that issues hence, that Christ himself is ours.

How comes Christ to be ours, How Christ comes to be ours
Christ is o^rs by his Fathers gift, God has given him for By his own and his
Fathers gift


By his Spirit.
for the Spirit is given for this purpose, to show us all things that are given
us of God, whereof Christ is the chief, therefore the Spirit of Christ tells us
that Christ is ours, and Christ being ours, all that he has is ours.

If he be ours, if we have the field, we have all the treasures in the field,
if we have him, we have all his, he was borne for us, his birth was for us, he
became man for us, he was given to death for us, and so likewise he is ours in
his other estate of exaltation, his rising is for our good, he will cause us to
rise also, and ascend with him, and sit in heavenly places, judging the world
and the Angels. We recover in this second, Use. 1.
what we lost in the first Adam.

This is a point of wondrous comfort to show the riches of a Christian,
Consolation.
his high estate, that Christ is his.

And Christ being ours, God the Father and the Holy Spirit and all things else
in the world, the rich promises are ours: for in Christ they are all made, and
for him they shall be performed, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
for indeed he is the chief promise of all himself, and all are yea and amen
in him. Can we want righteousness, while we have Christ's Righteousness, is
not his garment large enough for himself and us too? is not his obedience
enough for us? shall we need to patch it up with our own righteousness? he is
ours, therefore his obedience is ours.

And this should be a ground likewise of contentation in our condition and
state whatsoever, Use. 2.
Christ himself is ours. Contentation.
In the dividing of all things, some men have wealth, honors, friends and
greatness, but not Christ, nor the love of God in Christ; and therefore they
have nothing in mercy: but a Christian he has Christ himself, Christ is his
by faith and by the Spirits witness, therefore what if he want those
appendencies, the lesser things, he has the maine, what if he want a riveret,
a stream, he has the spring, the ocean, him in whom all things are, and shall
he not be content. Put case a man be very covetous, yet God might satisfy him,
what should anxious thoughts disquiet us. When we have such bills, such
obligations from him who is faithfulness it self, when a Christian cannot
say, honor favor, or great persons are his, yet he can say, he has that that
is worth all, more then all, Christ is his.

O may some say, Object
this is but a speculation, Christ is yours, a man may want and be in misery
for all that, Answ.
no it is a reality, Christ is ours, Why sometimes we want out ward things
being in Christ.
and all things else are ours, he that can command all things is mine, why then
do I want other things? because he sees they are not for my good, if they were
he would not withold them from me, if there were none to be had without a
miracle, no comfort, no friends, he could and would make new out of nothing,
nay out of contraries, were it not better for me to be without them.

That you may the more fully feed on this comfort, Use. 3.
study the excellencies of Christ in the Scripture, Exhortation to study the
excelleny of Christ.
the riches and honor that he has, John 17. ult.
the favor he is in with his Father, with the intercession that he makes in
Heaven, study his mercy, goodness, offices, power, etc. and then come home to
your selves, all this is mine, for he is mine, the love of God is mine, God
loves him and therefore he loves me, because we are both one, he loves me with
the same love that he loves his Son, thus we should make use of this, that
Christ is ours. I come to the second,

I am my Beloveds.
This is a speech of reflection, second in nature, though first in place and in
discovery to us, sometimes we can know our own love, when we feel not so much
the love of Christ, 1 John. 4. 19.
but Christ's love must be there first, I am my Beloveds.

How are we Christ's Beloved, How we come to be and are in Christ beloved.
we are his first of all by his Fathers gift, for God in his eternal purpose
gave him for us, and gives us to him, as it is in the excellent prayer, John
17. By his Fathers gift.
I had not them of my self first, but thine they were before all worlds were,
thou gave them me to redeem them, and my Commission does not extend beyond
thy gift; I die for all those that thou gave me, I sanctisie my self for
them that they may be sanctified, so we are Christ's in his Fathers gift, but
that is not all, though it be the chief fundamental principal ground of all.

For we are his likewise by Redemption, Christ By Redemption.
that he might die for us to purchase us. We cost him dear, we are a bloody
Spouse to Christ, as that froward woman wrongfully said to Moses, Exodus 4. ^5.
thou art a bloody husband unto me, so Christ may without wrong say to the
Church, thou art a Spouse of blood to me. We were indeed to be his Spouse, but
first he must win us by conquest in regard of Satan, and then satisfy justice,
we were in such debt by finne, lying under Gods wrath, so as till all debts
were paid, we could not in the way of justice be given as a Spouse to Christ.

Nor is this all, but we are Christ's by Marriage By Marriage.
for when he purchased us, and paid so dear for us, when he died and satisfied
divine justice, he did it with a purpose to marry us to himself, we have
nothing to bring him but debt and misery, yet he took upon him our nature to
discharge all, that he might marry us, and take us to himself, so we are his
by Marriage.

By con^ent.
he has given himself to us, and we have given our selves to him back again.
To come to some Use of it, if we be Christ's as Christ is ours,

First it is a point of wondrous comfort, Use 1.
God will not suffer his own to want, Consolation against wants.
he is worse then an Insidell that will suffer his Family to perish; when we
are once of Christ's Family, and not only of his F^mily, but of his body, his
Spouse. Can we think he will suffer us to want that which is needful?

Against all Satan's accusations.
I am Christ's, I am Christ's, if he have any thing to say, lo we may bid him
go to Christ, if the Creditor comes to the wife, she is not liable to pay her
own debts, but says, go to my husband; so in all temptations learn hence,
to send Satan whither he should be sent, when we cannot answer him, send him to
Christ.

For the tim^ to come.
what a ground of comfort is this, that we are Christ's as well as he is ours;
what a plea does this put into our mouths for all things that are beneficial
to us, Lord I am thine, save me (says the Psalmist) why? save me, beca^se I am
thine, I am thine, Lord teach me and direct me. The husband is to direct the
Spouse, the head should direct all the senses: All the treasures of wisdom
are in Christ, as all the senses are in the head for the good of the body, all
fulness dwells in him, therefore plead with him, I want wisdom, teach me
and instruct me how to behave my self in troubles, in dangers, in fears; if
it be an argument strong enough amongst men (weak men) J am thine, I am thy
child, J am thy Spouse, etc. Shall we attribute more pity and mercy to our
selves then to the God of mercy and comfort, who planted these affections in
the creature? Shall he make men tender and careful over others, and shall not
he himself be careful of his own flock? do we think that he will neglect
his Jewels, I^ 62. 3.
his Spouse, his Diadem and Crown? he will not.

But you will urge expe^ience, we see how the Church is used even as a forlorn
widow, as if she had no husband in the world, as an Orphan that had no Father;
therefore how does this stand good.

The answer is, Answer 1.
all that the Church or any particular Christian suffers in this world, That
the sufferings both of the church and particular persons is especially for
cons^rmity with Christ the head.
it is but that there may be a conformity between the Spouse and the Husband.
The Head wore a Crown of thorns, and went to heaven and happiness through a
great deal of misery and abasement in the world, the lowest that ever was: And
it is not meet that the Church should go to heaven another way.

Then again, all this is but to fashion the To fashion her to be like Christ
that is all the hurt they do, to drive the Church nearer to Christ then
before, Christ is as near to his Church as ever in the greatest afflictions by
his Spirit, That though Christ see ^e absent in affliction, yet he is never
more grationsly nearer then then,
Christ cries out on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; it
is a strange voice, that God should be his God, and yet notwithstanding seem
to forsake him. But God was never more his God then at that present; indeed he
was not his God in regard of some feelings that he had enjoyed in former times,
he seemed to be forsaken in regard of some sense, as Christ seems to forsake
the Church in regard of some sense and feeling, but yet his God still. So the
Church may say, I am thine still, though she seem to be forsaken in regard of
some feelings, yet she is not deserted in regard of Gods care for support of
the inward man and fashioning to Christ. The Church has never sweeter
communion with Christ, That the sweetest Communion with Christ is under the
greatest crosses.
then under the greatest crosses, and therefore they many times have proved the
ground of the greatest comforts, for Christ leads the Church into the
wilderness, and then speaks to her heart, H^sea 2. 14. Christ speaks to the
heart of his Spouse in the wilderness, that is, in a place of no comfort,
there are no Orchards or pleasures, but all discomforts, there a man must have
it from heaven, if he have any good in the wilderness. In that wilderness
that is in a desolate disconsolate estate; Christ speaks to the heart of his
children, there is in the wilderness oftentimes a sweet intercourse of love
incomparably beyond the time of prosperity.

Again, to stay your hearts, know this will not be long, as we see here the
Church seemed to be forsaken and neglected, fell into the hands of cruel
Watchmen, and was feign to go through this and that means, but it was not
long ere she met with him whom she sought after. It may be midnight at this
time, but the night continues not long, it will be morning ere long. Therefore
the Church may well say, Rejoice not against me O mine enemy, Micah 7. 8.
as it is Micah 7. For though I be fallen I shall rise again, though I sit in
darkness, the Lord will be a light unto me. It shall not be always ill with
the Church, those that survive us shall see other manner of days then we see
yet (whatsoever we shall our selves) Hence we have also an Use of trial;
Tria^l if or not we be Christ's by giving our selves over to him to be ruled
by him.
Whosoever are Christ's, they have hearts to give themselves to him, as he
gives himself, not his goods or his honors, but himself for his Church. So
the Church gives her self to Christ, my delight is in him, he has my self,
my heart, my love and affection, my joy and delight, and all with my self, if
I have any honor, he shall have it, I will use it for his glory, my riches I
will give them to him and his Church and Ministry and Children, (as occasion
shall serve). I am his, therefore all that I have is his if he ask it at my
hands. That after we have given our selves to Christ it is an (...) matter to
part with all things unto him.
It is said of the Macedonians, they gave themselves to Christ, and then their
riches and goods, it is an easy matter to give our riches to Christ when we
have given our selves rst. A Christian as soon as ever he becomes a Christian,
^ Cor. 8. 5.
and ever after to death and in death too, he gives up himself to Christ? they
that stand with Christ, and will give this or that particular, will part only
with idle things that they may spare, are they Christ's, No, a Christian gives
himself, and all his to Christ: so we see here what we should do if Christ be
ours, let us give up our selves to him, as it is Romans 12. the issue of all that
learned profound discourse in the former part of the Epistle that Christ
justifies us by his righteousness and merit, and sanctifies us by his Spirit,
and has predestined and elected us and refused others, is this, I beseech
you, Give up your bodies and souls, and all as a living Sacrifice, That the
Churches ^^^fi^dence implies (...) etc resignation in a deep sense.
holy and accept ableunto God.

In brief these words imply renunciation and resignation, I am his, that is I
have given up my self to him, therefore I renounce all others that ^^and not
with his love and liking. I am not only his by way of service, which I owe him
above all that call for it, but J am his by way of resignation, if he will have
me dye, I will dye, if he will have me live here, I will, I have not my self
to dispose of any longer, I have altogether alienated my self. from my self,
I am his, to serve him, his to be disposed off by him, I have renounced all
other.

Therefore here we have another answer to Satan, Answ.
if he come to us and solicit us to sin, let the Christians heart make this
answer, An answer to satan against despair or (...) in temptation
I am not mine own, what has Satan and his instruments to do with me? is my
body his to defile, is my tongue his to swear at his pleasure, shall I make
the temple of God the member of an harlot? 1 Cor. 6.^5.
(as the Apostle reasons) shall I defile my vessel with sin? What says
converted Ep^r^^m, Hosea 14. 8. What have I any more to do with Id^ls, for I
have seen and observed him. We ought to have such resolutions ready in our
hearts: indeed when a Christian is resolute, the world counts such to be lost,
he is gone, we have lost him, say your dissolute prosane persons It is true
they have lost him indeed, for he is not his own, much less theirs any
longer, but he is found to God and himself, and the Church, thus we se^ what
springs from this, that Christ is ours, and that we are Christ's back again.
Let us carry this with us even to death, and if times should come that God
should honor us by serving himself of us in our lives, if Christ will have us
spend our blood, consider this I am not mine own in life nor death, That it is
our exceeding happiness that now we are not our own.
and it is my happiness that I am not my own, for if J were mine own what
should I do with my self, I should loose my self as Adam did. It is
therefore my happiness that I am not mine own, that J am not the worlds, that
I am not the Devils, that none else has to do with me, to claim any
interest in me, but I am Christ's, if I do any thing for others, it is for
Christ's sake. Remember this for the time to come, if there be any thing that
we will not p^rt with for Christ's sake, it will be our bane, we shall loose
Christ and it too. If we will not say with a perfect Spirit, I am his, my life,
my credit, my person is his, any thing his, look what we will not give for
him, at length we shall loose and part with it and him too.

The end of the nineteenth Sermon.
THE TWENTIETH SERMON.
CANT. VI. II. I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine, hefeedeth among the
Eillies.
THE Church you see here, though she stood out a while against all Christ's
invitation and knocking, yet at length she is brought to yield herself up
wholly unto Christ, and to renounce her self, which course God takes with most,
yea in a manner with all his people are they go out of this world to lay all
high things low, beat down every high thought and imagination, which exalts
it self against him, 2 Cor 10.
that they may give themselves and all they have to Christ, Luk 14. ^6.
if he call for it, for he that does not so is not worthy of Christ, if we do
not this at least in preparation of mind, let us not own the name of
Christians, least we own that which shall further increase and aggrava^^ our
condemnation, prosessing religion one way, andyet alienating our minds to our
lusts and pleasures of the world another way, to have peculiar love ^its of our
own distinct from Christ, how stands this, with, I am my Beloveds and my
Beloved is mine, how stands it with the self resignation that was spoken off
before.

Now this follows upon apprehension of Christ being ours, Reasons of self
resignation to Christ being persuaded that (...) is ours.
I am my Beloveds, because my (...) is (...) first, there are four reasons why
Christ must be given to us, before we can give our selves to him by this self
resignation.

1. Because he is the chief spring of all good affections, which he must plant
in us, loving us, ere we can love him, 1. Ioh. 4. 10, 19.

2. Because love descends, though it be of a fiery nature, yet in this it is
contrary, for love descends, whereas fire ascends, the superior first loves
the inferior, Christ must descend in his love to us, ere we can ascend to him
in our affections.

3. Because our nature is such that we cannot love but where we know (...)
selves to be loved (...), therefore God is indulgent to us herein, and that we
may love him he manifests his love first to us.

4. Because naturally (...) selves being c^nscious of guilt are full of fears
from thence: so that if the soul be not persuaded first of Christ's love, it
(...) away form him, as Adam did from God, and as Peter from Christ: depart
from me for I am but a sinful man So the soul of every man would say if
first it were not persuaded of Gods love in Christ, Isa. 33.
who amongst us shall dwell with the everlasting burning, therefore to prevent
that disposition of soul, which would rise our of the sense of guilt and
unworthiness, God first speaks to us in Christ; at length saying unto our
souls, I am thy ^alvation, Whereupon the soul first finding his love, loves
him back again of whom it ^inds if self so much beloved, so that our love is
but a reflection of his, I am my Beloveds, because my Beloved is mine.

It is with the Spirit of God, as with the spirits in the soul and body of a
man, there is a marriage betwixt the body and soul, the spirits join both
together, being of a middle nature, for they have somewhat spiritual near the
soul, and somewhat bodily near the body, therefore they come between the
body and the soul, and are the instruments th^reof, whereby it works. So it
is with the Spir^t of God, the same Spirit that tells the soul that Christ is
ours, the same Spirit makes up the match on our part, and gives us up to Christ
again.

Let this then be the trial, that we are Christ's by the spiritual Eccoe
that our souls makes to that report which Christ makes to our souls, whether
in promises or in instructions.

See hence likewise, Use. I.
the nature of Faith: for these are the words of Faith, Of Instruction.
as well as of love, That faith has a double work, as to receive Christ, so
to give us back again to Christ.
Faith has two branches, it does give as well as take. Faith receives Christ,
and says, Christ is mine, and the same Faith says, I am Christ's again.
Indeed our souls are empty, so that the maine work of Faith is to be an empty
hand, Mendica manus, (as Luther calls it) a beggars hand to receive, but when
it has received, it gives back again, both our selves and all that we can
do. as 2. Cor. 8. 5. the Churches of Macedonia gave themselves, and then they
gave their goods. Where Faith is, there will be a giving of our selves and our
goods, and (by a proportion) our strength, wits and all back again. This
discovers a great deal of empty false Faith in the world, for undoubtedly if
it were true Faith, there would be a yielding back again.

And again, That the Churches confidence ^he^es a mutual counterview of
justification and santification.
these words discover the mutual coherence of Justification and
Sanctification, and the dependence one upon another, I am my Beloveds and my
Beloved is mine, Christ is mine, his righteousness is mine for my
justification, I am clothed with Christ, as it is, Rev^. 12. The Spouse there
is clothed with the Sun, with the beams of Christ: but is that all? No, I
am my Beloveds, I am Christ's, there is a return of Faith in Sanctification,
the same Spirit that witnesses Christ is ours, it sanctifies and alters our
disposition, that we can say, I am Christ's. It serves to instruct us therefore
in the necessary connection of these two, Justification and Sanctification,
against the idle slander of Papists, that sinnefully traduce that Doctrine, as
if we were Solifideans, as if we severed Justification from Sanctification. No,
we hold here that whenever Christ is ours, there is a Spirit of
Sanctification in us, to yield all to Christ, though this resignation be not
presently perfect.

This likewise helps us (by way of Direction) to understand the Covenant of
grace, Use. 3.
and the Seals of the Covenant, A direction how to understand the Covenant of
grace.
what they enforce and comprise, not only what God will do to us, but the
duty we are to do to him again, though we do it in his strength. A Covenant
holds not on one side, but on both, Christ is mine, and I am Christ's again, I
will be their God, but they must have grace to be my people, and then the
Covenant is made up. The Covenant of grace is so called, because God is so
gracious as to enable us to perform our own part

And so in the Seals of the Covenant, Instanced in the Seals of the Covenant.
in Baptism, God does not only bind himself to do thus and thus to us, but
binds us also to do back again to him. So in the Communion we promise to
lead a new life, renewing our Covenant, and therefore we must not think that
all is well, when we have received our maker, though we continue in a
scandalous, fruitless course of life. No there is a promise in the Sacrament,
the Seal of the Covenant of grace, to yield up our selves to God, to return
to Christ again with our duty, then we come as we should do, when we come
thus disposed. This for direction, My Beloved is mine and I am my Beloveds.

To proceed to make an Use of Comfort to poor doubting Christians, Use. 4.
I am my Beloveds, is the voice of the whole Church, For Comfort to the weaker
Chrstians and to the whole Church.
that all ranks of Christians (if they be true) may without presumption take
up. I have not so much Faith, so much love, so much grace, so much patience, as
another (says a poor Christian) therefore I am none of Christ's* but we must
know that Christ has in his Church of all rancks, and they are all his Spouse,
one as well as another, there is no exception, there is a little spirit of
emulation, and a spice of envy in Christians that are weaker, if they have not
all that great measure of grace which they see in others, they fear they have
none at all, as if there were no Babes in Christ's school, as well as men, That
the nature of Faith is the same in the whole Church as in every particular
member.
and grown persons.

Then again, we see here the nature of Faith in the whole Church, it is the
same that is in every particular, and the same in every particular, as it is in
the whole Church. The whole Church says, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is
mine, I appropriate him, there is a spirit of appropriation in the whole, and
there is so in each particular. Every Christian may say with Paul, I live by
Faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2.
that has loved me and gave himself for me, and with Thomas, my God and my
Lord.

The ground hereof is, because they are all one in Christ, and there is one and
the same Spirit in the whole Church and every particular Christian, as in
pipes, though of different sounds, yet there is the same breath in them. So
Christians may have different sounds from the greater or lesser strength of
grace that is in the one and in the other, but all comes from the same breath,
the same Spirit. The Spirit in the Bride says come, Reve 2^.
the whole Church says it and every particular Christian must say it; because
as the body is acted by one Spirit and makes but one natural body, though
consisting of many parts weaker and stronger. So should there be a harmony in
this mystical body acted by that one Spirit of Christ, who so regards all, as
if there were but one, and regards every one so, as he does not forget the
whole, Sic omnibus attentus ut non detentus, etc. Christ so attends to all that
he is not detained from any particular, and he so attends every particular
that he is not restrained from all, there is the same love to all as to one,
and to every one, as if there were no other, he so loves each one that every
Christian may say as well as the whole Church, Christ is mine and I am Christ's.

In those things that we call Homogeniall, there is the same nature in each
quantity as in the whole, as there is the same nature in one drop of water as
in the whole Ocean, all is water, and the same respect of a spark, and of all
the element of fire. So Christ bears the same respect to the Church as to
every particular, and to every particular as to the Church.

To come to make an Use of Direction, Use. 3.
how to come to be able to say this, How to have direction to be able to say
with the Church, I am my Beloveds etc.
I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine? For answer heereto take notice in the
first place from the dependence, Christ must be first ours before we can give
our selves to him, therefore we must dwell We must dwell in the consideration
of Christ's love to us.
this must direct and lead our method in this thing. Would we have our hearts
to love Christ, to trust in him, and to embrace him, why then think what is
he to us? begin there, nay and what we are? Weak, and in our apprehension
lost, then go to consider his love, his constant love to his Church and
children, whom he loves he loves to the end, John 13. 1.
we must warm our souls with the consideration of the love of God in him to
us, and this will stir up our Faith to him back again, For we are more safe
in that he is ours, Gal 4. 9.
then that we give our selves to him: Phil. 3. 12.
we are more safe in his comprehenaing of us, then in our clasping and holding
of him: as we say of the mother and the child both hold, but the safety of the
child is that the mother holds him; If Christ once give himself to us, he will
make good his own part always, our safety is more on his side then on ours. If
ever we have felt the love of Christ, we may comfort our selves with the
constancy and perpetuity thereof, though perhaps we find not our affections
warmed to him at all times, nor alike, yet the strength of a Christians comfort
lies in this, that first, Christ is mine, and then in the 2. Dwell in the
consideration of our misery without Christ, and our necessity to have him.
that I am his. Now (I say) that we may be able to maintain this blessed
tradition of giving our selves to Christ, Let us dwell in the consideration of
his love to us, and of the necessity that we have of him, how miserable we are
without him, poor, beggarly, in bondage to the Devil, therefore we must have
him to recover us out of debt, and to enrich us. For Christ's love carries him
forth not only to pay all our debts for us, but to enrich us, and it is a
protecting, preserving love, till he brings us to Heaven his own place, where
we shall ever be with him: The consideration of these things will warm our
hearts, and for this purpose serves the Ministry.

We should therefore in the next place attend We must dili gently attend the
ministry of the Word.
for this very end. Wherefore serves the Ministry? Among many others, this is
one maine end, to lay open the unsearchable riches of Christ, therein you have
something of Christ unfolded, of his Natures, Offices, and benefits we have by
him, Redemption, and freedom, and a right to all things in him, the
excellencies of another world, therefore attend upon the means of Salvation,
that we may know what riches we have in him, this will keep our affections
close to Christ, so as to say, I am his.

And labor we also every day more and We must labor every day what we can to
contract, draw and to bring all our love to Christ.
we see in bu^ning glasses, where the beams of the Sun meet in one, how
forcible they are, because there is an union of the beams in a little point.
Let it be our labor that all the beams of our love may meet in Christ, that
he may be as the Church says, our Beloved, My Beloved is mine and I am my
Beloveds (says she) as if the Church had no love out of Christ. And is it
love lost? No, but as Christ is the Churches Beloved, so the Church is Christ's
love again, as we see in this book often, my Love, How far we may love other
things besides Christ.
my Dove. As all streams meet in the great Ocean, so let all our loves meet
in Christ. We may love other things, and we should do so, but no otherwise
then as they convey love to us from Christ, and may be means of drawing up our
affections unto Christ. We may love our friends (and we ought to do so) and
other blessings of God, but how? No otherwise then as tokens of his love to us:
we love a thing that our friend sends to us, O but it is as it does convey his
affection to us. So must we love all things as they come from Gods love to us
in Christ.

And indeed whatsoever we have is a love token, That all we receive from
Christ, even afflictions are love tokens.
even our very afflictions themselves, whom I love, I rebuke and chastise.

Again, that we may inflame our hearts with the love of Christ, We must
preserve our hearts in the love of Christ.
as we are exhorted by Jude, Let us consider the vanity of all things that
should entise us from Christ, Jud. ver. 21.
and labor every day more and more to draw our affections from them, as we are
exhorted, Psalm. 45. Hearken o daughter and consider, and incline thine ear,
forget also thine own people and thy Fathers house, so shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty. So if we will have Christ to delight in us, that we may say
we are his, let us labor to sequester our affections more and more from all
earthly things, that we may not have such hearts, as Saint I ames speaks of,
adulterous hearts. O ye Adulterers and Adulteresses know you not that the love
of the world is emnity with God.

Indeed there is reason for this exhortation, for all earthly things, they are
all vain and empty things, there is an emptiness in whatsoever is in the
world (save Christ) therefore we should not set our affections too much upon
them; A man cannot be wise in loving any thing but Christ, and what he loves
for Christ. Therefore let us follow that counsel, to draw our selves from our
former company, acquaintance, pleasures, delights, and vanities, we cannot
bestow our love and our affections better then upon Christ. It is a happiness,
that we have such affections, as joy, delight and love planted in us by God,
and what a happiness is it, that we should have such an excellent object to
fill those affections, yea to transcend and more then satisfy them. Therefore
the Apostle wishes that they might know all the demensions of Gods love in
Christ, there is a height, Ephesians. 3. 1^.
breadth, length, and depth of the love of God.

And let us think of the demensions, the height, breadth and depth of our
misery out of Christ. The more excellent our natures are, the more miserable
they are if not changed: for look what degree of excellency we have (if it be
not advanced in Christ) we have so much misery being out of him; therefore let
us labor to see this, as to value our being in him, so to be able upon good
grounds to say, I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine.

Again, let us labor to walk in the light of a sanctified knowledge to be
attained by the Gospel, 1 John 1. 3.
for as it is, 1. John 1. 3. the end of all our preaching is to assure Christ
to the soul, 1 John 5. 13.
that we may be able to say without deceiving our own souls, I am my Beloveds
and my Beloved is mine. The maine end of preaching.
All preaching (I say) is for this end, the terror of the Law and the
discovery of corruption is to drive us out of our selves to him, and then to
provoke us to grow up into him more and more. Therefore says John, All our
preaching is that we may have fellowship with the Father and the Son, and
they with us: And what does he make an evidence of that fellowship, 1 John 1. 7.
walking in the light, as he is light, or else we are liars; he is bold in
plain terms to give us the lie, to say we are Christ's, and have communion
with the Father and the Son, when yet we walk in darkness, in sins
against conscience, in wilful ignorance, the darkness of an evil life, we
have no communion with Christ; therefore if we will have communion with him,
let us walk in the light, and labor to be lightsome in our understandings, to
have a great deal of knowledge, and then to walk answerable to that light and
revelation that we have. Those that live in sins against conscience, and are
friends to the darkness of ignorance, of an evil life, Oh they never think
of the fellowship with Christ and with God, these things are mere riddles to
them, they have no hope of them, or if any, their hope is in vain, they bar
themselves of ever having comfortable communion with Christ here, much less
shall they enjoy him hereafter in Heaven.

Therefore labor every day more and more to grow rich in knowledge, to get
light and to walk in that light: to which end pray with the holy Apostle,
Ephesians I. That you may have the Spirit of Revelation, that excellent Spirit of
God to reveal the things of God, that we may have the light discovered to us.

What a world of comfort has a Christian that has light in him and walks in
that light, The exce^^ency of a Christian walking in di vine light above others.
above another man, whether he live or dye, the light brings him into
fellowship with the Father of lights, he that has this light knows his
condition and his way, and whither he goes, when he dies he knows in what
condition he dies, and upon what grounds. The very light of nature is
comfortable, much more that of grace, therefore labor to grow daily more and
more in the knowl^dge and obedience of the light.

All professors of the Gospel are either such as are not Christ's, A serious
ex^ort^tian for such who are not yet in Christ, to come in.
or such as are his, for such as are not yet, that you may be provoked to draw
to fellowship with Christ, Do but consider you are as branches cut off, that
will wither and dye, and be cast into the fire, unless you be grafted into the
living stock, Christ, you are as naked persons in a storm not clothed with
any thing to stand against the storm of Gods wrath, let this force you to get
into Christ.

And next for encouragement consider, That in the Gospel Christ by the
Ministry offers himself unto all.
Christ offers himself to all in the Gospel and that is the end of the
Ministry to bring Christ and our souls together, to make a spiritual
marriage, to lay open his riches and to draw you to him, if you confess your
sins he will forgive them, 1 John 1. 9.
and you shall have mercy, Herelieves those that are wearied and heavy laden,
Prove. 28.
and bids those come to him that are thirsty, Mat. 11 ult.
J^^ 55. 1
Christ came to seek, and to save that which was lost. Christ offers himself
in mercy to the worst soul.

Therefore if there be any that have lived in evil courses, in former times,
consider that upon repentance all shall be forgotten, and as a mist scattered
away and cast into the bottom of the Sea. Christ offers himself to you, these
are the times, this is the hour of grace, now the water is stirring for you to
enter: do but entertain Christ, and desire that he may be yours to rule you
and guide you, and all will be well for the time to come.

Do not object I am a loathsome creature full of rebellions. Object


Christ does not match with you, Answ.
because you are good, but to make you good, Christ takes you not with any
dowry, all that he requires is to confess your beggary and to come with
emptiness. He takes us not because we are clean, but because he will purge us,
he takes us in our blood when he first takes us, Ezekiel. 16.
Let none despair either for want of worth or of strength, Ephe. 5. 27.
Christ sees that for strength we are dead, and for worth, we are enemies, but
he gives us both spiritual strength and worth, takes us near to himself and
enricheth us. Let none therefore be discouraged, it is our office, thus to lay
open and offer the riches of Christ, if you will not come in, but love your
sinful courses more then Christ, then you perish in your blood, and we free
our hands, and may free our souls from the guilt thereof, therefore as you
love your own souls, come in at length and stand out no longer.

And for those that have in some measure given themselves up to Christ,
Exhortation to them that have given themselves to Christ
and can say, He is mine and I am his, let them go on with comfort, and never
be discouraged for the infirmities that hang about them. For one part of
Christ's Office is to purge his Church by his Spirit more and more, Ephesians. 5.
27. not to cast her away for her infirmities, but to wash and cleanse it more
and more till it be a glorious Spouse like himself. For if the husband will
by the bond of nature, bear with the infirmities of the wife (as the weaker
vessel) does not Christ bind himself by that which he accounts us bound? Is
there more love and mercy, and pity in us to those that we take near us,
then there is in Christ to us? What a most blasphemous thought were this to
conceive so? Only let us take heed of being in league with sin, for we cannot
give our souls to Christ, and to sinful courses too; Christ will allow of
no bigamy or double marriage where he has any thing to do, we must have
single hearts, resolving though I fall, yet I purpose to please Christ, and to
go on in a good conversation, and if our hearts tell us so, daily infirmities
ought not to discourage us, we have helps enough for these. First, Christ
bids us ask forgiveness, and then we have the mercy of Christ to bear with
weaker vessels, then his Advocation, he is now in heaven to plead for us: if
we were perfect, 1 Ioh 2.^.
we needed not that office; let none be discouraged therefore, but let us
labor more and more that we may be able to comprehend in some measure the
love of Christ, That to suffer and to facilitate all duties we should labor
more and more for the love of Christ.
so will all duties come off sweetly and easily, and then we shall be enabled
to suffer all things, not only willingly, but cheerfully, and rejoice in
them. Love is of the nature of fire, which as it severeth and consumes all
that is opposite, all dross and dregs, and dissolves coldness, so it quickens
and makes active and lively, it has a kind of constraining force, a sweet
violence, (as the Apostle says) the love of Christ constrains, 2 Cor. 5. 24.

Let a man that loves the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, be called to part
with his life, he will yield it as a Sacrifice with comfort. Come what will,
all is welcome when we are inflamed with the love of Christ, and the more we
suffer, the more we find his love, for he reserves the manifestation of his
love most for times of suffering, and the more we find the manifestation of
his love, the more we love him back again, and rejoice in suffering for him,
that we love so, whether they be duties of obedience, active or passive, doing
or suffering, all comes off with abundance of cherfulness and ease, where
the love of Christ is, that the soul can say, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved
is mine: nothing in the world is able to make such a soul miserable. It
follows.

He feeds among the Lillies.
The Church here shows where Christ feeds. Quest.
But the question is, Whether it be the feeding of the Church and People that
is here meant, or whether he feeds himself. For answer, he both feeds his
Church among the Lillies, Answ.
and delights himself to be there; the one follows the other, especially it
is meant of the Church, those that are his, he feeds them among the Lillies,

How.
Lillies are such kind of flowers as require a great deal of nourishment,
What meant by Christ's feeding among the Lillies.
and grow best in valleys and fat ground, therefore when she says, he feeds
among the Lillies, the meaning is, he feeds his Church and people in fat
pasture; as sheep in such grounds as are sweet and fruitful, such are his
holy Word and the Communion of Saints, these are especially the pastures
wherein he feeds his Church. The holy truths of God are the food of the
soul, whereby it is cherished and nourished up to life everlasting. This whole
Book is a kind of Pastoral (to understand the word a little better) a Song
of a Beloved concerning a Beloved, therefore Christ in many places of this
Book, he takes upon him the term and carriage (as it were) of a loving
Shepherd, who labors to find out for his sheep the fattest, fruitfullest,
best and sweetest pastures, that they may grow up as Calves of the Stall, as it
is Malachy 4. 2. that they may grow and be well liking.

You have (to give light to this place) a phrase somewhat likethis, where he
follows the point more at large, Cant. 1. 7.
Cant. 1. 7. the Church there praiesto Christ. Tell me O thou whom my soul
loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest at noone.
Those that are coming up in the Church desire to know with whom they may
join, and what truths they may embrace. Tell me where thou feedest and where
thou make thy flock to rest at noone: that is in the greatest heat and
storm of persecution, as at noone day the Sun is hottest: For why should I be
as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions? that is, by those
that are not true friends, that are false shepherds, why should I be drawn
away by them? I desire to feed where thou feedest among thy sheep. Why should
I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of those that are Emulators to
thee? as Antechrist is to Christ: thus the Church puts forth to Christ,
whereunto Christ replies, verse 8. If thou know not O thou fairest among women,
go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flocks, and feed thy kids beside the
Shepherds tents: that is, if thou know not, go thy way forth, get thee out of
thy self, out of the world, out of thy former course, put thy self forward,
stay not complaining, go on, putthy self to endeavor, go thy way forth,
whither? in the footsteps of the flocks, see the steps of Christians in the
best times of the Church in former times, tread in the steps of those that
lived in the best ages of the Church; feed thy kids, thy Christians, besides
the Shepherds tents, the best shepherds; mark where the Apostles and
Prophets fed their sheep, there feed thou, and mark the footsteps of the
flock that have lived in the best times, for of all times since the Apostles
and Prophets, we must follow those Virgin best times. All Churches are so far
true Churches as they have Consanguinity with the Primitive, Apostolical and
Prophetical Churches.

Therefore we are now to go out by the footsteps of the flock. Mark the
footsteps of former Christians, Abraham, Atoses, and David, and in Christ's
time, of John, Peter, and the rest, blessed Saints, walk as they walked, go
their way, and feed your selves by the shepherds tents: mark the shepherds
where they have their tents. So these words have reference to the Prophetical,
especially to the Evangelicall times, whereunto we must conform ourselves, for
the latter times are Apostate times, after a certain season the Church kept
not her purity, which the Scriptures foretold directly, that we should not take
scandal at it, the Church did fall to a kind of admiration of Antichrist, and
embraced doctrines of devils; ^ Tim. 4.
therefore now we must not follow these companies that lead into by paths,
contrary to the Apostolical ways, but see wherein our Church agrees with the
Apostolical Churches and truth, and embrace no truth for the food of our
souls, but that we find in the Gospel. For Antichrist feeds his flocks
with wind, and with poison, and with empty things. For what has been the
food in Popery? sweet and goodly titles, as if they poor souls had the best
Pastors in the world, when as they administer to them nothing but that which
will be the bane of their souls, full of poison and fraud. This is spoken to
unfold that place which gives light to this, spoken off the pastoral care of
Christ, he feeds his flock among the Lillies, plentifully and sweetly. From
hence may be briefly observed, first,

That Christ feeds as well as breeds.

Observe.
And we have need of feeding as well as breeding: where do thou feed? that
is, That we need^ feeding as well as breeding in Christianity.
build up thy children, and go on with the work begun in them. We have need
to be fed after we are bred, and Christ (answerable to our exigence and
necessity) he feeds as well as breeds, 1 Pet. 1. 2 3.
and that Word which is the ^eede to beget us, is that which feeds too. What is
the seed of the new Birth, the Word of God, the holy Promises they are the
seed, the Spirit mingling with them, whereby a Christian is borne, and being
borne is cherished and bred, therefore, As newborn babes, says the Apostle,
1. Pet. 2. 1. desire the sincere milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby.
So that the same thing is both the seed of a Christian, and that which breeds
him, the blessed truth and promises of God.

If you ask, Quest.
why we must grow up and be fed still?

Do but ask your own souls, Answer 1.
whether there be not a perpetual renewing of corruption, which still breaks
out into new guilt every day. In regard of daily new guilt.
Therefore we have need to feed every day anew upon the promises, upon old
promises with new affections, somewhat breaks out ever and anon which abaseth
the soul of a Christian, that makes him go with a sharp appetite to the
blessed truths that feed his soul.

And then again, Ans. 2. Because we need much strength.
we need a great deal of strength, which is mainetained by feeding, besides
the guilt of the soul, there needs strength for duty, which must be fetched
from the blessed Word of God, and the comforts thence, whereby we are able to
withstand and resist, to stand and do all that we do.

And then we are set upon by variety of temptations within and without, Ans. 3.
which require variety of wisdom and strength, In regard variety of
temptation needs variety of wisdom^
all which must begotten by feeding, and therefore you see a Christian for his
subsistence and being, has need of a feeding, cherishing, and maintaining
still by the sweet and blessed directions and promises out of the Word of God.
A refutation of their error who slight religious walking with God and the
exercises of religion.


Therefore you may see what kind of Atheistical creatures those are, and how
much they are to be regarded that turn off all with a compendium in Religion,
tush if we know that we must love God above all, and our neighbor as our
seves, and that Christ dyed for all: we know enough, more then we can practice,
they think these Compendiums will serve the turn, as if there were not a
necessity of growing still further and further in distinct knowledge. Alas the
soul needs to be fed continually, it will stagger else and be unsufficient to
stand against temptation or to perform duties.

A second general point out of the text is this, That as Christ feeds still
his flock and people, so he feeds them fully, plentifully, and sweetly among
the Lillies. There are saving truths enough, there is an all sufficiency in
the Book of God, what need we go out to man's inventions, seeing there is a
fulness and all sufficiency of truth there. Whatsoever is not in that is
wind, or poison, in the Word is a full kind of feeding. In former times when
they had not the Scriptures, and the comforts of them to feed on, what did the
poor souls then? and what do those remaining in Popery feed on? Upon stones
(as it were.) There was a dream of an holy man in those times (diverse hundred
years agone) that he saw one having a deal of manchet to feed on, and yet all
the while poor wretch he fed on stones. What folly and misery (...) this, when
there are delicate things to fe^d on, to gnaw upon stones? and what is all the
school learning almost, (except one or two that had better spirits then the
rest) but a knawing upon stones, barren distinctions, empty things, that had no
substance in them? they had the Scriptures (though they were locked up in
Latin, an unknown tongue) they had the sweet pastures of Christ to feed in,
and yet all this while they fed (as it were) on stones.

This should show us (likewise) our own blessedness that live in these times
wherein the streams of the Gospel run abundantly, Our happiness to be
borne under such plenty of spiritual food
sweetly and pleasantly. There is a fulness among us (even in the spirits of
the worst sort) there is a fullness almost to loathing of that heavenly Mannah:
but those souls who ever were acquainted with the necessity of it rather find
a want then a fulness, and still desire to grow up to a further desire, that
as they have plentiful means, so they may have plentiful affections after,
and strength by those means: let us know our own happiness in these times.
Is it not a comfort to know where to feed and to have pastures to go to,
without suspicion of poison? that we may feed our selves with comforts fully
without fear of bane, or noisome mingling of Coloquintida in the pot, which
would disrelish all the rest? To know that there are truths that we may feed
on safely. This the Church in the former place, Cant. 1. 6, 7. accounted a
great privilege, Oh show me where thou f^^dest at noone, In the greatest heat
of persecution, that I may feed among them; so then it is a great privilege to
know where to feed, and so to be esteemed, that thereby we may be stirred up to
be thankful for our own good, and to improove these privileges to our souls
comfort.

But the second branch that must be touched a little, Observe.
is, That there is fullness no where but in Gods house, and that there and
there only is that which satisfies the soul with ^atnesse and sweetness.

Nay not only the Promises but the very rebukes of Scripture are sweet, That
the rebukes of Scripture are sweet
the rebukes of a friend, they feed the soul, for we have many corruptions
which hinder our Communion with God, so that a Christian delights to have his
corruptions rebuked; for he knows if he leave them, he shall grow into further
communion with Christ, wherein stands his happiness in this world, and the
fullness of his happiness in the world to come.

If this be so, let us know then, that when we come to Religion we loose not
the sweetness of our lives, but only translate them to a far more excellent
and better condition, perhaps we feed before upon vain Authors, upon (as it
were) gravel, vain company, but now we have our delight (and perhaps find
(...) pleasure) in better things, instead of that which fed our idle fancy
(vain trea^^^es and the like) now we have holy truths to delight our souls,
Believe it, a Christian never knows what comfort is to purpose till (...) be
down right and sincere in Religion. Therefore Austine says of himself, Lord
I have wanted thy sweetness over long, I see all my former life (that I
thought had such sweetness in it) was nothing at all but husks, empty things;
now I know where sweetness is, it is in the Word and Truth. Therefore let us
not misconceive of Religion, as of a mopish and dull thing, wherein we must
loose all comfort, if we give our selves over to the study thereof; must we so?
must we loose our comfort? Nay, we have no comfort till we be religious indeed;
Christ feeds not his among Thorns and Briers and stinking weeds, but among
Lillies; do thou think he feeds thee among unsavory, harsh, fretting,
galling things? No, he feeds among Lillies. Therefore when thou comm^st to
Religion, think that thou come to comfort, to refresh thy soul, let us
make use of this for our souls comfort to make us in love more with the ways
of Christ.

Now to seal this further, How Christ the true shepherd feeds, is further
explained.
see what the Scripture says in some parallel places, Psalm. 23. The Lord is my
Shepherd, and what is the use that David presently makes hereof? Why, I shall
want nothing, he will feed me plentifully and ^boundantly, the whole Psalm is
nothing but a commenting upon that word, the Lord is my Shepherd, how does he
perform the duty of a shepherd, He makes me to lie down in green pastures
and leads me by the still waters, it is not only meant of the body, but of the
soul chiefly, he restores my soul, that is, when my soul languisheth and is
ready to faint, he restores it, and gives me as it were a new soul, he
refreshes it. We see say recreation is the creating of a thing a new, so he
restores my soul, he gives me my soul a new with fresh comforts: Thus the
blessed Shepherd does, and how? Because, he feeds among the Lillies, the
promises of the Gospel; then he does not only do good to the body and
soul, but he guides all our ways, all our goings out, He leads us in the
paths of Righteousness, and why, because I deserve so much at his hands? No;
for his own name sake, because he has a love to me, because he has
purchased me with his blood, and given his life for his sheep, has bought me
so dear, though there be no worth in me. He goes on, though I walk through
all temptations and troubles, which are as the valley of the shadow of death,
that is (where there is nothing but disconsolation and misery) yet I will fear
none ill, thou with thy rod and staff do comfort me. If I, as a wandering
sheep, venture to go out of the way, thou out of thy care being a sweet and
loving Shepherd wilt pull me in with thy hook and staff again, he has not
care only to feed us, but to (...) verne us also. What a sweet Shepherd and
Savior have we in covenant that (...) thus with us, and so he proceeds, thou
(...) prepare my table in the presence of mine (...), and for the time to come
he promi^^eth himself as much that God as he has been a Shepherd (for the
present) to provide all things necessary for body and soul and guidance, so
surely the goodness of the Lord shall follow me all the days of my life, for
he is a perpetual Shepherd, he will not leave us till he has brought us to
Heaven. Thus we see in this place the sweet care of Christ.

The like place you have, Isa. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a
Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his arms and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young: So he leads them into
the pastures and feeds them plentifully and sweetly, not only with sweet
things, but with a tender care, which is sweeter. As a Shepherd he takes into
his bosom the poor lambs that cannot walk themselves, and the sheep that
are heavy with young, he cares for them, he gently leads them that are poor,
weak. Christians that struggle and conflict with many temptations and
corruptions, Christ has a tender care of them, he carries them (as it were) in
his bosom and in his arms, and leads them gently: for indeed all Christ's
sheep are weak, every one has somewhat to complain off, ^^^refore he has a
tender care, he feeds them tenderly and sweetly, or else they might perish.

An other place (notable for this purpose) see Ezekiel. 34. ^^. wherein you have
the same metaphor from ^ loving Shepherd, and it is but a comment upon the
text, therefore being parallel places they may help our memories: I will feed
them in good pastures upon the high mountains of Israel, there shall their
fold be, there shall they lie in a good fold and in a fat pasture, I will feed
my flock and cause them to lie down, says the Lord God, I will seek that
which is lost, and bring back that which was driven away, I will bind up that
which was broken, and strengthen that which is sick, and destroy the fat and
the strong and feed them with judgment. Those that are Christ's true sheep
have somewhat to complain of, either they are sick, or broken, or driven
away, somewhat is amiss or other, but Christ's care preventeth all the
necessities of his sheep, he has a fit salve for all their sores: And (to
apply this to the business in hand) does not Christ feed us among the
Lillies, does he not now feed us with his own body and blood in the
Sacrament? would you have better food? My body is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed, that is, it is the only meat (with an Emphasis) the only
meat and drink that our souls could feed upon, God gave his Son to death
to shed his blood for my sins. What would become of the hunger bitten,
thirsty soul that is stung with ^^^tan and his temptations, were it not f^^
the blood of Christ to quench our (...) the body of Christ given by the Fath^^
^o death for sin, were it not that the soul^ ^ould think upon this, where
were the (...) of the soul? All this is represented to us here in the
Sacrament, we feed on the body and blood of Christ spiritually, and are
refreshed thereby, as verily as our bodies are refreshed with the bread and
wine. For God does not feed us with empty symbolls and representations, but
with things themselves, that the soul which comes prepared by Faith, is
partaker of Christ crucified, and is knit to him though now in Heaven; there is
as sure an union and communion between Christ and the Christian soul, as
there is between the food and the body when it is once digested.

Therefore let us come to this blessed, to this sweet food of our souls with
hungry appetites, and thankful hearts, that God has given us the best
comforts of his Word, and fed us with the sweet comforts of the Sacraments, as
a Seal of the Word. We should even spend our lives much in thankfulness to
God for this, that he will feed us so sweetly, that thinks nothing is good
enough for our food, but his own self with his own gracious Word and Truth.
Thus we should be very thankful unto God, and now at this time labor to get
hungry appetites fit for this bles^^d food to receive it.

(...) shall we do that? How to get hungry appetites to the Sacrament.


(...) seriously of the former part of thy To think seriously of former and
present sins
and (...) week past. For Christ (the food of the soul^ (...) well with the
sour herbs of Repentanc^* Let us stir up in our hearts Repentance for our
sins, and sorrow in the consideration of our own corrupt nature and life,
and when we have felt our corruptions and have the sense of our want, then
Christ will be sweet to us, the Paschall Lamb was to be eaten with sour
herbs, so Christ our Passover must be eaten with Repentance.

There must be purging.
there are many things which clogge the stomach; come not with worldly,
wicked, malicious affections which puff up the soul, I am 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1.
But lay aside (as the Apostle wishes) all guile, malice, and superfluity,
empty the soul of all sin and prepossessing thoughts or affections.

And then consider the necessity of spiritual strength that we have need to
grow up more Consider the necessity of spiritual strength.
we have need of strong Faith and strong assurance that Christ is ours, and
that we are his. Let us often frequent this ordinance, and come prepared as we
should, and we shall find Christ making good his own ordinance in his own
best time: so as we shall be able to say in truth of heart experimentally and
feelingly with the Church; My Beloved is mine and I am his he feeds among the
Lillies.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL Index of the Special points contained in this Book.
A
Accusations:
ACcusations of Satan how to answer them, page 458.
Actions.
Actions holy, rightly performed bring increase of strength and comfort, page
214. Actions of Christ all precious, page 389, 390.
Affections.
Our Affections ought not to cleave to base things, page 51. Affections are
like their objects, page 51. Affections of Christians are in Christ's
Government, page 266. Affection where it is in truth, it will discover it self
by outward expressions, page 271. True Affections are serious in the things of
God, page 307. Affections Christ the best object for them to be spent on, page
399, 400.
(...).
(...) a sign of Christ's love, page 16. (...) are a means to ^^ke us prize
Christ, therefore therefore we are not to murmur at them, page 367, 368. Christ
never more near his Church then when it is in Afflictions, page 460. Sweetest
communion with Christ is under the greatest Afflictions, page 460.
Alphonsus.
A story of King Alphonsus, page 398.
Appo^tite.
Appetite how to be procured to Christ and spiritual things, p. 74, 75.
Acknowledge.
We should as well Acknowledge that which is good in us as that which is evil,
p. 107, 108.
Apostatize.
Why so many Apostatize under (...) page 133, 134.

B*
Beauty, See Fairen (...)
Beauty wherein it (...) page 345, 346. Beauty of Christ is especially
spiritual, page 346. Christ is a most beautiful person, page 346.
Beloved.
How we come to be Christ's Beloved, page 457, 4^8.
Believing.
Believing in Christ more glorifies God, then if we were as pure as Adam, page
204, 205.

C
Calling.
Doing things in our general or particular Calling with respect to God and not
to man will arm us against all discouragements, page 235.
Christ.
Christ's presence is more and more desired where there is true grace, page 22.
Christ's presence why earnestly desired of the Church, page 22, 23. How to know
Christ is present with us, page 40. Christ's presence is an Heaven to
Christians, page 41. Having Christ's presence we need fear nothing, page 42.
Christ is our Brother, page 44. 170, 171. We ought not to be ashamed of Christ
and his cause, p. 44, 45. The comfort of Christ's being our Brother, page 45.
Christ only is the Churches Husband, page 49. Christ being our Husband our
sins or unworthiness should not discourage us, page 50. Christ how to know
we are espoused to him, page 52. We must be ruled by Christ, page 52. Christ
is to be hallowed in all conditions, page 52, 53. Direction for such who are
not yet in Christ, page 53. Excellency of their condition who are one with
Christ, page 34. Christ wheresoever he come^, he comes not empty, page 59.
Communion with Christ to be endeavored after, page 60. Christ and the Church
mutually feast each other, page 67. Christ resembled to a feastin sundry
respects, page 68, etc. There is that in Christ which answers to all our
wants, page 69. In Christ we enjoy choice rarities, page 68. In Christ there is
an overflowing of all that is good for our good, page, 70. How Christ is our
friend and We his, page 80. Why Christ sometimes uses us hardly, page 80.
Christ is a constant friend page 81. Christ still desires a further and further
communion with his Church, page 136. Christ why he withdrawes himself from
us, page 137, etc. Christ how to know he dwells in us, page 150, etc. We should
cherish good conceits of Christ, page 152. To labor to entertain Christ, page
156. Benefits of entertaining Christ, page 157, 158. Christ has never enough
of his Church till he has it in heaven, page 165, 166. Christ's low-stooping
for the good of our souls should quicken us to receive him, page 169. All love
scattered in relations is united in Christ, page 170. Christ's love to (...) is
free, tender (...) 175. Christ (...) is incomparable, page (...). (...)
wonderful love set (...) in his low abasement for^^ page 186, 187. Christ
resembled to a Dove, page 188. Christ's righteousness how made ours, page 197,
198. Christ looks not upon us in our present imperfections, but as he means
to perfect the work of grace in us, page 201, 202. Communion with Christ is
not easily attained, page 29. Communion with Christ hindered by false reasonings
and excuses, page 210. Christ does sometimes leave his Church and particular
members, page 245, etc. The kinds of Christ's leaving his Church, page 245. Ends
why Christ leaves his Church, page 246, etc. The cause of Christ's withdrawing
comfort from us rests in our selves, page 252, etc. Christ never leaves his
totally, page 254, 255, 260. etc. Christ's grace is the cause of ours, page 255,
256. Christ wonderful in his goodness (...) Saints, page 268. (...) Gods
children sometimes fail (...) for want of Christ's presence page 274, etc.
Christ's presence and ^^sence makes the summer and (...) of a Christian soul,
page 277. We should depend upon Christ when he seems to be absent, page 283.
We ought to be in love with Christ's government, page 297. Christ is a most
beautiful person, page 346. Christ's beauty is spiritual* page 346. Christ is
the chiefest of all, page 348. All our fulness comes from Christ, page 348,
349. Christ set ^oorth by all the excellencies of the creatures, page 349.
Christ only was King, Priest, and Prophet, page 358. Of Christ's Kingly,
Priestly and Prophetical offices, page 350, 351. Christ set forth in his
graces of mercy and meekness, page 355. Christ has the pre-eminence in all
things, p. 356. Christ's excellency is the Churches, p. 356, 357. Christ's
supereminent excellencies ought to draw those to Christ who are not yet in him,
p. 357. Two forcible reasons to draw us to Christ, page, 357, 358. Our sins
should not hinder our coming to Christ, p. 358. Christians justified in their
choice of Christ, page 358, 359. Folly of those who re^use Christ, and choose
base transitory things, page 359, 360. The woeful estate of those that accept
not of Christ, being off^red them, page 361, 362. We must have respect to
Christ in choice and love to other things, page 363. Christ, the means how to
highly esteem of him, page 363. etc. Exalting of Christ in our hearts is a
strong preservative against sin, despair and all discouragement, page 364,
365. Folly of delaying to seek Christ till old age, page 365. How Christ's
death is a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, page 371,
372. Christ has many excellencies in him, page 374. It should be the care of
Christians to stu^y the several excellencies of Christ, page 375, 376. Sights
of Christ that God shows to the souls of Christians, page 376. Sights of
faith which the soul frames to it self of Christ, page 377. Christ, why
compared to an head of gold, page 377, 378. Christ has clear eyes able to
discer^e all things, page 381, 382. Christ's doctrine is sweet and sound, page
388. All Christ's actions are precious, page 389, 390. Christ's ways are all
constant and firm, page 390. Christ every way considered is altogether lovely,
page 396, etc. Christ most lovely in his abasements for us, page 397. Christ's
righteousness ought perfectly to be trusted too p. 398 399. Christ is the best
object for our best affections to be placed on, page 399, 400, 476. Christ how
to know we love him, page 401 etc. A desire of the appearance of Christ is a
sign of our flaming love to him, page 404, 405. How to attain^ to an high
esteem of Christ, page 407* etc. Ends of the Churches setting forth Christ's
excellencies, page 413, etc. Christ's excellencies medi^ated on will justify
(...) exercises of R^^igion, page 416, etc. Christians have more cause to boast
of their portion in Christ the worldlings of the world, p ^^. Christ will not
belong absent from his Church, page 438, 439. We must be first united to
Christ's person before we can receive comfort and communion of his graces, p.
443, 444. Christ and Christians have a mutual propriety in each other, p. 446,
There is a mutual love, familiarity and likeness between Christ and
Christians, page 446, 447. Christ and Christians have a mutual care of each
others good p 448 449. There is a mutual complacency between Christ and the
Church, p. 449. They that are Christ's will be resolute in owning his cause, p.
450. That in order of nature Christ is ours first though not in order of
knowing, p. 453. How Christ comes to be ours, p. 454. Christ being ours we have
all things, p 455. Christ being ours it should make us (...) with our condition
whatsoever it be, p. 455. Christ's excellencies to be studied, p. 456. How we
come to be C^^sts beloved, p. 457, etc. Our giving up our selves to Christ is
an evidence that Christ is ours, p. 461. Reasons why Christ must be first
given to us before we can give our selves over to him, p. 466, 467. Christ has
the same care of every particular Christian as of the whole Church, p. 471,
472. How to be enabled to love and embrace Christ. p. 472, etc. Love to Christ
how it may stand with love to other things, p. 474. Christ feeds his Church
among fat pastures, p. 482, etc. Christ feeds as well as breeds, his Church, p.
485. Christ feeds his Church plentifully and sweetly, p. 487. Motives to entise
those who are not yet in Christ to come in p. 478.
Church.
Church in what respects compared to a Garden, p. 13. Church cared for and
protected of God, p. 18. The Churches disposition is to please Christ her
husband, page 25. The Church gives all to Christ p. 24. The Churchesll descent,
p. 46. The Church is the Spouse of Christ, page 47. Churches Husband Christ
only. page 49. The Church and every particular Christian is subject to variety
of changes, page 82. The Church in this latter age in a sleepy condition, page
95. None in the Church but have been allured at one time or other to come in,
page 162, 163. Church to be prayed for, page 164. Church Christ's love and why,
page 171, etc, and 183, 184. Out of the Church no saving love, page 174. Church
resembled to a Dove in sundry particulars, page 189, etc. Churches defense in
her persecutions, page 194, 195. Church of God has always a rest in God in
the worst times, p. 195* 196. Church how said to be undefiled, page 196, etc.
Church to be accounted a Church though defiled with corruptions, page 205,
206. Church never totally left by Christ, page 254, 255, 260. etc. Church how
wounded by the Watchmen, page 295. Church compared to Jerusalem in sundry
respects, p, 305, etc. The Church has been always persecuted by pretenders of
Religion, page 301. Church how to know we are members of it. page. 305. Church
fair under disgraces of the world, page 338, 339. Churches fairness whence
it comes, page 339. Churches fairenes is within, p. 339. Church never more
fair in Christ's eye then when she judges her self most de^ormed, p. 339.
Church how to be judged of under seeming disgraces, page 340 Church nothing can
dishearten it from commending Christ, page 373. Church why so exact in
particularising her beloved; page 374, etc. Church has no golden head but
Christ, page 378. The ends why the Church sets forth the excellencyes of
Christ, p. 413, etc. The heavy doom of those who are nough^ being in the
Church, page 431. Church why Christ will not be long (...) from it, page 438,
439. Churches and particular Chri^^^ns sufferings, reasons of them page 459,
460. Church, Christ never more near it then when it is in afflictions, page
460. Church fed by Christ in fat pastures, page 482, etc.
Christians.
Particular Christians in regard of the chiefest privileges have the same
regard as the whole Church, page 5. Christians should walk as men severed from
the world, page 16. Christians should be fruitful, p. 17. Christians not to
wrong them, p 45, 46. Christians weak not to be discouraged, p. 66. No
Christian but has somewhat to welcome Christ withal, page 68. Christians
gracious are abased for defects and indisposition to good, page 86, 87. A
Chris^^^n may know his estate though he be mixed with flesh and Spirit, page
106, 107. A Christian is, what his heart is, page 114. Christians how
differenced from Hypocrites, p. 116. Christians who the best, page 120.
Christians waking their excellency, p. 126. Christians know the voice of Christ
even in a sleepie estate, p. 130. True Christians are discerned by their
spiritual taste of the Word p. 130, 131. A Christian at the lowest longs after
Christ, p. 135. Christians love should be confined to Christ, p. 202, 203.
Christians are not to wrong themselves by false judging their own estate, p.
106. Christians lives should be nothing but a communion with Christ, p. 209.
Christians wanting comfort not to be censured, p. 250. Christians at the worst
have some sparks of grace left in them p. 261, 262. To be a sound Christian is
no easy thing, p. 292. All Christians not a like deserted of God and afflicted
page 292. Christians in the upbraidings of conscience should look as well on
the good in them as the ill, p, 341. Christians care should be to study the
several excellencies of Christ, page ^75. Christians should ende^^our to be
suitable to Christ their head, p. 379. Christians compared to Cedar^, p. 39.
Christians have more cause to boast of their portion in Christ then worldings
of the world, p 420. Christians in what respects they are compared to Lillies,
p. 432, etc. Christians why they want outward things, p. 456. It is Christians
happiness that they are not their own, p. 463, 464. Weak as well as strong
Christians the Spouse of Christ, page 470. Excellency of Christians walking in
divine light above others, p. 478. Christians happiness in these days in
regard of the plenty of means they enjoy, p. 488.
Censures.
Ill Censures of the world, comfort against them, page 434.
Company.
Company with Saints is a means to preserve us in a waking temper, p. 122.
Evil Company (...) Christ to withdraw himself from Christians, p. 137.
Comfort.
Comfort if not found in one means is to be sought in another, p 304
Confession.
Confession honors God, p. 84. Confession sh^mes S^tan, page 84. Confession
prevents malicious imputations from the world, p. 85. Confession gives ease to
the soul, p. 85. Confession is a means of present delivery out of trouble,
page 85, 86.
Consci^nce.
Conscience in a sleepy temper, how known to be awake, page 109, 110.
Afflicted in Conscienc^ are not to judge of themselves by feeling (...) by
(...) they are (...) Christ, p. 204, 20^. In the upbraidings of Conscience
Christians should as well look^ on the good in the (...) as on the ill, page
341, 342.
Conceits.
Men are apt to frame false conceits of God and Christ, pa. 218.
Convert.
How to be happy instruments to convert others, page 426, 427.
Corruption.
Corruption where it is not thoroughly purged and a careful watch kept over
the soul, there after a recovery will follow a more dangerous distemper, p.
83.
Correction.
Seasonable correction is an evidence of Christ's love, page 178. Patience of
God to us should make us patiently endure his corrections, page 169.
Covenant.
Covenant of Grace compriseth not only what God will do to us but our duty ^lso
we owe to him, page 469, 470.
Creature.
All Creatures are obedient to Christ, page 7. In every Creature there are some
beams of excellency, page 372.

D
Desire
The desire of Christ's children after his presence makes Christ vouch^afe it
them, page 38. The Church is carried from desire to desire after the presence
of Christ, page 39.
Death.
Death of Christ how it is a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the
whole world, page 371, 372.
Desertion.
Desertion outward and inward, page 245. Desertion to prepare for it, page 250,
251. Desertion the causes of it are in our selves, page 251, etc. Desertion
ends of it page 246, etc. and 452. Desertion signs of it, page 275 etc. What
Christians are to do in a state of Desertion, p. 288, etc. Desertion benefits
of it, page 290. After Desertion Christ uses to visit his Church with more
abundant comfort, page 440. In Desertion to see distemper is no wonder, page
451. When usually Christ returns to the sou^e after desertion, page 452 453.
Disgraces.
Disgraces of the times ought not to make us think the worse of others, page
298.
Doctrine.
Doctrine of Christ is sweet and sound, page 388.
Duties.
Holy duties, encouragement to be frequent in them, page 57. Spiritual duties
why shuffled off by men, page 216, etc.

E
Earthly.
Earthly things men prone to by nature, page 216.
Eyes.
Christ has clear eyes to see through all things, page 381, 382. Christ's
allseeing eye should be a means to restrain us from sin, page 383.
Endeavor.
Endeavor the benefit of it, page 256, 257.
England.
England how Christ has used all kinds of knocking to it, page 155, etc.
Envy.
No envy in Spiritual things, page 344.
Estate.
A Christian may know his estate, pa. 106, 107.
Excuse.
No excuses will serve the turn at the day of judgment, but such as arise
from an invincible necessity or (...) impediment, page ^^^. Folly of those that
fetch excuses from the things of this life to keep them from the duties of
Religion, page 229.

Excellencies of Christ, See Christ.
Excellencies of Christ why set forth by the Church, p. 413, etc.
F
Fathers.
Ancient Fathers in all things not to be relied on, p. 94, 95.
Faith.
Faith kept waking is a means to preserve our soul in a waking temper, page,
117, 118. Faith will carry a Christian through all discouragements, pa. 239.
Faith as it receives Christ so it makes us give our selves to him again, page
468.
Falls.
Falls of Christians not to be rejoiced in, page 180, 181.
Fairness See beauty.
Church fair under disgraces, page 338. Fairnes of the Church from whence it
comes, page 339. Fairness of the Church is inward and hidden, page 339.
Church never more fair in Christ^ eye then when she judges her self most
deformed, page 339.
Feasting.
There is a mutual feasting betwixt Christ and his Church, page 67, etc.
Feastings of Christ have been more sumptuous in some ages then in others, page
77.
Feeding.
That we need fee^ing as well as breeding in Christianity, page 485. Why the
soul needs continual feeding, p. 486. Christ feeds his flock plentifully and
^wee^y, p. 487.
Fear.
The fear of God is a means to preserve the soul in a waking temper, page
120.
Flesh.
Excuses of the flesh to hinder communion with Christ answered, page 210, etc.
Flesh and blood are not to be consulted with, page 222, etc.
Fruitful.
Christians planted in Gods garden ought to be Fruitful, p. 17.
Friendship.
Friendship, special things required in it, page 79.

G
Gifts.
Gifts of others to be improoved by questions. page 342.
Glory.
Glory to come to be set before our eyes to help us to pass through all
discouragements, p. 240, 241.
God.
God, where once he begins grace there he goes on to increase and finish it,
p. 21. God accepts and delights in the graces of his children, page 55. Gods
children never totally fall from grace, p. 111, 112, etc.
Good.
It is not enough that we are Good our selves, but our good must flow out to
others, page 20. Christians ought to labor to do Good to all, p. 21. Good
that is in us should as well be acknowledged as evil, p. 106, 107, 341. Good
that Christians retain in a sleepy estate, page 108, 109.
Goodness.
Goodness of God to man to be magnified, p. 110.
Government.
We ought to be in love with Christ's Government, p. 297.
Grace.
Grace is not only needful to put life into us at first, but also to quicken
and draw forth that grace we have. p. 19. Grace which God begins in us he will
perfect, p. 21. Grace truly wrought in us makes us still desire ^ further
presence of Christ, p. 22. God de^^ghts in the Graces of his children, p. 55.
Graces of the Spirit are acceptable to Christ, page 60. Graces of others and
our own ought to be rejoiced in, p. 61, 61, etc. Grace compared to Myrrh,
Spice, Honey, Milk, page 67. Gods children never totally fall from Grace, p.
111, etc. and 261, 262. All Grace comes from Christ, p. 255, 256. Graces of God
are sweet, page 257. Grace to be judged by the value not quantity of it, p.
291. True Grace grows stronger by oppositions, page 303. A sure argument that
we are in the state of Grace, page 304. Our state in Grace may be known by
our relish to the Word, p. 392, 393, 394. Grace though small in the beginning
yet is still growing, page 422. Error of Papists touching the efficacy of Grace
in congruity, p. 423.

H
Heart.
Heart gracious is p^ivie to its own grace and sincerity when it is in a right
temper, page 24. Hearts to approove them to Christ, page 57, 58. Heart what
meant by it page 105. A Christian is what his heart is, p. 114. Heart
differenceth a sound Christian from an Hypocrite, p. 115. Heart of a Christian
is the house and temple of God. p 150. Hearts, how to know whether Christ
dwells in them, page 150, 151.
Heresies.
Ancient Heresies revived in the Church, p. 95.
Hearing.
Our state in grace may be known by our spiritual taste in Hearing Gods
word, p. 130, 131.
Heavenly.
Heavenly things how to be brought to relish them, p. 221, 222, etc.
Husband.
Husband none of the Church but Christ, p. 49.
Hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy man naturally prone too, page 217.

I
Infirmities.
Infirmities ought not to discourage us, page 270, 480. Our Infirmities should
make us to prise Christ, page 368.
Imperfections.
Imperfections hinder not the acceptance of performances if we be sensible and
ashamed of them, page 25.
Imputations.
What we must do when false imputations are laid upon us, page 301, 302.
Comfort against false imputations, page 382.
Innocent.
Innocent the third, the first that challenged the title of husband of the
Church, page 49.
Injuries.
Injuries how far we may be sensible of them, page 303.
Inventions.
Multiplication of humane Inventions in the Church made Auststin complain that
the condition of the Jews was better then theirs, page 93.
Justification.
There is a necessary connection between Justification and Sanctification page
468, 469.

K
Knowledge.
Knowledge a means to keep the soul in a waking temper, pa. 119, 120.
Knocking.
How is Christ said to knock at our hearts, p. 140, etc. Why Christ knocks
when he has power to open to himself, page 147, etc. Christ's knocking is
specially by the ministry of the Word, page 161.

L
Lawful.
In the use of Lawful things we are especially to be watchful over our
selves, p. 124.
Life.
Life of a Christian should be a continual communion with Christ, page 209.
Love.
All Loves scattered in relations are united in Christ, page 170. Church
Christ's Love and why, page 171, etc. No saving Love out of the Church, page
174. Love of Christ to the Church is free, tender and invincible, p. 175. Love
to Christ will set us a work to glorify God page 177. Love of Christ to us
how known, p. 178, etc. No Love comparable to Christ's love p. 184. Love of
Christians to be confined only to Christ, p. 202, 203. Love to Christ will make
a Christian pass through all discouragements, page 240. First Loves ravishment
reason of it, p. 289, 374. Love-sicke to Christ what it is p. 319. How to know
we are sick of Love to Christ, page 311, etc. Love is ever industrious to set
out the praises of her Beloved, page 372. Love is wages to it self, page 414.
Love why it descends, p. 444, 445. Our Love to God how caused, p. 445. How to
have our hearts warmed with Love to God, pa. 445. Love to other things how it
may stand with our love to Christ, page 474. Love to Christ will enable us to
suffer and facilitates duties to us, page 481.

M
Marriage.
Resemblances betwixt the temporal and spiritual Marriage, page 48.
Means.
Christians are sensible of the Means of Salvation they enjoy p. 134. Outward
Means without the inward work of the Spirit will do no good, p 259, 260, 423,
424. Outward Means must not be rested in, page 260. Usually God works with
Means, p 424.
Meekness.
Meekness the definition and effects of it, p. 189, 190.
Ministers, See Watchmen. Mortification.
Two especial ways of M^rtification, p. 3.
Ministry.
The woeful estate of those that despise the voice of Christ in the Ministry,
p. 161, 162. Ministry of the Word setting forth Christ's excellencies to be in
love with it, p. 428.

O
Objections.
All Objections a sinful soul can frame against it self answered, page
153.
Omission.
Sins of Omission bring grief and shame, p. 264. Sins of Omission not to be
fleighted, p. 265.
Old Age.
Folly of delaying to seek Christ till Old Age, p. 365.
Ordinances.
All Christ's Ordinances are sweet and lovely, p. 384. Those who hate and hinder
the Ordinances of Christ are his enemies, p. 385.

P
Patience.
Patience of God to us should make us patiently endure his corrections, p. 169.
Persecuted.
The Church has been always Persecuted by pretenders of Religion, p. 301.
Persecuted side not always the best, p. 301.
Popery.
Popery crept into the Church by degrees and under glorious pretenses, p. 93,
94. Christ why so slighted in Popery, page 366.
Papists.
Papists objection, how shall we know that the word of God is the word of God,
answered, page 132. Papists error touching the efficacy of grace in congruity,
p. 423.
Prayer.
Order of Gods hearing his Church in Prayer, page 31. How God prepares our
hearts to Prayer, and then hears us, page 31, 32. Our Prayers why heard of
God, page 32, etc. Christians when they have no friend to go too, yet always
have a God to Pray too, p. 34. Prayer to be used of Christians, page 34. Spirit
of Prayer lost is the greatest loss of all, page 35. Cases wherein one is
unfit to Pray, page 35, etc. How Christians cross their own Prayers, page
234, 235. Prayers, how to know God hears them, page 37, 287. Best of Gods
children cannot sometimes Pray as they would, page 308, 309. Prayers of others
are to be desired, page 309.
Presence.
Christ vouchsafes his gracious presence to his children upon their desire of
it, page 38. Presence of Christ, how to know we enjoy it, page 40. Presence of
Christ is an Heaven on Earth to Christians, page 41. Having the presence of
Christ we need fear nothing, page 42. Want of the presence of Christ casts do
who a true child of God page 277, etc. All presence of Christ shund by a
carnal man, page 277, etc. Not to be discouraged though we feel not the
presence of Christ, pa. 282.

Q
Questions.
Questions breed knowledge, pa. 341. Gifts of others to be improoved by
Questions, page 314, 342.

R
Rejoice.
Christians are always to Rejoice, p. 72.
Religion.
Exercises of Religion discontinued causes Christ to withdraw himself from a
christian soul, pa. 137. Exercises of Religion how to attain a spiritual
relish of them so that we do not loath them and put them off with excuses, page
222, etc. Folly of those which fetch excuses from things of this life to keep
them from Religion, p. 229. Young men are to inure themselves to the exercises
of Religion, p. 230, 231, Religion to be adorned for the bringing in of others,
page 342, 343. To justify our own and others pains in the exercises of
Religion we must often think of the excellencies of Christ, p. 416, etc.
Resolution.
Resolution is required in spiritual courses, page 224. Resolution, help^ to
attain to it, page 224, 225, etc.
Righteo^snesse.
Righteousness of Christ how made ours, page 197, 198. Righteousness of
Christ perfectly to be trusted too, p, 398, 399,

S
Saints.
Saints stability proved, p. 186.
Satan.
Satan accusations how to answer them, p. 458.
Sanctification.
Sanctification a strong motive to it, p. 35.
Security, See Sleep.
Security brings sorrows page 268.
Seek.
How they that seek shall find, page 290.
Sin.
Sin should not discourage us Christ being made our Husband, page 50. Small
Sins a grief to gracious Christians, page 86. Sins of the Church make not
Christ take the advantage altogether to leave his Church, p. 138. Sin gri^ved
for ought not to discourage us, page 176. Si^s of omission bring grief and
shame, page 264. Sins of omission not to be slighted, page 265. Our Sins
should not hinder our coming to Christ, pa. 358. Our Sins rightly
apprehended will make us highly value Christ, p 401, 402. How to answer Satan's
temptations to Sin, p. 463.
Sinners.
Sinners weak not refused by Christ, p. 138, 139. Sinners how they may be said
to be holy and clean, page 198, 199.
Sleep.
What meant by the Sleep of the Church, page 88 Sleep spiritual resembled to
bodily, page 88, etc. Sleep spiritual resembled to bodily in the causes, page
90, etc. Sleep spiritual resembled to bodily in the effects of it, p. 90, etc.
Sleep spiritual resembled to bodily in the dangers of it, page 91, 92. Best
prone to Sleep, page 94. Civil Sleep of the state what it is, p. 95. Civil
Sleep a punishment of spiritual, p. 95. Sleepy state the signs of it, pa.
96, etc. Sleepiness motives against it, p. 99. Sleepy secure estate the danger
of it, p. 99. Sleepiness makes us loose our grace in a great measure and the
sense and comfort of it altogether, p. 100. Sleepines brings crosses on us, p.
100, 101. Sleepy temper odious to God, p. 101. In the Sleepy estate of
Christians what good is retained by them, p. 108, 109, etc. Difference between
the Sleep of a Christian and dead sleep of carnal men, page 134, 135.
Spirit.
Spirit of God in what respects compared to wind, p 9, etc. In what respects we
need the Spirits blowing upon us. p. 12, 13. The Spirit is a means to preserve
our souls in a waking temper, p. 118, 119. Spirit of God to make us spiritual
to be prayed for, p. 237, 238.
Spiritual.
In Spiritual things there is no envy, p. 344, 430.
Spouse.
Spouse of Christ is the Church, p. 47. Spouse of Christ none by nature, page
49. How to know we are the Spouse of Christ, p. 52. Direction for such who are
not the Spouse of Christ, p. 53. Spouse of Christ her excellent condition, page
54. Necessity of having Christ for our Spouse, page 54. Weak as well as strong
Christians the Spouse of Christ, p 470.
Stability.
Stability of Saints prooved, page 186.
Soul.
Souls immortality prooved, page 186. Soul a precious thing, p. 294.
Sufferings.
Sufferings of Christ in himself, page 167. Sufferings of Christ in his
Ministers, page 167. Our Suffering for Christ is a testimony of o^r love to
him, page 401, 402. The reason of the Churches and particular Christians
Sufferings, page 459, 460.
Suffer.
Love to Christ will enable us to suffer with cheerfulness, p. 481.

T
Times.
Times the worse they are the better we ought to be, p, 212.
Truth.
There is an antipathy in our nature to divine truths, p. 394.

V
Veil.
Veil of the Church, what meant by it, page 296. How the Veil of the Church
is taken away by false Watchmen, page 296.
Understanding.
Understanding not to be defiled with error, page 51.
(...)
How the Church is said to be (...), page 196, (...)
Unworthiness.
Our Unworthiness ought not to hinder our coming to Christ, page 78.
Voice.
Voice of Christ is known of a Christian even in a sleepy estate, page 130.

W
Waking.
Waking condition how to be preserved in it, page 116, etc. A Waking state is
a blessed state, page 116. Waking Christian his excellency, page 125.
Want.
We ought to be sensible of our spiritual Wants, page 74. Christ will not
suffer his to Want, page 434, 458.
Watchmen.
Watchmen why used of God, page 293. Every man is a Watchm^n to himself, page
294. How the Church was wounded by Watchmen page 295. Watchmen of the Church
why they become wounders of it, page 29^, 297.
Wait.
That we ought to wait Gods leisure, page 158, 439. After all our seeking
there must be waiting, page 442.
Ways.
Ways of God ought to be justified of us by sound reasons, page 226, 227.
Ways of Christ are all constant and firm, page 390.
Wicked.
Wicked men how said to be Cedars, page 391. Wicked men compared to thorns, p.
433.
Wickedness.
Wickedness never wanted pretexts, p. 219.
World.
Plodding upon the world takes away our desire of heavenly things, p. 74.
Worldlings.
Worldlings excuses to keep them from Christ, answered, p. 213, etc.
Word.
Papists objection, how to know that the Word is the Word of God, answered, p.
132. Why so many apostatize under the Word, p. 133, 134. When Christ's Word is
entertained, Christ himself is entertained, p. 154, 155. The woeful estate of
those that obey not the Ministry of the Word, p. 161, 162. Our state in grace
may be discerned by our relish to the Word, p. 392, 393, 394. Word of God
though for the present it be not eff^ctuall to us yet at one time or other it
will, page 273, 274. We ought to be in love with the Ministry of the Word,
because therein the excellencies of Christ are set forth, page 428.

FINIS.

