The Wedding.

As it was lately Acted by her Majesty's Servants, at the Phoenix in Drury Lane.

WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY, Gent.

Horat. -- Multaque pars mei
Vitabit Libitinam --
LONDON. Printed for John Grove, and are to be sold at his shop at Furniualls
Inn Gate in Holborne. 1629.

The Actors names.
Sir John Belfare. Richard Perkins. Beauford, a passionate lover of Gratiana.
Michael Bowyer. Marwood friend to Beauford. John Sumpner. Rawbone a thin
Citizen. William Robins. Lodam a fat Gentleman. William Sherlocke. Justice
Landby. Anthony Turner. Captain Landby. William Allin. Isaac, Sir John's man.
William Wilbraham. H^uer a young Gentleman, lover of Mistress Jane. John Young.
Cameleon, Rawbones man. John Dobson. Physician. Keeper. Surgeon. Servants.
Gratiana, Sir John's Daughter. Hugh Clarke. Jane, Justice Landbys daughter.
John Page. Milisent, Cardonaes daughter. Edward Rogers. Cardona. Tymothy Read.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful William Gowre, Esquire.
SIR, I know you, and in that your worth, which I honor more then greatness in
a Patron: This Comedy coming forth to take the air in Summer, desires to
walk under your shadow. The World owes a perpetual remembrance to your
name, for excellency in the Musical Art of Poesy, and your singular
judgment and affection to it, have encouraged me to this Dedication, in which
I cannot transgress beyond your Candor. It has passed the Stage; and I doubt
not but from you, it shall receive a kind welcome, since you have been
pleased to acknowledge the Author.

Yours. JAMES SHIRLEY.

To his learned and much respected friend, Mr. James Shirley, upon his Wedding.
AN enforced rapture, and high swelling phrase
Does only gaudy ignorance amaze;
Conceits that yield judicious Writers glory,
Enrich the beauty of thy Comicke Story:
Loves passion in smooth numbers is descride,
Such as becomes the softness of a Bride.
I want a Poets aerie soul, to give
Due praises to thy lines, which shall out-liue
The Crittickes spleen, the Atheists impious jest;
A modest pen becomes the Muses best,
And such is thine, as thy fair Wedding shows,
Who Crowns thee not, a debt to knowledge owes.
Edmond Colles.

To his worthy Friend Mr. Shirley, upon his Nuptial Comedy.
IS Beaumont dead? or slept he all this while,
To teach the World the want of his smooth style?
If he be dead, that part of him Divine
By transmigration of his soul is thine:
High is thy fancy, yet thy strain so sweet,
Death would be loved in such a winding sheet:
This Wedding needs no Offering, and thy worth
Is above flattery, to set thee forth:
From whose rich Muse thus Wedded, we shall see
Many fair Children borne to Poesy.
Robert Harue^.

In Hymeneum Ingeniosissimi Iacobi Shirley.
Dies fugaci de siliunt pede
Nec vrna cuiquam parcit, at improbae
Viuit superstes fama morti,
N^c gelidum metuit sepulchrum.
O qui ingales flauus Hymen toros
Ambis, corus^a iam nitidus toga
Incede, ^hirlciana laurus,
Perpetuos tibi dat triumphos.
Phoebus sacrat^ vellit ab arbore
Ramum, modestas quo decoret comas
Additque vatem Laureatis
S^deribus, numerumque claudit.
SPread fair thou growing Tree, with which in vain
The winds do wraste: ^lemish'd with the stain
Of impure life, some by Atheisticke rimes,
And witty surfeits, force these ruder times
To fond amazement; but thy fair defense
Rests in clear Art, and secure Innocence.
As thou, thy Muse is chaste, on which no Rape
Was ere by thee committed, Learnings Ape
Is frantic imitation; and the Bough
That Crowns such VVriters, withers on their brow:
I gratulate thy Wedding; Love does guide
My friendly Muse, thus to salute thy Bride.
William Habington.

To my deserving friend Mr. James Shirley, upon his Comedy, the Wedding.
THou need'st not, friend, that any man for thee,
Should to the World put in security.
Thy Comedy is good; 'twill pass alone,
And fair enough, without this ribbands shown
Upon the forehead on it: if high raised passion
Tempered with harmless mirth, in such sweet fashion,
And with such harmony, as may inuit
Two faculties of soul, and both delight
Deserve an approbation, in mine eye,
Such in just value is this Comedy.
Tho. May.

Of this Ingenious Comedy the Wedding. To Mr. James Shirley the Author.
THE Bonds are equal, and the Marriage fit,
Where judgment is the Bride, the Husband wit;
Wit has begot, and judgment has brought forth
A noble issue, of delight, and worth,
Grown in this Comedy to such a strength
Of sweet perfection, as that not the length
Of days, nor rage of malice, can have force
To sue a nullity, or work divorce
Between this well trimmed Wedding, and loud Fame,
Which shall in every age, renew thy Name.
John Ford.

The Wedding.
Actus Primi. Scoena Prima.
Enter Sir John Belfare, and Isaac his man, servants bringing in Provision.
Belfare. WEll done my Masters, ye bestirre your selves, I see we shall feast
to morrow.


Ser. Your worship shall want no Wood-cocke^ at the Wedding.


Isa. Thou have as many as thou can carry, and thirteen to the last dozen.


Bell. Isaac.


Isa. Sir.


Bell. Have you been careful, to inuit those friends, you had direction for?


Isa. Yes sir, I have been a continual motion ever sin^^ I rise. I have not
said my prayers to day.


Bell. We shall want no guests then.


Isa. I have commanded most on'em.


Bell. How sir?


Isa. I ha'bid 'em sir, there is two in my list, will not fail to dine w'ee.


Bell. Who are they?


Isa. Master Rawbone, the young usurer.


Bell. Oh he is reported a good Trencher-man,
He has a tall stomach, he shall be welcome.

Isa. They say, he has made on Obligation to the Devil, if ever he eat a good
meal at his own charge, his soul is forfeit.


Bell. How does he live live?


Isa. Upon his money sir.


Bell. He does not eat it.


Isa. No the Devil choke him, it were a golden age, if all the Usurers in
London should ha'no other diet; he has a thingut waytes upon him, I think,
one of his bastards, be got upon a spider, I hope to live, to see 'em both
drawn through a ring.


Bell. Who is the other?


Isa. The other may be known too, the barrel at Heidelberg was the pattern
of his belly, Master Lodam sir.


Bell. He Is a great man indeed.


Isa. Something given to the wast, for he lives within no reasonable compass
I Am sure.


Bell. They will be well met.


Isa. But very ill matched to draw a Coach, yet at pro^^^der, there will be scarce
an Oate between the lean ^ade, and the fa^ Gelding.


Bell. How lives he?


Isa. Religiously sir; for he that seeds well, must by consequence live well,
he holds none can be damned but lean men, for f^t men he says must needs be
saved by the faith of their body.


Enter Mr Beauford, and Captain Landby. Bell. Mr. Beauford and Captain Landby:
Isaac, call forth my Daughter.


Beau. Sir John, I hope you make no stranger of me,
To morrow, I shall change my title for
Your son, soon as the holy rites shall make me
The happy husband to your daughter, in the mean time
It will become me wait on her.

Bell. I possess nothing but in trust for thee,
Gratiana makes all th^ne.

Cap. I shall presume to follow.

Bell. Your friendship noble Captain to Mr. Beauford,
Makes your person most welcome,
Had you no other merit, pray enter. Exe. Bea. and Cap.
Heaven has already crowned my gray hayres!
I live to see my daughter married
To a noble hu^band, the envy of our time,
And exact pattern of a Gentleman,
As hopeful as the Spring, I am grown proud,
Even in my age. Exit.

Enter Marwood. Mar. Do hear firra?

Isa. I ^irra.

Mar. Is Master Beauford within?

Isa. No sir.

Mar. I was informed he came hither, is he not here?

Isa. Yes sir.

Mar. Thou say he is not within.

Is. No sir, but it is very like he will be to morrow night sir.

Mar. How is this?

Is. Would you have him be within before he is married.

Mar. Witty Groom, pret^ee inuit him forth; say here is a friend

Is. Now you talk of inuiting, I have two or three guests to inuit yet: let
me see.


Mar. Why do not move?


Is. And you make much ado, i will inuit you: pray come to the* Wedding to
morrow. Exit.


Enter Sir John Belfare, Beauford, and Captain. Bell. It Is he.


Bea. You were my happy prospect from the window, Coose you are a most welcome
guest.


Bell. Mr. Marwood, you have been a great stranger to the City, or my house for
the course entertaynement you received, has been unworthy of your visit.


Mar. It Was much abo^e my desert sir: Captain.


Cap. I congratulate your return.


Bell. Beauford, Gentlemen enter my house,
And perfect your embraces there: I lead the way. Exit.

Bea. Pray follow.

Mar. Your pardon.

Cap. We know you have other habit,
You were not wont to affect ceremony. Mar. and Bea whisper.

Bea. How?

Cap. I do not like his present countenance,
It does threaten somewhat; I would not prophecy.

Bea. Good Captain,
Excuse my absence to our friends within,
I have affairs concerns me with my kinsman,
Which done, we both return to wait on 'em.

Cap. I shall sir.

Bea. Now proceed.

Mar. We are kinsmen.

Bea. More we are friends.

Mar. And shall I doubt to speak to Beauford any thing,
My love directs me to?

Bea. What needs this circumstance?
We were not wont to talk at such a distance,
You appear wild.

Ma. I have been wild indeed
In my vngouernd youth, but have reclaimd it,
And am to laden with the memory of former errors,
Tha^ I desire to be confessed.

Bea. Confessed? I am no Gostly father.

Ma. But you must hear, you may absolve me too:

Bea. If thou have any discontentments prithee take other time
For their discourse, I am in expectation of Marriage,
I would not interrupt my joys.

Ma. I must require your present hearing,
A concerns us both, as near as fame, or life.

Bea. Ha! what is it?

Ma. We shall have opportunity at your lodging,
The streets are populous and full noise,
So please you walk, I Will wait one you.

Bea. I Am your servant. Exeunt.

Enter Justice Landby, and Milisent. Just. Milisent. Where Is my daughter?

Mil. In complement with Mr. Rawbone, who is newly entered sir.

Just. O there is a piece of folly.
A thing made up of parchment and his bonds
Are of more value then his soul and body,
Were any man the purchaser, only wise
In his hereditary trade of usury,
Understands nothing but a scriuener,
As if he were created for no use
But to grow rich with intrest, to his ignorance,
He has the gift, of being impudent,
What will he grow to, if he live, that is
So young a monster?

Mil. With your favor sir
If you hold no better opinion of this Citizen
It puzles, me why you inuit him, to your house
And entertainment, he pretending affection to your daughter,
Pardon me sir if I seem bold.

Just. As some men Milisent
Do suffer spiders in their Chamber, while
They count them profitable vermin.

Mil. But he is most like to scatter poison sir,
Your fame is precious, and your family
Not mingling with corrupted streams, has like
An entire River, still maintayn'd his current
Chaste, and delightful.

Just. Shall receive my bosom,
I Will sooner match her with an Ethiope,
Then give consent, she should disgrace our blood;
And herein I but try her strength of judgment
In giving him access; if she have lost
Remembrance of her birth, and generous thoughts*
She sucked from her dead mother, with my care
I Will strive to reinforce her native goodness,
Or quite divorce her from my blood: and Milisent
I Will use your vigilance.

Mil. Sir command.

Just. I will,
Not urge how I received you first a stranger,
Nor the condition of your life, with me,
Above the nature of a servant, to
Obliege your faith: I have observed thee honest.

Mil. You are full of noble thoughts.

Just. Though I suspect not
The obedience of my daughter, yet her youth
Is apt to err, let me employ your eye
Upon her still, and receive knowledge from you,
How she dispenceth favors, you shall bind
My love the stronger to you.

Mil. Sir, I shall be ambitions to deserve your favor
Withal the duties of a servant, and
I doubt not, but your Daughter is so full
Of conscience, and care in the conformity
Of her desires to your will, I shall
Enrich my sight with observation,
And make my intelligence happy.

Enter Cameleon. Just. How now: what is he?

Mil. It Is Mr. Rawbones squire.

Came. Pray is not my Masters worship here?

Just. Your Masters worship!
What Is that, his Spaniell?

Came. No sir, but a thing that does follow him.

Just. In what likeness,
I hope he does not converse with spirits.

Came. Heel not entertayne an Angel,
But he will weigh him first, indeed
I am all the spirits that belong to him.

Mil. So I think, but none of his familiar.

Just. What Is thy name?

Came. Cameleon.

Just. Good; did ever eat?

Came. Yes once.

Just. And then thou caught'st a surfeit,
thou could nere endure meat since: were ever christened.

Came. Yes twice, first in my infancy,
And the last time about a year ago,
When I should have been prentise to an Anabaptist.

Just. Does thy Master love thee?

Came. Yes, for, and I would gold I might have it,
But my stomach would better digest beef, or mutton,
If there be any such things in nature.

Mil. Here is his Master sir, and Mistress Jane.

Enter Rawbone, and Jane. Raw. How now Cameleon, have dined?


Came. Yes sir,
I had a delicate fresh air to dinner.

Raw. And yet thou lookst as thou had eat nothing this se'night, here
provide me a Capon, and half a dozen of Pigeons to supper, and when will your
worship come home, and taste my Hospitality.


Ian. When you please sir,


Raw. Yet now I think on it,
I must feed more sparingly.

Ian. More liberally in my opinion.


Raw. Would not any body in the world think so? did you ever see two such
eare-wigges as my man and I: do we not look^ like.


Ian. I think the picture of either o'your faces in a ring, with a Memento
mors, would be as sufficient a mortification, as lying with an Anotomy.


Raw. The reason why we are so lean and consumed, is nothing, but eating too
much: Cameleon now I think on^t, let the Pygeons alone, the Capon will be
enough for thee and I.


Came. The rumpe would last us a se'night.


Raw. I tell you forsooth, I ha brought my self so low, with a great diet,
that I must be temperate, or the Doctor says there is no way but one wo'me.


Came. That Is not the way of all flesh I Am sure.


Raw. It is a shame to say, what we eat every day.


Ian. I think so.


Came. By this hand: if it would bear an oath: we have had nothing this two
days but half a Lark; which by a mis-chance the Cat had killed too, the Cage
being open: I will provide my belly another Master.


Just. Now I Will interrupt em Master Rawbone.


Raw. I hope your Worship will repinie my boldness,
It Is out of love to your daughter.

Just. Sir, I have a business to you, a friend of mine upon some necessity
would take up a hundred pounds.


Raw. I Will pawn some ounces to pleasure him.


Just. It is more friendly said then I expected.


Raw. So he bring me good security, some three or
Four, or five sufficient and able Citizens, for
Mortalities sake, i will lend it him.

Just. Will you not take an honest man's word.


Raw. Few words to the wise, I will take any man's word to owe me a hundred
pound, but not a Lords to pay me fifty.


Just. Well: it is courtesy.


Raw. He shall pay nothing to me but lawful confideration from time to time,
beside the charges of th'ensealing, because he is your friend.


Just. This is extremity, can you require more?


Raw. More? what is eight in the hundred to me? my Scriuenes knows, I have taken
forty and fifty in the hundred vijs^ and mod^s of my own kins-men, when they
were in necessity.


Just. I apprehend the favor.
Enter Isaac. How now Isaac?

Is. My master commends his love to you sir, and does desire your presence
together with your Daughter and Nephew, at the arraignement of my young
mistress to morrow.


Just. How knave?


Is. She is to be married or arraigned, ith'morning, and at night to suffer
execution and loose her head.


Just. Return our thanks, and say we will wait upon the Bride Jane. Exeunt
Justice and Jane.


Is. Dear Master Rawbone, I do beseech you be at these Sessions.


Raw. Thou did inuit me before.


Is. I know it, but our Cock has a great mind, that sentence should likewise
pass upon the roast, the boyld, and the baked, and he fears unless you be
a Commissioner, the meat will hardly be condemned to morrow, so that I can
never often enough desire your stomach to remember, you will come.


Raw. Do think I won ^t keep my word?


Is. Alas, we have nothing, but good cheer to entertayne you, I beseech you
sir howsoever to feast with us, though you go away after dinner.


Raw. There Is my hand --


Isa. I thank you.


Raw. Is master Justice gone, and mistress Jane too? follow me Cameleon. I Will
take my leave when I come again.


Mil. Is^ac.


Isa. My l^ttle wit, thou wo't come with thy master tomorrow, I Will reserve a
bottle of wine to warm thy sconce.


Mil. I cannot promise.


Isa. If I durst stay three minutes, I would venture a cup with thee
irh'buttery, but it is a busy time at home: Farewell M^l^sent. Exit.



Mil. Marriage as much joy wait upon the Bride,
As the remembrance of it brings me sorrow,
A woman has undone me, when I dye
A Coffin will enclose this misery. Exit.

Enter Beauford and Marwood. Beau. You prepare me for some wonder.

Mar. I do:
And ere I come to the period of my Story,
Your understanding will admire.

Beau. Teach my soul the way.

Mar. I am not Cose ith'number of those friends
Come to congratulate your present marriage.

Beau. Ha?

Mar. I am no flatterer, the blood you carry
Does warm my veins, yet could nature be
Forgetfu^l and remove it self, the love
I owe your merit, coth oblige me, to
Relation of a truth which else would fire
My bo o^ne with concealment. I am come
To divide your s^u^e, ravish all your pleasures,
Poison the very air maintaynes your breathing,
You must not marry.

Beau. Must not? though as I
Am mortal I may be compeld within
A pair of minutes to turn ashes, yet
My soul already Bridegroom to her virtue,
Shall laugh at Death that would vnmarry us,
And call her mine eternally.

Mar. Death is
A mockery to that divorce I bring,
Come you must not love her.

Beau, Did I hope thou could
Give me a reason, I would ask one.

Mar. Do not,
I will too soon arrive, and make you curse
Your knowledge, could exchan^e thy temper for
An angels* at the hearing of this reason,
'Twould make you passionate, and ^urne man again.

Beau. Can there be reason for a sin so great,
As changing my affection from Gratiana?
Namen, and reach me how to be a monster,
For I must loose humanity* oh Marwood,
Thou leadst me into a Wilderness, she is --

Mar. False, sinful, a black soul she has.

Bea. Thou have a hell about thee, and thy language
Speaks thee a Devil, that to blast her innocence
Do belch these vapors: to say thou lie,
Were to admit, thou have but made in this
A humane error, when thy sin has aimed
The fall of goodness. Gratiana false?
The snow shall turn a Salamander first
And dwell in fire; the air retreat, and leave
An emptiness in nature, angels be^
Corrupt, and bribed by mortals sell their charity
Her innocence is such, that were thou Marwood
For this offense condemned to lodge in flames,
It would for ever cure thy burning fever,
If with thy sorrow thou procure her shed
One tear upon thee, now, thou art lost for ever,
And armed thus, though with thousand furies guarded,
I reach thy heart. Draws:

Mar Stay Beauford,
Since you dare be so confident of her chastity
Hear me conclude, I bring no idle fable
Patcht up between suspicion, and report
Of scandalous tongues, my ears were no assurance
To convince me without my eyes.

Bea. What horror!
Be more particular:

Mar. I did prophecy,
That it would come to this, for I have had
A tedious struggling with my nature, but
The name of friend ore-ballanc'd the exception:
Forgive me Ladies, that my love to man
Has power to make me guilty of such language,
As with it, must betray a woman's honor:

Bea. You torture me, be brief.

Mar. Then, though it carry shame to the reporters,
Forgive me heaven, and witness an unwelcome truth.

Bea. Stay, I am too hasty for the knowledge
Of something thou prepar'st for my destruction,
May I not think what it is, and kill my self?
Or at least by degrees, with apprehending
Some strange thing done, infect my fancy with
Opinion first, and so dispose my self
To death? I cannot, when I think of Gratiana
I enterrayne a heaven: the worst, I Will hear it.

Mar. It will enlarge it self too soon, receive it;
I have enjoyed her.

Bea. Whom?

Mar. Gratiana sinnefully, before your love
Made she and you acquainted.

Bea. Ha? thou have kept thy word thou can so poison all
My comfort*

Mar. Your friendship I ha^preferred
To my own fame, and but to save you from
A lasting shipwreck, noble Beauford, think
It should have rotted here, she that will part
With Virgin honor, nere should wed the heart.

Bea. Was ever woman good, and Gratiana
Vicious? lost to honor? at the instant
When I expected all my Harvest ripe.
The golden Summer tempting me to reap
The well grown ears, comes an impetuous storm
Destroys an ages hope in a short minute,
And lets me live, the copy of man's frailty:
Surely, some one of all the female sex,
Engrost the virtues, and fled hence to Heaven,
Left womankind dissemblers.

Mar. Sir, make use
Of reason, it is a knowledge should rejoice you,
Since it does teach you to preserve your self.

Bea. Enjoyed Gratiana sinnefully, it is a sound
Able to kill with horror; it infects
The very air, I see it like a mist
Dwell round about, that I could uncreate
My self, or be forgotten, no remembrance
That ever I loved woman: I have no
Genius left to instruct me -- it grows late:
Within --
Wait of my kinsman to his Chamber,
I shall desire your rest, pray give me leave
To think a little --

Mar. Cosen: I repent
I have been so open breasted, since you make
This severe use on it, and afflict your mind
With womanish sorrow, I have but cautioned you
Against a danger, out of my true friendship:
Prosper me goodness as my ends are noble*
Goodnight, collect your self, and be a man. Exit.

Bea. And why may not a kinsman be a Vilaine?
Perhaps he loves Gratiana, and envying
My happiness, does now traduce her chastity
To find this out, time will allow but narrow
Limits: His last words bad me be a man.
A man? yes I have my soul, t'does not become
A manly resolution to be tame thus,
And give up the opinion of his mistress
For one man's accusat on; -- ha: ith'morning?
Proper. Y^s Marwood I will be a man:
His (...)d, shall either make past the sense
Of this affliction. or mine en^orce
A tru^h^f^on him, if thou be^st wronged Gratiana
Ile^ ye the Mar^yr, bu^ if false, in this
I gain to ^ye, not hue a sacrifice. Exit.

Actus Secundi. Scena Prima.
Enter Cardona, and Isaac. Car. To the Tailors man, run.

Isa. To the Tailors man,
Why not to his master?

Car. The Wedding clothes not brought
Home yet, fie, fie.

Isa. W'o would trust of woman's Tailor, take measure so long before of a
Gentlewoman, and not bring home his commodity, there is no conscience in it.


Car. The arrant Shoemaker too.


Isa. Master Hide, is not he, come yet I called upon him yester-day, to make
have of my M^stress^s shoes, and he told me, he was about the upper leather, he
would be at her heels presently, I left his foot in the stirrup, I thought he
would have rid post after me.


Car. Prithee Isa^c, make have, how tedious thou art, have not thou been there
yet.


Isa. Oh yes, and here again, de'e not see me, you are so light your self.


Car. As thou go, call upon Cod the Persumer, tell him he uses us sweetly,
has not brought home the gloves yet. -- and do hear? when thou art at the
Peacocke remember to call for the sprig, by the same token I left my fan to
be mended: -- and do hear? when thou art there, it is but a little out of the
way, to run to the Devil, and bid the V^^tener make have with the runlets of
Claret, w^ shall ha no time to burn it.


Isa. You need not if it come from Devil, me-thinkes that Wine should burn it
self.


Car. Run I prithee.


Isa. Tailors, Shoe-makers, Perfumers, Feather-makers, and the Devil and all,
what a many occupations does a woman run through, before she is married. Exit.


Car. Fie upon it what a perplexity is about a Wedding, I might have been thus
troubled for a child of my own, if good luck had served.

-- Within. Cardona.

Car. I come Lady-bird. Exit.


Enter Beauford and Marwood. Mar. Was this your purpose.

Bea, This place of all the Park affords most priuacy.
Nature has placed the trees to imitate
A Roman Amphitheater.

Mar. We must be the sword-players.

Bea. Draw, imagine all
These trees were Cypress, the companions of
Our funeral, for one or both must go
To a dark habitation, me-thinkes
We two, are like to some unguided men,
That having wandered all the day in a
Wild unknown path, at night walk down into
A hollow grot, a cave which never Star
Durst look into, made in contempt of light
By nature, which the Moon did never yet
Be-friend with an^ melancholy beam:
Oh Cosen thou hastled me, where I neue^
Shall see day mo^e.

Mar. This is the way to make it
A night indeed, but if you recollect
Your self, I brought you beams to let you see
The horror of that darkness you are going to,
By marrying with Gratiana.

Bea. That name
Awakes my resolution, consume not
Thy breath ^oo idly, thou have but a small time
For the use om't, either employ it in the unsaying
Thy wrong to Gratiana, or thou hastens
Thy last minute.

Mar. I must tell Beauford them,
He is ungrateful to return so ill
My friendship, have I vnder-va'ued
My shame in the relation of a truth,
To make the man I wooed preserve, my enemy:
Why do thou tempt thy destiny with so
Much sin? do think I were a sword I dare
Not manage? or that I can be enforced
To a revolt? I am no Rebel Beauford:
Again^ I must confirm Gratianaes honor
Stained, the treasures of her chastity
Rifled, and lost, it was my unhappiness
To have added that, unto my other sins
Ith'wildnesse of my blood, which thou may punish.

Bea. Thou have repeated, but the same in
Substance touching Gratiana.

Mar. Truth is ever constant
R^maines upon her square, firm, and unshaken.

Beau. If what thou have affirmed be true, why should
We fight, be cruel ^o our selves, endanger
Our e^ernity, for the enou^ of
One frail woman^ let our swords exp^ct
A nobler cause. What man has such assurance
In any woman's faith, that he should run
A desperate hazard of his soul? I know
Women are not borne angels, but created
With passion and temper like to us,
And men are apt to err, and louse themselves
Caught with the soul of wanton beauty, fetterd
Even ^ith their mist^^sses hair

Mar. I like this well. as^de.

Beau. He has a handsome presence and discourse,
Two subtle charms to tempt a woman's frailty,
Who must be governed by their eye or ear
To love, beside my kinsman has been taxt.
F^r being ^oo prompt in wantonness, this confirms it
Then farwe^l woman kind.

Mar. This d^es become you.

Bea. Why should we fight, our letting blood wo'no^
Cure her, and make her honor white again:
We are friends, ^epen^ thy sin, and marry her.

Mar. Whom?

Beau. Gratiana.

Mar. How Sir, marry her?

Bea. Why can tho add to it another crime,
By a refusing to repair the ruins
Of that chaste temple, thou had violated?
Her Virgin tapers are by thee extinct,
No odor of her chastity, which once
Gave a perfume to Heaven, and and did refresh
Her innocent soul, they that have spoyld virginity,
Do half restore the treasures they took thence
By sacred marriage.

Mar. Marriage, with whom?

Bea. Gratiana.

Mar. Should I marry a whore?

Bea. Thou lie, and with a guilt upon thy soul,
Able to sink thee to damnation, draws again.
I Will send thee hence; a whore? what woman
Was ever bad enough to deserve that name?
Salute some native fury, or a wretch
Condemned already to hells tortures by it,
Not Gratiana; thou have awakned justice,
And given it eyes to see thy treachery,
The depth of thy malicious heart, that word, has
Dis-inchanted me.

Mar. Are you serious?

Bea. How have I fined in my credulity
Against virtue, all this while? what charm bound up
My understanding part, I should admit
A possibility, for her to carry
So black a soul; though all her sex beside
Had fallen from their creation? thou have
Not life enough to forfeit, what an advantage
To fame and goodness had been lost.

Mar. Will you fight?

Beau. Were thou defen^'d with circular fire, more
Subtle then the lightning, that I knew would ravish
My heart, and marrow from me, yet I should
Neglect the danger, and but singly armed,
Fly to revenge thy calumny: a whore -- come on sir.
Thou Art wounded: ha? Fight.

Mar. Mortally, fly Beauford, save thy self, I hasten to the dead.

Beau. Oh stay a while, or thou will loose us both,
Thy wound I cannot call back, now there is
No dallying with heaven, but thou pulst on thee
Double confusion, leave a truth behind thee,
As thou would hope rest to thy parting soul,
Have thou not wronged Gratiana?

Mar. Yes, in my lust, but not in my report,
Take my last breath, I sinfully enjoyed her, One hollows within.
Gratiana is a blotted piece of alablaster:
Farewell least some betray thee, heaven forgive
My offense, as I do freely pardon thine.

Beau. I cannot long survive, --
Is there no hope thou may recover?

Mar. Oh!

Beau. Farewell for ever then, with thy short breath
May all thy ills conclude, mine but begin
To muster, life and I shall quickly part,
I feel a sorrow will break Beaufords heart. Exit.

Enter Keeper and Servant. Ser. There are Cony-stealers abroad sir.

Keeper. These whoreson Rabbet suckers
Will nere leave the ground.

Ser. In my walk last night, I frighted some on em.
Pox a these vermin, would they were all destroyed.

Keeper. So we may chance to keep no Dear.

Ser. Why so?

Kee. An old Cony stops a knaves mouth sometimes.
That else would be gaping for Venison.

Mar. Oh.

Keeper. Whose that?

Servant. Here Is a Gentleman wounded.

Keeper. Ha?

Servant. He has bled much.

Keeper. How cam^ you hurt si^? no,
Not speak? if he be not past h^pe, let us
Cany him to my lodge* my wife is a
Pe^ce of a Su^g^on, has been fortunate
In some cures: tear a piece of thy shirt Raph,
To bind his wound quickly: -- so, so, alas
Poor Gentleman, he may hue to be dressed, and tell
Who has done this misfortune: gently Exe. carry him in.
Honest Raph, he has some breath yet:
Would ^ had my blood-hound here.

Enter Sir John Belfare Justice Landby, and his daughter Jane* Isaac waiting.
Bell. You Are welcome Mr Landby, and mistress Jane.
Where Is the young Captayn si^ your Nephew?

Just He went betimes to wait upon the Bridgroome.

Bell. They are inseparable friends, as they had
Divided hearts, they both are glad, when either
Mee^e a good fortune.

Jane. I Will be bold to see your daughter.

Bell. Do mistress Jane, she has
Her maids blush yet, she will make you amends for this,
And ere't be long I hope 'dance at your wedding. Exit Jane.

Just. I wish you many joys sir by this marriage:
Your daughter ha made discreet election,
She Will have a hopeful Gentleman.

Bell. Master Lan^by,
It would refresh my age to see her fruitful to him,
I should find a blessing for a young
^eaufor^, and be glad to d^ndle him, the
First news of a boy borne by my daughter
Would set me back seven years: O Master Landby,
Old men do never truly doat, until
Their children bring em babies.

Enter Mr. Rawbone, and Hauer as his servant. Isa. Master Rawbone* i will be bold
to present you
With a piece of Rose-mary, we ha such cheer.

Raw. Honest Isaac.

Isa. Pray do you belong to Master Rawbone?

Hau Yes sir.

Isa. You have eat something in your days.

Hau. Why prithee?

Isa Nothing, nothing,
Do You understand nothing, you shall eat nothing:
Unless some Benefactors like my master,
In pity of your bellies once a year
Do warm it with a dinner, you must never
Hope to see roast, of sod; he has within
This twelve month to my knowledge
Made seven men immortal.

Hau. How?

Isa. Yes, he has made spirits on em,
And they haunt such men's houses as my masters,
Spirits ath'buttery, let me counsel ye
To cram your corpse to day, for by his Almanacke
There Is a long Lent a coming.

Bell. Never see me,
But when you are invited.

Raw. Alas I h^d
Rather eat a piece of cold Capon at home,
Th^n be troublesome abroad. I hope forsooth
Mist^^sse Jane is as she should be.

Just She is ^n ^ealth:

Bell. You Have a fresh servant master Rawbone,
A proper fellow, and maintains himself
Hansomely.

Raw. And he wod not ha maintained
Himself, I had never entertaind him.

Isa. Where Is Cameleon?

Raw. I ha preferred him Isaac.

Isa. How?

Raw. Turned him away last night,
And took this stripling.

Enter Captain. Cap. Morrow sir John, where is the early Bridegroom?

Just. Came not you from him?

Bell. We expect him sir, every minute.

Cap. Not yet come? his servants* told me
He went abroad before the morning blushed.

Rel. We ha not seen him, pray heaven
He be in health.

Cap. I wonder at his absence.

Raw. Captain Landby, young man of war, I do
Salute thee with a broadside.

Cap. Do You hear, they
Say you come a woing to my Cosen,
That day you marry her, i will cut your throat,
Keep't to your self.

Hau. Thou art a noble fellow; things may prosper.

Cap. You come hither to wish C^n give em joy now.

Raw. Yes marry do I.

Cap. You do lie, you come to
Scour your durty maw with the good cheer,
Which will be damned in your lean Barathruw,
That kitchin-stuffe deuourer.

Raw. Why should you
Say so Captain? my belly did nere think
You any harm.

Cap. When it does vomit up thy heart
I Will praise it, in the mean time would
Every bit thou catst to day, were steept
In Aqua fortis.

Raw. What is that Jasper?

Hau. It is strong water.

Raw. Noble Captain, thanks in faith heartily:
I was afraid you had been angry.

Cap. I Will ha thee sowed up in a
Mony-bagge, and boyld to ielly.

Raw. You shall ha me at your service,
And my bags too, upon good security:
Is not this better then quarrelling, Jasper, --

Enter Cardona. Car. Is not the Bridegroom come yet, sure he has over slept
himself, there is nothing but wondering within, all the maids are in uproar,
one says he is a slow thing, another says, she knows not what to say, but
they all conclude, if ever they marry, they will make it in their bargain to be
sure of all things before matrimony, fie upon him, if I were to be his wife,
i would show him a trick for it, ere a year came about, or it should cost me a
fall, I warrant him. Exit.


Just. Sir John you are troubled.

Bell. Can you blame me sir:
I would not have our mornings expectation
Frustrate -- I know not what to think.

Just. Sir, fear not.

Bell. The morn grows old.

Just. Himen has long tapers.

Bell. What should procure his absence; he departed
But odly yester-day.

Cap. Marwood had engaged him,
They promised to return.

Bell. But we see neither.

Just. They Will come together, make it not your fear,
Beauford^ a Gentleman, and cannot be
Guilty of doing such affront, unless
Some misfortune --

Bell. That Is another jealousy.

Enter Lodam, Cameleon waiting upon him. Lod. Where is Sir John Belfare?

Bell. Ha? Master Lodam,
W^lcome.

Lod. I congratulate. --

Bell. Saw you master Beauford sir.

Lod. Yes I saw him, but --

Just. But what?

Lod. I kn^w not how he does,
Where is the Lady that must be undone to night,
Your daughter?

Bell. My daughter undone, name what unhappiness,
My heart already does begin to prophecy
How (...), name what disaster, give it
Expression pray, what is the news?

Lod. The news?
Why would ye know the news? it is none a'ch best.

Just. Be temperate then in your relation.

Bell. What is it?

Lod. They say for certain,
There were fou^e and twenty Colliers cast away,
Coming from New Castle it is cold news in the City,
But there is worse news ^broad.

Bell. Does it concern my knowledge? trifle not.

Lod. They say that Canary sack, m^st dance
Again to the Apothecaries, and be sold for
Physic, in hum-glasses, and thin bles* that the
Spaw-water must be transported hither, and
Be drunk instead of French wines:
For my part, I am but one.

Hau. Big enough for two.

Lod. This citadell may endure as long a siege
As another, if the pride of my flesh must be
Pulled down, farewell it t'has done me
Service this forty year: let it go.

Bell. Saw you master Beauford?

Lod. Yes Sir John,
I saw him but -- it was three days ago.

Cap. He is ridiculous.

Just. Do not afflict your self,
He will give a fair account at his return.

Bell. Pray heaven he may:
Enter Gratiana, Jane, and Cardona. My daughter.

Raw. Sir, I desire to be acquainted with you.

Lod. I have no stomach sir to your acquaintance,
You are a thought too lean.

Raw. And you a bit too fat.

Bell. Do not wonder girl at Beaufords absence?

Grats. Not at all sir, I am not now to learn
Opinion of his nobleness; and I hope
Your judgments will not permit you sin so much
To censure him for this stay. Fair morning
To master Landby, noble Captain, master
Lodam, and the rest.

Raw. I am so little
She cannot see me, give you joy forsooth,
I hope it is your destiny to be married.

Cap. And yours to be hanged.

Raw. How sir.

Hau. No harm,
He wishes you long life.

Raw. A long halter he does,
What to be hanged.

Hau. Las sir he knows you ha no flesh to burden you,
Light at a feather, hanging will nere kill you,
If he had wished sir master Lodam hanged.

Raw. Then, i will to him and thank him;
But here is mistress Jane.

Cap. You shall command me as your servant. -- sir. Exit. As he goes out, he
sees Rawb. court Jane.

Raw. I did but ask her how she did, I said
Never a word to her: Pox upon his bounsing
I am as fearful of him as of a Gun,
He does so powder me.

Grati. We have not seen
You sir, this great while, you fall away me-thinkes.

Lod Loosing Lodam I.

Grati. You are not the least welcome sir.

Lod. I do give you great thank, and do mean to dance at your Wedding for it,
I do marvel Master Beauford is not earlier, I should ha been here with
music Lady, and have fidled you too, before you were up, these lean Lovers,
ha nothing in em, slow men of London.


Bell. Gratiana. Lod spies Jane.


Lod. Who Is this? she has a mortal eye.


Isa. Cameleon? How now turned away your master.


Came. No, I sold my place; as I was thinking to run away, comes this fellow,
and offered me a breake-fast for my good will to speak to my Master for him, I
took him at his word, and resigned my Office, and turned over my hunger to him
immediately; now I serve a man, Isaac.


Bell. Isaac. -- Exit Isaac as sent off.


Lod. I do foresee a fall of this tower already,
Love begins to vnder-mine it.
Mistress, a word in private.

Raw. Jasper has't a sword.

Hau. Yes sir.

Raw. That Is well, let it alone:
Did see this paunch affront me?

Hau. He did it in love to the Gentlewoman.

Raw. In love? let me see the sword again. Draws.
Would twere in his belly -- put it up,
Thou deserust a good blade, it is so well kept.

Enter Isaac. Isa. Master Beauford, master Beauford.

Bell. Where?

Isa. Hard by, within a stones cast a my
Mistress, here sit here. Enter Beauford.

Great. My dearest Beauford, where have bin so long?

Bea. Oh Gratiana.

Great. Are you not in health?

Bell. Not well, it is then no time to chide:
How fare you sir?

Bea. I have a trouble at my heart: pardon
The trespass of your patience Gentlemen,
He publish the occasion of my absence,
So first, you give me leave, to unlade it here;
But with your favor, I desire I may
Exempt all ears, but Gratianaes, till
A short time ripen it for your knowledge.

Bell. Ha?

Just. Lets leave 'em then a while.

Bell. Into the Garden Gentlemen.

Raw. Withal my heart:
In my conscience the 'ile be honest together.

Bell. This begets my wonder, master Lodam.

Lod. Good sir John, i will wait upon you,
It is dinner time. Exeunt.

Bea. I have not time to dwell on circumstance,
I come to take my last leave, you and I
Must never meet again.

Great. What language do I hear,
If Beauford it should strike me dead?

Bea. This day, I had designed for marriage, but I must
Pronounce we are eternally diuorc'd:
Oh Gratiana, thou have made a wound
Beyond the cure of Surgery, why did nature
Empty her treasure in thy face, and leave thee
A black prodiglous soul?

Great. Defend me goodness!

Bea. Call upon darkness, to obscure thee rather,
That never more thou may be seen by mortal,
Get thee some dwelling in a mist, or in
A wild forsaken earth, a Wilderness,
Where thou may hide thy self, and dye forgotten.

Great. Where was I lost name what offense prouok'd
This heavy doom, dear Beauford, be not so
Iniust, to sentence me, before I know
What is my crime, or if you will not tell
What sin it is, I have committed, great,
And horrid, as your anger; let me study,
I Will count em all before you, never did
Penitent, in confession, strip the soul
More naked, i will unclasp my book of conscience,
You shall read ore my heart, and if you find
In that great Volume, but one single thought
Which concerned you, and did not end with some
Good prayer for you: Oh be just and kill me.

Bea. Be just, and tell thy conscience, thou have abused it
False woman, why do thou increase thy horror?
By the obscuring a mis-deed, which would
Were all thy other sins forgiven, undo thee
Oh Gratiana, thou art. --

Great. What am I?

Bea. A thing I would not name, it sound so fearfully,
'Twould make a Devil blush, to be saluted
By that, which thou must answer to.

Great. I fear --

Bea. That fear betrays thy guilt, tell me Gratiana
What did thou see in me to make thee think
I was not worthy of thee, at thy best
And richest value, when thou were as white
In soul, as beauty? for sure, once thou were so:
Had thou so cheap opinion of my birth,
My breeding, or my fortunes, that none else
Could serve for property of your lust, but I?

Great. Dear Beauford hear me.

Bea. A common father to thy sinne-got issue,
A patron of thy ^ifled, unchaste womb?
Oh tho^ were cruel, to reward so ill
The heart that truly honored thee: thy name
Which sweetn'd once the breath of him that spoke it,
And musically charmed the gentle ear;
Shall sound here-after like a Screech-owles note,
And fright the hea^er; Virgins shall lament
That thou have shamed their chaste society,
And often as Himen lights his tapers up,
At the remembrance of thy name, shed tears,
And blush for thy dishonor: from this minute,
Thy friends shall count thee desperately si^ke,
And whensoere thou go abroad, that day
The maids and matrons, thinking thou art dead,
And going to the grave, shall all come forth
And wait like mourners on thee.

Great. Ha ye done?
Then hear me a few sillables, you have
Suspicion that I am dishonourd.

Bea. No,
By heaven I have not, I have too much knowledge
To suspect thee sinful, but in the assurance
Of it, I must disclayme thy heart for ever:
Gratiana my opinion of thy whiteness
Has made my soul, as black as thine already;
Weep till thou wash away thy stain, and then,
I^h'other world, we two, may meet again. Exit.

Great. Weep inward eyes, hither your streams impart,
For sure, I have tears enough, to drown my heart. Exit.

Actus Tertij. Scena Prima.
Enter Beauford and Captain. Cap. You amaze me Beauford, Gratiana false?
I shall suspect the truth of my conception,
And think all women monsters, though I never
Loved with that neerenesse of affection
To marry any, yet I mourn they should
Fall from their virtue, why may not Marwood
Iniure her goodness?

Beau. What, and damme his soul?
Shall I think any with his dying breath
Would shipwreck his last hope? he mixed it with
His prayers, when in the stream of his own blood,
His soul was lanching forth.

Cap. That circumstance takes away al suspicion again,
Where left you Marwood?

Bea. In The Park.

Cap. Quite dead?

Beau. Hopeless, his weapon might have proved so happy,
To have released me of a burden too;
And but that manhood, and the care of my
Eternity forbids, I would force out
That which but wearies me to carry it,
Unwelcome life?

Cap. Would he were buried,
My fears perplex me for you; though none see
You fight, the circumstance must needs
Betray you: what is he. Enter a Surgeon.

Sur. I would borrow your ear in private.

Beau. We are but one to hear, his love has
Made him? to great a part of my affliction:
Speak it.

Sur. The body is taken thence.

Beau. Ha.

Sur. I cannot be deceived sir: I beheld
Too plain a demonstration of the place;
But he that suffered such a loss of blood,
Had not enough to maintain life till this time,
Which way so ere his body was conuey'd:
I must conclude it short lived, I am sorry
I could not serve you.

Beau. Sir, -- I thank you,
You deserve I should be grateful: gives him money.
It must be so -- Exit Surgeon.

Cap. What fellow's this?

Beau. A Surgeon.

Cap. Dare you trust him?

Beau. Yes, with my life.

Cap. You have done that already in your discovery.
Pray heaven he prove your friend.
You must resolve for flight, ye shall take ship --

Beau. Never.

Cap. Will you ruin your self? there is no security --

Beau. There is not Captain,
Therefore I Will not change my air.

Cap. How?

Beau. Unless thou can instruct me how to fly from
My self, for wheresoever else I wander,
I shall but carry my accuser with me.

Cap Are you mad?

Beau. I have heard in Affrick^, is a tree, which tasted
By trauailers, it breeds forgetfulness
Of their Country, can direct me thither?
Yet 'twere in vain, unless it can extinguish,
And drown the remembrance I am Beauford:
No -- I Will not move, let those poor things that dare not
Dye, obey their fears, I will expect my fate here.

Cap. This is wildness,
A desperate folly, pray be sensible: --
Whose this, it is Gratiana.

Enter Gratiana with a Cabinet of Jewels. Bea. Ha, farewell.

Came. You shall stay now a little.

Bea. I will not hear an accent, I shall loose
My memory, be charmed into belief
That she is honest with her voice, I dare not
Trust my frailty with her.

Came. She speaks nothing,
Is all a weeping Nyobe, a st^tue,
Or in this posture, does she not present
A water Nymph* placed in the midst of some
Fair Garden, like a Fountain to dispense
Her Crystal streams upon the flowers? which cannot
But so refresht, look up, and seem to smile
Upon the eyes that feed em:
Will she speak?

Great. Though by the effusion of my tears, you may
Conclude, I bring nothing but sorrow with me,
Yet hear me speak, I come not to disturb
Your thoughts, or with one bold and daring language
Say how unjust you make my sufferings:
I know not what
Has raised this mighty storm to my destruction,
But I obey your doom, and after this,
Will never see you more. First I release
And give you back your vows; with them, your har^*
Which I had locked up in my own, and cherisht
Better, mine I Am sure does bleed to part with it,
All that is left of yours, this Cabinet
Delivers back to your possession,
There Is every jewel you bestowed upon me,
The pledges once of love.

Bea. Pray keep em.

Great. They are not mine, since I have lost the opinion
Of what I was, indeed I have nothing else,
I would not keep the kisses, once you gave me,
If you would let me pay them back again.

Beau. All women is a laborinth, we can,
Measure the height of any star, point out
All the dimensions of the earth, examine
The Seas large womb, and sounds its subtle depth,
But art will nere be able to find out,
A demonstration of a woman's heart,
Thou have enough undone me, make me not
More miserable, to believe thou can be virtuous:
Farewell, enjoy you this, I shall find out
Another room to weep in. Exit.

Cap. Lady I would ask you a rude question:
Are you a maid?

Great. Do I appear so Monstrous? no man will
Believe my iuiury: has heaven forgot
To protect innocence, that all this while
It has vouchsafed no miracle, to confirm
A Virgins honor?

Cap. I am answered:
I do believe she is honest; Oh that I could
But speak with Marwoods ghost now, and thou be
In hell, I Would meet thee half way, to converse
One quarter of an hour with thee, to know
The truth of all things, thy Devil Iaylour
May trust thee without a waiter, he has security
For thy damnation in this sin alone,
I me f^ll of pity now, and spite of manhood
Cannot forbear, come Lady, I am confident,
I know not which way -- that you are virtuous --
Pray walk with me, i will tell you the whole story;
For yet you know not your accuser.

Great. I am an exile hence, and cannot walk
Out of my way, Beauford farewell, may Angels
Dwell round about thee, live vn^ill thou find,
When I am dead, thou have bin too unkind. Exeunt.

Enter Milisent and Mistress Jane. Jane. May I believe thee Milisent, that my
father
Though he give such respect to him I hate,
Inten^s no marriage? thou have releast
My heart of many fears, that I was destined
To be a sacrifice.

Mil. It had been sin
That Milisent should suffer you perplexe
Your noble soul, when it did consist in
His discovery, to give a freedom
To your laboring thoughts, it is now no more a secret,
Your father makes a trial of your nature,
By giving him such countenance.

Jane. What thanks shall I give?

Mil. Your virtue has both vnseal'd
My bosom, and rewarded me.

Jane Oh Milisent:
Thou have deserved my gratitude; and I cannot
But in exchange of thy discovery
Give to thy knowledge, what I should tremble
To let another hear; for I dare trust thee with it.

Mil. If I have any skill
In my own nature, shall nere deceive
Your confidence, and think my self much honored,
So to be made your treasurer.

Jane. It Is a treasure,
And all the wealth I have, my life, the sum
Of all my joys on earth, and the expectation
Of future blessings too depend upon it.

Mil. Can I be worthy of so great a trust?

Ian^. Thou art, and shall receive it, for my hear^
Is willing to discharge it self into thee:
Oh Milisent! though my father would ha been
So cruel to his own, to have wished me marry
Him, it was not in the power of me obedience
To give consent to it, for my love already
Is dedicate to one, whose worth has made
Me, but his steward of it, and although
His present fortune does eclipse his luster,
With seeming condition of a servant,
He has a mind derived from honor, and
May boast himself a Gentleman: is not
Thy understanding guilty of the person
I point at? ^ure thou can not choose but know him.

Mil. Not I.

Enter Hauer. Jane. Then look upon him Milisent.

Mil. Ha?

Hau. My master, mistress Iaue sent me before,
To say, be comes to visit you.

Jane. But thou art before him in acceptance, nay
You stand discovered here, in Milisent you may
Repose sa^e trust.

Hau. Her language makes me confident,
You are a friend.

Mil. To both a feruant.

Hau. I shall desire your love.

Jane. But where is this man of morgages?
We shall be troubled now

Hau. I left him chawing the cud, ruminating
Some speech or other, with which, he means to
Arrest you.

Mil. He is entered.

Enter Rawbone. Hau. I have prepared her.


Raw. Fortune be my guide then.


Hau. And she is a blind one.


Raw. Mistress Jane, I would talk with you in private, I have fancied a
business, I know you are witty, and love invention, it is my own, and nobody
else must hear it -- Be it known to all men by these presents.



Ian. This is like to be a secret.


Raw. That I Jasper Rawbone Citizen, and Housekeeper of London.


Hau. A very poor one I Am sure.


Raw. Do owe to mistress Jane, Lady of my thoughts, late of London
Gentlewoman.


Hau. Is she not still a Gentlewoman?


Raw. Still a Gentlewoman good man Coxe-combe? did I not say she was Lady of
my thoughts? where was I now?


Hau. At good man Coxe-combe sir.


Raw. -- Do owe to mistress Jane, Lady of my thoughts, late of London
Gentlewoman, my true and lawful heart of England -- to be paid to his said
mistress, her executors, or assigns.


Hau. To her executors? what will you pay your heart, when she is dead?


Raw. It Is none of my fault, and she will dye, who can help it? thou do
nothing but interrupt me: I say to be paid, to his said mistress, her
executors, or assigns, whenever she demand it, at the font-stone of the
Temple --


Hau. Put it, the top of Paul's and please you; your conceit will be the higher.


Raw. Which payment to be truly made and performed, I bind, not my heirs,
but my body and soul for ever.


Hau. How your soul sir?


Raw. Peace fool, my soul will shift for it self, when I am dead that will be
sure enough: -- In witness whereof, I have hereunto put my hand and seal,
which is a hansome spiny youth, with a bag of money in one hand, a bond in the
the other, an Indenture between his legs, the last of the first merry month,
and in the second year of the reign of King Cupid.


Hau. Excellent! but in my opinion, you had better give her possession of your
heart, I do not like this owing: faith pluck it out, and deliver it in the
presence of us.


Raw. Thou talk like a puisne, I can give her possession of i^, by delivery
of twopence wrapped up in the wax, twill hold in Law man; -- and how, and how
do you like it? I could have come over you with Verse, but hang Ballads, give me
Poetical prose, every Mounte-banke can time, and make his lines cry twang,
though there be no reason in em.


Ian. What Music have I heard?


Raw. Music? Oh rare!


Ian. He has Medusaes noble countenance,
His hairs do curle like soft and gentle Snakes:
Did ever puppy smile so? or the Ass
Better become his ears? oh generous beast
Of sober carriage, sure he is valiant too,
Those blood-shot eyes betray him, but his nose
Fishes for commendation.

Raw. What does she mean Jasper?


Hau. Do You not see her love sir? why she does doat upon you, Which makes her
talk so madly.


Raw. Forsooth I know you are taken with me, alas these things are natural
with me, when shall we be married forsooth?


Ian. With your license sir --


Hau. Do You not observe her? you must first procure a License.


Raw. You shall hear more from me, when I come again -- Jasper -- Exit Rawbone
hastily.


Hau. My heart does breath it self upon your hand -- Exit.


Mil. Your father and Master Lodam* --


Enter Lodam, Justice, Cameleon. Lod. Sir I do love your daughter: -- I
thought it necessary to acquaint you first, because I would go about the
business iudicially.


Just. You obliege us both.


Lod. I Will promise you one thing.


Just. What*s that?


Lod. I Will bring your daughter no wealth.


Just. Say you so: what then you promise her nothing.


Lod. But I will bring her that which is greater then wealth.


Just. What Is that?


Lod. My self.


Just. A fair ioynture.


Lod. Nay, i will bring her more.


Just. It shu'not need, no woman can desire mo^e of a man.


Lod. I can bring her good qualities, if she want any: I ha trauail'd for em.


Just. What are they?


Lod. The Langu^ges.


Just. You susp^ct she will want tongue: -- let me see -- Parlez franzois
monsieur.


Lod. Diggon a cam^ag.


Just. That Is We^ch.


Lod. Pocas palabras.


Just. That Is Spanish.


Lod. Troth I have such a confusion of languages in my head, you must even take
em as they come.


Just. You may speak that more exactly -- Hauelar spagni^l Signior?


Lod. Serge-dubois, -- Calli-mancho, et Perpetu-ana.


Just. There Is stuff indeed, since you are so perfect, I Will trust you for the
rest. I must refer you sir unto my daughter, if you can win her fair
opinion, my consent my happily follow: so She is in presence --


Lod. Me^cie Madame -- Salutes Jane.


Just. This fellow looks like the principal in Usury, and this Rat follows
him like a pitiful eight in the hundred: -- come hither s^ra, your name is
Cameleon.


Came. It is too true sir.


Just. You did live with master Rawbone.


Car. No sir, I did starve with him, and please you:
I could not live with him.

Just. How do you like your change?


Came. Never worse.


Just. Master Lodam wants no flesh.


Came. But I do: -- I ha no Justice sir, my lean master would eat no mea^e,
and my fat master eats up all -- is your Worships house troubled with Vermin?


Just. Something at this time.


Came. Peace and i will catch a mouse then. -- lies down.


Enter Captain and Gratiana. Just. My nephew turned Gentleman Usher.


Cap. Sir John Belfares daughter.


Just. Alas poor Gentlewoman,
I compassionate her unkind destiny.

Cap. Let us entreat a word in private sir --


Lod. I cannot tell how you stand affected, but if you can love a man, I know
not what is wanting, greatness is a thing that your wisest Ladies have an itch
after: for my own part I was never in love before, and if you have me not,
never wilbee again. Think on it between this and after dinner, I will stay
o'purpose for your answer.


Ian. You Are very short.


Lod. I wod not be kept in expectation above an hour, for love is worse then a
Lent to me, and fasting is a thing my flesh abhorres, if my do^blet be not
fi^'d, I know who fa^es the worse for it. I would keep my flesh to swear by,
and if you and I cannot agree upon the matter, I would loose nothing by you.


Jane. You Are very resolute.


Lod. Ever while you live, a fat man, and a man of resolution go together: I
do not commend my self, but there are no such fiery things in nature.


Jane. Fiery?


Lod. It Is proved, put em to my action, and see, if they do not smoke it, they
are men of mettle, and the greatest melters in the World, one hot service makes
em roast, and they have enough in em to bast a hundred -- you may take a lean
man, marry your self to famine, and beg for a great belly, you see what became
of sir John's daughter: -- come I would wish you be well advised, there are more
commodities in me, then you are aware of, if you and I couple, you shall fare
like an Empress.


Jane. That will be somewhat costly.


Lod. Not a token. I have a privilege: -- I was at the Tavern the other day,
in the next room I smelt hot Venison, I sent but a D^awer to tell the Company,
one in the house with a great belly, longed for a corner, and I had half a
pasty sent me immediately: I will hold intelligence with all the Cooks in the
Town, and what dainty, but I have greatness enough to command?


Just. I like it well: -- be as wel-come here, as at your Fathers. Milisent --
make it your care to wait upon this Gentlewoman, but conceal she is our
guest. I should rejoice to see this storm blown over. -- Nephew attend her to
her Chamber. Exe^nt Gratiana, Captain, Milisent.


Enter Rawbone and Hauer hastily. Raw. I ha bin about it -- iustles Lodam, and
falls down.


Lod Next time you ride post, wind your horn, that one may get out a'the way.


Just. What Is the matter Jane.


Raw. It Is guts, if I durst, my teeth waters to strike him.


Just. What ha you done?


Lod. Let him take heed another time.


Hau. Take such an affront before your mistress.


Raw. I have a good stomach --


Hau. That Is well said.


Raw. I could eat him.


Hau. Oh is it that?


Lod. Let me alone, nobody hold me.


Raw. I Will have an action of battery.


Lod. Whoreson mole-catcher --
Come not near me Weezel.

Raw. Prithee Jasper do not thrust me upon him --
I do not fear you sit.

Lod. Again shall I kick thee to pieces.


Hau. Let him b^ffu^ly^e -- to him -- Hauer thrusts him upon him.


Raw. I do not fear you.


Just. Jane remove your self.


Jane. Master Rawbone, I am sorry for your hurt. Exit.


Hau. She jeeres you.


Lod. For this time I am content with kicking of thee.


As Lodam offers to go out, Hauer pulls him back. Hau. My master desires
another word w'ee sir. --
You must fight with him -- To Rawbone.

Raw. Who I fight?


Lod. You spider catcher, ha you not enough? you see I do not draw.


Just. Very well.


Hau. By this hand, you shall challenge him then, if he dare accep^t, i will
meet him in your clothes.


Raw. Will ye. Hum -- I do not fear you -- satisfaction --


Hau. That Is the word.


Raw. That Is the word -- you will meet me guts.


Lod. Meet thee by this flesh, if thou do but provoke me: -- you do not
challenge me -- do not -- do you long to be minced?


Hau. At Finsbury --


Raw. At Finsbury.


Hau. To morrow morning --


Raw. To morrow morning -- you shall find I dare fight.


Lod Say but such another word.


Raw. Finsbury, to morrow morning, there it is again --


Just. I cannot contain my laughter, ha, ha, ha. Ex^


Raw. So, lets begon^ quickly, before he threaten me, yo^ made me challenge
him, look to it.


Hau. Fear not, I warrant you. Exeunt Raw and Hauer.


Lod. Sir Nouerint, if I can but prove, thou do come with in three
furlongs of a windmill, i will set one a top of Paul's to watch thee -- shall
forfeit thy soul, and i will cancel thy body worse then any debtor of thine did
his obligation -- he is gone -- and now I think upon the matter, I have
somewhat the worst on it, for if I should kill him, I shall never be able to
fly, and he has left a piece of his scull, I think, in my shoulder --
whither am I bound to meet him, or no? I will consult some of the sword men, and
know whether it be a competent challenge -- Cameleon.


Came. Sir.


Lod. Has the Rat, your master that was, any spirit in him?


Came. Spirit? the last time he was in the field, aboy of seven years old,
beat him with a Trap-sticke.


Lod. Say thou so? I will meet him then, and hew him to pieces.


Cap. I have an humble suite -- if it be so, that you kill him, let me beg his
body for an Anatomy, I have a great mind to eat a piece on him.


Lod. It Is granted, follow me, i will cut him up I warrant thee. Exe.


Enter Beauford, and Captain. Cap. I have a letter.


Beau. From whom?


Cap. Gratiana.


Bea. I would forget that name, speak it no more.


Cap. She is abused, and if you had not been
Transported from us, with your passion,
You would ha changed opinion, to have heard
How well she pleaded.

Bea. For her-selfe.


Cap. You might,
With little trouble gather from her tears
How clear she was, which more transparent, then
The morning dew, or crystal, fell neglected
Upon the ground: some cunning Ieweller
To ha seen em scattred, would a thought some Princess
Dropped em, and covetous to enrich himself,
Gathered them up for Dyamonds.

Beau. You are then converted.

Cap. Oh you were too credulous.
Marwood has played the Vilaine, and is damned for it*
Could but his soul be brought to hear her answer
The accusation, she would make that blush,
And force it to confess a treason, to
Her honor, and your love.

Beau. You did believe her.

Cap. I did, and promised her to do this service,
She begd of me at parting, if she sent
A letter, to convey it to your hand,
Pray read, you know not what this paper carrie^.

Beau. Has she acquainted you?

Cap. Not me, I guess,
It is some secret, was not fit for my
Relation, it may be, worth your knowledge;
Do her that justice, since you would not hear
What she could say in person, to peruse
Her paper.

Rea. It can bring nothing to take off
The offense committed.

Cap. Sir you knew not
What satisfaction it contaynes*
Or what she may confess in it* for my sake -- Reads*

Beau. To him that was -- what?
Confident of her Virtue
Once an admirer, now a maurner for
Her absent goodness: she has made the change.
From her that was, would (...) become this paper
Had she conseru'd her first immaculate whiteness,
It had been half profane, not to salute
Her letter with a kiss, and touch it, with
More veneration then a Sybil^ leaf^*
But now all Ceremony must be held
A superstition, to the blotted scrole,
O a more stained writer -- I Will not read:
If vnprepar'd, she win with her Discourse,
What must she do, when she has time, and study,
To apparel her defense?

Cap. Deny her this.

Beau. Well, I will read it.

Enter Servant. Ser. Here Is Sir John Belfare.

Beau. Say any thing t'excuse me, beet your care
That none approach the Chamber.

Cap. So, so, now unrip the seal.

Enter Sir John Belfare, Isaac. Bell. Not speak with him, he must have stronger
guard
To keep me out: where is Beauford?

Beau. Here.

Bell. Then there is a Villain.

Beau. That Is course language.

Bell. I must not spin it finer, till you make me
Understand better, why my daughter, and
In her, my family is abused.

Beau. She has not then accused her self -- I Will tell you,
I did expect your daughter would have been
My Virgin bride; but she reserved for me
The ruins of her honor, I wod not speak
In The rude dialect, you may sooner collect,
An English.

Bell. Is she not honest, will you
Make her then a whore?

Beau. No^ I, her own sin made her.

Bell. Thou lie, nor can my age make me appear
Unworthy a satisfaction from thy sword.

Isa. Does not he call my young mistress whore?

Bell. Keep me not from him Captain he has in this
Given a fresh wound, I came t'expostulate,
The reason of a former suffering,
Which unto this was charity, as thou art
A Gentleman, I dare thee to the Combat:
Contemn not Beauford my gray hairs, if t'has^
A Noble soul, keep not this distance; meet me,
Thou art a Soldier: for heavens sake, permit me
Chastise the most uncharitable slander
Of this bad man.

Beau. I never injured you.

Bell. Not injured me? what is there then in nature,
Left, to be called an injury? did not mock
Me, and m^ poor fond girl with marriage?
Till all things were designed, the very day
When Hymen should have worn his saffron robe:
My friends invited, and prepared to call
Her Bride; and yet, as if all this could not
(Summed up together) make an injury:
Does thy corrupted soul at last conspire
To take her white name from her? -- give me leave
To express a Father, in a tear, or two,
For my wronged child. O Beauford! thou have rob^
A father, and a daughter -- but I woe not
Usurp heavens justice, which shall punish thee
Above my weak arm; may thou live, to have
Thy heart as ill rewarded, to be a father
At my years, have one daughter, and no more
Beloved as mine, so mocked, and then called Whore.

Cap. Alas good old man. Exit Bell. Isaac.

Bea. My afflictions
Are not yet numbered in my fate, nor I
Held ripe for Death.

Cap. Now read the Letter.

Beau. Yes, it cannot make me know more misery. Reads.

Beauford, I dare not call thoe mine, though I could not hope, (while I was
living,) thou would believe my innocence, deny me^ no^ this favor after
Death, to say I once loved thee -- H^ death? Captain is she dead?


Cap. I hope she employed not me, to bring this news.


Beau. Yes, Death -- ha?
Prithee read the rest: there is something
In my eyes, I cannot well distinguish
Her small Characters.

Cap. My Accuser by this time, knows the reward of my iniury^ Farewell, I am
carrying my Prayers for thee to another World -- her own Martyr, drowned
Gratiana.


Beau. Read all.

Cap. I have.

Beau. It cannot be, for when thou make an end,
My heart should give a tragic period,
And with a loud sigh break: drown'd^
It Was no sin above heavens pardon*
Though thou had been false,
To thy first vow, and me, I wod not had
Thee dyed so soon* or if thou had affected
That death, I could ha drowned thee with my tears,
Now they shall never find thee, but be lost
Within thy watery Sepulcher.

Cap. Take comfort.

Beau. Art dead?
Then here i will Coffin up my self, until
The Law vnbury me for Marwoods death,
I wo^^t hope for life, mercy sha' not save
Him, that has now a pattent for his Grave. Exeunt.

Actus Quarti. Scena Prima.
Enter Milisent and Gratiana. Mil. It Is his command to whom I owe all service,
I should attend you.

Great. Thou Art too diligent:
I prithee leave me.

Mil. I should be unhappy
To be offensive in my duty; yet
Had I no charge upon me, I should much
Desire to wait.

Great. On me?

Mil. I know not why,
Your sorrow does inuit me.

Great. Thou Art too young,
To be acquainted wo't.

Mil. I know, it wod not
Become my distance, to dispute with you,
At what age, we are fittest to receive
Our griefs impression.

Great. Leave me to my self --

Mil. I must, if you will have it so. offers to go out.

Great. Me thought
I saw him drop a tear, come back again:
What should he mean by this unwillingness
To part; he looks, as he would make me leave
My own misfortune to pity his:
Thy name?

Mil. I am called Milisent.

Great Do thou put on that countenance to imitate
Mine? or have a sorrow of thy own, thou
Would express by it.

Mil. Mine does become my fortune.
Yet yours does so exactly paint out misery
That he, that wanted of his own, would mourn
To see your picture.

Great. Mine is above
The common level of affliction.

Mil. Mine had no example to be drawn by,
I would they were a kin, so I might make
Your burden less by mine own suffering.

Great. I thank thy love.

Mil. And yet I prophecy,
There Is something would make mine a part of yours,
Were they examined.

Great. Passion makes thee wild now.

Mil. You have encouraged me to boldness, pardon
My ruder language.

Great. Did thou ever love?

Mil. Too soon^, from thence sprung my unhappiness.

Great. And mine.

Mil. My affliction riper then my years,
Has brought me so much sorrow, I do not think
That I shall live, to be a man.

Great. I like thy sad expression, we will converse
And mingle stories.

Mil. I shall be too bold.

Great. We lay aside distinctions, if our fates
Make us alike in our misfortunes; yet
Mine will admit no parallel: ha! we are interrupted:
Enter Justice reading a Letter. Lets withdraw, and i will begin.

Mil. You may command, and when
Your stories done, mine shall maintain the Scene. Exeunt.

Just. To maintain such bliss I will,
Wish to be trans-formed still:
Nor wilt be a shame in love, reads,
Since I imitate but Jove;
Who from heaven has strayd, and in
A thousand figures worse then mine,
Woed a Virgin, may not I,
Then for thee a servant try:
Yes for such a maid as thee,
Vary as many shapes as he;
Rawbone clothes my out-ward part,
But thy livery my heart:
Hauer, ha: young Hauer?
This Letter I found in my Daughters prayer Book, is this your Saint? how long
ha they conspired thus? Report gave out, he was gone to travail: It seems he
stays here for a Wind, and in the mean time would rigge up my Daughter: he
is a Gentleman well educated; but his Fortune was consumed by a prodigal
father, ere he was ripe, which makes him I suspect; borrow this shape to court
my Daughter; little does Rawbone think his servant is his rival: I find the
iugling, and will take order they shanot steal a marriage.

Enter Captain. Nephew, I ha news for you.

Cap. For me sir.

Just. You are a Soldier, there is a duel to
Be fought this morning, will you see it?

Cap. It does not sir become a Gentleman
To be spectator of a fight, in which
He Is not engaged.

Just. You may behold it Cosen,
Without disparagement to your honor; Rawbone
Has challenged Mr. Lodam, the place Fins^ury --

Cap. They fight? a doublet, stuffed with straw, advancing
A bull-rush, were able to fright em both
Out a'their senses, tha'not soul enough
To skirmish with a field-mouse; they point a duel?
At Hogs-don, to show fencing upon Cream
And cake-bread, murder a quaking Custard,
Or some such daring enemy.

Just. Did not
Affairs of weight compel me to be absent,
I would not miss the sight, on it; for the Usurer
Has got his man Jasper t^appeare for him
In his apparel.

Cap. Jasper.

Just. For mirths sake
You may behold it, and let me entreat,
At your return, perfect relation
Of both their valors.

Cap. You shall Sir.

Just. And Coze --
If it be possible, procure em hither
Before they shift, I much desire to see em.

Cap. Promise your self they shall: I will defer
My conference with Gratiana, and
Intertayne this recreation.

Just. So: I have a fancy,
This opportunity will give it birth,
If all hit right, it may occasion mirth. Exit.

Enter Milisent, and Gratiana. Great. Which part of my discourse compels thee to
This suffering?

Mil. Your pardon Lady, I
Did prophecy what now I find, our stories
Have dependanc^

Great. How prithee?

Mil. That Marwood
Whom you report thus wounded had a near
Relation to me, and it was my fortune
To come to close his eyes up, and receive
His last breath.

Great. Ha?

Mil. I know more then Beauford,
And dying he oblieg'd my love to tell t'him
When ere we met.

Great. You beget wonder in me:
Did he survive his slander? there is hop^
He did reca^t the injury he did me.

Mil. He did confirm, he had enjoyed your person,
And bad me tell Beauford he left behind
A living witness of the truth he dyed for:
Naming a Gentlewoman Cardona,
That bred you in your fathers house, whom he
Affirmed, betrayed your body to his lust.

Great. Cardona?
Piety has forsaken earth:
Was ever woman thus betrayed to sin,
Without her knowledge?

Mil. W^'d he had not been
My kinsman, I begin to fear him:

Great. Wherein had I offended Marwood,
He should alive, and dead so persecute
My fame? Cardona too in the Conspiracy,
It Is time to dye then.

Mil. My heart mournes for you
In the assurance of your innocence,
And were I worthy to direct you --

Great. Has, mali^e
Found out another murderer?

Mil. Would you be pleased to hear me, I could point
You out a path, would bring you no repentance
To walk in, if (as I am confident)
Your goodness fears not, what Cardona can
Accuse your honor with, let her be
Examined, the^ her knowledge will quit you,
Or make your s^ffe^ing appear iu^t, this is
An easy trial, and since Marwood had
A stubborn soul, for though he were ^y kins-man
I prefer justice, and held ^ham to check
His own report, women have softer natures,
And things may be so managed, if there be
A treason, to enfo^ce confession from her:
Would you please t'imploy me in this ^eruice,
And though unworthy be directed by me,
I beg it from you, i will engage my being
You shall find comfort in it.

Great. Do any thing;
But I am lost already.

Mil. You much honor me. Exeunt.

Enter Lodam, and Cameleon. Lod. Came, see and if he be come yet, bring me word
hither.


Came. I see one lying of the ground --


Lod. Is there so? lets steal way before we be discovered, I do not like when
m^n lie p^rdue, beside, there may be three or four of a heap, for ought we
know: lets back I say.


Came. It Is a horse.


Lod. Hang him jade, I knew it could be nothing else: is the coast clear
Cameleon?


Came. I see nothing but five or six.


Lod. Five or six: treachery! an ambush, it is valor to run.


Came. They be Wind-mill^.


Lod. And yet, thou wo^'st persuade me, it was an ambush for me.


Came. I?


Lod. Come thou were afraid, and the truth were known; but be valiant: I have
a sword; and if I do draw* it shall -- be against my will: is he not come yet?


Came. And he were between this and More-gate, you might sent him.


Lod. If he come, some body shall smell ^ll ^auouredly, ^re he and I part: --
ha! by this ^^^sh it is he; Came, go ^ell him I am sick.


Enter Ha^er, Rawbone, ( having changed clothes) Captain. Hau. Master Lodam.


Lod A brace of bullets to my hear.


Cap. Here can I stand and behold the Champions.


Lod. I have expected you this two hour^s, which is more then I had one to all
the men I ha fought withal, since I slew the high German in Tutle.


Cap. Wh^rson, moale-cather.


Lod. Draw Spider.


Cap. Wel^ ^^y^ toade.


Hau. Let us c^nferre a little.


Lod. Con^erie me no conferrings: I will have no more mercy on thee, then an
Infidel: and t'hadst been wise, thou might ha kept thee at home, with thy
melanchol^y Cat, that keeps thy Study, with whom thou art in Commons, and
do feed on Rats a Sundays; then perhaps a leg or an arm, with thy Jews
ears had satisfied me, when I met thee next: draw I say, why do not draw?


Hau I come to give you satisfaction.


Lod. What with words?

Sir Tartar, my Fox shall scratch thy guts out, which I will send to the
Beare-Garden: Do hear Usuring dog, i will tell thee my resolution. I do mean
to give thee as many Wounds before I kill thee, as a Surgeons sign has; and
when I am weary of skarrifying thy flesh, i will bore thy heart -- which done:
mark what I say; I will divide thy quarters: observe and tremble; then will I
ha thee put into a tub or Barrel, and powder thee, and after three days in
pickle, this thing that was thy servant, this Cacodemon whom thou did statue
once, Cameleon, shall in revenge of his pityfull famine, eat thee up, devour
thee, and grow fat in the ribs again with thy flesh. Mammon --


Came. I hungrily thank your Worship.


Raw. What have I s^apt? aside.


Lod. Which is more, after thou art dead, I wonot leave thy soul quiet, i will
torment thy Ghost: for I will straight to thy house where I will break open
thy Chests, lined with white and yellow mettle, which I will cast away on pious
uses: then summon all thy debrors by a Drum, and give em in, all their Bills,
Bonds, Evidences, Indentures, Defesances, Morgages, Statutes.


Raw. I shall be undone. --


Lod. And there were a million on em.


Raw. I Will home, and shut up my doors, for fear he kill Jasper and use me so
indeed.


Cap. If thou do offer to look home again, till they ha done, i will cut thee
off at thigh.


Raw. Ah --


Lod. Draw I say.


Hau. Since there is no remedy.


Lod. His sword appears Came.


Came. If he were a coward you were able to conjure a spirit into him, with
those threatenings.


Lod. Pox a'my dulues: do hear scoundrell, if I should incline to mercy,
what submission? ha? let me see -- I, I, live, thou shall upon thy knees
confess thy rascality, and ask me forgiveness in private, in the presence of
mistress Jane, and the twelve Companies which at thy charge shall be feasted
that day, in More-fields.


Hau. That must not be.


Lod. Then say when thou art dead, thou were offered conditions for thy life:
Came, thou shall feed, and feed high Cameleon, -- let me see; -- come it is my
foolish nature to ha compassion o'thee, I know thou art sorry, shat only
confess thy self a rascal under thy hand then, and stay my in ended revenge
which else would ha been immortal.


Hau. Let me consider.


Lod. Oh^ Came. --


Cap. Both cowards, we shall have no skirmish.


Raw. Now I think on it, what if my man Jasper, should be valiant and kill
Lodam -- umh? what pickle were I in: worse-worse, he will run away, I shall
be taken and hanged for the Conspiracy. Pulls Have, by the sleen^. r Ah --
Jasper, ^ogue that I was, where were my brains to challenge him -- he wonot
hear -- a stubborn knave, he looks as if he meant to kill: ah Jasper.


Cap. I ha seen a dog look like him, that has drawn a Wicker bottle,
rattling about the streets, and leering on both sides, where to get a quiet
corner to bite his tail off.


Raw. I do imagine my self apprehended already: now the Constable is carrying
me to Newgate -- now, now* I me at the Sessions house, in the Docke: -- now
I Am called -- not guilty my Lord: -- the Jury has found the indicement Billa
vera -- now, now comes my sentence.


Hau. I am resolved sir.


Raw. Ha. --


Hau. You shall have what acknowledgement, this pen of steel will draw out in
your flesh, with red ink, and no other, dear master Lodam.


Lod. How?


Cap. So, so.


Raw. Now I Am in the Cart, riding up Holborne in a two wheeled Chariot, with a
guard of Halberdiers: there goes a proper fellow says one: good people pray
for me: now I am at the three Wodden stilts. --


Lod. Is this Rawbone the Coward?

Do hear thing -- consider what thou do, come among friends, thy word
shall be as good as a note under thy ^^nd, (...) not my fury -- wod I were
off, with asking him forgiveness.


Raw. Hey! now I feel my toes hang in the Cart:
Now it is drawn away, now, now, now,
I am gone -- turns above.

Hau. You must show your fencing.


Lod. Hold: I demand a par^^e.


Hau. How?


Lod. It Is not for your reputation to deal with a
Gentleman upon unequal terms.

Hau. Where lie the odds?


Cap. Howes this?


Lod Examine our bodies:

I take it I am the fairer mark, it is a disadvantage: feed til you be as fat
as I, and i will fight w'ee as I am a Gentleman.


Hau. It sha not serve your turn. Fight.


Lod. Hold, murder, murder.


Raw. I Am dead, I Am dead.


Cap. Whoreson puffe-paste, how he winkes and barks: How now Gentlemen, master
Lodam.


Lod. Captain, should a come but a little sooner, and ha seen good sport, by
this flesh he came up handsomely to me; a pretty spark faith Captay^e.


Hau. How sir?


Lod. But if you be his friend, run for a Surgeon for him, I have hurt him
under the short ribs, beside a cut or two ith'shoulder: would I were in a
Millars sack yonder, though I were ground for it, to be quit onem.


Hau. You wonot use me thus?


Lod. I were best deliver my sword ere I be compeld to it -- a pretty fellow,
and one that will make a soldier, because I see thou have a spirit, and c^nst use
thy Weapon, i will bestow a dull blade upon thee Squirrell.


Cap. Deliver up your Weapon:


Lod. In love in love Captain, hea's a spark a my reputation, and worthy your
acquaintance.


Hau. Thou mully-puffe, were it not justice to kick thy guts out.


Lod. When I am dis-arm'd.


Hau. Take It, again you sponge --


Lod. What? when I have geent thee: it is at thy service, and it were a whole
Cutlers shop: be confident.


Raw. My Agu^ has not left me yet* there is a grudging a'the halter still:


Cap. Master Rawbon^, I repent my opinion of your Cowardice.
I see you dare fight, and shall report it to my Cosen:
You shall walk home, she will take it as an honor,
And present your prisoner.

Raw. Jasper, lets go home and shift, do not go -- honest Jasper.


Hau. You will be prattling sir -- I Will wait upon you Captain: Master Lodam
--


Lod. I will accompany thee, thou art noble, and fit for my conversation, honest
master Rawbone -- a pox upon you.


Cap. Nay, you shall wait a your master with his leave, good Jasper


Hau. How now Jasper? Exeunt.


Music: A Table set forth with two Tapers: Servants placing Ewe, Bays, and
Rosemary, etc. Enter Beauford. Beau. Are these the herbs you strew at
Funerals.

Servant. Yes sir.

Beau. It Is well, I commend your care,
And thank ye; ye have expressed more duty
Im not enquiring wherefore I command
This strange employment, there in the very
Act of your obedience: my chamber
Looks like the Spring now? ha'yee not art enough
To make this Ewe ^ee grow here, or this Bays?
The emblem of our victory in Death?
But they present that best when they are withered:
Have you been careful that no day break in
At any Window, I would dwell in night,
And have no other starlight but these tapers:

Ser. If any ask to speak with you,
Shall I say, you are abroad.

Beau. No, to all do enquire with busy faces
Pale or disturbed, give free access. Exit ser.
What do I differ from the dead? would not
Some fearful man or woman seeing me,
Call this a Churchyard, and imagine me
Some wakefull apparition among the graves;
That for some treasures buried in my life,
Walk up and down thus? buried? no it was drowned,
I cannot therefore say, it was a chest,
Gratiana had nere a Coffin, I have one
Spacious enough for both on's, but the waves
Will never yield to it, for it may be they
Soon as the northern Wind blows cold upon em,
Will freeze themselves to marble over her,
Least she should want a tomb:
Enter Keeper. Thy business.

Keeper. He dyed this morning:
A friend of his and yours did practice on him
A little Surgery, but in vain; his last
Breath did forgive you: but you must expect
No safety from the Law: my service sir.

Beau. I have left direction, that it cannot miss me:
And had thou come to apprehend me for it?
With as much ease thou might; I am no statesman
Officious, servants makes no suitors wait
My doors unguarded; it is no laborinth
I dwell in; but I thank thy love, there is something
To reward it: justice cannot put on
A shape to fright me.

Keeper. I am sorry sir,
Your resolution carries so much danger. Exit.

Beau. What can life bring to me, that I should court it:
There is a period in nature, is it not
Better to dye and not be sick; worn in
Our bodies, which in imitation
Of ghosts, grow lean, as if they wooed at last
Be immateriall too; our blood turn ielly
And freeze in their cold channel, let me expire
While I have heat and strength to tug with death
For Victory.

Enter Milisent. Mil. You may disburden there,
But gently, it is a chest of value, mistress --
I Will give him notice, where is Beauford?

Beau. Here.

Mil. What place do you call this?

Beau. It Is a Bridal chamber.

Mil. It presents horror.

Beau. Ha you anything
To say to me?

Mil. Yes.

Beau. Proceed.

Mil. I come to visit you.

Beau. You are not welcome then.

Mil. I did suspect it, and have therefore brought
My assurance wo'me, I must require
Satisfaction for a kinsmans death,
One Marwood.

Beau. Ha?

Mil. Your valor was not noble,
It was a course reward to kill him for
His friendship: I come not with a guard of
Officers to attach your person, it
Were too poor and formal, the instrument
That sluc'd his soul out, I had rather should
Sacrifice to his ashes, and my sword
Shall do it, or yours be guilty of another,
To wait upon his ghost.

Beau. Young man be not
Too rash without the knowledge how our quarrel
Rise to procure thy self a danger.

Mil. Make it
Not your fear, I have heard the perfect story,
And ere I fight with thee shat see thy error;
Acknowledge thou have killed a friend, I bring
A perspectiue to make those things that lie
Remote from sense, familiar to thee, nay
Thou shat confess thou know the truth of what
Concerns him, or Gratiana.

Beau. When my soul
Throws off this upper Garment, I shall know all.

Mil. Thou shat not number many minutes, know
`Twas my misfortune to close up the eyes
Of Marwood, whose body I vowed never
Should to the earth without revenge; or me
Companion to his grave: I ha therefore brought it
Hither, it is in this house.

Beau. Ha?

Mil. His pale corpse
Shall witness my affection.

Bea. Thou did promise
To inform me of Gratiana.

Mil. And thus briefly:
Marwood revealed at death another witness
Of his truth, for Cardona he corrupted
To betray Gratiana to him.

Beau. Ha Cardona!
Heaven continue her among the living,
But half an hour.

Mil. I ha saved ye trouble,
She waits without, in your name I procured
Her presence, as you had affairs with her
She Is vnprepar'd, a little terror will
Enforce her to confess the truth of all things.

Beau. Thou do direct well.

Mil. Still remember Beauford
I am thy lenemy, and in this do but
Prepare thy conscience of misdeede to
Meet my just anger.

Bea. I am all wonder. Milisent bring in Cardona.

Mil. He Is now at opportunity.

Car. Sir you sent
To speak with me.

Beau. Come nearer, I hear say
You are Baud; tell me how go Virgins
In The sinful market; nay I must know hell-ca^
What was the price you took for Gratiana^s:
Did Marwood come off roundly with his wages*
Tell me the truth, or by my fathers soul
I Will dig thy heart out.

Car. Help.

Beau. Let me not hear
A syllable that has not referrence
To my question -- or --

Car. I Will tell you sir:
Marwood --

Beau. So.

Car. Did vitiously affect her:
Won with hi^ gifts and flatteries, I promised
My assistance, but I knew her virtue was not
To be corrupted in a thought.

Beau. Ha.

Car. Therefore --

Beau. What do you study --

Car. Hold -- I would deliver
The rest into your ear, it is too shameful
To express it louder then a whisper --

Mil. With what unwillingness, we discover things
We are ashamed to own: Cardona shudst
Ha used but half this fear in thy consent.
And thou had nere been guilty of a sin
Thou art so loath to part with though it be
A burden to thy soul: how boldly would
Out innocence plead for us; but sha^ done.

Beau. Then was Gratiana^s honor saved.

Car. Untouched.

Bea. Where am I lost: this story is more killing
Then all my iealousies: Oh Cardona
Go safe from hence, but when thou come at home,
Lock thy self up and languish, till thou dye
Thou shall meet Marwood, in a gloomy shade,
Give back this salary, Exit Cardona.

Mil. Have I made good
My promise, do you find your error.

Beau. No I ha found my horror -- has the chaste
And innocent Gratiana drowned her self?
What satisfaction can I pay thy ghost?

Mil. Now do me right sir.

Beau. She Is gone for ever,
And can the earth still dwell a quiet neighbor
To the rough Sea, and not it self be thawed
Into a river; let it melt to waves
From henceforth, that beside the inhabitants,
The very Genius of the World may drown,
And not accuse me for her: Oh Gratiana.

Mil. Reserve your passion, and remember what
I come for.

Beau. How shall I punish my unjust suspicion?
Death is too poor a thing to suffer for her*
Some spirit guide me where her body lies
Within her watery vrne, although feal'd up
With frost, my tears are warm and can dissolve it,
To let in me, and my repentance to her.
I would kiss her cold face into life again
Renew her breath with mine, on her pale lip
I do not think, but if some artery
Of mine were opened, and the c^im^o^ flood
Conuay'd in^o her v^ines, it would agree
And with a gentle gliding steal it self
Into her heart, in li^'no her dead faculties,
And with a flat^ery, tice her soul again,
To dwell in her fair tenement.

Mil. You loose
Your self in these wild fancies; recollect
And do me justice.

Beau. I am lost indeed,
With fruitless passion: I remember thee
And thy design again; I must account
For Marwoods death is it not? alas thou art
Too young, and can not fight, I wish thou were
A man of tough and active sinews, for
Thy own revenge sake, I would praise thee for
My death, so I might fall but nobly by thee:
For I am burdened with a weight of life --
Stay, did not tell me thou had brought hither
The body of young Marwood --

Mil. Yes.

Beau. Since a mistake, not malice did procure
His ill fate, I will but drop one funeral
Tear upon his wound, and soon finish
To do thee right.

Mil. Ye shall. A coffin brought in.

Beau. Does this enclose his corpse? how little room
Do we take up in death, that living, know
No bounds? here without murmurring we can
Be circumscribed, it is the soul, that makes us
Affect such wanton, and irregular paths;
When that is gone, we are quiet as the earth,
And think no more of wandering: oh Marwood
Forgive my anger, thy confession did
Inuit thy ruin from me, yet upon -- Op^^s.
My memory forsake me, it is Gratiana's
Spirit, have thou left thy Heavenly dwelling
To call me hence? I was now coming to thee:
Or but command more have, and I will count it
No sin to strike my self, and in the stream
Of my own blood to imitate how thou
Did drown thy self.

Great. I am living Beauford.

Beau. I know thou art immortal.

Great. Living as thou art.

Beau. Good angels do not mock mortality.

Great. And came --

Beau. To call me to my answer how I durst
Suspect thy chastity, i will accuse my self
And to thy injured innocence give me up
A willing sacrifice.

Great. Oh my Beauford, now
I am ouer-blest for my late sufferings;
I have solicited my Death with prayers:
Now I would live to see my Beauford love me.
It was thy friend induced me to that letter,
To find if thy suspicion had destroyed
All seeds of love.

Beau. Art thou not dead indeed,
May I believe? her hands is warm, -- she breathes
Again -- and kisses as she wont to do
Her Beauford, art Gratiana? Heaven
Let me dwell here until my soul exhale.

Mil. One sorrow's cured Milisent begone,
Thou have bin too long absent from thy own. Exit.

Bea. Oh my joy ravished soul, but where is the youth
Brought me this blessing? vanished Gratiana
Where is he? I would hang about his neck
And kiss his cheek, he we not leave me so:
Gone? sure it was some angel, was he not,
Or do I dream this happiness, wot not thou
Forsake me to?

Great. Oh never.

Beau. Within there --
Bid the young man return, and quickly, least
My joy above the strength of natures sufferance,
Kill me before I can express my gratitude:
Ha ye brought him?

Enter Officers. Officer. Mr. Beauford, I am sorry we are
Commanded to apprehend your person.

Great. Officers ha?

Officer. You are suspected to have slain a
Gentleman, one Marwood.

Beau. Have I still my essence ha?
I had a joy was able to make man
Forget he could be miserable.

Officer. Come sir.

Beau. If ere extreamities did kill, we has
Shall dye this very minute.

Great. You shanot go.

Officers. Our authority will force him.

Great. You Are villains, murderers:
Oh my Beauford!

Beau. Leave me Gratiana.

Great. Never, i will dye with thee.

Beau. What can we say unto our misery,
Saved in a tempest that did threaten most,
Arrived the harbor, ship, and all are lost.

Officer. To the next Justice. Exeunt.

Actus Quinti. Scena Prima.
Enter Sir John Belfare. Bell. Whether art fled Gratiana? that I can
Converse with none to tell me thou art still
A mortal? taken hence by miracle?
Though angels should entice her hence, to heaven,
She was so full of piety, to her father,
She would first take her leave.

Enter Isaac and a Physician. Isa. There he is sir, he cannot choose but talk
idly,
For he has ^o^ slept since the last great mist.

Phi. M^st?

Isa. I sir* his daughter, my young mistress went away in it, and we can hear
no tale nor tidings of her, to tell you true, I would not disgrace my old
master, but he is little better then mad.


Phi. Unhappy Gentleman.

Bell. It Is so, he murdered her;
For he that first would rob her of her honor,
Would or fear after-ward to kill Gratiana,
He shall be arrangn'd for it; -- but where shall we
Get honest men enough to make a Jury?
That dare be conscionable, when the Judge
Looks on, and frowns upon the Verdict, men
That will not be corrupted, to favor
A great man evidence, but prefer justice
To ready money? ^h this age is barren --

Phy. Master Beauford's newly
Apprehended for some fact, and carried
Fore Justice Landby, in my passage hither
I met him guarded.

Bell. Guarded for what?

Phy. Some did whisper he had killed --

Bell. Gratiana.
Oh my girl, my Gratiana, -- Isaac, Beauford is taken, it is apparent he has
slain my daughter, and shanot I revenge her Death? I Will prosecute the Law with
violence against him, not leave the Judge, till he pronounce his sentence,
then I Will dye, and carry Gratiana the news before him. Follow me* Exeunt.


Enter Justice Landby, and Jane. Just. I expect Jane thou wot reward my care
With thy obedience, he is young and Wealthy,
No matter for those idle ceremonies
Of wit and court-ship.

Jane. Do I hear my father?

Just. He will maintain thee gallant, City wives
Are fortunes darlings, govern al, their husband^
Variety of pleasure, and apparel
When some of higher title are often feign
To pawn a Lady-ship: thou shat have Rawbone.

Jane. Virtue forbid it, you are my father sir,
And lower then the earth I have a heart
Prostrates it self, I had my being from you,
But I beseech you, take it not away
Again, by your severity.

Just. How Is this? I like it well. aside.

Ian. You have read many lectures to me, which
My duty has received, and practiced, as
Prec^pts from heaven, but never did I hear
You preach so ill, you heretofore directed
My study to be careful of my fame,
Cherish desert, plant my affection on
Nobleness, which canonely be sufficient
To make it fruitful, and d'ce counsel now
To marry a disease?

Just. Good! my own girls --
What is it you said? ha?

Jane. For the man himself
Is such a poor and miserable thing --

Just. But (...) another word, and I take off
My blessing: how now Jane?

Ian. (...), I fear
He is in earnest, marry me to my grave,
^o that you shall have my consent, oh do not
Enforce me to be guilty of a fal^e
Vow, both to Heaven and Angels; on my knees --

Just. Humble your heart, (...) and correct your sullenness,
I am resolved, would you be sacrificed
To an unthrift, that will (...) away his skin,
Rather then want to stake at Ord^aries?
Consume what I have gathered at a breake-fast,
Or mornings draugh? and when you ha teemed for him
Turn Semptr^^le to find milk and clouts for babies:
Foot stockings, to maintain him in the Compter?
Or if this ^ayle, erect a bandy Citadell,
Well manned, which fortified with ^^my-Cannon
Tobacco pipes, may raise you to a fortune,
Together with the traile --

Jane. Oh my cruel stars!

Just. S^^rre me no stars, i will have my will --

Ian. One minute has ruined all my hope, Milisent
Was cruel thus to mock me.

Enter Captain, Hauer, Lodam, Rawbone, and Cameleon. Cap. Vnde -- Cap. and
Just, whisper.

Isa. You hear, now he talks.

Bell. But I ha found the way, it is but procuring
Acquaintance with the foreman of the Jury,
The Sessions bell-weather, he leads the rest
Like sheep when he makes a gap, they follow
In huddle to his sentence.

Isa. Speak to him sir.

Phi. God save you sir John Belfare.

Bell. I am a little serious -- do not trouble me.

Phi. Do You not know me?

Bell. I n^yther know, nor care for you, unless
You can be silent.

Phi. I me your neighbor --

Isa. Master Doctor --

Bell. Away fool.

Isa. No sir, a Physician.

Bell. A Physician? can you cure my daughter?

Phi. I sir, where is she?

Bell. Cannot you find her out by art? a good
Physician, should be acquainted with the Stars:
Prithee erect a figure, grave Astronomer,
Sh'at ha the minute she departed; turn
Thy Ephemerides a little, i will lend
Thee Ptolomy, and a nest of learned Rabbis
To judge by: te^l me whither she be a live,
Or dead, and thou shall be my Doctor, i will
Give thee a round per Annum pension,
And thou shall kill me for it.

Phi. He has a strange De lyrium.

Isa. I sir.

Phi. A Vertigo in's head.

Isa. In his head.

Bell. What says the Raven?

Isa. He says, you have two hard words in your head sir.

Phi. Have you forgot me sir, I was but late
Familiar to your knowledge.

Bell Ha'your pardon gentle sir I know you now,
Impute it to my grief, t'hath almost made me
Forget my self.

Phi. I come to visit you.
And cannot but be sorry, to behold
You thus afflicted.

Bell. Doctor I am sick,
I Am very sick at heart loss of my daughter
I fear, will make me mad, how long do you think
Man's nature able to resist it, can
Your love or art prescribe your friend a Cordial?
No, no, you cannot.

Phi. Sir, be comforted.
We have our manly virtue given us,
To exercise in such extremes as these.

Bell. As these? why do you know what it is to
Loose a daughter? you converse with men, that
Are diseased in body; punished with a gout
Or fever: yet some of these are held
The shames of physic, but to th'mind you can
Apply no salutary medicine:
My daughter sir, my daughter --

Phi. Was too blame
To leave you so, loose not your wisdom for
Your daughters want of piety.

Bell. Speak well
A'th dead, for living she would not be absent
Thus from me, she was ever dutiful
Took pleasure in obedience: oh my child,
But I have strong suspicion, by whom
She Is made away. Beauford --

Phi. How?

Bell He that pretended marriage -- he gave her
A wound before.

Raw. Jasper? what case am I in?

Hau. Be wise and keep your counsel, is not all for your honor?

Lod. Lady (...) by this time, you are able to distinguish
A difference (...) Ra^bone and my self.

Came. I fi^d^ (...).

Cap. You shall do n^ble sir.

Just. Mr. Rawbone, the only man in my wishes:
My nephew gives you valiant, your merit
O^e-ioyes me, and to show how much I value
Your worth my daughter yours, i will see you
Married this morning ere we part, receive him
Into your bosom Ian^, or loose me ever.

Ian. I obey sir: will my father cozen himself?

Han. Ha, do I dream?

Raw. Dream quotha, this is a pretty dream.

Just. Master Lodam, I hope you will not repine at his fortune.

Raw. But Rawbone will pine, and repine if this be not a dream?

Lod. I allow it* and will dine with you.

Came. And I.

Raw. Jasper: no, will no body know me?

Just. Let Us loose no time, I have no quiet tell
I call him son.

Raw. Master Justice, do me right,
You do not know who I am -- I am --

Just. An ass sir, Are you not? what make you prattling?

Raw. Sir, --
Noble Captain, a word, I am --

Cap. A Coxecombe.
Your man is fancy sir.

Raw. Then I am a -- sleep.

Cap. I forget Gratiana

Just. Cosen, you shall supply my place at Church, while I pr^pare for your
return, some guests we must have -- nay, nay haste, the mo^^e grows old,
we will have it a Wedding day.


Han. Here Is a blessing beyond hope.


Raw. Sure I am sleep, I will cene walk with 'em till my dream be out.


Enter Beuford, Officers, Marwood disguised, Keeper, Gratiana. Just. Mr.
Beauford, welcome and Gratiana --

Beau. You will repent your courtesy, I am
Presented an offender to you.

Off^. Yes, and please your worship, he is accused.

Just. How?

Great. Sir, you have charity, believe em not,
They do conspire to take away his life.

Keeper. May it please you understand, he has killed
A Gentleman, one Marwood, in our Park,
I found him wounded mortally, though before
He dyed, he did confess.

Beau. Urge it no farther,
I Will save the trouble of examination,
And yield my self up guilty.

Great. For heavens sake
Believe him not, he is an enemy
To his own life; dear Beauford, what do you mean
To cast your self away, you are more unmerciful
Then those that do accuse you, then the Law
It self, for at the worst, that can but find
You guilty at the last, too soon for me
To be divided from you.

Beau. Oh Gratiana, I call heaven to witness,
Though my misfortune made me think before,
My life a tedious and painful trouble,
My very soul a luggage, and too heavy
For me to carry, now I wish to live,
To live for thy sake, till my hair were siluer'd
With age; to live till thou wodst ha me dye,
And were a weary of me: For I never
Could by the service of one life, reward
Enough thy love, nor by the suffering
The punishment of age and time, do penance
Sufficient for my injury, but my fate
Hurries me from thee, then accept my death
A satisfaction for that sin, I could not
Redeem alive, I cannot but confess
The accusation.

Enter Sir John Belfare, and Isaac. Bell. Justice, justice, I will have justice:
Ha Gratiana!

Great. Oh my dear father --

Bell. Art a live, oh my joy, it grows
To mighty for me, I must weep a little
To save my heart --

Isa. My young mistress alive.

Exit Great. If ever you loved Gratiana, plead for Beauford,
H'as been abused, by a villain, alls discovered,
W'aue renewed hearts, and now I fear, I shall
Loose him again, accused here for the death
Of Marwood, that was cause of all our suffering.

Bell. I ha not wept enough for joy Gratiana
That thou art alive yet -- I understand nothing
Beside this comfort.

Great. Dear sir recollect,
And second me.

Just. The fact confessed, all hope
Will Be a pardon sir may be procured:
Sir John -- you are come in a sad time.

Great. What is the worst you charge him with?

Keeper. He has slain a Gentleman.

Just. No common trespass.

Great. He has done justice.

Just. How?

Great. A public benefit to his Country in it.

Just. Killing a man? her sorrow ouer-throwes
Her reason.

Great. Hear me, Marwood was a Villain,
A rebel unto virtue, a prophaner
Of friendships sacred laws, a murderer
Of virgin chastity, against whose malice
No innocence could hope protection;
But like a (...) by an Eagles talent,
It grow^ng dies.
What punishment can you inflict on him,
That in contemp of nature, and religion,
Inforces breach of love, of holy vows?
Sets them at war^e whose hearts were married
In a (...) congregation of Angel^:
I know you will no^ say, but such deserve
To dye yet Marwood being dead, you reach
Your fury to his heart, that did this benefit.

Beau. Oh G^ati^^^ if I may not live
To (...) thee here, Il would thou had been dead
Indeed so in a little time, we should
(...) each other in a better World?
But since I go before thee, I will carry
Thy (...) along, and if my soul forget not,
What it has (...), when it conuerst with men,
I will so talk of thee among the blessed.
That they shall be in love with thee, and descend
In holy shapes, to woe thee to come thither,
And be of their society do not (...) thy beauty
With such a shower, keep this soft rain,
To water some more lost, and ba^ren garden,
Least thou destroy the spring, which nature made
To be a wonder in thy cheek

Just. Where is Marwoods body?

Mar. Here sir.

Omnes. A live!

Mil. Ha Marwood?

Mar. A live, as glad to s^e thee, as thou art
To know thy self (...) for my (...);
Which I of purpose by this honest friend,
To whose cure, I owe my life, made you believe,
I increase our joy at meeting: for you Lady,
You are a woman, -- yet you might ha been
Less violent in your p^eading, do not
Eng^ge me past respects of mi^e, or your own honor.

Great. Mine is above thy malice, I have a breast
Impenetrable, against which, thou ^^ndly aiming,
Thy arrows, but recoile into thy bosom,
And leave a wound.

Beau. Fri^nd we have found thy error --

Mar. Let it be mine, we have had sto^mes already.

Great. Tel^ me injurious man for in this presence
You must acquit the honor you accus^d,
Discharge thy poison here, in humane Traitor --

Beau. Thou wo^t a^ke her now so giuene^, she is al chastity.

Mar. Why do you tempt me t^us?

Bell. It was ill done sir --

Just Accuse her to her face.

Mar. So so, you see, I am silent still.

Gra. You are t^o f^l of guilt to excuse your treachery.

Mar. Then farewell all respect, and hear me tell
This bold and insolent woman, that so late
Made triumph in my death.

Mil. Oh sir proceed not,
You do not declare your self of generous birth,
Thus openly to accuse a Gentlewoman,
Were it a truth.

Great. He may throw soil at heaven,
And as soon stain it.

Mar. Sir boy, who made you so peremptory
He would be whipped.

Mil. With what? I am not armed
You see, but your b^g language would not fright
My youth, were it be friended with a sword;
You should find then I would dare to prove it
A fals^ hood, on your person.

Just. How now Milisent?

Mar. Has my love made me thus ridiculous?
Beauford, that you will suffer such a boy
To affront me? then against all the world
I rise an enemy, and defy his valor
Dares justify Gratiana virtuous.

Enter Isaac, and Cardona. Isa. Believe your eyes.

Car. My daughter alive?
Oh my dear heart.

Mar. You are come oppor^unely,
Cardona speak the truth, as thou would not
Eat my p^^nard, is not Gratiana
A sinful woman.

Mar. What means Marwood, ha?

Bell. I am in a laborinth?

Car. H^ld, I confess --
Y^u never did enjoy Gratiana.

Mar. Ha?

Car. Let not our sh^m^ be pub^icke, sir, you shall
Have the whole truth, oh that my tears were able
To wash my sin away -- won wi^h your promises,
I did, in hope to mark my self a fortune,
And get a husband for my child, with much
B^acke oratoury, woe my daughter to
Supply Gratianaes bed, whom with that
Circumstance, you enioy^d, tha^ you b^leeu'd
It was the virgin you desired.

Bell. Is It possible?

Mar. I am ^t a confasion, where is this daughter?

Car. She with the fear (as I conceive) of her
Dishonor, taking a few jewels with her,
Went from me, I know not whither, by this time
Dead if not more unhappy in her fortune.

Mar. Into how many sins h^th lust engaged me?
Is there a hope you can forgive, and you,
And she whom I have most dishonored
I never had a conscience till now,
To be grieved for her, I will hide my self
From all the World.

Mil. Stay sir --

Great. You hear this Beauford, father --

Beau. This she co^fest to me, though I concealed
From thee the error, Marwood dead, their shame
Would not ha given my life advantage, now
We have ore-come the malice of our fate:
I hope you will call me son.

Bell. Both my loved children.

Just. I congratulate your joy.

Mar. Beauford, Gentlemen,
This is a woman, Lucibol your daughter,
The too much injured maid: oh pardon me,
Welcome both to my knowledge, and my heart.

Car Oh my child.

Just. My servant prove a woman?

Bell. You le marry her.

Mar. I shall begin my recompense:
Lea^ you to Church we will find the P^iest more work.

Just. He has do^e some already, for by this time
I have a daughter married to young Hauer.
That walked in Rawbones li^e^y, -- they are returned.

Enter Captain, Hauer, Jane, Lodam, and Cameleon. Hau. Father your pardon,
though you meant me not
Your son, yet I must call your daughter, wife:
Here I resign my Citizen.

Bell. Young Hauer.

Just My blessing on you both,
I meant it so: a letter took off this
Dis^^uise before; nay here are more couples,
Enoug^ to play at Barly-break*

Raw. Ma^^e^ Lodam, you and I are in Hell,

Lod. How?

Hau. You and I are friends.

Lod. I knew, by instinct, I had no quarrel to thee:
Art thou Rawbone?

Raw. I am not ^runke --

Lod. No, but thou art disguised shrewdly.

Raw. I wonot believe, I am awake:
This is not possible.

Beau. Leave off to wonder Captain.

Cap. Sur^ this is a dream.

Raw. As sure, as you are there Captain, alas we do but walk and talk in
ou^ sl^epe, all this while.


Bell. Away, away.


Lod. I to dinner bullies.


Raw. Do You hear Gentlemen, before you go, does nobody know me? who am I? who
am I?


Just. You are master Rawbone fit, that would have married my daughter, that is
now wise, I take it, to this Gentleman, your seeming servant.


Raw. Dream on, dream on: Jasper, make much a'the wench now thou have got her,
am not I finely guld?


Hau. I think so.


Raw. Dream on together, a good jest in faith, he thinks all this is true now.


Cap. Are not you then, awake fit?


Raw. No marry am I not sir.


Cap. What do you think a'tha^ sir. k^cke^ him.


Raw. That sir? now do I dream that I am kicked.


Cap. You do not feel it then.


Raw. Kick, kick your hearts out.


Lod. Say you so, let my foo^e be in too then.


Raw. Sure I shall cry out in my sleep -- what a long night it is.


Bell. Set on.


Lod. I, I, we may come back, and take him napping.


Beau. Come Gratiana,
My soul best half, lets tie the sacred knot,
So long deferred, never did two lovers,
Meet in so little time so many changes;
Our Wedding day is come, the s^rrowes past
Shall give our present joy more heavenly taste. Exeunt.

Epilogue.
Rawbone. Gentlemen: Pray he favorable to wake a Fool Dormant I ^on^st ye;
^ ha been kicked, and kick^ to that purpose, may be, they knocked at the wrong
door, my brains are a sleep in the Garret* I must appeal from their feet
to your hands, there is no way but one, you must clap me, and clap me soon^ly
d^e^ hear* I shall hardly come to my self else.

Oh since my case without you desperate stands,
Wake me with the loud Music of your hands.

Exit.
