A very godly and necessary Sermon, preached before the young Countess of
Comberland in the North, the 24. of November, 1577.

By Christopher Shutt.

1. Pet. 4.7. The end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober and watch
unto prayer.

Eccles. 12.13, 14. Let us hear the end of all: fear God, and keep his
Commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. For God will bring every
work unto judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

To the right honorable and most virtuous Lady, the Lady Margaret, Countess
of Comberland, C. S. wishes all happiness and increase of grace, from God the
father, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
AS I descended (right honorable and my good Lady) into a secret consideration
of the age of this present world, and of the last end thereof, I perceived,
that our savior Christ, in going about by sundry signs and tokens, to
foreshew and premonish his elect, of the ruinous decay and dreadful downfall
of this last generation, Mat. 24.37 Mar. 13.32 Luke 17.28 1. Pet. 3.20
compared the days thereof to the days of Noe before the floode, what time the
wicked gave over them selves to all unrighteousness, heaping one sin upon an
other, until the water came and swept them all away: to the end by due
remembrance of Gods fearful plagues, most justly powered upon that sinful
and careless generation, the godly might in all reverence and holy
conversation, watch and wait within the arc of Christ's Church, for that
long wished and most welcome time, of their translation to eternal happiness.
which thing, whilst the faithful have reason to remember, it banisheth far
from them the vain delights of earthly vanities, and prepares them most
readily to the obedience of the word of God, whereby they be forewarned with
watchful Noe, of many future woes and fearful dangers, and also enkindeled
in true godliness and holiness of life, with fear and trembling to work their
salvation. Phil. 2.12.
For since they know themselves on earth to be but strangers, Ebr. 11.13.
where al things must consume, and have a sudden and a certain end, their
chiefest purpose ought to be, (as says the Apostle) to be sober, 1. Pet. 4.7.
1. these. 5.3
and to watch in all godly conversation unto prayer. For suddenly, no doubt,
the end shall come, as was the coming of the flood in Noe his time, yea even
in an hour, when man thinks not, and then blessed shall he be, that is
found in Noe his arc, and watches, with his garments clean, Apo. 16.15 Mat.
25.10
and his lamp of righteousness burning, for he shall enter with the bridegroom
into rest, and so be saved from destruction.

Neither do I see what days may be so rightly compared with the days of Noe,
as these wherein we live: wherein so few be righteous, and so many sleeping
in security of sin. Whereat I can not but tremble, to behold in the spirit,
the great calamities and endless woes which may fall upon this sinful generation,
the wickedness whereof is written with a pen of iron, and with the piont of a
diamo^d: Ier. 17.1.
which these eyes of ours are very likely to behold, 2 Re. 22.11 Isa. 49.8.
and 55.6.
except with good Josias we be humbled in this acceptable time and day of
grace, to seek unto the Lord, and in true repentance, to avoid his heavy
wrath. For, no doubt, since the first time that England ever had the knowledge
of Gods Gospel (I speak not of the times of ignorance, the mystie clouds
whereof are past) was there in it, never more ripenes of all manner of sin,
and carnal security, then these present days in all estates express, and
therefore the more we stand in danger of destruction.

God has called us early and late by the preaching of his word, 2. Chro. 36
15.
but we are nothing better: what remains then, but that we feel his
scourges? Genesis 19.2. pet. 2.6.
When Sodom and Gomorrha would not be moved by the preaching of just Lot,
what remained but fire and brimstone from heaven to be their destruction? When
Pharao and the Egyptians refused the words of Moses, Exo. 14.28
the red sea was appointed to be their confusion. 2. King. 17.6, 14.
When Israel and Judah would not be counseled by the voice of the prophets of
God, Ier. 4. and 7. and 19.
the Assyrians and the Babylonia^s were raised up to plague them and destroy
the^. When Jerusalem was nothing bettred by all the sermons and miracles of our
savior Christ, Luke 19.43
and would in no wise acknovvledge the time of her visitation, the Romans
were appointed to be her desolation. And even so in this sermon ensuing, it
may be gathered, that when the careless man refuses to be warned by the
word of god, the Lord has many plagues prepared for his destruction. Can the
Lords word the^ be of some so stubbernely among us conte^ned, and
hypocritically of other some received, and the fruits of holy life in fevv
brought forth, and the land escape unpunished? It is to truly verified of us,
which in times past was witnessed of the days of Noe, vvherin al flesh had
corrupted it self, and filled the la^d with iniquity, whilst only Noe and
his family being but a few in number, were occupied in making of the Arc
for their deliverance. Whereof (Madame) when I had preached before your honor,
more compendiously perhaps, through shortness of the time, then either your
Honor could have desired, or I my self have wished, I was then of some so
vehemently required, to impart in vvriting to their further consolation, what
then in pulpit I had spoken, that notvvithstanding I judged my labors to
simple to pass abroad, and my self far unmeet for such a purpose: yet
durst I not deny to comfort such, as thirsted after spiritual knowledge, and
to warn such as would escape, of the vengeance to come, and so eftsoons
resolved my self, as nere as god would give me leave to explane and augment,
what my purpose was then in the pulpit to utter. Neither had I far to seek
to whose patronage, I might commend what herein I went about, when as daily
your honors godly zeal and virtuous life, called me to offer it unto your
wisdom: whose vvilling heart, not only I have had experience of, to accept my
labors in good part before this time, but also see your whole endeavor
alvvayes bent to further the proceedings of the Gospel, and to reclame this
ignorant country from their wonted erroures, to the church and arc of Christ.
A rare virtue in your sex, and such as may condemn the slackenes of some
other kinds, who care full little how it goes with the Church, so they
them selves may live at will and ease. Psalm. 119.30.
But as your honor has chosen the way of truth to be your treasure and
delight, Psalm. 119.30.
and eke your perfect wisdom and nobility, Deuteronomy. 4.6.
and also by your happy and welcome coming into these rude and desert parts,
have ministered great solace to the godly: so do I wish with all my heart, and
daily pray, that your honor may happily proceed, as you have virtuously begun,
to the great benefitte of Christ's church, and to the comfort of your quiet
conscience in the last day.

Your honors most humble in Christ, Christopher Shutt.

C B

A very godly and necessary Sermon preached before the young Countess of
Comberlande in the North, the 24. of November. 1577. by M. Christopher Shutt.
Ebr. 11.7. By faith Noe being warned of God, The Theme.
of the things which were as yet not seen, moved with reverence, prepared the
arc, to the saving of his household, through the which arc, he condemned the
world, and was made heir of the righteousness, which is by faith.


THe holy ghost (right honorable and well-beloved) lays forth to our
consideration, Ebr. 11. toto.
in this chapter, a long rehearsal of ye faithful men of God, in the former
ages of the world, whose perfect faith and true religion is made manifest, to
all posterities, in this place of scripture: who after that by faith they were
justified before God, Romans 3.2 and 4.5, 6. Isai. 6.3.
like trees of righteousness, they brought forth the fruits of al obedience, in
godly conversation. Among whom the Apostle reckons up the lively faith and
godly life of righteous Noe, in the latter end of the first age. Ge. 6. toto.
Who beholding ye great ripenes of sin, and corruption of all flesh, 1. Pet.
3.20 and 2. pet. 2.5.
with ouerflowing waters to be punished, being warned of God, with all
reverence and fear, prepared the arc, for the safety of him self and his
household, and also to condemn the great security of that careless
generation: Mat. 24.38
whereby he obtained through the free mercy of God, to be called the heir of
the righteousness which is according unto faith. The due remembrance whereof,
may enkindle in us, if we loathe not our salvation, the vigilant care wherewith
we ought to be pressed, in this last age and winding up of these our sorrowful
days, wherein such ripenes of al iniquities, so horrible contempt of Gods
word, and so manifest ungodliness, foretell and prognosticate the small fall of
this totering world, to be very near an end, that when the same shall come, we
might be saved within ye arc of Christ's Church with faithful Noe, rather
then by our carnal security, to hazard loss of body and soul for ever.

The words of the Apostle as they lie in order, contain especially, two
things to be observed. The one, whereupon it came, that Noe was moved to
prepare the arc: The other, what effect yt arc had, when it was made. The
former is contained in these words, By faith Noe being warned of God, of the
things which were as yet not seen, moved with reverence, prepared the arc.
Wherein is perceived, first an admonition to be given him: Secondly, a readiness
in him to believe the same: and last of all the making of the arc, to declare
ye obedience of his faith. The other follows in the text: He prepared it, to
the saving of his household, through which arc, he condemned the world, and was
made heir of the righteousness, which is by faith. Wherein is noted, what
effect it had in Noe and his family: next of al, what effect concerning the
wicked: and lastly, how this obedience of Noe, was accepted and rewarded of
God.

Albeit (right honorable and beloved) the elect of God in this life, walk
through the valleye of tears and shadows of death, Psalm. 23.4.
yet the Lord continues, their light and strength and rock of sure defense,
Psa. 27.1, 5.
who in the time of trouble, will hide them in his tabernacle, that not one
hear of their head shall perish: Luke 21.18
but when the floodes of adversities approach, he gives them warning to escape,
and so delivers them out of temptation, 2. Pet. 2.9.
and reserueth the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. Which
warning the Lord gave now to Noe, with whom he had, Genes. 6.8.14.
according to the riches of his grace, entered into a covenant, to the end he
might prepare an arc for his deliverance, against the coming of the flood,
wherewith the wicked should be drowned. In like manner when the sins of the
Sodomites cried for vengeance from heaven, Genesis 19.15
the Lord premonished righteous Lot, being wearied with their uncleanness, to
separate him self and his from them, least he should have perished in the
flame of the city, which was ready with fire and brimstone to be destroyed.
Nom. 16. toto.
When Corah, Dathan, and Abiron, with their company, had repugned the
ordinance of God, and contrary to his commandment, offered up strange
incense, and so provoked the wrath of the Lord against them, the Lord
commanded Moses and Aaron to exempt them selves and the rest of the
congregation from their company, lest they should have bin swalowed up
together with them, quick into hell. Such faithful warning the spirit of
God, gives to the elected saints in the revelation, that they should come out
of Babylon and touch no unclean thing, Apoc. 18.4
least in being partakers of her sins, they should have bin partakers of her
plagues. wherein we may learn the great care, Psalm. 34.15 and 121.4.
which the Lord has for the salvation of his people, forewarning them always
of the dangers to come, to the end they might safely rest under his
protection. For surely he will do nothing, Amos. 3.7
but he first reuealeth his word unto his Prophets, that they may warn his
chosen early and late, Iere. 7.13.
to save them selves in time of trouble. The Lord foretold the people of
Israel and of Judah, Isa. 10.5. Iere. 25.9.
by the mouth of his Prophets, their captivity in Assyria and Babylon, long
time before they felt any sore, that the godly might seek deliverance. Our
Savior Christ premonished his elect of many dangers to come, Mat. 24.16
that those which were in Jury, might flee unto the mountains and seek to
save themselves, under the cross. Act. 20.29. 2. these. 2.3 1. tim. 4.1. 2.
tim. 3.1.
The Apostles foreshewed the coming of false prophets, and of Antichrist the
man of sin, and of his manifold abominations, wherewith he should poison the
world, that the godly might be the better furnished with the word of truth,
to preserve them selves against his wily trains, of man's decrees and vain
inventions. We have been admonished these nineteen years and more, and warned
by the preaching of the Gospel, to forsake papistrie and superstition, to
leave our sinful ways, and to follow the righteousness of life, that we
might be saved from destruction. We have bin at our wits end, Luke 21.25.
with signs and strange reports, and fearful sights from heaven, calling us
to repentance. We have felt of earthly co^sumptions, Deuteronomy. 28. Amos. 4.
and diverse kinds of death, with loss of friends and other things, to humble
us to fly from the wrath to come. We have been astonished with the lamentable
ruin of Monarchies and kingdoms round about us, that we sleep not in
security. And daily we do see such troubles every where, as do forewarne our
overthrow, if in time we do not repent. Wherefore as the Lord has set
watchmen over us in bidding us take heed to the sound of the trumpet, Ezekiel.
3.17 and 33.4.
let us beware with reverence and fear: for if we walk after the stubbernes
of our stony hearts, and say with the wicked, we will not take heed, Iere.
6.17, 19. Iere. 5 25.
then will he bring upon us the fruits of our own imaginations, and all the
curses of the law, and so we shall lie down in our own confusion, and be
covered with our shame, because we loathed instruction, Prou. 1.29.
and hated to be reformed. For surely the overthrow of the wicked sleeps
not, though yet they live in all prosperity, Job. 21.7. psalm. 37.35. iere.
12.1, ^
and flourish as a green Bay tree. Let not us then follow their ^^usion of
ryote, 1. Pet 4.4
but in time receive the Lords warning with Noe, Micah. 6.8.
to humble our selves to walk before our God. The Storcke in the air (as
says the Prophet) knows her appointed times, Iere. 8.7.
the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallowe, observe their opportunity of
coming, and shall not we know the judgments of our God? Isai. 1.3.
Or can the Ox know his masters stall, Isai. 1.3.
or the Ass his masters cribbe, and shall not Israel know his God? Let us be
warned by the voice of God, let us receive instruction and be wise betime.
Prou. 8.33.
For blessed is the man, that hears wisdom, watching daily at her gates, and
giving attendance at the posts of her doors: For he that finds her,
finds life, and shall obtain the favor of the Lord, and only this is our
wisdom and perfect understanding, to receive and observe the admonitions of
our God.

When Noe were thus admonished by the Lord, he did not by and by forget his
word, or choke it with the cares of life, Luke 8.14.
and voluptuousness of living, then prevailing: but as his faith was wrought
thereby, so was he now emboldned and his faith increased and preserved by these
admonitions, John. 1.12. Romans 10, 17. 2. These. 3.3
concerning things to come. For as by meats and drinks the body is increased,
and by the wholesome counsel of physicians, the sickness to be feared, is
prevented: so by the word of God, the faith of Noe was increased, and by the
admonitions thereof, the dangers to be feared were avoided, whilst he
willingly gave credit to that which was spoken. By this his readiness to
believe the word, appears plainly (beloved) the faithful heart, which the
godly ought to have toward the same, that in believing the word of truth,
Leui. 26.3, 12. ier. 7.23 Nu. 10.29
the Lord may be their God, and they his people. This readiness was in the
Kenites, when they left their own country, to go with the Israelites into ye
land of Canaan, that they might be further instructed in the law of God. 2.
Kin. 22.21, 13.
This readiness was in the good king Josias, when his heart melted within him
for fear of the plagues of God toward the land, neither ceased he, until
he had enquired of the Lord what was to be done. Psalm. 84, 6.
This readiness was in all those which went through the valley of tears,
from strength to strength, to seek the Lord in Sion. This readiness was in
the Prophets and Apostles, Mat. 19, 27
whilst they left all things to obey the will of God. Act. 2.37.
This readiness was in ye Jews when they were fired with the words of Peter,
and with penitent hearts required what to do. And this ought to be our readiness
toward the word of our salvation, and toward the admonitions of the most
highest, that whilst he speaks, we give ear, Pro. 1.24. ier. 7.26, 27
whilst he cries, that we make answer, and whilst it is said, to day,
Psalm. 95.7, 8
that we believe and hear his voice. These should be the days, wherein men
should follow no more the stubbornness of their wicked hearts, Iere. 3.17.
Mic. 4.1, 2. psalm. 122.1.
but rather should go up to the mountain of the lord, to be instructed in his
laws with reverence and fear. Esai. 2.18.20.
These should be the days, wherein the idols should de destroyed, and men
should forsake their molten gods. Psalm. 110.3
These should be the sweet and joyful days of Jerusalem, wherein the people
should offer willing offerings of obedience and thankfulness. These should be
the Halcionios dies of the Church, when righteousness and peace, when mercy
and truth should meet and kiss each other. Psalm. 85.10.
But in stead of readiness to the world, the ears of many are uncircumcised,
Iere. 6.10.
that they neither can, nor will hear the law of God. In stead of casting
away ye vanities of Idols, Apo. 13.8, 16.
they are marked with the beasts mark, whom they worship. In stead of
quietness and love, the hearts of many are set on mischief, whilst discord,
envy and debate prevail so much. Colo. 3.8.
I fear therefore, these days are more like the days of Noe, wherein the
contempt of truth bare rule amongst so many. Gene. 6.
They are the days of the provocation in the wilderness, Nu. 11.4, 5. psalm.
95.9.
wherein the delights of Egyptiacal servitude, is preferred before the sweet
Manna of everlasting happiness. I wonder what evil spirit has bewitched men,
Galat. 3.1.
that they should not believe the truth. Why have they put upon them an whorish
face, Iere. 3.3.
and a shameless look, and made their hearts like an adamant, Zach. 7.12.
whilst they walk in the error of their hearts, and in the vanity of their
own imaginations? Every man flattereth himself in his own ways, Esa. 65.5.
and thinks him self more holy then his fellow, but yet he pluckes not the
beam of pride out of his eye. Mat. 7.3, 4.5.
We say with filthy Judah, Iere. 2.23.
that we be not polluted, nor have followed after Baalim: and yet we are
unclean, by means of popish superstition. Apoc. 17.4
We brag and boast with the proud Pharisie, Luke 18.11. Psalm. 38.4.
of our righteousness: yet feel we not the burden of our sins and faith in
Christ, and therefore remain unjustified. We say with the angel of Laodicea,
Apoc. 3.17 18.
that we be rich and much increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and
yet we know not that we are wretched, miserable, poor and blind and naked.
What remains then for us, but to bye of the Lords fine gold, that we may be
rich, and white raiment, yt we may be clothed, yt our filthy nakedness do not
appear, and that our eyes may be anointed with the eye salve, yt we may see, with
al readiness to obey the truth, and to be warned with Noe, to make preparation
against the floods of evil to come.

But especially (well-beloved) the faith of Noe appeared in this, yt he saw the
things to come, which presently could not by outward senses be discerned. For,
seeing that the flood was not come, before an hundredth and twenty years were
ended, the tract of time might have removed and banished away the remembrance
thereof. It might also have seemed incredible to flesh and blood, that such a
water should come so quickly: besides all these, the wicked followed their
delights without respect: and to be short, these threatenings of such floods
might have been judged vain: but Noe his faith did mount aloft, and reached
above the capacity of outward senses, and looked up to things more excellent
by much, the^ could by outward means be understood: which things yet hid and
not apparent, the holy ghost seals in our hearts, for our more assurance. Ebr.
11.1.
According whereunto the Apostle calls faith the substance of things hoped
for, and the sure demonstration of things which are not seen: thereby not
only lifting up our faith to things to come, but also fully assuring us of the
performance thereof, for God is faithful which has promised. Ebr. 10.23.
We are already saved by hope, To. 8.24, 25
but hope that is seen is no hope: for how can a man hope for that which he
sees? but if we hope for that which we see not, we do with patience abide
for it. 2. Cor. 4.7.
And this treasure we have in our earthen vessels, that the excellency of
that power might be of God, and not of us. And therefore our conversation is in
heaven, from whence we look for the savior, Phil. 3.20.
even Jesus Christ, with whom our life is hid in God, Col. 3.3, 4.
that when Christ, which is our life, shall appear, the^ shall we also appear
with him in glory: Such a sure persuasion of things to come had Noe, neither
wauered he in faith at all. This is that exceeding comfort, which makes glad
the hearts of the elect in the midst of the sorrows of this life, assuredly
beholding with ye eyes of faith, such things as neither the eye of man has
seen, Esai. 64.4. 1. cor. 2.9.
nor his ear has heard, nor yet his heart perceived or understood. Such an
undoubted hope and trust had the godly fathers under and before the law, Gene.
3.15 and 15.5. and 22.17, 18. Deu. 18.18 2. Sa. 7, 16.
when with the eyes of faith they beheld the Messiah and savior Christ to
come, and so were justified, as we believe now, that he is come already, and
has wrought our redemption. Such was the faith of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
Ebr. 11.13.
concerning the promises of the land of Canaan, when as they were but strangers
upon the earth, and had not a foot breadth to possess, believing what the Lord
had promised, should surely come to pass. Such an assurance of faith had
Moses, when he refused the delights of Egypt, and the pleasures of Pharaos
court, Ebr. 11.24, 25, 26.
to suffer persecution with his brethren, looking to the promised reward. This
assured faith of things to come had good king David, Psalm. 89.28, 29.
when he trusted that his throne should continue, and be established for ever.
This assurance of things to come, our Savior Christ commended to his
disciples, against the assaults of persecution, promising them, that they should
sit upon twelve thrones with him, Mat. 19.28. luke 22.30.
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. This assurance had the Apostle Paul,
when he desired to attain the righteousness of faith, Phil. 3.8, 9 10. 2. Ti.
4.8.
and resurrection of the just, that he might wear ye crown which God had laid
up in store for him. And what else moved the saints of God, Apo. 12.11
to withstand the beast, and not to love their lives to death, but that by
faith they saw the new Jerusalem? And this is that golden saying of Ignatius
going to be martyred, Euse. lib. 3. cap. 36.
Nihil moror visibilium, nec inuisibilium, modo Iesum Christum acquiram. I
neither (says he) care for things now seen, nor things which are not
seen, so that I may lay hold of Jesus Christ. This is our comfort (dearly
beloved) in these dangerous days and byllowes of the world, that our faith is
not fixed of things present, but of things to come. For though now we be the
children of God (as says the Apostle) yet does it not appear what we shall be.
1. John. 3.2.
For we know, yt when Christ shall appear, we shall be like to him, for we
shall see him as he is. We see now in a glass darkly, but the^ shall we see him
face to face: 1. Cor. 13.12.
we know but now in part, but then shall we know, even as we are known. We
are now corruptible, 1. Cor. 15.53.
but we shall be clothed with incorruptio^. We are now but mortal, but this
mortal shall be swalowed up of immortality. We are now afflicted and in
distres, 2. Cor. 4.17, 18.
but ye same is but for a moment, and yet causes in us, a most excellent, and
eternal weight of glory, while we look not on the things which are seen, but
on the things which are not seen: for ye things which are seen, are but
temporal, but ye things which are not seen, Romans 7.23, 24, 25.
are eternal. Though for a while we feel ye relics of sin in us provoking
us to evil, yet look we daily when yt time shall come, yt this body of sin may
be don away We feel in our selves the sparks and seed of much unrighteousness,
yet do we hope in stead thereof, we shall be clothed with ye fine reins and
righteousness of Christ, Apo. 19.8. 1. Cor. 1.30 2. cor. 5, 21. Psalm. 32.1, 2
and all our transgressions to be pardoned. We feel for a little, hunger and
cold, yet do we hope for the abundance of all delights and heavenly
treasures. We daily sorrow and weep, 2. Cor. 4.8, 9, 10. 2. pet. 2.7.
and are vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked, yet trust we that
our sorrow shall be turned into joy, Ioh. 16.20, 21. Apoc. 21.4
and all tears wyped from our eyes. We now abide with patience the tauntes and
checkes of Antichrist and his members, Apo. 14.9.
but yet we see by faith, that Babylon the mother of all abominations, Apoc.
17.4
shall suddenly fall and come to naught, for that her sins are in remembrance
with God. Apoc. 18.5
We daily fear the assaults of sin and death, yet do we know by faith that
Christ has conquered them for us. 2. Cor. 5.21 colos. 2.14. apo. 20.14.
We feel our frailty in this life, and thraldom to infirmities, 1. Cor.
15.31, 32.
yet do we hope for everlasting rest in the resurrection of the just. Such is
the assurance of our faith, surmounting far the reach of man's capacity:
she wauereth not, she sincketh not, she doubts not (as says the
misbeleeuing papist, leaning to his idle works) but she makes the good
conscience sure, Romans 4.16.19. and 8.16, 38, 39. Ebr. 10.22
and always has (...), whilst she plainly beholds the things as yet not
seen, but surely for to come to pass.

Further, whereas this readiness of Noe was joined with reverence, it is
(dearly beloved) to teach us, that his faith was directed both to the
promise of the covenant, whereby he was received into favor, and also to the
threatenings of GOD, whereby the Lord menaced the destruction of the world,
which he believed to come, and so did tremble. And as by the former, he was
assured of gods favor, so by the other, in respect of his own infirmity, he
feared least he should have perished with ye wicked. Wherein we must note two
things, the one, what is the object of our faith: the other, how it trembles
in respect of our selves, at the plagues denounced, Psalm. 42.5, 11. Romans 8.38
and yet for all that, is assured of Gods mercy.

Our faith is leueled and directed, especially at Christ the object thereof. For
like as the Israelites did with their bodily eyes behold the brazen serpent, and
were cured: Number. 21.9. Ioh. 3.14.
even so does faith the eye of our soul, behold the Son of God lift up upon
the altar of the cross for our redemption. And like as wholesome meats only
nourish the body, even so nothing does feed our faith, but Christ crucified,
ye bread of life: Ioh. 6.35.48.51.
at whose work of redemption, our faith must always look, or else we must
needs be pressed down, with the terror of our own conscience into hell. Mat.
11.28 Ioh. 3.16. Col. 1.19. and 2.3.
For seeing that the promises of the Gospel are a ready way to lead us to
the knowledge of Gods mercy reueyled in Christ, in whom it pleases the father
that al fulness should dwell, and in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and
understanding, to whom we can not come, but being fully persuaded, that our
salvation rests in his free grace and mercy: the obiecte of our faith, which
she does chiefly behold, must of necessity be the promises of the Gospel,
laying forth to us Christ crucified for our sins, Ioh. 3. and 5. and 6. tot.
To. 5.19.
by whose obedience our salvation is wrought, and in whom alone the Father is
well pleased: Mat. 3.17.
for in him our faith beholds the law of God fulfilled for us, who took the
curse thereof upon him self, Galat. 3.13 Ephe. 1.7. and 2.13.
that he might make us blessed. In his blood our faith beholds perfect
redemption and remission of our sins: and we which were far of, are now
made near, and reconciled to ye father. 1. Pet. 2.24
By his stripes, we feel by faith, that we are made whole, and clothed with
his righteousness: 1 Cor. 1.30
by his only sacrifice done once for ever, Ebre. 9.12. and 10.10, 18
our faith beholds eternal redemption purchased, and them consecrat for
ever, that are sanctified: so that where forgiveness of sins is, there is no
more oblatio^ for sin. In him, through him, To. 5.1. and 8.34. Ephe. 3.12
and for his sake, faith boldly approaches to the throne of grace, to find
mercy to help in time of need: Ebr. 4.16.
for he is our peace, our advocate and the propitiation for our sins. 1. John
2.2
Finally, by faith in him we are assured of Gods favor, Ioh. 3.16. To. 8.1,
34.
and of eternal life, so that there is now no damnation to such as be graffed
in Christ Jesus, which walk according to the spirit, and not according to yt
flesh. For it is Christ that does justify us, and therefore none can condemn
us, none ca^ lay any thing to our charge, neither separate us from the love of
God. And thus is Christ with his death and passion, the only object of our
faith. Also these two, Christ crucified, and our faith, always must go
together. For, as the sun shining in the firmament, avails him not, that
has none eyes to see the same, neither him that wincketh with his eyes and
will not see, but only him that does behold the light thereof: So does the
death of Christ profit him nothing, which lacks true faith to lay hold upon
the same, Galat 2.20 Ioh. 3. and 6. tot.
but only such as by a lively and fruitful faith, apply the same unto them
selves.

Besides that Noe his faith was specially directed to the promise of ye
covenant, yet was he made more watchful a great deal, and kept in obedience,
by the terrors of the flood, and so with fear and trembling wrought his
salvation, Phil. 2.12.
not yt he wauered in the faith, but that he feared in transgressing to be
punished with the wicked. For this effect the plagues powered upon the wicked,
bring forth in the lives and conversation of ye godly, that these are made more
circu^spect by much to stand in fear, least they should fall. Deuteronomy. 29.2 and
18.12.
When Moses counseled the Israelites to the observance of the law, he warned
them to fear, by the plagues powered upon ye Egyptians, and upon the
Canaanites, thereby to keep them in obedience. When Jeremy threatened
captivity unto the land of Judah, he used the captivity of the ten tribes
then being in Assyria, Iere. 3.8.
to make them tremble and afraid. When the Apostle understood the hautines of
the Romans, To. 11.18.
he used the punishment of the Jews, 1. Co. 10.5
in whose place they were graffed, to bridle them and keep them in obedience.
When the Corinthians waxed proud of the graces of God, the Apostle laid forth
the plagues of God against the Jews in the wilderness, that who so stood, might
take heed he did not fall. And this is ye cause why the holy Ghost calls us
to fear, that we should not by our dissolute life shake of and lose our faith,
and make the last end worse the^ the beginning. Luke 11.26 Mala. 1.6.
The son honors his father, and a servant his master. If the^ God be a
father to us, we must honor him, if he be a Lord, we must fear his stripes.
O that we had the reverent dread and fear which Noe had, it would make us
ready to know and do the will of God, it would bring forth an unfeigned
loathing and hatred of sin in us, it would budde forth the study of true
godliness, it would set us forward to the love of God and profyt of our
brethren. But though we feel the scourge of God so sore, that there is no whole
part already in the body, Isa. 1.6.
yet are we not humbled nor afraid: though we be strike^, Iere. 5.3.
we do not sorrow: though we be consumed, we refuse to receive correction. For
why? we have made our faces harder then a stone, and will not return though we
be warned of the future woes. In stead of keeping the commandementes of GOD,
Mat. 15.9.
we observe the precepts of men, wherewith we worship God in vain. In stead
of fear and true obedience, Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3.
we loose the bridle to the effusion of al riot. In stead of true religion,
nothing is to be found but either mere Atheism, Apo. 3.16.
or flat dissimulation. In stead of holiness of life, we deck our selves with
pride, and in stead of judgment and righteousness, Isa. 5.7. Hos. 4.2.
we bring forth oppression and crying of the poor, and blood touches blood.
Where is now the reverence and fear, wherein we live, or how are we
restrained from offending, by the remembrance of the sea of evils to come? No,
no (beloved) we fear men more the^ god. And if in some things we submit our
obedience, to the hearing of the scriptures, and ordinary administration of
the Sacraments in Ecclesiastical assemblies, yet is such duty in many of us
but constrained, and not of a good and zealous heart, delighting in the
Gospel. But if we do neglect, we fear the magistrates sword. Well, let us not
play to long with our fleeing shadow, Isa. 8.13.
but sanctify the Lord, that he may be our fear, and betime begin with Noe
to fear ye worst: for if the wrath of God be kindled but a little, Psalm. 2.12.
blessed are all they that put their trust in him. And thus ye see, that our
faith is specially directed at the promises of God, and yet must we not be
careless and void of fear, and so do what we list, but always we must stand
in awe, and be afraid to offend, lest with the wicked we have reward.

He prepared the Arc. When Noe was in sundry wise thus moved, he addressed
himself without delay to the making of the Arc, thereby to witness his
obedience of faith. For even as water flows from the fountain, so does this
his obedience spring from faith, whereby he had apprehended the promise of
salvation. His obedience appears the more, for that the making of this work
was tedious, and often hindered with ye furiousnes of the wicked: which uneath
he could patiently have abiden, if that he had not safely rested in the
promise of ye covenant. But faith the mistres of obedience, brought forth such
fruits as might express his willing mind, to obey the Lords commandment. This
is that excellent bra^che of our religion, that our faith be not fruitles, as
our adversaries make report, Mat. 7.16, 17. and 12.33
but like a good tree it must bring forth the fruits of integrity and
righteousness of life. For even as fire burns and cannot be without heat, no
more then the sun without his light: Iam. 2.14. To. 12.1, 2. Ephe. 2.10
even so is it impossible for a true faith, to be without good works. which
although they do not justify us before God, yet are they to be done, that our
obedience of faith may thereby be discerned, Mat. 5.16. Romans 1.5.
which may be seen, whilst we walk in the law of God.

When Moses was ready to take his leave of the Israelites, how earnestly he
required of them obedience to the law of god, Deuteronomy. 4.6. and 28. toto.
it is most manifest throughout the whole book of Deutero. When Samuel had
appointed yt Jews a king, 1. Sam. 12.14.
how sweetly does he move them to the obedience of the law? When David would
publish and sing the praises of God, how vehementlye does he counsel the Jews
to hear the voice of God, Psalm. 95.7, 8. and 119. toto.
and not to harden their hearts, as in the deserte? When the Prophets would
have the people to turn to the Lord, yt his wrath might be turned from them,
their chief persuasion rests herin, that they would testify their faith, not
by the multitude of sacrifices, Ier. 7.22, 23 Hos. 6.6. Micah. 6.8.
but by obeying the word of God. This obedience our Savior Christ requires
of his disciples, if they love him, Ioh. 14.15.
to keep his commandments: and this is the same which ye Apostle Paul calls
the obedience of faith: Romans 1.5.
to the end after we be justified, we might express the same by our
obedience to the law of God, Romans 6. toto. and 8.1. and 12.1. Gal. 5.1. Ephesians.
4.1. etc.
and therefore in all his epistles, after the treatise of justification, he
commands the fruits of newnes of life. whereby (dearly beloved) we are to
learn, how fruitful our obedience ought to be in good works, Iam. 2.14. 1.
pet. 2.12
for so much as our faith is made manifest thereby, god is glorified, Romans 13.8.
T^^us 2.14 and 3.14.
and our brethren profited, he has made us a peculiar people unto him self,
that we should be folowers of good works, we must therefore live holily,
soberly, and righteously in this present world. he has redeemed us from the
hands of our enemies, Luke 1.71, 74.
that we should serve him in holiness and righteousness for ever. He has given
us heavenly graces many, 1. Pet. 4.10
and endued us with his holy spirit, therefore must the body dye to sin,
Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.24, 30. Romans 8.10. 1. Pet. 1.15
and the spirit live for righteousness sake. He is holy who has called us,
therefore must we be holy in all our conversation. Let us therefore (dear
brethren) show forth our obedience in newnes of life, Romans 6. tot 2. pet. 1.10
and make strong our election and calling by our good works, 1. Cor. 15.58.
and our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

We make great boastes and crakes, that we be Christians, let the same be
proved true or false by our lives: for not every one, that says, Lord, Lord,
Mat 7.21. and 12.50.
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of God:
neither is every one brother or sister to Christ, but only those which hear
and keep his word. and this is the fruit of our obedience and righteousness
toward God.

If we covet to be blessed and have good success, Joshua. 1.8. 1. king. 2.3
we must needs begin at this obedience of our faith. Leuit. 26.3 12. Iere.
7.23.
If we will have the Lord to be our God, and we our selves to be his people,
then must we humble our selves to obey his word. if we will be counted the
friends of Christ, Ioh. 15.14.
then must we do whatsoever he has commanded us. If we will be purified by
faith in heart, 1. Pet. 1.22 Acts 15.9.
we must begin to obey the truth. If we will be safely armed against spiritual
wickedness, Ephesians. 6.17.
we must hold fast the word of God. finally if we covet to be saved, Romans 1.16.
we may not be ashamed of the Gospel, but in all meeknes receive ye same,
Iam. 1.21.
for it is able to save our souls. We say with the Israelites to Moses, Deuteronomy.
5.27 29.
that we will observe the law. But, oh, that there were such an heart in us,
to fear the Lord, and to keep his commandementes always, that it might go
well with us, and with our children for ever. Wherefore as obedience is better
then sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15.22. Deuteronomy. 4.6.
so let this be our wisdom, with Noe to declare and show forth our faith by
our obedience unto the word of God.

Besides all this, the obedience of righteous Noe, more plainly did appear in
that he did not follow his own purpose and devise, Genesis 6.15, 16.
but the appointment of God in this making of the arc. for he made it in
length, in breadth, and height, and in all other parts accordinglye as he was
commanded. This is the wisdom of God, who will not have his Church builded
according to man's devise, but by the direction of his word. Exo. 25.40 Act.
7.44. Ebr. 8.5.
When Moses was commanded to build the tabernacle, he was straightly charged to
do it according to ye pattern showed unto him in the mount. When the
Israelites were instructed how to serve God, Deuteronomy. 12.29, 30, 31, 32.
when they came into the land of promise, they were forbidden to serve him
after the manner of the Canaanites, and only to worship him according to his
law, without either turning to the right hand or to the left. Ezra. 3.12, 13.
When the Jews returned out of captivity, and repaired the ruins of the
temple at Jerusalem, they reedified it according to the former building made by
Salomo^. When our savior Christ builded the spiritual arc and temple of his
church, he laid no other foundation but him self, Ier. 3.11. ephesians. 2.10. mat.
16.18.
who was the rock, against the which the gates of hell should not prevail. For
finishing whereof, in the gathering together of the saints, Mat. 28.20 romans
15.18
he charged the Apostles straightly, but to speak, what he had taught them. This
ought to be our special care in building and reformation of religion, not to
do what we think good, but as the Israelites before they took any thing in
hand, Exo. 28.30 nu^. 27.21 judge. 1.1.
asked counsel of God: so must we in all our ways be ruled by his word, which
is the way for us to walk in: Isa. 30.21.
which the holy ghost has written, Ioh. 20.31.
that we might believe, and in believing might have life. Wherefore whosoever
brings any other Gospel, though it were an angel from heaven, Gal. 1.8.
let him be accursed, neither let us receive him into our houses, 2. Ioh. 10.
neither bid him, God speed. Now then, if this be the wisdom of God, which Noe
followed, when he would not build, but as he was appointed, which Moses, the
Jews, our savior Christ and the apostles have observed, what kind of
building may that be, which stands only upon men's devises and vain
imaginations, such as is the whole religion of Antichrist? Surely, it is like
ye religion of the false prophets which sewed pillowes under the elbowes of the
Jews, in flattring them in their sins, Ezekiel. 13.10, 15.
whilst they dawbed and walled their building with untempered mortar. Or it is
like the house builded upon the sand, Mat. 7.26
which because of the weak fu^dation can not well endure. Or it is like the
straw and stubble, 1. Cor. 3.12, 13.
which is laid upon the good fundation, which at the fiery trial of the
spirit of God consumes, and comes to naught: and like as a paper arc or ship
of leaves had been a vain devise against the water to save Noe and his
family: so is the whole religion of Antichrist in vain to save our souls.
What a foolish paradise delight they in, which make their arc or ship, of the
rotten boardes of man's traditions, Mat. 15.8, 9.
which can never hold together? how loathsome an ensign has that vessel,
Apoc. 13.17.
which caryeth the mark and Image of the beast? How lightly, how perilously,
Isai. 55.2.
and how vainly is he fraughted, that makes the chaff of bulls and pardons,
his surest traffic? What loose anchre hold has he, Isai. 64.6. luke 17.10.
trow ye, that rests and rides upon his own merits and sinful works? How
uncertain is his course, Ioh. 14.6. col. 2.18.
who directs his race to sail to heaven by the mediation of saints? What a
cowardly maryner is he, that always is afraid at the paper rocks and painted
fyers of purgatory? What vain ordinance is holy bread, 2. The. 2.10 1, tim.
4.1. 2. tim. 4.3. 2 pet. 2.1, 2 apoc. 18.3, 4.
and holy water, to fight against the powers of hell? What food or
nourishment can his beads, his palms, his ca^dles, his oil, his ashes, and
other relics, minister unto him? What an uncertain trumpet is sounded, 1.
Cor. 14.
where the vanity of organes is good service? finally, how ca^ he ever sail
in safety, who has none sitting at the stearne, but only Antichrist, whose
purpose is to overthrow the ship? In such a naughty arc and ship they sail,
that row on forward without let, in their own inventions and rotten ship of
papisme and Idolatry. but the arc and ship of God, is made of the pyne trees
of his word, Ephe. 4.12 ioh. 10.27. and 17.3. Col. 1.14. Ephe. 4.30 Apoc. 7.3,
14. Mat. 11.28 Ebr. 4.14, 16. Mat. 16.18
pitched within and without, with the assured grace of Christ, marked with the
spirit of God and faith, fraughted with ye weighty merits of Christ's passion,
casting sure anchor in his promises directed by his mediation to the father,
emboldened with his blood against ye rocks and gates of death, defended with ye
ordinance of Christian armor against the force of Satan, Ephe. 6.11 1. these.
5.8.
and nourished with the word and food of life. Let us no more then sail
with them, Apoc. 18.4
nor yet retain any of their abominations. But let us address and prepare our
selves with Noe to be warned, let us with readiness of faith obey, and let
our good life express the same, in furthering the buylding of the Church in
our several callings, in all things being governed by the word of God, and
then with Noe we be well admonished. And thus much of the former part, whence it
came that Noe was moved to make the Arc. 2, Tim. 2.7.
The Lord give you understanding in all things, and he that has ears to
hear, let him hear.

He prepared the Arc to the saving of his household. The Lord (well-beloved)
has diverse means to save his people from destruction: and therefore the Arc
is said first to have had this effect, that Noe his family might be saved
thereby. For like as in the burning of Sodom, the little town Zoar was a
refuge for the safety of Lot, and his two daughters, Genesis 19.20
and Chaldea for Gods people, in the destruction of Iewrie, and Egypt for
Joseph, Marie and the child Jesus, Mat. 2.13.
against the furious assaults of Herod: eue^ so the Arc was now the means
which God would use for Noe his refuge, to save him and his from drowning. This
is the loving care which God has over his people, Psalm. 34.15 and 95.1. etc
in defe^ding them under the shadow of his wings, from falling with the wicked.
Let us then cast our care upon him, 1. Pet. 5.7.
for he is careful for us: and then in the perishing of the wicked, we shall
be safe within the Arc.

Neither must we think that the Arc was able to have preserved Noe and his
family from drowning: No no, it was the grace of God, Genesis 6.8.
who had received him into favor, which grace he did assure him of, by
preserving him alive within the Arc. Which thing the Apostle Peter does
declare, 1. Pet. 3.21
where he compares Baptism and the Arc together, for like as in Baptism,
not the putting away of the filthiness of the flesh saves us, but a good
conscience, that makes request to God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ:
even so, not the outward making of the Arc, but faith, believing the promise
of God unto salvation, justified and preserved Noe, whereof ye Arc was a holy
sign or sacrament, for the confirmation thereof: whereby we must observe, not
to give that unto the Sacraments, which is proper to the grace signified
thereby. For Sacraments, 1. Sa. 4. tot. Ioh. 1.33. 1. Cor. 10.5
neither of them selves, nor in them selves, include the grace of God: for that
belongs to the Creator, and not unto the creature. But they be as
instruments, seals, Genesis 17.10 exo. 12.11. mat. 26.26. and 28.19.
pledges and confirmations of Gods promises, whereby he does make more strong
his graces in our hearts, the fruits whereof we do receive by a lively faith.
For the salvation of Gods chosen rests not in sacramental signs, Tit. 3.5.
but in the (...) and good pleasure of God. Ephesians. 1.9.
Abraham, to whom the promise was made, Genesis 15.6. Romans 4.3, 4
was justified in believing the word of grace, long time before he received
the sign or Sacrament of Circumcision, which afterward was added for the
confirmation of the promise. Jacob was chosen, Genesis 25.23 Rom 9.11, 12. Act.
10.44, 47.
when he was yet unborn, and never had heard of any Sacrament. Cornelius and
his company, believing the words of Peter, were endued with the holy ghost,
bef^^^ ^hey were baptized. Whereby we learn that our salvation rests not in
ye outward Elements, but in the promise of Gods free mercy and grace in
Christ, Ephesians. 1.4, 5
who before the fundations of the world were laid, chose us by him to be
adopted unto salvation, which grace he seals in our hearts by the
Sacraments, for our more behoof, the virtue whereof we do receive by faith.

Neither herein must we (beloved) abridge or extenuate the dignity of the
Sacraments, and think they be but only signs of grace, (as the papists
falsely slander us) But as we say not with the Jews, nor with the papists, 1.
Sa. 4. Conc. trident. ses. 6. cap. 8.
that the Sacraments do give grace, and so with them commit Idolatry: so do
we not say that they are only bare signs unto the godlies faith, but
rightly hold the mean between them both, and believe assuredly, with the
sacramental sign, Tit. 3.5. Mat. 26.26.
that grace is present undoubtedly to the faith of him, that does receive the
same aright. And thus ye see, that not the Arc, but the grace of God preserved
Noe and his family, for whose salvation and deliverance, the Arc was made an
instrument and means.

It is not without good consideration, that the Arc was for the safety of Noe
his household: for it does express the right government of his well disposed
family, wherein the fear of God did flourish and continue. For like as when the
head is well and sound, and also the stomach pure from hurtful humors, the
body is commonly well affected: even so where the head or chief of any family
is found in faith and fears God, it commonly goes well with all the
household. For this cause Moses gave commandment unto the Jews, Deu. 6.5, 6
7. and 31.12.
that the law might be kept in their families, that they might prosper in all
that they went about. 2. Sam. 6.11.
When Obed-edom had received ye Ark of God into his house, which signified
true religion, the Lord blessed him and all his household. When the widow of
Zarephath in the days of Eliah, 1. King. 17.10. etc.
and the other widow of Israel in the days of Elisha, 2 King. 4.1 etc.
had received the Prophets of God into their houses, how mightily and
mercifully the Lord provided for them, who is ignorant? When our Savior
Christ had restored the rulers son to his health, Ioh. 4.53.
the ruler believed and all his family. After Zacheus had received Christ into
his house, Luke 19.9.
and was converted, salvation came to the same household. To be short, Act.
10.44.
when Cornelius the Centurion embraced the Gospel, his family also believed and
was baptized, and the holy Ghost fell upon them all which heard the preaching.
How well that house was ordered, where Timothy was brought up, 2. Tim, 1.5. and
3.25.
his knowledge in the scriptures from a child can witness. This is the care of
religion, which ought to be kept in our houses, and this is the good
conversation which the Lord looks for at the hands of the householders of al
degrees, Ephesians. 6.1. etc.
especially if they look for the blessing of God to fall upon them, and to be
saved with Noe in the Arc of Christ's Church. But look round about us, and
what shall we find in our families? Is it not verified of us, which the
Prophet Jeremy spoke so long agone upon the Jews: The children gather
sticks, Iere. 7.18.
the fathers make the fire, and the women bake cakes for the queen of heaven?
So fowly are our families for the most part corrupted, with ignorance and
superstition. In stead of ye knowledge of God, and true religion, there is
nothing to be found, but Atheism and gross idolatry. In stead of the
reverence and fear of Gods majesty, blaspheming of his name, Hos. 4.3.
and every other word most horribly powdered with an oath. In stead of honest
and sober living, To. 13.13.
chambering and wantonness, banqueting and minstrilsie, Isa. 22.13.
eating and drinking like Epicures, for to morrow we shall dye, thus feeding
our selves as an Ox unto the slaughter. In stead of godly meditations,
abominable gaming, as carding, dycing, and consuming of the gifts of God, Luke
16.1.
not lent to us for such a purpose. In stead of reading and hearing of the
word of God, Col. 3.16.
to comfort and exhort one another, the reading and good liking of profane
fables and fruitless books, more meet for Mearcers shoppes, to wrappe their
spices in, then for a well disposed family to be taught and nurtured by. O where
shall we find a good Noe, to order his household aright in fear and true
obedience, and to forewarne them of the flood of evil to come? If to govern a
family aright, were to purchase land, or for a man to enriche him self, or
leave a welthie son, few were behind with this endeavor. But O vain man,
have thou more desire to leave thy son a fair buylding, and full of lands,
then for to instruct him in the way of godliness, and leave him a virtuous
conscience? Have thou rather a desire to hoorde up treasure for him, Mat. 6.19.
with rust and mothe to be consumed, then for to teach him the knowledge of
God, which will not canker but last for aye? Deuteronomy. 6.5. and 28.2.
If either thou or thine will prosper well, you must begin in true religion
to serve the Lord, and then you shall be blessed. Will thou the^ know how to
order thy family? Nourishe none, keep none, I say, make much of none, Psalm.
15.4.
but such as fear the Lord. The godly king David describing the government of
his well disposed family, speaks in this wise: Psalm. 101. toto.
I will (says he) walk in the uprightness of my heart, in the midst of my
house. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them
that fall away, it shall not cleave unto me. A froward heart shall depart
from me: I will know none evil. Him, that privily slandereth his neighbor,
will I destroy. Him, that has a proud look and high heart, I cannot suffer.
Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me:
he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. There shall no deceitful
person dwell within my house. He that tells lies, shall not remain in my
sight. etc. Wherein we may plainly see, the right pattern of a well disposed
family. We read in the Ecclesiastical stories of the primitive church, Eusebius.
de vita Constable. lib. 1. ca. 11.
that when Co^stantius the Emperor would take a trial of his household
servants, he commanded them to show forth of what religion they were. And when
the time was appointed unto them, either to sacrifice unto the Idols, and so to
remain his servants, or otherwise to confess Christ, and so to depart away,
(for thus he thought to try them) when every one had showed what he was, all
such as were Idolaters, and denied Christ, he banished from his Court,
supposing them never to be faithful toward him, who were unfaithful toward
God: and contrary to their expectation, he made much of them that feared the
Lord, and did confess his name. An apt way for our behoof, to vanish sin
and superstition from our families, that when the end shall come, we may be
saved with Noe and his family in the Arc.

And where as the holy Ghost says, that the arc was for the sauegard of Noe
and his family, it is to admonish us also, yt there is no salvation without
the church of Christ, prefigured by the arc. For as the branche can not bear
fruit, Ioh. 15.4.
except it do abide within the vine, for else it dies and withers: and as
the hand cut from the body, can not live, but wastes and consumes for lack
of life: no more can we, except we do abide in Christ: he is the vine, we are
the branches. This made the prophet David call upon the Lord, to remember him
with the favor of his people, Psalm. 106.4.
and to visit him with his salvation. When the prophets described the
restoration of the Church in the later days, Isai. 37.32. joel. 2.32.
they did not teach that every man should be saved by what religion so ever he
retained, but only promised salvation to such as fled to mount Sion, and to
Jerusalem, thereby understanding the church of Christ. Ezec. 13.9.
When Ezechiel denou^ced the wrath of God against the false prophets, he told
them that they should not be in the assembly of the Lords people, neither should
be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither should enter into the
land of Israel, neither should know that he was the Lord God. Here then
(well-beloved) it stands us upon, to try whether we be within the arc of the
church of Christ or not, for else we perish. For as the light of the sun
avails not him that lies in a dark and close dungeon, where is always
night and never day: even so the graces of god do nothing help those that lie
in darkness, and shadow of death, until they have access into the Church of
the faithful. For so long as we be without the church and number of the
faithful, we are aliants, strangers, pilgrims, Ephesians. 2.19.
and men without God in this world: yea, Romans 5.10.
we be enemies to God, until we be reconciled to the father by Christ. 1.
Pet. 2.10 Ezec. 16.6.
We are without mercy, and polluted in our blood, until by him we obtain
grace, and be washed from our sins. Apoc. 1.5. Ephe. 2.1, 2. etc.
We are dead in trespasses and sins, till we be raised up with the
righteousness of Christ. Apo. 14.8. and 17.2. and 18.3.
We be drunke^ with the poisoned dregs of superstition, until we have the
sovereign triacle of Gods promises in the word of the truth, for our
preservation. How the^ ought we, think you, to make haste into this arc? your
own consciences herein shall be my judges. Surely, we can not be partakers of
the heavenly graces, Ioh. 15.1. etc.
except we be within the church of Christ: for only upon the same, they are
bestowed. Where can our souls be fed with the word of God, but among the
faithful, Ioh. 10.27.
who are the sheep of Christ, and hear his voice? Where shall we show our
thankfulness, and confirm our faith with the sacraments, Mat. 26.26. and
28.19.
but in that Church, where they be sincerely ministered? Where can we have
forgiveness of our sins, Romans 3.25. Ephesians. 2 8. Gal. 4.6. 1. Pet. 4.10
the grace of God, ye holy ghost, the righteousness of Christ, and other his
benefits, unless we be within the Church, for whom he wrought the same? If
therefore we hope for happiness, and look assuredly for salvation, the^ must we
keep within the arc, and then we shall be safe and sound. And yt we be not
deceived with the title of the Church, Iere. 7.4. and 18.18. mat. 3.9.
which the adversaries always have in their mouths, ye Lord has left us his
true and sincere word, Ioh. 10.27. Acts. 2.42. ephe. 5.25, 26, 27.
the right administration of his sacraments, and ecclesiastical discipline, to
be the perfect marks of this his spiritual arc, whereto whilst we do cleave
and stick, we cannot be deceived, or perish with the wicked.

What then (says the papist) shall we think of all those, which lived in the
time of ignorance, and were without the Church, which now we have, which was so
lately found? shall we judge them to be damned? which thing we must needs do,
except we make the Church of Rome, the arc and Church of Christ. Concerning
the Church of Rome, this is to be observed: that this Church of Rome which now
is, is not the same, but only in place, with that which was in ye primitive
time. For then they followed the doctrine of the Apostles, now they have
revolted from the same, and Antichrist sits in the Temple of God. 2. These.
2.4 apoc. 13.11. etc.
And though the ancient fathers speak much in the commendation of ye Church
of Rome, yet speak they only of the church before that superstition crept into
the same.

And now before I answer to this question, I must propounde the like to them.
Before the time of Boniface the third, then Pope of Rome, when superstition and
corruption crept into the Church, and the light of the truth began to be
darkened, were all damned, which never before or after yielded to the sea and
religion of Rome? Were all undone which never believed transubstantiation,
concluded by Innoce^tius the third? or those which never worshipped their
breaden god, which thing Honorius did decree? What need I speak of other
vanities? Were all the Prophets and holy men of God, was Christ and his
Apostles, and the ancient fathers of the primitive Church, beside the way, and
out of the arc, which had the spirit of God, Isai. 59.21. john 16.13
to lead the^ into all truth, who taught the sacred verities, and all things
necessary to salvation, and yet did never retain such vanities, as these men
hold? Matthew. 24.2. these. 2.4. 1. tim 4.1. 2. pet. 2.1, 2
And if they did foretell any thing thereof, it was but to bid the Church
beware of such ungodliness.

And as for the arc or Church wherein we be, it was before theirs was ever
devised, not newly and of late years, as many judge, begun, but renewed and
reformed of late, according to the word of God, and is in substance and
doctrine, all one with the Church of God, Genesis 3.15. and 22.18. deuteronomy. 18.18
ioh. 8.56. hebr. 13.8.
from the beginning, directed by his spirit, and by the scepter of his word.
And albeit it was long hid through the tyranny of the devil, who drove the
woman into the wilderness, Apoc. 13.8
yet ceased there not infinite numbers, to withstand and gainsay the
pollutions of Idolatry, whom God preserved by his grace, though they could not
be seen by the eyes of men. For like as faith is chiefly known to God, and
cannot be discerned by outward senses, otherwise then by the declarations
thereof: 2. Tim. 2.19.
so the Lord knew only who were his, whose faith was known by their
resistance to the beast. When John foretold the corruptions of the later times,
and of the man of sin, he showed that there was of all tribes many sealed
with the spirit of God, Apoc. 7.4.
and marked with the blood of the Lamb, received by faith, who perished not in
the lake of Antichrists pollutions. He told that the two witnesses of Christ
(whereby he meant the small number of the true Church) Apoc. 11.3
should be murdered by the beast: Apoc. 13.7
who should make war with the saints of God, and torment them to death, Apoc.
17.6
who should be drunken with the blood of saints and holy martyrs, which could
never have been, if there had been none, to have gainsaid his wicked ways. I
need not speak of the churches of Grecia, who still withstood ye popish
vanities: yea there never ceased some, to withstand her erroneous religion.
Neither must we think that all was lost, that lived the^. For why? the Lord
has ways and means unknown to man, to save his people, as he saved the
thief, Luke 23.42
even in the last hour, Ephesians. 1.4.
upon the cross. And as he has chosen in his secret purpose, unknown to man,
who shall be saved: Ioh. 6.37. and 10.28.
so will he not lose one of them, but call them in due time.

As for this argument, which they use herein, Psalm. 78.7, 8. iere. 9.14. ezekiel.
20 18.
it has been a stu^bling block to the wicked of all ages. The Jews were
moved with nothing so much, to gainsay the doctrine of the Prophets, calling
them from their Idolatry, but that their fathers had lived, as they did at
that present: and yet they ought not to have followed their fathers further,
then their fathers followed the word of truth. John. 4.20, 22.
The woman of Samaria reasoned thus against our Savior Christ: Our fathers
(says she) worshipped in this mountain: but he made her an answer, that
they worshipped they knew not what, for salvation came of the Jews.

But it is not ye part of a good conscience, when ye truth is opened, to leap
from the same, into the seat of judgment, and define who were saved, who were
not: but rather referring al to the mercy and good pleasure of God, both
concerning our forefathers and all others, to labor our wits to do his will.
For now this thing is condemnation, Ioh. 3.19.
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness more then light. And
to say the truth, if some of our elders in the times of ignorance, had had
the truth as we have no we reueyled, they would long since have repented in
sackecloth and ashes. Mat. 11.21
But it is greatly to be feared, which our savior Christ does threaten to
come to pass against the Jews, to be laid against us. For as the men of
Niniue repented at the preaching of Jonas, Mat. 12.41
and not ye Jews at ye preaching of Christ, who was greater the^ Jonas: even
so the good and faithful dealing which they had in times past in civil
causes, does reprove our iniquities, and tell what they would have bin if they
had had the light. And therefore a good father says full well: Beza epis. 1.
Men had better consciences then, and less knowledge: now have they more
knowledge and worse consciences.

But if these men will brag of auncientie, the^ must they look unto the old
ways of the Prophets and Apostles, Iere. 6.16.
and to Christ ye truth it self, Col. 2.3.
in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and understanding: for Antiquity
without verity, is nothing worth. If they would boast of unity, the same must
be reposed in true doctrine, Ephesians. 4.3. phil. 2.2.
and the holy ghost, and not in idle ceremonies. If they will glory of
succession, the same will help the^ nothing, except they follow the ancient
fathers, Ephe. 5.1. phil. 3.17.
in sincerity of doctrine and godly conversation: for they be not the true
successors of holy men, which always sit in their chayres, but they which
follow their faith and godly works. Did. 40.
And if they make their vaunt of multitude, the most part are not always best
inclined. For why? narowe is the way, that leads unto life, Mat. 7.13, 14.
and few there be that find it, but wide is the way yt leads to perdition.
And though many be called, yet few be chosen. Mat. 22.14
Only Noe his family which were but eight in all, were saved alive, Genesis 7.
when all the world besides was drowned. And though they brag much of the
title of the church, Iere. 7 4, ^1.
the church, yet have they made thereof a den of thieves, Mat. 21.33 mar.
12.1.
and broken down the vineyard of the Lord, and erred from the way of truth.
Let us therefore repair not unto them, but unto the Arc of Christ, and so we
shall be sure and safe, from drowning and destruction.

Furthermore, it is to be noted, that notwithstanding Noe and his family were
safe within the Arc, and sure from drowning, yet were they tossed to and fro,
with the fearful waves and sourging seas, and also dismayed with the cloudy and
mistie air, not much unlike unto ye disciples of our Savior Christ, Mat.
8.24. mar. 4.35.
afraid upon ye seas at the dangerous tempests, tossing the ship wherein they
were. But as then our savior Christ most comfortably did awake, and command
both winds and seas to be still: so was the merciful God careful for Noe in
these afflictions within the Arc, and after many wearisome days, did bring
him safe to land. Thus is the Church of God always in the raging tempests and
byllowes of this world afflicted with many tribulations, Ioh. 16.33. act.
14.22. 2. tim. 3.12.
before she can arrive to the haven of heavenly happiness. Albeit Abraham had
the Lord to be his buckler and exceeding great reward, Genesis 12. and 20.
under whose defense he was safely guarded, yet was he tried by famine and
other dangers many, for the better exercise of his faith. Psalm. 27.1. and
66.12.
The Prophet David was well assured of the Lords favor and mighty
protection, that he needed not to fear, yet was his faith and patience proved
by many afflictions, both of wicked Saul and others mo, and him self ordained
to go through fire and water, before he came to the place of sweet refreshing.
Before our Savior and captain Christ, Mat. 16.21
the head of the Church did with our flesh ascend into heaven, he passed
through the grievous torments of the cross. Before the saints and holy men of
God attained everlasting happiness, their faith and patience was tried by the
manifold persecutions of Antichrist and his members. 1. Pet. 4.12 Apoc. 11.7.
and 12.11. and 14.12.
And even in these days, the beast and man of sin, and son of perdition,
together with many kings and nobles of the earth, Psalm. 2.2. Apoc. 17.12, 13.
does breathe grievous threats and wicked counsel against the Church and
spouse of Christ, and stir up strife all the day long, wherein we must learn
(dearly beloved) to arm our selves with faith and patience against such
persecutions. For although we be within the Arc, yet will the waters of
afflictions stream and strive against us. Mat. 7.24.
Though our faith be builded upon the rock and sure fundation Christ Jesus,
yet will the boisterous blastes and winds of wickedness assault and shake us,
if it were possible to make us fall. We must needs be like fashioned to our
master and captain Christ, Romans 8.29. 2. Tim. 2.11.12.
to suffer with him, that we may reign with him, to dye with him, that we may
rise again with him, 2. Cor. 1.5, 7.
to be partakers of his sorrows, that we may be fellows at his joys. We must
needs be tried as fine gold from base metal, 1. Pet. 1.7. and 4.12, 13, 14.
Ebr. 12.7. etc.
as the godly from the ungodly, and as children from bastardes in the fiery
furnace of afflictions. We must needs have the relics of sin punished in
us, and therefore we are tossed within the Arc and chastised of the Lord, 1.
Cor. 11.32.
least with the wicked world we should be condemned. Hereby the Lord will also
have us to be stirred up, to seek for succor from his throne of grace in
calling upon him in the day of trouble. Psalm. 50.15.
Our faith, our patience and other virtues more, must needs be explored and
known. 1. Pet. 1.7. iam. 1.3, 4, 12. 2. Cor. 5.1, 2.
we must be inflamed with the desire of the life immortal, wherewith we shall be
crowned, after we have endured tentation. Neither must we in the midst of
these afflictions be discomfited or faynt-hearted: for why? we abide nothing,
but it is according to the will of God, 1. Pet. 3.17 Mat. 5.11, 12.1. pet. 2.21.
neither happens any thing unto us, but the same has happened to the godly
of all ages. And although for a time we cate the bread of tears, and drink
the waters of adversity, yet afterward shall we be filled with the heavenly
Manna, Apoc. 2.17 and 22.17. Psalm. 30.5.
and waters of everlasting life. Heaviness may well endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning. The Lord has promised to be present with us, by his
grace, Mat. 28.10 1. pet. 4.14 and 2. pet. 2.9
and to comfort us in distress, and to deliver us out of tribulation. And
though we be tossed in the Arc for a year, perhaps for more, yet shall we
rest at length upon Armenia, Genesis 8.4, 5
and the floodes be dried up: and then the Lord shall take vengeance of them
who here afflict and molest us. Apoc. 18.20.
And in the mean time, he shall turn their hearts that they do us no wrong,
as he turned the heart of Esau toward Jacob. Genesis 33.4.
He shall call them back from persecuting us, as he called Saul from
following and pursuing after David, 1. Sa. 23.27
yea he shall put such a snaffle in their mouths, then they shall do no more
then in his secret providence he has appointed. Act. 2.23. and 4.28.
Wherefore, Ephesians. 6.12.
when we be impugned by satan and the spiritual powers of wickedness above
our bodily reach, when we walk through the midst of many false brethren,
2. Cor. 11.26.
and by these adversaries of the truth be reproched, slandered, reviled and
persecuted, and also weakened through our own infirmities, let this be our
hope and comfort, that we be within the Arc, and once the joyful day will
come, Isai. 25.8. apoc. 7.17
when God shall wipe away all sorrows from our eyes, and crown us with glory
and worship. And therefore, whilst we be within the Arc, let us not despair
for trouble and adversity, for God is faithful who has promised. Ebr. 10.23.
And thus much of the first effect of the Arc.

The second effect it had, was touching the wicked, for ye scripture says,
Whereby he condemned the world. Whilst Noe and his family (dearly beloved)
were long exercised in the making of the Arc, and thereby obeyed the
commandment of God, they did condemn the stubbernes of the wicked which
refused to do the same, and to be warned, and so took away al excuses from
them, so that as the Arc was for the safety of Noe, so was it likewise a
condemnation for the wicked. This is (dear brethren) the nature of the
admonitions and warnings of God, which for the most part have a double effect,
for to ye godly, which believe the same, they are the savor of life, to life,
2. Cor. 2.16
but to the wicked which refuse ye same, they are the taste of death unto
destruction. Exo. 14.
For as the red sea was a safe passage for the Israelites coming out of
Egypt, and a drowning to the Egyptians: And as the fire of Babylon hurt not the
three children cast into the Oven, Dan. 3.21, 25.
but yet burnt the ministers which cast them in: And as the Lions saved Daniel
alive, Dan. 6.22, 24.
but quickly did devour his accusers: even so is the nature of the word of
God. Wherefore it is compared to the fire, which melts wax, and hardens
clay, and to the trumpe in battle, Iere. 6.17.
which encourages some, and discourageth other some. And as the rayn coming
down from heaven returns not thither again, Isai. 55.10.
but makes the earth fruitful: even so shall the word of God accomplish
every where, whatsoever his will is. And therefore as it is a condemnation to
the wicked, so is it the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16.
to all those which believe ye same. Let us therefore submit our selves and all
our cogitations to the same, 2. Cor. 10.5.
least in refusing it, we be condemned thereby, and all excuse taken from us.

But it fares with this generation, whereof few embrace the truth and live
thereafter, as it did with the world in the days of Noe. For as then they were
disobedient to Noe, Genes. 6. 1. pet. 3 20 and 2. pet. 2.5
and contemned the preaching of righteousness: so now many good Noes preach
the word sincerely, but alas, it falls into the hearts of many, Mat. 13.3,
4.
but as good seed into evil ground, and therefore, either brings forth
little, or else no fruit at al: the contempt whereof was then, and so is now,
the cause of many plagues. Genesis 3.
What banished Adam out of Paradise, and brought so many woes upon him and all
his posterity, Romans 5.19.
but the contempt of Gods word? what ouerthrewe the Israelites in the
wilderness, Psalm. 95.9. ebr. 3.12. etc. Jude. 5. etc.
and plagued their posterity in the land of Canaan so often, but the contempt
hereof? what lost Saul the favor of God and the scepter of his kingdom, 1.
Sa. 15.
or what led Israel and Judah into captivity, 2. Kin. 17.14. iere. 9.12, 13.
luke 14.18. rom 11.21. ebr. 4.1.
but the contempt of this? what held the Jews from the heavenly supper and
graces of God? what deprived them of the dignity of ye children, and benefit
of the kingdom, but the contempt of this? what should I speak of the
manifold plagues of God powered upon this realm of England, and nations round
about us for the contempt of his word? And then how happens it, Nom. 11.5,
6, 7.
that we still loath the same, as the Israelites did Manna in the wilderness? or
is it that we would be in the spiritual Egypt of filthy papistrie again, and
so deprive our selves of the land of rest?

But as in Noe his time, Genesis 6.12.
all flesh, even all degrees were sore corrupted: so is it now, most
lamentable to behold, all flesh is gone astray, and iniquity ripe on every
side. Look into the heads and high estates of al sorts, who should have
knowledge and be lights for others: and even these (as the Prophet says)
have broken the yoke and burst the bonds asunder. Iere. 5.5.
Where should be zeal and true religion? Where should be godliness and
innocence of life, but chiefly in these? but do we not see many of them,
either professed papists, or manifest dissemblers? Where should the ministry
be relieved and vpholde^, but by these? and do not diverse o^ them make spoil
and havoc of the Church goods, to cloth and feed them selves, and starve
the poor? Where should the good and godly laws of England be better
executed, but by these? They do not make, they mar and break the laws. And
if there be some godly statutes made, Isocrates (...).
it is to true in some, which the Orator says, (...). Many laws we make,
but we little regard or keep them. And as the Poet says, Auro venalia iura.
Why are the laws like spyders webs, to let the waspe escape and to torment the
fly? If gentlemen offend, as their hands are ryfest in transgression, Ezra.
9.2.
they have their purse, and courtly friends, they shall escape unpunished: But
aye the poor goes by the walls. What else is this, but even to make and sell
the laws? I need not speak of brybing and insatiable officers, who rather
seek for gain, then for maintaining of the truth, Psalm. 14.4.
who make the poor their pray and spoil. But this I say, as sometimes an
ancient king has said: Saepe boni iudices habent malos vicarios, Foxus. to 1.
page 111.
quorum reatibus ipsi domini constringuntur, si non eos coerceant, and a
rapacitate cohibeant. that is, Oftentimes good magistrates have evil
vicegerentes, or under officers, with whose offenses the heads them selves are
chayned, if they stay them not, and refrain them from greedines. And what may
we rightly judge to be the cause of these offenses, but even the neglect of
the word of God, which should teach us to do aright, and to flee from evil?

And as the contempt in this degree is horrible, so would I wish it spread
no further: then should our ministry be the freer from offense, and our
gospel have the better speed. But it is herein, as Jeremy said, Iere. 2.8.
The priests say not, Where is the Lord? and they that should minister ye law,
know not the Lord: the pastors have offended against him, and the Prophets
prophecy in Baal, and go after things which do not profit. Our ministry is
fowly (to say the truth) corrupted: for whilst ignorant ministers and dombe
dogs, 1. Kin. 12.31. 2. chro. 13.9. isa. 56 10.
more like to Ieroboams priests, and sacrificing massemongers, have cure and
charge of soul, while tagge and ragge may be admitted to this function,
whilst gentlemen may have the profits of the flock, and hire Sir John
Lackelatine to sing or say the service, how shall the Gospel have good
success? whilst Church to Church is joined, Act. 20.28. nehe. 6.3.
and non residencies borne withal and well liked, what can go forewarde in the
building of the Lord? where preaching is but once a quarter (I say not where
it is seldom or never, which I might) or once a month (which some think more
the^ needs, and if it be each Saboth, it is counted a work of supererogation)
how can the people be reclaimed from their vanities, or kept within the fold in
dew obedience? Go to, what springes of such contempt in these estates? even
effusion of all riot, and running into sin, of the inferior sort. For as the
wall within and eke without, is made of squared stones, between the which the
less stones are contained, to make the building up: eue^ so the minister
within the Church, and the Magistrate in the common weal, should support and
uphold the meaner sort in dew obedience. If then the squared stones within,
or else with out fall down, the less can never long endure, because they lack
their stay. And of contempt in these degrees, it comes to pass, that lack of
discipline and good living is the cause of many sins, Mat. 18.17.
both in the Church and common weal. Neither would I have this forgotten,
that whilst ecclesiastical officers may for money dispense with offenders,
1. Sa. 15.8. 1. kin. 20.42.
and also vain pity in the common weal may shadow iniquities, the Church
can not go well. Surely, Surely it is with England, as the Prophet Osee said
it was with Israel: Hos. 4.1, 2, 3.
The Lord has a controversy with the people of the land, because there is no
mercy, no truth, no knowledge of God in the land. But by swearing, lying,
killing, stealing and whoring men break out, and blood touches blood: therefore
shall the land mourn, etc. How ripe the sins of England be for ye sickle of
Gods vengeance, Apoc. 14.15.
every Christian eye can testify. And yet for all this, we are fast a sleep
with the careless world, in the time of Noe. We eat and drink, Mat. 24.37
luke 17.28. 1. pet. 3.20
we marie and give to marriage, most like, until the flood shall take us hence:
Amos. 6.4.
we lie upon our soft couches, and put away the evil day far from us: we
bless our selves, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
when we hear the threatenings of the Lord and curses of his law, and say, We
shall feel none evil: we are drunken with foolish Nabal, 1. Sa. 25.36
until Abigail bring us word that we must dye. We spoil, and make our selves
merry with the goods of other men, 1. Sa. 30.16
as the Amalekites did in Ziklag, until David, Gods scourge come upon us to
wound us to death and make a reskewe. Da. 5.3, 30.
We drink with Balthazar in bowls, until the Medes take away our kingdom.
we enriche our selves, Luke 12.18.
and also enlarge our barnes, and lay up treasure in store for many years, and
yet this present night our soul must be taken away, Luke 12.20.
and then who shall possess our substance? we waste and spoil our masters
goods, Luke 16.1.
and live unmindful of our duty, until we be called to render an account of
our stewardshippe. we sleep full hard with the foolish virgins, Mat. 25.5.
and our lamps quite put out, till that the bridegroom be gone in, and the
door fast locked that we can not enter. We sit like the proud strumpet
Babylon, Apoc. 18.7, 8.
and feed our selves with folly, that we shall feel no sorrow nor widowhead,
and yet al sorows shall suddenly come upon us. Finally we say, 1. The. 5.3.
Peace, peace, and all things quiet, even when the end is at hand. Nay rather,
Mat. 25.13
let us watch and pray, and have our lamps of righteousness burning, that we
may enter into rest with the bridegroom at his coming, and leave betimes our
great security, least we perish with the wicked.

It is reported of Tamberlane the king of the Parthians, who termed himself
Iram dei and orbis vastitatem, to have set up three several dais three several
kinds of tents, whereof the first was white, betokening mercy, if his enemies
would yt day yield: ye second day, the te^ts were red, betokeni^g ye bloodshed
of the rulers, the third was black, signifying the burning and destruction of
the city, neither was there hope of mercy when the white tents were taken
down, although they humbled themselves with laurel. Let us go forth with
laurel branches in this our time and day of grace, for it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who is a consuming fire: let us
be admonished by the word of truth, or else the same will condemn us with
the wicked.

But the time is past, and I have wearied you to much, I will therefore note one
word or two, of the last words, and so make an end.

He was made the heir of righteousness, which is according to faith. This is
now the acceptance and reward of Noe his faith, who first was received into
favor by believing the promise of God, and thereby had God a merciful father.
Of who^, this his obedience was accepted, not for any the worthiness of flesh
and blood, which was none, To. 8.33, 34.
but by the free grace of God, accepting in good worth, what he did. For when
faith believes the promises of God concerning salvation, Romans 8.15, 17.
and apprehends the adoption of the children, then follows the inheritance
of our righteousness, for that we being by faith the children of God, are
heirs, even fellow heirs with Christ of his kingdom. For after we believe,
we are sealed with the spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, Ephe. 1.13 14.
until the redemption of the possession, purchased unto the praise of his
glory. This is that which the Apostle says, Tit. 3.7.
that we being justified by ye grace of God, should be made heirs, according
to the hope of everlasting life. And for this cause is Christ ye mediator of
the new Testament, that through death, Ebr. 9.15.
which was for the redemption of the transgressions which were in the former
Testament, they which were called, might receive the promise of the eternal
inheritance. Blessed be God therefore, (let us all say) even ye father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.3.
which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again, unto a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance immortal and undefiled, reserved in heaven for us.

This inheritance of righteousness, Genesis 12.1. ebr. 11.8.
Abraham beheld with the eyes of faith, when he forsook his own country
looking for a better, and everlasting in heaven, rejoicing in spirit to see
the day of Christ the Messiah. Ioh. 8.56.
This inheritance David longed after, Psalm. 42.1. and 27 13.
when like as the Heart desired the water brooks, even so his soul longed
after the Lord, hoping to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living. This inheritance the Apostles believed to have, Ioh. 6.68.
when they confessed Christ to be the Son of God, and to have the words of
Eternal life. This inheritance the Saints in the revelation cast their eyes
upon, Apoc. 12.11. and 14.1^
when with patience they endured the torments of death, because they would
not yield to the pollutions of Antichrist. And this is that crown of
righteousness which we desire, whilst we daily pray, Luke 11.2. Apoc. 22.20.
Thy kingdom come. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Finally this is that
inheritance of faith, which our Savior Christ has already taken possession
of for us, and which we shall feel, when he shall sweetly say, Mat. 25.34
Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you, from the
beginning of the world. Apoc. 21.48.
Then shall all sorrow and tears he wiped from our eyes, then shall we see
death, sin, Satan, Antichrist and his members trodden under foot, 1. Cor.
15.55, 56, 57.
and swalowed up in victory, Apoc. 14.2
whilst we shall sing ye songs of triumph before the throne of ye lamb, and
this shall be the reward of ye obedience of our faith. Wherefore whilst we see
the end to draw nere, 1. Pet. 4.7. and 2. Pet. 3.11.
let us prepare and address our selves, that we may be found in ye Arc of
Christ's church, so shall we be sure from destruction, and assured of everlasting
happiness, to be the reward and inheritance of our faith, given us of God for
the love and worthiness of his only son Jesus Christ, To. 6.23.
our only redeemer and Savior: to whom with the father and the holy Ghost
three distinct persons, and one invisible and everlasting God, be al honor,
glory, praise and dominion for ever. So be it.

FINIS.
Blessed are they which hear the word of God and keep it. Luke 11.28.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.
ANNO. 1578.

printer's or publisher's device TIGRE: REO. ANIMALE DEL. ADAM. VECCHIO. FIGLI
VOLO. MERCE. LEVANGELIO. FATTO. N'ESTAT. AGNELLO



