A true report of the late horrible murder committed by William Sherwood,
Prisoner in the Queens Benche, for the profession of Popery, the 18. of June,
1581.
I Am the more loath at this time, to lay open unto the view of the whole
world, that late foul murder committed by Sherwood, because I would not
speak much of them which be gonne, and be thought to bite them by the back
which are dead, and so be like unto those Papists which being hot in
cruelty, did not only curse the dead contitinually, but did take up and burn
the hones of diverse good men into ashes, to signify unto the world, that no
drink could cool their thirst, but blood, no Sacrifice could content the^,
but the warm heart blood of Martyrs, and the death of the Saints of God. But my
intent is this, for as much as their scabbes now break out, and that their
cruelty seeks no corners, but sets it self upon a Stage to be beheld of
all men, to give all good Christians warning, that as they shall hear of their
naughtines, and see it so, they will learn to spew them out of their stomachs
for ever. It was wunt to be said often, and to be true: Envy braggeth, but
draws no blood. But now it may be as truly said: the malice of a Papiste,
it braggeth little, but it is hardsie satiffied, but with abundance of much
^^od.

Their desired time of revenge is not past, and their malice has not yet
vomitted his gall. We may see this, that because opportunity offers not it
self, to let them delight their eyes with beholding our channelles, running
and reking, with the warm blood of Protestauntes: rather then they will want
this delight, they will wash their hands in the blood of their own brethren,
in their own chambers. This is the portion of their cupps, which if they
might, we should be made to drink to the dregs.

These are the Bores which destroy the Vineyard, who because they are not
baighted with Dogs, and their ears torn off, they will play like mad Dogs
themselves, biting all that come in their way.

They give out in their Lybelles which they scatter, ^^^ndlie advertisements,
as Indas ^ff^^^ a ^aindlie ^isse. They cast them selves (...) ^^ke and
Subjects, at the seete of our gr^tions ^^uer^^^me, but their long ears d^^
^^wray their conditions. Their throats are open Sepulchers, they flatter with
their tongues: and so is it their kind, for it is as natural for a Dog to
bark, as to wagge he^ tail: If the common wealth be not purged of this
infection, the plague will be so great, that upon every good Protestauntes
d^^^e, lord have mercy upon us, may shortlis be ^^ritten.

But I will breefly deliver out this fearful Tragedy, in the which I will set
out nothing that in false, nor willingly keep any thing bac^e that is true.
In the Queens Bench, there were two detained for Popery: The one called
Richard Hobson, borne in the I Will of Wight, of good Parentage, young in years
(but as time ^ffereth) many young and green heads, are seasoned Papists. The
other named William Sherwood, a Gentleman, born^ to some Lands, in Yorkshyre,
at Walkington, by Byuerley, a man condemned in a Primanerie, for extolling the
Supremacy: a derider of Gods Ministers, a disturber of Preachers, a contemner
of the service confirmed by her Majesty, calling it devilish: one well liked
of many Papists, but best liked of himself, because he was so disobedient,
they accounted him stout: because he prated much, they accounted him learned:
but because he has shamed them much, they would now accoumpt him mad. It
fortuned before the death of Hobson, about six weeks, that Sherwood for want
of payment was removed from his lodging, well shakeled, to the common Gaile,
whose misery being pitied by this young man, was also relieved by his means,
(as at sundry other times he was). The quarrel as I am creddibly informed was
this: Hobson gave his word for the money that Sherwood owed: a friend of
Sherwoods shortly after, had sent five pounds for the payment of his charges,
which Hobson receiving, disbursed it for himself, and within few days after,
satisfied the residue, because this money was not paid to Sherwood first: at
Dinner time with open words he protested, that he could not abide Hobson. This
young man moved him oftentimes earnestly to be reconciled, showing his grief
unto him, in that he took offense at him, but nothing might move his mind
that thirsted, or stay his hands that itched to commit murder. It is a
speech commonly used, that love waxes and waneth oftentimes with the Moon,
but it may be as commonly seen, that the hatred of a Papist never waxes and
waneth, but still waxes, still increases: he that has been planted in
Popery, his Grapes are Grapes of Gall: his clusters are always bitter. If the
Pope has once given them a Soppe, they are lightly never sober after: if he
have once powered his licker into them, their Vessels can hardely be made
clean. But to be brief, the day grew on, which was the 28. of June, about 8.
of ye clock in the morning, at which time he had determined, to murder his
fellow Papist, and that the matter might more easy be brought to pass, he
caused the night before the Keeper to rea^^^ue all Hobsons weapons, so that the
next morning, as Hobson was coming down thorough Sherwoods Chamber, from his
prayers, Sherwood shutting his Chamber ^oore, affailed him with a knife, and a
stool tressell, a ^^ouishing him, afterward gave him a large wound, keeping
him down and struggling till he bled to death, Hobson often crying, help
Father Throckmorton, he kills me with his knife: master Throckmorton and
others, hearing this noise, came upon Sherwood, and by force broke up his
doors, found the young man all to be sowsed in his own blood, and gasping for
breath: who after a few faint words, yielded his soul into the hands of God.
Sherwood perceived a great many busy about Hobson, began to practice to
escape, but by heed taking of one Master Smithes man, he was brought to the
Marshalles hands, and embrued in his fellows blood: who being examined, he
denied the manifest murder, which by witness was proved, and he being
brought to the flaine body, the blood which was settled, issued out a treshe.
Thus he stewe this young man, in deed and cause, miserably in form and
fashion, cruelly and beastly.

Let us advisedly now weigh and cou^^der, what manner of ^^for this is, that
cutteth so sharp: If they be thus unable to master their passions, and thus
like blood ^uckers, do open them against their own feliowe prisoners, what
shall we look for at their hande^, Quibus sepibus tam immanes bell^a^
conti^^bimus: What hedges can be made strong enough, to keep in these beasts.
Tullie, writing against Anthony. Phillip. 7. says thus: Qui fa^ilierem
iug^laret, quid hic occasions d^ta faci^^ i^imice? Et qui illud animi causa,
fee^vit hunc prede causa quid facturum putetis? He that will kill his familliar
freende, what will he do, if occasion be offered, to his enemy: And he that
will do this of stomach, what will he offer to do for spoil?

Surely, so they will do as they have done: they will deuowre poor
Protestauntes, as Beasts eat grass, keeping them under: we shall (if time
served) not only be choked with the smoke of Popery, but we shall be burnt
up with the fire.

Their imprisonmentes, have so enritched them (...) that they abound in all
manner of wealth, especiallies no men better furnished for war, for
rebellion, then they. In this great time of mercy, they do nothing but ^^ther
heaps of stones to throw at us. They are making of the halters, to hang us:
they are whetting of their knives, to cut our throats. These tie Dogs,
when they shall be let loose, they will byte us, nay, they will hayts us to
death.

It is time to cut of the Hydra his heads, a^^ to strangle him within his Cave,
for how soever it comes to pass they lift up their heads on high, Papistry
began to wa^ dead and to be cold in ye mouth: it begins now to wax warm
again and to neese, we poo^e Protestants are afraid, but that God and our
gracious Prince is with us and has broke still the arm of ye wicked, our
hearts would mell like wax in the midst of our bowels: the Lord has deliue^d
her Majesty, hitherto from the^, as Dowe from the hand of the Hu^^^r, and as a
Bird from the hand of the Fowler, and God gr^^nt they be never taken for good
subjects, till they become Iubiect to God and his Gospel. This subjection of
theirs and false Protestation of faith to her Majesty is a false color, we
win^^^ hard or else we be merue lously blinded if we perceans it not, God
remove such Subjects from so good a Prince. It is piety that these black
Havens should go for Birds with the rest: I hope God will so bless us,
especially all Magistrates, that they will look to it at the last that they
shall not be in acco^^p^e with them as to be the finger next the thombe.

But now to return to his end, Qualis Vita, finis ita, as he lived so he dyed.

Being araigned at Croydon, he continued still obstinately denying the fact,
hoping for some healpe by pardon, but a just judge prevented an ungracious hope.

The 12. of July he was returned home manacled with an other, who was
condemned for a rape: his behavior the night before he suffered, was according
to his accustomed usage, resolute in opinion, though false and dissolute in
behavior, driving of his Christian brethren that exhorted him, with dry
scoffs, and no marvel, for scoffing mocking and moweing, licking of Chalices
and all manner of toying, is the life of their religion.

The next day was the 13. of July, the appointed time, for the execution: In
the morning certain devout Christians had access unto him, whom at the first
entrance he cut of, or hearing a small time, despised. The time of the
execution drue nighe, which was performed, over against the Queens Benche,
where the murder was committed by the under Shriefe of Surrie, and the Baily of
Southwarke, from the white Lion, to the place where he should suffer, after
many vain words of conceived repriue had by the way, he was caused to clime
the Ladder, on which being placed, he entered this kind of discourse.

I beseech all Romish Catholics to help me in this my extremity, with their
virtuous and godly prayers, for other which are of a contrary profession, as I
abhor their religion, so I will none of their prayers. But if there shall be
here present any one of the true Catholic Romish faith: I beeseth them of
their prayers in my behalf.

The people hearing these his obstinate speeches, with sundry exclamations,
cried out, hang him, hang him, there be none here of his profession.

Nevertheless he continued his wicked speeches, proclayming the Pope of Rome
the supreme head of the Universal Church, Christ's Uicar here upon earth. Yet
notwithstanding, though by evident reasons he was confuted, yet the God of this
world had so blinded him, that no reason could prevail with him.

And farther, whereas the Preacher persuaded him to lay his hope on Christ
whose mercy was infinite, he vehemently cried out, away with the Woolfe, he
peruerteth the truth, and troubles me, away with the Woolfe.

Being farther inquired of the murder, he persisted in his unjust denial,
laying contrary to all evidence and probability, the death of the young man
Hobson to his own charge.

When no hope of confession or recantation was to be conceived, the Shriefe
caused him to be removed higher, to the end that execution might be
performed, wishing him by earnest and devout prayers, to call for mercy and
repentance, to crave grace.

But he by these tokens perceiving death at hand, contrary to a meek Lamb,
as he termed him self, fled down the Ladder to fly from the Butcher, thereby
showing the unstableness of his faith, so that the hangman was enforced to
undo the Halter which he had fastened to the Iibbet, and to put it about his
neck below, and so by little and little to draw him up.

Where resting, after many persuasions by the Shriefe and the Preacher, and no
profit in the midst of his Lattine Pater noster, was turned off to the mercy
of God.

I am persuaded if all the rest were thus handled, no one faithful subject
should draw less breath, and then I am sure (thorough Gods great goodness) the
happy peace of this land should be made perfect, you see how boldly he embraced
foreign jurisdiction, all they which be Papists, heartily do the like, I pray
God that if they be not haltered, yet that they may be bridled with shorter
Raines, that they be not so headstrong, as this man was.

If a Sheep werier be well cougeled at the syrste, he forfaketh his trade: so
if Papists were thoroughly dealt withal, they would forget to make the Pope
supreme head of the Church of England.

I be^eeche those that be in authority to look to it, and thus committing the
poor (yet quiet) estate of the Church of England, to the old and wonted care
of our grations Prince, and the rest that bear any office, I end, not willing
to spend many words upon so vile and carrenly a generation, but as Peter, Act.
2. exhorted his scholars in many words, saying, Save your selves from this
froward generation, so I with few words, exhort all estates to look to
themselves, and to take heed of this viperous and pestilent generation from
ancient cruelty, of the which the Lord deliver this whole land of England
both now and for ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood and Edward White. 1581.


