RIC: SIBBS S: THEOL: D: AVL: KATHARINAE CANTAB: MAG: NEC NON HOSPITIO GRAI: A
S: CONCIONIBVS. Aetat. Suae 58.
portrait of Richard Sibbs

THE RETVRNING BACKSLIDER, OR, A COMMENTARY upon the whole XIIII. Chapter of
the Prophecy of the Prophet HOSEA.

Wherein is showed the large extent of GODS free Mercy, even unto the most
miserable forlorn and wretched sinners that may be, upon their Humiliation and
Repentance.

Preached by that Learned and Judicious Divine, Dr. SIBBS, late Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Grayes Inn, and Master of Katherine Hall in CAMBRIDGE

Published by his own Permission before his Death.

JEREM. 3. 10, 11. Go and Proclaim these words toward the North, and say,
Return thou Backsliding Israel, says the LORD; and I will not cause mine
Anger to fall upon you: for I am merciful, says the LORD, and I will not
keep Anger for ever.

Only acknowledge thine Iniquity, etc.

LONDON, Printed by G. M for George Edwards in the Old Baily in Greene-Arbour
at the sign of the Angel, MDCXXXIX.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader this Treatise begs the favor of those, concerning whom especially
it is said Christ came for, poor trembling siners, the blind, the prisoners of
hope, and such who by the assiduity, iteration and multitude of Satan's
discouragements and temptations, sit as it were in darkness, and in the valley
of death, to whom every sour thing is sweet. Because these most of all relish
and stand in need of mercy: for when the least flame of that unsupportable
wrath, breaks forth in show, which is powered out like fire, and kindled by the
breath of the Lord of Hosts like a river of brimstone, which can make the
mountains quake, the hills melt, burn up the earth and all that is therein,
the poor soul for the time thinking on nothing but blackenesse and darkness
of tempest, whilst by past sins, without sight of the Mediator stares them in
the face with millions of unconceiveable horrors and astonishments; then to see
light in darkness, Mercy in wrath, the Sunshine of righteousness, a gracious
God appeased by a Mediator, with some sight and sense of its interest therein,
this must needs overjoy the troubled soul: which is the maine subject of this
book: how gracious God is to encourage miserable sinners to return: what
encouragements and helps he gives them: what effects his gracious working has
in them: and how sweetly they close with him again. Wherefore though this
mess comes not unto thee set forth in a Lordly dish, not having passed since
the preaching thereof, under the exquisite hand of the most worthy Author, yet
despise it not: for many times though things of greater judgment affect the
understanding most, yet things of lesser concisenesse, work more upon the
affections in a plain flowing way: which happiness with all other felicities
he wishes thee, who is ever

Thine in the best bonds J H.

THE SVMME OF THIS TREATISE.
THE time when Hosea prophesied, page 2. The people of God are exhorted to
repentance by many motives, page 3. Gods answer to their petitions, page 4. God
comes not suddenly upon his children, but gives them warning, page 6. Which
arises from the goodness of his nature; page 7. Spiritual means best for
preventing judgments, page 7. In returning to God there must be a stop, page 8.
Humiliation what it is, page 9. Resolution what it is, page 9. How to know the
truth of our Humiliation, page 10. Where there is a falling into sin there
will be a falling into misery, page, 12, etc. God is willing to be at peace with
us, page 16. In all our distresses we must come to God in prayer, page 17, 18,
etc. Why we must bring words with us though God knows our mind, page 22. That
words and purposes must concur in prayer, page 23. Confession how it is to be
made, page 24. Why all iniquity is to be praid against, page 25. The trial of
a sound desire, page 26. Mercy begged above all, page 27. Whether we ought not
to think of our former sins, page 28. How we may know our sins are forgiven,
page 29, etc. The misery of those that have not their sins forgiven, page 32.
Gods favors are complete to his children, page 33. The loadstone of the soul
is good, page 34, etc. How we may know blessings come from the love of God,
page 37, 38, etc. The use of vows, page 42, etc. of a broken heart, page 45,
etc What the sacrifice of praise is, page 48, 49. Why lips are mentioned for
praise, page 50. Helps to praise God, page 51, 52, Doubting kills
thankfulness, page 53. Assurance is the nurse of thanksgiving, page 54. We
should take advantage of our dispositions, pa. 59. Encouragements to praise
God, page, 60, etc. How to know when praise is accepted, page 63. Reformation
must be joined with prayer, page 66. True repentance is of the particular sin,
page 67, 68, etc. The creature cannot help of it self, page 71, etc. We are
not to place our confidence in forces at home or abroad, page 77. War is
lawful, page 78, 79. How we shall know when we exceed in confidence in the
creature, page 80, 81. Boasting is Idolatry, page 82, 83. The danger of carnal
confidence, page 84. The emptiness of the creature, page, 85, etc, Men
naturally prone to Idolatry, page 92, 93, etc. Bitterness of sin causes
repentance, page 99, 100, 101. Our affiance ought not to be upon the creature
but upon God, page 102. What Religion is, page 103, 104. Why the world hates
Christians, page 105. Mercy a most sweet object, page 106, 107, etc. Why God
shows mercy to the distressed, page 110, 111, etc. Worldliness to be hated,
page 115, 116, etc. How to retort Satan's policy in our extremity, page 119.
Where God gives a spirit of prayer he will answer, page 126, 127. Why we should
come before God in prayer; page 128, 129. That Gods Church and Children are
prone to backesliding, page 131, etc. How shall we know we are sick of this,
page 134, etc. Repentance not to be delayed, page 139. Want of conviction makes
us careless, page 150, 151, 152. God is willing to save us, page 143, etc. The
scope of the new Covenant, page 149. The greatest sin is to deny God the
glory of his Mercy, page 150. An encouragement to search our sins deeply, page
151, etc. How to know God has pardoned our sins, page 156 157, 158. Why
carnal men are so quiet, page 159. How to know the pardon of sin, page 160.
Why God suffers infirmities, page 161, etc. Why the soul must be humbled, page
165. How God loves freely, page 172, 173, etc. Gods anger against sin, page
183, 184, etc. Repentance turns away Gods anger, page 188, 189. etc. How anger
felt may be remooved, page 193. How to know afflictions are not in wrath though
continued, page 195, 196, 197. That God has a salve for every sore, page 202.
Gods love is a fruitful love, page 205, 206. Why Gods grace is compared unto
the Dew, page 207. Grace comes insensibly and invisibly, page 209. ^^0, etc How
to come to have grace to sanctify and alter our nature, page 218. Christians
grow like Lillies, page 219, 220. The first spring of the Gospel was speedy,
page 221. Water every year turned into wine, page 222. Of a necessity in
growth, page 224. We must claim the promises, page 225. Whence comes the
stability of Gods children, page 227, 228, 229. Why Gods children are not
comfortable, page 230, 231, etc. How to be rooted in grace, page 237. We must
labor to know the promises, page 239. Why Christians fear their estate is not
good, page 241, 242, 243. The benefit of fruitfulness, page 256, 257, etc. The
Church yields a shadow, page 264, 265, etc. The family the better for a good
governor, page 271, 272, etc. Gods children shall revive as corn, page 279,
280, 281. Christians compared to the Vine in fruitfulness, page 283, 284, etc.
Why Christians send forth so sweet a sent, page 292, 293, etc. A fruitful
conversation very savoury, page 297, 298, etc. True renouncing of sin must be
with indignation, page 307. The souls aim page 308, 309. We must not only
leave sin but loath sin, page 310, 311, 312, etc. Limitation for expressing
our hatred to sin page 317, 318, etc. How we may come to hate sin, page
321, etc. The consideration of what we are and hope to be will keep us in good
temper, page 328. Of Idolatry, page 333. The reasons of Ephraims hatred of
Idolatry, pa. 334, 335, etc. The Idolatry of Christians, 344, etc. The scope of
the new covenant, page 355, etc. Corporal and spiritual adultery, page 359.
Why we must not have any more to do with Idols, page 366, 367. Helps to hate
sin, page 368, 369, etc. Nothing lost by renouncing Idolatry, p. 373, etc.
Never better with a Christian then when he has renounced all wicked courses,
page, 378, 379. How God sees the afflictions of his children, page 380, 381,
etc. The most comfortable creature in the excess harmefull, page 385.
Renouncing Idolatry brings protection, page 386, 387, etc. We are subject to
scorchings here, page 391. The misery of those that have not God for a shadow,
page, 392, 393, etc. From man comes nothing that is good, p. 403, etc. Why some
have more grace then others, pa. 408. 409, etc. Against future fears, page
416, 417, etc. There are but few truly wise, page 426, 427, etc. VVorldly
wisdom what it is, page 432, 433. True wisdom carries men to Gods word, pa.
435. Gods ways to us, page 441, etc. The word of the Lord perfect, page 445,
446, 447. The best way to a right end is to take in Gods ways, page 448, 449.
Who be just men, page 450, 451, etc. The disposition of just men, page 457,
458, 459. Men must have spiritual life before they can walk, page 461, 462,
etc. Helps to walk, page 467, 468, etc. Why we should walk in Gods ways,
page 472. 473, etc.
THE RETVRNING BACKSLIDER.
SERMON. I.
Hos. 14.1, 2. O Israel, Return unto the Lord thy God: For thou have fallen by
thine iniquity.

Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take away all
iniquity, etc.


THE whole frame of Godliness is a Mystery, The Apostle calls it, a great
Mystery, comprehending all under these particulars: God was manifested in the
flesh, Justified in the Spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16.
Seen of Angels; Preached unto the Gentiles: Believed on in the world:
received up into Glory. Amongst which Mysteries, this may well be the Mystery
of Mysteries; God was manifest in the flesh: which includes also another
Mystery; The Gratiousnesse and abundant tender Mercy of God toward miserable
wretched and sinful Creatures, even in the height of their Rebellion;
appointing such a remedy to heal them: which is the subject of this Chapter,
and last part of this Prophecy: which as in thunders out Terrible Judgments
against hardhearted impenitent sinners: (such as were the most part of Israel)
So is it mingled full of many and sweet Consolations to the faithful in those
times, scattered amongst the wicked troup of Idolaters then living.

The time when Hosea prophesied was under the Reign of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz,
and HeZekiah Kings of Judah: and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Ioash,
King of Israel: In whose days Idolatry was first universally set up and
countenanced by Regal power; This Jeroboam (who caused Israel to sin) that
he might strengthen himself made use of Religion and profanely mixed it with
his civil assures in carnal policy, and so leavened the whole lump of
Israel with Idolatry; that shortly after the whole Ten Tribes for their sin,
and their injustice, cruelty, lust, security, and such other sins as
accompanied and sprang from this brutish Idolatry, were led away captive by the
King, of Assyria, and the Lords Righteous judgment made manifest upon them.

There being notwithstanding amongst these some faithful ones though thinly
scattered, who mourned for, and by their good examples reproved these
abominable courses. There being also a seed of the Elect unconverted, and of
the converted some that were carried down to far in the strength of this
stream of wickedness. In this Chapter therefore being the conclusion of this
Prophecy there are many excellent and heavenly encouragements, also many
earnest incitements to repentance and returning to the Lord, with free and
gracious promises not only of pardon and acceptance, but of great rewards in
things spiritual and temporal to such as should thus return.

O Israel, Return unto the Lord thy God, for, thou have fallen by thine
iniquity.

Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all
iniquity, etc.

In this Chapter,

1. We have an Exhortation to Repentance, with the Motives enforcing the same.
[ O Israel, Return unto the Lord thy God]. V. 1.

2. The Form [Take with you words, and say unto the Lord, etc.] Uer. 2.

3. A Restip^^ation, what they should Do and Return back again, having
their Prayers granted. 1. Thankesgiving [So will we render the Calves of our
life] 2. Sound Reformation of their beloved Sin, [ Ashur shall not save us,
etc.] with the Reason thereof, [ For in that the Fatherless finds Mercy,
Uerse. 3.

4. Gods Answer to their Petitions. 1. In what He will do for them. [Heale
their backsliding, Love them freely: and be as the Dew unto Israel] with the
Reason thereof, [For mine Anger is turned away from him] V. 4. 2. What he will
Work in them: A proportionable speedy growth in height, breadth and depth: [
He shall grow as the Lilly, and Cast forth his roots as Lebanon, etc.] Which
Mercy is further Amplified; by a blessing powered out also upon their Families.
[They that dwell under his shadow shall returne] Verse. 5. 6. 7.

5. There is set down a further effect of this Repentance, and gracious work
in them: A sound and strong well rooted Indignation against their former
darling sins [Ephraim shall say, what have I any more to do with Idols?]
Backed with a strong Consolation: [I have heard him, and observed him, etc.]
Verse. 8.

6. The Diverse Event and Jssue of this Gods so Gracious Dealing is showed: both
in the godly and Wicked. 1. The Wise and Prudent, understand and know, that the
ways of the Lord are right, and shall walk in them. But 2. [The Transgressors
shall fall therein.] Ver. 9.

O Israel, Return unto the Lord thy God: for thou have fallen by thine
Iniquity.

Every word has his weight, and in a manner is an Argument to enforce this
Returning.

O Israel! Israel we know is a word of Covenant: Jacob was Israel, a Prince and
Wrestler with God, (as they also ought to be) Therefore he enforces, you also
ought to Return, because you are Israel. And 2. It was also an Encouragement
for them to Return, because God so acknowledges them to be Israel: and will
be Gracious unto them, though they were such hideous siners.

Return (says He) unto the Lord Jehovah, Who is the chief good; for when a
man returns to the creature, which is a particular changable good
unsatisfying the soul, he is restless still until he come unto Jehovah, who
is the all-sufficient universal good, who fills and fills the soul
abundantly: therefore, Return to him who is the fountain of all good, and
gives a Being unto all things: Ierem. 2.13
and not to broken Cisternes. He is Jehovah, like himself and changes not.
And then He is thy God. Therefore Return to him who is thy God in Covenant,
who will make good his gracious Covenant unto thee, and did choose thee to be
his people, before all the nations of the world; this therefore is also an
Encouragement to Return. And then Thou have fallen by thine Iniquity.

Therefore because thou art fallen by thy Iniquities, and thine own Inventions
have brought these Miseries upon thee, and none but God can help thee out of
these Miseries, seeing he only can, and is willing to forgive thy sins, and
revive thee: Therefore,

O Israel, Return unto the Lord thy God; for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity.

Now in that he forewarneth them of the fearful Judgments to come, which
were to fall upon them, unless they were prevented by true Repentance; hence
in general it is to be observed;

Obser.
That God comes not as a sudden storm upon his people, but gives them warning
before he smites them.

This is verified in Scripture: when the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great,
Genesis 18.20.21
The Lord said, Because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because
their sin is very grievous: I will go down now and see whether they have
done altogether according to the cry of it which is come unto me; and if not,
I will know. And wherefore was the Arc of Noah so long in building, but to
give warning to that sinful age, which were nothing bettered by it. The like
we have of Pharaoh, Exodus 11.1.
and all the Egyptians who had so many warnings and miracles showed before
their destruction came. Thus God dealt in Amos: Therefore thus will I do unto
thee; and because I will do this unto thee; Amos. 4.12.
Prepare to meet thy God O Israel. O Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37.
Jerusalem (says Christ) thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children
together: even as a hen gathers the chickens under her wings, and ye would
not? What need we stand upon proofs? are not all the Threatenings of
Scripture, as so many warning pieces of approaching Judgments.

The Reason hereof is, His own nature, he is a Exodus 34 6.
he made the world in six days; yet has continued it six thousand years,
notwithstanding the many sins and provocations thereof, His mercies being
over all his works. Psalm. 145.9.


And partly, from a special regard to his own these terrible thretnings not
being killing and wounding, but like Ionathans warning Arrows, who though he
shot, yet meant no other harm to David, 1. Sam. 20. Use.
save to forewarne him of harm.

Let us therefore observe Gods gracious and mild dealing in so much mercy, who
gives us so many warnings by his servants, and lesser judgments, which we
have had amongst us, Let us take notice and believe, so as belief may stir
up fear, and fear may provoke care, and care stir up endeavors, to provide
us an Arc even a hiding place beimes before winter and worse times come upon
us.

Hence issues another general Point:

The best provision for preventing of destruction is spiritual means.

God himself is a Spirit, and spiritual means reach unto him, who is the
first mover of the great wheel of all the affairs of this world: It is
preposterous to begin at the second cause, we trouble our selves in vain
there, when we neglect the first. We should therefore begin the work in
Heaven, and first of all, Take up that quarrel which is betwixt God and our
souls: If this be done first, we need not fear the carriage of second things,
Romans 8.28.
all which God out of his good providence, and gracious care will frame to
work for good to his: for whose sakes (rather then help should fail) he will
create new helps. Isa. 4.5.
Wherefore in all things it is best to begin with God.

The third general point, is this: That

Obser.
Of all Spiritual means, The best is to return to the Lord.

In Returning, 1 There must be a stop.
In this Returning, 1. There must be a stop: those who have run on in evil
ways, must first stop their lewd courses, for naturally from our birth and
childhood we are posting on to Hell; and yet such is our madness, (unless the
Spirit of God show us our selves) to be angry with these who stand in our way.

To make this stop then (which is always before Returning) 1. There must be
Examination and Consideration whether our ways tend: there be stopping
Considerations, which both waken a man, and likewise put rubs in his way. If a
man upon Examination find his ways displeasing unto God, disagreeing from the
Rule, and consider what will be the end and issue of them, (nothing but death
and damnation) and withal consider of the day of Judgment, The hour of Death,
The all-seeing eye of God and the like. So the Consideration of a man's own
ways, and of Gods ways toward him, partly when God meets him with
goodness: I have hitherto been a vile wretch; and God has been good to me,
and spared me: and partly when God stops a wicked man's ways with thorns,
meets him with crosses and afflictions, these will work upon an ingenious
spirit to make him have better thoughts and deeper considerations of true
happiness and the way unto it. God puts into the heart of a man (whom he
intends to save) serious and sad considerations, what estate he is in, whither
his course leads; and withal, he lets them feel some displeasure of his
toward them in those ways, by his ways toward them. where upon they make a
stop.

2. There must be Humiliation, 2. Humiliation.
with displeasure against our selves, judging and taking revenge of our selves,
working and reflecting on our hearts, taking shame to our selves, for our ways
and courses. And withal, there must concur some hope of mercy: for, so long
as there is hue and cry (as we say) after a Traitor, he returns not, but
flies still and hasts away; but offer a pardon, Luke 15.
and he Returns. So, unless there be hope of pardon to draw a man again to
God, as the Prodigal was moved to Return by hope of mercy and favor from
his father, we will not, we dare not else Return.

3. 3. Resolution.
There must be a Resolution to overcome impediments, for when a man thinks or
resolves to turn to God, Satan will stir up all his instruments, and labor
to kill Christ in his Infancy, and to quench good while it is in the purpose
only the Dragon stood watching for the Birth of the Child so does Satan
observe the birth of every good resolution and purpose so far as he can know
them to destroy them.





His present actions also be contrary to his former: there is not only a change
of the disposition of his soul: There is a Change of Actions.
Behold all things are become new. Not some things but all, not only new, but
with a Behold new. 2. Cor. 5.17.
This change undoubtedly shows that there is a true conversion and unfeigned.

By our association.
3. By our association, he that turns to God, turns presently to the company
of Gods people: together with the change of his nature and course of life,
there is a change of company, that is of such as we make choice of for amity
and friendship; Isa. 11.
other company by reason of our callings, and occasionally may be frequented.

Turned, but has gone backwards from sin a great way, when the things of
Heaven only are great things in his eyes, for, as the further a man goes from
a place, the lesser the things behind him seem, so the greater the things
before, he being nearer to them. The more sublime and high thoughts a man has
of the ways of God, and the meaner thoughts of the world and worldly matters
he esteemed so highly of in the days of his vanity: the more he is Turned
unto God.

This Returning is further enforced, saying, Return, unto the Lord thy God.

It is very emphaticall and significant in the Original, return [usque ad
Iehovam] even to Jehovah, as though he should say, do not only begin to
Return toward Jehovah: but so Return, as you never cease coming till you
come to Jehovah.

Even unto the Lord thy God. Obser.


It is not enough to make a stop and to forbear the practicing of our former
sins: but we must come home, even unto the Lord our God, to be pardoned, and
healed of him.

The Prodigal serve, Luke 15.
had been never a whit the better, to see his sin and misery, and to be
grieved for his wicked life past, unless he had come unto his father for
Pardon and Comfort. Act. 2.38.
And when those were pricked in their hearts at Peter's Sermon, asking Peter
what they should do? he exhorted them, To Repent, every one to be Baptized in
the name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of sins: and so they should receive
the Holy Ghost. And when Christ invites all those who are weary and heavy
laden to come unto him; Matt. 11.28.
he bids them not now be further humbled and grieved for their sins: but by
Faith to come unto him to be healed, and so they should find rest and peace to
their souls. It is not sufficient for a wounded man to be sorry for his
brawling and fighting, and to say he will fight no more: but he must come to
the Surgeon to have his wounds stopped, dressed and healed, or else it may cost
him his life: So it is not enough to be humbled and grieved for sin; and to
resolve against it: we shall relapse again do what we can, unless we come
under the wing of Christ to be healed by his blood.



For thou have fallen by thine Iniquity. Here diverse points might be insisted
on. 1. that

Obser.
Where there is a falling into sin, there will be a falling into misery and
judgment.

This is made good in the experience of all times, ages, persons, and states,
still the more sinnfull any were, the more fearful judgments fell upon them:
and as soon as any man came into a sinful state, he entered into a declining
state, as Jacob said of his son Reuben who had defiled his bed: unstable as
water, Thou shall not excel; Genes. 49.4.
because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed So sin still debaseth a man: so
much sin so much loss of excellency.

The Use hereof is first against those, that complain of their troubles and
miseries, as Lam. 3.39.
God is a sufficient wise and holy disposer and orderer of all the ways of
men; and rewarder of good and evil doings; God being wise and just in his
disposing of all things, it must needs follow, that it shall go well with
those that are good; as the Prophet speaks; Say unto the just, that it shall
be well with them; for the reward of their works shall be given them. And if
it fall out otherways then well with men, the blame must be laid on their own
sin. As the Church confesses, and therefore resolves: Micah. 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him;
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me
forth in the light; and I shall see his Righteousness. If Adam sin he shall
find a Hell in a Paradise, if Paul return and return to God he shall find a
Heaven in a Dungeon.

It should move us therefore to seek unto God or else, howsoever we may
change our plagues; yet they shall not be taken away, nay we shall still
(like Pharaoh) change for the worst, who though he had his judgments changed:
yet sin the cause remaining, he was never a whit the better, but the worse
for changing, until his final ruin came.

Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is Death, Sin will cry till it has its wages. Where
Iniquity is, there cannot but be falling into judgment. Therefore they are
cruel to their own souls, that walk in evil ways, for undoubtedly God
will turn their own ways upon their own heads. We should not therefore
envy any man (be he what he will) who goes on in ill courses, seeing some
judgment is owning him first on last, unless he stop the current of Gods
wrath by Repentance. God in much mercy has set up a Court in our hearts to
this end, that if we judge our selves in this Inferior Court, we may escape,
and not be brought up into the higher: if first they be judged rightly in the
Inferior Court, then there needs no review. But otherwise, if we by
Repentance take not up the matter, sin must be judged some where, either in
the Tribunal of the heart and conscience, or else afterward there must be a
reckoning for it.

that therefore all the power of the world, and of Hell, cannot keep a man in
misery, nor hinder him from comfort and happiness, if he will part with his
sins by true and unfeigned Repentance; as we know Manasses, 2 Chro. 33.12, 13.
as soon as he put away sin the Lord had mercy upon him, and turned his
captivity. So the people of Israel in the Judges, look how often they were
humbled and returned to God, still he forgave them all their sins, as soon as
they put away sin, God and they met again. Psalm. 106.43, 44. Psalm. 107.19.
So that, if we come to Christ by true Repentance, neither sin nor punishment
can cleave to us.

Thou have fallen, etc. Fallen blindly as it were, thou could not see which
way thou wentest or to what end thy courses did tend, therefore thou art come
into misery, before thou know where thou art. A sinner is blind, 1 Cor. 4.
the god of this world has put out his eyes, they see not their way nor
foresee their success. The Devil is ever for our falling, that we fall into
sin, and then fall into misery, and so fall into despair, and into hell,
this pleases him. Cast thy self down, says he to Christ, down with it,
down with it says Edom, Hell is beneath, the Devil drives all that way.

Take heed of sin, take heed of blindness, ponder the path of your feet,

Verse. 2. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, etc. These
Israelites were but a rude people; and had not so good means to thrive in
grace, as Judah had: Therefore, he prompts them here with such words as they
might use to God in their returning. [Take with you words,] whereby we see how
gracious God is unto us, in using such helps for our recovery, and pitying us
more then we pity our selves. Is not this a sufficient warrant and invitation
to return, when the party offended who is the superior, 2 Cor. 5.
desires, intreates, and sues unto the offending, guilty inferior, to be
reconciled.

God is willing to be at peace with us.
But this is not all, he further shows his willingness in teaching us who are
ignorant of the way; in what manner and with what expressions we should return
to the Lord. He gives us not only words and tells us what we shall say, but
also gives his Spirit so effectually therewith, as that they shall not be
livelesse and dead words, but (as Rom, 8.26.) with unexpressible sighs and
groans unto God; who hears the requests of his own Spirit. Christ likewise
teaches us how to pray, we have words dictated, and a spirit of Prayer powered
upon us. As if a great Person should dictate and frame a Petition for one who
were afraid to speak unto him. Such is Gods gratiousnesse, and so ready is he
in Jesus Christ to receive sinners unto mercy.

Take unto you words. None were to appear empty before the Lord at Jerusalem,
but were to bring something. So it is with us, we must not appear empty before
our God, If we can bring nothing else, let us bring words, yea though broken
words, yet if out of a broken and contrite heart it will be a sacrifice
acceptable.

This same taking of words or petitions in all our troubles and afflictions
must needs be a special remedy, it being of Gods own prescription, who is so
infinite in knowledge and skill: whence we observe, That

They who would have help and comfort against all sins and sorrows, must
come to God with words of Prayer.

As we see in Ionahs case in a matchless distress, words were inforcive and
did him more good then all the world besides could: for after that he had bin
humbled and prayed out of the whales belly; the whale was forced to cast him
out again. Luke 15.18.
So the Prodigal son being undone, having neither credit, nor coin, but
all in a manner against him; yet he had words left him. Father, I have sinned
against Heaven and before thee: and am no more worthy to be called thy son,
make me as one of thy hired servants. After which his father had compassion on
him. And good Hezekiah, Isa. 38.2.
being desperately sick, of a desperate disease, yet when he set his faith a
work, and took with him words (which comfort only now was left unto him) we
know how after he had turned his face toward the wall and prayed with words.
God not only healed him of that dangerous disease, but also wrought a great
miracle for his sake, causing the Sun to come back ten degrees. Thus when
life seemed impossible: yet words, prayers, and tears prevailed with God.
Iehoshaphat also, going to war with Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18.31
against Gods commandment, and in the battle being encompassed with enemies:
yet had words with him ready and after prayer found deliverance. James 5.
Eliah, likewise after a great drowth and famine, when rain had bin three
years wanting: and all in a manner out of frame for a long time: Took with
him words: and God sent rain abundantly upon the earth again.

The Reason is, because Prayer sets God on work, Hos. 2.21, 22.
and God who is able and willing to go through with his works, sets all the
creatures on work. 1 King. 18.45.
As we heard of Eliah, when he prayed for rain, the creatures were set a
work to effect it. 2 Chronicles. 15.2
we shall find him come to us. Iehoshaphat we read was in great distress when
three Kings came against him, yet when he went to God by unfeigned and hearty
fasting and prayer, God heard him, fought for him, and destroyed all his
enemies. The Scripture shows also how after Hezekiahs Prayer, 2 Chronicles. 19.6
14.
against Senacheribs Blasphemies and threatenings: the Lord sent forth his
Angel and destroyed in one night of them, 2 King. 19.20.35.
a hundred fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrians.

This is first for Reproof of those who in Hezekiah did in Senacheribs case.
The first time he turned him off to his cost with enduring a heavy taxation,
2 King. 18.14.
and yet was never a whit the better for it; for Senacherib came shortly after
and besieged Jerusalem, until Hezekiah had humbled himself and prayed: and
then God chased all away and destroyed them; he had better have done so at
first, and so have saved his money, and pains too. 2 Chronicles. 14.11
The like weakness we have a proof of in Asa: who when a greater Army came
against him of ten hundred thousand men, laid about him, Prayed and Trusted in
God: and so was delivered, with the destruction of his enemies, yet in a lesser
danger, 2 Chronicles. 16.2.
against Baasha King of Israel, distrusted God; and sent out the Treasures of
the house of God, and out of his own house unto Benhadad King of Syria: to
have help of him, by a diverting war, against Baasha King of Israel, which
his plot though it prospered, yet was he reproved by the Prophet Hanani, 2 Chronicles. 16.7.
and wars thenceforth denounced against him. This Asa notwithstanding this
experiment afterward sought unto the Physician, before he sought unto God.

Secondly, This blames that barrenness and which for want of hearts we often
find in our selves. It were a strange thing to see a wife have have words
enough for her maids and servants: and yet not to be able to speak to her
husband. We all profess to be the Spouse of Christ, what a strange thing
then is it, to be full when we speak to men, yet be so empty and want words
to speak to him. A beggar we know wants no words, nay, he abounds with
variety of expressions, and what makes him thus fruitful in words: What makes
a bold beggar.
his necessity and in part his hope of obtaining.

These two make beggars so earnest. So would it be with us, if we found
sufficiently our great need of Christ; and therewith had hope, it would
embolden us so to go to God in Christ, that we should not want words: but we
want this hope and the feeling of our necessities, which makes us so barren in
prayer.

Prepare thy self therefore to prayer by getting unto thee a true sense of thy
need: acquaintance with God, and hope to obtain, and it will make thee fervent
in prayer, and copious in thy requests.

for Consolation, though one should want all other means, yet whatsoever their
misery be, if they can take words, and can pray well, Isa. 38.3.
they shall speed well. If the misery be for sin, confess it, and ask pardon
for it, and they shall have it, and be cleansed from all unrighteousness. 1
John 1.9.
Words fetch the comfort to us, though it be the blood of Christ only that
has paid the debt. Isa. 53.5.


The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON.
Hos. 14.2. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him take away
all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we render the Calves of our
lips.


AS we lost our selves in the first Adam; so the mercy of God in the Covenant
of Grace found out a way to restore us again by the second Adam, Jesus Christ,
in whom all the Promises are yea and Amen, yesterday and to day, and the same
for ever. And as the wisdom of God did freely find out this way at first
comforting our first Parents with it in Paradise: so this bowels of
incomprehensible love of his, has so gone on from time in all ages of the
Church, comforting and raising up the dejected spirits of his Church from time
to time, and awakening them out of their drowsinesse and sleepie condition. And
many times the greater sinners he dealt with, the greater mercies and tender
bowels of compassion were opened unto them, in many sweet and gracious
promises tendering forgiveness, and inviting to Repentance, as here in this
Chapter and whole Prophecy is showed: what Tribe so wicked, so full of
Idolatry and Rebellion as Ephraim, and yet here Ephraim and Israel are taught a
lesson of Repentance: as the tender Nurse feeds her child and puts meat in
its mouth, so here the Lord puts words in the mouth of this Rebellious people.

Take with you words and turn unto the Lord.



Why we must bring words with us though God knows our mind.
Its true, God needs no words, but we do, to stir up our hearts and
affections: and because he will have us take shame unto our selves; having
given us our tongues as an instrument of glorifying him, he will have our glory
used in our Petitions and Thankesgivings: and therefore, in regard of our
selves, he will (as was said) have us take words unto our selves; for exciting
of the graces of God in us by words, blowing up of the affections, and for
manifestation of the hidden man of the heart: God will be glorified by the
outward as well as by the inward man.

And Turn to the Lord. He repeats the exhortation of Returning, That words and
purposes must concur in Prayer.
to show, that words must not be empty, but such as are joined with a purpose
of turning to God: for otherwise to turn to him with a purpose to live in any
sin, is the extremity of profane impudence; to come to ask a pardon of the
King, with a resolution to live still in Rebellion against him, what is this
but mockery, as if one should come with a dagg to shoot him. Such is our
case, when we come to ask forgiveness with a purpose to offend. It is the
extremity of profaneness to come to ask a pardon, to the intent that we may
sin still: therefore he repeates it again; Take unto you words, and turn to
the Lord. The Form is,

Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously; or (Do good to us) So will
we render the Calves of our lips. Wherein we have 1. A Petition 1. To take away
all iniquity. 2. To receive them graciously.
2. A Restipulation, or promise of thankfulness back again to the Lord: So
will we render the Calves of our lips. So that we may observe hence


What God will grant us, he will have us ask of him: yet for all these things
I will be sought unto of the House of Israel; says God: because he will have
us acknowledge our homage and dependence upon him: therefore we must ask what
he has purposed to give. Take away all iniquity, etc. where there is an
implication of a confession of their sins and great iniquities: Take away
iniquity; and Take away all iniquity: that is, our manifold guilt. So before
Petition there must be a free and full Confession, as was showed before.

Of Confession, how it is to be done, and unto whom.
Now this Confession here, is made to God, and to God only (says Austin in
this case) Because it is a point in controversy, it is good to hear what the
Ancients say. There are a curious sort of men, who are busy to search into
other men's lives, and are careless in amending their own. Augustine.
Says he, what have I to do with men to hear me confess when I have offended
God: we must confess to God, and to God only. But in some cases there may be
public and private Confession to men. Public in public offenses for the
satisfaction of the Church and the glory of God, for preventing of scandal.
Private to Ministers for the quieting of conscience: but this is only in some
cases; men go not to the Surgeon (as the Papists would have it) for every
little prick of their finger. Simile.
No, but yet in some cases it is good to open the matter to a Minister who has
the tongue of the learned: but the sin is toward God, against him; he only
being able to forgive sins, as the Pharisees confessed, Mark. 2.7.
None can forgive sins but God; the Papists therefore herein are worse then
the Pharisees.

The Petition is, Take away iniquity, and all iniquity. Why all? Why all
iniquity is prayed against.
because where there is any true goodness in the heart, that hatred which
carries the bent of the soul against one sin, 1. In a sincere soul all are
alike hated.
is alike against all (as I showed) and the devil carries thousands to hell by
this partial obedience; because he knows at any time where to have such. God
and a purpose to sin will not stand together, nor dwell in a heart that allows
it self in any sin, be it never so small. He says, Take away all, because the
Spirit of God works in a man renewed such a disposition of sincerity to hate
all alike.

Secondly, he says, Take away all iniquity, 2. Because a renewed soul desires
to be like God.
because the heart which desires to be at peace with God, desires also to be
like God, who hates all sin: therefore (says the sanctified soul) forgive
all sin, Take all away, that I may have nothing in me displeasing unto thee: I
desire to join with the Lord, to hate what he hates, and as he hates, to
carry a perfect hatred to the whole kind. Take away all iniquity, hatred is
not satisfied, but with the utter abolishing of the thing hated. Therefore it
has this extent here, Take away all sin; both the guilt and the reign of
every sin, that none may rule in me, nay, by little and little purge out all:
Take away iniquity, and the train of all which it draws after it, Judgments.
Take away inquity; that is, forgive the sin, and overcome the power of it by
sanctifying grace, and remit the judgments attending it.

Take it away. Sin hateful to a conscience awaked.
That is, take away the guilt of it utterly by pardon, and the remainders
thereof by sanctifying grace, so as the Spirit may rule and be all in all in
us. They see sin is an offensive thing, and therefore they say, Take it away,
as an offensive odious thing, and as a burden. For howsoever it be sweet as
honey in the committing it, afterward when the conscience is thoroughly awaked,
it is most offensive and bitter; so as in this case, a sinner would gladly run
from his own conscience, and from himself, run any where from the tormenting
and racking thoughts of conscience awaked: and withal hates the place where it
was committed, and the company with whom, yea the thoughts of them, as Absalom
hated Thamar after he had lain with her, so a sinner awaked from sin, hates
what he formerly loved. As good men love the circumstances of any thing which
puts them in mind of any good they have done, loving both place and person. So
it is with a sinner when his conscience is awaked, he hates all things which
puts him in mind of his sins, therefore, Take it away, forgive it, cast it into
the bottom of the Sea, blot it out of thy remembrance, cover it, impute it
not, all which phrases show a taking away.

Trial of a sound desire of forgiveness.
Therefore, I beseech you, let us examine our selves hereby, whether our desire
of forgivenes be sound or not, if we desire sin should be taken away, we cannot
think of it with comfort. For in that many think with delight of their old
sins, what do they else, but repeat them over again and again? but where
the heart is soundly touched with a saving sense of sin; O then he cries,
Take it away, Take it out of my conscience that it cause not despair there,
and out of thy remembrance, that no advantage be taken against me for it. Take
it away. But it is no otherwise taken away then by satisfying of divine
justice. How much are we beholding to Christ therefore, who has borne and
taken away our sins, (and as the Scape-goate) gone away with the burden of all
into the wilderness of oblivion. Blessed be God, and the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world. We can never bless God too much nor
sufficiently for Christ. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now we may think of sin without shame and despair: O blessed state, when a
man can think of his former odious and filthy loathsome sins, and yet not
despair: Because when he believes in Christ, the blood of Christ purges all
away, takes away all sin. He has taken them away.

You see here in the first place, That a true Convert first begs mercy above
all.
they pray for the taking away of their iniquity, for take away this, and all
other mercies follow after: because this only is it which stops the current of
Gods favors, which remooved, the current of his mercies run amain. As when
the clouds are gone, the Sun shines out: So let our sins be remooved, and
Gods favor immediately shines upon us. Therefore first, Take away all
iniquity; and then we shall see nothing but thy Fatherly face in Christ. You
see what the care of Gods children is to seek mercy and favor in the first
place: as David, Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy on me, O Lord: this he begs first of
all, whereas God had threatened other terrible judgments, as that the sword
should never depart from his house, etc. yet he neglects all (as it were) and
begs only for mercy, to take away iniquity. For, a sinner is never in such a
blessed condition as he should be in, until he prize and desire mercy above
all; because though we be in misery, until then (with sinful Ephraim) Hos.
7.14. we howl upon our beds for corn and wine, preferring earthly sensual
things before all. But that soul and conscience which is acquainted with God
and the odiousness of sin, that soul God intends to speak peace unto in the
end, desires pardon of sin and mercy above all, for it knows that God is
goodness it self, and that when the interposing clouds are vanished, God
cannot show himself otherwise, then in goodness, grace and mercy. Take away
all iniquity.

Ought we not to think of our former sins, shall God take them away
altogether out of the soul?

unto others, to abase us and keep us low all the days of our life, and to
make us deal gently and mercifully with others being sensible of our own
frailties. As they are naught in the conscience, so they are good to the
memory. Therefore let us think often of this, what the chief desire of our
souls to God should be for mercy, to have sin taken away. In all the
Articles of our Creed, that of cheifest comfort is, That of Remission of
sins. Wherefore are all the other Articles of Christ, his Birth, Death, and
Crucifying, but that he might get the Church, and that the privileges thereof
might be, Forgiveness of sins, Resurrection of the Body, and life
everlasting: but Forgiveness of sins is in the first place.



1. By something that goes before. 2. By something which follows after.
viz. 1. An humble and hearty Confession, as 1 Ioh. 1.9. 1. By an hmble
confession.
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: therefore, whether I feel
it or not, if I have heartily, fully, and freely confessed: my sins are
forgiven. God in wisdom and mercy may suspend the feeling thereof, for our
humiliation, and for being over-bold with Satan's baits; yet I ought to believe
it, for I make God a lier else, if I confess heartily, and acknowledge my
debt, to think that he has not canceled the bond.

2. When we find strength against it. Mat. 9.2, 6.
Secondly, sin is certainly pardoned, when a man finds strength against it, for
where God forgives, he gives strength withal: as to the man whom he healed of
the Palsy. Thy sins are forgiven thee, take up thy bed and walk. When a man
has strength to return to God, to run the way of his Commandments, and to go
on in a Christian course, his sins are forgiven, because he has a Spirit of
faith to go on and lead him forward still. Those who find no strength of
grace, may question forgiveness of sins, for God where he takes away sin, and
pardons it (as we see here in this Text after prayer made to take away
iniquity) he does good to us.

3. Some peace of conscience.
The third evidence is, some peace of Conscience, though not much perhaps, yet
so much as supports us from despair, as Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by
faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, being
acquitted from our sins by faith, we have peace with God: so much peace, as
makes us go boldly to him: so that one may know his bonds are canceled and his
sins forgiven, when with some boldness he dare look God in the face in Jesus
Christ. A Judas, an Achitophell, a Saul, because they are in the guilt of their
sins cannot confess comfortably and go to God: which when with some
boldness we can do, it is a sign that peace is made for us.

4. By love to God.
Again, where sin is pardoned, our hearts will be much enlarged with love to
God, as Christ said to the woman, Luke 7.47. Her sins which are many, are
forgiven her, because she loved much. Therefore, when we find our hearts
inflamed with love to God, we may know that God has shined upon our souls in
the the pardon of sin, and proportionablie to our measure of love, is our
assurance of pardon, therefore we should labor for a greater measure thereof,
that our hearts may be the more inflamed in the love of God. It is impossible
that the soul should at all love God angry, offended, and unappeased, nay,
such a soul wishes that there were no God at all, for the very thoughts
thereof terrify him.

Again, where sin is forgiven, 5. By mercifullnes to others.
it frames the soul suetably to be gentle, merciful and to pardon others, for
usually those who have peaceable consciences themselves, are peaceable unto
others, and those who have forgiveness of sins, can also forgive others; those
who have found mercy, have merciful hearts, showing that they have found mercy
with God. And on the contrary, he that is a cruel merciless man, it is a
sign that his heart was never warmed nor melted with the sense of Gods mercy
in Christ. Therefore, as the Elect of God (says the Apostle) put on bowels of
compassion: as you will make it good that you are the Elect of God, members of
Christ, and Gods children.

Therefore, Their miserable condition who have not forgiveness of sins.
let us labor for the forgiveness of our sins, that God would remoove and
subdue the power of them, take them away and the judgments due to them, or
else we are but miserable men, though we enjoyed all the pleasures of the
world, which to a worldly man are but like the liberty of the Tower to a
condemned Traitor, who though he have all wants supplied, with all possible
attendance: yet when he thinks of his estate, it makes his heart cold, dampes
his courage, and makes him think the poorest Carman or tankerd bearer (at
liberty) happier then he, who would not change estates with him. So it is with
a man that has not sued out his pardon nor is at peace with God, he has no
comfort so long as he knows his sins are on the file, that God in heaven is
not at peace with him; who can arm all the Creatures against him to be
revenged of him; in which case, who shall be Umpire betwixt God and us, if we
take not up the controversy betwixt him and our souls. Therefore it being so
miserable a case to want assurance of the forgiveness of sins; it should
make us be never an hour quiet till we have gotten it; seeing the uncertainty
of this life, wherein there is but a step betwixt Hell, Damnation and us.
Therefore, sue unto God, plie him with broken and humble hearts, that he would
pardon all the sins of our youth and after age, known and unknown, that he
would pardon all whatsoever: Take away all iniquity.

And do good to us. For so it is in the Original, but it is all one, Receive
us graciously, and do good to us. All the goodness we have from God it is out
of his grace, from his free grace and goodness, all grace, every little thing
from God is grace: as we say of favors received of great persons, this is his
grace, his favor; so this is a respect which is put upon all things which we
receive from God (when we are in Covenant) all is gracious. Take we the words
as they are (the more plain) in the Original. Take good, and do good to us:
take good out of thy Treasure of goodness, and do good to us, bestow upon us
thy own good. First, Take away our iniquities, and then take good out of thy
bounty and do good to us, whence we see,

That Gods mercy to his children is complete and full. Doct. That Gods favors
are complete to his children.


For he takes away ill, and does good, men may pardon but withal they think
that they have done wondrous bountifully when they have pardoned, but Gods goes
further, he takes away ill and does good: takes good out of his Fountain, and
does good to us.

Therefore let us make this use of it, Use of encouragement.
to be encouraged when we have the first blessing of all (Forgiveness of
sins) to go to him for more and more, and gather upon God further and
further still, for because he is a Fountain of goodness that can never be
drawn dry, he is wondrously pleased with this. We cannot honor him more
then by making use of his mercy in the forgiveness of sins, and of his
goodness, in going to him for it, and having interrested ourselves in his
goodness, go to him for more. Lord, thou have begun, make an end, thou have
forgiven my sins, I want this and this good, together with the pardon of my
sins do me good. Receive us graciously: or, do us good. That good is the
loadstone of the soul.
Now good is the loadstone of the soul, the attractive that draws it,
therefore (after Forgiveness of sins) he says, do good. The Petition is
easy, God will soon grant it, for nothing else interposeth betwixt God and
us, and makes two, but sin; which being remooved, he is all goodness and
mercy. All his ways are mercy and truth. Psalm 25.10.
Yea even his sharpest ways are mercy, all mercy; when sin is forgiven, there
is goodness in all, in the greatest cross and affliction. Do good to us.

That God appears to be good only to a sanctified soul.
The soul we see desires good, and needs good; It is a transcendent word here,
and must be understood according to the taste of Gods people, of a sanctified
soul. Do good, especially do spiritual good to us, together with the
forgiveness of sins, give us the righteousness of Jesus Christ; sanctifying
grace, such good, as may make us good first; for the desire must be such as
the person is who makes it. Wicked men (as it is said of Balaam) have good
gifts, without the good God: but we must not be so pleased with gifts,
unless we be good our selves, and see God making us good. Can an evil tree
bring forth good fruit? Mat 7.18.
Therefore the Apostle calls the regenerate person Gods workmanship. etc. We
are Gods good work, and then we do good works, being made good, good comes
from us, Do good to us.

It is an acknowledgement of their own emptiness, Do good to us. That asking
of good, argues the ingenuity of confessing want and emptiness.
We are blind in our own understandings, inlighten us; we are perplexed, set
us right; we are dull, quicken us; we are empty, fill us; we are dark, shine
upon us; we are ready to go out of the way, establish us; every way do good
to us suitable to our wants. The best that we can bring to thee is emptiness,
therefore do thou do good to us, fill us with thy fulness. Do good to us
every way whereby thou usest to convey spiritual things to thy servants
souls: give us first thy grace, thy Spirit, which is the spring of all good
things; for the Spirit of God is a Spirit of direction, of strength, of
comfort, and all: therefore he who has the Spirit of God has the spring of
all: that is begd in the first place. And then, give us good Magistrates to
rule us well; and good Ministers, who are the dispensers of grace, instruments
of our salvation, the Conduit-pipes whereby thou derivest and conveyest good to
us; when thou have made us good, continue the means of salvation for our good
every way. The Church when she says, Do good to us, has a large desire; here
be seeds of wondrous large things in these two short petitions, Take away all
iniquity, And do good to us. A Bono Deo, etc. From the good God nothing can
come but what is good: therefore do good to us in all spiritual things. The
Prophet David aims at this excellent good, Psalm. 4.6, 7. saying that other men
are for corn, wine and oil, and say; who will show us any good? But Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thy loving kindness is better
then life, therefore do good to us. When thou have forgiven our sins, shine
graciously upon us in Jesus Christ.

In the good desired outward prosperity is also included.
And it extends its limits likewise to outward prosperity (this desire of doing
good) let us have happy days, sweeten our pilgrimage here, let our profession
of Religion be comfortable, do not lay more crosses upon us then thou will
give us strength to bear, do good to us every way. But mark the wisdom of
the Holy Ghost in dictating of this Prayer to them: he speaks in general,
do good to us; not to do this or that good, but he leaves it to the wisdom
of God, as they here frame their hearts unto the will of God. Do good to us,
spiritual that needs no limitation, because we cannot more honor God then to
depend upon him for all spiritual good things. Thou art wiser, and know
what is good for us better then we our selves, beggars ought to be no choosers,
therefore, Do good to us; for the particulars we leave them to thy wisdom.
O Beloved it is a happy and blessed privilege to be under the conduct of so
wise and All-sufficient a God, who is good, and as he is good, knows best
what is good for us. We would have riches, liberty and health, I but it may be
it is not good for us, Do good to us. Thou Lord know what is best, do in
thine own wisdom what is best.



Take away our iniquity and do us good, we should make this petition for the
Church and our selves, pardon our sins and do good to us, to our persons, to
the state, to the times wherein we live, to the Church at home and abroad, do
good to all. How to know when blessings enjoyed come from Gods love.


An^ we may observe this from the order; and know, what good we have, it comes
from God in love, when it comes after forgiveness of sins. How then may we
take comfort of all the good things we have enjoyed, having seen many good
days, enjoyed many good blessings, in health, wealth, good Magistracy,
Ministry, Peace, plenty and the like? If all this goodness of God lead us to
God, and draw us nearer unto him after forgiveness of sins (grounded on the
former evidences I spoke of) then they come in love. But never let us think to
have true comfort with a blessing, or any good thing we enjoy, till we have
assurance of Gods love and mercy in the forgiveness of sins; least God strip
us naked of all the good things we have, and make us as naked as Dives in
Hell, who had not (any thing that was good) to refresh his body or soul. So
that all good things we enjoy here without this, will only aggravate our
condemnation. Let us observe therefore, how all our good things are joined with
spiritual good, whether we our selves are made better by them or not, having
our sins pardoned. I beseech you let us renew our requests for forgiveness
of sins every day, making our accounts even with God: desiring grace to set
our souls in a holy and sanctified frame with God, that our selves may be
good, our conversation good: and that then, he would do good to us all other
ways, and sanctify all other things. This is the Method of Gods Spirit in
setting us right onwards in our heavenly journey: first to have forgiveness of
sins, then sanctification: to be better our selves, and then to look for
peaceable and comfortable days in this world, if God see it good. What can be
more? Take away all iniquity, and do us good: all manner of good.

Therefore since all good comes from God, the first and chief good, let us
labor to have communion with him by all sanctified means, that so he may
take away our ill, and do us every way good, to our souls, bodies,
conditions. O what a blessed thing is it for a Christian to keep a strict and
near communion with the fountain of goodness, who can do more for us then
all the world besides. When we are sick on our death beds, or when conscience
is thoroughly awaked, then to speak peace comfortably to us in this great
extremity, is more worth then all this world. Therefore let us labor to keep
communion with God, that he may speak peace to our souls when nothing else
can.

I beseech you therefore let us take heed, how we break or walk loosely with
God, seeing we can have no further comfort of any good thing we enjoy, then
we are careful to keep and maintain our peace and communion with him at all
times; and when we run into arrerages with God, then be sure we lie not in
sin, but say, Take away all iniquity, and do good to us, laboring to be in
such an estate, as God may give us his holy Spirit, both to make us good, and
sanctify unto us all other good. There be good things, which are are good of
themselves, and which make all other things good. Thus by communion with God,
we our selves are made good, and all other things likewise are made good to us;
all his ways being mercy and truth unto those who fear him. Therefore resign
we our selves and all that we have unto his wisdom and disposing: because
oftimes there is good, where we imagine the worst of evils to be: as it is
sometimes good to have a vein opened, Simile.
to be purged, the Physician thinks so, when yet the Patient, impatient of
Reasons issue, thinks not so; But as the Physician is wiser then the Patient
to know what is best for him; so God is wiser then man to know what is good for
him, who intends us no hurt when he purges us by affliction

All our care therefore should be, to annihilate our selves, to come with empty
poor souls to God, Do good to us. In which case, it is no matter what our
ill be, if he do us good, who has both pardon and rich grace to remoove the
evil of sin, and convey all grace unto us out of his rich Treasury.

So will we render the calves of our lips. Here is the Restipulation, or
promise, they Return back again to God: for there is no friendship
maintained without rendering: when God has entered into Covenant with us; then
there is a kind of friendship knit up betwixt him and us (he becoming our
friend) We must not therefore be like graves to swallow up all and return
nothing; for then the inter-course betwixt God and us is cut off. Therefore the
same Spirit which teaches them to pray, and to Take to them words; teaches
them likewise to take unto them words of Praise, that there may be a Rendering,
according to Receiving; without which we are worse then the poorest creature
that is, which renders according to its receipt. The Earth (when it is plowed
and sowed) it yields us fruit. Trees being set, yield increase: Beasts being
fed, render in their kind: yea the fiercest untamed Beasts, Psalm. 19.10.
(as we read of the Lion) have been thankful in their kind; The Heavens
(says the Psalmist) declare the glory of God and the firmament shows forth
his Praise. So there must be a Return, if we be not worse then beasts.
Therefore the Church here promises a Return by the same Spirit which stirred
her up to pray. So will we render the Calves of our lips.

Now this promise which the Church makes here of praise is a kind of vow: So
will we render, etc. To bind ones self is a kind of vow. The Church
therefore binds her self that she may bind God; for binding her self by vow
to Thankfulness, she thereby binds God, who is moved with nothing we can
do so much as with setting forth of his Praise, which was his end in all the
Creation, the setting forth of his glory. The end of the new Creature, is the
end of all things both in nature and grace; the end whereof is Gods glory from
whence all things come, and wherein all things end: as we say of a circle, all
things begin and ends in it. All other things are for man, and man for Gods
glory; when the soul can say, Lord, this shall be for thy honor to set forth
thy praise, it binds God. Hence that they might moove God to yield to their
prayers, they bind themselves by a kind of vow; Do thus, O Lord, and thou
shall not loose by it, thou shall have praise, So will we render thee the
Calves of our lips.

So, Promises and vows of praise are alleged as an argument to prevail with
God, for the obtaining of that the Church begs for; So will we render, etc.
Not to enter into the common place of vows, only this much I say, that there
is a good use of them, to vow and promise Thankefullnesse when we would obtain
blessings from God. That which a promise is to men, that a vow is to God; and
usually they go together in Scripture, as Psalm. 132.2. It is said of David,
That he vowed unto God; and swear unto the mighty God of Iaakob. So we have
all in Baptism vowed a vow, so that it is good to renew our vows often,
especially that of new obedience; and in this particular, to vow unto him, that
we will praise him, and strive that his glory be no looser by us. Helps and
use of vows.


1. To excite, and quicken our dullness.
It is good thus to vow, if it were but to excite, and quicken our dullness and
forgetfullnesse of our general vow; to put us in mind of our duty, the more
to oblige us to God and refresh our memories. This bond, that having promised,
now I must do it, provokes the soul to it, as it helps the memory, so it
quickens the affections.

Besides, as by nature, we are forgetful, 2. To be a bridle to our
inconstancy,
so we are inconstant, in which respect, it is a tie to our inconstant and
unsteady nature, for there are none who have the Spirit of God at all with any
tenderness of heart, but will thus think; I have vowed to God, if it be a
heinous thing to break with men, what is it wittingly and willingly to break
with the great God? a vow is a kind of oath; this is the sacrifice of fools,
to come to God, and yet neither to make good our vows, nor endeavor to do it.

Let us consider therefore, what we have done in this case. By permission of
authority there was a Fast lately when we all renewed our vows (we mocked
God else) received the Communion. Will God be mocked think you? No, but
howsoever man may forget, God will not, but will come upon us, for non-paiment
of our vows and Covenants. Lay we it to heart therefore what Covenants we
have made with God of late. And then, for the time to come, be not discouraged
if you have been faulty in it. There is a general vow, wherein though we have
failed (if we be his children and break not with God in the maine, cleaving
to him in purpose of heart, occasionally renewing our purposes and Covenants)
yet let not Satan discourage us for our unfaithfullnesse therein; but be
ashamed of it, watch more; look better to it for the time to come, and make
use of the gracious Covenant; and upon recoverie, say with the Church. So will
we render the Calves of our lips.

It was the custom under the Jewish policy (you know) to offer sacrifices of
all sorts. But the Spirit of God speaks here of the Church of the Jews under
the New Testament, especially what they should be after their Conversion,
having reference to the Jews in Christ's time, and to the believing Jews in
all times, implying this much, howsoever not Legal sacrifices, of Calves,
Bullocks, Sheep and Lambs, yet the Calves of the lips, which God likes better
are acceptable to him. And it likewise implies some humiliation of the Church.
Lord, whatsoever else we could offer unto thee it is thine own, though it
were the beasts upon a thousand mountains; Psalm. 50.
but this (by thy grace) we can do, to Praise thee. For God must open and
circumcise our lips and hearts, before we can offer him the Calves of our
lips. Thus much the poorest creature in the world may say to God, Lord, I will
render thee the Calves of my lips, other things I have not, this I have by thy
gracious Spirit, a heart somewhat touched by the sense of thy favor:
therefore, I will render thee the Calves of my lips, that is, Praise; as the
Apostle has it, Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of
praise to God continually; that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to
his Name. [So will we render thee the Calves of our lips] Whence the point is,

That Gods children at all times have their Sacrifices.

There is indeed one kind of Sacrificing determined, and finished by the
coming of Christ, who was the last Sacrifice of propitiation for our sins.
The more to blame those, who yet maintain a daily Sacrifice, not of laud and
praise, but of cozening and deluding the world in saying mass for the sins
of the quick and the dead, all such Sacrifices being finished and closed up in
him (our blessed Savior) who, by one Sacrifice (as the Apostle speaks) has
perfected them that are sanctified: and that; Heb. 10.14.
By one Sacrifice when he offered up himself; Heb. 7.27.
when all the the Jewish Sacrifices ended, since which all ours, are but a
commemoration of Christ's last Sacrifice (as the Fathers say) The Lords Supper
with the rest: Which remain still, and the Sacrifice of praise, with a few
others I desire to name.

First, The Sacrifice of a broken heart, 1. The Sacrifice of broken heart
whereof David speaks, Psalm. 51.17. which Sacrifice of a wounded broken heart
(by the knife of Repentance) pleases God wondrously well.

And then, 2. A broken heart offering Christ
A broken heart that offers Christ to God every day, who though he were
offered once for all: yet our believing in him, and daily presenting his
Atonement made for us, is a new offering of him. Christ is Crucified and
Sacrificed for thee as often as thou beleevest in Christ Crucified. Now upon all
occasions we manifest our Belief in Christ, to wash and bathe our selves in
his blood, who justifies the ungodly, so that upon a fresh sight of sin with
contrition for it, he continually justifies us. Thus when we Believe we offer
him to God daily, a broken heart first, and then Christ with a broken heart.

3. Our selves.
And then when we believe in Christ, we offer and sacrifice our selves to God,
in which respect we must (as it were) be killed ere we be offered; for we may
not offer our selves as we are in our lusts, but as mortified and killed by
Repentance. Then we offer our selves to God as a reasonable and living
sacrifice, when we offer our selves wholly unto him, wit, understanding,
judgment, affections and endeavor, as Paul says of the Macedonians, 2 Cor.
8.5.
they gave themselves to God first, and then their goods. In sum, it is that
Sacrifice Paul speaks of, Romans 12.1. To present our bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, etc. for a Christian who believes in the Lord
Jesus, is not his own, but sacrifices himself to him that was Sacrificed for
him. As Christ is given to us, so he that believes in Christ gives himself
back again to Christ. Hereby a man may know if he be a true Christian, and
that Christ is his; if he yields up himself to God; for, Christ died and rose
again (says the Apostle) that he might be Lord both of quick and dead.
Therefore (says he) whether we live or die, we are not our own, what we do
or suffer in the world, in all we are Sacrificed, so says a sanctified soul;
my wit, my will, my life, my good, my affections are thine, of thee I received
them; and I resign all to thee as a Sacrifice. Thus the Martyrs to seal the
Truth (as a Sacrifice) yielded up their blood. He that has not obtained of
himself so much, as to yield himself to God, he knows not what the Gospel
means; for Christian Religion is not only to believe in Christ for
forgiveness of sin, but the same faith which takes this great benefit,
renders back our selves in liew of Thankefullnesse.

So that, whatsoever we have (after we Believe) we give all back again. Lord,
I have my life, my will, my wit and all from thee, and to thee I return all
back again: for when I gave my self to believe in thy dear Son, I yielded
my self and all I have to thee: and now having nothing but by thy gift; if
thou will have all, I will return all unto thee again; if thou will have my
life, my goods, my liberty thou shall have them. This is the state of a
Christian who has denied himself, for we cannot believe as we should,
unless we deny our selves. Christianity is not altogether in believing this
and that, but the faith which mooves me to believe Forgiveness of sins,
carries us also unto God, to yield all back again to him.

More especially, 4. Almsdeeds.
among the Sacrifices of the New Testament, are Alms, as Heb. 13.16. To do
good, and to communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well
pleased.

5. The Sacrifice of Praise.
And (among the rest) The Sacrifice of Praise, which is in the same Chapter ver.
15. first, he says, by him (that is, by Christ) let us offer the sacrifice of
praise to God continually, that is, The fruit of our lips, which is but an
exposition of this place, which because it is especially here intended; I will
a little enlarge my self in.

The Calves of our lips, implies two things:

Not only Thankefullnesse to God;

But glorifying of God in setting out his praise; otherwise to thank God for
his goodness to us, or for what we hope to receive, without glorifying of
him, is nothing at all worth. For in glorifying there are two things.

1. A supposition of Excellency, for that cannot be glorified which has no
excellency in it; glory in sublimity, has always excellency attending it. And

2. The manifestation of this glory.

Now when all the excellencies of God as they are, are discovered and set out,
his Wisdom, Mercy, Power, Goodness, All-sufficiencie, etc. then we glorify
him. To praise God for his favors to us, and accordingly to glorify him, is
The Calves of our lips, but especially to praise him. Whence the point is,

That the yielding of praise to God, is a wondrous acceptable Sacrifice.

Which is instead of all the Sacrifices of the Old Testament, then which, the
greatest can do no more; nor the least, less, for it is the sacrifice and
fruit of the lips. But to open it, it is not merely the sacrifice of our lips;
for the praise we yield to God it must be begotten in the heart. Hereupon the
word ((...)) speech, signifies both Reason and Speech, there being one word in
the learned language for both. Because, speech is nothing but that stream
which issues from the spring of reason and understanding; therefore, in
Thankesgiving there must not be a lip-labor only; but a Thankesgiving from
the lips, first begotten in the heart, coming from the inward man, as Psalm.
103.1. The Prophet says, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within
me, bless his holy Name; Praise must come from a sound judgment of the worth
of the thing we praise God for. It must come from an affection which desires
that God may have the glory, by the powers of the whole inward man, which is a
hard matter to rouse up our selves to praise God with all the powers of our
soul, all that is within me, praise his holy Name. There goes Judgment,
Resolution of the will, strength of affections, and all with it.

And then again, besides this, The Calves of our lips, carries us to work.
The orall Thankesgiving must be justified by our works and deeds; or else, our
actions will give our tongue the lie, that we praise him with the one, but
deny him in the other. This is a Sollocisme, as if one should look to the
earth and cry O ye heavens? so when we say, God be praised, when yet our life
speaks the contrary, it is a dishonouring of God. So the praise of our lips
must be made good and justified by our life, actions, and conversation: this
we must suppose for the full understanding of the words. We will render (from
our hearts) the Calves of our lips, which we must make good in our lives and
conversations, ever to set forth thy praise in our whole life.

Quest. Why lips are mentioned for praise only, Answ.
But why does the Prophet especially mention lips; The Calves of our lips, which
are our words.

1. Partly, because Christ who is the Word, delights in our words. 2. Because
our Tongue is our glory, and that whereby we glorify God. 3. And especially,
because our Tongue is that which excites others
Being a trumpet of praise, ordained of God for this purpose. Therefore, The
Calves of our lips. Partly, because it stirs up our selves and others; and
partly, because God delights in words especially of his own dictating. To come
then to speak more fully of Praise and Thankesgiving, let us consider, what a
sweet, excellent and prevailing duty this is; which the Church (to bind God)
promises unto him, The Calves of our lips. I will not be long in the point,
Helps to praise God.
but only come to some helps how we may come to do it.

First, this Praising of God must be from an humble broken heart, 1. It must
be from an humble broken heart.
the humble soul that sees it self not worthy of any favor, and confesses
sin before God, is always a thankful soul. Take away our iniquity, and then
do good to us, we are empty our selves; Then will we render thee the Calves of
our lips. What made David so thankful a man? He was an humble man; and so
Iaakob; what abased him so in his own eyes? his humility; Genesis 32.10.
Lord I am less then the least of thy mercies. He that thinks himself
unworthie of any thing, will be thankful for everything, and he who thinks
himself unworthy of any blessing, will be contented with the least. Therefore,
let us work our hearts to humility, in consideration of our sinnefullnesse,
vileness, and unworthiness, which will make us thankful, especially of the
best blessings, when we consider their greatness, and our unworthiness of
them. A proud man can never be thankful. Therefore that Religion which teaches
pride, cannot be a thankful Religion, Popery is compounded of spiritual
pride. Merit of Congruity before Conversion, Merit of Condignity and desert of
heaven after, Free Will and the like, to puff up nature, what a Religion is
this? must we light a candle before the devil? is not nature proud enough, but
we must light a candle to it? 2. A due consideration of the greatness of the
blessings.
to be spiritually proud is worst of all.

And with our own unworthiness, add this, a consideration of the greatness
of the thing we bless God for: setting as high a price upon it as we can, by
considering what and how miserable we were without it. He will bless God
joyfully for pardon of sin who sees how miserable he were without it, in misery
next to devils, ready to drop into hell every moment: and the more excellent we
are, so much the more accursed without the forgiveness of sins. For the
soul by reason of the largeness thereof, is so much the more capable and
comprehensible of misery, as the devils are more capable then we, therefore
are most accursed. O this will make us bless God for the pardon of sin, and
likewise, let us set a price upon all Gods blessings, considering what we were
without our senses, speech, meat, drink, rest, etc. O beloved, we forget to
praise God sufficiently for our senses. This little spark of Reason in us, is
an excellent thing; grace is founded upon it, if we were without Reason, what
were we? If we wanted sight, hearing, speech, rest, and other daily blessings,
how uncomfortable were our lives? This consideration will add and set a price
to their worth, and make us thankful to consider our misery without them. But
(such is our corruption) that favors are more known by the want then by the
enjoying of them, when too late we (many times) find, how dark and
uncomfortable we are without them, then smarting the more soundly; because in
time we did not sufficiently prize, and were thankful for them.

And then, labor to get further and further assurance, that we are Gods
children, beloved of him: 3. To get assurance that we are in Gods love.
this will make us thankful, both for what we have and hope for. It lets out
the life blood of Thankefullnesse to teach doubting, or falling from grace.
What is the end I beseech you why the glory to come is revealed before the
time? that we shall be sons and daughters; Kings and Queens; heirs and
co-heires with Christ; and all that he has is ours? Is not this knowledge
revealed before hand, that our praise and thankesgiving should before hand be
suitable to this Revelation? being set with Christ in heavenly places already.
Whence comes those strong phrases, we are raised with Christ; Ephesians 2.6.
sit with him in heavenly Places: Col. 1.13.
are translated from death to life: Tronsformed into his image: 2 Pet. 1.4.
Partakers of the divine nature, etc. If any thing that can come betwixt our
believing and our fitting there could disappoint us thereof, or unsettle us, it
may as well put Christ out of Heaven, for we sit with him. That Popish Doctrine
of doubting kills Thankfulness to God.
If we yield to the uncomfortable Popish Doctrine of doubting, we cannot be
heartily thankful for blessings; for still there will rise in the soul
surmises, I know not whether God favor me or not, it may be I am only fatted
for the day of slaughter. God gives me outward things to damn me, and make me
the more inexcusable; what a cooler of praise is this, to be ever doubting and
to have no assurance of Gods favor? But when upon good evidence (which cannot
deceive) we have somewhat wrought in us distinct from the greater number of
worldlings, Gods stamp set upon us, having evidences of the state of grace, by
conformity to Christ, and walking humbly by the Rule of the Word in all Gods
ways. Then we may heartily be thankful, yea and we shall break forth in
Thankesgiving: this being an estate of Peace, and joy unspeakeable and
glorious, wherein we take every thing as an evidence of Gods love.

That assurance of being in the state of grace, is the nurse of Thankesgiving.
Thus, the assurance of our being in the state of grace, makes us thankful for
every thing: so by the contrary, being not in some measure assured of Gods love
in Christ, we cannot be Thankful for everything. For it will always come in
our mind, I know not how I have these things, and what account I shall give
for them. Therefore, even for the honor of God, and that we may praise him the
more cheerfully, let us labor to have further and further evidences of the
state of grace, to make us thankful both for things present and to come,
seeing faith takes to trust things to come, as if it had them in possession:
Whereby we are assured of this; that we shall come to heaven, as sure as if we
were there already. This makes us praise God before hand for all favors: as
blessed Peter begins his Epistle. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; 1 Pet. 1.3.
which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively
hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
you, etc. As soon as we are newborn, we are begotten to a Kingdom, and an
Inheritance: therefore assurance that we are Gods children, will make us
thankful for grace present and that to come, as if we were in Heaven already;
we begin then the employment of Heaven in thankesgiving here to praise God
before hand with Cherubines and Angels. Let us then be stirred up, to give God
his due before hand, to begin Heaven upon Earth; for we are so much in heaven
already as we abound and are conversant in thanksgiving upon earth.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE THIRD SERMON.
HOS. 14.2, 3. -- So will we render the Calves of our lips.

Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any
more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods, for in thee the Fatherless
finds mercy.


THE words (as we heard heretofore) contain a most sweet and excellent form
of Returning unto God, for miserable lost and forlorn sinners, wherein, so
far God discovers his willingness to have his people return unto him, that
he dictates unto them a form of prayer, Take with you words and turn to the
Lord, say unto him Take away iniquity. Wherein we see how detestation of sin
must be as general as the desire of pardon: and that none heartily pray to God
to Take away all iniquity, who have not grace truly to hate all iniquity. And
do good to us, or do graciously to us, for there is no good to us till sin be
remooved, though God be goodness it self: there is no provoking or meriting
cause of mercy in us; but he finds cause from his own gracious nature and
bowels of mercy, to pity his poor people and servants. It is his nature to
show mercy; as the fire to burn, a spring to run, the Sun to shine:
Therefore it is easily done (as the Prophet speaks) Who is a God like unto
thee. Micah. 7.18.


Where we came to speak of the Restipulation, So will we render the Calves of
our lips: where Gods favor shines there will be a reflection, love is not
idle, but a working thing: it must render or die; and what does it render?
diverse Sacrifices of the New Testament which I spoke of, that of a broken
heart, of Christ offered to the Father to stand betwixt Gods wrath and us; our
selves as a living Sacrifice: Almsdeeds, and praise, which must be with the
whole inward powers of the soul.

Praise is not comely in the mouth of a fool (says the Wiseman) nor of a
wicked man, as Psalm. 50.16, 17. says God to such, What have thou to do to
take my words in thy mouth since thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
words behind the? There are a company who are ordinary swearers, and filthy
speakers; for them to praise God, James 3.10.
James tells them, that these contrary streams cannot flow out of a good
heart; O no: God requires not the praise of such fools.

I gave you also some Directions how to praise God, and to stir up your
selves to this most excellent duty, which I will not insist on now, but add a
little unto that I then delivered, which is, To take advantages of our
disposition James 5.13.
That we must watch all advantages of praising God, from our dispositions. Is
any merry, let him sing (says James) O, it is a great point of wisdom, to
take advantages with the stream of our temper to praise God. When he does
encourage us by his favors and blessings, and enlarge our spirits, then we are
in a right temper to bless him: let us not loose the occasion. This is one
Branch of redeeming of time, to observe what state and temper of soul we are
in, and to take advantage from thence. Is any man in heaviness? he is fit to
mourn for sin: let him take the opportunity of that temper. Is any disposed to
cherfulness; let him sacrifice that marrow, oil, and sweetness of spirit
to God. We see the poor birds in the springtime, when those little spirits
they have are cherished with the Sunbeams, how they express it in singing;
so when God warmes us with his favors, let him have the praise of all.

A censure of those who take the advantage of Gods blessings to feed their
lusts.
And here, I cannot but take up a lamentation, of the horrible ingratitude of
men, who are so far from taking advantage by Gods blessings to praise him;
that they fight (like Rebels) against him with his own favors. Those tongues
which he has given them for his glory, they abuse to pierce him with
blasphemy, and those other benefits of his lent them to honor him with, they
turn to his dishonor, like children, who importunately ask for diverse
things, which when they have, they throw them to the dog. So, favors they will
have, which when they have obtained, they give them to the devil, unto whom
they sacrifice their strength and cherfulness, and cannot be merry,
unless they be madd and sinful. Are these things to be tolerated in these
days of light? How few shall we find who in a temper of mirth turn it the
right way?

Encouragement to Praise God.
But to add some encouragements to incite us to praise God, 1. We honor him by
it.
unto the former; I beseech you let this be one, That we honor God by it; it
is a well-pleasing Sacrifice to him. If we would study to please him, we
cannot do it better then by praising him.

2. It is the most gainefull trading.
And it is a gainefull trading with God: for in bestowing his seed, where he
finds there is improovement in a good soil, with such a sanctified
disposition as to bless him upon all occasions, that there comes not a good
thought, a good motion in the mind, but we bless God who has injected such a
good thought in our heart: there I say God delights to shower down more and
more blessings, making us fruitful in every good work to the praise of his
Name. Sometimes we shall have holy and gracious persons make a law, that no
good or holy motion shall come into their hearts which they will not be
thankful for. O, when God sees a heart so excellently disposed, how does it
enrich the soul? It is a gainefull trade. As we delight to bestow our seed in
soyles of great increase, which yield sixty and an hundred fold, if possible:
so God delights in a disposition inclined to bless him upon all occasions: on
whom he multiplies his favors.

And then, in it self; 3. It is a most noble act of Religion.
it is a most noble act of Religion, it being a more base thing to be always
begging of God; but it argues a more noble, raised and elevated spirit to be
disposed to praise God. And it is an argument of less self-love and respect,
being therefore more gainefull to us. Yea, it is a more noble and royal
disposition, fit for Spiritual Kings and Priests thus to Sacrifice.

Again, 4. Because we have more cause to give thanks then to pray.
indeed we have more cause to praise God then to pray, having many things to
praise him for which we never prayed for; Who ever prayed for his election,
care of Parents in our infancy, their affection to us, care to breed and train
us to years of discretion; besides those many favors daily heaped upon us,
above all that we are able to think or speak. Therefore Praise being a more
large Sacrifice then Prayer, we ought to be abundant in it. For those that
begin not Heaven upon earth, of which this praise is a maine function, they
shall never come to Heaven, after they are taken from the earth; for there is
no heavenly action, but it is begun upon earth: especially this maine one, of
joining with Angels, Seraphims, and Cherubims in landing God? Shall they praise
him on our behalf, and shall not we for our own? We see the Quire of Angels
when Christ was borne, sang, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God on high, on earth Peace, and good will toward men. What was
this for? Because Christ the Savior of the world was borne, whereby they show,
that we have more benefit by it then they. Therefore if we would ever join
with them in Heaven, let us join with them upon Earth, for this is one of the
great privileges mentioned by the Author to the Hebrews, unto which we be
come too, Communion with the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.22.
and to the company of innumerable Angels: we cannot better show that we are
come to that blessed estate and Society spoken of then by praising God.

5. Praising brings joy.
And lastly, If we be much in praising God, we shall be much in joy, which
eases misery; for a man can never be miserable, that can be joyful, and a
man is always joyful when he is thankful. When one is joyful and cheerful,
what misery can lie upon him? Therefore it is a wondrous help in misery to
stir up the heart to this spiritual Sacrifice of Thankesgiving, by all
arguments, means and occasions. Our hearts are Temples, and we are Priests, we
should always therefore have this light and Incense burning in our hearts, as the
fire did always burn on the Altar in Moses time, that we may have these
spiritual Sacrifices to offer continually. Where this is not, the heart of
that man or woman, is like the abomination of desolation, Dan. 12.11.
which (when the daily Sacrifice was taken away) was set up in the Temple. And
certainly where there is not praising of God, the heart is an abomination of
desolation, having nothing in it, save monsters of base lusts and earthly
affections.

But how shall we know that God accepts these Sacrifices of Praise?



How to know when our Thankesgiving is accepted.
by fire from Heaven; this was ordinary with them. So if we find our hearts
warm, cheared and encouraged with joy, peace, and comfort in praising God;
this is as it were a witness by fire from Heaven that our Sacrifices are
accepted. Let this now said be effectual, to stir you up to this excellent
and useful duty of Thankesgiving, without multiplying of more Arguments; save
to put you in mind of this, Psalm. 37.4.
that as we are exhorted to delight our selves in the Lord, one way (among the
rest) to do it, is, to serve him with cherfulness, it is an excellent
thing to make us delight in God, who loves a cheerful giver, and
Thankesgiver. So will we render the Calves of our lips. But to proceed.

After this their solemn Covenant and promise of yielding Praise to God, that
if he would forgive all their sins and do good to them; then he should have
the best they could do to him again, (Praise) Here is A Promise of new
Obedience, which has two Branches,

1. A Renunciation of the ill courses they took before.

Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say
any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods.

2. Then there is a Positive duty implied, in these words;

For, in thee, the Fatherless finds mercy.

Whereof, the one springs from the other; Ashur shall not save us, we will not
ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the works of our hands, ye
are our gods. Whence comes all these? for in thee, the Fatherless finds
mercy. Thou shall be our Rock, our Trust, our Confidence for ever: what will
follow upon this? Ashur shall not save us any longer, we will not ride upon
Horses, etc. for we have pitched and placed our confidence better; on him, in
whom, the Fatherless finds mercy.

Ashur shall not save us. The Confidence which this people had placed, partly
in Ashur, their friends and associates; and partly in their own strength at
home; now (promising Repentance) they renounce all such confidence in Ashur,
Horses, and Idols. Ashur shall not save us, etc.

First for this, Ashur shall not save us; that is, the Assyrians, whom they had
on the one side, and the Egyptians on the other: it being (as we see in the
Prophecies of Isay and Jeremy) ordinary with Gods people, in any distress to
have recourse to the Assyrians, or Egyptians; as if God had not been
sufficient to be their Rock and their shield. We see how often the Lord
complains of this manner of dealing. Isay 30.2. and 31.1. Woe unto them that
go down into Egypt for help, and stay on horses, and trust in chariots,
because they are many, etc. The Prophets (and so this Prophet) are very full of
such complaints. It being one of the chief arguments he presses, their
falsenesse in this, that in any fear or peril, they ran to the shelter of
other Nations, especially these two, Egypt, and Assyria, as you have it, Chap.
12.1. Ephraim feeds on wind, and follows after the East wind, he daily
increases lies and desolation, and they do make a Covenant with the
Assyrians; and oil is carried into Egypt, that is, Balm, who had this
privilege above all other nations, to abound in precious Balmes: which balm
and oil they carried for a present into Egypt, to win their favor against
the Assyrians. Sometimes they relied on the one, and sometimes on the other,
the story and causes whereof were too tedious to relate, wherefore I come to
the useful points arising hence. Ashur shall not save us.

1. That man naturally is prone to put confidence in the creature.

2. That the creature is unsufficient and unable to yield us this prop to
uphold our confidence.

3. That Gods people when they are endowed with light supernatural, to
discern and be convinced hereof, are of that mind to say [Ashur shall not
save us.]

But to make way to these things, we must first observe two things for a
preparative.

Doct. That reformation must be joined with prayer and praise.
First, That Reformation of life must be joined with Prayer and Praise. There
was Prayer before, and a promise of Praise; but (as here) there must be joined
reformation of their sin. That it must be so it appears. First for Prayer: it
is said, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear
my Prayer: and for Praise; The very sacrifice of the wicked (who reformes not
his ways) is abominable: Pro. 15.8.
so that without Reformation, Prayer and Praise is to no purpose. Therefore it
is brought here after a promise of Praise. Lord as we mean to praise thee, so
we intend a through reformation of former sins whereof we were guilty. We
will renounce Ashur and confidence in Horses, Idols and the like. Therefore let
us when we come to God with Prayer and Praise, think also of reforming what is
amiss. Out with Achan; if there be any dead fly or Achan uncast out, Josh.
7.19.
Prayer and Praise is in vain. Will you steal, lie, commit Adultery, swear
falsely, and come and stand before me (says the Lord by the Prophet Jeremiah)?
Ier 7.9.
will you offer to Pray to me and Praise me living in these and these sins? No,
God will abhor both that Prayer and Praise, where there is no reformation.
Psalm. 50.16.
What have thou to do to take my Name in thy mouth, since thou hate to be
reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? says God. Where he pleades with
the Hypocrite for this audacious boldness in severing things conjoined by God.
Therefore as we would not have our Prayers turned back from Heaven, which
should bring a blessing upon all other things else. As we would not have our
sacrifices abominable to God, labor to reform what is amiss, amend all, or
else never think our lip-labor will prove any thing but a lost labor,
without this Reformation.

A Second thing which I observe in general, before I come to the particulars,
is,

That true Repentance is of the particular sin which we are most addicted
to, and most guilty of.

The particular sin of this people (whom God so instructs here) was their
confidence in Assyria, Horses and Idols. Now therefore Repenting, they repent
of the particular maine sins they were most guilty of, which being stricken
down, all the lesser will be easy to conquer. As when Goliath himself was
stricken down, all the host of the Philistims run away. So when Goliath shall
be slain in us, 1 Samuel 17.51.
the reigning ruling domineering sin, the rest will easily be conquered.

Trial of Repentance.
Therefore let us make an Use of Examination and trial of our Repentance. If it
be sound, it draws with it a reformation, as in general, so especially of our
particular sins, as those, 1 Samuel 12.8. confess and say, Above all other
things we have sinned in this, in asking a King. We were naught and had
offended God many ways before, but herein we have been exceeding sinful,
in seeking another Governor, being weary of Gods gracious Government over us.
So a gracious heart will say, I have been a wretch in all other things, but in
this and that sin above al other. Thus it was with the woman of Samaria, Joh.
4.18.
when she was put in mind by Christ of her particular grand sin, that she
had been a light woman and had had many husbands, he whom she lived with now
not being her husband. This discovery (when Christ touched the galled part)
did so work upon her conscience, that it occasioned a general repentance of
all her other sins whatsoever. And indeed sound repentance of one maine sin,
will draw with it all the rest. And for the most part when God brings any man
home to him, he so carries our repentance, that discovering unto us our
sinnefullnesse, he especially shows us our Dalilah, Isaac, Herodias, our
particular sin, which being cast out, we prevail easily against the rest. As
the charge was given by the King of Aram against Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18.30
fight neither against great nor small, but only against the King of Israel,
kill him, and then there will be an end of the battle. So let us not stand
striking at this and that sin which we are not so much tempted to, if we
will indeed prove our repentance to be sound, but at that maine sin which by
nature, calling or custom we are most prone unto. Repentance for this causes
Repentance for all the rest, as here the Church says, Ashur shall not save us,
we will not ride upon horses, etc.

It is a grand imposture, which carries many to Hell, they will cherish
themselves in some gross maine sin, which pleases corrupt nature, and is
advantageous to them: and by way of compensation with God they will do many
other things well, but leave a dead fly to mar all. Whereas they should
begin here especially. This much in general, which things premised, I come to
the forenamed particulars. First,

That naturally we are apt and prone to confidence in outward helps and present
things.

This came to our nature from the first fall; what was our fall at first? A
turning from the All-sufficient unchangeable God to the creature. If I should
describe sin, it is nothing but a turning from God to one creature or other,
when we find not contentment and sufficiency in one creature, we run to
another, as the bird flies from one tree and bough to another, so we seek
variety of contentments from one thing to another, such is the pravitie of our
nature since the fall. This is a fundamental conclusion; man naturally will,
and must have somewhat to rely on. The soul must have have a bottom, a
foundation to rest on, either such as the world affoords, or a better. Weak
things must have their supports: as we see, the Vine being a weak thing, is
commonly supported by the Elm or the like supply. So it is with the soul
since the fall: because it is weak, and cannot uphold nor satisfy it self
with it self, therefore it looks out of it self. Look to God it cannot till
it be in the state of grace, for being his enemy, it loves not to look to him
or his ways, or have dealing with him; therefore it looks unto the creature,
that next hand unto it self. This being natural since the fall, that what we
had in God before when we stood, we now labor to have in the creature.

Loss of former communion with God.
Because (as was said) having lost Communion with God, somewhat we must have to
stay the soul.

2. Abuse of our fancy.
Secondly, because Satan joins with our sense and fancy, by which we are
naturally prone to live, esteeming of things, not by faith and by deeper
grounds, but by fancy. Now fancy having communion with sense, How our fancies
come to be so abused, as to doat on the creature.
what it discovers and presents for good and great; fancy makes it greater,
and the devil above all having communion with that faculty of fancy, and so
a spirit of error being mixed therewith, to make our fancy think the riches
of the world to be the only riches: The greatness and goodness of the
creature, to be the only greatness and goodness, and the strength thereof,
the only strength: This spirit of error joining with our own spirits, and
with the deceit of our natures, makes us set a higher value on the creature,
inlargeth and inrageth the fancy, making it spiritually drunk so as to
conceive amiss of things.

Israelites here did, the Assyrians and the Egyptians: for being enemies,
they trusted in a broken reed, as we shall see further in the second point,

How these outward things cannot help us. Doct. That the creature cannot help
in our especial need.


How prone so ever we are to rely upon them, they are in effect nothing, they
cannot help us, and so are not to be relied upon. Ashur shall not save us.
Indeed it will not, it cannot; these things cannot aid us at our most need. So
that that which we most pitch upon, fails us when we should especially have
help; some present vanishing supply they yield: but little to purpose. They
have not that in them, which should support the soul at a strait or great
pinch as we say.

Solomon in the whole book of Ecclesiastes, All is vanity and vexation of
spirit. There is a vanity in all the creatures, being empty and not able to
support the soul. They are vain in their continuance, and empty in regard of
their strength, they are gone when we have need of them. Riches (as the
Wiseman says) are gone, Pro. 23.5.
and have wings to fly away in our most need. So Friends, are fugitive good
things, being like to the brooks mentioned in Job: Job 6.15.
which when in Summer there is need of, then they are dried up, and yet run a
maine in Winter when there is no need of them. So earthly supports, when there
is no need of them, then they are at hand, but when we have most need of them
are gone. They are broken Cisternes, Ier. 2.13.
as the Prophet calls them: Cisternes, that is, they have a limited capacity, a
Cisterne is not a spring: so all their support (at the best) is but a bounded
and a mixed sufficiency, and that also which will quickly fail. Like water in
a Cisterne, which if it be not fed with a continual spring, fails or
putrifies presently. Likewise these outward things are not sufficient for the
grievance, for being limited and bounded, the grievance will be above the
strength of the creature; which though sometime it be present and do not
fail, yet the trouble is such that it is above the strength of the creature to
help. So that for these and the like respects, there is no sufficiency nor
help to be expected from the creature. Ashur shall not save us, he is not a
sufficient ground of trust. Why?

1. He is but a Creature. 2. He is an Enemy. 3. He is an Idolater.
So that, take him in all these three relations, he is not to be trusted.

1. He is a Creature, what is a Creature? nothing as it were, says the
Prophet, all creatures before him are as nothing, and as a very little thing;
and what it is, when he pleases he can dissolve it into nothing, turn it into
dust. Man's breath is in his nostrills, all flesh is grass, and all his glory
as the flower of grass. If a man trust the creature, he may outlive his trust,
his prop may be taken from him and down he falls. Ashur must not be trusted
therefore as a Creature; nor as a Man, for that brings us within the Curse: Ier.
17.5. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his arm, etc. So trusting in the creature not only deceives us, but
brings us within the Curse. In that respect, Ashur must not be trusted.

But Ashur likewise was an Enemy, and a secret enemy: for howsoever the ten
Tribes unto whom Hosea prophesied were great Idolaters, yet they were somewhat
better then Ashur, who was without the pale of the Church, and a wholly
corrupted Church: therefore they were enemies to the ten Tribes, and amongst
other reasons, because they were not so bad as they, nor deeply enough died
with Idolatry.

Many think they may complie with Popery in some few things to gain their
love, and that there may be a joining with them in this and that: but do we
think that they will ever trust us for all this? No, they will always hate us
till we be as bad as they, and then they will despise us, and secure themselves
of us. Therefore there is no trusting of Papists, as Papists: not only
Creatures, but as false, and as enemies. For this is the nature of wicked men,
they will never trust better then themselves, till they become as bad as they
are, after which they despise them; say they, now we may trust such and such a
one, he is as bad as we, becom'd one of us. Which is the reason why some of a
naughty disposition take away the chastity and virginity of men's consciences,
making them take this and that evil course: and then they think they have
such safe, being as bad as themselves. Wherein they deal as Achitophels
politic divelish counsel was, 2 Samuel 16.21.
that Absalom should do that which was naught, and then he should be sure that
David and he should never agree after that: and that then by this discovery,
the wicked Jews set on mischief might secure themselves of Absalom. So they,
now that they join with us, God will forsake them, we shall have them our
instruments for any thing. First, they would have the ten Tribes as bad as
they, and then gave them the slip whenever they trusted them.

Again, neither were they to be trusted as Idolaters, to have league and
society with them. There may be some commerce and traffic with them, but
amity and trust none. Ashur and Egypt were horrible Idolaters and therefore
not to be trusted in that respect. As we see the Prophet in this case
reprooved good Iehoshaphat when he had joined with wicked Ahab, King of the ten
Tribes: 2 Chronicles. 19.2
should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore
wrath is upon thee from before the Lord. So we see it is a dangerous thing to
be in league with Idolaters; even such as the ten Tribes were, who had some
Religion amongst them: this good King was chidden for it.

We will not ride upon Horses. What kind of creature a Horse is, it is worth
the seeing, what a description God gives of him, that we may see what reason
the Spirit of God has to instance in the Horse, says God to Job. Have thou
given the Horse strength? Job ^9.19, 20, 21, etc.
Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? Can thou make him afraid as a
grasshopper? The glory of his Nostrills is terrible: He paweth in the valley,
and rejoices in his strength, he goes on to meet the armed men. He mocketh
at fear, and is not affrighted: neither turns he back from the sword. The
quiver ratleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield. He swalloweth
the ground with fierceness and rage, neither believes he that it is the
sound of the trumpet: He says among the Trumpets, Ha, Ha; and he smells the
battle a far of, the thunder of the Captains and the shouting. A notable
and excellent description of this warlike creature: and yet for all this
excellency so described by the Spirit of God, in another place, Psalm. 33.17.
the Psalmist says, A Horse is a vain thing for safety, neither shall he
deliver any by his great strength; Psalm 20.7.
Some trust in Chariots and some in Horses: but we will remember the name of
the Lord our God. Pro. 21.31.
So in another place, The Horse is prepared against the day of battle, but
victory is of the Lord.

How often have you in the Psalms, that proud warlike creature disparaged,
because naturally men are more bewitched with that, then with any other
creature. If they have store of Horses, then they think they are strong.
Therefore, God forbids the King to multiply Horses to himself: Deuteronomy. 17.16
nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end he should multiply
Horses, etc. Because God is the strength of his Church, when there is no
multitude of Horses: You see it is a bewitching creature, and yet a vain
help, a place like this we have, Isa. 2.7. complaining there of the naughty
people which were among the Jews, at that time as bad as the Israelites. Says
he, Isa. 2 7.
Their land also is full of silver and gold; neither is there any end of their
treasures, their land is also full of Horses, neither is there any end of their
Chariots. What is there a fault in that? No. Luther says, good works are
good, but the confidence in them is damnable. So gold and silver, Horses and
Chariots are good creatures of God. But this was their sin, confidence in these
things: there is no end of their treasures; if they had treasure enough, they
should do well enough. Their land also was full of Horses. Was this a fault?
No, but their confidence in them: they thought they were a wise people to have
such furniture and provision of munition for war: but God was their King, and
the chief governor of his people, and for them to heap up these things, to
trust over much in them, it was a matter of complaint, Their land also is full
of Idols.

Thus you see there is no confidence to be put neither in the one nor the
other: That there is no confidence to be put, either in Home, or foreign
forces.
neither in the association of foreign friends, who will prove deceitful;
reeds of Egypt, that not only deceive, but the splinters thereof fly about,
and may run up into the hand; such are Idolaters and false friends, deceitful
and hurtful. Nor in Home, there is no trust, in Horses, munition or such like.
What does this implie, that to war and have provision in that kind is
unlawful, and unnecessary, because he finds fault here with Horses and the
like? No, take heed of that, Luke 3.14.
for John Baptist if the soldiers profession had been unlawful, he would
have bid them cast away their weapons, but he bids them, Do violence to no
man, neither accuse any falsely, etc. And God would never style himself, Isa.
42.13.
The Lord of Hosts, and a man of war, Psalm. 18.34.
and he that teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight, unless it
were good in the season: therefore war is lawful, seeing in the way to
Heaven we live in the midst of enemies.

That war is lawful.
Therefore it is but an Anabaptisticall fancy, to judge war to be unlawful:
No, no, it is clean another thing which the Holy Ghost aims at: to beat
back carnal confidence. For it is an equal fault, to multiply helps, and
to neglect them: either of both are fatal many times, to multiply Horses
trusting in them, or to spoil Horses and other helps vainly, so to weaken a
Kingdom. Therefore there is a middle way for all outward things, a fit care to
serve Gods providence, and when we have done trust in God without tempting of
him. For to neglect these helps is to tempt him; and to trust in them (when we
have them) is to commit Idolatry with them. Beware of both these extremes, for
God will have his providence served in the use of lawful means: when there is
this great care in a Christian Commonwealth; there is a promise of good
success: because God is with us: otherwise what is all, if he be our enemy?
So we see the second point made good, That these outward things of themselves
cannot help. Therefore comes this in the third place,

That when God alters and changes and moldeth a new the heart of a man to
Repentance, he alters his confidence in the creature.

A Christian state will not trust in Ashur, nor in Horses, it is true both of
state and persons. The Reason will follow after in the end of the verse: For in
thee the Fatherless finds mercy. Moses eye put in him, Heb. 11 27.
a new eye to see him that is invisible, to see God in his greatness, and
other things in their right estimate as vain things. What is Repentance, but a
change of the mind, when a man comes to be wise and judicious, as indeed
repentant men are the only wise men. Then a man has an esteem of God to be
Elshady, All-sufficient, and all other things to be as they are uncertain;
that is, they are so to day, as that they may be otherwise to morrow: for that
is the nature of the creatures, they are in Potentia, in a possibility to be
other things then they are. God is always, I am, always the same, there is not so
much as a shadow of changing in him. Wherefore when the soul has attained
unto this spiritual eyesight and wisdom; if it be a sinful association
with Egypt or Ashur, with this Idolater or that, he will not meddle; and as
for other helps, he will not use them further then as subordinate means. When
a man is converted, he has not a double, not a divided heart; to trust partly
to God, and partly to the creature: If God fail him he has Ashur and horses
enough, and association with all round about, but a Christian he will use all
helps as they may stand with the favor of God, and are subordinate under him.
Now for Trial.



Ashur, and with Horses: but all the mercinary soldiers in the world, and all
the Horses at home and abroad, what can they do when God is angry? Now, when
there is such confidence in these things as for to outdare God, then there is
too much trust in them; that trust will end in confusion, if it be not repented
of; for that lifts up the heart in the creature, and as the Heathen man
observes, God delights to make great little, and little great. It is his daily
work to cast down mountains, and exalt the valleys. Those that are great,
and boast in their greatness, as if they would command Heaven and Earth, God
delights to make their greatness little, and at length nothing, and to raise
up the day of small things. Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12.9.
if I rejoice, it shall be in my infirmities, in nothing else; for God
delights to show strength in weakness.

to Assyria, and Egypt, those false supports and sandy foundations, they were
careless of God, and therefore must trust in somewhat else. Wherefore if we
see a man secure and careless, certainly he trusts too much to uncertain
riches, to Ashur, to Egypt, to friends, or to outward helps, his security
bewraies that. If a man trust God in the use of the means, his care will be to
keep God his friend by Repentance and daily exercises of Religion, by making
conscience of his duty. But if he trust the means and not God, he will be
careless and weak in good duties, dull and slow, and (out of the Atheism of
his heart) cry Tush, if God do not help me, I shall have help from friends
abroad, and be supported with this and that at home, Horses and the like, all
shall be well.

Let us therefore enter into our own souls, Ashur shall not save us, we will
not ride upon Horses; he speaks comparatively, as trusted in. Therefore let us
take heed of that boasting vainglorious disposition arising from the supply
of the creature: Says God, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, Ier.
9.23.
neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in
his riches: but let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands
and knows this, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness,
judgment and righteousness in the earth, etc. Let a man glory that he knows
God in Christ to be his God in the Covenant of grace: that he has the God of
all strength, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords to be his: who has all other
things at his command; who is independent, and All-sufficient. If a man will
boast, let him go out of himself to God, and plant himself there, and for
other things take heed the heart be not lift up with them.

1. That boasting is Idolatry.
Consider, what kind of thing boasting is, it is Idolatry, for it sets the
creature in the place and room of God. And it is also spiritual Adultery, 2.
Adultery. Iam. 4.4.
whereby we fix our affections upon the creature which should be placed on
God, as it is in James, Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not t^^ the
friendship of the world, is enmity with God? 3. Drunkenness. Habak. 2.4, 5.
(...) Habakuk calls it Drunkenness, for it makes the soul drunk with
sottishness and conceitednesse, so as a man (in this case) is never sober, 4.
Boasting causes blindness.
until God strip him of all. And then again, it puts out the eye of the
soul, it is a kind of white that marres the sight: when a man looks to
Ashur, Horses, and to outward strength, where is God all this while? these are
as so many clouds that they cannot see God, but altogether pore upon the
creature: he sees so much greatness there, that God seems nothing. But when a
man sees God in his Greatness and Almightinesse, Job 42.6.
then the creature is nothing: but until this be, there is a mist and
blindness in the eye of the soul.

And when we have seen our guiltiness this way (as who of us in this case may
not be confounded and ashamed of relying too much on outward helps?) then let
us labor to take off our souls from these outward things, whether it be
strength abroad or at home. Which that we may do, we must labor for that
Obedience which our Savior Christ exhorts us unto in self-denial, not to
trust to our own devises, Mat. 16.24.
policy, or strength; wit, will, or conceits that this or that may help us,
nor any thing: make it general. For when Conversion is wrought, and the heart
is turned to God, it turns from the creature, only using it as subordinate to
God. We see usually, men that exalt themselves in confidence either of strength
of wit, or whatsoever, they are successelesse in their issue: for God delights
to confound them, and go beyond their wit: as we have it, Isay 30. They
thought to go beyond God with their policy, they would have help out of
Egypt, this and that way. O says the Prophet: but for all this, God is wise
to see through all your devises: secretly hereby touching them to the quick, as
sottish persons who thought by their shallow brains to go beyond God; you
think Religious courses, and the obedience God prescribes to you to be idle
needless courses, but notwithstanding God is wise, he will go beyond you and
catch you in your own craft. Isa. 30.3.
Therefore, the strength of Pharaoh shall be your shame, and the trust in the
shadow of Egypt your confusion. Thus God loves to scatter Babels Fabriques and
Holds that are erected in confidence of humane strength against him; Genesis 11.8.
he delights to catch the wise in their own craft; to beat all down, lay all
high imaginations and things flat before him; that no flesh may glory in his
sight. There is to this purpose a notable place in Isay. Behold all ye that
kindle a fire, Isa. 55.11.
that compass your selves about with sparks: (for they kindled a fire and had
a light of their own, and would not borrow light from God:) Walk in the light
of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled, but what is the
conclusion of all? This shall ye have of mine hand, I dare assure you of this,
says the Prophet: You shall lie down in sorrow: those that walk by the light
and spark of their own fire; this they shall have at Gods hands; they shall
lie down in sorrow.

Danger of carnal confidence
Let us therefore take heed of carnal confidence. You have a number who love to
sleep in a whole skin, and will be sure to take the safest courses (as they
think) not consulting with God, but with flesh and blood. It might be
instanced in stories of former times how God has crossed Emperors and great
men in this kind, were it not too tedious. But for present instance, you have
many who will be of no settled Religion, O they cannot tell, there may be a
change, therefore they will be sure to offend neither part: this is their
policy, and if they be in place, they will reform nothing; O I shall lay my
self open to advantages, and stir up enemies against me: and so they will
not trust God, but have carnal devices, to turn off all duty whatsoever. It
is an ordinary speech, but very true: Policy overthrowes Policy. It is true
of carnal Policy, when a man goes by carnal rules to be governed by Gods
enemy, and his own; with his own wit and understanding, which leads him to
outward things: this kind of Policy overthrowes all policy and outward
government at length. Those that walk Religiously and by Rule, they walk most
confidently and securely as the issue will show; Therefore, consider that (set
God aside) all is but vanity, And that

First, In what respects the creature is so empty.
in regard they do not yield that which we expect they should yield: there is
a falsehood in the things, 1. They deceive our expectation.
they promise this and that in shows, but when we possess them, they yield it
not; as they have no strength in deed, so they deceive. Then also, There is a
mutability in them; 2. They are mutable.
for there is nothing in the world but changes, there is a vanity of corruption
in them; all things at last come to an end, save God, 3. They are snares and
battes unto us.
who is unchangeable. Then again besides the intrinsecall vanity in all
outward things, and whatsoever carnal reason leads unto, They are snares and
baits unto us, to draw us away from God, by reason of the vanity of our
nature, vainer then the things themselves: therefore take heed of confidence in
any thing, or else this will be the issue, we shall be worse then the things
we trust, Vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1.1.
all things are vanity, Psalm. 62.9.
and man himself is lighter then vanity says the Psalmist, he that trusts to
vanity is worse then vanity, a man cannot stare non stante, stand on a thing
that cannot stand it self; a man cannot stand on a thing that is mutable and
changeable, if he does, he is vain with the thing. Even as a picture drawn
upon ice, as the ice dissolves, so the picture vanishes away. So it is with
all confidence in the creature whatsoever, it is like a picture upon ice, which
vanishes with the things themselves. He that stands upon a slippery thing
slips with the thing he stands on. If there were no Word of God against it,
yet this much may be sufficient out of the Principles of Reason to show the
folly of trusting to Ashur and Horses and the like.

Let this be the end of all then touching this carnal confidence, to beware
that we do not fasten our affections too much upon any earthly thing, at home,
or abroad; within or without our selves: for, God will destroy the wisdom of
the wise; 1 Cor. 1.19.
let us take heed therefore of all false confidence whatsoever. Let us use all
outward helps, yet so as to rely upon God for his blessing in the use of all.
And when they all fail; be of Iehoshaphats mind, 2 Chronicles. 20.12
Lord, we know not what to do, the creature fails us, our helps fail us,
but our eyes are upon thee. So when all outward Ashurs and Horses and helps
fail, despair not; for the less help there is in the creature, the more
there is in God. As Gideon with his Army, Judge. 7.2.
when he thought to carry it away with multitude: God told him there were too
many of them to get the victory by, least Israel should vaunt themselves of
their number: and so lessened the army to three hundred. So it is not the
means, but the blessing on the means which helps us. If we be never so low,
despair not; let us make God ours, who is All-sufficient and Almighty, and
then if we were brought a hundred times lower then we are, God will help and
raise us. Those who labor not to have God the Lord of Hosts to go out with
their Armies, if they had all the Ashurs and Horses in the world all were in
vain. It was therefore a good resolution of Moses, says he to God, If thy
presence go not with us, Exodus 33.15,
carry us not hence, he would not go one step forward without God: so if we
cannot make God our friend to go out before us, in vain it is to go one step
forward. Let us therefore double our care in holy duties, renewing our Covenant
with God before the decree come out against us: the more religious, the more
secure we shall be. If we had all the creatures in the world to help us, what
are they but vanity and nothing, if God be our enemy. These things we know
well enough for notion, but let us labor to bring them home for use in these
dangerous times abroad. Let us begin where we should, that our work may be
especially in heaven. Let us reform our lives, being moderately careful, as
Christians should without tempting Gods providence, using rightly all civil
supports and helps seasonably and to the best advantage: for (as was said) the
carelessness herein for defense, may prove as dangerous and fatal to a state,
as the too much confidence and trust in them.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will
we say any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods, for in thee the
Fatherless finds mercy.


WE showed you heretofore at large, how the Spirit of God by the Prophet, does
here dictate a form of turning unto these Israelites, Take unto you words,
and then teach them what they should return back again: Thanks, So will we
render the Calves of our lips, wherein they show two things. 1. That they have
no great matters to render, Oxen or Sheep, etc. 2. They show what is most
pleasing unto God, The Calves of our lips; that is, thankesgiving from a broken
heart, which (as the Psalmist speaks) pleases God better then a bullock that
has horns and hoofes. But this is not enough, the Holy Ghost therefore does
prescribe them together with Prayer and Thankesgiving, Reformation, Ashur shall
not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the
works of our hands, ye are our gods, for in thee the fatherless finds
mercy. So that here you have Reformation joined with Prayer and Praise. Whence
we observed diverse things, That without Reformation our Prayers are
abominable: That in Repentance there must be Reformation of our special
sin, which here they do, Take this one thing more in the third place,

In Reformation, we must go not only to the outward delinquencies, but to the
spring of them, which is some breach of the first Table.

The Root of all sin whence.
The root of all sin is the deficiency of obedience to some command of the
first Table, when confidence is not pitched aright in God, or when it is
misapplyed, and misfastened to the creature: when the soul sets up somewhat
for a stay and prop unto it, which it should not do, this is a spiritual and
a subtle sin, and must be repented of, as here, Ashur shall not save us, etc.
It were good therefore for all those who seriously intend the work of
Repentance to take this course. If the gross fault be of the second Table;
take occasion of sorrow and mourning thence; but when you have begun there,
resolve and bring all to the breeding sin of all, which is, the fastening of
the soul falsely: when it is not well fastened and bottomed in the root. And
therefore it was well done by Luther, who in a Catechism of his brings in the
First Commandment into all the Commandments of the first and second Table.
Thou shall have no other gods but me, Therefore thou shall sanctify the
Sabbath; Honor thy Father and Mother, shall not take my Name in vain: shall
not Commit Adultery, shall not steal, etc. Because he that has no god but
that God in his heart, will be sure to sanctify the Sabbath; Honor his Father
and Mother, not Commit Adultery, nor steal. And whence come all the breaches
of the Second Table? Hence, that there is not the true fear and love of God in
our hearts, and it is just with God for their spiritual sins, to give them
up to carnal and gross sins. Therefore, though the Israelites here, had
many gross sins to repent of, yet they go to the spring head, the breeding
sin of all, false Confidence; this is to deal thoroughly, to go to the core.
Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses. From whence in the
third place, they descend to the next branch of their sin, Idolatry.

Neither will we say any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods.

All false confidence has two objects, for it is always either 1. Out of
Religion, or 2. In Religion.


For the first, all ill confidence and trust if it be out of Religion, it is in
the Creature, either 1. Out of us, or 2. In our selves.


Secondly, if it be in Religion, it is in a false god, as here, neither will
we say any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods. Observe hence in
the first place,

That men are naturally prone to Idolatry.
The story of the Bible and of all Ages shows how prone men are to Idolatry
and will worship, and what miseries ensued thereupon. Amongst other instances,
we see how presently after that breach in the Kingdom of David and Solomon,
by Ieroboams setting up of two Calves, how suddenly they fell to Idolatry, so
that after that there was not one good King amongst them all, until the nation
was destroyed. And so in the story of their Antiquities, see how prone they
were to Idolatry in the wilderness; Moses does but go up to the Mount, and
they fall to Idolatry; cause Aaron to make a Calfe, and dance round about it.
The thing is so palpable, that it need not be stood upon, That man's nature is
prone to Idolatry, which will not raise up it self to God, but fetch God to it
self, and conceive of him according to its false imaginations.

Now Idolatry is two ways committed in the false hollow and deceitful heart
of man: either 1. By attributing to the creature that which is proper to God
only; investing it with Gods Properties, or 2. By worshipping the true God in
a false manner.


So that in the first place, What Idolatry is.
Idolatry is to invest the creature with Gods properties. Go to the highest
creature, Christ's Humane nature; we have some bitter spirits (Lutherans they
call them) Protestants; who attribute to the humane nature of Christ, that
which only is proper to God, to be every where, and therefore to be in the
Sacrament. You have some come near them, both in their opinion and in their
bitterness. They will have a nescio quomodo, Christ is there though they know
not how; but this is to make Christ's humane nature a god; to make an Idol of
it. So prayers to Saints and Angels, this makes Idols of them, because it
invests them with properties to know our hearts, which he must know unto whom
we pray. And then, it gives unto them that which is proper to God, Worship,
and Prayer. But, we must call upon none, but whom we must believe in, and we
must believe in none but God. Therefore, worshipping of Saints or Angels is
Idolatry.

Secondly, Idolatry is to worship the true God in a false manner, to fix his
presence to that we should not fix it to, to annexe it to statues, Images,
Crucifixes, the picture of the Virgin Mary and the like. Not to run into the
common place of Idolatry, but to come home unto our selves. neither will we say
unto the works of our hands, ye are our gods?

Heathens were, and worse. The very Egyptians, they worshipped none for gods,
but those who were alive, as a Papist himself says, (though he were an
honest Papist) The Egyptians worshipped living creatures, but we are worse
then they, for we worship stocks and stones, and a piece of bread in the
Sacrament. And to this purpose, one of their Jesuits confesses this, and
yields the question for granted; That if there be not a Transubstantiation of
the bread turned into the body and blood of Christ, we are worse Idolaters
then these, and these nations: because we worship a piece of bread, which is a
dead thing. But we assume (according to the Scriptures, The Judgment of our
Church, of Antiquity, and of the Truth it self) the bread is not
Transubstantiated, at least it is a doubtful matter; for if it be not the
intention of the Priest it is not: see here, upon what hazard they put the
souls of people.

among the rest this is one, that they do not worship the image, but God or
Christ before the Image.

Popish shifts for worshipping of Images answered.
That the Fathers who wrote against the Heathens meet with this pretense, The
Pagans had this excuse, we worship not this statue of Jupiter, but Jupiter
himself. Thus they have no Allegation for themselves, but the Heathen had the
same, which the Ancient Fathers confuted. They are guilty of Idolatry in both
the forenamed kinds: For first, They worship things that they should not, as
appears by their Invocation of Saints, vows to them, their Temples, Altars and
the like full of their Images, giving them honor due unto God. And then They
worship the true God in a false manner before their Images, there is no kind
of Idolatry but they are grossly guilty of it. Whereof let this be the Use.

Thankefullnesse, that God has brought us into Goshen, into a Kingdom of
light, that we are borne in a time and place of knowledge of the true God,
wherein is the true worship of the true God. It is a matter that we cannot be
too thankful to God for. in that we are freed from Jesuits who go about to
poison the souls of Gods people, let us show our thankefullnesse for this, and
shun Idolatry of all sorts whatsoever.

Colloquintida in their pottage: so, there is death in the pot of Romish
Religion. 2 King. 4.40.
Therefore it were good to compel them to come in and serve the Lord their God:
as it is said, good Josiah compelled those in his time to serve the Lord; 2 Chronicles. 34.33
so it were good such courses were taken to reform and reclaim them. As Saint
Augustine said of himself in his time, being a Donatist; he altered his
judgment by force; in which case, it would be with them as with children, who
when they are young, must be forced to school; but afterward, they thank
them who forced them. So it is in Religion, though it cannot be forced, yet
such might afterward bless God for them who brought them to the means, who
instead of their blindness trained them up in more knowledge, by forcing them
to use the means; for which (when God should open their eyes) they might
bless God another day. But this point of gross Idolatry (so (largely handled
in books) is only touched by the way, that we may hate Idolatry the more:
which could not be left out, the words leading to say somewhat of it, seeing
how these Converts here hate it, and out of that hatred make this profession:
neither will we say any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods, etc.

But this is not all, we must know that there be other Idols then the Idols
which we make with our hands: besides these Religious Idols, there be Secular
Idols in the world, such as men set up to themselves in their own hearts.
Whatsoever takes up the heart most, which they attribute more to then to God,
that is their Idol, their god. A man's love, a man's fear is his god. If a man
fear greatness rather then God, that he had rather displease God then any
great person, they are his Idols for the time. Pro. 29.25.
The fear of man brings a snare, says the Wiseman, and those who to get the
favor of any in place, sacrifice therefore their Credit, Profession, Religion
and souls; it is gross Idolatry, dangerous to the party, and dangerous to
themselves. It was the ruin of Herod to have that applause given him, and
taken by him, Act. 12.22.
The voice of God and not of man. So for any to be blown up with flatterers
that lift them up above their due measure, it is an exceeding wrong to them,
prejudiceth their comfort, and will prove ill in the conclusion, indeed
treason against their souls.

So there is a baser sort of Idolaters, who sacrifice their credit and state,
whatsoever is good within them, their whole powers, to their base and filthy
pleasures. Thus man is degenerate since his fall, that he makes that his god,
which is meaner then himself. Man that was ordained for everlasting happiness
and Communion with God is now brought to place his happiness and contentment
in base pleasures. Whereas it is with the soul of man for good or ill, as it
applies it self to that which is greater or meaner then it self. If it apply
it self to confidence and affiance in God, then it is better, for it is the
happiness of the soul to have Communion with the spring of goodness, as
David speaks, It is good for me to draw near to God, Psalm. 73.28.
etc. when we suffer the soul to cleave in affiance to earthly things, it
grows in some measure to the nature of the things adhered to: when we love
the world and earthly things we are earthly. Till the Spirit of God touch the
soul (as the loadstone does the heavy iron drawing it up as it were) it will
cleave to the creature, to baser things then it self, and so makes the
creature an Idol, which is the common Idolatry of these times. Some make
Favor, as the ambitious person: some their Pleasures, as baser persons of
meaner condition: and some Riches, every man as their temper, and as their
temptations are.

Now it is not enough to be found in Religion one way in the maine, but we must
be sound every way, without any touch of Idolatry. In a special manner, the
Apostle calls the Covetous man an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5.
because he makes his riches his Castle, thinking to carry any thing with his
wealth, but his riches oftentimes prove his ruin, for whatsoever a man loves
more then God, God will make it his bane and ruin: at least be sure to take it
away, if God mean to save the party: Therefore, here they say; Ashur shall
not save us, we will not ride on Horses, neither will we say any more to the
work of our hands, ye are our gods.

For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy. Here he shows the Reason of their
rejecting of all false confidence in Ashur, in Horses, in Idols: because they
had planted their confidence in the true God. They said so when they had
smarted by Ashur, and by Idolatry: then Ashur shall not save us, etc. They knew
it by Rule before, but till God plagued them, as he did often by Ashur and by
Egypt, when he broke the reed that it did not only not up hold them, but run
into their hands, they made no such acknowledgement, hence observe,

Usually it is thus with man, he never Repents till sin be imbittered to
him.

He never alters his confidence, That sins ^^tternesse causes Repentance.
till his trusts be taken away; when God overthrowes the mold of his devises,
or brings them upon his own head, setting him to reap the fruit of his own
ways; imbittering sinful courses to him, then he returns. Instruction
without correction does for the most part little good. When Ashur had dealt
falsely with them, and Idolatry would do them no good, then they begin to
alter their judgment. What makes men after too much confidence in their wit,
when they have by their plots and devises gone beyond what they should do, and
wrapped and entangled themselves in a net of their own weaving (as we say)
alter their judgment? They are then become sick of their own devices, this
makes the change. For till then, the brain has a kind of net to wrap our
devices in. So many have nets in their brains, wherewith they entangle
themselves and others with their idle devices: which when they have done, and
so woven the webb of their own misery; then they begin to say, as the Heathen
says, when he was deceived. O fool am I, I was never a wise man. Then they
begin to say, I was a fool to trust such and such. I have tried such and such
policies and they have deceived me, I will now alter my course. And surely, men
of great parts are seldom converted, till God confound their plots, and lays
flat all their false confidence. When Ashur disappoints them, then Ashur shall
not save us, etc.

him to shame, rather then he should go on and thrive in an evil and carnal
course, and so to end his days. There is no evidence at all which can be given
of a Reprobate, because there may be final Repentance, Repentance at the last.
But this is one, and as fearful a sign as may be, to thrive and go on in an
evil course to the end. When God shall disappoint and bring a man to shame in
that he prided in, and built upon, It is a good sign; if thereupon we take
advantage to turn to God, and lay a better bottom and foundation, as we see
here, Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, etc.

For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy. As if he should say, we have that
supply of strength and comfort from thee, that Ashur, Horses and Idols cannot
give: Therefore we will alter our confidence, to fix and pitch it upon thee,
and trust thee, because, In thee the Fatherless finds mercy. We shall not
need to say, in thee will we trust; for, if God be apprehended thus, as one, in
whom the Fatherless finds mercy, affiance will follow. For, the object is
the attractive and lodestone of the soul, so that if a fit object be
presented unto it, Affiance, Confidence and Trust, will of it self follow.
Therefore the Spirit of God forbeares multiplication of words, and sets down
this: For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy: and does not say, in thee will
we trust, for that is implied; whosoever conceives that God is so gracious and
merciful to despicable miserable persons: such as are set down, in this one
particular, Fatherless: they cannot but trust in God, therefore, the one is
put for the other: For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy. Whence, from the
dependence of the words observe,

That it is not sufficient to disclaim affiance in the creature, but we must
pitch that affiance aright upon God.

We must not only take it off where it should not be placed, but set it where
it should be. Cease from evil, Isa. 1 16, 17. Isa. 2.22.
and learn to do well. Trust not in the creature. Cease from man (as the
Prophet says) whose breath is in his Nostrills; Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy ways to God, trust in him. The Heathen by the light of nature knew
this, It is much easier to see the vanity of the creature, then to know where
to pitch our confidence.
that for the Negative, there is no trusting in the creature, which is a vain
thing, they could speak wonderful wittily and to purpose of these things,
especially the Stoics. They could see the vanity of the creature: but for the
Positive part, where to place their confidence, that they were ignorant in. And
so, for the other part here; Neither will we say any more to the works of our
hands ye are our gods. Idolaters can see the vanity of false gods well enough.
In Italy you have thousands of the wittier and learneder sort who see the folly
and madness of their Religion. And among our selves, how many witty men can
disclaim against Popery, who yet in their lives and conversations are not the
better for it: because they think it enough to see the error that misleades
them, though they never pitch their confidence as they should do. It is not
enough therefore to rest in the Negative part. A Negative Christian is no
Christian, not to be an Idolater, not to be a Papist, no there must be somewhat
else, Mat. 3 10.
we must bring forth good fruit, or else we are for the fire, and are near to
cursing and burning. Heb. 6.8.
This is spoken the rather, because many think themselves well, when they can
disclaim against the errors of Popery, and that they are good Christians,
because they can argue well. O, such make Religion nothing but a matter of
opinion, of canvasing an argument, etc. But, it is another manner of matter:
Religion what.
A divine Power exercised upon the soul, whereby it is transformed into the
obedience of divine truth, and molded into it. So that there must be a
Positive, as well as a Negative Religion, a cleaving to God, as well as a
forsaking of Idols.

Again, in the severing of these Idols from God, we must know and observe
hence,

That there is no Communion between God and Idols.

Neither will we say any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods; for
in thee the Fatherless finds mercy. There must be a renouncing of false
worship, Religion, and confidence, before we can trust in God. Mat 6.24.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, says Christ. We cannot serve Christ and
Antichrist together, we may as well bring North and South, East and West
together, and mingle light and darkness, as mix two opposite Religions. You
see here, one of them is disclaimed, ere affiance be placed in the other.
Therefore the halters betwixt two Religions are here condemned. It was
excellent well said by Joshua. Josh. 24.19.
They had there some mixture of false worship, and thought therewith to serve
also Jehovah: no (says he) you cannot serve Jehovah. What is Ioshuahs meaning,
when he says they could not? not only that they had no power of themselves;
but you are a naughty false people, you think to jumble Gods worship, and that
of Heathens together: you cannot serve God thus. So a man may say to those who
look Rome-wards for worldly ends, and yet will be Protestants, you cannot
serve God, you cannot be sound Christians, halting thus betwixt both. These
are not compatible, they cannot stand together; you must disclaim the one, if
you will cleave to the other, we see the ground here: Neither will we say any
more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods; for, in thee the Fatherless
finds mercy.

Again, whereas upon disclaiming of false confidence in the creatures and
Idols, they name this as a ground, For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy;
observe,

In what measure and degree we apprehend God aright to be the All-sufficient
true God, in that measure we cast away all false confidence whatsoever. The
right apprehending of God, shakes off all false trust.


The more or less we conceive of God as we should do, so the more or less
we disclaim confidence in the creature. Those who in their affections of joy,
love, affiance and delight, are taken up too much with the creature (say what
they will) profess to all the world by their practice, that they know not God.
By the contrary, those who know and apprehend him in his greatness and
goodness, as he should be apprehended, in that proportion they withdraw
their affections from the creature and all things else. It is with the soul in
this case, as with a balance, Simile.
if the one skale be drawn down by a weight put in it, the other is lifted
up. So where God weighs down in the soul, all other things are light, and
where other things prevail, there God is set light. Ashur shall not save us;
for he can do us no good: nor Horses, because they are vain helps. How
attained they to this light esteem of Ashur and Horses? For in thee the
Fatherless finds mercy. That which is taken from the creature they find in
God. Why the world hates Christians escaped from them.
And this is the Reason why the world so malign good and sound Christians,
they think, when God gets, that they loose a feather (as we say) some of
their strength: surely so it is; for when a Christian turns to God and becomes
sound, he comes to have a mean esteem of that which formerly was great in his
sight; his judgment is otherwise, as we see here, Ashur, Horses, Idols, and
all they esteem nothing of them. Horses and the like are good, useful and
necessary to serve Gods providence in the use of means, not to trust in or
make coordinate with God. In the world especially great persons would be gods
in the hearts of people; therefore, when they see any make conscience of their
ways; they think they loose them; because now they will do nothing but what
may stand with the favor of God. Thus far from the Connection, Now to the
words themselves.

For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy.

Wherein we have set forth unto us for our consideration of Gods rich goodness
toward poor miserable sinners.

1. The Attribute of God, Mercy. 2. The fit Object thereof, The Fatherless.
Mercy is that sweet Attribute that makes us partake of all the rest.
Mercy is Gods sweetest Attribute, which sweetneth all his other Attributes;
for but for Mercy, whatsoever else is in God, were matter of terror to us. His
Justice would affright us: His Holiness likewise (considering our impurity)
would drive us from him: Luke 5.8.
Depart from me (says Peter to our Savior) for I am a sinful man; Isa. 6
5.
and when the Prophet Isay saw God in his excellency a little: Then he said,
woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, etc. His Power
is terrible, it would confound us, His Majesty astonish us. O, but Mercy
mitigates all, he that is great in Majesty is abounding in mercy; he that has
beams of Majesty has bowels of mercy. O, this draws, especially miserable
persons, In thee the Fatherless finds mercy. And now, in the Covenant of
Grace, this mercy sets all a work. For it is the mercy of God by which we
triumph now in the Covenant of Grace, in that mercy which stirred up his
wisdom to find out a way for mercy by satisfying his Justice: So that the
first mooving Attribute of God that set him a work about that great work of
our salvation, by Jesus Christ, in the Covenant of Grace, was mercy, his tender
mercy, his bowels of mercy: Therefore of all others, that Attribute is here
named; For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy.

Mercy in God supposes misery in the creature, either present or possible: for
there is 1. A Preventing and 2. A rescuing mercy.

A Preventing mercy, whereby the creature is freed from possible misery, that
it might fall into, as it is his mercy that we are not such sinners in that
degree as others are; and every man that has understanding is beholding to God
for their Preventing, as well as for their Rescuing mercy. We think God is
merciful only to those unto whom he forgives great sins: O, he is merciful
to thee that stands, thou might have fallen fowly else. Mercy supposes
misery either that we are in or may fall into. So that mercy in God may admit
of a threefold consideration.

1. It supposes Sin; so there is a Pardoning mercy for that. Or 2. Misery,
that is, a Delivering mercy. Or 3. Defect or want in the Creature, which is,
Supplying mercy.
Whersoever mercy is conversant, it is usually about one of these three, either
Sin, or Misery, or Defects and wants, that is, to Persons in misery: for
indeed the word is more general then Fatherless; Deserted persons, that are
forsaken of others, and have no strength of their own, they are here meant by
the Fatherless. Who have no means, wisdom, power or ability of their own,
but are deserted and forsaken of others, whence the chief truth that offers it
self to be considered of us is this,

That God is especially merciful to those Persons who stand most in need of
mercy.

Why God is so ready to show mercy to the Fatherless?
First, because these do relish mercy most, and give him the glory of it,
applying themselves most to his mercy, being beaten out of the creature: and
the more we have communion with God being driven out of the creature and other
comforts, the more he discovers himself to us: as the nearer we are to the
fire, the hotter it is, so the nearer we are to God, the more good and
gracious he every way shows himself unto us. Now what makes us near him,
but extremity of misery, whereby we are beaten from all other holds whatsoever.
Hos 5 15.
It is acknowledged to be his work, when he does it for these that are
deserted of all others, then he has the chief glory of it. This is one end
why God suffers his children to fall into extremity of great sorrows and
perplexities, to fall very low in depths of miseries (as the Scripture speaks)
Psalm. 131.1.
that he might discover a depth of his mercy, beyond the depth of their
misery, to show that there is a depth deeper then that depth, for their misery
is sin, O but the bowels of his compassions are infinite both in measure and
time: His mercy endures for ever. Psalm 136.


Again, God is jealous of their affiance and confidence, knowing that
naturally, unless we fall into some straites and weaning extremities, we shall
place our affiance upon the creature; therefore he deals thus with us. He
knows our sickness well enough, that we are desperately addicted to present
things, therefore to cure this sickness in us, he draws us by extremities
from the creature to himself, which when it fails we go to him. Help Lord,
why? Psalm. 60.11. Psalm. 12.1.
for vain is the help of man, it is time then to help. Help Lord, for the
godly are perished from the earth. It is time to help Lord, for if thou do
not, none will, whereby they come to have their confidence upon the rock,
which is worth all. Other men they run from creature to creature, from help to
help, as sick bodies do, to this and to that drug, and to this and that
potion, they seek to many things to beg comfort from; but a Christian has a
sure foundation that he may stay upon, In thee the fatherless finds mercy.

To come now to speak of the words as they lie in the whole, they carry
another instruction;

That God is very gracious and merciful to fatherless and distressed persons.

As we have it, Psalm. 10.18. That God will judge the fatherless and the
oppressed, that the man of the earth may no more oppress. So Psalm. 146.9. It
is said, The Lord preserves the strangers, he releeveth the fatherless and
widow, etc. And for the general we have it, Psalm. 145.14.
The Lord releeveth all that fall, and raises up all that be bowed down. God
he opens his ear to hear their cry, to judge the fatherless and the
oppressed, the like we have in Exodus. Exodus 23.9.
Also thou shall not oppress a stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger,
seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt, and Exodus 22.23. says he, Thou
shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child; if thou asslict them in any
wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry. These among
many, are direct places to show the truth of this, that God is merciful, not
only in general, but to those persons set down by a Synechdoche; a figure
where one is set down for all of the same kind. God is merciful to all
persons, in any kind of misery or distress whatsoever, 2 Cor. 7.6. Psul. 46.1.
Isa. 41.17. Isa. 59.16. Jsa. 63.5. Isa. 48.9.
as the Apostle speaks, God is he who comforted the abject person: the
forlorn, the castaway persons of the world, and he is a very present help in
trouble. So as when there are none to help, then he awaketh and rouseth up
himself to lay hold for us, His own arm brings salvation for his own sake.
So when there is misery and none to help, God will find cause and ground from
his own bowels to show mercy, to take pity and compassion upon his poor
Church and Children, which should teach us.

To take notice of this most excellent Attribute of God, and to make use of it
upon all occasions, at our most need, then to present to our souls God thus
described and set out by his own Spirit, to be He that comfort the Abject,
and shows mercy to the fatherless and oppressed: this we should make use of
for the Church in general, and for every one of our selves in particular. The
Church has been a long time like a forlorn widow as it were; God has
promised that he will have a care of the widow and the fatherless, and so he
will of his poor Church. We see in the parable, Luk 18.5.
the widow with her importunity prevailed with an unrighteous Judge: the
Church now being like a widow, what is wanting but a spirit of supplication
and Prayer, which spirit if the Church had to wrestle with God and lay hold
upon him as Iaakob did, Hos. 12.4. Isa. 62.7.
and not suffer God to rest till he had mercy on his poor Church: Certainly
it would be better with it then it is, for God comfort the widow, if one,
what will he do for the whole Spouse which has so long been a despecable and
forlorn widow. And for the time to come, It ought to minister matter of
comfort for the Church, certainly, God that is merciful to the Fatherless,
he will be merciful to the poor Church. We see in the Revelation, though the
woeman was persecuted by the Dragon, Rev. 12.14.
yet there were given two wings of a great Eagle to her that she might fly
unto the wilderness, where she had a place provided of God. It alludes to the
story of the Israelites when they came out of Egypt, God provided for them in
the wilderness, they had Manna from Heaven, and water out of the rock, and
till they came to Canaan, God provided every way for them in a mavelous
manner. So God will be sure to provide for his in the wilderness of this
world, he will have a harbor still for the Church, and a hiding place from the
stormy tempests of her adversaries. Isa. 4.5, 6.
Therefore let us not despair, but stir up a spirit of Prayer for the
Church: that he who shows mercy to the fatherless, and commands mercy to be
showed to the widow; that he would show that himself, which he requires of
us. And why may not we hope and trust for it? The Church in this world is as it
were a fatherless person, a Pupil, an Orphan, a Sheep in the midst of
wolves, as Daniell in the lions den, as a ship tossed in the waves, as a lilly
among thorns, it is environed with enemies, and of it self, (like the poor
sheep) is shiftlesse. What is the Church but a company of weak persons? not
so witty for the world as worldly wise men are, nor so strong in the arm of
flesh, nor so defenced? but a company of persons who have a hidden dependence
upon God, we know not how, and hang as it were by a thread: as the Church in
this land, and abroad in other places. The true Church is maintained we know
not how: God keeps up Religion, the Church and all, because he is merciful to
the Fatherless, who have no shifting wits as the worldly Achitophels have. God
is wise for them that are not wise for themselves, and powerful for them, that
have little strength of their own. Therefore, let us not be discouraged though
we be weak creatures, a little flock, like a company of sheep, yet
notwithstanding we have a strong Sheapheard. Psalm. 23.1. Isa. 5.1.7.
The Church is like a vine, a poor despicable withered, crooked, weak plant,
which winds about, and must be supported or else it sinkes to the ground, yet
it is a fruitful plant. So the the Church of God, a number of weak Christians
professing Religion, they want many helps, yet God supports them, and has
ordained this and that haven for them: as this Magistrate, and that Person, God
has one support or other for them. While they are fruitful and true Vines,
God will have a care of them, Isa. 54.11.
though they be never so weak and despised in the eye of the world.

to make God our All Sufficiency in all estates whatsoever, and not to go one
hairs breadth from a good conscience for fear of after claps. I may be cast
into prison, I may loose my goods. What of all this? is not God All-sufficient?
and is not he especially seen in comforting of those who stand in most need of
comfort, who want other helps? Isa. 41.17.
and will he be indebted to any man who stands out in a good quarrel for his
cause? will he not give needful supply, if not in this world, yet in a better
of all comforts whatsoever? It is a good supply, when the loss is in outward
things, Isa. 60.17.
and the supply in inward peace, grace and strength; it is a happy loss that
is lost to the advantage. There was never any man yet from the beginning of the
world, Isa. 64.5.
who lost by cleaving to Religion and good causes, God ever made it up one way
or other. Therefore this is a ground of courage, to cast our selves upon doing
good when God offers the occasion, relying upon God as Hester did; If I perish
I perish, she meant, Est. 4.16.
If I perish, I shall not perish; such have a better condition in the love and
favor of God then they had before, or should have had, if they had not
perished. It is the way not to perish, so to perish: it is as clear and true
as the Sunshine: but we want faith to believe it.

Lactantius, Because God would have men stand out and die in a good cause
willingly; therefore he has promised in a special manner to be a Father to
the Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow. Are we the chief Fathers of our
children? No, we are but under God to bring those who are his children into the
world, we are but instruments, God is the chief Father, best and last Father,
Isa. 9.6.
The Everlasting Father; who takes upon him to be a Father to the Fatherless,
whom he charge all not to heart. Experience shows, how he blesses the
posterity of the righteous, who have stood in defense of the truth. Therefore,
let us make no pretenses either for baseness, dejection of spirit, or
covetousness to keep us from well-doing, for God will reward all.



1 Cor. 7.29.
Let those who are married be as if they were not married, meaning in regard of
this scraping of wealth together by unlawful means of covetousness, or in
regard of readiness to do works of mercy. What does God appoint one
Ordinance of marriage to take a man of all good duties? No, notwithstanding
this we must do fitting works of mercy; God will be the Father of the
Fatherless. Many use oppression, and go to Hell themselves, to make their
children rich. Who commands us to make our children in show a while happy here,
to make our souls and bodies miserable for ever. There is a moderate care (as
the Apostle speaks) so that he who cares not for his own is worse then an
infidel; 1 Timothy 4.8.
but we must not make this pretense to excuse injurious and extortive courses:
But let God alone; he will do all things well, trust him. Or, if any thing
should befall us otherwise then well; what if it do? God is the God of the
Fatherless, whatsoever he takes away he supplies it better another way. For
whence have the creatures that infusion to help? Is it not from God? and when
the creature is taken away, is not God where he was?

Coloss. 3.12.
Put on therefore, as the Elect of God (holy and Beloved) bowels of mercies,
etc. as if he should say, as you would prove your selves to be Elect, members
of Christ and children of God, so show your likeness in this particular, The
bowels of mercy and compassion. This has ever been, and yet is at all times a
character of Gods children, and shall be to the end of the world. It is a sig^^
such a one has found bowels of mercy, that is ready upon all occasions to
power forth those bowels of compassion upon others: as hard-heartednesse this
way shows a disposition which yet has not rightly tasted of mercy. As we say
in another case, those that are appeased in their consciences, in the sense of
the forgiveness of sins, they are peaceable to others, because they feel
peace. So here, those that feel mercy, will be merciful; those that have
felt love, will be loving to others. Pro 12.10.
A good man is merciful to his beast, but the mercies of the wicked are
cruel. Those therefore that are hard-hearted and unmercifull, hardening
themselves against the complaints of the miserable: there is (for the present)
no comfort for them, that the Spirit of God has wrought any change in their
hearts, for then it would stamp the image of God upon them, they would be
merciful to the fatherless, widow, and distressed persons. What shall we
think then of a generation of men, who by griping usury and the like courses
have made many widows miserable? Let such profess what they will, whilst
they are thus hard-hearted, they have not the bowels of Christ. God is so
merciful, that you see (as the Jews call them) he has hedges of the
commandments, that is, he has some remote commands which are not of the
maine, and all to hedge from cruelty: as, Thou shall not kill the Dam upon the
west. Exodus 23.19.
Thou shall not sees a kid in his mothers milk. What tends this too? nothing
but to show the mercy and bowels of God, and that he would have us to abstain
from cruelty. He that would not have us Murder; would have us keep aloof of,
and not be merciless to the very dumb creatures, birds and beasts: therefore,
let us labor to express the image of our heavenly Father in this.

the Father of the Fatherless and of the Widow. Therefore, for shame, for
shame, learn as to live, so to die by faith: and as to die by faith in other
things, so to die in this faith, that God as he will receive thy soul, so he
will receive the care of thy posterity. Can thou with affiance yield up thy
soul unto God, and will thou not with the same confidence yield thy posterity.
Thou art an Hypocrite if this distract and vex thee, when yet thou pretendest
to die in the faith of Christ. Can thou yield thy soul, and yet art grieved
for thy posterity? no, leave it to God: he is All-sufficient, Psalm. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof. We need not fear to put
our portion in his hands, he is rich enough, The earth and all is his.
Therefore, when we are in any extreamitie whatsoever, rely on this mercy of so
rich and powerful a God, improove it, for it is our portion, especially in a
distressed condition. Were it not for Faith wrought by the blessed Spirit of
God, he would loose the glory of this Attribute of mercy. Now Faith is a wise
power of the soul, that sees in God what is fit for it, singling out in God
what is fit for the present occasion of distress. Is a man in any extremity of
misery, let him look to mercy. Is a man oppressed, let him look to mercy to
be revenged of his enemies: is a man in any perplexity, let him look to mercy,
joined with wisdom, which is able to deliver him. Religion is nothing else
but an application of the soul to God: and a fetching out of him somewhat (as
he has discovered himself in the Covenant) fit for all our exigents; as there
is somewhat in God, and in the Promises, for all estates of the soul. Faith
therefore is witty to look to that in God which is fit for its turn. Satan's
policy in our extremity, how to retort it.
Let us therefore take heed of Satan's policy herein: who in our extremity
uses this as a weapon to shake our Faith. Tush (as it is in the Psalm) God
has forsaken and forgotten him. Has he so? nay, because I am in extremity and
deferted above others, rather God now regards me more then before, because,
Heb. 12.6.
he scourges every son whom he receives. So retort Satan's fiery darts
back again. For indeed that is the time wherein God exalts and shows himself
most glorious and triumphant in mercy, where misery is greatest. Where sin
abounds, Romans 5.20.
there grace abounds much more, so where misery abounds, mercy superabounds
much more. Therefore let us be as wise for our souls, as Satan can be
malicious against them, what he uses for a weapon to wound the soul, use the
same as a weapon against him.

To end all, let Faith in Gods mercy answer this his description; and let it be
a description ingrafted into us at such a time. Does God care for the
fatherless, and mean persons who are cast down and afflicted? why then, I
will trust that God who does so, being in this case my self. If he will help in
Extremity, trust him in Extremity: Habak. 3.17.
If he will help in distress, trust him in distress: if he will help when
all forsake, trust him when we are forsaken of all. What if a stream be taken
away? yet none can take away God from thee: what if a beam be taken away? thou
have the Sun it self: what if a particular comfort be taken away, so long as
God, who comfort the abject, and is merciful to the distressed, Fatherless
and Widows, continues with thee, thou needs not fear. A man cannot want
comfort and mercy, so long as the Father of mercies is in covenant with him. If
he sin, he has Pardoning mercy for him; if weak, he has Strengthening
mercy; if in darkness, he has Quickening mercy; if we be dull, dead, and in
danger, there is Rescuing mercy, and if subject to dangers we may fall in,
Psalm. 32.10.
there is for that, Preventing mercy. Therefore there is mercy ready to
compass Gods children about in all conditions, when they are environed with
dangers, yet God is nearer to guard their souls, then the danger is to hurt
them.

Therefore let us take the counsel of the blessed Apostle, Phil. 4.6, 7.
Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and supplication, with
thankesgi-let your requests be known to God: and what then, will God grant
that I pray for? perhaps he will not. But yet, The Peace of God which passes
all understanding, shall guard your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. As
if he should say, in nothing be overcarefull, let your care be when ye have
used the means, to depend upon God for support in the event and issue of all.
If God deny you what you pray for, he will grant you that which is better: he
will set up an excellent inward peace there, whereby he will stablish the soul
in assurance of his love, pardon of sins and reconciliation: whereby their
souls shall be guarded, and their hearts and minds preserved in Christ: so
they become impregnable in all miseries whatsoever, when they have the Peace of
God which passes all understanding to guard them within. Therefore, let us not
betray and loose our comforts, for want of making use of them; or for fear
some should call us Hypocrites: and on the other side, let us not flatter our
selves in an evil course: but make the conscience good, which will bear us
out in all miseries, dangers, and difficulties whatsoever. Nothing makes
losses, crosses, banishment, imprisonment, and death so terrible and out of
measure dreadful unto us, but the inward guilt and sting in the inside, Gen
42.21.
the tumults of conscience. Clear this well once, make all whole within, let
conscience be right and straight; let it have its just use and measure of truth
and uprightness; and go thy way in peace, I warrant thee, thou shall hold up
thy head, and wind thy self out of all dangers well enough: nothing shall
daunt or appale thy courage: for says Solomon, Pro. 28.1.
The Righteous is bold as a Lion; what can, what should he fear, who is heir
of all things, whose all things are, Revel. 21.7.
and who is reconciled to God in Christ, Heb. 1.14.
having all the Angels and Creatures for his servants: for whose sake, Romans
8.28.
all things must needs work together for good.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
THE FIFTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.4. J will heal their backesliding, J will love them freely, for mine
Anger is turned away from him.


THE superabounding mercies and mavelous loving kindnesses of a gracious and
loving God to wretched and miserable sinners (as we have heard) is the
substance and sum of this short sweet Chapter; wherein their ignorance is
taught, their bashfullnesse is encouraged, their deadness is quickened, their
untowardnesse is pardoned, their wounds are cured, all their objections and
petitions answered: so as a large and open passage is made unto them and all
other miserable penitent sinners for access unto the throne of grace. If they
want words, they are taught what to say; if discouraged for sins past, they
are encouraged that sin may be taken away; yea all iniquity may be taken
away; Take away all iniquity; if their unworthiness hinder them, they are
taught for this, That God is gracious: Receive us graciously; if their bypast
unthankfullnesse be any bar of hinderance unto them; they are taught to
promise thankfulness: So will we render the Calves of our lips. And that
their Repentance may appear to be sound and unfeigned, they are brought in,
making profession of their detestation of their bosom sins of false confidence
and Idolatry: Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses: neither
will we say any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods. And not only
do they reject their false confidence: to cease from evil, but they do good,
and pitch their affiance where it should be: For, in thee the Fatherless
finds mercy.

None must therefore be discouraged or run away from God, for what they have
been; for there may be a returning, God may have a time for them, who in his
wise dispensation does bring his children to distress, that their delivery may
be so much the more admired by themselves and others, to his glory and their
good. He knows us better then we our selves, how prone we are to lean upon
the creature, therefore he is feign to take from us all our props and supports;
whereupon we are forced to rely upon him. If we could do this of our selves,
it were an excellent work and an undoubted evidence of the child of God, that
has a weaned soul in the midst of outward supports, to enjoy them, as if he
possessed them not, not to be puffed up with present greatness, not to swell
with riches, nor be high minded: to consider of things to be as they are, weak
things, (subordinate to God) which can help no further, then as he blesses
them. But to come to the words now read.

I will heal their backesliding and love them freely, etc.

After that the Church had showed her Repentance and truth of returning to God:
now in these words and the other verses unto the end of the chapter, (saving
the last verse, which is a kind of acclamation issuing from all the rest of the
foregoing verses, Who is wise and he shall understand these things, etc.) is
set down an answer unto that prayer, Repentance and reformation which the
Church made, all the branches of which their former suit, the Lord does
punctually answer. For, they had formerly prayed, Take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously, do good unto us: unto which he answers here,

I will heal their backesliding, etc.

Which is thus much, I will pardon their iniquities, I will accept graciously
of them, I will love them freely, and so of the rest, as will appear
afterward, and in sum, God answers all those desires which formerly he had
stirred up in his people. Whence ere we come to the particulars, observe in
general.

Where God does give a spirit of prayer he will answer.

It needs no proof, the point is so clear and experimental, all the saints
can say this much from their experience of Gods gracious dealing with them: and
the Scriptures are full of such instances and promises, which we all know. To
name a place or two for all the rest. Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm.
50.15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. So in another place, And it
shall come to pass that before they call I will answer, Isa. 65.24.
and whilst they speak I will hear. It has been made good to Persons, as
Daniel, Elias, Solomon, Iaakob and others, and it has been, and is made good
unto all ages of the Church from time to time, and shall be unto the end of the
world. And therefore the Prophet sets down this as a conclusion undeniable
from the premises, Psalm. 65.2.
O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come, whence he draws
this excellent consolation. Iniquities prevail against me; as for our
transgressions, thou shall purge them away.

us. For, he dictates this Prayer unto them: Take with you words, etc. and say
unto the Lord, take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. So that,
where God stirs up holy desires by his Spirit, he will answer exactly, there
shall not a sigh be lost. Likewise (says the Apostle) the Spirit also helps
our infirmities: Romans 8.26.
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self
makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. Therefore
there cannot a groan be lost, nor a darting of a sigh, whatsoever is
spiritual must be effectual, though it cannot be vented in words. That God
has an ear in man's heart.
For God has an ear not only near a man's tongue to know what he says, but
also in a man's heart, to know what he desires, or would have. As the observing
careful tender mother many times knows what the child would have though it
cannot speak: so God he knows the desires, sighs, and groans of the heart
when we cannot speak. For, sometimes there may be such a confusion upon the
soul, by reason of diverse disturbances, that it cannot express nor vent it
self in words, therefore the Spirit vents it self then in sighs and groans
which are heard and accepted: because they are the desires of his own Spirit.
This much the Prophet David excellently shows. Psalm. 10.17.
Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart,
thou will cause thine ear to hear. God he first prepares the heart to pray,
then his ear to hear their prayers and desires. If this will not encourage us
to be much in suit to God, and put up our petitions to him, A strong motive to
draw us before God in Prayer.
to labor for a spirit of prayer; I know not what will prevail: when we know
that no petition shall be turned back again unanswered. When we are to deal
with Princes upon earth, they oftentimes regard neither the persons nor their
petitions, but turn their backs upon both. O! but a Christian has the care
of God and Heaven open unto him: such credit in Heaven, that his desires and
groans are respected and heard. And undoubtedly a man may know that he shall
be heard, when he has a spirit of prayer, in one kind or other, though not in
the particulars, or kinds we ask; hear he will for our good. God will not
loose the incense of his own Spirit, of a spirit of prayer which he stirs up,
it is so precious: Therefore let us labor to have a spirit of prayer, which
God regards so much: Seeing for a certain, wheresoever he gives a spirit of
prayer, he means to give that we pray for, but according to his heavenly
wisdom, as here his answer is,

I will heal their Backesliding, I will love them freely, etc.

God answers them exactly unto all they praid for, beginning first with the
ground of all our comfort, forgiveness of sins, According to their petition,
Take away all iniquity: he answers, I will heal their backesliding, or their
rebellion. Backesliding is an aggravation of sin: every sin is not a
rebellion, Apostasy, or backsliding, for their be also sins of infirmities,
we usually rank sins thus, in 1. Sins of Ignorance. 2. Sins of
Infirmity. 3. Sins against knowledge, with a higher hand. And 4. The Sins
against the Holy Ghost.


Now this is more then to cure sins of Ignorance, and of Infirmity, when he
says, I will heal their backesliding.

(Take away all iniquity.)

Jeroboam, that made the rent, the ten tribes grew worse and worse continually,
so that they had been utterly extinguished; but that God, was wondrous
gracious to send them Prophets, to preserve many that they should not bow the
knee to Baall; being merciful to them, to bear with their backesliding so
long: for besides their calves, they had false gods, they did not only worship
the true God in a false manner by the calves, but they had Baals also. So that
we see God when he will comfort, will comfort to purpose, and take away all
objections that the soul can make; a guilty soul being full of objections; Oh
my sins are many, great, rebellions, and Apostacies: But, be they what they
will, Gods mercy in Christ is greater and more. I will heal their
backesliding, or their rebellion, God is above conscience, let Satan terrify
the conscience as he will, and let conscience speak the worst it can against
it self, yet God is greater. Therefore let the sin be what it will, God will
pardon all manner of sins; as they pray to pardon all, so he will take away
all iniquity, heal their backesliding, but to come nearer the words.

I will heal, etc. The healing meant here, is especially in the pardon of
their sins, answerable to their desires in justification. And there is a
healing also in sanctification by the Spirit: when God takes away the venom
from the wound, then God cures in sanctification; both are meant; but
especially the first. In a wound we know there is, 1. The malignity and venom
of it, and then, 2. The wound it self so festered and rankled.


Now pardoning grace in justification, takes away the anguish and malice of the
wound, so that it cease to be so malignant and deadly as to kill, or infect.
And then sanctification purges and cleanses the wound, and heales it up. Now
God through Christ does both. The blood of Christ does heal the guilt of
sin, which is the anger and malignity of it. And by the Spirit of Christ he
heales the wound it self, and purges out the sick and peccant humor by
little and little through sanctification: God is a perfect healer, I will heal
their backesliding. See here the state of the Church and Children of God, they
are prone to backesliding and turning away: That the state of the Church and
Gods children is prone to backsliding.
we are naturally prone to decline further and further from God. So the Church
of God planted in a family in the beginning of the world, how soon was it
prone to backesliding, this is one weakness since the fall, it is incident to
our nature to be unsettled and unsteady in our holy resolutions. And whilst we
live in the midst of temptations, the world, together with the sicklenesse of
our own nature, evil examples, and Satan's perpetual malice against God and
the poor Church, are ill Pilots to lead us out of the way. This is spoken to
make us careful how to shun Backesliding, for we see how many opinions are
foisted in amongst us, and have got some head, that durst not before once be
named amongst us. Popery spreads it self amain; even Churches are prone to
backsliding. Therefore S. Paul's advice is, Be not high minded, but fear,
Romans 11.20.21
for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed least he also spare not
thee. What is become of Rome, so the same will become of us, if we stop not
our backeslidings.

Now in that Gods promise is, I will heal their backeslidings, observe in the
first place.

That sin is a wound, and a disease. Observe. That sin is a wound and
disease.


Now as in sickness there is, 1. Grief troubling and vexing the party who
feels it: and 2. Deformity of the place affected, which comes by wounds and
weaknesses. So in all sin (when we are sensible of it) there is first
grief, vexation, and torment of conscience: and then again, deformity; for
it takes away the beauty and vigor of the soul, and dejects the countenance,
it debaseth a man, and takes away his excellency, Gen 49.4.
as Jacob says of Reuben, Unstable as water, thou shall not excel, because
thou wentest up to thy fathers bed. Says God to Cain, Genesis 4.6.
why art thou wrath, and why is thy countenance fallen? and the Prophet David
he confesses: Psalm. 32.3, 4.
when I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long.
So again, There is no soundness in my flesh, Psalm. 38.3.
because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my
sin. So that sin is a wound and a disease, whether we consider the
miseries it brings on soul and body or both. Therefore howsoever a sinful
person think himself a goodly person, and wear his sins as ornaments about
him, Pride, Lust and the like; yet he is a deformed loathsome person in the
eyes and presence of God; and when conscience is awakened, sin will be
loathsome, irksome, and odious unto himself, fill him full of grief and
shame, so that he cannot endure the sight of his own soul.

That all sins are diseases.
Now all sins whatsoever are diseases: The first sin of all sins, which
we call hereditarie Original sin, what is it but an hereditarie disease? a
leprosy which we drew from our first Parents, spread over all the soul,
having the seeds and spawne of all sin in it. The Church of Rome makes it
less then other sins, as indeed Popery is ignorant both of the height of
grace, and of the depth of corruption; for, if they knew the one, they would
be more capable of the other. Why do they not conceive aright of grace, and
of the height of it? because they know not the depth of Original sin. And
indeed the true knowledge of this disease is proper only to the child of God
in the true Church: none but he knows what Original sin is, others can
dispute and talk of it, but none feels it but the child of God. Now all other
particular actual sins, 1. Sin like a disease in regard of the cause.
be diseases flowing from hence: so that all diseases in this kind, arise
either 1. from our selves, as we have a seminary of them in our own hearts:
or else, 2. from the infection and contagion of others: or 3. from Satan, who
has society with our spirits (as men have with the outward man) coming in by
his suggestions and our intertaining of them: so that in that respect, sin is
like unto a wound and a disease, in regard of the cause of them.

And, in regard of the effects, 2. Sin is like a disease in regard of the
effects it breed^
sin is like a disease. Diseases if they be neglected, breed death it self,
and become incurable; so it is with the diseases and sins of the soul,
neglect them, and the best end of them will be, despair in this world,
whereupon we may have advantage to fly unto the mercy of God in Christ. This
is the end of sin, either to end in a good despair, or in a fruitless
barren despair at the hour of death leading to Hell, when they have no grace
to repent. Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is death, etc. Sin it self is a wound, and that which
rises from sin, is a wound too, doubting and despair: for this disease and
wound of sin, breeds that other disease, a despair of mercy, which is the
beginning of Hell, the second death. These things might be further enlarged,
but for the present only in general, know, That sin is a disease and a
wound of the soul, so much worse then the diseases of the body, by how much
the soul is more precious then it, and the death of the soul more terrible
then the death of the body. Sin is a disease and a wound: for, what is Pride
but a swelling? what is Anger, but an intemperate heat of the soul like an
Ague as it were? what is Revenge, but a wildfire in the soul? what is Lust,
but a spreading Canker in the soul, tending to a consumption? what is
Covetousness, but as a sword, a perpetual wounder of the soul, piercing it
through with many sorrows? what is Security, but as it were the Lethargy and
Apoplexy of the soul? and so we might go on in other resemblances.



If the body be extreme cold, we know there is a distemper, or if it be
extreme hot: so if the soul be so extreme cold, that no heavenly Motives or
sweet Promises can work upon it, stir it up, then certainly there is a
disease upon the soul.

If the soul be inflamed with Revenge and Anger, that soul is certainly
diseased: the temper of the soul is according to the passions thereof, a man
may know by his Passions, when he has a sick soul.

If a man cannot relish good diet, then we count him a sick man, so when a man
cannot relish holy discourse, nor the Ordinances of God. You have some men,
that can relish nothing but profits and pleasures, and such vanities, but no
divine thing, such have sick souls undoubtedly.

So again, a man may know there is a deadly sickness and soreness upon the
soul, 1 when it is senseless of its wounds, and 2 is senseless of that which
passes from it: as men (we say) are ready to die, when excrementall things
pass from them without any sense. So a man may know that he is desperately
soule-sicke, when oaths, lies, and deceitful speeches pass from him, and yet
he is senseless of them, they think not of them, they mean no harm: does
that argue a sound state of body, when a man is so desperately ill, that he
feels not his bodily hurts, and is this a good state of soul, when these
filthy things come out from it insensibly? it is an argument of extreme
deadness of spirit, and irreverence, and of a desperate sin sick soul, when
there is no dread or awe of the Majesty of God; let such look about them: it
is an aggravation of the danger of the soul, this kind of temper. We usually
say, when the stomach is so weak that it can hold no nourishment without
casting it up again as fast as it receives it; certainly such a one is sick
and in a dangerous state of body. So when a man hears and hears, and reads
and reads, and digests nothing into nourishment, but all is left where he heard
it; it is a sign that they have sick souls, when their retentive power is so
weak. And there is certainly some sickness, some dangerous obstruction in
that soul, that cannot digest the wholesome Word of God to make use of it;
some noisome lust then certainly obstructs the soul which must be purged out.

It is a pitiful thing to see the desperate condition of many now, who though
they live under the tyranny of sin, yet flatter their own disease, and
account them their greatest enemies, who any way oppose their sick humor.
What do they most cordially hate? The sound preaching of the Word; the very
sight of such a one, whose calling has been to put us in mind of our sins,
evil courses, and vanities of the world, is loathsome and offensive to carnal
men, in whom corruption is grown up to such a tyranny, that it swayes the
whole soul to devise how to satisfy it. Man is so diseased, that those lusts
in him (which he should labor to subdue and mortify by the power of the
Spirit) do so over-sway him, that all his life is nothing else, but a disease
and backsliding into sin. And as if we were not corrupt enough our selves,
how many are there who feed their corruptions, when they frequent ill places
and company, whom they cannot be without, and are as fish in the water,
feeding the old man in them. So that such are not only sick, but defend,
maintain, and feed their sickness, their whole life being spent this way:
which they laugh at, and make Pride their chain and ornament, as the Prophet
speaks. This is spoken that we may take up a lamentation for the vileness of
man's nature, and to teach us how to judge aright of men, when they devise how
to have their liberty strengthened to go to Hell (as it were) with an high
hand: having their will so fortified that no man is able to deal with them,
thwart them, or teach them any thing. If it were offered to most men to have
what estate they would in this world: what are their wishes and desires? O,
that I might live as I list, that I m ght have what would content my pleasures,
without control, that I might have no crosses, but go smoothly on: yet this
which is the desire of most men, is the most cursed estate of all, and most to
be lamented. Thus it appears, Sin is a wound and a disease: what Use may we
make of it?



by timely physic? all sins are diseases, and growing like diseases run from
ill to worse and worse. 2 Timothy 3.13.
Wicked men (says the Apostle) grow worse and worse. Therefore, if sin be a
disease, prevent it presently; for as we see, Heretics and others the like are
hardly found, but at the first: and then are hardly cured: so, if we neglect
the diseases of our souls, they will breed a consumption of grace, or such an
ill temper of soul, as that it cannot well desire to repent. Nay when a man
lives in wicked rebellious courses long, God will give him up to such terrors
of conscience, that it will not be pacified, but upbraid it self, I have been
a sinful wretched creature, mercy has been offered me again and again,
but now it is too late, having outstood all the means of grace, and rejected
them. When they have considered that their lives have for a long time been a
mere rebellion, and that they have put off the checks of conscience, the
admonitions of the Word and Spirit, with the motions thereof: it is long in
this case before a man can have peace; for answerable to the continuance in
sin, is the hardness of the cure, if it be cured at all.

Therefore there is no dallying with sin, That there is no dallying with sin,
to delay repentance.
I shall repent at length, but not now; yet a while I will continue these and
these courses, I shall do well enough, etc. as if a man who were sick or
desperately wounded, should say, I shall do well, and yet neglect to send for
the Physician. None are so desperately foolish in case of the body, why should
we for our souls? is not that in much more hazard then the body, if we had
spiritual eyes to consider of it? That want of conviction of the sinfullnesse
of sin, makes us so sinful and careless
The truth is, people are not convinced of this; that sin is such a sickness,
which is the reason they are so careless of it. But when the conscience is
awaked, as it will be one day, here or in Hell; then they will be of another
mind. Nay, in this world, when friends, nor riches, nor any thing can comfort:
then they cry out, O that they had not been so foolish, they would give a
world (if they had it) for peace of conscience, this will be the best of it,
for men that go on in sin. Therefore, before hardness of heart grow upon us
(that disease following the disease of sin) let us take heed, and labor to
have our souls healed in time. Thus we have found, That sin is a sickness:
for so much is implied, when he says: I will heal their backsliding. Whence
the direct Observation is,

That God is the great Physician of the Soul.

For he says here, I will heal their backsliding, so that healing implies,
the taking away of 1. The Guilt of sin, which is the venom of it: by
Justification 2. The Rage of sin, which is the spreading of it; by
Sanctification. 3. The Remooving the judgment upon our estate.


For (unless God be the more merciful) these things follow, where there is
sin, and breaking of his law, there is a state binding over to damnation and
guilt: when there is a sinful disposition raging, and bringing us from one
degree of sin to another, then there is Gods judgment and wrath revealed
from Heaven against this. Now when God heales, he heales perfectly, but in some
regards slowly, as we shall see hereafter. In regard of Forgiveness of
sins, he heals perfectly; but by little and little, in regard of the other
of Sanctification, he stops up the issues of our corruption by little and
little. For other things, and judgments in this world, he remooves the malice,
and takes away the sting of them, which is the venom; as he says afterward,
For mine Anger is turned away, which being remooved and turned from things,
then they are no more judgments. What cared Paul for imprisonment, Acts 16.
when he knew Gods wrath accompanied not the stocks? let wrath be taken from
the suffering; that the soul be sound, then it is no matter what condition a
man be in, he carries Heaven and Paradise with him. Therefore, so far God
remooves those diseases and sicknesses of condition, as they carry venom in
them: so changing the condition, that whatsoever we suffer, it has the nature
of an exercise, medicine, or correction only. But that which invenomes all,
and makes the least cross a curse, Psalm 89.46.
and sinkes deep, is the anger of God joined with things. The least cross
when it carries with it the anger and vengeance of God, and reports that to
the soul; I have offended God, and it is just with him thus to inflict wrath
upon me: this is terrible, and it puts a sting to the cross. Now God here
promises to remoove that, I will heal their backsliding; This principally in
the first place is meant of healing in regard of Justification; taking away
that guilt from the soul, which inthralls it, and binds it over to
condemnation and judgment. God will set the soul at a spiritual liberty and
so heal it. Thus you see the point clear, That God is the great Physician of
the soul.

Heb 4.13.
all things are naked and open before his eyes, he knows the inward part of
the soul, the seat of all sin. We know not our selves as he knows us;
there is a mystery of selfe-deceit in the heart which he knows, who can search
all the hidden corners of the heart; which is the Reason why he is so good a
Physician and so excellent, because he is a discerner and searcher of the
heart, who can see all, and so can cure all, being above the sting of
conscience, he has a remedy above the malidy, he is greater then our
conscience, therefore he can cure our conscience.

as he can heal our souls, so he is willing to do it: which his
willingness we may know by the medicine he does it by, his own dear Son;
he has provided a plaster of his Sons blood to heal us. And besides his
own inward willingness, being now a gracious Father to us in Christ Jesus; 2
Cor 5.^0.
he sends his Ambassadors to heal and cure us in his Name, to apply his
medicines, and to beseech and entreat us to be reconciled, God by them
entreats us to entreat him for pardon and mercy, and is so willing to be
entreated, that ere we shall sit out; he teaches us words (as we heard) Take
unto you words, etc. as he is an able, so he is a willing Physician. Christ
the great Physician together with his Father expects not that we should first
come to him, but he comes first, and sends to us. 1 Ioh. 4 9, 10.
The Physician came to the sick, though for the most part the sick (if able)
go to the Physician. But here is the contrary, he came from Heaven, took our
nature upon him, and therein died, by which his bloodshedding he satisfied the
wrath of God, justly offended with us. Isa. 53.10.
So he heales our souls that way, having undergone the anger and wrath of God,
that his blood might quench and appease that anger, Isa. 53.11, 12.
by a plaster thereof made and applied to our souls.

Do we doubt of his willingness, Gods willingness to save us. Mat. 11.28.
when he comes to us and calls us, Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. It is his Office which he has assumed
to heal our souls. The many cures he has done, shows the ability and
willingness of the Physician, cures whereof we are incapable of, by reason of
our mean condition. A King as his place is greater, so sometimes his sins
are greater then others are: 2 King. 33.12,
yet he cured Manasseth that sinful King, together with Mary Magdalen, Paul,
Peter, and the rest, who were a company healed by this Physician. Therefore all
this is for the glory of our Physician, we may see what he can do, by what he
has done: as amongst us, Physicians are sought after, according to their skill
and cures done. Consider in the Sacrament how ready God is to cure and to heal
us, how gracious he is in the Sacrament of Baptism, wherein he ingageth us to
believe, Psalm. 119.49.
admitting us into the Covenant, and preventing us with mercy, before we knew
what a Covenant or Seal was. And so to persuade us of his willingness to
forgive our sins and heal our Rebellions, he has ordained the Sacrament
not for his sake, but to strengthen our weak faith, and help us. The point is
easy for matter of our understanding, but hard in regard of use and
Application: especially when it should be made use of, in time of temptation,
then let us lay it up as a comfortable point, this gracious Promise of God, I
will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, etc. Lay this up against
the hour of temptation, make use of it then, alleging unto God his own
Promise and nature: as David did. Lord, remember the Promise wherein thou have
caused me to trust. Ezekiel. 16.6.
Thou have promised pardoning and healing of all our transgressions, etc.
Remember thy free Promises made in Jesus Christ. God cannot deny himself nor
his Word, but loves to have his bonds sued: remember this.

And when conscience is surprised with any sin though it be never so great)
look not on the disease so much, as who is the physician, and what his
plaster and medicine is? God is the Physician, and the blood of Christ is the
Plaster. What if our sins be mountains, Mic. 7.18, 19.
there is an ocean and a sea of mercy to swell above and cover these
mountains of our sins. Our sins in this case are like fire, which falling
into the sea, is by and by quenched. What if our sins be of never so long
standing (as these their backeslidings here, had continued hundreds of years,
wherein they were a backesliding generation) yet, it is no matter of what
standing or continuance the disease is, so long as God has promised to be the
Physician, and the blood of Christ is the Plaster that heals us. The
Question is not, what, how many, Jsa. 1.18, 19.
how great and of what continuance our sins are: but how we stand affected
toward them, hate them, and resolve against them. That sin connot hurt us
which we fight against, mourn for, complain of, resolve to leave, and truly
hate. Let us never stand then in comparisons with our sins, which bear no
proportion to the infinite skill and power of our great Physician: and to the
infinite work of Christ's all sufficient satisfaction. What can thou object o
man? It is Christ that justifies the ungodly, who art thou that condemns?
Romans 8.33, 34.
It is he that died, yea rather who is risen again, who is also at the right
hand of God, and also makes intercession for us. Thou can not satisfy for
the least sin: God has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. Levi. 16.21.
Isa. 53.5.
The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are
healed.

Let us therefore be wise for afterward, hear, read, lay up, and meditate
for the time to come, for times will come (if we belong to God) that nothing
will content or pacific the soul, but the infinite worth and merit of an
infinite and free mercy apprehended in the face of Jesus Christ. When our sins
are set in order before us, the sins of our youth, middle, and old age, our
sins against conscience, against the Law and Gospel, against examples,
vows, Promises, Resolutions, and admonitions of the Spirit and servants of
God. When there shall be such a terrible acouser, and God shall perhaps let
the wounds of conscience fly open and join against us; when wrath shall
appear, be in some sort felt, and God presented to the soul, Heb. 12.29.
as a consuming fire, no comfort in heaven or earth appearing, hell beneath
seeming ready to revenge against us the quarrel of Gods Covenant. O then for
faith to look through all these clouds, to see mercy in wrath, Heb. 12.6.
love in correction, life in death; the sweetness of the promises, the virtue
and merit of Christ's sufferings, death, resurrection, and intercession at the
right hand; The sting of death removed, 1 Cor. 15.55.
sin pardoned and done away, and glory at hand; In sum this promise made
good, which leads unto all this happiness (as we shall by and by hear) I
will heal their backesliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is
turned away. O this is a marvelous matter then to be persuaded of. Therefore let
us make a right use of these words in due season. For they are, Pro. 25.11.
like appels of gold with pictures of silver, like balm to a green wound,
like delivery in a shipwreck: but indeed all comparisons come far short of
this illustration, as the terror of incensed wrath in the fearful
apprehension of eternal unspeakeable misery is beyond any other fear,
apprehension, or joy.

But least this grace be abused by others (for we must not withold the
childrens bread, for fear others partake with them unto whom it belongs not)
let them know this much, that those who turn this grace into wantonness, and
will be evil, because God is thus gracious; that there is no word of comfort
in the whole Scripture for them, who stand resolved to go on in their sins,
presuming of mercy. See what God says in this case. Deu. 29.18, 19, 20.
Least there should be among you a root that bears gall and wormwood: and
it come to pass when he hears the words of this curse that he bless
himself in his heart: saying I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; The Lord will not
spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy, shall smoke
against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie
upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under Heaven. Psalm. 68.21.
God will wound the hairie scalpe of such an one, who goes on in his
wickedness, and means to be so. And in the New Testament, those who thus
make a progress in sin, what do they? They are said to treasure up unto
themselves wrath, Romans 2.5.
against the day of wrath: and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.
Therefore Gods word speaks no comfort to those, who purpose to live in any
sin. All the comfort can be spoken to such is, That yet they are not in
hell, that yet they have time to return to this great Physician of the soul.
But take such an one in his present condition, he can have no comfort in this
estate, wherein there is but a step between him and hell; So as when the
rotten thread of this uncertain life shall fail, or is cut asunder, down they
fall. We have no comfort here for them, till they return; This precious
balm belongs to the wounded conscience. Briefly for use then.

2 Chro. 16.12.
upon all occasions; Trust and cleave to him, not like good Asa (but not good
in this) who forgot himself, and sent first to the Physicians. But let us
especially rely upon God and look to him, Isa. 4.5.
who can create help, and must bless all means whatsoever. He is a healing
God, who will heal all rebellions, and the most grievous sicknesses; he is a
Physician that is good for all turns. There are some diseases which are called
the scorn of Physicians, as the Gout, the Ague, and the like, wherein in some
cases, they are put to a stand and know not what to do; but God is never at a
loss, his skill cannot be set down, he is good at all diseases; to pardon all
manner of sins. Therefore, let us go to him for cure, seeing there is neither
sin, nor grief, nor terror of conscience arising thereupon which can be so
great, but God can cure both the sin and the terror, (if we take a right
course) and speak peace to the soul. God is a healing God, arising when he
comes, with healing in his wings. As he says, Mal 4.2.
I will heal their rebellion, etc. And as he is a healing Physician, so he
puts his patients to no charge, for as he says, I will heal their
backesliding, so he says, I will love them freely.

Therefore let us the more build upon this truth, That free mercy is the scope
of God in the new Covenant.
which is indeed the sum of all Godliness; For what is the Gospel, but the
triumph of mercy? do but consider the scope of God in the new covenant,
whereof the Sacrament is a seal: which is only to show forth the exaltation
of the Grace and Mercy of God in Jesus Christ, above all unworthiness
whatsoever. For all there, is for the glory of his Mercy. For in the Covenant
of grace, mercy does triumph against judgment and justice, Romans 5.21.
which mercy of God in Christ is said by the Apostle, to reign unto life
everlasting, by Jesus Christ our Lord. It reigns, and has a regiment above,
and over all. For mercy in God stirred up his Wisdom to devise a way by
shedding of the blood of Christ Jesus God-man, to satisfy divine Justice, and
rejoice against it. But whence comes this that justice should be so satisfied;
because a way is found out how none of Gods Attributes are loosers by mercy.
That the greatest sin which is pardonable is to deny God the glory of his
mercy.
Wherefore in any temptation when we are prone to doubt of Gods love; say, what
shall we wrong God more by calling in question his mercy, and the excellency of
his loving kindness which is more then any other sin we have committed? This
is a sin superadded against his Mercy, Power, Goodness, Gratiousnesse and Love
in healing of sin: which takes away the glory of God in that Attribute,
wherein he labors to triumph, reign, and glorify himself most, Psalm. 145.9.
and which is over all his works. Therefore he that offends herein, in denying
God the glory of his great, tender unspeakeable mercy, whereby he would
glorify himself most in the Covenant of grace, he offends God most.

That we honor God most of all by giving him the glory of his mercy.
Therefore, let us at such times as God awakens conscience, be so far from
thinking that God is unwilling to cure and help us, as to think that hereby
we shall Honor God more by believing, then we dishonored him by our sin.
For the faith of an humble contrite sinner it glorifies God more then our
better obedience in other things does: because it gives him the glory of that
wherein he delights; and will be most glorified: the glory of his mercy and
truth, of his rich abundant mercy that has no bounds. There is no comparison
between the mercy of God in the Covenant of grace, and that to Adam in the
state of nature: for in the first he did good to a good man, first he made him
good, and then did him good: but when man did degenerate, and was fallen into
such a cursed estate as we are, for God then to be good to a sinner, and freely
to do good, here is goodness indeed, triumphant goodness. Cain was a cursed
person, who said, Genesis 4.13.
my punishment is greater then can be borne, we know who spoke it; no, God is
a Physician for all diseases, if they be Crimson sins, he can make them white
as wool. Isa. 1.18.


Who would not be careful therefore to search his wounds, his sins to the
bottom? An encouragement to search our sins deeply.
let the search be as deep as we can, considering that there is more mercy in
God, then there can be sin in us. Who would favor his soul, especially
considering, if he neglect searching of it, sins will grow deadly and
incurable upon that neglect. Let this therefore encourage us not to spare our
selves, in opening the wounds of our souls to God; that he may spare all.
Thus we saw formerly, The Church here is brought in dealing plainly with God
and confessing all (for she had an excellent Teacher) and God answers all;
beginning with this, I will heal their backsliding. They were Idolaters, and
guilty of the sins of the second Table in a high measure (no petty sins)
yet God says, I will heal their backsliding, etc. Which being healed, then an
open highway is made for all other mercies whatsoever, which is the next point
we Observe hence;

That the chief mercy of all, which leads unto all the rest, is the pardon
and forgiveness of sins.

Healing of the guilt of sin we see is set in the front of these Petitions
formerly showed: which as it is the first thing in the Churches desires, Take
away all iniquity, etc. So it is the first thing yielded to in Gods Promise; I
will heal their backsliding, etc. Pardon of sin, and cure of sin, whereby
the conscience cease to be bound over to condemnation is the first and
chiefest blessing of God, and is that for which the Church falls out in a
triumph. Who is a God like unto thee, Micah. 7.18, 19, 20.
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage, because he delights in mercy? etc. And this is that excellent
and sweet conclusion of the new Covenant also, whereupon all the rest of those
former foregoing mercies there are grounded: Ier. 31.34.
for, I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.
Yea this is the effect of that grand Promise made to his Church after the
return of their captivity. Jer. 50.20.
In those days, and at that time says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall
be sought for: and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall
not be found; for, I will pardon them whom I reserve. The point is plain, and
clear enough, it needs no following. The Reason is,





Why we want the sense of the forgiveness of sins.
because some sin or other is upon the file uncancelled, perhaps unconfessed,
or because we are stuffed with Pride that we believe not, or are so troubled, or
trouble our selves, that we apprehend not, or believe not the pardon of sins
confessed and hated. But sure it is, Forgiveness of sins, unstops the spring
of mercy, and unvailes Gods gracious face in Jesus Christ unto us. Sin being
not pardoned, this stops, as the Prophet speaks, our iniquity is that which
keeps good things from us. Therefore the chief mercy is that which remooves,
that which unstops the current of all mercy: I will heal their backsliding,
etc. Look as a condemned Prisoner in the Tower, let him have all contentment,
as long as he is in the displeasure of the Prince, stands condemned, and the
sentence unreversed, what true contentment can he have? none at all. So it is
with a sinner, that has not his pardon and quietus est from heaven: yield him
all contentment which the world can afford; all the satisfaction that can
issue from the creature; yet, what is this to him, as long as he has not
mercy, and that his conscience is not pacified, because it is not cleansed and
washed with the blood of Christ?

Jonah 1.4.
Sin is like Jonas, whilst he was in the ship there was nothing but tempest:
Josh. 7.11, 12.
like Achan in the Army, whilst he was not found out Gods judgment followed
the camp. Sin is that which troubles all, therefore it must be taken away
first, and therewith all evil is taken away: therefore, the first mercy is a
forgiving, pardoning and quieting mercy. When the blood of Jesus Christ by the
hand of faith is sprinkled upon the soul, God creating a hand of faith to
sprinkle and shed it upon the soul; Christ loved me, and gave himself for
me, then the soul says, though my sins be great, yet the satisfaction of
Christ is greater: God has loved me, and gave his own Son for me, and I
apply this to my self, as it is offered to me, and take the offer, this
pacifieth the soul, as it is written, The Blood of Christ who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God; Heb. 9.14.
is that which purges our conscience from dead works to serve the living God.
To a Repentant sinner, this Blood of sprinkling speaks better things then the
blood of Abell: Heb. 12.24
not as his blood cried for vengeance: but mercy, mercy. When the soul is thus
pacified, there is the foundation of all other mercy whatsoever. The Order is
this, when God is reconciled all is reconciled, when God is at peace with us in
the Forgiveness of sins, then all is peaceable at home and abroad, conscience
is in peace within, and all the creatures at peace without, all which with all
that befalls us, have a command to do us no hurt: as David gave charge to the
people of Absalom. When God is reconciled, and at peace, all things are at
peace with us; for is not he Lord of Hosts, who has the command of all the
creatures? therefore this grace of forgiveness is the chief grace.

To show it in one instance more; David was a King and a Prophet, a comely and
a valorous person, but what esteemd he most? did he say, blessed is the man,
who is a King or a Prophet, or a valiant Warrior, or has Dominion, Obedience,
or great possessions as I have? O no, Blessed is the man whose sins are
forgiven, Psalm. 32.1.
and whose iniquities are covered. You see wherein this holy man David sets and
pitcheth happiness? in the forgiveness of sins: Blessed is such a man.
Though he were a great King, he knew well enough, that if his sins were not
pardoned and covered, he had been a wretched man.

Therefore, this should teach us to desire of souls, that God would shine upon
them in Jesus Christ, pardon and accept us in his beloved, they go together.

Psalm. 103.
as it is Psalm. 103.1, 3. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name, etc. Why? Who forgiveth all thy iniquities, and heals
all thy diseases. We should bless God most of all for this, that he has
devised a way by Christ to receive satisfaction for sin, to pardon it, and
say unto our souls, I am thy salvation: this is the greatest favor of all.



Answ. How to know that God has pardoned our sins.
The answer is, if together with pardon of sin, he heal sin: for God when
he takes away the venom of a wound that indangers death, the deadly disease,
he takes away also the swelling of the wound and glowing of it. 1. If with
pardoning there be subduing.
When he cease to make it deadly, he heales the soul withal, and subdues
our iniquities, as his Promise is. So there is together with pardoning mercy,
curing mercy in regard of Sanctification. Where God is a Father to make us
Sons, he is a Father to beget us anew: so where Christ comes by Blood to wash
away our sins, he comes by Water also and the Holy Ghost: where he is a
Comforter in the forgiveness of sins, he is a Sanctifier: And the soul of a
distressed sinner looks to the one as well as the other. Ask the soul of any
man who is truly humbled, what do you chiefly desire? O, that God would pardon
my sins: But is that all? No; That he would also heal my sins, and subdue
my Rebellions; that I may not any longer be under the government and tyranny
of my lusts; but under Gods gracious government, who will guide me better then
before. Hos. 2.7.
This we see to be the Order in the Lords Prayer; after we are taught to say,
Mat. 6.12, 13.
Forgive us our trespasses, it follows, And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil, which is for the time to come: So David, Psalm. 19.12, 13.
Cleanse me from my secret sins, and keep me that presumptuous sins have not
dominion over me, etc. So that this is the desire of an afflicted conscience
truly humbled; curing as well as covering of sin. This is a sure evidence
that our sins are pardoned.

Then again when there is peace, 2. By Peace. Romans 5.1.
when the soul feels this, it is a sign that God has healed the soul: For
(says the Apostle) being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Blood of Christ has a pacifying power in
forgiveness of sins. When Jonas was cast out there was a calm: So when
sin is cast out and pardoned, there is a calm in the soul; which comes from
the forgiveness of sins.

Again, Healing is known by this, 3. When we are willing to be searched.
if we have hearts willing to be searched, for then our will is cured, which
in the state of grace is more then our Obedience: when we would be better then
we are, then certainly our will is not in league with corruptions. Now where
the will is so much sanctified, I resolve to be better, I would be better, and
I use all means, being glad when any joins with me against my corruptions, I
am glad of all such advantages, here is a good sign. As now, when a man goes
to Church, and desires, O that my corruptions might be met withal, O that I
might be laid open to my self, and know my self better then I have formerly
done: this is the desire of an ingenuous soul. Where there is no guile of
soul, a man is glad to have himself and his corruptions discovered, whereas
another frets and kicks, and rages against the Word of God, which is a sign
that there is some league betwixt him and his sin. You have some, that above
all things in the world, they would not have such and such downright
Ministers: O take heed this is a sign of a hollow heart, and that a man is in
love with his disease: can there be a cure where there is a love of the disease?

4. By our estimation of heavenly and earthly things. Coloss. 3.1.
Not to name many, the last (which is a high pitch) shall be by our estimation
of things here and above: What has this healing wrought in thee? What
estimation of things? How is thy heart weaned from the world? How are thy
affections set on things which are above? When a sick man is soundly recovered,
though his distempered palate could not relish the best meats in his
sickness, yet now he relishes and loves the best most of all. Look then to
our selves, how forget we with blessed Saint Paul, the things which are behind,
Phil 3.13.
pressing hard to the mark which is before, for the high price of that
Calling? How stand we affected to long for our Country, this world being only
the place of our pilgrimage? Surely a soul that is soundly healed, is an
undervaluing soul, to use this world and all things therein as though we used
them not: and it is also a valewing soul, 1 Cor. 7.29.30
to covet spiritual things above all. Psalm. 119.79.127.
O (says David) how I love thy law, it is my meditation all the day. I love
thy Commandments above gold, yea above fine gold. The joy of this estate, 1
Pet. 1.8.
is a joy unspeakeable and glorious: of which it is said, the stranger shall
not meddle with. Pro. 14 10.
This much concerning the disease, before we come to the cure, a Question
arises.



From ignorance and deadness of conscience, of his disease, and from sound
satisfaction, by faith knowing Christ; the Spirit of God sealing this knowledge
to the soul: if peace be thus settled, it is a sign of a sound cure.



Answ. How to know pardon of sin, when corruption gives soyles still.
Not to speak of transient actual sins, that are past and pardoned when we
have repented of them: but of the root of all sin, which is weakness and
corruption in us, fortified and (as it were) entrenched by nature, occasions
and custom, of this the Question is; How to discern of pardon, the root of
sin remaining, and now and then foyling us? The Answer is Affirmative, we may
have that sin pardoned, which yet occasionally may foil us still. For a man
is in the state of health, though he have the dregs of a disease hanging upon
him, whereby a man ofttimes has some little fit of the disease. When nature and
physic has prevailed over the disease; yet after that, there may be
grudgings. So when God has cured the soul by pardon, and has begun to cure
in Sanctification, the cure is wrought, though some dregs remain: because
those dregs are carried away with daily physic, and daily flying to God, Lord
forgive our debts, Lord heal us: every prayer and renewing of Repentance
carries some debt away, till death comes, that excellent Physician, which once
for all perfectly cures both soul and body bringing both there where both
shall have Perfection.



Iebusites and the residue of that kind, Judge. 3.1.
were left uncast out from among Israel, that thereby he might prove Israel,
and least they should be a prey unto wild beasts to devour them. So some
remainders of the flesh are left still in the best, that these wild beasts
might not prey upon their souls, spiritual pride, which is a detestable
sin, robbing and denying God of his Prerogative, and security, the grave of
the soul: to cure these two especially, God makes the relics and remainders
of sin a medicine unto us.



Why ^od suffers diseases and infirmities to remain in us
Diseases are suffered to put us in mind of infirmities in the root, which we
knew not before; for if these should not sometimes break forth into a disease,
we would think our nature were pure: therefore God suffers them to break forth
into diseases. Numb 20.12.
Who would have thought that Moses had been passionate? certainly himself
did not know himself at the waters of strife: that the seeds of anger should
be in the meekest man in the world? who would have thought that David whose
heart smote him for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, 1 Samuel 24.5.
that so mild a man should have cruelty in him? and yet after that, he
committed murder. Who would have thought that Peter, Mat. 26.33.69, etc.
who made such protestations of love to Christ, that though all men forsook
him, yet he would not, yet after that should deny his Master, and forswear
him? all which was to show us, that it is useful for us sometimes to have our
corruptions break out, to put us in mind what inward weaknesses we have
unknown and unsearched in us, and that we may know the depth of our
corruption. Gods children are gainers by all their infirmities and weaknesses,
That Gods children are gainers by their affliction and weaknesses.
whereby they learn to stand stronger. Here is a maine difference betwixt the
slips of Gods children, and the ordinary evil courses of others: they grow
worse and worse, the ofter they fall into sin, the more they are settled upon
their dregs. But Gods child has the remainders of corruption in him from
whence he has infirmities, and whence he breaks into diseases: but
notwithstanding, corruption is a looser hereby; for the ofter he falls into
sin, it is the weaker and weaker: for the more he sees the root of it, the
more he hates it, resolves and strives against it; till it be consummated by
Repentance and Sanctifying grace. Let no man therefore be too much cast down
for infirmities, though ofttimes they break out, In what case we may be
comforted, though infirmities break out.
if thereupon we find a renewed hatred, Repentance and strength against them:
for God looks not so much how much corruption there is in us, as how we stand
affected to it, and what good there is: whether we be in league with it, and
resist it. It is not sin that damnes men, but sin with the ill qualities: sin
unconfessed, not grieved for, and unresisted, else God has holy ends in
leaving corruption in us, to exercise, try us, and keep us from other sins,
Therefore sin is left uncured.

Now the way to have it cured, The way to have sin cured both in heaven and
in sense of conscience by Sanctification.
both in the Pardon, and likewise in Sanctification we have it in the Context;
what does God say? I will heal their backsliding, etc. after they had searched
their hearts, and thereupon found iniquity; and then prayed, Take away all
iniquity, after they had desired a divorse from their sins, Ashur shall not
save us: and when they had some faith that God would cure them, and accordingly
put confidence in God, the Father of the Fatherless. Then says God, I will
heal their backsliding, so that sense of pardon in the forgiveness of sins,
and sense of grace, comes after sight, sense, weariness and confession of
sin. God does not pardon sin, when it is not seen, sorrowed for, nor
confessed, and where there is not some degree of faith, to come to God the
Father of the Fatherless, and the great Physician of souls. When we do this,
as it is said in the Context, then we find the forgiveness of sins, with
the gracious power of Gods Spirit healing of our diseases. I will heal their
backsliding.

Let us therefore remember this, least we deceive our souls; for it is not so
easy a thing to attain unto forgiveness of sins as we think.

That though ^orgivenesse of sins be freely given: yet the preparing way
thereunto costs us dear.
And then again, though forgiveness of sins be free, yet notwithstanding
there is a way whereby we come to forgiveness of sins, that costs us
somewhat; God humbles the soul first, brings a man to himself, to think of
his course, to lay open his sins and spread them before God in confession,
and working upon the soul hearty Repentance: so to come to God, and wait for
forgiveness of sins, perhaps a good while before there be a report of it.
There are none who have sins forgiven, but they know how they come by it: for
there is a predisposition wrought in a man's soul by the Spirit which teaches
him, what estate he is in, and what his danger is, whereupon follows
confession, and upon that peace. God keeps his children many times a long
while upon the rack before he speaks peace unto them in the forgiveness of
sins, because he would not have them think slightly of the riches of his
mercy. It is no easy matter to attain unto the sense of the forgiveness of
sins, though indeed we should strive to attain it, that so we may walk in
the comforts of the Holy Ghost. The difficulty of obtaining or recovering the
sense of forgiveness, may be seen in David; after his fall did he easily
obtain sense of pardon? O no, God held him on the rack a long time, He roared
all the day long, Psalm. 32.3, 4.
his moisture was turned into the drought of Summer. But when he had resolved
a through and no slight confession; when he had resolved to shame himself,
and glorify God; then says he; And thou forgavest my sin, but till he dealt
thoroughly with his soul without all guile, he felt no comfort. So it is with
the children of God, when in the state of grace they fall into sin; it is no
slight, Lord have mercy upon me, that will serve the turn; but a through
shaming of themselves before God, and a through confession, resolving and
determining to be under another government; to have Christ to govern them, Why
the soul must wait and be humbled before the sense of the forgiveness of
sins.
as well as to pardon them: God will no otherwise do it. Because he would
glorify his rich mercy herein: for who would give mercy its due glory, if
forgiveness were easily attained without shaming of our selves? If it came
easily without protestation and waiting upon God, (as the Church here) we
should never be thoroughly humbled for our sins, and God would never have the
glory of his mercy, nor known to be so just in hating of sin in his dear
children, who long ago upon such terms have attained sense of forgiveness
of sins. It is worth our trouble to search our souls, and to wait at
Christ's feet, never to give over until we have attained the sense of
forgiveness of sin. It is heaven upon earth to have our consciences enlarged
with Gods favor in the pardon of sin.

That there can be no sense of pardon, where Humiliation and Reformation is
wanting.
What is the Reason that many profess, that God is merciful, and Christ has
pardoned their sins, etc. if the ground be right, it is a high conceit of
mercy: and such have been soundly humbled for their sins. But do thou
profess so who live carelessly in thy sins and licentiously still; surely
thy ground is naught, for had thou been upon the rack, in Gods
scalding-house and smarted soundly for sin; would thou take pleasure still
to live in sin? O no. Those that go on carelessly in their actions and
speeches not caring what they are, did they ever smart for sin who carry
themselves thus? Surely these were never soundly humbled for sin, nor
confessed them with loathing and detestation. Therefore let us mark the
Context here inferred: after they had confessed, prayed and waited, resolving
Reformation in their false confidence: then God promises, I will heal their
backsliding. It is a fundamental error in a Christian course, the sleighting
of true humiliation, which goes along in all the Fabric and frame of a
Christian course. Let a man not be soundly humbled with the sight of his sins,
his faith is weaker, and his Sanctification and comfort the sleighter. Whereas
if a man would deal truly with his own heart, set up a Court there, and
arraigne, judge, and condemn himself (which is Gods end in all his dealings,
afflictions, and judgments inflicted upon us) the deeper we went in this
course, the more would our comfort be and the report of Gods mercy, in the
sense of that which follows: I will love them freely, for mine Anger is turned
away.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
THE SIXTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.4, 5. -- J will love them freely, for mine Anger is turned away.

J will be as the Dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth
his Root as Lebanon.


IT was a good speech of S. Austin, those that are to petition great persons,
they will obtain some who are skillful to frame their Petitions, least by
their unskillfullnesse they provoke Anger instead of carrying away the benefit
desired. So it is here with Gods people being to deal with the great God, and
not being able to frame their own petitions, God (as we heard before) does it
for them: and answers them graciously with the same mercies which he had
suggested them to ask; his answer being exact to their petitions, I will heal
their backsliding, I will love them freely, etc. wherein God exceeds all
Physicians in the world whatsoever, for they have nature to help them.
Physic is the midwife of Nature, helping it to do that which it cannot do
of it self: Physic can do nothing to a dead man; but God is so great a
Physician, that he first gives life, and after that spiritual Life is in some
degrees begun, by little and little he heales more and more. I will heal their
backslidings.

We have an error crept in amongst some of the meaner ignorant sort of people,
who think that God sees no sin, when he has once pardoned men in
Justification, who falsely smooth themselves in this wicked sensual conceit,
think they can commit no sin offensive to God; as though God should frame
such a Justification for men, to blindfold him and cast dust (as it were) in
his eyes: or justify men to make them loose and idle. No, it is false, as
appears by this place; for how can God heal that he sees not? He sees it not
to be revenged on them for it, but he sees sin, to correct it and to heal
it. He sees it not after a revengefull wrathful justice to cast us into Hell
and damn us for it; but he sees it after a sort to make us smart and lament
for it, and to have many times a bitter sense of his wrath and forsaking, as
men undone without a new supply of comfort and peace from Heaven. Let a man
neglect Sanctification, daily sorrow and confession of sin, and now and then
even craving new pardon for sins past, casting all upon a fantastic conceit
of faith in their justification: what follows, but Pride, Hardness of heart,
Contempt of others and neglect of better then themselves, and pronenesse, out
of Gods judgment, to fall from ill to worse, from one error to another? In
this case the heart is false and deceitful, for whilst it pretends a glorious
faith to look back to Christ, to live by faith, and lay all on him by
justification; it winds it self out of all taskes of Religion, sets the heart
at liberty, neglects Sanctification and Mortification of lusts, and beautifying
the image of God in them, giving too much way to the flesh. Therefore away with
this false and selfe-conceited opinion: which draws poison out of that which
God speaks to confirm and stablish us, That he sees no iniquity in Iaakob,
etc. Whence from these Hyperbolicall speeches, they think that God sees not
that which we our selves see. But, he heales our backslidings, therefore he
sees them, for how can he heal a wound, if he see it not? He sees it, but not
to their destruction who are freely justified by his grace. But we will leave
this point, it being too much honor to them to spend time in confutation of it
and will rather say unto it, as Isay speaks of a menstruous cloth, get thee
hence. Isa 30.22.


Now as God is a most gracious God, never weary of well doing and comforting
his people, because it is his nature to be merciful: So he has suitable
expressions of it, he goes on with mercy upon mercy, loving kindness upon
loving kindness. He had promised before: I will heal their Backeslidings,
take in sum all their Apostacy, all shall be healed. But this is not all,
he answers all the accusations and doubts of Satan: who is still objecting
against us our unworthiness, misery, wretchedness to have such favors
conferred on such filthy creatures: Therefore, he takes of all with this which
follows, as they had prayed, Receive us graciously; So the answer is full,
and suitable to their request.

I will love them freely. Put case, they out of conscience of their own guilt
should see no worth in themselves or cause why they should be respected: yet I
see reason in mine own love.

I will love them freely.

children freely, and shall not God much more who gives this love and plants it
in us, be admitted to love freely. But indeed there is absurdity and
infidelity in distrust. For it is against reason to deny the mighty God that
which we have in our selves. If he did not love freely, how could he love at
all? what could he foresee in us to love us for before hand? the very manhood
of Christ deserved not the grace of union, it was freely given.

I will love them freely. That which first of al we observe hence is this much.
That God loves his people freely. So Romans 5.8, 9. Says the Apostle. God
commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed
for us: much more being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. The like we have in Ezekiell, says God, Ezekiel. 36.22.
Therefore, say unto the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, I do not
this for your sakes O house of Israel, but for mine holy Names sake, which ye
have profaned among the heathen whether ye went. Adam when he had sinned that
maine great sin, what did he? fly from God, run away, Genesis 3.12, 13.
and when God called to him and debated the matter with him, he accused God,
and excused himself. Yet for all this God pitied him, and clothed him, and
made him that promise of the blessed seed. What desert was there here in Adam?
nay, rather the quite contary: yet God loved him freely. The same may be said
of Saint Paul for the time past a persecuter, what deserving was therein him?
none at all, yet he found Gods free love in his conversion: Act. 9.15.
for says God to Ananias; He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name
before the Gentiles. Here was no deserving in Saint Paul, Act. 9.5.
but Gods free election which in time took place, and so we may say of the
Prodigal having spent all, Luke 15.20.
his Father pardoned all and loved him freely.

Because it is his name and nature to be gracious, Exo. 34.6.
and to love freely, and whatsoever is Gods nature, that has a freedom in the
working.

Because no creature can deserve any thing at Gods hands. 1. Because by nature
we are all Gods enemies and therefore what can enemies deserve? nothing but
wrath and vengeance. 2. If we have any graces, they are the gift of God, and
therefore we deserve nothing by them, they being of his own gift. So saint
James speaks, Iam. 1.17.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above and comes down from
the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning. And
Saint Paul says: That of him, and through him, and to him are all things: Romans
11.36.
what should follow hereupon? To whom be glory for ever.

hands: but both are false, the cause of love is free from himself: for, when
we have done our best, Luke 17.10.
yet (says the Holy Ghost) we are unprofitable servants.

Grace, and not in free Grace it self. If we would have any sound peace, let
us look for it in free Grace. Therefore the blessed Apostle, in the entrance of
his salutations in his Epistles, still joyneth Grace, and then Peace, to show
us that if we look for sound Peace; we can no where find it but in Grace.
We would find Peace, in the Grace that is in us; but it is labor in vain,
for we shall never find it but in free Grace.

Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.
having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his; and let every one that
names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Where speaking of election
which comes from the free love of God, he makes that a sure foundation to
build on; if there be a reformation to depart from iniquity, we may be
comfortably assured of our salvation. And as it is with Election, so is it with
all the other fruits of God love: Vocation, Romans 3.24. Joh. 13.1.
Adoption, Justification, and Perseverance: the foundation of God fastly sealed
in the way of holiness stands good and sure in all.



loves us freely, and did love us whilst we were enemies: make therefore upon
all occasions the Apostles use of it. For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God Romans 5.10.
by the death of his son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by
his life?

I will love them freely. In the next place, from hence we observe another
point which necessarily follows upon the former: That God did not then begin
to love them, when he said I will love them freely: but to discover that love
unto them, which he carried unto them from all eternity. For instance hereof
Saint Paul was beloved of God, ere God manifested his love unto him: as he
testifies of himself, that the discovery of this free love was, Gal. 1.15.16.
when it pleased God who separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by
his Grace, to reveal his son in me, etc. So Ephesians. 1.3, 4. The Apostle
blesses God in his salutation unto them, who had blessed them with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. But whence fetches he the
ground hereof? According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of
the world, that we should be holy and unblameable before him, in love. Ephe.
1.4.
We need not multiply places more to prove it, our adversaries would feign
seem to clear God only in all, and so shroud their arguments under such
needless pretenses, shift of all places, name we never so many with their
strong heads, distinctions, and sophismes. But God will one day give them no
thanks for their labor: the will of God (how unequal soever in our eyes, who
cannot with our shallow conceits sound the depth of such mysteries) being
ground enough to justify all his actions whatsoever. We will therefore come
to some Reasons of the point.

Whatsoever is in God (manifested in time) is eternal and everlasting in him,
without beginning and ending, for wh tsoever is in God, is God. 1 John 4.8.
Joh. 14.6.
God is not loving, but Love: and he is not only true, but Truth it self: he
is not wise only, but Wisdom it self. And therefore his love discovered in
time, must needs be from all eternity.

love them now, that he did not formerly love, As we see, those who loved
Paul after his Conversion, loved him not before, there was then a change in the
Church: in which case, if God should so love, he should be changeable, and so
be like unto man.

John. 17. makes it clear, that the love of God begins not with the
manifestation thereof: for Christ there, knowing all the Fathers secrets (as
coming out of the bosom of the Father) intimates the contrary: where he makes
one end of his prayer for them to be, Ioh. 17.23.
That the world may know, that thou have loved them, as thou have loved me. Now
how he loved Christ is also showed a little after; For thou lovedst me before
the foundation of the world: Joh. 17.24.
Therefore the Saints and Children of God are loved with an everlasting former
love, not beginning at that instant discovery thereof.

This is my beloved son, Mat. 3.17.
in whom I am well pleased; yea and when he received him up into glory. The
Sun shines as clearly in the darkest day, as it does in the brightest. The
difference is not in the Sun, but in some clouds which hinder the
manifestation of the light thereof. So God loves us as well, when he shines
not in the brightness of his countenance upon us, as when he does. Job 42.7.
Job was as much beloved of God in the midst of his miseries, as he was
afterward when he came to enjoy the abundance of his mercies.

I will love them freely, etc. The last Point which we gather from hence,

That this free love and favor of God, is the cause of all other mercies and
free favors, whereby he discovers his love unto us.

1. It is the cause of election, Romans 5.11.
even so then as this present time also there is a remnant, according to the
election of grace. So 2. For Vocation: when the Apostle had showed that the
Ephesians were saved by Grace; Ephe. 5.7.
he adds, that in the ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his
grace, In his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus: he afterward
shows, when this grace began first to have being, Ephe. 2.10.
For we are his workmanship created unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk therein. 3. Forgiveness of sins, In whom we
have a redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Ephe. 1.7.
according to the riches of his grace. So 4. For the grace of Love: We love
him, 1 John 4.19.
because he loved us first. 5. For Justification, and Sanctification. It is
said, that Christ has loved us, Rev. 1.5.
why? For he has washed us from our sins in his own blood; and Saint John
says, He has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father. 1. Kings to
fight against the world, the flesh, and the devil. 2. Priests, to teach,
instruct, reprove, and comfort our selves and others by the word of God: and
then to offer up the sacrifice of a broken heart, in prayers and praises. All
comes from freedom of love. 6. So every good Inclination comes hence. For it
is God which works in us, Hos. 5.14. Phil. 1.13.
both to will and to do of his good pleasure. So 7. Every good Work: For we
are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which he had
before ordained that we should walk therein: For by grace ye are saved (says
he) through faith. Ephe. 2.8.10.
So 8. For Eternal life: the Apostle shows: It is the gift of God, Romans 6.23.
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This should teach us in the first place to be humbled, in that we are so
miserable naughty servants, doing so little work, nay nothing as we should,
yet should have so good wages: 1 Cor. 4.7. Ephesians. 2.9.
but God loves us freely, etc. It should rather humble us the more, then puff
us up in pride, in regard that there was nothing in us which might deserve any
thing at Gods hand.

Ioh. 17.23, 24.
that if he loved us from everlasting with a free love, in a sort, as he loved
Christ, that therefore the effects of his love toward us shall never fail; as
the Apostle shows, Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of God, are without Repentance. Faith and Repentance
being fruits of his love wrought in us, shall hold out: therefore the weakness
of these graces as they shall not hinder our salvation; no more should they
discourage us, or hinder the comfort of our profession. Because that Faith and
Repentance which we have, is not any work of ours, but the work of Gods free
love in us: therefore they shall be continued, and accepted. For our
Perseverance does not stand in this, that we have strength in our selves to
continue faithful to God, but because he out of his free love, continues
faithful to us; and will never fail, nor forsake them whom he has once taken
into his everlasting favor, on whom he has set his everlasting free love, as
the Apostle speaks of Christ. Who also shall confirm you unto the end, 1 Cor.
1.8, 9.
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: but upon what
ground? God is faithful by whom we were called unto the fellowship of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. So that if any of the Elect should fall away, God
should be unfaithful. The case in Perseverance is not how faithful we are,
but how faithful God is, who guides us here with his Counsel in all things,
Psalm. 73.24.
and afterward receives us into glory. So in another place, after the Apostle
had prayed, Now the very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly; 1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24.
and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul and body be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. What makes he the ground of this
his Prayer? Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it.





How to manifest our love to God.
First, in loving his Word: as Psalm. 19. and Psalm. 119. Secondly, in loving his
people, 1 Ioh. 5.1, 2. Thirdly, in longing for, and loving his second coming,
Revel. 22.20.

Now follows the Reason of the discovery of this free love showed now in
time to them.

For mine Anger is turned away from him.

Here is the third Branch of Gods answer to their Petition, Mine Anger is
turned away from him: which is included and implied in the former; I will heal
their backsliding: how could he do this if he were Angry? No, he says, I
will love them freely: which argues that his anger was appeased. God knows
that variety of words and expressions are all little enough to raise up and
comfort a doubting, wounded, galled soul: which when it is touched with a
sense of sin and of his displeasure, cannot hear words enough of comfort.
This God knows well enough, and therefore he adds expression upon expression:
I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine Anger is
turned away from him. The soul which is touched with the sense of wrath and
defiled with the stains of sins dreadful impressions, receives all this
cheerfully, and more too: therefore in such cases, we must take in good part
the largeness of Gods expressions. For mine Anger is turned away from him. To
unsold the words therefore.

Anger is the inward displeasure which God has against sin, and his purpose
to punish it: Anger of God what.
accompanied with threatenings upon his purpose, and execution upon his
threatenings. The point to be observed in the first place is,

That there is Anger in God against sin.

We need not stand to prove the point it is so manifest to every man, the
Scripture is copious in it; if we consider either judgments executed upon
sinners: threatenings against sin, or the Saints complaining of it; as Psalm.
74.1. Job 42.7. Psalm 6.1. Psalm 90.11. Psalm 38.1, 3. Isa. 63.6. with many
the like places prove, That there is Anger in God against sin; we will
rather see the Reason of it.

Because there is an Antipathie betwixt him and sin, which is contrary to
his pure nature. Sin as it opposes God, so it is contrary unto him; and
indeed, sin would turn him out of his soveraigntie. For what does a man when
he sins wittingly and willingly, but turn God out of his government, and
causes the devil to take up Gods room in the heart? when a man gives way to
sin, then the devil rules, and he thinks his own lusts better then Gods
will, and his own carnal reason in contriving of sin above Gods wisdom in
his Word: therefore he is a proud Rebel. Sin is such a kind of thing that
it labors to take away God, for it not only puts him out of that part of his
throne, man's heart, but for the time a man sins, he could wish there were no
God to take vengeance of him. Can you wonder therefore that God is so opposite
to that, which is so opposite to his Prerogative royal as sin is?

The effects of Gods Anger against sin.
The truth is, God is Angry with nothing else but with sin, which is the only
object of his Anger. That which foolish persons make a trifle and sport of,
Psalm. 14.1.
Swearing, filthy speaking and lying, is the object of Gods Anger. For this
offense of sin, 2 Pet. 2.4.
he did not spare the Angels of Heaven, but tumbled them thence, never to
return again. Genesis 3.23.
Sin also thrust Adam out of Paradise, and made God angry with him and the
whole world, Genesis 6.13. 2 Pet. 3.12.
so as to destroy it with a flood of water; and will at last make him burn and
consume up all with a deluge of fire. Yea, it made him in a sort angry with his
own dear Son, when he under-went the punishment of sin, as our Surety:
so that he cried out, My God, my God, Mat 27 46.
why have thou forsaken me? If God thus showed his anger against sin, in
punishing it in Christ our Surety, who was made sin for us, and yet had no
sin in himself: how will he punish it much more in those who are not in
Christ: those who stand in their own sin and guilt, what will become of
them? So that God is angry with sin and with nothing else.

The second thing we gather from this, where he says, My Anger is turned away
from him, Gods Anger being taken especially for judgments, is,

That Gods Anger is the special thing in Afflictions.

They come from his Anger, (as has been showed) therefore he says, I will
take mine Anger from you, whereby he means judgments, the effect of his
Anger. For in the Scriptures Anger is ordinarily taken for the fruits and
effects of Gods Anger, which are terrible judgments, as we may see, Deuteronomy.
29.20. and so in many other places.



That the least cross, if set on by Anger prooves as the most terrible.
Because they issue from his Anger and displeasure: for it is not the
judgments, but the Anger in them, which lies heavy upon the soul; when they
come from Gods Anger, they are intolerable to the conscience, else when we
suffer ill, knowing that it is not from Gods Anger, but for trial of our
graces, or for exercise we bear it patiently. Therefore God says, mine Anger
is turned away from him, for this unremooved imbittereth every cross though it
be never so small. Let Gods Anger be upon a man, and he will make a conceit, a
very light thing, to be as a heavy cross unto him, and vex him both in body
and state, more then mightier crosses at some other time shall. Will you see
this in one instance, where God threatens his own dear people thus: And the
Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 28.27.
and with the Emrods, and with the scah, and with the itch whereof thou can
not be healed. What is a scab, and an itch and the like such a terrible
judgment, which in these days is set so light by? O yes, when it comes with
Gods displeasure, when the least scratch is set on fire by Gods anger it shall
consume us, it prooves incurable, as there it is threatened: whereof thou can
not be healed. When the vermin came in Gods Anger upon that hard hearted
King; all Pharoahs skill, and his Magitians skill, could not beat them out,
Exodus 8.9.
because (as they confessed) this was the finger of God. Let any thing come as
a messenger of Gods Anger, it comes with vengeance and sticks to the soul,
like a fretting leprosy, Levit 14.45, 46.
which when it entered into a house, many times could not be gotten out again
with pulling out stones, or scraping them, till the house were demolished. So
when Gods Anger is raised and kindled against a person, you may remoove this
and that, change place and company, and use of helps, yet it will never leave
fretting till it have consumed him, unless it be removed by Repentance, if it
be never so small a scratch or itch, all the Physic in the world shall not cure
it. For as the Love of God makes all other things in God comfortable unto us,
so it is his Anger which makes al his Attributes terrible: as for his Power,
the more he loves me, the more he is able to do me good. But otherwise, the
more he is Angry and displeased, the more his other Attributes are terrible. If
he be Wise, the more he will find out my sins; if he be Powerful, and
angry, the more he can revenge himself on me: is he Angry and Just; the more
woe to me. So there is nothing in God when he is Angry, but it is so much the
more terrible, for this puts a sting in every thing: which when it is remooved
out of malignant creatures armed with a sting, then they are no more hurtful.
The sting of every evil and cross is Gods Anger and wrath: this being
remooved, nothing hurts, all crosses then are gentle, mild, tractable and
medicinal; when God has once said, For mine Anger is turned away from him.
After that is gone, whatsoever remains is good for us, when we feel no Anger
in it. What is that which blows the coals of Hell, and makes Hell, Hell, but
the Anger of God ceazing upon the conscience, Isa. 30.33.
this kindles Tophet, and sets it a fire like a river of Brimstone. Therefore
this is a wondrous sweet comfort and encouragement when he says, For mine
Anger is turned away from him. Whence in the next place we may observe,

That God will turn away his Anger upon Repentance.

When there is this course taken (formerly mentioned) to turn unto the Lord
and to sue for pardon: to vow Reformation, Ashur shall not save us, and a
through reformation of the particular sin; and when there is wrought in the
heart faith to rely on Gods mercy, as the Father of the Fatherless, in whom
they find mercy: then Gods Anger is turned away. God upon Repentance will
turn away his Anger. The point is clear, we see when the Lord has threatened
many grievous judgments and plagues for for sin, one upon the neck of
another, denounced with all variety of expressions in the most terrible manner:
yet after all that thundering, Deuteronomy. 28. and 29. It follows, And it shall come
to pass when all these things are come upon thee; Deuteronomy 30.1, 2, 3
the Blessings and the Curses which I have set before thee: and thou shall call
them to mind among all the nations whether the Lord thy God has driven thee:
and shall return unto the Lord thy God, etc. That then the Lord thy God will
turn thy Captivity, and have compassion upon thee, etc. After Repentance, you
see the promise comes presently after: not that the one is the meritorious
cause of the other; but there is an order of things, God will have the one come
with the other: where there is not sense of sin and humiliation, and thence
prayer to God for pardon, with reformation and trusting in his Mercy; there the
anger of God abides still. But where these are, His anger is turned away. God
has established his order, that the one of these must still follow the other.

Another excellent place to the forenamed, we have in the Chronicles. If my
people that are called by my Name, 2 Chro. 7.14.
shall humble themselves and pray: (as they did here in this Chapter Take words
unto your selves) and seek my face; and turn from their wicked ways: As they
did here, Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses etc. We will no
more rely on the barren false helps of foreign strength, what then? I will
hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
Here is the promise, whereof this text is a proof, so in all the Prophets
there is a multiplication of the like instances and promises; which we will
not stand upon now, as not being controversiall. It is Gods name so to do, as
we may see in that well-knowne place of Exodus. Jehovah, Jehovah, God,
Merciful, and Gracious, Long suffering and abundant in goodness, and Truth;
Exo. 34.6.7.
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and sin,
etc. And so it is said, At what time so ever a sinner repents himself of his
sins from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his sins out of my
remembrance, says the Lord God. The Scripture is plentiful in nothing more,
especially, it is the burden of EZe. 18, and.33. forgiveness of sins and
remoovall of wrath upon repentance.

And for Examples: see one for all the rest, let the greater include the
lesser. Manasseth was a greater sinner then any of us all can be, because he
was enabled with a greater authority to do mischief, all which no private
man, or ordinary great man is capable of, not having the like power, which he
exercised to the full in all manner of cruelty, joined with other gross and
deadly sins, and yet the Scripture shows, 2 Chr. 33.12.13.
that upon his humiliation, and praying he found mercy: God turned away his
anger.

That of the Prodigal, is a parable also fitted for this purpose; who had no
sooner a Resolution to return to his Father. Filius timet convitium, Luke 15.
etc. The son fears chiding; the father provides a banquet. So God does
transcend our thoughts in that kind: we can no sooner humble ourselves to
pray to him heartily, resolving to amend our ways, and come to him, but he
lays his anger a side to entertain terms of love and friendship with us. As
we see in David, who was a good man, Psa 32.3, 4.
though he slubbered over the matter of Repentance, all which while Gods hand
was so heavy upon him, that his moisture was turned into the drought of
Summer, he roaring all the day long. But when once he dealt thoroughly in the
business and resolved, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Let our humiliation be real and
through, with prayer for pardon, and purpose to reform, and presently God will
show mercy.

Because it is his Nature so to do: his Nature is more inclined to mercy then
anger: For him to be angry, it is still upon supposition of our sins. But to
be merciful and gracious, it always proceeds from his own bowels, whether
we be sinners or not; without all supposition God is still merciful unto whom
he will show mercy. Who is a God like unto thee (says the Prophet) that
pardons iniquity, Micah. 7.18.
and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, he retains
not his anger for ever; because he delights in mercy. Things natural come
easily, without pain, as beams from the Sun, water from the Spring, and as
heat from fire: all which come easily, because they are natural. So mercy and
love from God, come easily and willingly: it is his nature to be gracious and
merciful. Though we be sinners, If we take this course here (as the Church
does) to pray and be humbled; then it will follow, Mine anger is turned away
from him. The Use is,

Pro 28.13.
so here he says, mine Anger is turned away. As they confess, so he is
merciful to forgive them. It is good to observe the experiments of Gods truth.
Every word of God is a shield, Pro. 30.5.
that is, we may take it as a shield. It is an experimental truth whereby we
may arm our souls. This is an experimental truth, that when we are humbled
for our sins, God he will be merciful unto our sins, and allay his
anger; as it is in this text. Therefore it is said, Those that know thy name
will trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10.
for thou never failest those who put their trust in thee. Let us then open our
hearts unto God, and confess our sins unto him, and if we resolve
amendment, we shall find the truth of his gracious promises, he will turn
aside his anger, and will never fail us if we put our trust in him. Pro.
18.10.
The name of the Lord is a strong tower, and the righteous fly to it and are
safe. This name of mercy, grace, and favor, is a strong tower to distressed
consciences, let us therefore remember to fly unto it when our consciences are
awaked and distressed with sin, and sense of Gods displeasure. Seeing these
kinds of promises are as a city of refuge, let us run unto them, and we
shall not be pulled from the horns of this altar; as Ioab once was from his:
but shall at all times find grace and mercy to help us at the time of need:
it is a comfortable Point. Mine anger is turned away from him.



Anger of God, whereby we must judge of things, for, either it is 1.
Vindicative, or Anger. 2. Fatherly -- Anger.


God after our first conversion he remooveth his Vindicative anger; How anger
felt, may yet be said to be removed.
after which though sometimes he threaten and frown upon us, yet it is with a
Fatherly anger: which God also removes with the shame and correction attending
it, when we reform and amend our wicked ways. There is 1. A Child of Anger.
2. A Child under Anger.


Gods Children are never children of wrath and anger, after their first
conversion; but sometimes children under wrath, if they make bold with sin,
so as they cannot use their right of sonship to go boldly to the throne of
grace; because then, (though they have the right of sons) they conceive of God,
as angry with them; and cannot use it so long as they live in any sin against
conscience, and so continue, until they reform and humble themselves (as the
Church does here) after which they can and do rejoice again, claim their
right, and are not either children of wrath, or under wrath. David after he had
sinned that foul sin, was a child under wrath, not a child of wrath. So if
we make bold to sin we are children under wrath: for oft-times God begins
correction at his own house, 1 Pet. 4 17. Number 20.12. 2 Samuel 24.1. 1 Cor. 11.30.
if there be any disorder there. You know God was so angry with Moses, that he
was not suffered to enter into the land of Canaan. And David when he had
numbered the people, God was angry with him, and with the Corinthians also for
unreverent receiving of the Lord's Supper. But here is a course prescribed to
remove his fatherly anger, and to enjoy the beams of his countenance and
Sunshine of his favor in Christ: if we humble our selves, confess our sins
and fly unto him as the Church here does: then we shall find this made good:
For mine Anger is turned away from him. But it may be asked,





1. When he afflicts them, it is to correct them for their sins: after which
when they have pulled out the sting of sin by confession and humiliation, if
afflictions continue, his anger does not continue.

2. Affliction sometimes is for an exercise of Patience and Faith, and trial
of their graces; and for the exemplarie manifestation to others of Gods
goodness to them.

But even then they may know that things come not in anger unto them, by this,
How to know afflictions are not in wrath though they continue.
that after Repentance God speaks peace unto their conscience; so that, though
the grievance continue, it is with much joy in the Holy Ghost, and peace of
conscience, in which case, the soul knows that it is for other ends that God
continues it. Therefore the first thing in any affliction is to remoove away
the coare and sting thereof by humbling our selves, as the Church here does.
After which our consciences will be at peace for other things God has many
ends in correcting us: he will humble us, improove our afflictions to the good
of others; and will gain himself honor by our afflictions, sufferings, Rom
5.5.
and crosses. When God has shed abroad his love in our hearts by his Spirit,
then we can rejoice in tribulation, and rejoice under hope, though the
affliction continue, because the sting is gone, anger is remooved.

For mine anger is turned away from him. The last Point we observe from hence,
and gather from all these general truths is, this,

Where there is not Humiliation for sin, and hearty Prayer to God, with
reformation of our ways, flying unto God for mercy (who is merciful to the
Fatherless) there Gods wrath continues.

For as where they are performed his anger is turned away: so must it needs
follow, that where they are not performed his anger continues. Therefore, let
us examine our selves; The Spirit of God here speaks of healing backeslidings,
and of turning away iniquity; let us look well to our selves, and to the
present state of things, that our diseases be soundly cured, our personal
diseases, and then let us be sensible of the diseases of the land and pray for
them; for there are universal diseases and sins of a kingdom as well as
personal. And we are guilty of the sins of the times, as far as we are not
humbled for them. Paul tells those who did not punish the incestuous person, 1
Cor. 5.2.
Why are ye not humbled rather for this deed? Where there is a public
disease, there is a public anger hanging over upon that disease, the cure
whereof is here prescribed: to be humbled as for our selves so for others.
Therefore let us beware of sin, if we would shun wrath, especially of
Idolatry, or else we shall be sure to smart for it, as Ephraim did, of whom the
Spirit of God says: When Ephraim spoke trembling; Hos. 13.1.
he exalted himself in Israel: but when he offended in Baall he dyed. Ephraim
had got such authority, what with his former victories, and by the signs of
Gods favor among them, that when he spoke, there was trembling, and he exalted
himself in Israel. But when he offended once in Baall, that is when he became
an Idolater, he dyed. It is meant of the civil death especially; that he lost
his former credit and reputation. We see then the dangerous effects of sin,
especially of Idolatry, wherefore let us fortify our selves against it: and
bless God that we live under such a gracious, just, and mild King, and good
government, where there are such laws against this great sin especially; and
beseech God long to continue his life and prosperity for our good amongst us.
For Use then,

Take unto us words, humble our selves, and have no confidence in Ashur,
munition, people; or in the work of our hands: but trust in God, so shall we,
be happy and blessed. Whatsoever our enemies be; yet if we can make God our
rock, fortress and shield, then it is no matter who be our enemies. Romans 8.31.
If he be on our side who can be against us? Let us all (Ministers and all)
reform our selves, and stand in the gap, after the course here prescribed: and
go to God in a right manner, so we may dissipate all the clouds of anger
which may seem to hang over our heads, and find God experimentally making
this promise good to us, which he made then to his people: I will heal their
backesliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him.

Therefore let us do as Iaacob did with Esaw, A certain way to shun anger.
when he came incensed with mighty displeasure against his brother Iaakob comes
before him humbly, Genesis 23.3, 4.
prostrates himself before him; and so turns away his anger. So when God is
angry with us, and comes against us, let us humble our selves before him, to
appease him: as Abigall quieted David by humbling herself before him, 1 Samuel
25.23.
when he had a purpose to destroy her family. So let us come before God in
humility of fault, and God will turn away his anger. As when there was a great
plague begun in the army, Number. 16.48.
Aaron stood with his canser betwixt the living and the dead, offering incense
and making atonement for them, whereby the plague was stayed. So in any wrath
felt or feared, for our selves, or the state we live in: let every one hold his
censure and offer the incense of prayer; Take with you words. God is wondrously
moved to pity, Reve. 8.4.
by the incense of these sweet odours offered up by Christ unto the Father,
believe it, it is the only safe course to begin in heaven, such a beginning
will have a blessed ending, other courses, politic and subordinate helps must
also be taken, but all is to no purpose unless we begin in heaven: because
all things under God are ruled and moved by him; who when he is favorable
makes all the creatures pliable unto us; but especially makes this good; I will
heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away
from him.

The end of the sixth Sermon.
THE SEVENTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.5. J will be as the Dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the Lilly, and
cast forth his Root as Lebanon.

His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree and his
smell as Lebanon.


THE Church (as we heard) had been humbled, and therefore is comforted: it is
usual in the Scriptures, Joel. 1.27, 28. Hos. 30.14.15. Isa. ^ 18, 19. Deu.
3.1. Ier. 3.12. Ier. 3.12. Jer. 30.1.
especially in the Prophetical parts thereof, after terrible threatenings to
come with sweet promises: because God in all ages has a Church. Therefore God
in this Chapter takes this course, he makes gracious promises to this people,
grounded upon the former part of the Chapter, wherein God had dictated unto
them a form of Prayer, Repentance, and Reformation. Take with you words and
turn to the Lord, say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, etc. Whereupon a Reformation is promised, Ashur shall not save us,
we will not ride upon horses, etc. Which was a reformation of that national
sin which they were guilty of, false Confidence. Now (as we have heard) God
answers them to every particular. He makes a gracious promise, That he will
heal their backesliding, according to their Prayer, Take away all iniquity,
and to that, Receive us graciously, he answers, I will love them freely, for
mine anger is turned away from him.

Now it cannot be but that God should regard the desires of his own Spirit,
when both the words and Spirit proceed from him, therefore he goes on more
fully to answer their desire of doing good to them: saying, I will be as the
Dew to Israel, etc.

In which words the holy Prophet, does first by a Metaphar and borrowed speech
set down the ground of all happiness. So that there is here given a more full
satisfaction to the desires of the Church.

1. The cause of all, (I will be as the Dew) etc. 2. The particular Persons to
whom: (to Israel.) 3. The fruit of this follows: (he shall grow as the
Lilly, and cast forth his root as Lebanon.
Now the words read are a fuller satisfaction to the desires of Gods people,
which were stirred up by his own Spirit. I will be as the Dew unto Israel,
where,

1. You have set down, The cause of all, which follows: God by his gracious
Spirit will be as the Dew unto Israel.

2. And then upon that, the prosperous success this Dew of Gods Spirits has
in them, They shall grow as the Lilly.

Lilly grows, but has no stability: every thing that grows is not well
rooted. Therefore, he adds in the second place, They shall cast out their
roots as Lebanon, that is, with growth they shall have stability: not only
grow in hight speedily, but also grow fast in the root with firmness.

But his branches shall spread; whereby he shall be more fruitful and
comfortable to others.

Olive tree, his beauty shall be as the Olive tree for fruitfulness.

shall delight in them, be as the smell of Lebanon. Which was a wondrous
pleasant delightful place, which yielded a pleasant savor round about. So we
see what a complete kind of growth this is: wherein blessing upon blessing is
promised, the Holy Ghost cannot enough satisfy himself in variety of
comfortable expressions. Nothing is left unsatisfied that the heart can
propound. He will make them grow, be steadfast, fruitful, delightful, and
pleasant. So that we have here to consider.

1. The favor and blessing that he promises, to be as the dew to Israel. 2.
The excellency of it, in diverse particulars. 3. The order wherein it is
promised.
Before we come to the words themselves, if we remember and read over the
former part of the prophecy, we shall find it full of terrible curses; all
opposite unto that here promised, to show,

We can never be in so disconsolate a state, but God can alter all.

That God has a salve for all sores.
He has a right hand as well as a left, Blessings as well as Curses: Mercy as
well as Justice; which is more proper to his nature then that. Therefore, let
Christian souls never be discouraged with their condition and state whatsoever
it is.

Eccles. 7.14.
For, as there are many maladies, so there are many remedies opposite to them;
as Solomon says, This is set over against that, etc. Jf there be a thousand
kinds of ills, there are many thousand kinds of remedies. For, Zach. 1 19, 20,
21.
God is larger in his helps, then we can be in our diseases and distresses,
whatsoever they are: therefore it is good to make this use of it.

I will be as the dew unto Israel, and he shall grow as the Lilly: and cast
forth his roots as Lebanon: his branches shall spread, and his beauty be
large, etc. Whereunto tends all this largeness of expression? God does it in
mercy unto us, who especially need it, being in a distressed, disconsolate
estate. Therefore they are not words wastfully spent; we may marvel sometimes
in Isaiah, and so in some other Prophets, to see the same things in substance
so often repeated (though with variety of lively expressions) as it is (for the
most part) the manner of every Prophet? Surely, because it is useful and
profitable, the people of God need it. There is, nor never was any man in a
drouping sinking condition, but he desires line upon line, word upon word,
promise upon promise, expression upon expression.

One would think, is not a word of God sufficient?

Christ is all in all. What large expressions are here thinks a profane heart,
what needs this. As if God knew us not better then we know our selves.
Whenever thou art touched in conscience with the sense of thy sins, and
know how great, how powerful, how Holy a God thou have to deal with, who
can endure no impure thing, thou will never find fault with his large
expressions in his Word and Sacraments; and with the variety of his promises,
when he translates out of the book of nature into his own book, all
expressions of excellent things to spread forth his mercy and love. Is this
needless? No, we need all, he that made us, redeemed us, preserves us, knows
us better then we our selves, he who is infinite in wisdom and love, takes
this course.

And mark again in the next place, how the Holy Ghost fetches here this
comfort from things that are most excellent in their kind. They shall grow as
the Lilly, that grows fairly and speedily: And they shall take root as
Lebanon; to show that a Christian should be the excellentest in his kind, he
compares him in his right temper and state, to the most excellent things in
nature. To the Sun, to Lions, Trees of Lebanon, Cedars, and Olive Trees for
fruitfullnesse: and all to show, that a Christian should not be an ordinary
man. All the excellencies of nature are little enough to set out the excellency
of a Christian; he must be an extraordinary singular man. Says Christ, What
singular thing do ye? He must not be a common man. Therefore, when God would
raise his people, he tells them, they should not be common men, but grow as
Lillies, be rooted as Trees, fruitful as Olives, and pleasant beautiful, as
the goodly sweet smelling trees of Libanus. How graciously does God condescend
unto us, to teach us by outward things, how to help our souls by our senses:
that when we see the growth, fruitfulness, and sweetness of other things; we
should call to mind what we should be, and what God has promised we shall be,
if we take this course and order formerly prescribed. Indeed a wise Christian
endowed with the Spirit of God, extracts a quintessence out of every thing;
especially from those that God singles out to teach him his duty by, when he
looks upon any plant, fruit, or tree that is pleasant, delightful, and
fruitful, it should put him in mind of his duty.

I will be as the dew te Israel, etc.

These sweet promises in their order follow immediately upon this, that God
would freely love them, and cease to be angry with them: then he adds the
fruits of his love to their souls, and the effects of those fruits in many
particulars, whence first of all we observe,

Gods love is a fruitful love.

Wheresoever he loves, he makes the things lovely: we see things lovely; and
then we love them: but God so loves us, that in loving us he makes us lovely.
So says God by the Prophet, I have seen his ways and will heal him: I will
lead him also and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. Ezekiel 16.2, 3.
Isa. 5 7 18.
And from this experience of the fruitfulness of Gods love, the Church is
brought in rejoicing. Jsa 61.10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord; my soul shall be joyful in my God: for
he has clothed me with the garments of salvation; he has covered me with
the robe of righteousness: as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments,
and as a bride adorneth her self with her jewels. Thus he makes us such as may
be aimeable objects of his love, that he may delight in.

Do good unto us.

I will be as the dew unto Israel: and he shall grow up as the Lilly, etc.
Let us stand more upon Gods love then we have formerly done, and strive to have
our hearts inflamed with love toward God again. As the Prophet David does:
Psa. 116 1.
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice and my supplications. It may
be for outward condition, that even where God loves they may go backewards so
and so: but for their best part their souls, God will be as the Dew to them;
and they shall grow as Lebanon. God will be good to them in the best things.
And a Christian when he begins to know what the best things are concerning a
better life: he then learneth to value spiritual blessings and favors above
all other whatsoever. Therefore, God suits his promises to the desires of his
children; that he would water their dry souls, that he would be as the dew
unto them. Gods love is a fruitful love, and fruitful in the best things. As
we know what David says: There be many who say, who will show us any good,
Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness
in my heart, Psa 4.6, 7.
more then in the time that their corn, and their wine increased. So God fits
his gracious promise answerable to the desires of a gracious heart.

I will be as the Dew to Israel. To come to the words in particular, 2. The
excellencies of Dew in diverse particulars. Quest. Answ.
for this is the ground of all that follows, I will be as the Dew unto Israel.

How will God be as the Dew to Israel?

This is especially meant of and performed to the Church under the New
Testament, especially next unto Christ's time; Why the Grace of God is compared
to Dew.
when the Dew of grace fell in greatest abundance upon the Church. The
Comfortable, Sanctifying, Fruitful Grace of God is compared to Dew in many
respects. 1. Because it comes freely from God.


First, The Dew does come from above. God sends it, it drops from above and
cannot be commanded by the creature. So all other gifts and especially this
perfect gift, the Grace of God, comes from above, from the Father of lights:
there is no principle of grace naturally within a man. It is as childish to
think that Grace comes from any principle within us, as to think that the dew
which falls upon a stone is the sweat of the stone: as children think that the
stone sweats, when it is the dew that is fallen upon it. Certainly our hearts
in regard of themselves are barren and dry: wherefore Gods Grace, in regard of
the Original, is compared to Dew, which should teach us to go to God, as the
Church does here, and pray him to deal graciously with us, to do good to us,
for this cause laying open our souls unto him, to shed his Grace into them.

Grace comes insensibly and invisibly.
Thirdly, The Dew does fall Insensibly and Invisibly. So the Grace of God, we
feel the comfort, sweetness and operation of it, but it falls insensibly
without observation. Jnferiour things here feel the sweet and comfortable
influence of the Heavens, but who sees the active influence upon them, which
how it is derived from superior bodies to the inferior is not observable? as
our Savior speaks of the beginnings of grace and workings of it. Ioh. 3.1.
The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, or whether it goes: so is every one that is
borne of the Spirit. It works we know not how: we feel the work, but the
manner of working is unknown to us. Grace therefore is wrought undiscernably.
No man can see the conversion of another, nay no man almost can discern his
own conversion at first; Therefore this Question should not much trouble you;
show us the first hour, the first time of your conversion and entrance into
the state of grace. Grace (to many) falls like the dew, by little and little,
drop and drop, line upon line, it falls sweetly and undiscernably upon them at
the first. Therefore, it is hard to set down the first time, seeing (as our
blessed Savior speaks) grace at the first is wondrous little, likened to a
grain of Mustard Seed. But though it be small at first, Mark. 4.31, 32.
yet nothing is more glorious and beautiful afterward, for from a small seed,
it grows to overspread and be great, shooting out branches. And as the root
of Iesse was a despised stock and in show a dead root, yet thence Christ rose,
a branch as high as Heaven. So the beginning of a Christian, is despised and
little, like a dead stock as it were, Pro. 4.18.
but they grow upward and upward still, till they come to Heaven it self. Thus
we see there is nothing in the world more undiscernable in the beginning then
the work of grace, which must make us not overcurious to examine exactly the
first beginnings thereof, because it is as the falling of the Dew or the
blowing of the wind.

Again, as it falls undiscernably and invisibly, Grace works sweetly and
mildly upon the soul.
so very sweetly and mildly, not violating the nature or course of any thing,
but rather helping and cherishing the same, or if it make any chang in any
thing, it does it mildly and gently. So usually (unless it be in some
extraordinary case) God works upon the soul by his grace mildly and sweetly:
Grace works sweetly upon the soul, preserving its freedom, so as man when he
begins to be good shall be freely good from inward principles wrought in him.
His judgment shall like the course he takes, and be clean opposite to others
that are contrary, from an inward principle, as free now in altering his course
as formerly he was in following the other. There is no violence but in regard
of corruption. God works strongly and mildly; strongly for he changes a stone
into a fleshie heart, and yet sweetly, he breaks not any power of nature, but
advances it: for grace does not take away or imprison nature, but lift it up
and set it at liberty: for it makes the will stronger and freer, the judgment
sounder, the understanding cleerer, the affections more orderly, it makes all
things better, so that no violence is offered to nature.

Dew, In regard of the Operations of Dew. For what effects has Dew upon the
earth? first it cooles the air when it falls, and then with coolness it has
a fructifying virtue: for falling especially on tender herbs and plants, it
soakes into the root of them, and makes them fruitful. So it is with the
Grace of Gods Spirit, it cooles the soul scorched with the sense of Gods
Anger, as indeed all our souls will be (when we have to deal with God who is
a consuming fire) till we take that course to look upon him in Christ for the
pardon of sin: Heb 12.29.
after which his Grace and the sense of it cools, asswageth, and speaks
peace to an uncomfortable, disconsolate heart. This voice, Son be of good
comfort, 1. Grace like dew is a cooler.
thy sins are forgiven thee, O! this has a cooling in it: and this also, This
day shall thou be with me in Parradice, O! how it cooled and chered the good
thief, and comforted him. And so when God says unto the soul, I am thy
Salvation, O! when the soul feels this, how is it cooled and refreshed?

And the soul is not only cooled and refreshed, but, 2. Grace fructifieth as
dew does.
It is also sweetened and made fruitful with comfort to the soul. If we were
to see a man in the pangs of conscience, stung with fiery temptations, as with
so many fiery serpents and poisoned darts, which drink up the spirits, and
presents God a consuming fire, and Hell beneath full of insupportable torments
set on by the insupportable wrath of God: then we should know what it were to
have grace in this efficatious manner, cooling and refreshing the soul that
has these fiery darts stuck into it of violent strong temptations, which to
the present sense, are the flashes and beginnings of Hell. O! It is an
excellent thing to have the Grace of God in such a case to assuage and cool
the maladies of a distressed soul, which for the present seems to burn in a
flame of wrath. As it cooles, so also it makes the heart fruitful, our hearts
of themselves being as the barren wilderness and wild desert. Psalm. 107 33, 14.
Now God by his grace turns the wilderness into water springs, as it appears
in many places of the Prophets Says God: For I will power water upon him that
is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground, Isa 44 3. Jsa. 45 8.
I will power my Spirit upon thy seed, etc. So Grace it turns the barren
wilderness, the heart dry of it self, and makes it fruitful. We know what
Paul said of Onesimus, a fruitless servant, Philem. 16.
nay a fugitive thief; he is unfruitful no longer (says he) now that he is
become a convert, another, a new man, now he will do good service. A man is no
sooner altered by the dew of grace, but howsoever formerly he were a naughty
hurtful person, of whom every man was afraid, because of his wickedness, yet
now he is a fruitful person, and strives to bring forth fruits worthy of
amendment of life. Mat. 3.8.


6. Grace is unresistible.
And we may add one more in the next place, in regard of the unresistiblenesse
thereof; for as nothing can hinder the dew from falling from the sweet
influence of Heaven unto us, Job. 38 37.
or hinder the working of those superior bodies upon the inferior, or hinder
the wind from blowing: so, who can hinder Gods Grace? they may out of malice
hinder the means of it, and hinder the gracious working of the Spirit, by
discouragements in others: which is a sign of a divelish spirit, when yet God
has a hand in that too after a sort. For it raineth in one city and not in
another by Gods appointment, but nothing can hinder where God will have the dew
and water and shine of the influence of grace work, nothing in the world can
stop it. So it is said in that excellent Prophecy of Christ, and his kingdom.
Psalm. 72.6.
He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grass: as showers that water
the Earth, which as they cool and fructify, so come they unresistibly.

Let none therefore be discouraged with the deadness, drienesse, Use. Against
discouragement in regard of our barrennes in goodness.
and barrenness of their own hearts: but let them know that God does
graciously promise (if they will take the course formerly set down) to be, as
the dew unto them. Therefore let them come unto the ordinances of God with
wondrous hope, confidence and faith that he will be as dew unto them, that
seeing he has appointed variety of ordinances; the Word and Sacraments, he
will bless those means of his own ordaining and appointing, for his own
ends. He that has graciously appointed such means of grace, will he not
bless them? especially having promised; I will be as the dew unto Israel.
Therefore let us attend upon the ordinances, and not keep away though our
hearts be barren, dry and unfruitful: God is above the heart, and able to
turn the wilderness into a fruitful place: he can make the heart a fit
habitation for himself to dwell in. Let us by faith attend upon the
ordinances, if we find not comfort in one ordinance, let us go unto another,
and another, comfort and help shall come, especially, if with the Church, Cant.
3.4.
we go a little further. For the promise is, I will be as the dew unto Israel.

3. The order of Gods Promise.
But mark the order wherein he makes this promise; First, he gives grace to
pray to him. Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, do good to us.
Then he gives a spirit of reformation, promising amendment, whereupon this
follows, that he will forgive their sins, love them freely, etc. And be, as
the dew unto Israel. He will be as the dew unto Israel, but he will give them
grace first to be humbled, confess sin, and pray to God for grace and
forgiveness. There is an order of working in the soul: God gives
Justification before Sanctification, and before he freeth from the guilt of
sin, he gives grace to confess sin. If we confess our sins he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 Ioh. 1.9.
and to cleanse us from them, says S. John. Where these go before, grace will
follow: and where they do not, there will be no Sanctification. Therefore let
us consider the order, for wheresoever God takes away iniquity and heales their
souls in regard of the guilt of their sins: unto those he will be as dew.
Therefore if we have still barren souls, without desires or strength to
goodness; certainly our sins are still upon the file, for Justification is
never without holiness of life: Whosoever is in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17.
he is a new creature. When this is done, God will be as the dew: because he
does pardon our sins for this cause, that he may thereby fit us to be
entertained in the covenant, and are we fit to be in covenant with him until
our natures be altered? Therefore whenever he enters into covenant with any,
he changes their natures, that they may be friends, and have communion with
him. Then the same soul which cries take away all iniquity: desires also the
dew of grace to make it better; this order is not only necessary on Gods part,
but in regard of the soul also. For, was there ever any soul from the
beginning of the world that truly desired forgiveness of sins, which did
not also therewith desire grace? such a soul were but an hypocritical soul.
For if it be rightly touched with sorrow, it desires as well ability to subdue
sin, as forgiveness of sin: Holiness and Righteousness with
forgiveness. Luke 1.75.


loves freely: there also he gives the best fruits of his love, bestows the
dew of his grace to work upon and alter our natures. Christ came not by blood
alone to die for us, but by water also to sanctify us. He will not only love
freely: but he will be as the dew where he loves freely: therefore if we have
not sanctifying grace, we have not as yet pardoning grace. For, we know the
Prophet joins them both together: Psa. 32.1, 1.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile. If we retain a guilefull false spirit, our sins
are not forgiven, we see both these are put together.

Egyptians had the river Nylus that overflowed the land every year, caused by
anniversary winds, which so blew into the mouth of the river, that it could not
discharge it self into the sea: whereupon it overflowed the banks, and left a
fruitful slime upon the ground, so that they needed not nine as other
Countries, because it was watered with Nylus. Hereupon they did not depend upon
Gods blessing, nor were so holy as they should: but were proud of their river,
as is intimated by Moses unto the people. Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11.
But the land whether thou go in to possess it, is not as the land of
Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowest thy seed, and wateredst it
with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: But the land whether ye go to possess
it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinks water of the rain of heaven:
a land which the Lord thy God cares for, etc. They having more immediately
rain from Heaven, saw Gods hand in watering it, whereas the Egyptians did not.
And what makes a Papist to be so unthankful? He thinks he can with his own
industry water his own ground with somewhat in himself. What makes another
man thankful on the other side,? Because he knows he has all things by
dependence from the first cause: for as in nature, Act. 17.28.
In God we live, moove, and have our being: much more in grace, we have all
our nourishment, spiritual being, Mal. 4.2.
mooving and life from the dew of Heaven: all our heat is from the Sun of
Righteousness, which makes a Christian life, to be nothing else but a gracious
dependence. Phil. 4.13.
I can do all things (says Saint Paul) big and great words. O! but it is,
through Christ that strengthens me. These things must not be forgotten, for a
child of the Church, is a child of grace, by grace he is what he is, he has
all from Heaven. Eze. 29.9.
Suitable to the former place is that in Ezekiel. And the land of Egypt shall
be desolate and waste, and they shall know that I am the Lord, because he has
said, the river is mine, and I have made it. He shall be desolate, because he
boasts and brags of his river, and depends not upon God for the sweet showers
of the former and the latter rain: they boasted because it was a fat fruitful
country, which the Romans called their granary. But we must look for all
from Heaven; God by his Spirit will be as the dew.

You know in Paradise there were four rivers that watered the Garden of God,
that sweet place, That the head whence all blessing, come is in Heaven.
and made it fruitful; but the heads of all these rivers were out of Paradise.
So it is with the Church of God, Psalm. 46.4.
There is a River the streams whereof makes glad the City of God (as the
Psalmist speaks) many precious comfortable graces (the particulars whereof
follow) but where is the head-spring of that river? it is in Heaven. We have
all from God, through Christ the Mediator: So though we have of the Water and
Dew, yet notwithstanding the head and spring of all is from without the Church,
in Heaven, in Christ, in the Mediator. And therefore in all the excellent
things we enjoy in the Church, let us look to the Original first cause;
Christ by his Spirit, He is as the Dew to his Church.

Use of Direction, How to have grace to sanctify our natures.
Do as the Church does here, desire it of God. Lord teach me to see and know
my sins: Lord Take away all iniquity, and receive me graciously: Heal my
soul for I have sinned against thee. O love me freely, Turn away thy angry
face from my sins, and be as the Dew unto my barren soul; my dead soul, O
quicken it, make good thy promise, come swiftly, come speedily, come
unresistably like rain upon the mowen grass; Psalm. 72.6.
as showers to water with the dew of grace, and fructify my dry parched
soul. Thus we should be earnest with God for grace for our selves, and for the
Churches abroad, for our Church and State at home. Therefore let such an use be
made of it generally, as God and not other foreign helps may especially be
trusted in: for it is the only way to destruction, to let God alone, and to
trust to this body, and that body, for in this case (many times) God makes
those we thus trust in our destruction, as the Assyrians and Babylonians were
the ruin of the ten Tribes. But begin always first in Heaven, set that great
wheel a working, and he will make all things comfortable, especially for our
souls: then we shall not only find him to make good this promise, I will be
as the Dew unto Israel: but the residue which follow after.

He shall grow as the Lilly, etc. Those unto whom God is Dew, a double
blessing, he will make them grow, and so grow, as they shall grow up as the
Lilly: Thistles and nettles and ill weeds grow apace also, but not as Lillies;
but Gods children are Lillies, and then they grow as Lillies. Quest. Answ.
Christians grow like Lillies.


How do Christians grow like Lillies?

First, for beauty and glory. There is such a kind of glory and beauty in that
plant, that it is said by our Savior, 1. In regard of beauty and glory Mat.
5.29.
That Solomon in all his royalty was not arrayed like one of these, because his
was a borrowed glory from the creature, but the Lilly has a native beauty of
its own.

Again, 2. In regard of sweet fragrant smell.
the Lilly has a sweet and fragrant smell, so have Christians, a sweetness
and shining expressed in their conversation; as we have it a little after: His
smell shall be as Lebanon, etc.

And then again, 3. In regard of purity.
in regard of purity and whiteness: So Christians are pure and unspotted in
their conversation, and their aim is purity and unspottednesse: whiteness
betokens an unstained conversation. So the people and children of God, they are
Lillies, beautiful and glorious in the eyes of God, and of all those who have
spiritual eyes, to discern what spiritual excellency is: howsoever in regard
of the world their life be hidden. Their excellency is veiled with
infirmities, afflictions and disgraces by the malignant Church: yet in Gods
esteem, and in the esteem of his children they are Lillies; all the dirt in
the world cast upon a pearl, cannot alter the nature of it: So, though the
world go about to besmeere these Lillies with false imputations, yet they are
Lillies still and have a glory upon them; for they have a better spirit and
nature then the world has. And they are sweeter in their conversation then the
world; for when they have begun to be Christians, they sweeten their speeches
and discourses. There is no Christian who is not of a sweet conversation, so
far as grace has altered him, he is beautiful, lovely and sweet, and has
the whiteness of sincerity.

4. In regard of sudden growth.
Now as Gods children are Lillies, and then grow as Lillies for sweetness,
glory and beauty: so they are like Lillies especially, in regard of sudden
growth. When God gives a blessing there is a strange growth on a sudden, as
it is observed of this plant that it grows very much in a night; So Gods
children, when his blessing is upon them, they thrive marvellously in a short
space. To make this clear, The first spring of the Gospel was speedy in
growth Acts 2.41. Mat. 11.12.
when the dew of grace fell in our Saviors time upon the Christian world, what
a world of Lillies grew suddenly. Three thousand in one day, at one Sermon,
converted by Peter: The Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence in John Baptists
time, that is, the people thronged after the means of grace, and offered a
holy violence to the things of God. So when this dew of grace fell, it was
prophesied of it, Psalm. 110.3.
The youth of thy womb (says he) shall be as the morn^ng dew. The Dew comes
out of the womb of the morning, for the morning begets it. Thy youth shall be
as the dew of the morning; that is, they shall come in great abundance, as we
see it fell out in the first spring of the Gospel. In the space of forty
years by the preaching of the Apostles what a deal of good was done through a
great part of the world: How did the Gospel then break out like lightning by
means of that blessed Apostle Paul, who himself carried it through a great
part of the world.

And now in the second spring of the Gospel, when Luther began to preach: The
second spring of the Gospel was also speedy.
in the period of a few years, how many Countries were converted and turned to
the Gospel? England, Scotland, Swethland, Denmark, the Palatinate, a great
part of France, Bohemia and of the Netherlands. How many Lillies grew up here
on a sudden? Sudden growths are suspected, and well they may be, but when God
will bless; in a short space a great deal of work shall be done. For God is
not tied to length of time. He makes water to be wine every year in tract of
time, Water every year turned into wine.
for he turns the water of Heaven into the juice of the grape, so there is
water turned into wine, that done in tract of time, which he can do in a
shorter time, as he did in the Gospel, John. 2.1, etc. Where is the
difference? that he did that miraculously in a short time, which he usually
effects in continuance of time. So now many times he does great matters in a
short time, that his power may be known and seen the more: as we see now in
these wars of Germany, how quickly God has turned his hand to help his
Church, and hiss for a despised forgotten nation to trample down the
insulting, afflicting, menacing power of the proud enemy: and he can do so
still if our sins hinder him not. Surely if we stand still and behold the
salvation of the Lord, we shall see great matters effected in a little time.
They shall grow as the Lilly, the accomplishment of this promise is not wholly
yet come, for there be blessed times approaching, wherein when the Jews are
converted, They shall grow as the Lilly, in those glorious times there spoken
of, at the conversion of the Jews, Romans 11.
and fullness of the Gentiles coming in: the accomplishment whereof we expect,
to the rejoicing of our hearts; that they should at length prove indeed with
us the true children of Abraham.

Use of all, labor that the Dew of God, may prove the Dew of Grace, that God
would make us Lillies. If we would be beautiful and glorious, have a luster
upon us, and be as much beyond others as pearls are beyond common stones, and
as Lillies are better then Thorns and Briers, let us labor to have the Grace
of God, so to be accounted Lillies, whatsoever the world accounts of us.

Lillies, who cast a good and a sweet favor. For we shall gain by their
acquaintance, Pro. 12.26.
whom Solomon affirms to be better, and more exellent then their brethren
What are other people then? they are but Thorns; therefore let not those which
are Lillies have too much, or near acquaintance with Thorns, least they
prick us, and (as our Blessed Savior says) turning again all to be rent us.
Mat. 7.6.
It is said of our Blessed Savior in the Canticles, He feeds among the
Lillies. And indeed where is there any true delight to be had under Heaven, but
in their company who are gracious. What can a man receive from profane spirits
in regard of comfort of soul? nothing, they are as the barren wilderness that
can yield nothing, their hearts are empty, therefore their tongues are worth
nothing. But let our delight be with David toward the most excellent of the
land, Psalm. 101.6.
and then we shall not only grow as the Lilly, but (as it follows) we shall
cast forth our roots as Lebanon.

And cast forth his roots as Lebanon. Necessity of growth in diverse respects.
Because we have spoken of growth and shall have occasion to touch it hereafter,
we will not be large in the Point. God here promises a growth not only to the
Church, but to every particular Christian: and it is very necessary it should
be so; for without growth, neither can we give God his due Honor, nor he
receive the smell of a sweet Sacrifice from us, as is fit. Nor can we without
it with-stand our enemies, or bear our crosses that God may call us too.
Again, without growth and strength we cannot perform those great duties that
God requires at our hands of Thankfulness: nor do things so cheerfully and
sweetly as may be comfortable to us. In sum without growth, we can do
nothing acceptably, either to God or his people: the more Grace, the more
acceptance. Which is spoken that we may value the Promises, this especially
that we shall grow up in Grace and Knowledge, as the Lilly, and cast forth our
roots as Lebanon.

But how shall we come to grow?

1. We must go to God claiming the promises in a right order.
then for a heart to reform our ways, to enter in a new covenant for the time
to come, that we will not trust in Ashur, but will renounce our particular
personal sins, after which we shall find sanctifying grace, so as the dew of
Gods Spirit will make us grow: therefore, take this order to improove the
promises. Go to God for his love in Christ, for the pardoning of sin, and
accepting of us in him, that we may find a sense of his love in accepting of
our persons, in the pardoning of our sin, which is the ground of love: for
then this sense of his love will kindle our love toward him again, feeling
that we are in the state of grace. Then go to God for his promise in this
order: Lord, thou have promised that thou will be as the dew, and that we shall
grow as Lillies: make good thy promise then, that I may find the effectual
power of it transforming my soul into the blessed Image of thy dear Son.

And know, 2. We must use all means of growth.
that we must use all the means of growth together with the promise: for in
the things of this life, if a man were assured that the next year would be a
very plentiful year; would men therefore because they were thus forewarned,
hang up their plowes, and not prepare their ground, no, but they would the
rather be encouraged to take pains, because they know that howsoever God be
pleased to vouchsafe plenty, yet he will do it in the use of means, observing
and depending on his Providence. So when he has made gracious promises of the
Dew of his Grace, and of growth as Lillies, etc. This implies a subordinate
serving of his gracious Providence; therefore it is a way to stir us up unto
the use of all means rather, and not to take us off from them. Genesis 17.8.
Even as God when he told the Israelites: I will give you the Land of Canaan,
did only promise it, leaving the remainder to their conquest in the use of
means. Should this have made them cast away their swords? No, but it was that
they might fight, and fight the more courageously. So when God has promised
growth in Grace, should this make us careless? O no, it should make us more
diligent and careful, and comforts us in the use of means, knowing that our
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58.
Now Lord I know I shall not loose my labor in hearing, in receiving of the
Sacrament, in the communion of Saints, and use of sanctified Means; for thou
have made a gracious promise, that I shall grew as the Lilly, and that thou will be as the Dew unto me; therefore make thy good work begun effectual unto
my poor soul, that it may flourish and be refreshed as a watered garden. But
there are several sorts of growth formerly touched, either 1. A growing
upward, or 2. A growing in the root, or 3. A Spreading and growing in the
Fruit, and Sweetness.


Therefore Christians must not always look to have their growth in one and
the same place, but must wisely consider of Gods prudent dealing with his
children in this kind, as will be further seen hereafter in the particulars.

He shall cast forth his roots as Lebanon. That is, He shall cast and spread,
and so put forth his roots as Lebanon: he shall grow upward and downward; in
regard of firmness he shall be more rooted. Jn what proportion Trees grow
upwards, in that proportion they take root downwards: because otherwise, they
may be top heavy and overturne, a blast of wind taking advantage of their
tallness and weakness to root them out the sooner: therefore proportionable
to their spreading above, there must be a rooting in the ground. As the prophet
speaks to Hezekiah of Gods people, 2 King. 19.30.
And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah, shall yet again take
root downward and bear fruit upward. There must be firmness in the root,
as well as growth in the branches, for which cause, God here promises to the
Church and every Christian stability and fixednesse, that as he grows upward
like the Lilly, so he should grow downward, firm and strong.



The cause of the Saints stability. Ioh 1.16.
Especially from this, that they are now in the Covenant of grace, rooted in
Christ who is God-man, in whom they are firmly rooted. In Adam we had a root
of our own, but now our root is in Christ. All grace is first powered into
Christ's blessed Nature, and then at a second hand, Out of his fullness we all
receive grace for grace. Being rooted in Christ we become firm, for there is
in him an everlasting marriage and union. Romans 11.18.
The Root bears us, we bear not the Root: Christ bears us, we bear
not him. So now in the covenant of grace, all the firmness is out of us. Even
as salvation it self was wrought out of us by a Mediator; so it is kept by a
Mediator out of us: all goodness, grace, and favor of God to us is not in us
but in Christ, but it is so out of us as Christ and we are one. But now we
only speak of the cause of our firmness and stability, that because we are
in the state of grace, we have an everlasting firmness as we are in Christ
Jesus. God now making a second covenant, he will not have it disanulled as the
first was, Lev. 18.5.
for his second works are better then his first. His first Covenant was, Do
this and live, but his second is, Romans 10.9.
Believe this and live: So as howsoever our state in grace be but little, yet
it is of a blessed growing spreading firm nature, so sure, as what is begun in
grace, will end in glory, where God gives the first fruits, he will give
tenths, yea the full harvest, and all. Because by the covenant of grace, we
are one with Christ, who is an everlasting Head that never dies. Sub-servant to
this now we have promises in the covenant of grace, That we shall never depart
from him, and that he will never depart from us to do us good, he puts an
awband into our hearts, that we shall never depart from him: but this Point
being often touched, leaving it, we will come to answer some objections.



1. Psalm. 125.1.
they are as Mount Zion which cannot be remooved, but abides forever: which
though it may be shaken with earthquakes yet it is not remooved thereby. The
gates of Hell and sorrovves of death mav set sore upon them, but not prevail
against them, Mat. 16.18.
they may fall but not fall away, they may be as a wether-beaten tree, but not
as a tree pulled up by the roots: therefore they are compared here to a tree
whose root stands fast still. This much the Church after a sore trial and
endurance of much affliction confesses. Psalm. 44.17, 18 19.
All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee: neither have we
dealt falsely in thy covenant: our heart is not turned back, neither have our
steps declined from thy way, though thou have broken us in the place of
Dragons; and covered us with the shadow of death, etc.

And again, though they fall; yet they learn to stand fast by their falls,
are gainers by their losses, and become stronger by tneir weaknesses: as tall
Cedars the more they are shaken by the winds, the more deeply they take
rooting: So Christians, the more storms and blasts they have, the more they
are fastly rooted: that which we think to be the overthrow of Gods children,
does but root them deeper. As Peter after his fall took deeper rooting, and
David, etc. so after all outward storms and declinings, here is the fruit of
all; they take deeper rooting, Isa. 30.
whilst their sins are purged away by their fiery afflictions.



all his works being beautiful in time: Eccle. 3.11.
therefore they apprehend not their comforts as they ought, and so go mourning
the longer; the time of knitting divine experiences together not being yet come.

Moses for anguish and vexation of spirit: Exo. 6.9. Heb. 12.11.
No affliction (says the Apostle) for the present is joyous, though afterward
it brings forth the quiet fruit of Righteousness.

Satan's malice, who casts in floods of temptations, is great: so that the soul
cannot enjoy that sweet tranquillity and peace it otherwise might, casting in
doubts and numbers of what-ifs into the soul: so that for a time, he causes a
strong diversion in them, whence after that, there follows peace again, when
those temptations are seen and overcome.

It is long also of our selves, who are not armed for crosses and afflictions,
until we are suddenly surpized by them; and then leaving our watchfullnesse,
and forgetting our consolation, we are struck down for the present by them,
and cannot support our selves against them.

it comes also from Gods wise ordering and disposing Providence, who will not
do all at once: our comforts must come by degrees, now a little and then a
little: our experience, and so our comforts come together, after we have
honored God in dependence upon his will and pleasure; and yet this hinders
nor, but a Christian grows still though he be for the present insensible of
it: as a man is alive and grows whilst he sleeps, though he be not sensible
of it. Other objections have been formerly touched.

He shall cast forth his roots as Lebanon. We see then that the state of Gods
children is a firm and a stable condition, The difference of the godly and
wicked, the one having a foundation, the other none.
whence we may observe the difference betwixt Gods people and others. Gods
people are rooted and spread their root. But the other have rottenness in
their root, being cursed without any foundation. For take a man who is not a
good Christian, where is his foundation? only in the things of this world. Now
all here is vanity, and we our selves by trusting vanity become vain; Psalm.
62.9.
Every man in his best estate is altogether vanity; vanity in himself, and
trusts in vanity. What stablenesse can there be in vanity? Can a man stare non
stante? stand in a thing that stands not in it self? Will a picture continue
that is drawn upon the Ice? will it not fail and melt away when the Ice upon
which it is drawn thawes? So all these who have not the dew of Gods grace,
they are as a picture upon the water, have no foundation, and stand upon that
which cannot stand it self. Therefore the Scripture compares them to the
worst of grass, which has no good root, Psa. 129.6.
grass upon the house top, which has no blessing of those that come by, but
there stands perking up above others. So it is with men that have no grace,
they can perke up above others: but as they have no stable root, nor the
blessing of Gods people, stability, with the Spirit of God inwardly, and the
prayers of Gods people to water and bless them: so they perish and wither
quickly. Nay whole nations (if wicked) have no foundation. What is become of
the great Monarchies of the world? The Assyrian, Persian, Grecian and Roman
Monarchies? and for Cities themselves, they have died like men, and had their
periods. Only a Christian has a kingdom, a stable condition which cannot be
shaken: Heb. 12.28.
he takes his root strongly, and grows stronger and stronger till he grows
to heaven, nay indeed while he lives he is rooted in Heaven before his time,
That a Christian is firm and stable, because his root is in Heaven.
for though we be in Earth we are rooted in Heaven. Christ our root is in
Heaven, and his Faith which is wrought from Heaven, carries us to Christ in
Heaven, and love that grace of union following the union of Faith, carries us
to Christ also: even before our time, we are there in Faith, Love and Joy.
Therefore a poor Christian is firm and stable even in this life, having union
with Christ, though he creep upon the earth and seem a despised person, yet
his root is in Heaven, where he has union with Christ; His life is hid with
God in Christ: Coloss 3 3, 4.
who when he shall appear, he shall appear with him likewise in glory.
Therefore, if Christ be firm, the estate of a Christian must needs be firm:
For he is a Cedar, another man is as grass or corn upon the house top, Isa.
40.6.
All flesh is grass, says the Prophet: Object. I but they have wit and
memory, and parts, etc. yet they are but as the flower of the grass, perhaps
better then ordinary grass, but the grass withers, and the flower fades:
what continues then? O the word of the Lord, and comfort and grace by that
word, endures for ever, and makes us endure for ever. This is excellently set
down by the Prophet David, Psalm. 1.3.
we see there the righteous man is compared to a tree planted by the water
side, his leaf fails not. So a Christian is planted in Christ, he is still on
the growing hand, and his leaf shall not wither, Those who are planted in the
house of the Lord, Psalm. 92.13.
shall flourish in the Courts of our God, They shall still bring fruit in their
old age, they shall be fat and flourishing, they shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon.

A comfort from the firmness of our condition.
This clear difference, should stir us up to be comforted in our condition,
which is firm and stable. Why do we value crystal above glass? Because it
is brighter, and of more continuance. Why do we value continuing things,
inheritances above annuities? Because they continue. If by the strength of our
discourse we value things answerable to their lasting; why should we not value
the best things? our estate in grace, this is a lasting condition, for a
Christian is like a Cedar, that is rooted, and takes deeper and deeper root,
and never leaves growing till he grow to Heaven: He shall cast forth his
Roots as Lebanon.

what the Psalmist says of a Doeg a cursed man, who had a destroying power.
Why boastest thou thy self in mischief O mighty man? Psalm. 52.1.
the goodness of God endures continually. Why boastest thou thy self that
thou can do mischief and overturne Gods people? etc. Know this that the
good will of God continues. Boast not thy self, thy tongue devisest mischief,
as a sharp razor, God shall destroy thee forever. He shall cast he away and
pull thee out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of the land of the living.
Those men that rejoice in a destructive power, in their ability to do
mischief, and exercising of that ability all they can, they shall be plucked
out of their place, and rooted out of the land of the living. And as it is in
Job, Job. 27.21.
they shall be hurled away as a man hurles a stone out of a sling, Then what
shall the righteous say? they shall see and fear, and say: Lo this is the man
that made not God his strength, Psalm. 52.7.
but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in
wickedness. He thought to root himself so fast that he should never be
remooved, but at the last it shall come to pass, that all that see him shall
say: lo, see, what is become of him? this is the man, that trusted in his
riches, and made not God his strength, what is become of him? says David of
himself, I am like a green Olive tree in the house of God: Psalm. 52.8.
I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever. Let them trust if they will in
Riches, Power, Strength, and Favor with Saul and great men, yet
notwithstanding be Doeg what he will, I shall be a green Olive planted in the
house of God, etc.

So here is a double use the Scripture makes of these things. 1. The godly man
rejoices in his condition, and 2. Other men fear and grow wise not to trust
to their fading condition. They are (as the Prophet speaks) as a bay tree that
flourishes for a time, Psalm. 37.35.
and then after come to nothing, their place is no where found. They keep a
great deal of do in the world for a time, but afterward, where is such a
one? their place is no where found, no where comfortably, they have a place in
Hell, but comfortably a place no where. This is the estate of all those who
have not a good root, for says Christ, Mat. 15.13.
Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up. It is
true of every condition and of every man, if God have not planted him in that
excellent state, or do not in time, he shall be rooted up: for the time will
come that the earth will hold him no longer, he roots himself now in the
earth, which then shall cast him out. He cannot stay here long, Heaven will not
receive him, then Hell must. What a miserable thing is this, when we place and
bottom our selves upon things that will not last? when our selves shall
out-last our foundation? when a man shall live for ever and that which he
builds on is fading, what extreamitie of folly is this? to build on Riches,
Favor, Greatness, Power, Inheritance, which either must be taken from him, or
he from them, he knows not how soon.

What makes a man miserable, but the disappointing of his hopes, and crossing
of his affections? now when a man pitcheth his soul to much upon his worldly
things, from which there must be a parting, this is as if it were the rending
of the skin from the flesh, and the flesh from the bones, when a man's soul
is rent from that he pitcheth his happiness on, this makes a man miserable:
for misery is in disappointing the hopes and crossing the affections. Now only
a Christian plants his heart and affections on that which is everlasting, of
equal continuance with his soul: as he shall live for ever, so he is rooted
for ever in that which must make him everlastingly happy. These things we
hear, and they are undeniable true, but how few make use of them to desist
from going on in a plodding swelling desire of an earthly condition to overtop
other men? such labor to grow in taulenesse and height, but strive not to be
rooted. Now that which grows perking up in height, over-topping other things,
yet without root, what will become of it? It will be turned up by the Roots.

Now, How shall we grow to be rooted? How to be rooted in Grace.
For to attain heereunto, it is not only necessary to apply the promises and
challeng God with them, but to consider also what ways he will make then good.
1. To know Gods free grace


First, labor to know God and his free Grace in Jesus Christ: 2 Pet 3.18.
Grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; they go both
together, the more we grow in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of
the Grace of God in him, the more grace and rootednesse we shall have. For
that which the soul does clearly apprehend, it fastens upon in that measure
it apprehends it. Cleerenesse in the understanding breeds earnestness in the
affections, and fastness too. So the more we grow in knowledge, the more we
root our selves in that we know. And therefore the Apostle prays for the
Ephesians, that they might have the Spirit of Revelation, etc. That they might
know the height, breadth, depth and length of Gods love, that passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 3.14. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family of Heaven and Earth is named: that
he would grant you according to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened by
his Spirit in the inner-man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith,
that ye being rooted and grounded in love, in the sense of Gods love to us, and
so of our love to him again (for we are not rooted in love to God, till we be
rooted in the sense of Gods love to us) that you may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, the height and breadth, etc.

1. Labor to know the Promises.
And withal, labor to know the gracious Promises of Christ, for we are knit to
him by virtue of his word and Promises: which like himself are, Yea and Amen.
JEHOVAH yesterday, to day and the same for ever. 2 Cor. 1.20.
So al his Promises made in him, they are Yea and Amen, in themselves firm,
and firm to us in him. They are Yea and Amen: that is, they are made and
performed in Christ, in whom they are sure to be performed, and thereupon they
are firm too. God made them, who is JEHOVAH, and they are made in Christ that
is JEHOVAH. So God the Father JEHOVAH, he promises, and he makes them good in
Christ JEHOVAH, who is unchangeable.

But this is not enough, 3. Our hearts must be stablished on that which is
firm.
we must labor to have our hearts stablished, that they may rely firmly on
that which is firm. For if a thing be never so firm, except we rely firmly
on it, there is no stability or strength from it. Now when there is strength in
the thing, and strength in the soul, that strength is impregnable and
unconquerable strength. In Christ they are Yea and Amen, in whom he stablisheth
us, annoints us, seals us, and gives us the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts.

How does God stablish us upon the Promises? How God does stablish us.
The rest which follows is an explication of this; when he gives us the
earnest of the Spirit, and seals us to be his, in token he means to make good
the bargain, then we are established. But we are never firmly established,
till we get the assurance of salvation. Then as the Promises are Yea and Amen
in themselves, so we are stablished upon them, when we are sealed and have the
earnest of the Spirit. Let us labor therefore to grow in the knowledge of Gods
love in Christ, to know the height, breadth, depth, and length of it, and to
grow in all the gracious Promises which are made in Christ, who is Amen
himself, as his Promises are, and then when we are sealed and anointed by the
Spirit, we shall be so stablished that nothing shall moove us. Therefore let us
use all means for the establishing of growth in us, the Word and Sacraments
especially. For as Baptism admits us into the house of God, so by the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the blessed food of the soul, we are
strengthened. In the use of these means, let us make suite unto God to make
good his gracious Promise unto us, that we shall grow as Lillies, and take
root, as the Cedars in Lebanon.

Let us know that we ought every day to labor to be more and more rooted: do
we know what times may befall us? We have need to grow every day, to grow
upward, and in breadth, and in depth. If we considered what times we may live
to, it should force us to grow every way, especially in humility, that root
and mother or graces, to grow downward in that, to grow in knowledge and faith
until we be filled with the fulness of God.





Yet notwithstanding, it should be the endeavor of all to grow what they can
in grace, when, if they grow not so fast as others, let them know that there
are several ages in Christ. A young Christian cannot be so planted and so
deeply rooted as another that is of a greater standing. This should not
discourage any, seeing there are babes in Christ, as well as strong men.
Therefore where there is truth of heart, with endeavor to grow better and
better, and to use all means, let no man be discouraged. Remember always this
for a truth, that we may grow, and we ought to grow, and the children of God
ordinarily have grown more and more, both in fruitfullnesse and steadfastness
every way, but not with a like growth in measure, or time. Therefore labor to
make use of these Promises, and not to favor our selves in an ungrowing
estate, for grace is of a growing nature. If it grow not in fruitfullnesse, yet
it grows in the Root; as a plant sometimes grows in fruitfullnesse,
sometimes in the Root. There is more virtue in Wintertime in the Root, then
in the fruit which is gone. So a Christian grows one way if not another:
though not in outward demonstration, yet in Humiliation. God sometimes sees it
necessary, that our branches should not spread for a while; but that we should
grow in Humility, by some faults and sins we fall and slip into, that we may
see our own weakness, and look up.

Let us labor therefore who have so long enjoyed such store of blessed means,
under the dew of Gods grace and the influence of his Spirit, in the Paradise of
God, his House and Church, having so long lived in this Eden, let us labor now
to spread, and grow in fruitfullnesse, that so we may be filled with the
fulness of God. It is the chief thing of all to be rooted and grow in grace.
You see, God when he would single out a blessing, he tells them not, that they
shall grow rich, that they shall spread out and grow rich in the world. No, but
you whom I love freely, take this as a fruit of it, You shall grow as the
Lilly, you shall grow fruitful as the Olive, etc. This is the comfort of a
Christian, though he grows downward often in the world, and things of this
natural life, yet he grows upward in another condition, as Lillies and
Cedars, they grow downwards one way, but they grow upwards another. Perhaps
they may decay in their state and favor, and in their practice and cunning in
this life: but a Christian, if he be in the use of right means, and put in
suite the gracious Promises, he is sure still to grow in Grace, in Faith and
Love, and in the inner man.

Is not this a comfort, that a Christian has a comfortable meditation of the
time to come in all his crosses? That it is for better and better still: that
as in time he is nearer Heaven, so he shall be fitter and fitter, and nearer
and nearer still with a disposition suitable to the place. That the time to
come is the best time, and that he shall grow every way, in height, in breadth,
in depth and length, SER. VIII.
and apprehension of Gods love: and that the more he grows in knowledge of
these things, the more he shall grow in all dimensions, being as sure of
things to come, as of things past: and that neither things present nor to come,
shall ever separate him from the love of God in Christ. What a comfortable
state is a Christian in, who is always on the mending hand, that is such a
child of hope, when the hope of the wicked shall perish? Let us labor
therefore, that we may be in such a case and state of soul, as that thoughts
of the time to come may be comfortable: that when we think we must be
trasplanted hence out of the Paradise and Eden of Gods Church, into a heavenly
Paradise, that all our changes shall be for the better. What a fearful thing
is it to be in the state of nature? What foundation has a man in that estate,
who has no root here, and that root he has will fail him ere long? How
fearful is it for such a man to think of a change, when it is not a change
for the better?

Here is wisdom, if we will be wise to purpose, let us be wise this way,
labor in the first place, to prize Gods favors, and to know how to come by
them in the use of all means. Look to God for the performance of these
gracious promises: for they are not of what we shall do in our selves; but
what God will do in the Covenant of grace. And if a Christian should not be
rooted and grow stronger and stronger, we should not fail, SER. VII.
but God and Christ should fail, who is our root and bears us up. Therefore
God has taken upon him the performance of all these things; what remains
from us, but a careful using of all means; and in the use of all, a going out
of our selves to God, That he would be as the Dew to us, and cause us by the
dew of his Spirit to grow more and more rooted in grace as long as we live in
this world; and then our rooting and stability lies upon God, not upon us: he
fails if we fail; who has undertaken, That we shall grow as the Lilly, and
cast forth our Roots as Lebanon.

The end of the seventh Sermon.
THE EIGHTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.6, 7. His branches shall spread, his beauty shall be as the Olive tree
and his smell as Lebanon.

They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive as the
Corn, and grow as the Vine, the sent thereof shall be as the Vine of Lebanon.


WE have heard at large heretofore what petitions God put into the heart and
mouth of his Church: as also what gracious answer God gives his own Petitions:
he cannot deny the prayers made by his own Spirit. And as he is goodness it
self, so he shows it in this, that he goes beyond all that we can desire,
think or speak: his answer is more transcendent, as the Apostle speaks: he
does exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.19.
etc. For whereas they in particular and in brief say, Do good to us, and
receive us graciously: He tells them, He will be as the Dew unto them: and
from thence, being Dew to them, is then spreading and growing as a Lilly, and
casting of their roots as Lebanon: and their Branches shall spread, etc. and
all this to encourage us to come to so powerful and large-hearted a God; who,
as he is able to do more then we desire of him: so he will also do it. He
will be as the Dew unto us. This is the general of all, for all other
fruitfullnesse comes from this: 1. God will be as the Dew, and then 2. They
shall grow as the Lilly, and cast their Roots as the Cedars in Lebanon, they
shall not only grow upward but downward, for the Lilly quickly spreads it
self forth: but they shall be like the trees of Lebanon for steadfastness; and
then spread in breadth, grow in all dimensions. Which is fulfilled of the
Church in general, and of every particular Christian, when once he is in
Christ, using sanctified means: they grow then in the root, and upright, and
in every dimension: His Branches shall spread, and then His beauty shall be as
the Olive Tree.

Which though fruitful and excellent, yet because it has no sweet smell, it
is added: His smell shall be as Lebanon.

These excellencies promised to the Church of God, are not all in one tree, but
yet they are in some sort in every Christian, what agrees not all to one plant,
agrees to the plants of Righteousness; they grow upwards and downwards,
spread and are savoury and fruitful: all agrees to a tree of righteousness.
We say of man he is a little world, a compendium of this great world, as
indeed there is a comprising of all the excellencies of the world in man; for
he has a being with those creatures who have only that, and therewith he has
growing sense and reason, whereby he has communion with God and those
understanding Spirits the Angels: so that he is as it were a sum of all the
excellencies of the creatures, a little world indeed. The great world has
nothing, but the little world has the same in some proportion. So it is in
Grace, a Christian has all excellencies in him that are in the world: there is
not an excellency in any thing but it is in an higher kind in a Christian. He
has the beauty of the Lilly, and he grows up in spreading, smell and
fruitfulness; his wisdom exceeds that of all the creatures: there is not an
excellency in nature, but we have some proportionable excellency in grace
which is above it. God uses these outward things to help us, that we should
do both body and soul good by the creatures. Whatsoever does our bodies good,
either by necessity or delight, they help our souls: as plants and trees, not
only refresh the outward man, and the senses, but also they teach our souls,
as here the Holy Ghost teaches them by outward things. First it is faid His
Branches shall spread.

When God enriches the soul with saving grace, one shall grow every way and
flourish abundantly, extending forth their goodness one every side largely to
the knowledge and open view of others, and then further, His Beauty shall be as
the Olive tree.

What is the beauty of the Olive tree? to be useful, fruitful, and to bring
forth good fruit. Indeed the glory of a tree is to be laden with fruit, and
useful fruit, which is the best property of fruit to be useful and
delightful. So the glory of a Christian, who is a plant of righteousness, of
Gods own planting, is to abound in fruits of Righteousness. Indeed the Olive
is a very fruitful tree, and the oil which comes and distills from it has
many excellent properties agreeing to graces.

How the fruitfulness of the Olive is compared to diverse graces.
that will be above the rest: so Grace it commands all other things, it gives
a sanctified use of the creature and subdues all corruption.

one is hostile to the other as Solomon speaks, The Just is abomination to
the wicked. Pro. 29.27.


Zachary, there is mention made of two Olives before the Lord, Zach. 4 3.
which feed the two candlesticks. And Olives of Grace, have always fatness
distilling from Christ to feed his lamp with oil, Gods Church has always
oil: and those that are Olives, they keep the Church by their particular
calling.

1. He shall be fruitful as the Olive, and

2. Abundant in fruit as the Olive.

3. Constant in fruit, like the Olive

For it bears fruit much, and never fails, no not in winter: and has a
perpetual greenness. Indeed the child of God has a perpetual verdor: as it
is Psalm. 1, his leaf never fails: Psalm. 1.3.
Because that which is the cause of flourishing never fails him. Which causes
are two,

1. Moisture.

2. Heat.

For we know Moisture and Heat, Causes of the perpetual flourishing of the
Saints.
these two are the causes of all kindly growth. If a tree have more moisture
then heat, then it is waterish, if it have more heat then moisture, then
there is no bigness in the fruit. So true it is, that moisture and heat are
the causes of fruitfullnesse, in a good proportion. So Gods children having the
Son of Righteousness always shining upon them, and being always under the
Dew of grace (the promise being, to be as the Dew to Israel) having all Dew to
fall upon them for moisture: and having the Son of Righteousness to shine
upon them to make them fruitful, their leaf never fails, they never give
over bringing forth fruit: because they have in them causes perpetuating
fruitfulness, though not alike. Because Christ by his Spirit is a voluntary,
and not a natural cause of their fruitfulness. That is, he is such a cause as
works sometimes more and sometimes less, to show that grace springs not from
our selves, and to acquaint us with our own weakness and insufficiency. Heaven
is the perfection of all both Graces and Comforts. 1 Pet 1.4.
Wherefore Peter calls the state of Heaven, an inheritance, immortal and
undefiled, that fades not away: Why is that an estate of grace and comfort more
then this of this world? Because it is a never fading estate, there they are
always in one tenure, and because Christ shows himself always there, there is
abundance of water to moysten them, and heat to cherish them. There is no
intermingling or stopping in growth as is here; therefore it is an inheritance
that fades not away, having the supply of a perpetual cause of flourishing.

This in some degree is true of the Church on earth, it is the inheritance of
God that fades not, and Christians therein are Olives that bring forth fruit
constantly, having a perpetual freshness and greenness. Psalm. ^2.12.
So the Righteous man is compared to the Cedars of Lebanon which bring forth
much fruit in their age: he shall be fruitful as the Olive, from all which
this point formerly touched follows.

That it is the Excellency and Glory of a Christian to be fruitful in his
place.

Both to be fruitful in his place as a Christian, and in his particular
calling. To be fruitful as a Magistrate, as a Minister, as a governor of a
family, as a neighbor, as a friend, to be fruitful in all. Because in
Religion every near relation is as it were a joining together of the body of
Christ one to another, by which some good is derived from one to another. God
uses these relations as conduits to convey graces. A good Christian, the
meanest of them is a good neighbor, and does a great deal of good, being
fruitful as a neighbor, fruitful as a friend, much more as a husband, as a
Magistrate, as a Minister. These relations are a knitting to Christ, by which
fatness and sap is derived from the head for the good of the whole body.
Therefore a Christian in all relations is fruitful. When he comes to be a
Christian, Hest. 4.14.
he considers like good Mordecai what good he may do: as he told Hester, what
if thou be called to the kingdom for this purpose? So a Christian will reason
with himself, what if I be called to be a Magistrate or a Minister for this
purpose? what if I be called to be a friend for such or such a purpose: to do
this or this good? indeed such are gracious Quaeres made to a man's soul, to
enquire for what purpose has God raised me? to do this or that. To be idle,
or barren, or noisome. O no, to be a plant of Gods planting: my glory shall be
my fruitfullnesse in my place.

Therefore let us every one consider with our selves, wherefore God has set us
in the Church in our particular standings. Wherein let us remember this, that
howsoever God may endure barrenness out of the Church in want of means; yet
he will never endure it under means. It is better for a bramble to be in the
Wilderness then in an Orchard; for a weed to be abroad, then in a garden
where it is sure to be weeded out, as the other to be cut down. If a man will
be unprofitable, let him be unprofitable out of the Church: but to be so
where he has the dew of grace falling on him, in the means of salvation,
where are all Gods sweet favors; to be a bramble in the Orchard, to be a
weed in the Garden, to be noisome in a place where we should be fruitful,
will God the great Husbandman endure this? He will not long put it up; but that
he exercises his children with such noisome trees to try them, as he has
some service for these thorns to do, to scratch them: so were it not for such
like services for a time, he would weed them out and burn them, for
whatsoever is not for fruit is for the fire: Mat. 3.10.
Yea, every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and
cast into the fire.

And the more to stir us up hereunto, let us know that wheresoever the dew of
grace falls, and where there is the means of salvation, that at that very
time, there is an axe, an instrument of vengeance laid to the root of the
tree, which is not struck down presently, but it is laid to the root, that is
vengeance is threatened to the tree, to that plant which has the means, and
brings not forth good fruit in time and season. What is the end thereof? to be
hewn down and cast into the fire. As we see the Church of the Jews, when
Christ came, the Messiah, the great Prophet of the Church, never was there more
means of salvation: yet even then, what says John Baptist, Now, even now, is
the axe laid unto the root of the tree; and indeed in a few years after, the
whole tree, the Church of Jews was cut down. And Revel. 6. we see, after the
Rider on the white horse, which is the preaching of the Gospel, there comes a
red bloody Horse, and a pale Horse: War and Famine. After the white Horse,
his triumphant Chariot, the preaching of the Gospel if this take not place,
that it win and gain not: what follows after? the red and the pale Horse,
War, Famine, and Destruction. It will not be always with us as it is; for the
Gospel having been so long preached, we having been so long planted in Gods
Paradise the Church: if we bear not fruit, The axe is laid to the root of the
tree: God will strike at the root, and root up all, therefore let every one in
their place be fruitful.

Every one that is fruitful, God has a special care of. The benefit of
fruitfullnesse. Deuteronomy 20.19, 20.
If any tree were fruitful, the Israelites in their conquests were to spare
that, because it was useful, and they might have use of it. So God will
always spare fruitful trees, and have a special care of such in common
calamities. Let us therefore be exhorted not only to bring forth fruit, but to
bring forth fruit in abundance, to study to excel in good works, the word in
the Original is, A Standerdbearer: to stand before others in good works. As
it is in Titus, Titus 3.8.
labor to be as Standerdbearers, to go before others in good works: strive
to outgoe others in fruitfullnesse; for therein is the excellency. For those
both in the sight of God and men are in most esteem, who are most fruitful in
their callings and places. The more we excel in fruitfullnesse, the more we
excel in comfort: and the more we excel this way, the more we may excel: for
God will tend and prune good trees, John 15.2.
that they may bring forth more and better fruit. And the more majesty we walk
with, the more we dampe the enemies, seeing them all under our feet; a
growing Christian never wants abundance of encouragement, for he sees such
grounds of comfort, as that he walks impregnable and invincible in all the
discouragements of this world, breaking through all, Pro. 30.30.
as Solomon says, it is a comely thing to see a Lion walk: so much more it is
to see a valiant strong well-growen Christian (who is bold as a Lion) abound in
good works.

It is said, His beauty shall be as the Olive, and his smell as Lebanon; the
Olive of it self has no sweet smell, therefore it is made up by another
resemblance.

His smell shall be as Lebanon. Lebanon stood on the North side of Judea; and
was a place abounding with goodly trees, and all sweet plants whatsoever, which
cast a wondrous sweet sent and smell a far off: as some Countries abound so
in sweet fruits and simples, as Oranges, Lemmans and the like, that the
fragrancie of the smell is smelt of passengers as they sail along the Coast.
So was this Lebanon a place full of rare fruits and fragrant flowers, which
cast asent a far of. Now, hence the Holy Ghost fetches the comparison; They
shall smell as Lebanon: that is, as those plants in Lebanon which cast a sweet
and delightful smell a far off: whence we will only observe this,

That a Christian by his fruitfullnesse does delight others.

He is sweet to God and man, as the Olive and the Vine speak of their
fruitfullnesse, They delight God and man. So a Christian, Iud. 9.9, 13.
both alive and dead he is pleasing and delightful to the spirits of others,
to God, and all that have the Spirit of God. As for God himself, we know that
works of mercy are as it were a sweet odor; he is delighted with good works,
Phil. 4.18.
as with Sacrifice, smelling a sweet savor from them, Psalm. 141.2.
and their prayers ascend as sweet incense before him. Every good work is
pleasing and delightful to God, who dwells in an humble heart, Pro. 11.20.
and broken spirit: The upright are his delight. We see likewise how Christ
commends the graces of his Church, which whole book is full of praises in this
kind one of another. The Church sets out the praises of Christ, and Christ the
praises of the Church. The Church is sweet, Cano. 2.14.
O let me hear thy voice for it is sweet and lovely; The Churches voice is
sweet praying to God or praising him. So whatsoever comes from the Spirit of
God in the hearts of his children is sweet, God lays to heart the voice of his
children.

And as it is true of God, so is it of Gods people, they are delighted with the
savor of those things that come from other of Gods people. For they have
graces in them, and therewith the Spirit of God which is as fire to set a work
all those graces in them. For it is the narure of fire where it incounters with
sweet things, to kindle them and make them smell more fragrant and sweet. So a
Spirit of love makes all sweet and pleasing whatsoever in the children of God:
it puts a gracefulness upon their words; making their reproves, admonitions,
comforts, and whatsoever comes from them to have a delightfullnesse in them:
because all is done in love, and comes from the Spirit of God, which carries a
sweetness in it, to all those endowed with the same Spirit.

Josiah, whose very name was like the ointment of the Apothecarie. So the name
of those who have stood out for good, and have been good in their times, it
carries a sweetness with it when they are gone. The Church of God rises out
of the ashes of the Martyrs, which hitherto smells sweet and puts life in those
who come after: so precious are they both dead and alive.

Paul left behind him by his writings to the Church, even to the end of the
world? what fragrancie of delightful smells have the holy ancient Fathers and
Martyrs left behind them? Mat. 26.
a good man should be like the box of ointment spoken of in the Gospel, which
when it was opened, the whole house was filled with the sweetness thereof, so
a good man should labor to be full of sweetness, willingness and abilities
to do good, all kindled by a Spirit of love in him, that when he is opened,
all should be pleasing and delightful that comes from him. Christ never
opened his mouth but good came from him, and the Heavens never opened in vain:
therefore in opening of our mouths, we should labor to fill the places where
we are with a good savor. O how contrary is this to the condition of many,
what comes from them? filthy speeches and oaths, nay that which should be their
shame they glory in. We see it is the glory of a tree to be fruitful, and to
cast forth a good savor, like the trees of Lebanon. What vile spirits then are
such men led withal, who delight to offend God and man by their impious
speeches? who yet are so bold as to show their faces, to outdare others that
are better then themselves: such are contrary to all Gods senses. The Scripture
condescends so far to our capacity, as to attribute senses unto God, of
feeling, smelling and touching, etc. So God is said to look upon his children
with delight, and to hear their prayers. Cant. 2.14.
Let me hear thy voice, etc. And he tastes the fruit that comes from them. So
on the contrary, all his senses are annoyed with wicked men and vile persons,
who are abominable to God, as the Scripture speaks. As a man that goes by a
stinking dunghill stops his nose and cannot endure the sent. So the
blasphemous breath of graceless persons, it is abominable to God, as it were,
God cannot endure such an odious smell, Hab. 1.13.
and for his eyes he cannot endure iniquity, to look upon the wicked, and for
his ears, their prayers are abominable, how abominable then are their
persons whence those prayers proceed? they have proud hearts hating God and
man, wherefore praying out of necessity not love to him, they are abominable.
And so for feeling, Isa. 1.11.
your sacrifices are a burden unto me, I cannot bear them, Amos. 2.13.
and the Prophet complains that God was burdened and loaded under their
sins, as a cart pressed till it be ready to break under the sheaves. All
his senses are offended with wicked men. This hardened wretches think not off,
that whilst God fills their bellies with good things, go on in security, but
the time will come, when they shall know the truth of these things, what it is
to lead an odious abominable life, contrary to God and all good men. Hence we
see what we should be, that we may give a sweet sent: His smell shall be as
Lebanon.

Wicked men know this very well, that the lives, speeches, and courses of good
men for the most part are fruitful beyond theirs, therefore what they can,
they labor to cast aspersions upon them that they may not smell so sweet, so
crying down those who are better then themselves, that they may be the less
ill thought of: and setting a price upon all things in themselves and their
companions. Take me a knot of cursed companions, and they are the only stout,
the only wise and learned men, all learning it must live and die with them:
and all other men, though incomparable beyond them in abilities, in grace, in
fruitfulness to do good, they are no body, and this policy the Devil
teaches them. But this will not serve the turn, for God both in life, and
after death will raise up the esteem of such who have been fruitful, Pro.
10.7.
when, The memory of the wicked shall rot, and not be mentioned without a
kind of loathing. Therefore let no man trust to this foolish policy, to cry
down all others that are better then themselves, thinking thereby themselves
shall be better esteemed. This will not do, for as all other things, so our
good name is at Gods disposing. It is not in the world to take away the good
name or acceptance of good people; for they shall have the in spite of world,
a place in the hearts of Gods people, who are best able to judge. The next
thing promised is,

They that dwell under his shadow shall return.

The Holy Ghost it seems cannot express in words and comparisons enough the
excellent condition of the Church and of the Children of God, when they are
once brought into the state of Grace. The former words concern the excellency
of the Children of God in themselves: and these the fruitfullnesse and
goodness of them that are under them, who shall be brought into the families
and places where they live. They that dwell under his shadow, under the shadow
of Israel, shall return and revive as the corn: and grow as the Vine, etc.
For so it is most fitly meant of Israel. For formerly it is said. I will be
as the Dew unto Israel. Originally it is meant of Christ's shadow; but because
whosoever dwells under the Churches shadow, dwells under Christ's, therefore it
is fitly applied to Israel: They that dwell under Isreal's shadow shall
return. What returning? Return to God by Repentance, this is supposed: for
those that dwell in the Church of God, if they belong to God, by the help of
good means they shall attain to reformation and Repentance. But it is
especially meant of that which follows upon it, They shall return; that is,
they shall revive, as a man's spirits after a swound are said to return, and
things after a seeming decay and deadness are said to be quickened and return
again. So all that dwell under the shadow of Israel, they shall return to
God by Repentance: They shall Return, having a greater vigor and liveliness,
recovering that which they seemed to have lost before.

They that dwell under his shadow shall Return.

When God will bless any people he will bless all that belong to them, and
are under them, because they are blessed in blessing them, even as we are
touched when our children are stricken: God strikes the father in the child,
the husband in the wife, the master in the servant, because there is some
relation and dependence betwixt them. As it is in ill, so it is in good, God
blesses the father in the child, the King in the subject, and the subject in
the King God blesses one in another. And in blessing because God loves the
Church, all the friends of the Church are the better for it. They prosper that
love the Church, Psalm. 122.6.
though they be not members of it, all that bless Abraham shall be blessed,
though they be not actually good, yet if they wish him well, a blessing is
promised. So when God blesses a man to purpose, he blesses all that belong to
him, all that be under his shadow fare the better. The point to be handled is
this

That the Church it self yields a shadow, being shadowed it self by Christ,
who spreads his wing over it. Now what is the use of a shadow.

1. It is for a retiring place to rest in.

2. It is for Defense against the extreamitie of heat.

3. It is for Delight, If the shades be good and wholesome,

For as Philosophers express the Nature of trees, there be some trees which
yield noisome shadows, some trees have a heavy noxious dangerous shadow,
because there comes a sent from the tree (as Naturalists observe) which annoyes
the brains. But he speaks here of good trees. Israel is a tree that yields
a shadow unto all, that is all that are under Israel shall rest quietly, and
not be annoyed with the heat of Gods wrath and the like, they shall be
delighted having a sweet refreshing under the Church.

God in Scripture is often said to be a shadow, and his people to be under the
shadow of his wings. Psalm. 36.7.
But God and the Church are all one in this, for they that are under the
Churches shadow, are under Gods shadow, for the Church is Christ's, and Christ
Gods. Therefore to be under the Church, is to be under God, and to be in the
Church, is to be under Gods protection. They both agree, as we see Micah 5.7.
The Church is said to be Dew, because God be-dewes the Church, and the Church
be-dewes others, and here the Promise is, I will be as the Dew unto Israel,
Where the same name is attributed unto God. Christ is a vine, Ioh. 15.1.
and the Church is a vine; Christ is a Dew and a shadow, so is the Church;
because Christ communicates his excellencies to her, and she hers unto others.
Therefore there can be no offense in applying this to the Church: which is the
proper meaning of the place, for the Church is a shadow for rest and freedom
from annoyance, unto all that come under her.



Job. 5.23.
nothing can hurt the Children of the Church, God will be and is a Sun and a
shield unto them; a shield to keep off all ill, Psa. 84.11.
and a Sun to confer all good unto them. So his promise is to Abraham; I
will be thy Buckler and thine exceeding great reward. Genesis 15.1.
A Buckler to keep ill from him, and an exceeding great reward for good.
Therefore it is a sweet shadow to be under the Church, where God is all in all
to them, who makes all things work for good unto them, even the greatest
evil. Now what a delightful thing is it to have a resting place with them,
which either suffer no ill, or God turns all ill to their great good? where
God is a Sun and a shield, a Buckler, and an exceeding great reward, as he is
to his Church and Children?

And then again, God is about his Church, as a wall of fire to protect it,
Zach. 2.5.
not only as a shadow to keep of storms, but as a wall of fire to keep off
and consume enemies. God in regard of protection of his Church, is a compassing
unto them: as it is in Job, says Satan, Have thou not made a hedge about him
and all that he has? Job. 1.10.
There was a hedge about Job, his wife, children and goods, which the Devil
durst not enter, nor make a gap in, until God gave him leave. Therefore, those
that are under the shadow of the Church, they are safe, and may rest quietly.

But this is especially understood spiritually, the Church is a shadow, and her
self under a shadow spiritually: that is, in regard of spiritual evils from
the worst enemies. For out of the Church, where is any fence for the greatest
ill of all, The wrath of God? Jn the Church of God there is set down a way of
pacification, how the wrath of God is taken of and appeased in reconciliation,
by the death and sufferings of Jesus Christ; whereby the believing soul
attaineth peace and joy unspeakable and glorious Out of the Church there is no
means at all to pacify the greatest ill, therefore there is no true rest out
of the Church, nothing but stings and torments of conscience. And as there is a
shelter against the wrath of God, which burns to the bottom of Hell: so here
is a remedy against death and damnation: for now death is made a friend to the
Church and the children of the Church, for the sting of it is taken away, so
that it does them more good then any thing in the world: ending all their
misery, and sinning, and opening a passage unto eternal happiness. All other
petty ills that attend upon death are nothing: there is a rest from all these
whatsoever: for all afflictions have a sanctified use to Gods people for their
good. There is therefore a rest and refreshing in the Church, for all those
that come under it.

And as this is true of the Church in general, so it is true of particular
families that are little Churches, there is rest and happiness in them: God
blesses all under the roof of a godly man, whosoever comes under that shadow
comes for a blessing or for further hardening: we see in the current of
Scripture ordinarily, that when God converted any one man, he converted his
whole family, Luke 19.9.
Salvation is this day come to thy house, (says Christ) to Zaccheus; when
salvation came to his heart, it came to his house, Act. 16.33.
all was the better for it. So the Iaylor, when he believed, he and his whole
house were Baptized: when God blesses the governor once, then it is supposed
all the house comes under the covenant of grace. Abraham and his house were
blessed. But this holds not always, for there was a Cham in good Noah's family,
still there will be Ravens and wild beasts, among the tame beasts: there will
be an Ishmaell in Abraham's family, a Doeg in the Church of Judah, a Judas in
Christ's family, and a Demas among Gods people. That is, let the family be never
so good, you shall have some by Gods judgment naught in the same. As it is
said of Ieremiahs figs, Ier. 24.1.
the good figs were exceeding good, and the bad exceeding bad. There is none so
good as those that are in a gracious family, and none so naught, as such who
are naught there. Because they are cursed and under a curse being bad under
such gracious means: being like the ground which receives the rain and
showers from Heaven, Heb. 6 7, 8.
and yet is not the better for it, and so is accursed. If a man who is untoward
were in a gracious family, it is supposed he would be better, but those who are
naught where they should be good, under abundance of means, such are in danger
to be sealed to eternal destruction. Such being bad, are very bad, who though
they break not out to dangerous enormities, because of the place; yet to have
a barren untractable heart under abundance of means, is to be hardened to
destruction, without a special mercy to make it work afterward. For some
who have lived in gracious families, though for the present the seed fructified
not; yet have afterward found that seed fructify after a long time, and have
blessed God that ever they came under such a shadow: therefore though such
barrenness be a dangerous sign, yet must we not suddenly either condemn our
selves or others in this case. Because in the things of God in the Church, it
is as in nature, the seed springs not as soon as it is sown: so that grace at
length which has seemed to lie dead, after many years may sprout out. Monica
Saint Austins mother, was a gracious woman, whilst he was an untoward young
man, as appears by his own confessions: yet his mother having prayed much for
him, he was converted after her death and became a glorious Father and
instrument of the Churches good. It is ordinary amongst us, many when they have
gone astray, reflect home upon themselves, consider under what means they have
been, calling to mind the gracious instructions they have had, and so by Gods
assistance are new men. Therefore let none despair, in regard of time or
place; because God may have further aims then we can reach too; but unless
God give a special blessing after such watering, it is for the increase of
condemnation, not to profit under such abounding means, but still to be like
Pharoahs lean kine, Gen 41.
full fed and lean still. For the Promise is: Those that are under his shadow
shall return.

There is here a fit occasion offered to spend much time in pressing care upon
those that are Governors, that even out of love unto those that are under
them, they would labor to be gracious: because if they be gracious, God will
give them those that are in their family. The whole family was baptized when
the Master was baptized, and when any man was called, the whole family came
within the covenant. When Shechem and Hamor were circumcised, Gen 34.24.
all the city was circumcised also. It is true especially of Governors,
there is no man that has grace for himself alone: God gives special graces
to special persons to be a means to draw on many others. Wheresoever grace
is, it is of a spreading nature: it is said here of such, their Branches shall
spread: It is communicative, and of a piercing nature, a little whereof will
work strangely. 2 King. 5.3.
As we know a little short speech of a poor maid to Naaman the Assyrian how it
wrought, and was the occasion of his conversion. So a little savoury speech
will often minister occasion of many heavenly thoughts: God so assists it with
his Spirit, that it often does a great deal of good.



David professes, Psalm. 101. to walk singularly and exactly in all things in
the perfect way: that so he might please God and men, shining out before them
in an holy glorious conversation in the midst of his family. And as by their
example, so by their authority they use to bring all under them to outward
obedience at the least, which brings a blessing to the family. Because when
grace is once kindled in the Master, he will see all at least come to outward
conformity. They cannot work grace in them, but as the Prophet speaks they
may compel them to use the means; or else not to suffer a wicked and untoward
person to dwell under their shadow. We know why God said that he would not
conceal his secrets from Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
because he knew he would instruct and teach his family in the fear of God: so
this may be said of every one that is an Abraham, a Governor of a family; they
labor to tell them all things that have done good to themselves, therefore
they are the better for living under their shadow. Nay further, not only the
Governor of the family, but if there be any graciously good in the family,
they do much good. Labans family was the better for Jacob: Genesis 30.27.
and Potiphar, he and the Iaylor both prospered the better for Joseph's sake;
Genesis 39.5.23.
so Naaman that great Captain fared the better for his poor maid. It is a
true position, God stablisheth grace in none who are gracious, for themselves
merely, but for the good of others also that converse with them: whether it
be Governors or servants: no man lives to himself, and for himself only;
but for the good of all within their reach.

use their service, as a man would use the service of his beast, they feed
their bodies and think they have no charge of their souls. Now this is one
reason why all that come under the shadow of a good Governor are the better,
because they take care for their instruction and best good, that they live in
obedience to Gods Ordinances, and not like wild creatures, ruffians,
vagabonds, Cains and the like. What a strange thing is this to have a care of
the body the worser part, and neglect the more excellent part, their souls?

Joshua, when he called the people togther, says he do what you will, J know
what I will do, I and my house will serve the Lord. Josh. 24.15.
If you will be Idolaters or so and so: but I and my house will serve the Lord;
so certainly there is no man who in truth of heart fears the Lord, but he is
able to say, I and my house will serve the Lord.

dew of grace falls not; for God usually derives spiritual and heavenly things
by outward means. They that dwell under his shadow shall return. They shall
return to God, and by returning to him, return as it were and revive. As when
in a swoond, a man's spirits return again, he is said to revive. But the
ground of Returning is, that they shall return to God and come under his roof
in the Church. But more immediately this is true, they shall return, and shall
quicken and revive in returning. Which we spoke of in the beginning of the
Chapter. Only this shall be added to that; that a wicked man out of judgment
of the danger of his estate may make a stop: but turning is more then so: in
this case a man turns his face to God and heaven-wards, to good things
formerly neglected, on which he turned his back formerly. What is turning, but
a change of posture, when the face is turned toward that the back was to
before? So it is in this spiritual turning to God: when heavenly things are in
our face, when God and Jerusalem the Church are in our eye still, minding
heavenly things and not earthly, then we are said to return. And therefore
these converts mentioned in Jeremy, are thus described in their conversion,
Ier. 50.5.
asking the way to Zion with their faces thither-ward: whereas before in the
days of our corruption we turned our backs to God, now when we return, Psalm.
16.8.
we set the Lord always before us in every thing: this is properly to return,
to revive and flourish also in returning. Thus we have heard how all who live
under the shadow of Christ do return, and what use we should make of it.

The end of the eighth Sermon.
THE NINTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.6. They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive
as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the sent thereof shall be as the Vine of
Lebanon.


OUR desire of good things is not so large as God is bountiful in satisfying
our desires, and going beyond them, as we see in this Chapter, their hearts
were too narrow to receive all that good which God intended them. Receive us
graciously, this was their petition: whereunto God answers, that he would be
as the dew unto them, that they should grow ac the Lilly, and cast forth their
root as Lebanon: and their branches shall spread: that they should grow in all
dimensions, upwards and downwards, and spread in beauty and smell, Their beauty
shall be like the Olive, and their smell like Lebanon. And because he would be
God-like, like himself, that is thoroughly and abundantly gracious and
merciful, he does not only (as we have heard) promise a blessing to Israel
himself, but unto all near unto him and belonging to him: Those that are
under his shadow shall return, they shall revive as the corn.

We are all too shallow to conceive either the infinite vastness of Gods
justice to impenitent sinners, or his boundless mercy and goodness to his
poor Church and children. Therefore God to help our weak conceit in this
kind borrows all the excellencies of nature, and makes use of them in grace.
He takes out of the book of nature into his book what may instruct our
souls: and therefore sets down the growing estate of a Christian by all
excellent comparisons that nature will afford, many whereof we have gone over,
the last we spoke of was, that mercy which God superabundantly shows unto the
friends and servants of the Church, Those that dwell under his shadow shall
return. Now those that shall thus return, they revive in returning: for they
turn to the fountain of life, to the Son of Righteousness: they come under
Gods grace, therefore they must needs return and revive in vigor, as they
return to God: which vigor is especially meant here, when he says, Those that
dwell under his shadow shall return.

They shall revive as the corn. Now how does the corn revive? nor to speak
of that comparison that the godly are corn and not chafe, as the wicked are,
who are driven too and fro without any solidity, which though true, is not here
especially aimed at. For it is supposed that they who are good and gracious
have a substance, soliditie, usefulness and goodness in them like the corn;
Psalm. 1.
not being empty chafe, which the wind blows away. This is useful to
mention: but to come to the scope intended by the Prophet.

They shall revive as the corn, In this first, that as the corn when unsowne
it lies dead in the granarie, fructifieth not, but when it is sown springs up
to an hundred fold, as we read of in Isaacks time, who received so much
increase. Genesis 26.12.
So it is with converted Christians before they were under any gracious means,
or in a good place, they lay as it were dead and did not spring forth. But
afterward being planted and sown under gracious means, in good company in a
good family, then they increase and grow up and multiply: They revive like the
Corn.

some sort, covered with winter storms ere it spring out from the oppressions
of frost and snow, and hard weather, as if it were altogether perished: yet
notwithstanding it is all the while a preparing for springing up again more
gloriously. So it is with the Church, which seems to die often in regard of
spiritual mortification by afflictions, whereby it is dead to the world: yet
all this while, there is a blessed life in the spirit, preparing the soul
under the hard pressures of all weathers, to a glorious springing up again.
Therefore the Church has no hurt by afflictions, no more then the corn has
by the winter, which is as necessary for it, as the springtime, or summer. For
else, how should the earth be ripened and prepared? how should the worms and
weeds be killed, if it were not for hard weather? So it is with a Christian,
those afflictions that he suffers, and under which he seems to be buried, they
are as useful to him as all his comforts. Nay a Chistian is more beholding to
afflictions for his graces and comforts, then he is to outward blessings. One
would think that the goldsmith were a spoiling his plate when he is a burning
of it, when all that while the dross is but a consuming out of it; and the
vessel so hammered and beaten out, is but a preparing to be a vessel of
honor to stand before some great man. So it is with a Christian: an ignorant
person looking but one way, thinks God neglects such a one, and that if God
cared for such a one, or such a one, would or could such and such things befall
them? they conclude hence (as the Psalmist says) God has forsaken him, and
forgotten him. Psa. 71 11.
And as Christ the head of the Church was thought to be forgotten and
neglected, even when he was most dear and precious unto God: so even they all
this while, the Spirit of God is working an excellent work in them, preparing
and fitting them for grace and glory. Therefore in that respect also: They
shall revive as the Corn.

They shall revive as the corn in regard of fructification; It is true both of
the Church and of particular graces. We see one grain of corn when it is
almost perished and turned to froth, nothing in a manner, presently out of it
springs a stalk, and thence an ear and in that many ears, God giving it a
body, sixty or a hundred fold as he pleases. So it is with a Christian, when
he is planted he will leaven others, and those others and others. A few
Apostles leavened the whole world, scattering the Gospel like lightning all
over the same. So it is true of grace in Gods Children, it is like a grain of
mustard seed at the first, yet it grows up and fructifies, Mat. 13.31.
from knowledge to knowledge, faith to faith, and grace to grace, from virtue
to virtue, from strength to strength, from one degree to another: nothing less
at first, and nothing more great or glorious in this world in progress of
time, nothing so admired of God, and pleasing unto man: as this which makes one
all glorious and without spot.

O! what can be said more to encourage us to come under gracious means, to
love God and his Ordinances, good company and the communion of Saints,
considering they are such happy people? Those that are under their shadow shall
return, revive, and be vigorous; They shall revive as the corn, which does
(when it seems to be dead) notwithstanding all weathers grow up and
multiply. And whereas it seemed dead before and lay hid, being sown it grows:
So being planted in the Church we shall grow: for there is a hidden virtue in
the least grace, in the least of Gods Ordinances, more then we are aware off
(says Christ) Where two or three are gathered together in my name, Mat. 18.20.
there am I in the midst of them. Much more is this made good in great
Congregations and families. But this is not all, he says; They shall grow as
the Vine.

Howsoever the Church which is the mother Church grows before in the former
words: the new Church that comes under her shadow, shall grow in the same
manner; They shall grow as the Lilly: their Branches shall spread: and more it
is said here, They shall grow as the Vine. It is a comparison delightful to
the Holy Ghost, to compare Christ to a Uine, the Church to a Uineyard: and
Christians unto vines: but such as draw all their moisture and fatness in them
from Christ the true Uine, their sweetness being a derivated sweetness.

They shall grow as the Vine. The Vine is fruitful, so Christians. Iud. 9.9,
13.
as we read in the Judges: The Olive and the Vine would not forsake their
sweetness to be a king: for it is said by them, that they revive God and man,
being pleasing to them. So every true Christian is like a vine for
fruitfullnesse, he is a tree of Righteousness, a plant of Gods own planting,
a vine that spends himself in bearing fruit.



that it may bring forth the more fruit. John. 15.2.
So the Church and people of God are never a whit the worse for afflictions:
for as the best vines need dressing and pruning, the best ground plowing, the
best linen washing, the best metal the fire to consume away the dross, the
best things we use having something amiss. So the best Christians need
dressing and purging from the great husbandman, whereby they are not the worse
but the better, having thereby much corruption purged away from them: as the
pruning of the vine, makes it not the worse, but draws wild things from it,
which would draw away the strength of the vine. A Christian is the better for
his afflictions, wherein the glory of the Church especially consists. For the
Church never thrived better then in Egypt, where they labored to crush and to
cut the vine. God brought his vine out of Egypt for all this, maugre all the
malice of the enemies. The Church was never more glorious in it own seat,
then it was in Babylon under the Captivity, how glorious then was the Church in
Daniell and others.

The Vine is rugged, and unseemely.
Again, to the outward appearance, the vine is a rugged unseemely plant, being
not sightly and beautiful to look on: yet is it abundantly fruitful under
that unsightlines. So if we look to the outward state and face of the Church,
it is nothing else to look to but a deformed company, defaced by affliction,
live-lesse here (as it were) having their life hid up with God in Christ, Col.
3.3.
(as the Apostle speaks) their life here is covered over with many
afflictions, crosses, infirmities and disgraces, whereunto they are subject,
like unto other men. Therefore as it was the state of the head, to have no
outward form or beauty, though inwardly he was all glorious. So the beauty of
the Church is inward: for outward show, it being unsightly like the vine,
crooked and uneven, there being nothing delightful in it unless it be in
regard of the fruit that comes from it. So it is with the Church of God and
particular Christians: who though in outward government they have not that
policy and outward glory other governments have, yet there is an inward secret
work of Gods government of the Church by contraries, How God governes his
Church by contraries.
which exceeds all other policies, wherein he brings glory from shame, life by
death, he brings down and lifts up; when he is about his excellent work, he
humbles first. This is an ordinary way, therefore we must not take offense
at any outward deformity that we see in the Church, and in Gods Children,
when they seem to be trampled upon: they are but as vines, unsightly to the
eye, they have a life, though it be a hidden one.

It is excellently set down by EZekiel, Ezekiel. 15.
what the vine is of it self, it is serviceable for nothing: we cannot make a
pin of it; It is such a brittle wood as is good for nothing but to bear
fruit. So take a Christian that professes Religion, if he be not fruitful in
his place, of all men he is the worst: of all men he is either the best, or the
worst: as the vine, if it bear fruit it is the best, though it be an unsightly
tree: but otherwise it is fit for nothing but the fire. Therefore let no man
glory in his profession, that he is baptized, hears sermons, and reads. But
where is thy fruit? wherefore serves the dressing and pruning of the vine, but
for fruit? if there be no fruit, a Christian is the worst man that lives:
worst, in regard that he is bad under good means, and in condition he is the
worst of all men, his torment is the greater. Those that are barren and
unfruitful under means, the time will come, that they will wish they had
never enjoyed such a testimony against themselves.

Pro. 30.26.
And (as Solomon says of the conies) though they are a weak people of
themselves, yet notwithstanding they have a strong rock over their heads,
where they are safe, though they be as weak as the vine. So Gods people
though they be weak of themselves; yet they have a strong support to up-hold
them; God by the Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry (especially by his
Spirit) keeps them up and supports them, that they spread in largeness and in
fruitfulness.

Mat. 11.21.
Of all woes, the greatest woe lies upon them, who enjoy plentiful and
abundant means and yet are not fruitful.

fruit; As it is in Esaias; Spoil it not, for there is a Blessing in it. Isa.
65.8.
If a Christian be fruitful, and labors to be more fruitful, God gives a
prohibition, he is my vine, do him no harm: Touch not mine anointed, Psalm.
105.15.
nor do my Prophets no harm. Satan himself and all creatures in Heaven and in
Earth, have a prohibition to touch his vines no further then shall be for their
good. Will a man suffer men to come into his Orchard to break down his vines?
he will not. Surely though the sins of this nation be very great: yet one
thing ministers hope, God has a great many vines under his shadow and
protection, many conscionable Magistrates, Ministers and people of other
professions; Governors of families and the like, which walk holily, God will
spare the vineyard, even for the vines that bear fruit. A notable place
amongst others we have Cant. 2.15. Take us the Foxes and the little Foxes that
spoil the vine: for our vines have tender grapes. There is in every Church not
only gross Papists, and foreign enemies, that would root out all if it
were in their power: but subtle foxes also, men that pride themselves in
divelish policy, to under-mine the Church and Children of God: who whersoever
they see vine or grapes, they malice that: both the means and grace wrought by
the means is the object of their cruelty. Subtle foxes they are who account
it a great deal of glory to be accounted polliticke men, to do mischief
secretly and closely in the Church: will God suffer these foxes? no, he will
not, Cant. 2.5.
Take us the foxes, the little foxes that destroy the vines. God has young
growing vines, so as he will not only care for the great vines, but for the
tender vines also. Christ has a care of his Lambs, as he said to Peter, Joh.
21.15.
love thou me etc. Then feed my Lambs, my little ones. So Christ speaks in
the Gospel of these little ones, Mat. 18.10.
I tell you (of a truth) that the Angels of these little ones, behold the face
of my Father, etc. And so he speaks in another place; Isa. 48.1, 2.
A bruised reed will he not break, and smoking flax will he not quench,
until he bring forth judgment unto victory. So likewise he promises, that
he will carry the lambs in his bosom, Isa. 40.11.
and gently lead them that are with young.

good, and yet are discouraged, because it is not with them as with some other
Christians of their acquaintance. Know that there is no set measure of grace
necessary to salvation but truth. God does assign us a measure of grace
according to his good pleasure, and according as he has purposed to make us
profitable to others in the use of means. Those whom he means to use for
suffering or doing of great matters in the Church, those he fits sutably for
that he means to call them to: others have not that abundance of grace, out
of Gods wisdom, who knows best how to dispense his own graces to his own
glory. If we allow not our selves in our weaknesses, but groan under them,
hate them, and strive against them, reaching toward perfection: in this case
our weaknesses shall not hurt our salvation; but God will perfect his power in
our weakness. 2 Cor 12.9.


So we see it is not the multitude of fruit, but the sincerity of it, if it be
true, that makes a Christian; if there be truth of grace, it will out and
spread the branches, it shall not always be so with us. Sincerity and
endeavor to grow, with a desire and thirst after growth, makes a man a
Christian. Therefore as was said, we must not be discouraged, though our growth
and spreading be not like others. Every Christian has his measure; though
every one be bound to go further and further, from faith to faith, and grace
to grace: yet there is a blessing in a little, and a promise also to him that
uses it well: To him that has it shall be given. Christ has a care that the
foxes do not hurt the little tender grapes: Mat. 13.12.
let none therefore be discouraged for their non-proficiency in the ways of
God, so as to go back and leave off, he knows best when and how to take away
the bates, snares and temptations that are set to catch them, and discourage
them. Let God alone with his own work, who is the great vinedresser: do thou
thine own work, attend upon good means, wait upon God, and then let the
malice of the world and the Devil be what they will, he will have a care of
his vines, and the more care, the more young and tender they are, etc.

These considerations may affect us, not only to take good by the vine for our
bodies, but for our souls also, and so the same thing may cherish both body
and soul. A Christian by grace has an extracting virtue, to draw holy uses
out of every thing, as the Holy Ghost here compares us to a vine, to teach us
these and the like things now unfolded. The last thing promised is,

The sent thereof shall be as the vine of Lebanon.

This Lebanon was a mountanous place, on the north side of Judea, wondrous
fruitful in all kind of trees, in Cedars and goodly Vines, so it did abound in
spice, and all goodly things. Therefore to show that a Christian should be the
best of his rank, he fetches comparisons from the best things in nature.

The sent thereof shall be as the vine of Lebanon.

Now the Vine of Lebanon had a sweet sent in it, both to draw to the liking,
and then to delight in the taste and taking thereof. So it is with the graces of
God in his children, they carry as it were a sweet sent with them, both to draw
others to delight in, and taste of the same things.



Head first, and from thence it is derived unto the members, Psalm. 133.2.
all who must partake of this ointment. As it is said of the head of Aaron,
that that ointment which was powered on his head, ran down to his skirts, and
all his rich attire about. So that sweetness in Christ is powered on the
skirts, all along upon his members, even the meanest Christian receives Grace
for Grace, John. 1.16.
sweetness from Christ. The Virgins: Cant 1.3.
that is, such as defile not themselves with idolatry and such other lewd
courses: they follow after Christ in the smell of his sweet ointments. It is
spoken of Christ who carries such a sweet smell with him, Psalm. 45.8.
as all his garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia, etc. So sweet is the
smell of Christ when he is unfolded in his Benefits and Offices, that the pure
and holy virgin souls of the Saints follow after it. His Name is as an
ointment powered out; Cant. 1.3.
that is, himself is his Name, and his Name is himself (as the Hebrew
Proverb is) Christ made known in the unfolding of the Word, that is his Name.
When the box is opened, all in Christ is like ointment, in the preaching of the
Word all is sweet, and nothing but sweet in Jesus. Now a Christian being a
member of Christ, and a virgin soul following Christ, must needs draw
sweetness from him, casting out that sent unto others drawn from him, because
they partake of Christ's annoynting. What is the name of a Christian, but a man
anointed with Christ's ointment, one anointed to be a King and a Priest in some
sort? Rev. 1.6.
therefore, they carry the savor of him wheresoever they go. Aaron the high
Priest, Exo. 39.26.
had sweet garments, which made a savor where he went, having Bells and sweet
Pomgranates at the bottom of his garment. He had not only Bells to discover
him; but sweet pomegranates also. So it is with every Christian; not only the
Minister, but every Christian is a Priest under the New Testament, and carries
a savor with him, graces that spread and cast a sweet sent in all places
wheresoever, which they exercise upon all good occasions: as Saint Paul
expresses it, Romans 8.5.
They savor the things of the Spirit. Those who are in Christ, they have the
Spirit of Christ, or they are none of his. And having the Spirit of Christ they
savor of the things of the Spirit, that is their thoughts, speeches, actions,
and conversation are savoury. Romans 8.8.
Those that are in the flesh (says the) Apostle cannot please God, they are
unsavory. A carnal man has no savor in his speeches, they are either
worldly or civil, without spiritual savor: because he has nothing of the
Spirit of Christ to savor off. His heart (says Solomon) is little worth, Pro.
10 20.
the like we may say of his thoughts, actions, and affections, they are
unsavory and little worth. He has a dead heart to goodness, and thence
whatsoever goodness comes from him is forced and against the hair (as we
say) But a Christian having the Spirit of Christ; and therewith communion with
Christ, all his discourses and actions are for the most part savoury, those he
acts as a Christian; therefore from his communion with Christ it is said
here, His smell shall be as Lebanon.

The sent thereof shall be as the Vine of Lebanon.

Delightful both to God and holy blessed spirits, likewise to the Church, and
to the Angels which are about us, and pleasing to our own spirits; for there
issues a wondrous contentment, even to the conscience of a person which is
fruitful and abundant in goodness, that soul receives an answerable
proportion of comfort. As it is with heat that accompanies fire always; so
there is a kind of heat of comfort, which naturally accompanies the heat of
any good action: there remains a sweet relish to the conscience of the
performer, reflecting with Humility upon himself, with thankfulness to God,
from whose Dew (as we have heard before) comes whatsoever is good: reflecting
on this with an eye to the principal cause it breeds a great deal of comfort
to the soul. As it was said of Josiah, the memory of Josiah was like the
ointment of the Apothecary, whereas one the contrary, It is said, The
remembrance of the wicked shall rot. Pro. 10.7.
God threatens the Jews, that they should be a hissing to all nations, Deuteronomy.
28 37.
and that they should be abominable to all kind of people (for what is so
odious now as the name of a Jew?) yet certainly this whole promise shall be
verified even of them: this whole Chapter having an eye unto the calling of the
Jews. The time will come that the sent of these odious people (who are now the
object of hatred unto all people) shall be as the Vine of Lebanon.

Vine, that brings forth grapes, and much fruit, and casts a sent from him (as
the sent of Lebanon) upon all fit occasions. For his words should be, Pro.
25.11.
as the Apples of Gold set with pictures of silver. He is seasonable in his
actions of Consolation, and brings forth his fruit in due season, as the
promise is. Psalm. 1.3. Eccle. 3.11.
For Solomon shows, that every thing is made beautiful in his season. Those
therefore, that have not a good word to speak, but rather express the
contrary, rotten unsavory discourse, vain in their conversation, savouring
nothing that is good: how have they as good a heart to God as the best? No this
is not to be a Christian, who should savor like Aarons garments, or like these
graces coming from his head to him: who should spread abroad his sweetness
unto others, Mat. 12.35.
shining out as a light amongst others? Therefore away with this base plea: a
rotten speech, argues a rotten heart. What can come out of a vessel but such
as is within it, if the issues be naught, what is the vessel but naught? if
all be unsavory outward, what is there but a rotten heart within.

1 Pet. 2.9.
Patience, Love and Obedience of Christ. As Peter speaks and exhorts us, to
show forth the virtues of him who has called us from darkness into his
mavelous light. Then we answer our title, and cast forth a sent like
Lebanon, when inwardly and outwardly, all things join to make us fruitful and
savoury before God and man.



The excellency of a savoury and fruitful conversation.
and will smell a sweet savor of rest, as it is said of Noah after his coming
out of the Arc; for God delights in his own graces, which he admireth in us.
As he said to the woeman of Canaan, O woeman, great is thy faith, Mat 15.28.
be it unto thee as thou will. God as it were stands admiring his own graces,
he is so delighted with the Faith, Love, Prayers, and Patience of his children,
which is further excellently expressed in the Canticles. Cant. 3.6.
Who is this that comes up out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with mirrh and frankincense, and all the spices of the merchant?
Christ there is brought in admiring at his Church and Children, conflicting
through all the miseries and encumbrances of this world, which hinder and
oppose their journey to Heaven-wards, wherein they thrust forth all the
practice of their holy graces, which smell like spices. Then let us not envy
God, the Saints, and holy people the sweetness of our graces, but let our sent
smell abroad to the content and comfort of all, that they may delight in these
graces that come from us, in our Humility, Patience, Faith, Love, Sincerity,
and all these graces wherein we resemble Christ, and show forth his holy
virtues: therefore for our own comfort, and the delight of all, and to assure
our selves of Heaven, and of the love of God whilst we live here, let us labor
to be fruitful in our conversations, and to cast forth a sent in regard of
others, which has an attractive drawing force. For when they see a holy,
fruitful and gracious conversation, it casts forth a sent and makes others
like Religion: Cant. 5.
So God is glorified, and Religion is adorned. What greater ornament to
Religion then to see a fruitful gracious Christian who has ability and a
heart to do good upon all occasions, with an humble meek peaceable spirit,
taught of God to be so for the good and love of others?

That a little gracious conversation is more winning then many words.
There must be Pomegranates with bells, a sweet conversation with words, a
little whereof will do more good to others then a great many words. A good
conversation is sweet, and has a kind of oratorie joined with it. Therefore if
neither for God, or Christ, or others, yet for our own sakes and the
reflection of that good sent upon our selves, let us be fruitful. A man cannot
grow in fruitfullnesse, but he must needs grow in comfort, Peace and Joy.
Nothing cheereth and solaceth the heart of a Christian more then this, the
conscience that God honors him to be fruitful, to do good, and cast a
sweet savor to draw others to good things. This will comfort us upon our
deathbeds, more then all other things. Therefore in all these respects; for
love of God, others, and our selves, which are delighted with the expressions
of our graces, let us labor to be fruitful trees in Gods garden, and to bring
forth much fruit, that we may send forth a sent like Lebanon.

Now who would not be in such an estate and condition as this; as to have title
to all these gracious promises, for the dew of Grace to fall upon him, To grow
as Lillies in height, and to spread as other plants do, to grow upwards, and
downwards, to be rooted as Cedars, and fruitful as Vines. The Spirit of God
sets himself here to show Spiritual things by Earthly comparisons, to make us
the more capable of them. The misery of the contrary condition may well stir
us up to seek after the forementioned. For what a misery is it, to have the
curse of God upon ones soul, to have it like the barren wilderness void of
all grace and comfort that may delight others, or is spiritual, savoury, or
savingly good? So all these promises tend to encourage us to be in the
condition of Gods Children, that when we are in that estate, we may comfort our
selves, and be able to claim our part, portion and interest in these excellent
promises.

Thus by Gods blessing we have passed over the particulars of Gods gracious
promises to his Church, and all that shall come under the Church; all which
should encourage us to go to God, and do as the Church does here, take words
to our selves, and desire God, to take away all iniquity, and heal all our
backeslidings, and that we may renounce all vain confidence, as the Church
does here: who is taught to trust horses no longer; Ashur shall not save us.
And then let us (as was said) cleave unto the blessed promises, that we may
improove them, and make them our own every day more and more. Therefore let us
have in the eye of our soul the excellency of growth; or else we shall not
value these promises. Let us consider what an excellent condition it is to
grow, flourish and be fruitful, having a due esteem of all these promises
before hand. The excellency of a growing Christian Prove. 28.1.
Do but consider how excellent a Christian is that grows above others, what
a majesty he has in his carriage? how undauntedly he walks in all oppositions
whatsoever, as a Lion in his courses. How he overlookes Hell, Wrath, Death,
Damnation and all. What a sweet communion he enjoys with God in all the
disconsolations that the world puts upon him. He carries his Heaven in his
heart, and a Paradise within him, which is planted with all graces, whereas
another man carries his Hell about him.

Wherefore let us take such courses to help our selves as the Church does
here: trust in God and not in man, or in the arm of flesh; and be encouraged
from all which has been said, to have a good conceit of God, to be fruitful
and draw on others to goodness, that God, his Saints and Angels may be
delighted with the sent of our graces, and our selves comforted; that we may
rejoice in our portion and lot that God has dealt so graciously to us, and
glory more that he has made us members of Christ, and heirs of Heaven, then in
any condition of this world. O the incomparable excellent state of a Christian,
above all the glory of this world: who not only grows, but shall grow to
heaven-wards still; and as he has begun to hate sin, shall hate it more and
more: God has undertaken it shall be so: Ephraim after all these sweet
promises and dew of Grace, shall say; What have I any more to do with Idols,
etc. The prosecution whereof must be referred until the next time.

The end of the ninth Sermon.
THE TENTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have J any more to do with Idols? J have
heard him and observed him: J am like a green fur tree, from me is thy fruit
found.


WE have heard at several times heretofore, how God out of the largeness of
his goodness, goes beyond those desires which he puts into his peoples
hearts. They briefly entreat him to Do good to them, and to deal graciously
with them. And he answers them largely: that He will be as the Dew to them;
that they shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth their roots as Lebanon,
All set out by most excellent comparisons, helping grace by nature, our souls
by our bodies, and our spirits by our senses. As we have souls and bodies, so
God applies himself to both. His Branches shall spread; his Beauty shall be
as the Olive, and his smell as Lebanon.

Then in the 7. Verse, his gracious promise reaches unto those who dwell under
the Church: Those that dwell under his shadow shall return, they shall revive
as the corn, and grow as the Vine, etc. The new Church that shall come under
the shadow of the old, shall flourish as the ancient did. They that dwell under
his shadow, that is under Ephraims and Isreal's shadow shall return, and be
partakers of the same dew of grace.

Now this eigth verse contains a further gracious promise to Ephraim upon his
repenting and former resolutions: Ephraim said, Ashur shall not save us, we
will not ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands ye are our gods. Now what says God here? (repeating the words of
Ephraim) Ephraim (shall say) is not in the Original, but only set down to
express what the meaning is, whereas Ephraim said, What have I any more to do
with Idols? Ephraim shall have this answer, I have heard him, and observed him,
I am like a green fur tree: from me is thy fruit found.

As though the Lord had said, let not Ephraim think that when he has forsook
Idols, he has forsaken his comfort, (as though there were no comfort in
walking according to the rule of my Word and Laws.) Let him know that in steed
of these poor and base comforts, either in gross Idolatry, or other more
cunning Idolatries whatsoever which formerly took him up, that now he shall
exchange them for more solid and substantial comforts. For, I have heard him,
and observed him: so that let him see what he loses in parting with base
corruptions, worldly lusts, pleasures and the like, he shall find it more
abundantly supplied in a far more excellent manner in me, and in the fruits
and effects of my love unto him; so as he shall find that there is nothing
lost by entering strictly into my service. And whereas formerly he walked in a
vain shadow, in relying on Egypt, Ashur, and the works of his own hands: now
he shall have a far more excellent shadow, which no storm, nor rain, nor
injury of weather can pierce through: I am like a green firre-tree unto him.
Not such a shadow as those his Idols were, who could not keep off the storm
of Gods wrath from him, Jonah. 4.5, 6.
nor such a shadow as Ionahs gourd was, which flourished for one day, and was
nip't the next. No, I will be constant and permanent as my self, I will be as
the green fur tree; a constant shadow to keep back all annoyance
whatsoever; not like the cursed noisome shadow of Idols, under which Ephraim
rested before. But, I will observe and regard him, and be like a green fur
tree unto him. I will not only be a shadow and shelter of defense unto him
from injury and molestation, that he may rest quietly; but he shall be also
fruitful: though the fur tree be not so fruitful: yet from me is thy fruit
found, whatsoever he is in himself; yet this shall not be matter of
discouragement unto him: I am all sufficient, there is enough in me to supply
him with: from me is thy fruit found. But to take them in order.

Ephraim shall say, what have I any more to do with Idols, etc.

Some think the words come upon Ephraims observing and hearing of him: so as
when God is seen in his most excellent majesty and glory, and observed as he
is just, merciful and wonderful terrible in himself, that this manner of
hearing and observation causes flesh and blood so to stoop and reform, as
they yield themselves, and resign up all unto God, seeing that miserable
condition they are in, and what an infinite distance there is betwixt their
impurity, and Gods most excellent holiness. As we read of Isaiah when he had
seen God in his throne of majesty; Isa. 6.5.
Woe is me (says he) for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips,
and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen
the King, the Lord of Hosts. And so of Job, Job. 42.5, 6.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee,
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Which indeed is
true in the general, that a man then truly repents and turns unto God,
when he knows God and himself to purpose; and never effectually until then:
for Christ who cannot lie, and is truth it self, calls this kind of
knowledge eternal life. This is life eternal, to know thee to be the only
very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. John. 17.3.
But though this be a general truth: yet we take it here rather for an
encouragement unto Ephraim, as before, that nothing is lost by cleaving unto
Gods ways, and forsaking of sin. Now whereas Ephraim (shall say) what have I
any more to do with Idols: In the words we may consider.

1. The manner of expression, with a great indignation of soul, What have I
any more to do, etc.

2. The matter so hated with indignation, is Idolatry, their former Idols.
Ephraim (shall say) What have I any more to do with Idols.

Ephraim we see renounceth Idolatry, The true renouncing of sin must be with
indignation.
but in what manner is this done? with an high indignation of zeal and hatred:
What have I any more to do with Idols: He does not say now that Ephraim has
left Idolatry, I will supply all these comforts that they had by Idols. But
Ephraim loathes Idolatry, therefore he says What have I any more to do with
Idols? It is a figurative Question, implying a strong denial with a strong
indignation. What have I any more to do with Idols? I have had too much to do
with them: I have now nothing to do with Idols. It is a negation and denial
with as great aversation, and abomination as can be possibly expressed: for in
such questions, the denial is set forth more strongly by a negation, and with
a greater emphasis, then by any affirmation is possible to express. So elegant
is the Spirit of God in setting forth spiritual things in a heavenly and
transcendent manner.

Ephraim (shall say) what have I any more to do with Idols, etc.

Hence in that Ephraim shall say thus, and say it with such vehemence of spirit
and indignation, we may observe in general.

There is excellent use of the affections.

God has planted the affections in us to be as the wind, to carry the soul
too and fro, forward or backward: for affections are planted in the soul
answerable to things aimed at by it. For, as in the nature of things, there be
good and bad, delightful and hateful, hurting or pleasing: so answerably God
has framed the soul to the nature of things. That the soul has affections
suitable to the things it aims at.
For good things, God has planted affections in us to join, claspe, embrace
them and welcome them, as Love, Joy, Delight, and such like. And for evil
things, he has planted affections to avoid them, That Religion is especially
in the affections.
as indignation, hatred and the like. Indeed Religion is mainely in the
affections, whereof there is excellent use, take away them, and take away all
Religion whatsoever. A man, were it not for his affections, is like Mare
mortuum, the dead sea that never stirs. Therefore it is but a doting idle
conceit of these rigid men, that take away affections: much like the folly of
them, who because they have been drunk with wine, do therefore cut up all
the vines. But the way were to moderate the excess, not to cut up the vines.
So for the affections, we must not root them up, or cut them down, but order
them aright. For what does the first Commandent require? [Thou shall have no
other gods but me,] But a right ordering of all the affections of the soul,
Joy, delight, trust and fear, and the whole frame of them to be carried to
God. For the inward worship of God is nothing else, but the excellent working
of these affections sutably to the Law, with the detestation of the contrary.
It is not knowledge that makes a man a good man, but the affections? the Devil
and wicked spirits know much; but they have no love, joy, or delight in them.
Therefore we must value our selves and things, as we are in our will and
affections: for so God valueth us, and we should value others thereby. This
well done would bring us a wondrous deal of comfort, and stop our too much and
rigid judging and censuring of others.

Ephraim (shall say) what have I any more to do with Idols?

Now in particular we see here, that Ephraim not only leaves Idols, but there
is planted in him a sound indignation against them: whence we may learn,

That it is not enough to leave sin; but we must loath sin also.

A notable place to this purpose we have in the Prophecy of Isaiah, what they
should do after their conversion, in the case of hatred to Idolatry. Isa.
30.22.
Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven Images of silver, and the
ornament of thy molten Images of gold; thou shall cast them away as a
menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it get thee hence. There is a hatred and
a strong loathing indignttion against sin, when it is discovered in the
pollution and vileness thereof: which affection of hatred God has planted to
draw the soul away from any thing that is truly hurtful to it. It is not
enough to leave sin for some by ends, as fear of punishment, shame and the
like: but we must loath it also. The Prophet David when he professes his love
to the law: Psalm. 119.163.
how prooveth he it? I hate and abhor lying. Psalm. 13^.21.
And so again, Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? and am not I grieved
with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred, I
account them mine enemies. Here is hatred and perfect hatred with abomination.

John. 4.24.
therefore the strength of this consideration draws the soul to hate and love
with God, as he hates and loves: and as much as may be to hate sin as he
does.

My son give me thy heart. Give me thy love in that which is good, and hate
that which is ill. What ill we leave, we must hate first; and what good we do,
we must first love, or else we shall never do either of them acceptably to
purpose. What the heart does not, is not done in Religion, if it has no hand
in the avoiding of ill, it is not avoided: if it have no hand in the doing of
good, it is not done before God. Therefore in true conversion, there must be a
loathing of sin.

must not only leave, but loath sin.

But how may we know, discern, and try this true hatred of sin.

Our hatred of sin is 1. when it is universal.
First, true hatred is universal, he who hates ill truly, hates it universally
in the whole kind. As we see in wicked men and devils who hate God and all
goodness: so on the contrary those that are good, hate all ill whatsoever,
whether it pleasure, or displeasure them, they stand not upon it, they hate the
very nature of all ill. Those whose obedience and affections are partial, they
hate some evils, but not others, which is not true hatred wrought by the
Spirit of God, for that is universal to the whole kind.

2. Implacable.
Then also, wheresoever true hatred is, it is unplacable, and unappeasable,
there is no true end of sound hatred, but by the abolishing altogether of that
thing it hates; as we see the hatred of Satan to the Church and people of God,
is unappeasable and unquenchable; nothing in the world can stay Satan's hatred,
nor the hatred of his instruments, who hate the remembrance of Gods people.
Therefore the very name of Calvin and Luther must be put out of their books to
satisfy their hatred. Not only when they are dead, burn their bones, but
abolish their memory if they can. So there is the like disposition in Gods
people to that which is ill. A godly disposition it hates sin even to the
death, and is not quiet until all sin be abolished. Whereupon it is never
quiet in this life, but desires Heaven, not enduring patiently the least
relics and rags of sin: desiring that that which it so hates, might have
no being at all. Those who mince and cull things, who are so gentle and tender
toward their sins and corruptions in themselves and others: is this that
hatred which is unappeasable, and never rests, till it see either a through
Reformation or abolishing of what it so hates. Wherein it is a more rooted
affection then anger, for hatred is a rooted offensive displeasure against
persons and things; and so rooted as that nothing in the world can root it
out. Anger may be appeased, it is appeased in God, and it may and must be in
men. But hatred is implacable, aiming at the annihilation of the thing so hated.

3. When we hate sin chiefly in our selves.
Again, where true hatred and indignation is, there the nearer the ill is to
us, the more we hate it, etc. As we hate it in it self, so we hate it the more
the nearer it is to us, as a Toade or any venomous thing, the nearer it is to
us, we loath and abhor it the more. So certainly, whosoever hates and
abhors sin as sin (as it is a hateful thing to a renewed soul) so he
hates sin more in himself then in others: because it is nearest in his own
bosom. Every man hates a snake more in his bosom then a far off, because it
is more likely to do him harm there. Therefore those that flatter their own
corruptions, and are violent against others, as Judah against Thamar, she shall
be burned, Genesis 38.24.
bring her forth and burn her, when himself had gotten her with child. So
many are severe in punishing of others, as if they were wondrous zealous: but
what are they in their own breast? do they reform sin in their own hearts
and lives? he that truly hates sin, he hates his own sins more then
others, because it is near him.

4. When we hate sin most in our families, etc.
And so (in proportion) he that hates sin truly will hate it in his own
family, children and servants, more then in others abroad. It was a great fault
in David, that he cockered up Adoniah and others in his own house, whilst he
was more strict abroad. Can men think to redress and hate sin in the
commonwealth, and yet suffer it in their families? true hatred is most
conversant in its strength near hand. Those who suffer deboystnesse and
profaneness in their families, and never check it in their children and
servants, they hate not sin, whatsoever countenance they may take upon them
of reformation abroad, it comes out of by-respects, and not out of true
hatred.

5. When we hate the greatest sin in the greatest measure.
Again he that hates sin truly as sin, will hate the greatest sin in the
greatest measure; because he hates it, as it is hateful. Now in the nature of
things, the greatest sin deserves the greatest abomination, and aversation
from it. Therefore, he who truly hates sin, he hates the greatest sin
most of all. Those therefore that are very nice in less matters, and loose in
greater things, It is but Hypocrisy: for he who truly hates sin as sin,
where the greatest sin is, thither he directs the edge of his hatred, which
is the strongliest carried aagainst the strongest ill. And such a one will not
respect persons in evil; but wheresoever he finds it; if he have a calling,
there will be an answerable hatred of it. Therefore if one be a Minister of the
Word of God, he will do as good Micaiah did, 1 King. 22.
and will not balke Ahab for his greatness. And like good John Baptist, he
will tell Herod of his faults, because he hates sin as sin; therefore
(where he has a calling to it) he will hate it proportionably in the greatest
measure. 1 Samuel 2.
Good Ely in this case, was too indulgent over his sons: but we must love no
man so nearly, 6. If we can endure Reproofs for sin.
as to love the ill in them.

Again a man may know that he truly hates sin, if he can endure admonition
and reproof for sin. He that hates a venomous plant which troubles the
ground, will not be displeased if a man come and tell him that he has such a
plant in his ground, and will help him to dig it up: surely he cannot be
displeased with the party. So here, if a man do truly hate sin, will he be
angry with him that shall tell him that he is obnoxious to such an evil which
will hurt him dangerously and damn his soul if it be not helped? surely no:
therefore let men pretend what they will, those who swell against private
reproof, they do not hate sin as sin. Caution.
Only add we this Caution: A Reproof may be administered with such
indiscretion, out of self-love, and with a high-hand, as that a man may
dislike the carnal manner of reprooving. But if it be done in a good manner,
he that hates reproof, because he loves himself and his sin (pretend what
he will) he hates not sin.

7. Such will not be flattered in their sins.
So if a man love to be flattered in his sin, it is a sign he hates not sin
truly. For there is naturally a great deal of self-love in man, which makes
him that he loves to be flattered in his sins: whereupon he comes to be
abused to his own destruction, especially great men. Now it is a sign of an
ill state of soul, to be subject to be abused by flattery, and to hate
instruction: (says Paul) Am I your enemy, Gal. 4.16.
because I have told you the Truth.

8. If we hate to talk of, or mention it and shun occasions.
Again, we may know what our hatred to sin is, by our willingness or
unwillingnesse to talk of it, or mention it, or to venture upon the occasions
thereof. Where hatred is, there is outward aversation; we fly from what we
hate, and shun to frequent places where we may receive offense. Whatsoever
has an Antipathie to nature, that we hate and run away from. Therefore those
that present themselves to the occasions of sin, upon no calling: (say what
they will) they feed sin and live according to the flesh: those that hate a
thing, will never come near it if they can choose. Therefore, those that
present themselves willingly to places infected, where there is nothing
religious, but scorning of Religion, your common representations of
abomination, pretend what they will, their intent is to strengthen their own
corruption, against the good of their souls: this is the issue. Those that
hate sin, will hate all that which may lead to it, the representations of
sin also. Can a man hate sin and see it acted? wickedness is learned, when
one sees it acted, as one of the Ancients says well: therefore let us by
these and the like trials take notice what our hatred to sin is.

Only this our zeal, hatred, A limitation for expressing of our hatred to
sin.
and indignation to sin must have a mitigation and be regulated, least like an
exorbitant river it exceed the bounds: therefore not to follow the School
niceties in the exactness of differences, we will touch the mark a little,
how this zeal and hatred to sin in reproof (especially) must be qualified:
wherein we must consider diverse things.

First, Our calling must be respected, 1. We must consider our calling to
reproove others.
for howsoever we must carry an universal hatred to sin, thus far, that we
must not do it. Yet in the discovery of hatred and dislike to others, we must
consider what calling we have and how far we go.

And it must be done with a sweet temper, 2. It must be with a due respect and
keeping of distance to the party reprooved.
keeping our distance, and reserving the due respect unto those in whom we show
our dislike. As we see, Nathan when he came to tell David of his fault, how he
does it, what art he uses, It must so be done, as that it may appear to be
done out of pure zeal, that it is no wilde-fire, nor no heat of nature, but
that it comes merely from the spirit, and in much love with mildness and
pity: in which case it carries a wondrous authority. The discovery of hatred
to the faults either in a Minister, or in a Megistrate, though they must be
truly dealt with, and have their faults told them: yet there must be respect
had to their place, by reason of the weakness of men. As it is with the body,
great men have their Physicians as well as meaner: only their physic must be
more costly, because (perhaps) of their tenderness of their constitutions: but
as for their bodies, they must not be suffered to perrish, nor will not. So for
their souls, they must have that which other men have to help them: but it
must be done with reservation and respect, as Paul speaking to Festus the
Governor, calls him most Noble Festus, Act. 26.25.
etc. Pressing also goodness (in some sort) upon King Agrippa: O King Agrippa,
Act. 26.27.
believe thou the Prophets, I know thou do. So we see how we may examine
whether our hatred to sin be true or not.

Let every one therefore make Use of it in their calling; Those that are
entrusted with Gods Message, let them know that Gods Ambassadors are to be
faithful in their Message; for they serve a greater Lord then is upon the
Earth. And let them show their true hatred of ill, and the danger of sin
wheresoever they find it. And for those that are Governors of others, let
them not think that they hate sin in themselves, except they hate sin also in
all that belong to them and reform it. For we see here an evidence of
conversion: when Ephraim was converted. What have I any more to do with Idols?
and 2 Cor. 7.11. 2 Cor. 7.11.
There is an excellent description of the nature of Repentance by many parcels.
The Corinthians had repented: how is this evidenced? O! Behold (says he) this
self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort; what carfulness it
wrought in you? yea what clearing of your selves, yea what indignation? yea
what fear? yea what vehement desire? yea what zeal? yea what revenge? what
Revenge and Indignation against sin, a kind of extreamitie of hatred? a
hatred quickened and kindled, the height of hatred. What Indignation?
Jnsinuating, that wheresoever there is the truth of conversion, there will be
indignation against sin in our selves. As David confesses of himself having
sinned. Psalm 73.22.
So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee. When he suffered
such a thought to lodge in his breast, that it was better with the children of
the world, then with the Church of God, he was troubled for it. But when he
went into the Church of God, and saw the end of wicked men, then he saw his
own foolishness in being so deceived, and speaks against himself with
indignation. So wheresoever there is true conversion, there is hatred with
indignation against our selves. As in that place before alleged, they shall
say unto their Idols, Isa 30.22.
get thee hence: what have I any more to do with you? which is a phrase of
speech showing a disposition of hatred to the utmost extention. Get you hence;
So Christ to the Devil: Get thee behind me Satan. This is the right temper of
a truly converted Christian, expressed by diverse phrases in Scripture; By a
denial of our lusts, by killing and crucifying, by pulling out the eye, and
cutting of the right hand; which phrases, do they not imply a great strength
of hatred and indignation? when we must as it were pull out our own eyes: that
is our beloved sins, which are as dear to us as our eyes, and as useful as
our right hands unto us. Yet these must be cut off, Col. 3.2.
mortified, crucified, and denied. Therefore let us not deceive our selves: but
let us judge of the truth of our conversion, by our true hatred to sin in our
selves and others, and in all who are committed to our charge.

If this be so, what shall we judge of a cold lukewarm temper? It is the
nature of cold to gather Heterogeniall bodies together. As we see in Ice there
are strawes, and stones and all Heterogeniall things incorporated, because the
cold congeales them together. But where there is fire, there is a seperating of
the dross from the good metal. So where the Spirit of God is, it is not so
cold as to jumble sin and sin, this and that together: but it purges away that
which is ill, and that which is good it makes better. For in what proportion
the fire of Gods Spirit stirs up that which is good, in that proportion there
is a hatred of that which is ill. They are unparaleld affections. Those that
love God they hate evil. Those that are alike to all things, do show that
they have not this active true hatred against sin. No, Ephraim (shall say)
What have I any more to do with Idols?



How we may come to hate our sins. We must get near communion with God, and
a clear sight of his excellency.

Exo. 32.19.


we must every day labor to get a cleerer sight of the excellency of that
which is good, and a nearer communion with God by Prayer and Meditation: and
then when we have been with God, it will work an abomination of whatsoever
is contrary unto him. Thus Moses, when he had talked with God in the mountain,
at his return seeing them dancing and sacrificing to the Calfe of gold, what
did Moses? he brake the Tables asunder. So it is with those that have communion
with God, who is light it self, 1 John. 1.5.
and in whom is no darkness, who is Holiness and Purity it self: those who
have effectually conversed with God in his Ordinances, Meditation, Prayer and
the like; when they look upon sin which is contrary to God, they look upon
it with a more perfect hatred. So Esaias. 6. When God appeared to the Prophet,
and touched his tongue with a coal from the Altar (says he) Woe is me for I
am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, etc. for mine eyes have seen
the King the Lord of Hosts. Thus when once he had communion with God, he began
to loath himself. So if we would hate evil, let us labor more and more to be
holy and to increase in that divine affection of love. For in what measure we
love that which is good, in that measure we hate the evil. As it is Psalm.
97.10. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil. Insinuating that all that love the
Lord hate evil. All those that are near unto God, they hate all sin: the more
they grow into communion with God, the more they grow in the hatred of all that
is contrary. Let us therefore never talk of love to God, and of Piety and such
like; for if there be any grace or communion with God, we hate all sin in that
measure as God hates; he who has no zeal to reform that which God hates,
he has no love at all.

2. We must set before us what sin is in itself.
Again, the way to stir us up to hate sin in our selves and others, and out of
that hatred to reform it, is to set before us, what it is in it self: that it
is the loathsomest thing in the world; worse then the Devil himself: for it is
sin which makes him a Devil. That Corruption, Pride, Worldlines, and
Profanesse which we cherish, is worse then the Devil himself, because this
made him a Devil. Let us make sin therefore as loathsome as we can, and then we
shall hate it. And let us present it to our souls, as the most dangerous thing
of all, the ill of ills, which brings all other evils upon us. This may
appear more ugly in our sight, in that the foulness thereof could not be
expiated, but by the death of the Son of God. And consider, what great
torments he has prepared for that which we so cherish: this proud sinful and
carnal disposition of ours so opposite to all goodness; God has appointed to
punish it with eternal separation from his presence. It makes God hate his
own creatures: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 3. We must consider the dangerous
condition of unrepenting sinners.


And to stir us up to reform sin in all that belong unto us, we must consider
the dangerous condition that they live and die in, in whom this not reformed,
Eternal torments and separation is from God. These things may help to work in
our hearts a hatred of sin: and from this hatred, a Reformation of it, with
zeal and indignation. Therefore let us labor more and more for this temper of
soul, that we may be like God and carry the Characters of the Children of God
in us. There is no affection will distinguish us from Hypocrites more then
hatred, which comes of love, which is the first borne and breeding affection
of all others. For why do we hate any thing, but because it is opposite to
that we love? why do we hate ill, but because it is opposite to God and to
Christ whom we love? amongst others, take we along this consideration with us,
that it is the Spear which wounded our blessed Savior, and that it is that he
hates most, which we love most. Consider the Holiness of God that he would
punish it in his own son, ere it should not be punished.

4. We must consider it is the bane of all our comforts.
And consider that it is the bane of all our comfort, this which we so cherish,
and that it imbitters all things to us. We cannot rejoice (no not in the good
blessings of God) whilst we are guilty of sin: Psalm. 66.18.
neither can we pray comfortably, whilst our hearts regard it. In this case
that which should rejoice the heart, communion with God, Psalm. 50.16.
is terrible to us. What have I to do to take his name in my mouth, when I
embrace such sins. The day of judgment is terrible also, for how can a man
think comfortably thereof, if therewith he expect a heavy doom for his
sins he lives in? So we may say of the day of death, none of these can be
thought upon without terror, when therewithal it comes to ones mind the
cutting off from their sins, 2 Cor. 5.11.
and the terror of the Lord against all sin whatsoever. It should be the joy
of our hearts to think of these happy times: therefore there must needs be a
great deal of sin and Atheism in our hearts, when we cannot think
comfortably of them. For either we believe not these things, and so are plain
Atheists: or else, if we believe them, we are exceeding foolish to loose
future joys for the poor pleasures of sin for a season. 5. We must grow in
the love of grace and goodness.


Let us labor to grow in grace more and more, for the more we grow in the love
of God and of of good things, the more we shall hate sin: for whatsoever may be
said for the growth of love and cherishing of it to good things, the same may
be said for the hatred of ill in a contrary sense.

The last help shall be, to place and drive our affections a contrary way, 6.
Change the object to its right opposite.
to translate and place them on a contrary object, when they are stirred up to
evil attempts. As when Hatred is stirred up, direct it to its proper object,
sin: when Love is irregular; think with our selves, that God has not
planted this affection for this object: but to carry me another way: J must
love God above all, and all that he loves for his sake. Has God put Love and
Hatred into my heart to hate my brother whom I should love, and to love the
Devil, and hate God? O no! I should love God above all and my brother as my
self; and hate the Devil and all his works, whom J have renounced in my
Baptism; therefore in distempers of the affections, make a diversion, and
turn them the right way. As Physicians use to do, when the distempered blood
runs dangerously one way, If they cannot stop that, they open a vein to drive
the course of the blood another way. So it is Christian policy, when the
affections run dangerously one way, then to reflect thus upon our selves. I but
is this the end why God has placed this affection in me, Certainly no, he
has planted this affection in me for another purpose. Therefore, I will hate
that which I should hate, sin in general: and my own sin most of all,
which makes me hate my brother. This should be our daily task and study, to
take off the affections where they should not be placed, and to fix them where
they should be placed: and there to let them go amain, the faster the better;
restraining them where they should not run out.

Thus we ought to temper our selves, and to work in our selves as much as may
be a sound hatred to all sin, not only of the second Table, but of the first
also. The Church here says, What have I any more to do with Idols? Now I hate
all vain inventions. And think not with Gallie that this belongs not to us,
if we be Magistrates and called to it, to stand for the cause of the Church and
true Religion.

What have I any more to do with Idols?

The last thing to be observed from Ephraims manner of expressing his
indignation is,

That where Love is not well contracted and begun, it will not hold to the
end, but will end in eternal hatred.

That all wicked leagues must end in everlasting hatred Genesis 3.15.
The Serpent and Hevah had some poor acquaintance together (as the issue
proved.) What did it end in? The seed of the woeman shall break the Serpents
head. This association and acquaintance ended in everlasting war and breach.
So all covenants leagues and associations with those we should not join with,
can never soder handsomely together but will end in everlasting hatred. What a
strict league was in former times betwixt Ephraim and Idols? But when Ephraims
eyes are opened to see his Idols Devils, he detests and loathes all
abominations; and is of another mind; What have I any more to do with Idols?
he abhominates them, as the word imports.

Let us therefore beware with whom we join in intimate league. That naughty
association and leagues causes a miserable rent in the affections.
For what makes miserable so much, as the renting of the affections from that
they were strongly placed on; when love is rent from the thing beloved. If we
place our affections (for some bie respects) upon wicked persons, this will
cause so much the more torment and indignation against our selves, that we were
so foolish to suffer our affections to enter so deeply where they should not.
Rev. 17.12, 16.
Those that glory in their league with Antichrist, and wonder at the Beast,
thinking him a Demy-God: will this be always so? O no, when God opens the eyes
of any of his people, they shall hate them for ever. So wicked persons that now
are led on to this and that wicked course, shall this be always so? Woe to
thee if it be: but the time may come that thou shall say, What have I any more
to do with Idols, or with such an ones acquaintaince? I cannot endure to look
on him, he tainted me, and misled me, and tempted me: now we must be two,
part we must, and I would we had never met together. A Consideration in choice
of company.
Therefore before we place our affections on any, consider who they be; whether
we be likely to live with them for ever or not? whether there be any evidence
of grace in them. If not, let them be two to us; for whatsoever vanity is in
the things or Persons we love, if we belong to God we must be separate from
them, unless we will be damned. Therefore we must be wise to prevent the
danger betimes. Ephraim might have known before the danger of Idolatry had he
been wise, and prudent; But it is well he knows it now at length, which
causes him so to abhominate Idols: What have I any more to do with Idols?
This much is spoken because of the luke-warmenes and cold temper, neutrality
and halting of a great many in the world: having so many sinful
combinations, and associations one with another, as if these things were not
material.

That a reflection of what we are and hope for is a means to preserve a right
temper:
Now let men consider what a disposition this is, and how it stands with that
disposition which must be in those that are members of Christ, and look for
Heaven. Let a Christian always remember what he is, and what he hopes for, and
this will put him in a right temper. 1. What he is, a King, and an heir of
Heaven, etc. After which he should reason with good Nehemiah, Nehe^ 11.
Shall such a man as I fly? shall such a man as J do this? J am redeemed from
my sins and advanced to be a King, to rule over my lusts, to be an heir of
Heaven and eternal happiness in the world to come, to reign with Christ, and
shall J do thus and thus? Does this stand with my new temper, this sin, this
filthiness, this base action, and thoughts, that I am tempted to and
incumbered with. Shall such a man as I follow these base actions, ways and
companions? consider we this well, and then it will breed Ephraims Resolution,
What have I any more to do with this base lust? what has it to do with me?
or J with it? Is this and this action befitting a King and an heir of Heaven,
and a new creature? and if a man be in authority, then let him consider what
Mordecai said to Hester; Hest. 4.14.
What if thou be called to the Kingdom for such a purpose. What if thou be
called to this place or dignity for this purpose? to reform such and such
abuses. Think with thy self, not only in particular what thou art? but in
thy place, what if thou be called to reform such abuses? such unsound
doctrines? to stand for God and for the truth. This will breed this resolute
indignation of Ephraim in us; What have I any more now to do with Idols? All
which is for the manner of Ephraims indignation: A strong negation of an
abhominated thing: what have I any more to do, etc. The next which is the
Substance and Matter abhominated [Idolatry] must be reserved for some other
time.

The end of the tenth Sermon.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.9. Ephraim shall say, what have J any more to do with Idols? J have
heard him and observed him: J am like a green firre-tree, from me is thy fruit
found.


WE have heard at several times heretofore, how graciously God deals with
his people, alluring them by many free and gracious promises to his service,
the particulars whereof, we heard heretofore at large. This 9. Verse. has
reference unto that which went before Ver. 3. There Ephraim renounceth his
former Idols. Ashur shall not save us, etc. and here Ephraim shall say, what
have I any more to do with Idols? unto which the answer is, I have heard him,
and observed him; I am like a green firre-tree unto him: from me is thy fruit
found. Now in that Ephraim shall say, what have I any more to do with Idols?
This in sum is only the first part of the third Verse repeated in another
manner: that Ephraim shall and will go on in abhominating Idols, be constant
in his former resolution. Therefore in that Ephraim shall by the Spirit of
grace, go on in renouncing all false confidence, God shows here that Ephraim
shall loose nothing by it (for he intends here the continuance of time) I have
heard him, and J do hear him, and I will hear him and respect him: and be
like a shadie green firre-tree to shade him, causing him also to be abundant
in fruit, From me is thy fruit found.

Ephraim shall say what have I any more to do with Idols: here we considered
the manner of expression, and then the Matter it self.

Ephraim shall say, what have I any more to do with Idols?

To come therefore to the Matter it self specified (Idolatry) against which
Ephraims indignation is directed:

What have I to do with Idols?

In handling whereof we must take in all these four together, that is 1. False
Doctrine, which is the foundation of Idolatry. 2. Idols themselves: or 3.
Idolatry, which they tend to (for he which hates Idols, hates them, because he
hates Idolatry) or 4. Idolaters, as if he had said,


What have I any more to do with Idolatrous Doctrines, opinions or conceits:
or with Idols framed according to these conceits: or with Idolatry or
Idolaters? for these go together, no man worships Idols, but because he is
poisoned in his conceits: and Idols are forbidden, because Idolatry is
dangerous; and communion with Idolaters is forbidden, because of Idolatry. So
that the Doctrine, Idols, Idolatry, and Communion with them, all these are
objects of Ephraims abomination and indignation.

Ephraim (shall say) what have I any more to do with Idols?

It were to mispend precious time (appointed for better uses) to tell you of
the abominable distinctions of the Papists of Latria and Dulia, or to insist
upon a discourse of Heathenish Idolatry: Truths, but not so profitable for us
to spend time in. 1. Reasons of Ephraims hatred unto Idols.
Therefore we will rather come to show the Reasons, why Ephraim so abhors
Idolatry, Idols, and conceits of all.

To begin in the first place with Idols; 1. Because they are abominable unto
God.
when Ephraim is truly converted, he hates them, because Idols are abominable
to God, unto whom Ephraim is now converted. Ephraim hates Idols, for Idolatry
is spiritual Adultery, Religion is as it were a conjugal act of marriage, so
that a breach in religious worship, is a breach of spiritual marriage. Now the
worshipping of Idols being a breach of the conjugall act of marriage betwixt
God and the soul, spiritual Adultery, it must needs be abominable. For
adultery is an abominable filthy thing; much more spiritual Adultery:
therefore (says Ephraim) What have I now any more to do with Idols?

2. Because Idolatry frames base conceits of God
And then again, Jdolatry frames base conceits of God: whereas on the contrary
we should elevate and raise up our hearts unto him, Idolatry pulls him down
and conformes him to our base conceits. Were it not a wrong to man, to make him
like a Swine, or an Ape or some such ridiculous creature? who in this case
would think himself well used? there is not such disproportion betwixt any
creature and man, as there is betwixt the great God of Heaven and Earth and the
best creature that can be made to resemble him. Therefore it is an abominable
abuse and dishonor to the great Majesty of God to be represented any kind of
way.

3. Because they are opposite to God.
Again, Consider the opposition between any representation of God, and God:
they are corruptible things, God is incorruptible; they are visible, God is
invisible: they are vain and nothing; God a being of himself, who gives
being unto all things. God is the living God, and the cause of all life. To be
brief, the Scripture to show Gods hatred of them, calls them dunghill gods,
and (Abell) as it is in this book, vanity, nothing, a name to alienate the
affections from them.

Yea further, because God is a Jealous God, 4. Exo. 34 Because God is a Jealous
God. Isa. 42.8.
and will not give his Glory to another. Ephraim therefore as soon as he
comes to know God, he hates Idols, because he knows God being a Jealous
God could not endure them.

Now Idolatry is committed, How Idolatry is committed.
when either we set up false gods in place of the true God: or when we worship
the true God in a false manner.



Popery worship, Papists proved to be Idolaters.
and the names that the Heathen worship, and they will be all one. Now names be
no Realities.

How may this be cleared?

1. Because they give the honor due unto God unto others. Mat 4.
First, they give the honor due to God to others, which is Idolatry, the
religious worship only due unto God they give unto other things. Christ when he
said, him only shall thou serve: excepted the least divine worship from the
creature. The Devil we know would have had him fall down before him: but
Christ's answer is, Him only shall thou serve; that is him only shall thou
religiously prostrate thy self unto; so that religious worship is proper to
God only. Now this they give to Saints, for they pray to them, which is a
religious worship.







I vow to the Virgin Mary, etc. Now a vow is a religious act. They vow to
Saints, and burn incense unto them, erect Temples, and set apart days for
their worship, and so break all the four Commandments of the first Table. In
a good fashion it is not unfit to remember them, that their memorial may be
kept: but we are not to worship them.

And besides Saints, they have other false gods: for their head of the Church
is an abominable Idol, unto whom they ascribe that which is proper unto
Christ, to be the head of the Church, which has no influence from him, but all
from Christ the spiritual head thereof. Therefore the Apostle complains of
such: Who hold not the head, Col. 2.19.
etc. Those of the Romish Church, hold not the head, hold not Christ, because
they attribute that to Saints and men, which is proper to Christ only. They
make the Pope the judge of all controversies, who must give authority to the
word, and determine Scripture to be Scripture, what a shameful thing is this
to make him judge of the Scriptures which must judge him at the last day? a
pitiful thing it is, to see a man of sin go about to judge the righteous
law of God, and to determine of that which must ere long determine him unto
eternal torments, without particular repentance. Yet being spiritually drunk,
this folly they are given too, that they will be judge of that which must be
judge of them. Many ways they make him an Idol, ascribing that to him which is
proper to Christ.

1. Baptism.
for they ascribe to the water in Baptism power of conferring grace. Now grace
is Gods Creature only, for all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth cannot
confer the least dram of grace; it is a thing of Gods making. Now to raise an
element to confer grace, and then to trust in it ex opere operato, for the
conferring of it, is to make an Idol of it. 2. The Bread in the Lords Supper.
And for the Bread; none of all the Heathens ever had such an abominable Idol
as the Mass, a breaden God: for they worshipped living creatures, and there is
not the worst living creature, but it is better then a piece of bread; and yet
they worship that, for (by their own confession) if the intention of the
Priest be not to the action, there is nothing but bread. How may the minds then
of men be tormented, when they may or shall think, perhaps the Priest has no
such intention? and so are in danger of Idolatry. For says the Psalmist, Their
sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another god, Psalm. 16.4.
etc. So certainly the sorrows, and scruples of those that are Idolaters
shall be multiplied, they cannot but be much tormented in soul sometimes.
Coster himself a forward Jesuit acknowledges, That if (upon the words of
Consecration) the Bread be not turned and Transubstantiated into the body of
Christ, we are the most abominable Idolaters of the world. B. Jewel. D.
Rainolds. D. Fulke D. Whitaker. D Willet. Perkins, etc.
But we make the Minor and Assumption (long since prooved by the late worthies
of our Church) but there is no such transubstantiating of the Bread into the
Body of Christ: therefore by their own consent they are the most abominable
Idolaters of the world, worse then the Heathen.

And in their equalizing traditions (which are but the inventions of man's
brain) with the Scriptures: they commit Idolatry, in that they make their very
Church an Idol. But what should we speak of their Church, when they have the
Pope who is their Church vertually: for what is said of the one may be said of
the other. When they come to the issue, the Church is nothing but the Pope;
whatsoever their Church or counsels say, he is the whole Church. Many ways
they are gross Idolaters, especially the common people: for though they say
they give not Laws, worship to the Image, but Dulia, service. But can the
common people distinguish, who give worship to all alike? to say we worship not
the Image, but God before the Image, was the Heathens excuse, as we may see in
Arnobius. Can the common people distinguish? no, for they are ignorant Images
themselves, in this they are worse then the heathens, because they have more
light, and still the more light, the more sin. For they have been foretold,
that the whore of Rome should be the mother of all fornication, the Spiritual
Babylon, Sodom, Reve. 17.5.
and Egypt, in regard of Idolatry, the mother of all these abominations. Now
for them who have been forewarned hereof, and in so much light still to
continue Idolaters, and persist in false worship, is to be worse then the
Heathens, who had not the like light and warning.





Psalm. 115.8.
who are seldom converted; partly because they are drunk, and partly because
they are stupid, like the Idols they worship.

Egyptian darkness, out of spiritual Sodom, as Lot was out of that Sodom:
O we cannot be thankful enough, nor ought we to desire to return to Sodom
again, Genesis 19.
or unto Egypt. Where then is place left for neutrality? those neuters that
will be of neither Religion? Is such a disposition from the Spirit of God,
which makes Ephraim say here, what have I any more to do with Idols? Ephraim
would not be a neuter, therefore what shall we say unto them that present
themselves to Masses in their travells especially; is this to say with Ephraim:
what have I any more to do with Idols? we must believe with the heart, and
confess with the mouth to salvation: Romans 10.9.
if a man might escape with having his heart to God-wards and his body
prostrate, where were confession? In Elyas time, God told him, that there were
left seven thousand in Israel, who had not bowed the knee to Baal, 1 King.
19.18.
that is who made no bodily prostration. Therefore as the Papists do not join
with us, so neither ought we with them, if we hold the contrary Religion false:
in this case we should not present our selves with them in any service.

2 Cor. 6.14, 15
For what communion has God with Belial? Christ with Antichrist? what
communion? The Question is a strong Negation, as that of Ephraim here: What
have I now any more to do with Idols?



Pope is Antichrist, and Rome to be Babylon, and Babylon to be the mother of
al fornication. This must needs follow that there can be no reconciling of these
two Religions: we may come near them, and become Papists, but they will never
come near us to be good Christians.

1 John. 5.
and that we must beware of all Jdolatry, let us take heed therefore that we
have nothing to do with them more then we must needs. Converse with them in
our callings we may, because (as an ancient father says) we be compossessors
of the world, and not of Religion: we must go out of the world if we will not
have to do with them sometimes in the places where we live, but amity is very
dangerous with such; the Scripture runs much upon it, should we love them
whom God hates. It was Eves fault, that without a calling she ventured to talk
with the Serpent, we should therefore shun conversing and parley with them as
much as may be. As there were railes set about mount Synai, to keep of the
people from touching the Mountain; so God has set hedges about the second
Commandment, to keep us off from offending in it: as it was usual with God
in this kind. As when he would keep them far from murder, Deuteronomy. 22, 6. Exo.
23.19.
he forbad them to kill the damme with the young, and not to sees a kid in his
mothers milk, only to restrain them from murder that abominable sin; such
precepts the Jews call the hedges of the Commandments. So for Idolatry, the
Scripture would have us hate the garment spotted with the flesh, to defile the
Coverings of the Images; Jud. ver 23. Isa. 30.22. Ephesians. 5.11.
to account them as a menstruous cloth, etc. and to have nothing to do with
the unfruitful works of darkness. To hate all monuments of Idolatry. As
Augustine says of monuments; any monument mooves and stirs up the mind. So
any thing that may moove or stir us to Idolatry, we should abhor and keep
a far off from it.

And therefore the Commandments are set down in the highest pitch of the
sin, to show that we should avoid all the degrees under that which leads to
so great a breach, and that we should hate all those steps and leadings to the
sin it self. We should therefore beware of Popish writers, and do with them
as was done with the Magic books in the Acts; Act. 19.19.
burn them all, least they corrupt our selves and others. Learn we this of
the Papists, who hate our Books, burn them, or lock them up safe: yea hate
the very Names of Luther and Calvin, much more their Books.

In this case it is with the soul of man, That a man's spirit tastes of the
Authors he is most conversant in.
as with water that relisheth of that soil through which it runs: if it run
through a hot soil, as baths through a sulphury soil, it talks of that. So
the spirit of a man tastes of those authors he runs through. Therefore such
who converse much in Popish writings (unless Ministers who have a calling that
way to confute them) are in danger to be ensnared by them.

Ephraim here agree with such? a crucifix is but a teacher of lies,
representing only the outside and that falsely: for there is no expression in
Scripture what kind of man Christ was. And if there were, 2 Cor. 5.16.
yet the Apostle shows, That we must now no more know him any more after the
flesh: not as such a man, as tall, and fair, etc. But know him as the
Mediator, as King of Heaven and Earth, avoiding all lewd base conceits of him:
people in this kind are too bold, and run too near Popery. A Father says
well, No man is safe that is near to danger. 1 Cor. 10.14.
We are commanded to fly from Idolatry, we must not come near the pits
brinke, least we fall in; run and fly from it as from a Serpent, dally not
with the occasions.

The more close Idolatries of many Christians.
But to leave this gross Jdolatry, to speak of something which more nearly
concerns us, and which we are prone to: though we hate these gross
Jdolatries, yet there be some we are more nearly addicted to: as,

1. To have false conceptions of God.
First of all, there is a pronenesse in us in our worship, to conceive false
conceptions and Ideas of God, and so in place of worshipping God, we worship an
Jdoll of our own brain.



We must not conceive of God as of a finite essence.


1. First of all Negatively, do not dishonor God in imagining any character of
an infinite incomprehensible God, but conceive of him, as an infinite essence.

And then conceive not absolutely of God, but of God distinguished in three
Persons. 2. We must conceive of God, distinguished in 3 Persons.
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or else we conceive an Idol. For there
are three Persons in one common nature, and in our Prayers, we must not
conceive the Nature without the Persons.

In the third place, 3. We must not conceive of God without Christ.
we must not in our Prayers conceive of God without Christ the Mediator. For
even as God was only to be known and spoken to toward the Tabernacle: so
Christ is the Tabernacle now where God manifests his gracious presence, and
will be worshipped in him the Mediator. For God considered out of Christ is a
consuming fire: without Christ no converse with God. Let us therefore take
Christ along with us, when we go to God, go to him by God in our Nature, our
Immanuell, and so we shall conceive of God aright, and not worship an Idol of
our own brain.

Again there is another thing which is a common abuse among Christians, 4. It
is Idolatry to transform God like to us in affections.
wherein they come near to Idolatry, when they transform God to be like
themselves in their affections, as it is the property of all unregenerate men
to do so. Idolatry is so natural it cannot but transform God to be like it
self, as for instance. A man that is not a gracious man, in the pride of his
sinful course, thinks that God is like unto him: Psalm. 50.21.
Thou thoughtest that I was like unto thy self: therefore I will come against
thee, etc. As oppressors and such who grow great by ill courses, they justify
this much: would God let me alone if he did not approove of my courses? so they
make God like themselves. And so the good-fellowes of the world, they make God
to allow all their dissoluteness, because he lets them alone. So those that
are fierce and cruel by nature, who delight in cruelty, vexation and blood,
they transform God as though he delighted in such things, and make him a God
of blood. So others transform God to be all mercy: this is to make God an
Idol, and as ill as if they transformed him into this and that creature, worse
then the Heathens, in regard of their light under the Gospel, yet this is the
disposition of many Christians now a days.

Bacchus and Venus, such abominable gods?

as to transform Christ to die for such who go on in their sins without
remorse, or to transform him into the likeness of such and such vile
creatures.

Further, 3. It is Idolatry to set somewhat up above God in our souls.
there is another sort of Idolatry Christians are subject unto, to set up
somewhat in their hearts higher then God, there is no man without grace but he
does so until his conversion. Nay, when a man is converted, he is prone to
this, to Idolize and set up something above that which should be in the heart.
Col. 3.5.
Hereupon Paul calls Covetousness Idolatry: because a covetous man places
those affections upon his own wealth, which should dwell in God: Job. 31.24.
for he says to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence; thinking his wealth
shall bear him out in any ill cause whatsoever. And then again, that time
which he should spend in thinking of God and of a better life, he burieth
those thoughts in his mucke and wealth, toyling and moyling in the world, when
he should serve God. 4. Such commit Idolatry who have men's persons too much in
admiration.
Thus the covetous man is an Idolater.

And there are some guilty of Jdolatry likewise in an other kind, such as have
men's persons too much in admiration; that deifie them, especially if they be in
great place, such who will offend God before they will offend them, and whereas
for Gods Glory they should deny themselves: they deny themselves and make
themselves fools for men; and to please them by whom they hope to rise deny
both wit and honesty. This is abominable Idolatry, and such are as far
from Heaven and salvation, as those that fall before an Idol, if they repent
not. O! If these men that study to please men, and deny themselves for them,
would be as careful to please God as they have been to please men, how happy,
and what excellent Christians would they be. As a great man pleaser in his
time said; A Scottish Regent before his execution.
If he had served God as well as he had served his master the King in that
time; God had not left him so in his old years. To set up any man so high in
our affections, as for him to deny our selves, crack our consciences, and do
things unlawful, will be misery in the end. Gal. 1.10.
If I please men (says Paul) I am not the servant of Christ. He means
sinful pleasing, for their ought to be service and respect, due honor must
be given unto those who carry Gods Image, our Governors; yea great respect and
honor, and nothing in this kind can be too much; but to go beyond our bounds
herein, is to commit Idolatry. As the Heathen did, when the government of Rome
was turned into an Empire, some of their Emperors were made gods by them after
Augustus time, wherein they could not have devised to have done them greater
wrong, for they all came most of them to fearful ends. It is ill for any man
to have God his corrivall, for no greater misery can befall a man then to be
set up in Gods room, so to rule a man's honesty, will, and conscience at his
pleasure; for God is a Jealous God, and will not endure such Idolatry.

And so in the next place, 5. Such Idolize who professing Christ will not
suffer any thing for his sake.
they frame Christ an Idol, in taking him without his cross: they will be of
the true Religion, but when they come to suffer any thing, if it be but a
frown, a reproach or disgrace, they give out and fall back. Such they frame to
themselves an Idol, a false Christ: for the knowledge of Christ is never
without the Cross, some cross or other, some persecution or other in some
kind. 2 Timothy 3.12.
All who will live godly in Christ shall suffer persecution. A man may live
godly and not suffer persecution, but he that will live godly in Christ, so as
he shows his nature to be altered, carrying an Antipathy against all false
courses, and so as the world may conceive that he is such an one, it is
impossible that he should live in the world without persecution: because he
shall meet with those that are of an opposite disposition. Therefore to frame
a smooth Christ, all comfort, is to frame a false Christ and a false Religion,
to frame an Idol that has no truth in it, that never was, nor never will be to
the end of the world.

Again, 6. Idolatry is committed when we set up our own wits and wills
instead of Gods.
unconverted persons (especially) are prone to another Idolatry, to set up
their own wits and wills instead of Gods. So as there is not a greater enemy
to Religion then our own conceits and wills, which will have a model of
Religion of our own brain, which must stand let what will come of it. This is
the fault especially of great learned persons, who take upon them conceits and
apprehensions of things; and then do^e upon these brats of their own brain.
And so for will, to have our own will in all things, as the speech is, My mind
to me a kingdom is: I will have my will, whatsoever come of it. This is
Idolatry, for whosoever will come to Heaven, must deny his will: Mat. 16 24.
The first lesson in Christ's school is selfe-denyall, Deny all of wit and
will, to have no more wit and wisdom, especially in divine things then God
will teach us: and no more will, which is distinct and opposite to Christ's
will, but to bring our wills to his in all things. When men will go about
great affairs, and set upon things in their own wit and strength, never
praying nor depending upon God for a blessing, this is a kind of Idolizing of
parts, to work out things by policy, strength, wit, and parts. As that
Heathen Atheist could say, Let cowards pray if they will: but his success was
answerable. So is it not the common Atheism of the world, they go about
things in confidence of their wit and parts, and so hope to attain a glorious
issue: whereas God who overthrowes Babels, takes delight to confound all their
devices: it is his daily practice, Luke 1.52.
To send the rich empty away, and exalt the humble and mock. Those who set
upon things rashly without prayer, as though they were Lords of all, and
without dependence upon God, promising themselves good success, they make
Idols of themselves: as a proud man is an Idol, he worships himself, whilst
he leanes to his own wit, plots and parts: carnal men thus Idolize themselves.

Again you have some who are none of the worst, 7. Idolatry is committed by
trusting to the performances and tasks of Religion.
who commit this great sin of Idolatry by trusting to the outward
performances and taskes of Religion, thinking that God must needs be bound unto
them when they have done so many taskes, read and prayed, or heard so many
sermons, or done a good deed. But here lies the spiritual subtilty, in that
they set up these things too high, when if they find not that success they
look for, then they inwardly murmur against God: when rather all these things
should be done with a spirit of Humility and subjection, using them only as
means whereupon we expect Gods blessing, craving his assistance and strength
to do them in a holy and a selfe-denying manner: when we do otherwise, and
trust to the outward taskes and performances we do, we make them Idols. And
you have many that go along with outward performances, who never come to a
dram of grace, because they trust to the outward performances, and look not to
the life and soul of them, which is the Spirit of God assisting, quickening,
strengthening blessing them. The life of a Christian is a perpetual dependence
upon God in the use of means; and not an Idolizing of them, to be careless
when he has done his task.

8. It is Idolatry so to trust to the work of grace as to neglect
justificatio^ and acceptance to life everlasting.
But a more subtle Idolatry then this is of an other kind, when we trust too
much to the work of grace, and rely not upon God in Christ in the matter of
justification and acceptance to life everlasting, which is a fault both 1.
Before, 2. After Conversion.


The poor (says Christ) receive the Gospel, Mat. 11.5. Mat. 9.13. Mat. 11.21.
and those that are lost, Christ is sent to save them, and to call in the weary
and heavy laden.

the sins of all men, yet Christ's all-sufficient Righteousness is sufficient
for to do them all away, if we can go out of our selves, and cleave to that.
Therefore in trouble of conscience, we must not look either to our good or our
ill, but to Gods infinite Mercy, and to the infinite satisfaction of our
blessed S^viour the Lord Jesus Christ, there as it were loosing our selves,
seeing our sins as mountains drowned in the infinite sea of his Mercy. The
blood of Christ, that will pacify and stay the conscience, nothing else can
give rest to our souls. If we look to our works and to the measure of our
sanctification, what says holy Paul in the like case? Yea doubtless, Phil.
3.8.
and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do
count them but dung that I may win Christ, even his Righteousness and best
works; therefore there is no regard to be had of them in that case. Wherefore
when we would speak comfort to a distressed conscience, we must not look to
his ill or good, but to the command. This is his command that we believe: 1
John. 3.23.
and look to the all sufficiency of God in Christ, and the promises, whereby
we honor God in giving him the glory of his truth, and depart with comfort.
Therefore though we hate gross Idolatry, yet we see there are many ways
wherein the soul may be seduced, whereby we may come very near that sin
which our soul hates; by trusting too much to something out of God.

Direction) so as to fly from all Idolatry, How to reform our selves so as
to fly from Idolatry.
and to say with Ephraim, What have I now any more to do with Idols?

What have I now any more to do with Idols?

Paul's method, Coloss. 2. and in other places, when he would draw us from all
outward things, he speaks gloriously of the fulness of Christ. In him
dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily: and, In him you are
complete. Col. 2.9.
When he would draw them from, touch not, taste not, handle not, worshipping of
Angels, and from counterfeit humility, he labors to dispossess them of these
Idolatrous conceits, and to possess them of the fulness of Christ. If in him
we have fulness, why should we look for any thing out of him? If we be
complete in him, Jf all fulness be in him, why do we seek any thing out of
that fulness? Thus the holy Apostle shuts up his first Epistle, Babes
keep you from Idols. What is promised there? 1 John. 5.21.
Christ is eternal life, all is in him, whereupon presently comes this; Babes
keep you from Idols. If life and happiness and all be in Christ, If we be
complete in him, and the fulness of all be in him, why should we go out of
him for any thing? Genesis 17.1.
When God would persuade Abraham to leave all Idolatry, and all things else,
to depend wholly upon him, what does he first possess him with? I am God all
sufficient, etc. know God in covenant all sufficient, and Christ in the
fulness of his high perfections as mediator, in whom is all fulness and
life eternal, in whom we are complete: we shall then be so far from going
out of him for any thing, as we shall be of the same mind with Ephraim, what
have J now any more to do with other Jntercessors and Mediators? what have I
to do with will worship? what need I go to other cursed means, when God is
all sufficient? It is the scope of the new covenant of grace that we should
glory in God only, The scope of the new Covenant. 1 Cor. 1.30.
who has made Christ unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. And all this, because that whosoever glories in him should not go
out of him for any thing. The more we know therefore the fulness of Christ,
and Gods mercy in him, the more we shall abhor all Idolatry, with the kinds
and degrees of it.

Another help and means to cure this disposition in us is, to know that we
are naturally wondrous prone to it in one degree or another, It is reckoned up,
Gal. 5. as a work of the flesh, and naturally man has a working fancy, to set
up somewhat in his heart and understanding above, and besides God; Imaginations
to adulterate things. Men live by sense, and Imagination is next to sense, so
that naturally all men are Idolaters before conversion in one kind or other:
and dote so upon their own, that they will not be driven out of themselves
unto God in Christ, without a great deal of grace. As men naturally love the
child of their own body, so men love the children of their own brain.



shall mortify the cursed deeds of the flesh: for, nature will never subdue
nature; Romans 8.3.
the Spirit of God therefore is that which can, and must free us from all dregs
and tainture of this cursed disposition, which the Jews were so scourged for,
and hardly driven from.

Rev. 9.20. Where the Turk is said to be raised up against all these
Idolaters, that would not be kept from worshipping the Devil, and the Image of
the beast. Yet for all this, it is said they did not repent. And so the Jewish
Church was still punished with enemies raised up against them for their
Idolatry. And it is to be expected that the Idolatry of these western Churches
will at length pull down Antichrist himself, which must be before the
conversion of the Jews. For what hinders their conversion now? The world is
full of Idolaters, even Christians; and therefore there must be a confusion of
Antichrists Jdolatrous worship before the conversion of the Jews, who will not
return whilst that scandal is in their eye. Therefore that we may help
forward that glorious work, let us labor as much as we can to purge the
Church of this, in drawing others from Idolatry, that we may help to make way
for those glorious times a coming: for this Scripture especially has relation
unto the calling of the Jews, not to be fullfilled till then, when Ephraim
shall say, what have I now any more to do with Idols? with that for which we
have been so plagued for in former times.

Ephraim (at length) shall say, what have I any more to do with Idols? to
cherish pride and self conceit? which if ever I come to Heaven I must
renounce, hating my self for my own pride and folly.



Exhortation.
Therefore let us not think will worship a flight matter; Popery what?
for we see Popery is nothing else but a bundle of man's devices? we see in
Scripture, when the dearest friends of Christ came unto him with devices of
their own and good intentions, Christ notwithstanding saw the Devil in them.
Peter made a great confession, Thou art the Son of the living God, and then
he came, Mat 16.16.
Master spare thy self: whereunto Christ replied, (...) thee behind (...)
Satan. God is never more provoked then when men think to honor him with their
own devices, stablishing a false, and neglecting his own true worship. And
there is usually little amendment of these kind of persons, because they carry
with them a show of wisdom, as Paul says, Col. 2.18.
and great Humility: which things being so carried with a show of some grace
and wisdom (though they be desperate folly in the conclusion) men hardly will
part withal. Corporal and spiritual Adulterers are hardly reclaimed.
As we see of corporal Adultery, few of them are reclaimed; because it has a
bewitching alluring power: which is most true of the spiritual Adulterers,
there are few of them reclaimed, until God by some severe judgment alter and
bring down the proud imagination to serve him as he will be served, so as to
say with Ephraim here, What have I now any more to do with Idols?

Well that we may abhor Jdolatry the more, consider two or three direct
places. Who required these things at your hands, says God, Isa. 1.12.
when they think to please him with voluntary devised things, this will strike
them dumb then, the things that God requires being so easy and so few, yet
we to omit them all and to devise new things of our own: our reward shall be,
Who required these things at your hands? And then again says God, In vain
they worship me teaching for my precepts the devices of men. See then the
vanity of Idolaters, Mat. 15.9.
who though they would do nothing in vain, yet do all their will worship in
vain. It is not only Idolatry, but obstinate Idolatry, the Romish doctrine:
We would have cured Babel, but she would not be cured. Ier. 51.9.
Js this a light cause of our coming out of Babylon? do we leave them for
trifles, when they stand guilty of abominable Idolatry? you may see here, if
so be Ephraim out of holy affection say, what have I now any more to do with
Idols? What to think and judge of those that would bring God and Jdols
together; if Ephraim had been of the temper that many men now are, he might
have said, How some men slight Idolatry.
tush what need we care for Idols, Crucifixes and the like? there is not such a
distance betwixt them and us, why may not both Religions stand together? This
new fangled niceness is but the distempered devices of some few giddy headed
men who know not what they would have. This is the wisdom of many men in our
times, who reckon that there is not an eternal irreconcilable distance
between light and darkness, the service of God and that of Idols. We cannot
serve two masters, says Christ. Mat. 6.24.
Yes say they we may serve two masters, Antichrist and Christ, God and
Beliall. O but what says Ephraim? What have I now any more to do with Idols?
There can be no mixture you know where there is abomination. That Church Reve.
3. which was neither hot nor cold may parallel many now in our times, who are
neither hot nor cold, Papists nor Protestants, but politic Atheists, who
will be both or neither, whatsoever may best serve and advance their worldly
ends. How does God look upon such? (says he) I will spew them out of my
mouth: God hates such most of all, now I would thou were either hot or cold. If
this be the affection of Gods people toward Idols and Idolaters, an utter
aversation, and shall we think to jumble and mingle contrary things together,
to serve God and the Devil, Christ and Antichrist.

Thus we see what to think of the temper of these men, That in some lesser
matters we may use our own opinions. Phil 3.15.
in lighter matters indeed we may enjoy our own private opinions in some
things. As Saint Paul says in lesser things, If any men be otherwise minded,
God shall reveal it unto him. But when he comes to the point of justification
by Christ in Gods worship: what says he? If any man be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal it? No, but if I or an Angel from Heaven teach otherwise, let
him be accursed. Gal. 1.8.
Now when men teach another doctrine and worship, joining with gross
Idolaters in that worship, there we must be of Paul's spirit, If I or an Angel
from Heaven teach otherwise, let him be accursed. The Holy Ghost at first
appeared in the form and shape of a Dove which is a meek and mild creature,
Mat. 3.16.
that has no tallons to hurt with. Yet notwithstanding at another time, he
appeared in fiery tongues, Act. 2.3.
to show that the same Spirit that in lesser things maintains peace and love,
when it is set against any sin, especially against that sin of sins
Idolatry, which brings Gods vengeance upon Kingdoms and states, and roots
them out; there the Holy Ghost must appear in fire, that element must be in
the hearts of people against that sin: that though to persons that have their
slips, and in lesser matters there must be the spirit of a dove: yet there must
be in men the spirit of courage, indignation, abomination and hatred unto the
Idolatry of the times. That we may say from our hearts with Ephraim, What have
I now any more to do with Idols?

Conclusion.
Therefore let us join with those that we shall live for ever with in Heaven,
and go in the best courses, and we shall never need to fear separation, nor
want encouragements to well doing. Thus shall we neither grieve nor be ashamed
to say with Ephraim, What have I now any more to do with Idols? At the length
the Kings of the earth who adore the whore, they shall come and eat her very
flesh. Rev. 17.16.
So it will be the end of those that reign in other men's consciences, and in a
manner will be accounted gods, that all which is gotten with wrong to God,
shall be renounced with grief, shame, and detestation of the persons of those
that make Idols of others, and will be made Idols in the hearts of others,
thinking themselves not enough respected, unless they command the conscience:
the end of such cannot be good, all this must end in loathing, shame and
detestation. What have I now any more to do with Idols? said Ephraim; and what
have J now any more to do with such and such profaneness, hypocrisy,
double-dealing and the like, shall such persons (thus sinful) say one day,
with shame and horror of conscience. Wherefore let us meet God betimes, and
renounce our Idols of all sorts, that God may come to hear us, observe us: and
be as a green fur tree unto us, etc. Whereof if God please, we shall hear
more the next time.

The end of the eleventh Sermon.
THE TWELFTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.9. Ephraim shall say, what have J any more to do with Idols? J have
heard him and observed him: J am like a green fur tree, from me is thy fruit
found.


THE words (as we heard heretofore) are a gracious answer unto the prayer
which God himself by his Spirit had dictated to Ephraim: as likewise a reward
of Ephraims Reformation. Aided by grace, Ephraim shall my (...) What have I now
any more to do with Idols? God will hear him and observe him, and be like a
green fur tree unto him. For, (says God,) from me shall Ephraims fruit be
found. Whereby we see that whenever God does alter the soul by his grace,
there he also breeds divorce and division between it and all Idolatry, a
disposition in some sort like himself, having those Sympathies and antipathies
he has toward sin and goodness. Now because God is a jealous God, and
cannot abide Idols; therefore Ephraim being sanctified by the Spirit of God, is
minded as God is, What have I any more to do with Idols?



Mare mortuum, that dead sea. The affections are the wings and the wind of the
soul, that carry it unto all which it is carried unto: especially when the
wind of Gods Spirit blows upon it, then it is carried out of it self, for of
it self it cannot love or hate as it should, but God must raise the
affections, and lay them down again. We have not the managing of our own
hearts; grace teaches us to do all.

The particular then here, is indignation and hatred, What have I now any more
to do with Idols? So that the proper affection in Gods children, which should
be conversant about that which is ill, and sinnefully ill, is hatred and
indignation, here is hatred with indignation, the extent of the affection.



contrary. What have I to do with sin in any kind? when grace has altered
the disposition of a man's heart, then sin and he are two: two indeed in the
most opposite terms that may be, what have I any more to do with my former
delightful sins? we are two now, for we were before nothing but sin. And
indeed where this hatred is not, there men may leave sin, because sin
leaves them: but this is not enough, God would have us to hate it with
indignation, what have I now any more to do with it?

Ephraim should have?

1. Helps to hate sin.
Amongst those helps formerly named, this is a maine one: to represent to the
soul, (as the soul is quick and nimble in such apprehensions) the
odiousness of sin, that it is a truly hateful thing; and therefore that our
affection of hatred cannot be better set nor employed upon any object then that
of sin. For let us consider that it is not only ill in it self, defiling
the soul, and hindering communion with God, but it is also the cause of all
ills, being the ill of ills, as God is the good of goods. For our troubles and
terrors of conscience, we may thank sin, and for all that we suffer every
day in our conditions of life; what is all but the fruit of our own ways?
Wherefore suffers living man, L^m. 3.39. ^^r. 4.18.
(says the Prophet,) man suffers for his sin. Thine own inventions have
brought these things upon thee; therefore they are bitter unto thee, they shall
pierce thy bowels. Shall we not therefore hate that which is the cause of all
mischief to us? If we had an enemy, especially if he were a soothing false
enemy, that under pretense of love should seek our bane and ruin, and join
with our worst enemies, would we not hate such an enemy? Sin is the greatest
enemy which we have in the world, and does us more harm then the Devil
himself, for it betrayeth us to the Devil, and under pretense of favoring
and pleasing our nature, betrays us. It is a false deceitful enemy, which
comes not in an ugly shape, but closes with the soul in a kind of conjugall
love, Dalilah like enticing and alluring us, whereby it has the more advantage
and strength, in that it appears in a lovely, pleasing, and not in an
imperious commanding manner: therefore it should be the more hateful to us.
Shall we not hate such an enemy as always dogs us, and hinders us, hinders us
from doing any thing well, and puts us on to all that is ill. It is such an
enemy that we cannot go about to pray or do any good thing but it hangs upon
us and clogs us in all our performances. If a man knew that such a one as made
love to him and all his, were his great grand enemy, aiming at his destruction,
would a man ever love such a man? thy ba^e, false, revengfull, covetous,
worldly heart, it joins with Satan, without which he could not hurt thee.
Shall a man cherish that which betrays him to his worst enemy the Devil? and
then should he cherish that which makes a breach betwixt him and his best
friend? If a man saw one so maliciously evil toward him, as to sow dissension
by all means he could betwixt him and his best honorable friend by whom he
was maintained in all things, would not a man hate such a one? what does
sin else but breed division and emnity betwixt God and us? and further,
when it has moved us to do ill, it cries for vengeance against us at Gods
hands. Conscience soundly avvakened, is alvvayes clamarous to pull somevvhat
from God against us. Are not sinners justly called fools? either men must be
Atheists to deny all, or else if they cherish sin, they must needs be fools
and stark mad if they confess this that they join with that which is their
chief enemy. Therefore learn to be wise to salvation, make not with
Salomons fool a sport of sin, Pro. 10.23.
of swearing of defiling our selves and others, seeing God threatens
damnation unto such.

And then again, avoid all parley and intercourse with sin in the first
suggestions; or with wicked persons that may draw us away. Use sin ruggedly
and harshly as they do here, what have I to do with Idols? do but intertaine
parley with it, and it is of such an insinuating nature, that it will incroach
daily, and spread over the soul suddenly, betraying it to the Devil.
Therefore use it hardly in the first beginnings, and avoid Satan in the first
suggestions, if we love the peace of our souls, as Ephraim here, what have I
any more to do with Idols? for as we say in the case of honesty. They come to
near that come to have the refusal. They should not have so much hope from a
chaste person, there should be such a modest carriage, as should not give any
one the boldness to adventure in that kind. So if a man carry himself
remotely from sinnfull courses, he shall have a great deal of peace from
wicked men, who dare not so much as adventure to draw away such a one, they
know he is resolved. Therefore constant resolution against all sin and wicked
men will breed a great deal of peace, so as to say with Ephraim, what have I
any more to do with Idols?

And we must know, Hatred of sin whence?
that this hatred comes from the life of God in us, therefore we must by all
means maintain spiritual life, and then as we grow spiritual, we shall grow
in the detestation of sin, a sense of joy in good things; with a hatred of
all that is contrary. A man can never hate sin till he has the Spirit of
Christ in him, for there be 3. Quaeres, 3. Quaeres.
whereof this is the last.

Jeremy. 8.6. No man said what have I done? When conscience in a man is
awakened once, he says, O! what have I done? what case am I in?

what shall I do? as that Act. 2. Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be
saved? he that truly says, what have I done? if conscience be awakened, will
also say, what shall I do? you shall not need to drive him, when the Question
is answered, what shall I do to be saved? that is by casting my self upon
God in Christ. We need not put the Question, he will say of himself, what
have J any more to do with that which is contrary to that which saves me? What
have I to do with Idols? this What have I now any more to do with Idols?

For I have heard him and observed him. I have seen and observed him, some
read the words, but very few, which is thus a very good and pious construction
of them: What have I now any more to do with Idols? As if Ephraim should say,
these words I have seen him and observed him, that is, because I have seen
him and observed, therefore what have I now any more to do with Idols? As
soon as a man comes to hear God speak, and to observe God, down goes all
Idols, for indeed the respect to Idolatry, and any thing that is naught it falls
down in the soul, as the knowledge of the true God is lifted up, and as
affection to good things are raised up in the soul. What have I to do with
Idols any more; I have seen and observed him: as Job said of himself when he
had seen God: I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. Job. 42.2.
Much more all false courses, J abhor them all, now that I have seen and
observed him.

This is a safe, pious, and good sense, but the words under correction are
fitliest applied unto God himself, as if God rather then Ephraim said thus, I
will hear him and observe him, I will do thus and thus, I will be as a green
firre-tree to shade him from danger, and to make him fruitful. But you will
say Ephraim cannot cast away Idols till God respect him first. Ephraim shall
say, What have I to do with Idols. And God shall say, I have seen him, heard
him, and observed him, when he has cast away Idols.



That nothing is lost by renouncing Idolatry, and carnal confidence in any
worldly thing.

For God makes a supply in himself, I will hear him and observe him. Nothing
is lost, for God will be true of his promise, Seek ye first the Kingdom of
God and his Righteousness, Mat. 6.33.
and all other things shall be ministered unto you. The Truth of God and then
his Mercy makes this good. Is not God merciful to his children when they
renounce all false confidence? Jn regard of the truth of his promise and mercy,
he will make good this, that nothing is lost by cleaving to him. We read in
the story of our own times, in King Edward the sixts reign, the same day that
there was reformation of Idolatry in London, purging of Churches from roodes
and Idols. The same day was that noble victory and conquest in the North parts
over the enemies. So God answered their care in reforming things amiss with
good success.

On the contrary, when we go on with favoring abuses and corruptions, yet
expecting good success, it is in vain. Let Ephraim come to say, What have I
to do with Idols? and see then whether God will respect him or not. Do
Nations or persons think that God will respect them or bless them, whilst
they do that which is abominable to him. No; when Ephraim says, what have I
to do with Idols? then presently comes, God will hear and observe him, and
look to him, as you have it in that gracious promise, The eyes of the Lord are
open unto all them that fear him, Psalm. 34.15.
and his ears are open to their prayers, his eyes and his ears. Indeed God is
all eye and all ear, the best friend in the world, cannot have his eye always
upon us, the mothers eye cannot be always upon her child, she must have a time
to sleep, when neither her eyes nor ears are open to her child's prayers, it
may cry and die in crying sometimes before she can help it. But if we
renounce sin, we have a gracious Father, who will hear us, observe us, and
see us, and not only hear and see, but as the Scripture phrase is, do that
that follows all this, where he sees, he will pity and relieve, and where he
hears, he will pity and protect.

I have heard him, I have observed him. God will hear when once we renounce
sin. If I regard iniquity in my heart, Psalm. 66.18.
God will not hear my prayers, says David. But when I do not regard iniquity
God will hear my prayers. Then a man may know that God will hear him, when
once he has renounced sin and comes with clean hands and heart to God. As
it is in Isaias, they were corrupt in their course, and yet came to God, Isa. 1.
but he rejects all, so in the last of that Prophecy, he accounts of their
Sacrifices, as of the cutting off of a dogs neck, because their hands were
full of blood, and they were full of sin. Reform abuses, let there be
personal and national Reformation, and then come and reason the matter with
God, and see whether he will regard us or not. The spirit it is said, makes
requests for the Saints, and God knows the meaning of the Spirit, Romans 8.27.
because it makes request according to the will of God. The same Spirit that
stirrs us up to amend our lives and fly Idolatrous courses, the same Spirit
stirs us up to pray to God according to the will of God, and then God hears
the desires of his own Spirit. Of all judgments in the world this is the
greatest to pray and not to be heard, for when we are in misery our remedy is
prayer: now when that which should be our remedy is not regarded, what a
pitiful thing is that? Now here is an excellent blessing set down to pray,
and for God to hear, I will hear him and observe him. Because then God and
Ephraim were of one mind and join in one, therefore God cannot but hear and
regard Ephraim, being of his mind to love and to hate what he loves and
hates. Luke 16.
As soon as ever the Prodigal began to hate his former courses, the Father
came out to meet him, Psalm. 32.3.
and so of David, I said I will confess my sins to God, (I said) that is, in
my heart I resolved to confess to God, and thou forgavest mine iniquity, God
heard his resolution. We cannot else entertain a full purpose to go to God,
unless there be a cessation from sin: the Prodigal for all his contrition,
was afraid to be shaken of his Father for his dissolute life: O! but the
Father provides a banquet: so it is when we turn to God and resolve a new
life, to cast away our Idolatries, and former abominations, presently God
hears us and observes us, and is ready to meet us.

There is an excellent place even touching Ephraim himself, Ier. 31.18.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, thou have chastised me, and I
was chastised as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, turn me to thee and I
shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God, etc. Is Ephraim a dear son, is
he a pleasant child, for since I spoke against him I do earnestly remember him
still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will have mercy upon him. If
Ephraim begin to bemoane himself for his folly, presently follows, that
Gods bowels are turned to him, so it is said of Ephraim here, after he had
renounced Jdols, Gods bowels are turned toward him, I have heard him and
observed him. Which yields us a sweet and comfortable consideration, to turn
to God from all our sinful courses, because God is so ready to forgive, and to
forgive great sins. What if our sin be Jdolatry, the grand sin of the
first Table: yet if Ephraim say, what have I to do with Idols (though it be
spiritual adultery) yet if Ephraim begin to renounce Idolatry, God will say,
I have heard him and observed him. Jf your sins were as red as crimson (says
God) I will make them white as wool, etc, Crimson sins, double dyed sins,
Isa. 1.1^.
it is no matter what they are, if we come to God, there is more mercy in him
then sin in us. Jf Ephraim say, what have I to do with my former evil
courses, God will hear him and observe him.

It is never better with a Christian, then when he has renounced all wicked
courses, though he thinks himself undone if he leave his former Dalilah
delights, but there is no such matter, for we shall find a hundred fold more
in God, Mat. 19.29:
as Christ speaks, Whosoever leaves father or mother, brother or sister, house
or kindred for me, shall have a hundred fold in this world, that is, they shall
have it in contentment and grace, in peace of conscience, and perhaps in the
things of this life in another kind. What lost Abraham, when he obeyed God,
and forsook his fathers house? God was all-sufficient for him, he grew a rich
man. And what lost he by giving Isaake to God? he received his son again,
of whom there came an innumerable seed. And what lost holy David in waiting for
the time that he should come unto the Kingdom without making haste, he came
quietly to the possession of the crown: whereas Jeroboam who made more haste,
after God had told him he should reign, he was cursed in his government, and
none of his posterity came to good. There is nothing lost by depending and
waiting upon God, and renouncing of carnal confidence. We think naturally we
are undone, O! there is no such matter, as David speaks, When my father and
mother forsakes me, Psalm. 27.10
yet the Lord takes me up. John. 9.
As we know in the Gospel, when the blind poor man was excommunicated and
cast out, after he had spoke somewhat stoutely to the Pharisees, will ye also
be his Disciples? yet then Christ takes him presently into his company, being
expelled by them, what lost he by this? So when Jsraell had lost all their
fleshpots in Egypt, they had no loss, for God provided them Manna from
Heaven, and what lost they by that? they had Angels food instead of their
garlic and onyons.

I have observed him. That is, I will have a special eye to him, I will look
to him in all conditions and states whatsoever: God never slumbers nor sleeps,
like the Master of the house in the Parable, Luke 11.5.
who when the poor man came for bread, all the rest being asleep is awake,
and raised up by the importunity of the poor man. So the great Master of the
family of Heaven and Earth that governes all, he wakes day and night and never
sleeps; herein going beyond the care of the dearest friends we have in the
world, for they must have a time to sleep, the mother though she love the
child as her own bowels, yet notwithstanding she must have a resting time,
and perhaps in that time the child may miscarry: but God always observes, his
eye is always upon his children, they are before him, written in the palms of
his hands; Isa. 49.16.
he has them in his eye: as in Exodus, you have there God brought in observing
the children of Israel: I have seen, Exo. 3.7.
I have seen the affliction of my people Israel; they thought themselves
neglected of God, but he tells Moses, I have seen, I have seen, I know it
very well, he adds knowledge to sight. So there is no affliction in this world
to Gods children, but God in seeing sees, as before he hears the groans and
sighs, so he sees the most intimate inward affliction whatsoever that afflicts
the soul, as they were grieved in very soul at the tyranny of Pharaoh, Oh but
God in seeing he sees, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the
Sun. This is a consolation, when one thinks that no man sees and regards
alas, what shall become of me? Why should any man say so that has God to go
too, who is all eye, and all ear. God hears and sees, his ears are always
open, as it is often showed, especially Psalm. 34.15. It is said, His ears are
open to their prayers, and his eyes to see their afflictions.



Reve 1.14, 15.
but because he sees with a revengfull eye, and as his eyes are like a flame of
fire, so likewise he has feet of brass to tread them to powder.

etc. But in persecution in the world, our trouble lies with men: therefore it
is our comfort, God sees our trouble and their malice, and as he is ready to
help the one, so he is to revenge the other.

they be, whether matters of justice or piety.

Moses eye, to look on him who is invisible, his eye is upon us, and let our
eye be to him, both may be together. When these two eyes meet, when my heart
tells me that God sees me, and that I see God looking upon me, this makes
courageous: Therefore as God hears and sees us, so we must have an eye to see
him that is invisible. And so we pass from these words: I have heard him and
observed him, and what the Prophets meaning is; I have heard him and will hear
him: I have observed him and will observe him: For they contain a perpetual
action in God; not that he has, and will not do it now: but what he has done
and will do, that he sets down here in borrowed speeches, for he says also,

I will be like a green fur tree to him, from me is thy fruit found.

God will be like a green fur tree in regard of shadow, a Fur tree is a
high tree, a goodly smooth tree, barren in regard of fruit, but it has thick
leaves, which hinders rain from falling upon those who rest under the shadow
thereof, and likewise keeps the Sun from annoying them, so it is a fit tree
for shadow, and the fitter because it has no fruit, for usually those trees
which spend not themselves this way, they spend themselves in leaves, and have
a perpetual greenenesse, which is supplied with that which should be fruit in
fruitful trees. Therefore he sets it down by this comparison of a fur tree,
that so God will keep back all showers, tempests and storms, and all
annoying heat, and he will do it perpetually, as the fur tree has a
perpetual greenenesse, and he will do it with pleasure and delight, as it is
a delightful shadow. But because the Fur tree has no fruit on it, God will
not only be a shadow to his children to keep ill from them, but he will be a
fruitful tree to them. From me (says God) shall thy fruit be found, that is,
whatsoever good thou do, thou shall have it from me, all fruitful comfort
comes from me, and all grace; whatsoever is good for thee for prosperity of
soul or body, all is from me. So we see how God conveyeth himself and his
mercy here by sweet comparisons, dealing very familiarly with us, and speaking
to us in our own language: we will take both in order as they lie.

God will be as a fur tree in regard of shadow to the passenger, and keeping
off of storms, the great God, and the good God who is goodness it self, has
provided in this world, not only good for us, but has also promised defenses
against all annoyances. In the comparison it self we will observe somewhat
concerning the goodness of God, for as in this life we are subject to many
inconveniences, wants and necessities, so God has supply for all, even outward
necessities; we are subject to cold, for that we have the element of fire: we
are subject to storms, he has provided garments and skill to make them: so in
our travells he has provided some trees especially to shelter us. We cannot
name any inconvenience of this life, but the rich God in his goodness has
provided a suitable supply. Does God take care for this fading perishing life,
which is but as a vapor, and has he good things for it, and ^ences from the
ill and annoyances of it, till we have fulfilled our pilgrimage upon earth? and
will not that God have a care of our best life of grace that shall end in
glory, that we shall have all things necessary for life and godliness, which
has the promise not of this life only, 2 Pet. 1.3.
but of a better: he that is so good to this natural life, will be much more
in things concerning a better life, which he would have us mind more, I will be
as a green fur tree unto him.

God will be as a fur tree especially in regard of shadow to keep from all
annoyance both of storm and of the Sun, for the Sun in those hot
counteries annoyes them very much, as the Spouse complains of her blackness,
because the Sun had shined upon her, to be black as the tents of Kedar,
Cant. 1.5.
etc. Whence we may observe by the way,

There is not the most comfortable refreshing creature in the world, but take
it in the excess, it h^^mes and annoyes.

What more c^ (...) if it prevail and abo^ (...) creature, as we see in t^
(...) what more (...) more cherishing, refreshing a^ (...) S^nne, yet (...)
world, it is best to (...) with mode^^tion (...) the firr^-tr^^.

Th^^ God do^ (...) Mat. 23.37.
Mat. 11.2^.
God is to (...) instead of all the good we had by Idols we loose nothing by
it, God will be as a green fur tree* whence the point is,

There is a^ (...) provided for Gods people, when once they have renounced
their Idolatry and sinful (...).

Those who refuse the shelter of Idols, God will be a shelter unto them, a
green firre-tree unto them, another manner of shelter, th^^ that which Idols
or any other creature can give the^. Every (...) will have some shelter shield
o^ (...) this or that great man to shield or shelter himself under* A rich man
he has r^ches, ^^^ther this or that defense, every m^ (...) about him, will
have some shelter* and not lie open to all stor^ (...) But the only true
shelter is God himself to a Christians all other (...) are b^^ shadows, that
is they are nothing but like Jonas gourd, which may shelter for a time bu^
(...) that will eat them out* Riches and the favor of men may shelter for a
time, but there is a worm at the bottom which will root them out* death will
consume them, and those they depend upon* but God is a true shelter to his
people, an everlasting habit^^ion as it is written: Thou art our habitation
from generation to generation* Psalm. 9^ 1.
we dwell in him as in our Rock and Castle h^ (...) dwell (...) Therefore the
only wise man is th^^ Christian: For as No^h when (...) came upon the old
world and swept them away, had an Arc to save himself in so have all Gods
children a house to get over their heads in the worst times, which is Gods
blessed protection, in whom they are safe. Let us think often of these things,
what a blessed thing it i^ to be in the st^te of a Christian, that has alway^
a certain and sure protection (...) God. And what is fearful thing is (...)
Achitophe^^ of this world, to be as Ca^^^, Judas or Saul? who are shrewd in
counsel and policy, and yet when conscience is awakened by the storm of Gods
w^ (...) whilst he who is above conscience, and should be a shelter to them
frowns upon them: what a pitiful st^ (...) wickedest man in the world,
though h^ (...) dependence part^^ and strength from (...) help^, (...) God^
wrath comes, he is as a n^^ked man to the midst of a storm, (...) know^ (...)
therefore let (...) to have God for our shelter, if ^e would not be like these
miserable politicians and worldlings.

Now from this that the shadow is comfortable in those hot cou^^lyes, where the
Sun is directly over their (...), comes these sweet phrases in the Psalms,
and other Scriptures. Thou shall keep me under the shadow of thy wings* Cant
2.3.
as the apple tree a^^^^st the trees of the forest, so (...) down under (...)
shadow with great delight, (...) Church speaks of Christ, I sat under his
shadow with great delight, and his (...) was swe^^ to my taste. The like you
have in many places in the Psalms, I will name one or two more pregnant the^
(...) to help our memories, and to breed a deeper impression of so
comfortable* (...) people. He that dwells in the (...) place of the most High
that is God, shall abid^ (...) shado^ of the Almighty* Psalm. 91.1.
H^ (...) himself, He shall cover me with his feathers under his wings will I
^es^ hi^ (...) shall b^ my buckler, thou shall no^ (...) the pestilence that
walks in the (...) a th^^sand shall fall, etc. So that we see how God does
that to our souls and conditions, that the firre-tree, which in Gods good
cre^^^re, does to the body in the time of storm (...) heat; that is he do^
(...) shadow of his wi^ (...) comfortable and gratiou^ God unt^ (...) you see
is a clear truth, y^ (...) so comfortable we will i^ (...) God speaks Isa.
4.45. The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon
her assembly a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flame of fire by
night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense. See what a comfortable shadow
God is, he says, he will create, if they want the comfort of the firre-tree
and such like shadows, he says God will create, that is make them of nothing,
he will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, where his children
dwell, and upon their assemblies, a cloud and a smoke by day, that is, when
they are annoyed by the Sun, God will create a cloud to keep the rage and
the scorching heat of the Sun from them, and then, a shining flame of fire
by night, because in the night we need light, for upon all the glory shall be
a defense, that is upon all the glorious Saints of God, they are Glory, 1 Pet.
4.14.
for there is a Spirit of glory put into them. The people of God in whom God
will glorify himself, are glorious, and shall be further glorified, and they
shall in the mean time, have a defense by day and by night from all dangers
whatsoever.

Thus it is clear, that God will be a shadow to his people, as the fir tree:
which is an allusion to that grand passage of his providence in conducting the
children of Israel out of Egypt where (God to guide them) provided a cloud by
day, Exo. 14.20.
and a pillar of fire by night, the same pillar which was lightsome to the
Israelites was dark to the Egyptians, which cloud and pillar of fire
continued, (God conducting them) till they came into the land of Canaan. He
shadowed them by day with a cloud and lightened and heated them by a pillar of
fire at night, thus conducting them till they came to Canaan. So we passing
through the wilderness of this world till we come unto our celestial Canaan
Heaven, God will be a clouds by his gracious special providence, to keep all
ill whatsoever from us, and a pillar of fire to lighten and direct us till we
come to our heavenly Canaan, where he will be all in all, Revr. 7.16.
when we shall need neither Sun nor Moon, nor have any thing to annoy us.
There the noonday shall not burn us with heat of the Sun, nor the fire by
night, when we are in Heaven there shall be no annoyance of the creature there
shall be no more want of light because we shall have al light and refreshing
there for ever and ever. For as it is written, then all tears, all sorrow and
cause of sorrow shall be for ever wiped away, an allusion whereunto we have
comfortably set down Psalm. 121. Psalm. 121.
The more we shall enrich and refresh our memories with thinking of these
things, the more comfort will sink into our hearts. The 111. Psalm. is all spent
on comfort in this kind. I will lift up mine eyes to the hills whence comes
my salvation: my help comes from the Lord who made Heaven and Earth, all my
help is from him, he will not suffer my foot to be moved, be that keeper
Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. He will not slumber, that is, his eyes
are always open to see, as his ears to hear. Behold he that keeps Israel
(...) neither slumber nor sleep, the Lord is thy keeper, thy shadow, so that
the sun shall not s^ite thee by day, nor the moon by night, the Lord shall
preserve thy going out and thy coming in, from this time for ever. Thus we see
this Scripture is a large gloss and commentary upon this truth, that God with
a special providence and protection cares for his children to keep them from
all ill: he will be as the fur tree to them in regard of shadow; Whence we
observe in special,

That this life of ours wh^ (...) come to Heaven is subject to scorchings and
many annoyances, and those ^^th outwardly and inwardly, from our selves, and
from others.

Frist for outward annoyances, how many of them is our poor life subject unto?
and for inward terror and boiling heat of conscience, when God in anger
discovers himself unto (...), Psalm. 50.21.
and sets our sins in order before us: O then, if we have not a shadow; if
God in mercy through Jesus Christ be not a shadow to keep that boiling heat
from us, what will become of the poor conscience? especially if Satan adds his
poisoned fiery darts, poisoning, inflaming the conscience with temptations to
despair, as if God had forsaken and were angry, o^ when God seems angry, then
he seems like a consuming fire. O! who can abide it, when all these fiery
temptations are joined with Gods anger? yet the dearest of Gods Saints are
subject to these inward boiling heats of Gods anger. My God my God why have
thou forsaken me, Mat. ^7.46.
said the head of the Church himself, Job 16.12.
and see how Job complains, thou have see me as a But to shoot at. And in
regard of this spiritual disertion David complains much throughout the
Psalms. So this our life is subject to outward and spiritual annoyances, from
God, from Satan, and from our selves and the world every way annoyed with
scorchings and heat, what need a shadow, a protection, a defense else. That
supposes this.

Their misery who have not God for a shadow is showed.
If this be so then consider how fearful the condition of those people is that
are not under the shadow of the Almighty, who have not God as a firre-tree to
shadow and cover them, that he is not a cloud by day too, and a pillar of fire
by night, that have not him for a hiding place to spread the wings of his mercy
over them. What is the state of such people? Surely howsoever God feed them,
and fills their belly with good things in this world for a time, yet their
case will be fearful, when God lets loose conscience and Satan's fiery darts
against them. Judge then hereby what our state is by nature without God. The
same sun which cherishes and comfort, also tortures and scorches us: so
God is a sun, a quickening sun to his children, yea a vigorous sun, Mal. 4
2.
who has healing under his wings; but to the wicked he is a scorching and a
consuming fire, Heb. 12.29.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God who is so
dreadful: he will not be a shadow to the wicked in an excellent manner, he
indeed permits them to have many shadows in this world, many sweet comforts,
and keeps them also from many dangers, but they have not that worthy portion
which Hannah had from her Husband, Love at the hour of death, and in time of
temptation, when these comforts leave them, what shadow have they then? none at
all; but are as naked men in a storm, subject to the fury of Gods eternal
wrath. The things which are most comfortable to Gods people are most terrible
to them, as it is said in one of those plagues powered out upon Antichrist (for
all the violls there spoken of tend to the punishing of Antichrist, Reve. 6.
) there is a violl powered forth upon the Sun, which reflecting and lighting
upon them, causes them to blaspheme, they were so scorched with it. The Sun
by probable interpreters, is said to be the Word of God, which when it is
opened is sweet and comfortable to Gods people, but shining upon men that are
naught, especially at the hour of death, in affliction and in distress it
speaks no comfort to them, but causes them to despair, rage and storm. Nay
profane men when they are at the best, they rage and storm at the direction
of the sun, because it discovers to them that which they would not have
known.

them from all evil, as his promise was to Abraham in the covenant of grace:
Genesis 15.1.
I will be thy buckler to keep ill from thee; Psalm 84.11.
and thy exceeding great reward. And in the Psalms, God promises to be a
Sun for good, and a shield to keep off all ill. Will God bestow good and
keep off ill from us? then labor to come willingly under the shadow of the
Almighty, to serve him, and to make God in covenant our God, that he may be a
shield and a hiding place, unto us, and a shadow in all extremities whatsoever.
Those that attend upon great persons, they do it upon this hope: O! if I
belong to such a great person, he will shelter me, that every base person
shall not wrong me; I shall now have some prerogatives. Does carnal policy
teach poor creatures who are subject to abuse it, to get some shelter of great
noble Men to be privileged, and shall not spiritual wisdom teach us to get
under the great God, under the shadow of his wings? none can come near to
annoy us without his special will and leave, as in the story of Job, The
Devil durst not annoy him, Job. 1. Mat 8.31.
nor enter into the Swine, much less hurt Gods children, shall we not
therefore get under the service of our God, can any man shelter us better?
there is no service to that of a King, but is there any service to the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords? will he suffer his children to be abused in his own
sight, or his followers disgraced? surely no, therefore make this use of it, to
get into the service of the great God, which is a rich, secure, and safe
service.

a green firre-tree unto us.

unto us, for all the time of our life to come: whatsoever may come, we yet
pass under a buckler, let a whole shower and shot of arrows fall upon us, we
have a buckler, Thou Lord art my Buckler, Psalm. 18.1.
thou Lord art my defense, my hiding place, my castle: we are subject to a
world of dangers whilst we live here. But we have God instead of all, to
keep of all, he is a Buckler, a Shield, a Shadow and a Hiding place, let what
ill so ever be presented to our thoughts there is in God some fence against
it. For this purpose we have many excellent passages in Psa. 18. which was
made after a great deliverance. I love the Lord my buckler, my shield, my
defense, as if he should say, J have in my life time been annoyed with many
troubles, but I have found experience of God in all. He is my buckler, my
shield, my fence, every thing to me. So let us comfort our selves in this, let
come what will come, all shall come well to Gods children; he will keep
them, if not outwardly, yet in that they most desire to be kept in, he will
preserve their spirits from every evil work, from doing ill, and from
desperate falling from God; and he will guard them inwardly by the peace of
God which passes understanding; it shall guard their hearts, they shall have
inward peace in the midst of all the troubles of this world: a great comfort.
What a rejoicing is it to a poor passenger, when he passes by the high way
side in a hot burning day, or in a storm, to see a goodly high tree with
spreading boughs, that he may hide and repose himself under it from the
storm or heat, this pleases him marvellously, as Jonas gourd did him. Do
these outward poor content^^^ts so refresh us in this world, and shall we now
think that God which provides such poor contentments for this sorry life in
this world, will he not provide a shadow in regard of the m^ine dangers, surely
he will if we trust him, and show our trust by casting our selves upon him in
obedience suitable to our calling, (says the Apostle) I am persuaded t^ (...)
to come, Romans 8.^8, 39
nor life, nor dea^ (...) thing shall be able to separate us from the lo^^ of
Christ Jesus our Lord. Therefore let us be afraid of nothing that can befall
us. God will be a shield and a buckler, and all in all to us in a good way. We
have abundance of comfort every w^^re in Scripture, and want nothing but Faith
to apply it home in practice. Therefore we ought to beg of God so to enlarge
our Faith, that as his promises and comforts are very large so may out vessels
be to retain all these excellent comforts and sweet promises.

All other comforts in the world, are but like Jonas gourd, for all other
shadows yield only a shadow for a while, and th^^ the S^ (...) or East-winde
is like a worm to nip^^em a sunder. Never trust then, or le^^e to such
shadows as these be, o^ Friends, Riches, etc. Which are shadows (...)
^^^inarily holy upon* J have such and (...) a friend, a place and the like, my
mountain is thus and thus strong: all these are Jonas gourds, there is a worm
of vanity will be at the root of all and consume all, all other shadows are
but mere shadows. What is more transient then a shadow, but Gods shadow is
like a green fur tree, it never fails nor forsakes us, as all other
shadows and contentments do whatsoever: but God says he will be like a
green fur tree unto thee, yet this is not all, nor enough, for after this he
adds, From me is thy fruit found.

God is not only to his children a Fur tree in regard of shadow, that tree
abounding in leaves very thick, whereby we are kept from annoyance of
scorching heats of troubles and terrors of conscience, and persecution, etc.
This is not all, but he says also, From me is thy fruit found.

A Fur tree though it be for thickness of the leaves a very good shade, yet
it is a barren fruitless tree, but God is such a tree as has both shadow and
fruit, in God there is a supply of all wants whatsoever. All the scattered
excellencies of all creatures being united in God, and eminent in him, it is in
him, and in him in a divine gracious eminent and comfortable manner. All the
creatures as they come from God, are his creatures, neither is there any
creature but has somewhat of God in it. Therefore God vouchsafes to take Names
from the creatures, to be a Rock of salvation, he is as a rock to build on,
to be a shadowing tree, because he is a defense from ill, and to be a fruitful
tree, because he yields good and comfort and grace as he does fruit. When we
see any thing that is useful, we may say this we have from God in an eminent
manner, this preservation and comfort. Do J in my passage to Heaven find such
comfort in the creature? when I am passing through a wild place, have I such
comfort in the shadow of a tree? or when I am hungry am I so refreshed by a
fruitful tree? what comfort then is there in God, in Heaven, in glory, when
there are such comforts in the way of my pilgrimage in this world, therefore
God is said here both to be a firee tree, and a fruitful tree. For then the
passenger traveling through a wild barren place, thinks himself made, when
he can retire from the scorching of the heat, and also therewithal find
fruitfullnesse; shade and fruit concurring, he thinks himself marvellously
happy. This is the state of a Christian that has God for his God, being in
covenant with him, he is not only a strong protection and defense from all
annoyance (as God shadows us and is a Buckler from all evils both inward and
outward, from Satan and all kinds of evils and wrath) but he is also a
fruitful tree too, From me is thy fruit found.

The end of the twelfth Sermon.
THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.9. -- J am like a green firre-tree, from me is thy fruit found.


THIS holy Prophet, as we heard heretofore, did prophecy more then sixty
years among the ten Tribes, even until the time immediately preceding their
captivity and misery, in like manner as Jeremy and Ezekiel did to the other
Jews. Now because in the worst times God always had a remnant, and yet has:
therefore it is the Prophets care in this Chapter which we have gone over, to
instruct them in diverse particulars of Reformation, as we have heard at large:
To return to the Lord, to take words to themselves: which words (as we have
heard) are also taught them: backed with many sweet promises and encouragements,
in Gods answer to their petitions. The last whereof insisted and stood upon was
this, that God promises to be like a green firre-tree unto Ephraim (who
personated all the ten Tribes) Ephraim thought before to shadow and fence
himself by Idols, and league with other Idolatrous Nations, which were like
Jonas rotten gourd unto them, poor shadows and defenses, (but says God) I
will be a firre-tree for shadow to Ephraim, to defend him from all dangers
whatsoever, and then in the next place he ads From me is thy fruit found.

A firre-tree, is a green tree, but it has no fruit, the excellencies of the
creatures are applied to God but not the defects. Therefore when comparisons
are taken from the creatures and given to God, we must always except the
defects, supplying the same by some other clearing comparison. So God is not
only a firre-tree for shelter and defense, but he is a fruit-full tree, so a
fur tree is not, and therefore without comparison* God has more in him then
any creature has. For all that excellency which is in all the creatures is in
him, and that in a far more eminent manner: therefore he is both a shelter
and fruit. If a passenger in distress have not only a fur tree to shelter
him and shadow him, but a fruit tree also to feed him, he thinks he is made,
when God thus comforts him. So a Christian he has not only shelter from the
wrath of God; but he has also a place of rest and quiet, the mercy of God to
keep him, and the Word and Sacraments to feed him. God is a fruit tree, as
well as a fur tree.

From me is thy fruit found. That is, whatsoever is graciously or comfortably
good to us, in us, or issues from us, is all from God; hence first of all we
observe for our instruction,

From a man's self comes nothing that is graciously good.

Whatsoever is savingly good is altogether from God, Joh. 15.5.
without me (says Christ) you can do nothing: S. Paul was wondrous charie of
this point, 1 Cor. 15.10. he says, he labored more abundantly then they all:
yet not I, (he recalls himself) but the grace of God in him that did all: and
of my self, as of my self, I cannot so much as think a good thought. It is
from God that we have means to make us fruitful, and from the gracious
working of his Spirit comes it that they are effectual; that we think a good
thought, or open our mouths to speak a good word, it is from Gods Spirit
inabling us thereto. Open thou my mouth (says the Psalmist) and my lips shall
show forth thy praise. We are toung-tyed, and our lips sealed unless God open
them, we cannot speak one savoury seasonable word to further our account; we
may speak empty words, but never a word comes from the heart that is gracious
and good, but it must be by the Spirit of God. It is he who works all our
works in us and for us. Isa. 26 12. Phil. 1.6.
He begins the good work in us, and perfects it to the day of the Lord, the
truth of this is wondrous clear.

If this be so, then undoubtedly the differences in the graces of men it is
from another; merely from God, and Gods Spirit. There is indeed difference in
men, but this is originally fetched from the grace of Gods Spirit. The good use
of freedom that we talk so much of, it is from God, as well as the indowments
of it. We have free will, but the use of it is not in our power, Phil. 2.13.
to use this or that at our pleasure: for, It is God which gives the will and
the deed, of his good pleasure. Not only the deed, but the will too, we should
make the will an Jdoll else. For so many wills so many Idols, if we think one
man in himself can difference himself by his will.

Again in that God says, from me is thy fruit found: we may learn hence,

That fruit that is gracious comes from us and from God too.

the words, but it is God that opens our lips. We believe, but it is God that
gives us grace to believe. We do the action, but God gives us grace to do it.
Acts. 16.14.
God opened the heart of Lydia to believe, so that God and we meet together in
the same action. We have parts, understanding, will, affections, bodies and
souls, therefore the actions are said to be ours, because God works in us as
understanding creatures, but God sets the wheel a going, so that the actions
are originally his, and ours subordinately under him. From me is thy fruit
found.

If so be that God and man join in one action, From me is thy fruit found,
Why good works cannot merit.
as though he should say, whatsoever thou have or say that is good, it is
from me; here we see how and why good works cannot merit, though they come
from God, as all goodness does; yet in regard they come from us too, we add
some tainture thereunto from our corrupt nature. What God and Christ himself
does is absolute and perfect, as Justification: but what fruit he works in us,
there is somewhat of the old Adam in us, which taints the beauty of the work:
it is Gods fruit coming from him, and yet our fruit also coming from us:
which being so much tainted should humble us, in that we add nothing to the
truth of Gods work in us, but abasement and defilement by our corruptions:
From me (says God) is thy fruit found, so much as is supernaturally good: but
because our nature is not altered on the sudden but still tastes of the old
leaven, therefore there can be no meriting of Salvation by any works we do, 1
Cor. 5.7.
because they are not perfectly good.

For Humiliation.
they serve to work in us a deep Humiliation, seeing that we have nothing in
our selves but stains and defilements, all that is good in us coming from
God. From me is thy fruit found. What is from our selves then, if all good in
us comes from God? we are a barren and a cursed soil, nothing that is good
can come from us, even as the Earth was cursed after Adams fall, and brought
forth nothing but briers and thorns, so our soul naturally is a cursed soil
in it self, and brings forth nothing but weeds and thorns. Our hearts are
like the barren wilderness, full of evil noisome lusts and affections.
Therefore this serves to abase us, that we be not lifted up with any good in
us, for as that is altogether from Gods Spirit, so likewise we of our selves
add nothing to it but somewhat which may deminish the value thereof.

For Information of judgment.
and the state of grace, I mean of innocent nature, for in Adam we had a
standing in our Adam, Christ Jesus, we have many graces to fit us for Heaven,
and many good works we do, but all the fruit we have and yield is from God.
So that now this is a grand difference, Adam as it were had the keeping of his
own happiness locked up in himself, but we have our happiness, graces, and
whatsoever is good for us shut up in Christ, as the Spring and Fountain, which
is the reason of the perpetual stability and permanent condition of Gods
children, once his and ever his. And put the case we want this or that help,
yet this prejudiceth not the perpetuity of the condition of Gods children,
because those graces which come immediately from Gods Spirit, may be conveyed
sometimes without means, as well as with them. Therefore whatsoever decay is
in the branches that are grafted into this noble Vine Christ Jesus, in whom we
bare all the fruit we bear; yet notwithstanding there is life everlasting for
us in the root, which is by little and little distilled into us. The leaves
may fall, outward things may decay, but there is life always in the root of a
Christian, because he is in Christ, and has his fruit from him: he cannot want
fruit, no more then Christ can want influence and vigor. John. 15.5.
Which shows us the excellent state of a Christian under the new Covenant of
grace, that now we fetch all out of our selves, and it is happy for us that we
do so. For without Christ we can do nothing, as without the soul the body
can do nothing, so without the Spirit of Christ, we can do nothing, from him
is all. This is the reason why we must not trust to any grace in our selves
that comes from us, because grace comes from God in Christ, trust God the
Spring whence it comes, whose the fruit is, God the Father in Christ, from whom
all fullness comes, and is derived unto us: or else we make but an Idol of
grace, if we trust too much to grace, look to the Spring whence all comes to
us: From me is thy fruit found.



From him our fruit is found. Wait his leisure, he suspends grace and comfort
until a fit time, in regard of the degree: but yet there is always some grace
left, though he suspends the increase thereof until a fit time, because he
would have us know that it is of his giving. Christians who are acquainted
herewith, they w^ll not tie God to their time, but humbly go on in the use of
means, who though they find not their spirits and their comforts enlarged so
as at other times, nor so great, nor as other folks are, yet can say, Lord
thou give the Will and the Deed according to thy good pleasure, all comes
from thee, therefore I will use the means and depend upon thee, because J have
all from thee freely. God gives a spirit of Prayer, and then the thing we pray
for, all is from him, From me is thy fruit found. Do we find the Ordinances
fruitful, the preaching of the Word to open our understandings, to kindle our
affections, to inlighten our judgments, it is the Spirit of God that joins
with the means, that are dead of themselves, to make them fruitful: what are
the Ordinances without God, but empty conduit pipes of themselves? therefore,
From me is thy fruit found.

1 Cor. 3.6.
Paul may plant and Apollo may water, but if thou give not fruit from Heaven,
all is to no purpose. We forget this, and therefore prosper accordingly. We
think we can work fruit out of the means by our own wit, Oh! It is not so,
whatsoever is comfortable or gracious in the use of means, it is merely by
Gods blessing. And therefore seeing all our fruit whatsoever that is good comes
from God, let it stir us up to practice the spiritual worship of God, to
adore God, to beg of his fullness in Christ Jesus: and likewise to resign our
selves in all conditions unto him, Lord I put my self upon thee, all my fruit
is from thee, thou can sanctify any condition unto me. This adoration and
resignation, are parts of the spiritual worship of God. And likewise the
service of the Lord in fear and reverence, that inward service of the Spirit,
all depends upon this, that all our fruit is from God* therefore I must serve
him, and serve him as he must be served in Spirit and Truth. What makes a man
reverence another? Ioh. 4.24.
I depend upon him, without him J sink, will this make a man serve man? and
will it not make us serve God, and serve him with fear? what breeds an awful
fear? this that if he withdraw his influence, I fall into sin, despair, and
discomfort: so that the ground of all fear of God, and service springing from
this fear, it is from hence, that from him all my fruit, all my grace, and
comfort is found, therefore I must have grace to serve him, as a God in fear.
For if the soul be not possessed and seasoned with this heavenly doctrine, that
all comes from him, then surely where is Gods service? what becomes of it?
where is that adoration, and magnifying of God in our hearts? where is that
putting off our selves upon him in all condions?

Ier. 10.5.
that they can neither do us good nor harm, enforcing that they should not
fear them, so we may say of all other things distinct from God, they can
neither do good nor harm, except God enable them. Will you be slaves to men,
they cannot do good nor harm, but as God uses them whose creatures they are.
Therefore the worship of God is also founded hence; that God does all good or
harm; if men do it, they do it from him, he gives them leave, as it is said
of Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.10.
God bid him rail on David. If they do us good, they are his conduits,
whereby he deriveth good to us: therefore all is from him? we see then how all
the true and hearty worship of God comes from this; From me is thy fruit found.



But if I forsake this and that suppo^t, I shall lay open my self to injuryes
and wrongs.

Mark what the Spirit of God says: Ye that love the Lord hate that which is
evil. Psalm. ^9.10.
But if I hate that which is evil, Idols, etc. As Ephraim here does, I shall
be despised and trampled upon. No, (says he) God preserves the souls of his,
he will be a shield and a buckler: Psalm. 84.
a Sun and a shield, and no good thing shall be wanting to them that lead a
godly life. God will be a Sun for all good, and a shield to keep off all
ill, therefore let us be resolute in good causes; Whence comes all shifting,
halting, imperfect walking, and inconstancy in the ways of God, but from
this, that men know not where to have men? they are not grounded on this, that
whatsoever is fruitful and good comes from God, who will give whatsoever is
fruitful and good in depending upon him. This made the three children in
Daniell courageous, they knew they should have fruit from God; that is, grace,
comfort and peace, the best fruit of all. And therefore know O King, Dan. 3.18.
that we will not worship thine Idol, nor fall down before it. So holy Hester
being well grounded could say, Hest. 4.16.
If I perish I perish: I know the cause is good and if all help in the
creature be remooved and taken away, yet I shall have fruit in God.

Let us therefore carry this about us as a principle of holy life, to know that
our good is hid up in God, and not in the creature; so that if all help were
taken away, yet we have it immediately, purer and better in the fountain. What
if there were not a creature in the world to help me? what if all were against
me? yet God may make all their powers and endeavors fruitful. There is such
fruit from God, that he can make the worst things which befalls us fruitful,
when he pleases; there is a blessing in curses and crosses, a good fruit in
them: who can do him harm that God turns the bitterest things he suffers to
his good. Let none be daunted in a good cause, but go on resolutly, seeing God
has all in himself. Was not Moses forty days without any earthly comfort on
the mount? Exodus 34.28. Mat. 4.2.
and Christ also without natural sustentation so long? did not God give light
without a Sun in the first creation? we are tied to means but he is not. We
think if such friends and helps be taken away, that then all is gone, but what
were they? were not they means which God used at his good pleasure, and cannot
he give comfort without them? yes certainly, the greatest comfort and grace
is oft-times given immediately from God, when he salutes the soul by his own
Spirit, as he did Paul and Sylas in the dungeon, who in the midst of
discomfort, Act. 16.25.
had their spirit enlarged to sing hymns at midnight: God reserving that
comfort for that time. Therefore seeing all comfort is from God, and he is not
tied to this or that means, nay can bless all contrary means, is not this a
ground of Resolution?

Of comfort.
seeing all fruit is from God, who is in Covenant with his Children in Jesus
Christ, and who will improove all his attributes for their good, his Wisdom,
Goodness, Power and Mercy, let them therefore take comfort to themselves, that
howsoever the world may take their friends from them, Riches, Liberty, and what
you will: can they take God and fruit from them? No, From me is thy fruit
found. If they could take away the Spirit of God, grace and comfort from us it
were something, but can they do that? no, the worst they can do, is to send
us to Heaven to the Fountain of all grace and comfort: so that in this world
they cannot cast us into any condition wherein we cannot have communion with
God, in whom all the scattered excellencies of the creature are gathered
together meeting as it were in a center. It is he that comforts us in our
friends, that shows bowels to us in our mothers, wisdom and care toward us
in our parents. The bowels of a mother, the care of a friend, the strength of
wise assistance, has he not all in himself, if all be taken away? he has
all. Therefore let Christians comfort themselves that they can never be in a
condition wherein fruit shall be taken from them. The poor worldling labors
all his life for fruit, riches and friends, and when he dies then his fruit
fails him and falls, his leaf withers. What becomes of his fruit then? he
labored for that which yields him nothing but vexation and death. But a
Christian does otherwise, he labors for grace and comfort, to keep his
communion and peace with God, and when all is taken away, either by the injury
and wrongs of men, or by the extremity of the times, or as all will in the
hour of death: his fruit is most after, in death and after death, more then
can be by our narrow hearts conceived in the excellency thereof. O the
excellent estate of a Christian! imagine such a one to have a tree that grows
in Heaven, and sends forth fruit and branches to him in whatsoever state he is
in. And so indeed God reaches fruit from Heaven to the soul being in prison
and misery. He reaches from thence the fruit of grace, of spiritual strength
and comfort, a blessed estate. Therefore let Christians comfort themselves in
their condition, that all their fruit is from him: and that God especially will
then show himself abundant, when they stand most in need of him. Other trees
bear no fruit in winter and in storms, but God gives fruit most in the worst
times. He is a God that comfort the abject. As it is 2. Cor. 7. and here it
is said, that in him the fatherless finds Mercy: we have most fruit from him
in the worst times, then especially he delights to show himself a God, when
no comfort can be had from the creature.

Against future fears.
Therefore do not despair, but lay up this against evil times, never fear
for the time to come. Let the mountains be cast into the midst of the Sea, and
let the Earth and all rage, as the Psalmist says, and let things run upon a
head, Psalm. 46.2.
come what can come, God is where he was, and Gods children are where they
were, in regard of the maine comfort. They cannot be in such a condition, as
that they can be deprived of their God, and of his assistance, From me is thy
fruit found. Therefore care not for any condition that thou art in, this or
that, thou shall have that condition which shall be comfortable to thee: though
many like beasts go on, and look for no fruit from God.

times, not fearing any creature, or danger from the creature, because our
fruit is from God. What if we loose this or that, we know what was said to
Amaziah by the Prophet: 2 Chro. 25.9.
but what shall become of the hundred talents, says he, God is able to give
thee much more, so in the loss of friends, having this and that took from us,
let us comfort our selves, I but God is not taken from us. He who derives
comfort by this or that friend, can supply it better by his own Spirit. And
whatsoever we part with in a good cause, let us remember what Christ says: He
that parts with father or mother, Mat. 19.29.
with house or land for my sake, shall have a hundred fold in this world, and
afterward life everlasting. He shall have all made up in grace, which is a
hundred times better then any thing that is here, he shall have contentment
which is better then the things themselves: sometimes he shall missing one
worldly comfort, have more friends stirred up, but howsoever in want of one, he
shall be supplied in an other comfort that he never dreamt of in this world. So
that God is abundant to them that stick close to him in sincerity, he shall
find him abundant in the things of this life, in one comfort or other.

Therefore by these mercies of God here mentioned, Exhortation.
let us be entreated to be in love with the condition of a Christian life; and
say as Ephraim here, what have I any more to do with my former corrupt
courses, or Idols? give a peremptory answer to all sinful courses and
suggestions, either from others, or from our own corrupt nature. What have I
any more to do with you? No, God shall be my God, for if I can resign my
self wholly to God, and renounce the creature and all things else, God will be
as a green fur tree, and hear me; I shall loose nothing by it. Be then in
love with a Christian course, for it is the sweetest and the safest course, and
never wants comfort from Heaven, and it is the most honorable course that can
be, for it will hold our communion and peace with the great God of Heaven and
Earth: for though we break with others, we shall be sure of him. In which case
take heed of that base suggestion which the Devil himself was ashamed to
own, Job. 1.9.
That we serve God for naught. What shall we renounce Idolatry and wicked
courses, and think that God will not have fruit for us? shall I think if I
leave my sinful gain, that I or my posterity shall beg or starve for it?
do we serve a God that has no fruit? that is as a dead tree, or a barren
wilderness: No, we serve a God that had all in himself before he made the
world; and has all the excellency in himself contained in the creatures, it
is not in vain to serve him: Does Job serve God for nothing? said the Devil.
Therefore it is a suggestion worse then satanicall, to think we serve God for
nothing: or to think like those Hypocrites mentioned by the Prophet; Isa. 58.3.
that God regards not our fasting, or our devotion. No, we shall not loose a
good word for God, not a tear but he has a bottle for it, not a sigh or a
groan, or a farthing, Psalm. 56.8.
not a minutes time well spent shall be lost, he will pay us for every ill word
we endure for his sake, for every disgrace, loss or cross, do we serve that
God there is no fruit in? From me is thy fruit found?

Whatsoever our condition be in the world, let us comfort our selves with these
things, and think that it is not in vain to serve the Lord: for we cannot
serve a richer nor a more kind master and Lord: First of all he gives us
opportunity and means whereby fruit may be wrought in us, and then he works
the fruit of grace and comfort in us, and afterward rewards and crowns his
own fruit; but we add imperfections and inventions of our own and so mar
or stain all, but we deal with a gracious God in covenant, who pitties us as
a Father does his children, accepts and rewards what is his, and pardons what
is our own. Therefore let this much be effectual for the guiding of our
lives, and comforting of us in a good course. If we take ill courses we must
look for no fruit from God, but fruits of his displeasure; if we eat of the
forbidden tree, we shall eat and reap the fruits of our own ways, bitter
fruits, for in this case Jesus Christ who is a sweet Savior, will be a Judge
to us; and he who is the Lamb of God will be angry, so as we shall reap the
fruit of his indignation: In the Revelation, Reve. 6.16.
diverse are brought in desiring the hills and mountains to fall upon them, to
cover them from the presence of the Lamb. Let us not therefore turn a sweet
Savior to a rigorous Judge, by adventuring upon courses wherein we cannot
look for fruit: but let us commend our souls in well-doing unto him, as unto
a faithful Creator and Redeemer. 1 Pet. 4.19.
And as it is Proverbs. 3. Let us acknowledge him in all our ways, for it is
good to acknowledge and look to him: that is, look to him for strength,
quickening, success, grace and light to direct us: acknowledge him in all our
ways, and treasure up this comfort, that all fruit is found from God. If we
take good courses, we shall ever be fruitful, and have fruit from him, out of
his fullness for (says he:) From me is thy fruit found.

The end of the thirteenth Sermon.
THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.10. Who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent and he
shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are equal, the just shall walk in
them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.


THese words seal up the whole Prophecy, for the Prophet immediately before
prophesying of the captivity, discovers to them at length their sins as we
heard their Idolatry, adding new Idols to their former Idols, Baall to the
Calves, the Princes remooved the bounds, (old orders and laws) the Prophets
they were fools and did not see the judgments of God hanging over their
heads; and none of them all could see their gray-haires, that is, the signs of
their own ruin. After which out of a Christian love, care, and conscience of
his duty, by direction of the Spirit of God, he prescribes an excellent way
how they should carry themselves, by returning to the Lord, take words unto
your selves, renounce all false confidence in Ashur, and all domesticke helps
at home, horses and the like, and fly to God as your best Sanctuary. Then he
shows what God will do to them, answer all the desires he had put into their
hearts: I will heal their Backeslidings and love them freely, etc.

Now because these were great matters of great consequence, to make them either
happy in the observing them, or miserable in neglecting them, you see how he
shuts up all in a most weighty close: Who is wise and he shall understand these
things, prudent and he shall know them, for the ways of the Lord are equal,
etc.

Wherein the scope of the Prophet is, to stir up a holy regard of what has
been spoken, he would not have all lost for want of attention or application,
and therefore he here stirs them up to a holy use of all: which stirring up, is
excellently and figuratively clothed with an Epiphonemy, or acclamation, who
is wise and he shall understand these things, etc. He does not say, let men
understand these things, but who is wise and who is prudent? Let them consider
of these things, and then the Exhortation is backed with many Reasons, 1. It is
wisdom and prudence to regard these things that J have spoken (who is wise and
who is prudent) 2. And then again they are the ways of God that are spoken
off, and they are straight and equal in themselves. 3. And they lead to
happiness directly, without winding and turning, a man is sure to attain his
journeys end in them, and if they will take example of those who only are
exemplary to them, he tells them the Just shall walk in them, they shall not
walk alone, they shall have the company of a cloud of witnesses, who prosper
and walk on cheerfully in this way, and attain happiness in the end. 4.
Then the last argument is taken from the contrary end of all them who cavil
and snarle at Gods ways and truth, that think themselves witty to pick
quarrels with somewhat in Gods book, as it is a common fashion now a days to
have a divinity of men's own: Transgressors, such as are opposite to Gods
ways, they shall fall in these ways, that is they take offense at these ways
and so fall into sin, and by falling into sin, fall into misery, till at
last they fall into Hell, which is the end of all quarrellers with divine
truth, they fall and dash themselves upon them, and so eternally perish.


Now these are strong and forcible reasons to enforce care and attention of
what has been spoken, it is Wisdom and Prudence, and the ways of the Lord
here are straight, and then all godly people walk in them, and those that
stumble at them are sure to perish, and do perish in them; not that they are a
cause of their perishing, but by reason of the malice of men, finding fault and
picking quarrels with them, they fall first into sin, and then into misery,
thus we have the scope of the words.

Who is wise and he shall understand these things.

First of all, we must know that the Prophet here in this figurative speech
makes a kind of Exclamation, who is wise? he does as it were secretly mourn
at the Apostasy and fewness of those that be truly wise, as if he had said, I
have given you many directions, and showed you what sins lead to destruction,
I have showed what course ye are to take, and the bounty of God to those that
Return: but, Who is Wise and Prudent to regard these things?

Jn the words therefore (in regard of the speaker, the Prophet) we may observe
this ere we come particularly to them: the character of a holy, merciful,
gracious, and wiseman, that when he has spoken things to excellent purpose, he
would not have those things lost, but out of mercy and compassion mingled with
a great deal of heavenly wisdom, would have the best fruit of all he has
spoken. Which was the custom of the men of God in the Scriptures, the Spirit
of God leading them to strike the nail home, when they taught truths to lay
the word close upon the conscience, as much as they could. What is the whole
book of Deutrenomie, as the word signifies, but a repeating of the former
laws? Moses thought all to no purpose, unless he repeated laws, and fastened
them upon the soul: so our Savior Christ still when he had spoken excellent
things, says, Let him that has ears to hear, hear. So says Jeremy, Mat.
11.15. Iere. 9.12.
who is wise to consider these things? and the conclusion of that excellent
107. Psalm, is just thus, who is wise to consider these things? and Deuter.
32. says Moses, O that they were wise, that they would think of these things,
etc. So every wherein Scripture you have such fastening of things where truths
have been spoken in application of them: which does justify the course of
Gods Messengers in bringing the Word home unto men's consciences, because that
which is spoken loosely in general, no man applies in particular to himself,
we who are messengers of God, must therefore bring things home to the
conscience: who is wise and he shall understand these things, etc.

But that which more nearly concerns us is, whereas first of all he
propounds this exhortation to regard th^se things under this holy acclamation:
who is wise and who is prudent? we see first of all,

That there are but few who are truly wise and prudent.

Few that enter the right way: for our Savior shows that narrow is this way
and few there be that find it. Mat. 7.14.
The point needs not much proof it is so plain, and well known, wherefore it
is now touched only making way to other things. The Reason hereof is clear.

Men's mihi pro Regno, as one said. Now this being the proud poysonfull nature
of man, we must not think it a strange thing, that there are so few wise and
prudent: for a man cannot be wise and passionate, for his passion transformes
him to be a beast, a Devil. Now because most men live by sense and by humor,
which is a life they are nuzled in (especially those that are subject to
flatterers) therefore few come to be truly wise and prudent, to have so much
stedinesse and sobriety of spirit, as to deliberate what is to be done. They
will not in cold blood give leisure to their humors (but feed them) to consider
what is best. This being the humor of the world, no wonder that there be so few
prudent and wise.

To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed; and, Isa. 53.1.
Who has believed our report, etc. Then take heed of living by example, that
we be not led away with the sway and error of the times: for seeing there are
few wise and prudent, it is better and safer to follow one man reformed by
judgment, then a thousand others, one man is worth a thousand who is led with
judgment and by the Spirit of God.

Isa. 17.5, 6. Jer. 3.14.
as the grapes after the vintage, like a few scattered ears of corn after
harvest: one of a City, and two of a Tribe, a few of all. Therefore now let us
seal this truth with this exhortation.

may secure us to be of this small number; for if we be not, we shall never be
saved. For Christ's flock is a little flock; Luke 12 32.
and few there be that shall enter in at that strait gate: what have thou then
which may discover unto thine own soul that thou art of that number, and not
of the common multitude that shall be damned? it is a thing worth the inquiring
of our souls; what have we in us that may charactarise us to be Gods true
servants, Christ's true children, and members of the Church? and never rest in a
common persuasion of common grace, which castawayes may have as well as we. We
must strive for some distinct grace that reprobates cannot attain unto.

Who is wise and he shall understand these things, prudent, etc.

But to come more particularly to the words, Who is wise and he shall
understand these things, The holy man of God here in his exhortation naming
wisdom, singling out wise and prudent men; Who is wise and who is prudent? he
touches men upon the quick right vein, for who is there that would not be
thought wise and prudent? a corrupt man naturally rather desires to be thought
sinful then weak, judge him as you will, so you judge him not to be an
unwise, an unprudent man. A proud man till he be subdued and humbled, had
rather be thought dishonest then simple, because if he be dishonest, he
thinks it is out of choice: but to be simple, this argues imperfection, and
not freedom and bravery of spirit: therefore it being the natural desire and
instinct of all men to be thought wise and to be so, he endeavors to work
upon that affection in them, Who is wise, etc. Well says he, I know you all
desire to be thought wise and prudent men, would you make it good that you are
so indeed? believe my sayings, this is the way, whosoever is wise let him
understand these things, and he that is prudent let him hearken to these things
that I have spoken.

Man at first when he had communion with wisdom it self was a wise creature,
till he hearkened to Satan and so lost all, becoming as the beasts which
perish. Psalm. 49.12.
Yet in that glorious building, since the corruption of nature this amongst
that rubbish is reserved, that above all things there is a desire to be happy
and wise, which two desires are naturally the leading desires in men, To desire
to do well, and to be wise. Therefore the Prophet here upon that which is left
in man's nature takes advantage to build true wisdom and knowledge indeed.

To come then in brief to show what this wisdom and prudence is, Definition
of heavenly wisdom.
for there is some distinction between wisdom and prudence. Wisdom is a
heavenly light set up in the soul by the Spirit of God, whereby it discerns
the general truths concerning God, our selves, the state of the Church, the
privileges of Christianity, and such like: in sum it is a right divine
apprehension of spiritual truths.

Definition of heavenly prudence.
And prudence, this is a kind of sharpness of spirit, whereby the Spirit of
God directs the soul, knowing the right general principles to particular
cases. Prudence is an application of the general knowledge of general things
to particulars, and is an ordering of the life in particular exigencies and
cases in a right order, according to the direction of the Spirit, as we have
it, Prove. 8. I wisdom dwell with prudence. Divine wisdom wheresoever it is
dwells with prudence; that is, where God does inlighten the understanding to
conceive aright of the mysteries of salvation, there it dwells with prudence,
that is, it directs the soul to an orderly carriage of life toward God and
man, and in regard of it self, every way as it should do, in all estates,
times and conditions, that is meant here by prudence, a particular gift whereby
a man is fit to consult and deliberate of things in particular to be done, in
particular cases of conscience and the like. Now wisdom and prudence they are
both together in Gods people, howsoever perhaps one is more excellent then
another. Some are wiser who have a deeper search of truths in general: and
some are more prudent in their ways, that are weaker Christians for the maine
general truths. Yet there is not a good Christian but he has so much prudence
as will bring him to Heaven. But God gives extraordinary wisdom to some,
because they are leaders of others. Yet though in Gods dispensation there be a
difference, yet in every Christian they are joined together, there is no
Christian but he is wise for himself, which is Prudence. This is as it were
the salt which seasoneth all other graces, and knowledge whatsoever: for what
is knowledge without discretion, but a foolish humor? what is Patience but
blockishnesse, if a man do not discern how, why and upon what ground to be
patient? what is Religiousnesse without this, but superstition, and what is
Zeal but an indiscreet heat, if it be not seasoned with this Prudence? yea
and what is Constancy it self, but an indiscreet rigor and stiffness without
wit. So that it is the seasoning of all other graces whatsoever, that which
puts bounds and measure unto all: therefore he joins it with Wisdom, who is
wise and who is prudent? good as we say consists of a whole entire cause, unto
which must be occurrence of all circumstances together, one defect may make it
to be sinful. So this is Prudence to observe a due order clothed with
circumstances of the manner and season of every good action and duty, therefore
be joins here Prudence. Who is wise and he shall understand these things,
prud^nt and he shall know them?

Now these be the two graces that lead and guide a man's life: there must be
first a general understanding and light of the soul, and then there must be a
particular light to apply this general to particulars. Prudence is as it were
the steward of the soul, which dispenceth the light thereof according to
particular occasions.

Now for Wisdom and Prudence, we will not insist long on them, only we will
draw toward a right discerning of them squared and proportioned to our
understandings by resemblances of other things: for a man may know what they
are in divine things, by some proportion to humane things, what they are there,
as to give a little light to it.

Signs of worldly wisdom.
He is a wise prudent man in the world that will be sure to make the greatest
his friend. So

wise and prudent man in the world, that like the wise steward in the Gospel
provides for the worst times: Mat. 16.3.
what course did he take for himself herein, he provides for, as he fore-sees
danger. So spiritual Wisdom and Prudence will direct a man what is best for
his latter end, his eternal rest and happiness in another world. Heavenly
wisdom prefixeth to a man a full view of his latter end, and that which
follows thereupon in another world, and so makes him provide before hand, and
direct all things to that end. A wiseman will not have things to seek when he
comes to make use of them, Mat. 25.
like the foolish virgins who had their oil to seek when they should have had
it ready. He is truly spiritually wise toward his latter end, that as he
knows there is a state to come, so is truly prudent to have all things ready
against that time, that considering the uncertainety of this life, he may not
be surprised unawares, like those glorious virgins who had a lamp without oil.

And amongst men he is also counted a wise prudent man, that makes a right
choice, for this is wisdom, when a man discerns a difference, and answerably
makes his choice. Simile mat^r erroris, says one, Likeness is the mother of
error. There is a likeness between good and bad in the world, and between
truth and error, now he is a wiseman, who is not catchr with these
resemblances, but discerns a difference between temporal and eternal
things, shadows and substances, realities and appearances of things, and
suitably chooses eternals before temporals, the favor of God before the
favor of men, and in a word those things which concern everlasting happiness,
before those that are perishing, Wisdom is seen in choice. By these few
instances named, we may see what heavenly wisdom and prudence is, by
proportion of Wisdom and Prudence in earthly things. Now considering that
there is a better state in another world then in this, he must needs be a wise
man that orders things so, as that he may not loose eternity. Most men in the
world are pennywise and pound foolish, as we say: wise to a particular end, to
get particular favors and riches, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
so to satisfy their intentions: but for the maine which is Wisdom indeed, to
look to their last estate and happiness, and to fit their actions and courses
that way, how few are wise to purpose? how few provide for eternity? therefore
no marvel the Prophet says, who is wise and who is prudent? because men live
by sense and not by Faith.

Who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent and he shall know
them.

That the wise and prudent only know these things. There must be Wisdom and
Prudence before we can know divine Truths and make use of them: That true
Wisdom and Prudence carries men to Gods Word. Who is wise to understand these
things? by divine Truth we grow wise and prudent, the Spirit joining with the
same, and then we come to make a right use of them. There must be first a
spiritual Wisdom and Prudence enlightened by the Spirit, ere we can make use
of the word aright to taste and relish it. Because though the word be light,
yet light alone is not sufficicient to cause sight, but there must concur
unto the outward light an inward sight: grace must illuminate the understanding
and put a heavenly light into the soul. As by the light within meeting with
the light without, the eye being the instrument of sight, applying it self to
the thing, thence comes sight. So there be divine Truths out of us, wherewith
when the Holy Ghost puts an inward light into the soul, sanctified VVisdome
and Prudence, then the inward light meeting with the light without, we see and
apprehend. The Spirit therefore must join to work VVisdome and Prudence.
Naturally we are all dead and have lost our spiritual senses, therefore the
Spirit of God must work in us spiritual senses, sight and taste, that we may
see, discern, and relish heavenly things; which ere we can do, there must be
a harmony betwixt the soul and the things, that is the soul must be made
spiritual answerable to the heavenly things pitched upon, or else if the soul
be not set in a suitable frame, it can never make a right use of them.

Now when the understanding of a man is made wise by the Spirit of God, it will
relish Wisdom and Prudence. For the Spirit of God together with the Scripture
takes the scales off the eyes of the soul, subdues rebellious passions in the
affections, especially that rebellion of the will, putting a new relish in all,
so as they come to love affect and joy in heavenly things. Now when these
scales of spiritual blindness are fallen off the eyes of the soul, and when
rebellion is remooved from the will and affections, then it is fit to join and
approove of heavenly things, else there is a contrariety and Antipathy betwixt
the soul and these things: as the body, when the tongue is affected with some
aguish humor, cannot relish things, though they be never so good, but affects
and rellisheth all things suiting that distemper. So it is with the soul when
it is not enlightened, it judges all things carnally, there being an antipathy
between the soul and divine truths brought home unto it, perhaps a soul not
enlightened or sanctified will apprehend the generallities of truth very well:
but when they are pressed home to practice, then unless the soul be changed,
it will rise up and swell against divine truths, and reject the practice of
them. Without subduing grace to alter and change the soul, the affections
thereof are like the March Suns, which stir up a great many humors, but not
spending them, they breed aguish humors and distempers. So the light of the
word in a carnal heart, it meets with the humors of the soul and stirs
them; but if there be not grace in the soul to subdue these affections, it
stirs them up to be the more malicious, especially if they be pressed to
particular duties in leaving of sinful courses: so that the Spirit of God
must alter the understanding, and subdue the will and affections, ere there can
be a conceiving of divine truths savingly. Therefore before these acts, he
joins these graces: Who is wise, and who is prudent, etc.

between my soul and the things, that as there is a sweet relish in divine
truths, so there may be a sweet taste in me, to answer that relish which is
in divine truths, that the wisdom of thy word and my wisdom may be one, then
a man is wise. There is not the commonest truth, or practical point in
Divinity, but it is a mystery and must be divinely understood, and must have
prudence to go about it as we should do. Repentance and the knowledge of
sin, it is a mystery, till a man be sanctified in his understanding he can
never know what spiritual misery is, till the inward man be enlightened and
sanctified to know what a contrariety there is between sin and the Spirit of
God. As no man can know thoroughly what sickness is, but he that has been
sick, for the Physician does not know sickness so well as the patient who
feels it. So it is with a holy man sanctified by the Holy Ghost, tell him of
sin, he feels it, and the noisomenesse of it, the opposition of it to his
comfort and communion with God. Only the spiritual enlightened man can tell
what Repentance, sin, sorrow for sin, and the spiritual health of the soul
is. Therefore it is said here, Who is wise, and who is prudent? and he shall
understand these things.

The end of the fourteenth Sermon.
THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.10. Who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent and he
shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, the just shall walk in
them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.


AT length by divine assistance, we are come unto the conclusion of this short
Chapter, wherein the Holy Ghost from God has showed such bowels of mercy and
tender compassion unto miserable sinners, encouraging them to return unto the
Lord, by many and several arguments, being formerly insisted upon: our last
work was to show you what Wisdom and prudence was, the difference of them,
and how that none without these endowments are able to know and make use of
divine Truths and mysteries of Religion. Who is wise and he shall understand
these things? prudent and he shall know them? etc.

We came then to show that there must be Prudence and Wisdom, before we can
understand divine Truths, there must be an illumination within: it is not
sufficient to have the light of the Scripture outwardly, but there must be a
light of the eye to see: there must be wisdom and Prudence gathered from the
Scriptures. Now VVisdome and Prudence, if they be divine (as here is meant) it
is not a discreet managing of outward affairs of our personal condition, but
an ordering of our course to Heavenward. Wherefore a man may know whether he
be wise and prudent by his relishing of divine Truths, for otherwise he is not
wise and prudent in these things, which are the maine.

Now having showed, that only the wise and prudent can conceive and make a
right use of these great things delivered, he comes to show and defend the
equity of Gods ways, how crooked soever they seem to flesh and blood: these
things ought to be hearkened unto, because they are the ways of God.

The ways of the Lord are right. By ways here he understands the whole Law
and Gospel, the whole Word of God, which he calls right, not only because
1. They are Righteous in themselves, but 2. Because they reform whatsoever is
amiss in us and rectify us, and 3. Work whatsoever is needful for our good
and salvation.


Now more particularly, Gods ways are 1. Those ways wherein he walks to us:
or 2. The ways that he prescribes us to walk in, and 3. Our ways as they are
conformable to his.


Any of these are the ways of God, of all which more hereafter.

The ways wherein he walks to us, Gods ways to us.
because Election, Predestination, and Reprobation: the reasons whereof, if we
take them comparatively, cannot be searched out, why God should take one and
not another, it is an unsearchable way. But take a man single (out of
comparison) the ways of God will appear to be right, even in that harsh
decree which many men stumble so much at, for none are ever brought in the
execution of that decree to be damned, but you shall see the ways of the Lord
right, who a long time together offers them a great deal of mercy, which they
refusing, and resisting the Holy Ghost, taking wilfully contrary courses, work
out their own damnation. So that at length the issue of those unsearchable
ways will appear to be right in every particular, howsoever the comparative
reason at the first, why God singles out one man and not another will not
appear.

ways of his Providence, in governing the world and ruling of his Church, The
ways of his Providence, etc.
this is the way of God which is right: all which ways though we cannot in all
particulars see in this world; yet in Heaven in the light of glory we shall see
what cannot now be seen in the light of grace and nature. For there be
mysteries in Providence, who can tell the reason why of men equally good, one
should be sorely afflicted, and the other should go to Heaven without any
affliction in a smooth way? none can give a reason of it, but we must subscribe
to the hidden wisdom of God, whose ways are unsearchable in his Providence,
yet are they most right, though they be above our conceit. If we could
conceive all Gods ways, then they were not Gods ways: for in his ways to us,
he will so carry them as he will show himself to be above and beyond our
shallow conceits.

But the ways especially here meant are the ways which he prescribes us to
walk in, and they are, 1. What we must believe, and then, 2. What we must
do, there is,


First, Obedience of Faith, and then Obedience of life.

These are Gods ways prescribed in the word and only in the word.

Now our ways, when they join with Gods that is, when our life, Our ways
joining with Gods ways.
purposes and desires of the inner man, in our speeches, carriage and
conversation agree with Gods ways, then in some sort they are Gods ways, the
just shall walk in them. They shall walk in these ways, that is, in those
ways which God prescribes. As for those ways wherein God walks to us, we
have not so much to do here to consider them. But by walking in the ways
which he prescribes, we shall feel that his ways to us will be nothing but
mercy and truth. Psalm. 25.16.
The ways of the Lord are right, those ways that he prescribes to men to be
believed and done, they are right and straight, that is, they are agreeable to
the first rule of all. Right is the judgment and will of God: He is the first
truth, and the first good, the prime truth and good, which must rule all
others, Mensura mensurans, as they use to speak in Schools, the measure that
measures all other things: for all other things are only so far right; as
they agree to the highest measure of all, which is Gods appointment and will.
So the ways of God are said to be right, because they agree to his word and
will: they are holy and pure, as himself is just, pure and holy.

The ways of the Lord are right.

Right, as they agree to that which is right, and straight, and right likewise,
because they lead directly to a right end. We know a right line is that which
is the shortest between two terms, that which leads from point to point is
the shortest of all other lines. So Gods ways are right and straight, there
are no other ways which tend directly to happiness, without error, but Gods
ways, all other ways are crooked ways. So Gods ways are right, as they
look to God, and as they look unto all other inferior courses: they are
right to examine all our ways by, being the rule of them. And they are right,
as they look to Gods will and are ruled by him.

The ways of the Lord are right Hence observe we in the first place, that the
first thing we should look too in our conversation, must be to know this for
a ground,

That man is not a prescriber of his own way, and that no creatures will is a
rule.

We must embrace therefore no opinion of any man, or any course enjoined or
prescribed by any man, further then it agrees with the first truth and the
first right, Gods ways are right: right, as a standard that is a measure to
measure all other measures by. So Gods will and truth revealed is a right rule,
and the measure of all other rules whatsoever. Directions therefore which we
have of things to be believed and done from men, must be no further regarded
then as they agree with the first standard. Therefore they are mistaken, and
desperately mistaken, that make any man's will a rule, unless it be subordinate
to that which is higher, at which time it becomes all one with the higher
rule. When a man subordinates his directions to Gods, then Gods and his are all
one. Otherwise without this subordination, we make men gods, when we make
their will a rule of our Obedience. The ways of the Lord are right. But of
this only a touch by the way: the maine point hence is,

The Word of the Lord is every way perfect and brings us to perfection.

Psalm. 19.7, etc. Where whatsoever is Good, Comfortable, Profitable, or
Delightful, either for this life or the life to come is all to be had from
thence. And the Wiseman says, Pro. 30.5.
Every word of God is pure, etc. A similitude taken from gold which is fined
till it be pure, as it is expressed in another place, The words of the Lord are
pure words, Psalm. 12.6.
as silver tried in a furnace of earth and purified seven times. 2 Timothy 3.16.
And so the Apostle to Timothy. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for Doctrine, for Correction, for Reproof, for instruction
in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works.

charged upon God himself, who did not better provide and foresee for his
Church, what was good for it. But the Wise man condemns this their audacious
boldness, where he says, Add thou not unto his words, Pro 30.6.
least he reproove thee, and thou be found a liar. They bar reading of the
Scriptures, or to read them in english especially, least the people become
Heriticks. They think it safe to read their own books and idle dreams, but
reject the Word of God, and then (as Jeremy speaks) What wisdom is in them?
Jer. 8.^.
Surely none at all, for the only wisdom is to be governed by Gods most holy
word.

Mat. 5.28.
For (says Christ) Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but one jot and title of
the Law shall not fail. What makes so many judgments to overtake men, but
their unbelief? what made their carcases to fall in the wilderness, so as
they could not enter into the land of Canaan, but their unbelief? for (says
the text of them) They could not enter because of unbelief. Heb. 3.^9.
Infidelity and not believing God, is the root and cause of all our woe. It
began with our first Parents, and it cleaves too close unto us, even unto
this day. This comes from our Atheism and self-love, that if a mortal man
promise or swear unto us, we believe him and rest upon his word: but all that
the great God can do unto us by Promises, Commandments, Threatenings,
Allurements, and gracious Examples, will not make us give credit to his word,
but rather believe Satan, and our own false and deceitful hearts. As for
instance, Isa. 1.18. Isa. 50.10. Heb. 13.5.
God has promised that If our sins were as red as scarlet, yet he will make
them whiter then the snow, though they be never so strong for us, yet he has
promised to subdue them. If our wants be never so great, yet if we will trust
in God; he has promised to relieve us, and has said, that he will not fail
us nor forsake us, if we cast our care upon him. So for the Threatenings, we
must believe that there is never a one of them, but they shall come to pass,
as sure as the promises shall be made good. If these thoughts were firmly
fetled in us, that the ways of the Lord are right, and therefore must be all
accomplished in their time, it would make us restless to fly from sin, and
the punishments threatened, which all lie at the door, Genesis 4.7.
and will quickly be upon us, if they be not avoided by sound and hearty
Repentance.

stands in doing it, our misery in disobeying it. As we know it was with Adam:
what a sudden change did his disobedience work in himself, all the world
since being leavened with that miserable contagious fall of his. And for the
whole word, this is a general, we never want any good, but for want of love
and obedience unto it. Psalm. 119.165.
Great Prosperity shall they have (says David) who love thy law, and no evil
shall come unto them. And we never had nor shall have any hurt, but from our
unbelief and disobedience to the holy, pure, and perfect word of God, which is
attended with comfort and prosperity here, and ^^dlesse Glory hereafter.

The ways of the Lord are right. In the next place, If the ways of the Lord
be right and straight, so straight that they lead directly to the right end,
then it is clear,

That the best way to come to a good and right end is to take Gods ways. For
it is a right way, and the right way is always the shortest way. Therefore
when men take not Gods ways, prescriptions and courses, they go wide about,
and seldom or never come to their intended end. Gods way is the right way, and
therefore brings a man to his right end. Sometimes men will have their
turnings, their diverticula and vagaries, but they find by experience that Gods
ways they are the right ways, so as they never attain to comfort and peace
until they come again into those ways. God until then suffers them to be
snared and hampered, and to eat the fruit of their own ways, and then they
see the difference of Gods ways and theirs, and that Gods ways are the best,
and the streightest ways unto true happiness.

Indeed God suffers sometimes men that will have their own ways, to come
quickly to them, as some men hasten to be rich, and God suffers them to be
rich hastily: yet they are none of Gods ways which they take, but climb up by
fraud and deceit. I but that is only a particular end, which God suffers them
to attain by bie ways: but what will be the up-shot? Where will all these
ways end at length? surely in Hell. For when a man goes out of the right, and
straight, and direct way, to be great in the world, he is like a man who goes
out of his way, which is further about, who yet when he is in that way goes
on through thick and thin, because he will gain some way. He goes on
through thickets and hedges, fair and foul where he gets many scratches,
brushes, and knocks. Do any think in the world to attain his particular ends,
without the direct vvayes of God, God may suffer him to attain his particular
end, but with many flawes, knocks and brushes upon his conscience, which many
times he carries with him unto his grave, and finds it a great deal better,
both to attain unto his particular ends by Gods ways, and to have no more of
any thing in the world then he can have with a good conscience. For though
they be good men, oft-times God suffers such men to have bruses in their
conscience all their days; that they and others may know, that the best way,
is the straight and right way, which at last will bring us best to our end.

Having thus made it good, That the ways of the Lord are right; now for
conclusion of all the Prophet begins to show the diverse effects these right
ways of God have in two sorts of people, the godly and wicked.

1. That the just shall walk in them:

2. That the Transgressors shall fall therein.

Who be just men?
The just shall walk in them; who be the just men here spoken off? Such are
just men who give to every one their due, that gives God his due in the first
place, and man in the second place, whereby it is framed. The just shall walk
in them; that is, they shall proceed and go on in them till they be come to
the end of their race, the Salvation of their souls. And more particularly.

They respect all Gods Commandments.
Just men, first are such, who have a respect unto al Gods commandments. Psa.
119.6. Though in their disposition they find some more hard to them then
others, yet they do not allow themselves to break any, but strive so much the
more earnestly and constantly to observe them, as they find their natures
opposite to them. Now Hypocrites howsoever they do many things in show, yet
like Herod and Judas their hearts run in a wrong channel, they allow
themselves to live in, and like of some sin. The young man in the Gospel,
had not a respect unto all Gods Commandments, Mat. 19.
though Christ loved his aimiable parts; to this purpose James says, Iam. 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet off end in one point, he is
guilty of all. That is, he who allows himself in any one sin, he is
guilty of all. Ask Judas, is murder good? he would have said no: but he was
covetous and allowed himself in it, and so drew upon him the guilt of all the
rest. God is he who forbids sinning against them all: he who forbids one,
forbids all: and being rightly turned to God, the same authority makes us leave
all: it is not sin, but the allowance of it that makes an Hypocrite.

Again, they do things to a good end, They do things to a good end.
the Scribes and Pharisees (because they did nothing out of love to God or man,
but for vain glory and carnal respects) are condemned of Christ. So some are
brought in at the last day saying, Lord, Lord, have we not in thy name
prophesied, Mat. 7.22.
and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works:
and yet Christ professes not to know them, but calls them workers of
iniquity. They had Gifts and Calling and delivered true doctrine, etc. But
here was their failing, They prophesied in his name, but not for his Name.
Their actions were good in themselves, and for others, but the end of them was
naught, and therefore both they and their works are condemned. Yet this is not
so to be understood, but that Gods children have some thoughts of vain glory
which accompanies and creeps into their best actions, but they do
acknowledge this for a sin, confess it, and desire the Lord to pardon and
subdue it, and then it shall never be laid to their charge. Because having of
infirmities is not contrary to sincerity, but allowing of them, and living in
them, in which case the Lord is more pleased with our Humiliation for our
sin, then the motions to vainglory did offend him.

A desire to grow in Grace.
Christian Righteousness, as it sees still need, so it still desires more grace
and less sin, because he who has a true heart, sees both the want and worth
of grace, and feels his want. A man feels not the want of Faith, Humility,
and Love, till he have it in some sort, as it is said Philip. 3.15. As many as
are perfect are thus minded, to wit so many as are upright, all is one.

By love of the Brethren. 1 John 3.14.
Lastly, this just uprightness is known by love of the Brethren: By this we
know we are translated from death to life, because we love the Brethren.
Contrary to which is that disposition which envieth at all things which suites
not with their humors, Jam. 2.2.
as James speaks of those who prefer men and have their persons in
admiration in regard of outward things despising inferiors.



1 Cor. 3.22:
for all things are theirs, because they are Christ's, therefore it is their
bounden duty having an upright heart to rejoice in God, as the Prophet speaks:
Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, Psalm. 33.1. Psalm 52. ult.
for praise is comely for the upright. None have cause to rejoice but upright
men. 1. Because they of all others have title and right to joy: 2. Because they
have command to do it, seeing Heaven is theirs, all the promises are theirs,
and they are heirs of all things: it is a comely service and the work of
Heaven.



James says, Jam. 5.17.
that Elias was a man subject to like passions and infirmities as we are, yet
he was a righteous man, though a man subject to the like passions as we are.
Therefore the passions of Christians are not contrary to Christian, but to
legal Righteousness. But we are not under the Law but under Grace. Romans 6.15.
The first Covenant of works bids us have no sin. The other Covenant bids us
allow no sin, this much is for that Question what is meant by just men. It
remains now that we should further enquire into that mystery, how it is that
just men walk in the ways of God, and prosper therein: when yet wicked men
called Transgressors, fall therein. But this being a mystery by your patience
we will take time to unfold what we have to speak hereof the next time, if
God be so pleased.

The end of the fifteenth Sermon.
THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.
HOS. 14.10. -- The ways of the Lord are right, the just shall walk in them,
but the transgressors shall fall therein.


GODS children have their times of deadness and disertion, and again their
times of quickening and rejoicing: weeping does not always remain unto them
for their portion, Psalm. 30.5.
but joy comes in the morning: in the worst times the Saints have always
some comforts afforded them which supporteth them against all the storms and
tempests they endure: they have always a Goshen to fly too, others shall
perish in that way wherein they shall walk and escape.

The just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.

Thus far we are now come in the unfolding of this Chapter, having showed
Gods rich and incomparable mercies to miserable and penitent sinners, how ready
God is to embrace such, as this rebellious people named were, with all the
arguments used to make them return unto the Lord: we are now come at last unto
the upshot of all, a discovery of the several effect and work Gods word has
upon both sorts of people here named and aimed at.

The just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.

These were very bad times: yet there were just men, who walked in the ways of
God, so that we see.

In the worst times God will have always a people that shall justify
wisdom.

God will have it thus, even in the worst times, that the just shall walk in
them: though before he says, Who is wise and who is prudent? yet here he
shows that there shall be a number who shall walk in Gods ways. Who though
they go to Heaven alone, yet to Heaven they will though they have but a few
that walk in Gods ways with them, they will rather go with a few that way,
then with the wicked in the broad way to Hell: always God has some who shall
walk in his way: for if there were not some always who were good, the Earth
would not stand, for good men they are the Pillars of the world who uphold it.
It is not for wicked men's sake that God upholds the frame of the creatures, and
that orderly government, we see all is to gather together the number of his
elect, of whom in some ages there are more and in some less of them borne,
thereafter as God breathes and blows with his Spirit. For according to the
abundant working of the Spirit, is the number of the elect. Yet in all ages
there are some, because it is an Article of our Faith, to believe a holy
Catholic Church. Now it cannot be an article of Faith unless there were
always some that made this Catholic Church: for else there should be an act of
Faith without an object. Therefore we may always say; I believe that there are
a number of elect people that walk in the ways of God to Heaven-wards.

And what is the disposition of these some? The disposition of just men in
their places.
to have a countermotion to those of the times and places they live in. Some
are foolish, not caring for the ways of God, cavilling at them. But the just
shall walk in them; that is, they take a contrary course to the world that
slights wisdom. Thus in all times it is the disposition of Gods children to
go contrary to the world in the greatest matters of all. They indeed hold
correspondency in outward things, but for the maine, they have a contrary
motion. As we say of the Planets, that they have a motion contrary to the wrapped
motion, being carried and hurried about every twenty four hours with the
motion of the Heavens: they have an other motion and circuit of their own
which they pass also. So it is with Gods people, though in their common
carriage they be carried with the common customs and fashions of the times:
yet they have a contrary motion of their own, whereby being carried by the
help of Gods Spirit they go on in a way to Heaven though the world discern
it not, they have a secret contrary motion opposite to the sins and
corruptions of the age and times they live in. Therefore in all ages it is
observed for a commendation to go on in a contrary course to the present
times. Gen 6. Gen 18.
Noah in his time, Lot in his time, and Paul in his time, who complains All
men seek their own: Phil. 2.21.
it is a strange thing that Paul should complain of all men seeking their
own, even then when the blood of Christ was so warm, being so lately shed,
and the Gospel so spread: yet all men seek their own. And he speaks it with
tears, but what became of Paul and Timothy and the rest? Phil 3.20.
But our conversation is in Heaven from whence we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Let all men seek their own here below as they will,
we have our conversation contrary to the world. Our conversation is in Heaven,
etc. So that they hold out Gods Truth in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, that is when every man takes crooked ways and courses in carnal
policy, yet there are a company that notwithstanding walk in the right ways
of God clean contrary to others. The just will walk in the right ways of
God. As holy Joshua said, Choose you what you will do, Josh. 14.15.
but howsoever I and my fathers house will serve the Lord. So when many fell
from Christ for a fit, because his Doctrine seemed harsh, Peter justified that
way, when Christ asked him, will ye also leave me with the rest who are
offended? Lord (says he) whether shall we go? we have tasted the sweetness
of the Word, and felt the power thereof: Whether shall we go Lord, Joh. 6.68.
thou have the words of Eternal life. So Gods people have an affection
carriage and course contrary to the world.

2 Pet. 1.3.
which carries them up to God-wards against the stream and current of the
time.

divine goodness, a man may know he belongs to God, if he justify wisdom in
the worst times: if he stand for the truth to the utmost, thinking it of more
price then his life. It is the first degree to Religion, Luke 14 26.
to hate father and mother, wife and children, and all for the Gospel. Now
when a man will justify the truth with the loss of any thing in the world, it
is a sign that man is a good man in ill times.

Therefore in ill times let us labor to justify truth, both the truth of
things to be believed, and all just religious courses, not only in case of
opposition being opposed, but in example, though we say nothing. Heb. 11.7.
Noah condemned the world though he spoke not a word by making an Arc: so Lot
Sodom, though he told not all Sodom of their faults. So a man may justify
good things though he speak not a word to any man: for such a ones life is a
confutation and sufficient witness for God against the world. Therefore it is
good, though a man do not confront the world in his speeches: yet
notwithstanding at least to hold a course contrary to the world in his
conversation. We have need of a great deal of courage to do this: but there
is no heavenly wiseman, but he is a courageous man; though in his own spirit,
he may be a weak man, yet in case of opposition, Grace will be above Nature,
he will show then his heavenly Wisdom and Prudence and of what metal he is
made, by justifying wisdom in all times: The just shall walk therein. But to
come more directly to the words.

The just shall walk in them. That first men must have spiritual life, and be
just, before they can walk. Walking is an action of life, there must be life
before there can be walking, a man must first have a spiritual life, whereby
he may be just, and then he will walk as a just man. For as we say of a
Bowl (it is Austins comparison) it is first made round and then it runs
round, so a man is first just and then he does justly. It is a conceit of the
Papists that good works do justify a man: Luther says well, that a good man
does good works. Good works make not the man, fruit makes not the tree, but the
tree the fruit. So we are just first; and then we walk as just men. We must
labor to be changed and to have a principle of spiritual life, then we shall
walk and have new feet, eyes, taste, ears, and senses: all shall then be new.

Again, in the second place, the necessity of it appears hence that there
must be first spiritual life in the inward man, ere a man can walk. Because
there will nor else be a harmony and correspondency betwixt a man and his
ways. A man will not hold in those ways that he has an Antipathy too:
therefore his nature must be altered by a higher principle, before he can like
and delight in the ways of God. This is that which Gods children desire first
of God, that he would alter their natures, inlighten, change and quicken them,
work strongly and powerfully in them, that they may have a Sympathy and liking
unto all that is good, first they are just and then they walk in Gods ways.

The just shall walk in them. That a just man, he being the prudent and wise
man, he walks in Gods ways. That is spiritual wisdom and prudence, together
with Grace, Righteousness and Justice, they lead to walking in Obedience. Let
no man therefore talk of grace and wisdom or prudence altering him, further
then he makes it good by his walking. He that is just walks as a just man; he
that is wise, walks wisely, he that is prudent, walks prudently. Which is
spoken to discover Hypocrisy in men, that would be thought to be good
Christians and wisemen, because they have a great deal of speculative
knowledge. I but look we to our ways, let them show whether we be wise or
foolish, just or unjust: If a man be wise, Pro. 9 12. Pro. 14.8.
he is wise for himself, (as Solomon says) to direct his own ways. The
wisdom of the wise is to understand his own way that he is to walk in. If a
man have not wisdom to direct his way in particular to walk to Heavenward,
he is but a fool. For a man to know so much as shall condemn him and be a
witness against him and yet not know so much as to save him, what a miserable
thing is this? Now all other men that know much and walk not answerable, they
know so much as to condemn them and not to save them. Our Savior Christ he
calls such, foolish builders, Mat 7.
that know and will not do: so unless there be a walking answerable to the
Wisdom and Prudence prescribed, a man is but a foolish man.

Therefore let it be a rule of trial, would we be thought to be Wise and
Prudent, Just and Good? Let us look to our ways, are they Gods ways? do we
delight in these ways? and make them our ways, then we are Wise, Prudent and
Just.

The just shall walk in them. As the just shall walk in them; so whosoever
walks in them, are just, wise and prudent: for is not he prudent who walks in
those ways that lead directly to eternal happiness? is not he a wiseman
that walks by rule in those ways where he has God over him to be his
Protector, Ruler, and Defender? is not he a wise man who walks in those ways
that fits him for all conditions whatsoever, prosperity or adversity, life or
death? for all estates? he that walks therefore in Gods ways must be the
only wise man. What walking in Gods ways implies.


Now what things does this walking in the ways of God imply?

1 Perspicuity to discern them.
First Perspicuitie, those who walk in the ways of God, they discern those
ways to be Gods ways, and discern them aright.

2. To proceed in them.
Then when they discern them to be Gods good ways, answerably they proceed in
them from step to step, for every action is a step to Heaven or to Hell: so a
just man when he has discovered a good way, he goes on still.

3. An uniforme course.
And then he keeps an uniforme course, for so he does who walks on in a way, he
makes not indentures as he walks, but goes on steadie in an uniforme course, to
a right end. So a just man when he has singled out the right way, he goes on
in that steedily and uniformly.

4. Resolution.
And likewise where it is said the just walks in them, it implies Resolution to
go on in those ways till he come to the end, though there be never so much
opposition.

But how shall we know whether we go on in this way or not?

First, he that goes on in a way the further he has proceeded therein, looking
back, that which he leaves behind seems lesser and lesser in his eye, and
that which he goes too greater and greater: so a man may know his progress in
the ways of God, when earthly profits and pleasures seem little, his former
courses and pleasures seeming now base unto him, when Heaven and heavenly
things seem near unto him, it is a sign he is near Heaven: near in time,
and nearer in disposition and in wisdom to discern, because the best things
are greatest in his eye and esteem. In this case, it is a sign that such a
one is removed from the world, and is near unto Heaven, having made a good
progress in the ways of God.

It implies likewise in the second place, an uniforme course of life. Such a
one does not duties by starts now and then, but constantly, therefore we must
judge of men by a tenure of life, what their constant ways are: sometimes
though they be good men, they may step awry into an ill way, and yet come in
again. Sometimes an ill man may cross a good way, as a thief when he
crosses the highway: or a good man steps out of the way, but this is not
their way, they are both out and to seek of their way. A wicked man when he
speaks of good things he is out of his way; he acts a part and assumes a
person he is unskilful to act, therefore he does it untowardly. But a man's way
is his course, a good man's way is good though his startings be ill, and an ill
man's way is naught, though for passion or for bie ends, he may now and then
do good things. Therefore considering that the walking in the ways of God is
uniforme and orderly: let us judge of our selves by the tenure of our life, and
course thereof. And let those poor souls who think they are out of the way
because they run into some infirmities now and then, comfort themselves in
this, that God judges not by single actions, but according to the tenure of a
man's life, what he is. For oftentimes Gods children gain by their slips,
which makes them look the more warily to their ways for ever after that. He
that walks in the way to Heaven, if he be a good man, he looks to make surer
footing in the ways of God after his slips and falls. He labors also to make
so much the more haste home being a gainer by all his slips and falls. Let none
therefore be discouraged, but let them labor that their ways and courses may
be good, and not only so, but to be uniforme, orderly and constant, and then
they may speak peace to their own souls, being such as are here described,
The just shall walk in them.

Again, he that will walk aright in Gods ways, he must be resolute against
all opposition whatsoever: for we meet with many lets hindrances and
scandals, to drive us out of the way. Sometimes the ill lives of those who
walk in these ways, sometimes their slips and falls, sometimes persecution,
and our own natures are full of scandals, subject to take this and that
offense, and then we are ready to be snared on the right hand, or feared and
scared on the left. And our nature so far as it is unsanctified, is prone to
catch, and ready to join with the world: therefore we have need of resolution
of spirit and determination: as David, Psalm. 119.106.
I have determined O Lord: and I will keep thy laws, I have sworn that I
will keep thy righteous judgments: this is a resolute determination.

And then again, pray to God with David that he would direct our ways. Oh
that my ways were so directed to keep thy laws! I see that my nature is
ready to draw me away to evil, and perverse crooked courses: I see though I
determine to take a good course that there is much opposition: therefore good
Lord direct me in my course, direct thou my thoughts, words and carriage.
Therefore that we may walk steadfastly, let us resolve with settled
determination, praying to God for strength: otherwise resolution with
dependence on our own power may be a work of the flesh: but resolve thus,
these are right ways and straight, they lead to Heaven, Happiness and Glory,
therefore I will walk in them, whatsoever come of it. We have all the
discouragements which may hinder us in the vvayes of God. For as we are
travelers, so we are soldiers, vvarfaring men that meet with many rubbs,
thorns, therefore to walk amidst such dangerous vvayes we must be well
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, that is Patience, and
reasons taken from thence. God has provided spiritual armor in the Word
against all oppositions that meet with us: so that by Resolution and Prayer to
him, using his means we may go through all.

Now for a further help for us to walk constantly and resolutely in the
vvayes of God.

see any man to walk in a good way, let him not walk alone, but let us join
our selves with those that walk in Gods ways, for why does God leave us not
only his Word to direct us which way to go, but likewise examples in all
times, but that we should follow those examples? which are like the Pillar of
fire which went before Israel unto Canaan. We have a Cloud and a Pillar of
examples before us (unto which he alludes. Hebr. 12.1.) to lead us unto
Heaven, not only the Word, but examples in all times. Phil. 3.17.
Walk as you have us for an example (says Paul) therefore it is a character
of a gracious disposition to join with the just, and those who walk in the
ways of God. We see there is in all the creatures an instinct to keep company
with their own kind: as we see in Doves, Sheep, Geese and the like. So it
comes from a supernatural gracious instinct of grace, for the good to walk
and company with the good, helping them on in the way to Heaven. It is
therefore a point of special wisdom to single out those for our company who
are able to help us thither: as it is for travelers to choose their company to
travel with.

the whole course of our life, for the end infuseth vigor in our carriages, and
puts a great deal of life in the use of the means breeding a love of them,
though they be harsh. Therefore we must pray and labor for Patience to
conflict with our own corrruptions and those of the times we live in. This is
unpleasant to do, but when a man has his aim and end in his eye this
inspires such vigor and strength in a man that it makes him use means and
courses contrary to his own natural disposition, offering a holy violence
unto himself: as thus it is not absolutely necessary, that I should have this
or that, or have them all, or in such and such a measure, but it is absolutely
necessary, that I should be saved and not damned: therefore this course I will
take, in these ways I will and must walk, which lead to Salvation. Let us
therefore with Moses have in our eye, Hebr. 11.26.
the Recompense of the reward, and with our blessed Savior the head of the
faithful, have before our eyes the joy that was set before him, which will
make us pass by all those heavy things that he passed through. Let us with
the holy men of a^^ient time have the price of that high calling in our eye, to
make us notwithstanding all opposition press forwards toward the mark.

They shall walk in these ways: remember always, to take Wisdom and
Prudence along with you in all your walkings. It is put indefinitly, because we
should leave out none. For as we say in things that are to be believed, Faith
chooses not this object, and not another, so Obedience chooses not this
object, I will obey God in this and not in this, but it goes on in all Gods
ways. Therefore if we would walk on aright in Gods ways, there must be
consideration of all the relations as we stand to God. Mat. 6.33.
to please him above all, whomsoever we displease and to seek the Kingdom of
Heaven and his Righteousness before all, that all things may follow which are
needful for us.



Wisdom and Prudence is seen in those things especially, to use things
indifferent, indifferently, not to be much in the use of the world, in joy or
sorrow: but in moderation to use these things, being sure to set our affections
upon the maine.







of every idle word at the day of judgment. So that in all our labors,
carriage and speech we must labor to do all wisely and justly. These are the
ways of God, Mat. 12.36.
and The just walk in them.

Negatively what we must avoid in all our walking.

We must not do any thing against Religion Conscience or Justice.
Remember in general, we must never do any thing against Religion, against
Conscience, against a man's particular Place and Calling, or against Justice.
Let us not touch upon the breach of any good thing, especially of Religion and
Conscience. Thus a man shall walk in the ways of God, if with Wisdom and
Prudence he consider what ways are before him, to God, to himself, to others:
in all conditions and states of life, to see what he must, and what he must
not do, and then to walk in them answerably.

For our encouragement to walk in Gods ways in our general and particular
callings.

1. The ways of God are the most safe ways.
Know first they are the most safe ways of all, whatsoever trouble or
affliction we meet withal, it is no matter, it will prove the safest way in
the end. For as it was with the cloud which went before Gods people, it was
both for Direction and Protection: so the Spirit of God, and the ways of God
as they serve for Direction, so they serve for Protection, God will direct, and
protect us if we walk in his ways: let him be our Director, and he will be
our preserver and protector in all times.

Again, they are the most pleasant ways of all, all Wisdoms ways are paved
with Prosperity and Pleasure, 2. They are the most pleasant ways.
for when God does enlarge and sanctify the soul to walk in them, he gives
withal a royal gift, inward peace of conscience and joy unspeakeable and
glorious with an enlarged Spirit. God meets his children in his own ways,
they are therefore to walk there. Let a man start out of Gods vvayes, he meets
with the Devil, with the Devils instruments, and many snares. But in Gods
vvayes, he shall be sure to meet with God, if he walk in them with
Humility and respect to God, looking up for direction and strength, and denying
his own Wisdom: in this case a man shall be sure to have God go along with
him in all his vvayes. In Gods vvayes expect Gods company: therefore they are
the safest and the most pleasant vvayes. 3. They are the most clean and holy
ways. Psalm 19.9.


And they are the cleanest and holiest vvayes of all: having this excellent
property in them, that as they lead to comfort, so they end in comfort, they
all end in Heaven. Therefore let us not be weary of Gods vvayes, of
Christianity and our particular Callings: wherein what we do let us do as
Gods vvayes, having sanctified them by Prayer, and do it in Obedience to God.
They are Gods vvayes when they are sanctified; God has set me in this
standing, I expect his blessing therein, and what blessing I find, I will give
him the praise: God has appointed that in serving man J serve him: therefore
we must go on in our particular vvayes, as the ways of God, doing every
thing as the work of God, and we shall find them the comfortablest and
pleasantest ways which end in joy, happiness and glory.



Psalm. 1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,
etc. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law does he
meditate day and night.

Psalm. 34.7.
and though like David we slip out of the way, yet this not being our walk we
come to the way again. Though Gods children miss of their way, yet their
resolution, choice and endeavor, was to walk in the way, therefore such are
still in a blessed estate, and keep their communion with God. A man is not
said to alter his way, till he alter his choice and resolution. The best man
may have an ill passion and miss the way, but he will not turn from it
willingly. And the worst man may have a good passion, and come into the way,
but never continue in it, to make it his walk. From all which it appears,
that they are only righteous persons, who continue to walk in the ways of
God. It is therefore Consolation unto them who take that course, though all the
world go another way, yet they must imitate just men. And for us, we must
imitate these just men, though they be never so few in the world, and
despised. If we would be counted the servants of God, we must imitate them that
walk in those paths.

Now it is said that the other sort, wicked men, the ways of God shall have a
quite contrary course in them.

But the transgressors shall fall therein.

As one and the selfsame cloud was both light to the Israelites and
darkness unto the Egyptians: Exo. 14 20.
So the same ways of God prove both light and darkness, life and death to
the godly and wicked: as the Apostle speaks, unto the one they are the savor
of life unto life, 2 Cor. 2.16.
and unto the other the savor of death unto death. Therefore now here is the
conclusion of all: if no warning will serve the turn of all what has been
given and said: yet the word of God shall not return empty, it shall effect
that for which it was sent: Isa. 55.11.
one work or other it will do: even upon the most perverse,

The transgressors shall fall therein.

That the same word which is a word of life and salvation to the godly is an
occasion of sin and perdition unto the wicked. The same Sunn which makes
flowers and herbs to smell sweet, makes carrions to smell worse. The same word
which made the Apostles believe and confess Christ, did also make many others
of his Disciples go back from him, John. 6.60.
saying: This is a hard saying who can bear it? Act. 13.48.
So Act. 13. The same word which made the unbeleeving Jews blaspheme, did make
as many as did belong unto eternal life Believe. And when Christ preached,
many blasphemed, and said he had a Devil: others trusted and defended him. 2
Cor 2.16:
So says Paul, the same word to some is the savor of death unto death, and to
some the savor of life unto life: and so in another place he speaks of the
same word, but we preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.
unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness, but unto
them which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God. To this purpose Peter speaks of Christ, 1 Pet 2.7, 8.
unto you therefore who believe he is precious, but unto them which are
disobedient, etc. A stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, even unto them
which stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed. The Reasons are.

The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him* 1 Cor. 2.14.
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: but he that
is spiritual judges all things, etc.

Because they who do evil hate the light, and therefore cannot love what they
hate. This (Christ says) is the condemnation, John 3.19.
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness better then light,
because their deeds were evil.

1 Cor. 4.4.
therefore they are led away by the god of this world Satan, so that they
cannot perceive any thing that is spiritual, for God has not given them a
heart to perceive, etc. Deuteronomy 29.4.


The Faith of Gods elect; Tit. 1.1. Heb 11 6.
and we know without Faith it is impossible to please God: for it is said that
the word profited not those unbelieving Jews, because it was not mingled with
Faith in those who heard it. Hebr. 4.2.




Use is, First Reproof unto them who stumble at the wholesome Doctrines of the
Word, of Election, Reprobation, Predestination, and the like, such indeed
stumble at Christ himself, he is a stumbling block unto them, 1 Pet. 2 8.
as Peter speaks. They stumble at Christ who stumble at his Word.

Secondly, not to love the word the worse because evil men be made the worse
by it, which shows rather the mighty power of the Word, which discovers
them, and will not let them be hid, unmasking Hypocrites to themselves and
others. As we must not like the Sun the worse because it makes carrion smell;
nor the fan, because it winnoweth away the chafe; so must we not fall out
with the Word, because it has these effects upon wicked men.

Paul makes a sign of Election, 1 These. 2.13.
When they receive the word of God, as the word of God with Thanksgiving. This
indeed is a matter of praise to give God thanks for his good word, which saves
our souls, and comforts us here in the way of all our Pilgrimage, till we
arrive at heavenly glory.

For Conclusion of all, what then remains on our part to be done? surely to
hearken no more to flesh and blood, to the world or the Devil: but to hear
what God says in his most holy Word, and to frame our hearts with a strong
Resolution to this Returning here exhorted to. Psalm 32.10.
O if we knevv the many miseries and sorrovves which attends vvretched and
miserable sinners, and sinful courses here and hereafter, it would be our
first work to follovv Gods counsel to his people, to Return from our
sinful ways, to meet so gracious and merciful a God: that he may (as his
promise is) heal our Backslidings; and be, as the Dew unto us, to make us
fruitful and abundant in every good and perfect work.

What can be said more for our encouragement then that which has been
delivered in this Chapter. God the party offended, who is JEHOVAH, God
all-sufficient, exhorts us to return unto him, who is able and willing to help.
And he also (out of his rich goodness) forewarneth us of the dangerous
estate a sinner is in: who being fallen by his iniquity, ought therefore to
pity himself, Return and not run on in a further course of disobedience,
and backesliding. And words are put in our mouths, dictated by God himself,
which needs must be very prevailing with him: what an encouragement is this?
yea further, (as we have heard) these petitions are all answered graciously,
and abundantly above all they did ask: wherein God surmounteth our desires,
and thoughts, as we heard at large. Whereby we also may be confident to have
our petitions and suites in like sort granted, if we go unto God with his own
words, and form prescribed. If we take with us words of Prayer we shall be
sure to vanquish all our spiritual enemies: for faithful Prayer works wonders
in Heaven and Earth. Iam. 5.16.
And that God does not bid us be religious to our loss; he shows that we
shall loose nothing by following his counsel, and walking in a religious
course of life: having abhominated our Idols, He will observe us, and see us,
and be a shelter unto us, having a derivation of fruitfulness from his
fullness: In me is thy fruit found.

Lastly we have heard who can make right use of these things delivered? only
the wise and prudent: such only can understand heavenly things to purpose: his
secret is with them that fear him: and Wisdom is (only) justified of her
children. Psalm. 25.14. Mat. 11.19.
When others have no heart given them to perceive Gods ways aright (as Moses
speaks) Transgressors fall in Gods right ways, whilst the just walks
comfortably in them. O then let us hate sin every day more and more, and be in
love with Religion and the ways of God: for that is the true good, which is the
everlasting good, that better Mary's part, Luke 10.42.
which shall never be taken away: Whosoever drinks of this living water shall
never thirst again. John. 4.14.
The best things of this world, have but the shadow, not the substance of
goodness. Let us then be wise for our selves, and pity our selves in time
whilst it is called to day, because (as our Savior speaks) The night
approaches, John. 9.4.
wherein no man can work. O then, let us often examine our hearts and covenant
with them, let us see our sins as they are, and Gods goodness as it is; Isa.
1.18.
that our scarlet sins may be done away as a mist from before him. O banish
away our Atheism, which by our sinful conversation proclaims us to be of
the number of those fools, who have said in their heart, that there is no God.
This serious consideration, Psalm. 14.1.
always makes first a stop, and then a Returning: to believe indeed that there
is a God, who made the world, and a judgment to come. This God (by Moses)
calls true Wisdom indeed, To remember our latter end: Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O (says he) that they were wise that they would think of these things: of
which things? the miseries which attend sin here and hereafter, and the
blessings and comforts which follow a godly life both here and hereafter.
Lamen. 1.9.
That they would remember their latter end, the neglect whereof Jeremy shows
was the cause: that they came down wonderfully and had no comforter: because
they remembered not their latter end.

Therefore let us study this point well; that there is a God and a judgment to
come, and this will compel us even out of self-love to return from our
sinful courses, and make a stop. By this means we shall not need a Philips
boy to cry to us every day, we are mortal and must die, if our meditations
once a day be both in Heaven and Hell. These strong considerations (aided with
strong rational reflectings on our selves) will keep us within compass,
over-aw us and make us quake and tremble to go on in sin, which is worse
then the Devil in this, that thereby he became a Devil. This will drive us to
fly unto God, Mal. 42.
that he may heal our Backeslidings, who is described with healing under his
wings, who in the days of his flesh healed all miserable and Returning
Backesliders who ever came unto him. Therefore let us lay to heart these
things, that so we may be kept in soul and body pure and unspotted, holy and
without blame in his sight, until the day of Redemption, when our mortality
shall put on immortality, and our corruptible incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.54.
to reign with God for ever and ever.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS PRIVILEGE OR, A Christians constant Advocate: Containing a short,
but most sweet direction for every true Christian to walk comfortably through
this valley of tears.

By the Faithful and Reverend Divine, R. SIBS, D.D. and sometime Preacher to
the Honorable Society of Grayes-Inne.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for George Edwards dwelling in Green-Arbour at the
sign of the Angel, MDCXXXVIII.

A Table of the several Heads contained in this Treatise.
1. COnviction of sin how necessary it is to salvation. Page 491. 2. What
this Convincing of sin is. Page 491. 3. A particular Convincing of sin. Page
492. How we shall know the common Conviction of Conscience from this of the
Spirit. P. 493. The use of all this how the Spirit Convinces, Page 494.
Secondly, Conviction of Righteousness. P. 496. What the Conviction of
Righteousness is. P. 496. First, there is a fourefold Gradation of Conviction.
1. There must must be a Righteousness. P. 497. 2. That it is not in any
creature. P. 497. 3. That this Righteousness is to be had in Christ. P. 497.
4. The Spirit Convinces that this belongs to all believers. P. 489.

1. Question.
How the Holy Ghost does convince men of the righteousness of Christ. 498.
2. Question.
Why is the sending of the Spirit necessary for the convincing of this
righteousness. P. 499. For these Reasons. 1. Because it is above the conceit
of man. P. 499, 2. Reason why the Holy Ghost is necessary for this conviction.
P. 500. 3. Reason because flesh and blood is full of pride. P. 501.

Objection.
Alas I am not convinced of the Spirit that Christ is my righteousness,
therefore what case am I in. The full answer of this very comfortable. P. 501.
The use of all this. P. 503. In which is shown the privileges and
prerogatives of a man that is convinced in all temptations. P. 503.

1. When God himself seems to be our enemy. P. 503. 2. Against Satan. P.
503. 3. Against our own consciences. P. 504 How we may know whether we be
convinced of this righteousness. The answer to this. P. 504. Secondly, but how
shall I know that the Holy Ghost has convinced me enough of sin, so that I
may without presumption apply the righteousness of Christ. 1. If the Holy
Ghost have discovered my sinful condition. P. 504. 2. By the work of the
Spirit. P. 505. 3. By inward peace and great joy. P. 505. 4. Where this is it
answers all objections. P. 506.


The use.
How we should live by faith. P. 506. 2. How every day to make use of the
righteousness of Christ. P. 507.
Wherefore did Christ go to the Father.
1. To make application of what he had wrought. P. 508. 2. To send the Spirit.
P. 508. 3. To stop Satan's mouth. P. 508. 4. To make the Father our Father. P.
508. 5. Sweet comforts at the hour of death. P. 508.
The use.
Great comfort in the hour of death P. 509, 510.
April. 10. 1638.
Imprimatur

THO: WYKES.

THE SAINTS Privilege.
JOHN 16.8, 9, 10. When he is come, he shall reproove the world of sin,
righteousness and judgment. Of sin, because they believe not in me; Of
righteousness, because I go to my Father: Of judgment, because the Prince of
this world is judged.

Especially the 10. verse. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father and you
shall see me no more.


OUR blessed Savior descending from Heaven to Earth for the Redemption of man:
after he had accomplished that great work, he ascended thither again. And
knowing his Disciples would take his departure very heavily, he labors to
arm them against the assaults of all grief and sorrow that might otherwise
oppress them, and that by many arguments. Among the rest, this is not the
least, that when he is gone away, he will send the Comforter unto them. God
never takes away any thing from his children but he sends them a better. And
this Comforter whom he promised to send shall bear them through in all their
Ministry, all function, and in effect he thus bespeaks them. You my
Disciples are to encounter with the world, Be of good comfort, my Spirit shall
go along with you, and he shall reproove the world of sin, righteousness,
and judgment. Of your selves you are too weak, but the Spirit shall
strengthen you, and make way into the hearts of those that shall be saved, by
convincing them of sin, righteousness, and judgment; So that be not
discouraged, the Spirit shall breath courage into you and make way for your
doctrine. When the Comforter is come, he shall reproove the world of sin, and
of righteousness, and judgment: Of sin, because they believe not in me, Of
righteousness, because I go to the Father; Of judgment, because the Prince
of this world is judged.

There are three maine parts of salvation.

Knowledge of our misery, knowledge of our deliverance, and a life answerable.
The Holy Ghost shall work all these, he shall Convince the world of their own
sin, of righteousness by a Mediator, and of a reformation of life: So that
the Holy Ghost shall go along with you in the carriage of the whole business
of man's salvation. Where he begins, he makes an end. Where he Convinces of
sin, he Convinces of righteousness, and then of a necessity of a
reformation, he bears all before him, and he does it in a spiritual order.

First, he Convinces the world of sin, 1. Convincing of sin.
then of righteousness, then of judgment, because it were in vain to
Convince of the righteousness of Christ, unless he has before Convinced of
sin; For who cares for balm that is not wounded? Who cares for a pardon that
is not condemned? therefore he Convinces of sin first. I have spoken heretofore
of Convincing of sin.

Here is a threefold Convincing, of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment,
and every one of these has a reason added thereto. Of sin, because they
believe not in me; Of righteousness, because I go to my Father; Of judgment,
because the Prince of this world is judged.

The Holy Ghost begins with Convincing of sin; What is this Convincing? It is a
clear and infallible demonstration of our condition, What is this Convincing.
It brings a commanding light into the soul, It sets down the soul and takes
away all cavills, all turnings and windings. To convince is to make a man as
the Psalmists phrase is, lay his hand upon his mouth. Light is a convincing
thing, now we see the Sun, we see it is day, though ten thousand men should say
it is not day, we would not believe them, because the convincing hereof is
undeniable, that he must be an unreasonable man that gainesayes it.

So then, the Spirit of God brings a commanding light into the soul
undeniable; thou art thus and thus, here no shifting, no winding and turning
will serve the turn, when the Holy Ghost comes with this light. I do but
plainly unfold this.

This Conviction of the Holy Ghost is not in general only, that all men are
sinners, but particular and strong, thou art a sinner, and thou art in danger
of damnation; And it is universal, taking in sins of nature, sins of life,
sins of the understanding, will, and affections, and it is not of sin only,
but of the misery by sin, of the danger, folly, and madness of sin, and of
the aggravations that greaten sin: as of stifling so many good motions,
withstanding so many means, abusing so many mercies. The Holy Ghost Convinces
us thoroughly, that we can have nothing to reply. Because I have spoken of this
before, I am short. Beloved, unless the Holy Ghost Convince, there will be no
Convincing, our deceitful hearts have so many windings and turnings; proud
nature arms it self with defenses, as a hedge-hogg winds himself round and
defends himself by his pricks. So you have many cloth themselves with strong
words, ill translations upon others, frivolous mitigations, the way of the
multitude, as with a coat of male to keep out this Conviction, that did not
the Holy Ghost strike in hard with their consciences, Thou art the man; this
work would never be done.



1. Difference.
Common Conviction by the light of Nature is a weak Conviction, a little
spark will show a little light, but it will not inlighten a room, it must be
the work of some greater light, as the Sun; the Spirit is a strong light,
stronger then natural conscience. Natural conscience and common light is of
some breaches of the second Table. Natural conscience never convinces of
corrupt nature, but the Spirit does most of all, as you may see in David, Psalm.
51. Psalm. 51.
He resolves all into this, as if he should say, what should I tell you of my
murder and Adultery, in sin did my mother conceive me, so a true Christian
does not look to the branches so much as to the root.

Then again, 2. Difference.
a natural conscience when it convinces a man, it is against his will, it
makes him not the better man, he mends not upon it, but he is tortured and
tormented; But a man that is convinced by the Holy Ghost, he takes Gods part
against himself, he is willing to be laid open that he may find the greater
mercy; So that there is a grand difference between common conviction of
nature, and the Conviction of the Spirit. The Conviction of the Spirit is the
light of the Spirit, which is of a higher nature then that of natural
conscience, I will send the Comforter, when he comes he will greatly inlighten
and overpower the soul.

3. Difference.
Again, the Conviction of the Spirit sticks by a man, it never leaves the
soul: But that of an ordinary conscience it is but for a flesh, and after they
are worse then they were before. I must cut off these things, because the time
is always past upon these occasions before we begin.

Adam out of Paradise. What imbitters blessings and puts a sting into all
afflictions but sin? if it were not for sin we would take up any cross, and
bear any affliction more quietly then we do.

Therefore as we desire to be saved, and to stand with comfort before God at
the day of judgment, let us desire and endeavor to be thoroughly Convinced of
sin. Take heed of resisting the Spirit of God in the Ministry: why are so
many led captive of their lusts, but because they hate the Ministry of the
Word, they look upon it as Ahab did upon Elias, Have thou found me, O my
Enemy. They naturally are in love with their sins, and there is none so much
hated as those that present themselves to themselves. A man take him in his
pure naturalls is a foolish creature, his heart rises against Conviction. You
see the Pharisees, Wise men, Learned men, being convinced they hated Christ to
the death; why? Mat. 23.27.
because he did untombe them and discover the dead men's bones within. So many
now a days that are convinced, hate any that by life or speech discover their
sin unto them, if it were possible and in their power to the death. Thus the
Holy Ghost convinces of sin. But before I leave this point, let me add this
from the reason or ground of this Conviction [because they believe not in me]
That unbeleefe makes all other sins damnable, no sin is damnable if we
could believe and repent. Therefore we are convinced of sin, because we do not
believe: as we say of a man that is condemned, because he cannot read,
therefore he is condemned, he should escape if he could read being for no
great fault; so it is here, it is not believing in Christ and repenting makes
all other sins deadly.

The differing of one man from another is their faith and repentance, some
there be whose sins are greater then others, yet by the Spirit of God and
Faith, they work them out every day. It is faith in the brazen Serpent that
takes away the sting of the fiery Serpents.

J have done with the conviction of sin. Let us now come to speak of the
conviction of Righteousness.

2. Conviction of Righteousness.
Of righteousness, because I go to my Father and you shall see me no more; It
is a fit time for the Holy Ghost to convince Gods people of righteousness when
they are convinced of sin before, then they can relish Christ: Balm is balm
indeed when the wound is discovered and felt, O then a pardon is welcome when
the party is condemned. The reason of this conviction of righteousness is,
because I go to my Father and you shall see me no more. The Holy Ghost as he
sets on sin upon the conscience, so he takes off sin by applying to the
conscience the righteousness of Christ, this is his office, first, to convince
the world of sin, and then to convince of righteousness, whereby we stand
righteous before God.

And this righteousness here is not our own inherent, but the righteousness
of Christ a Mediator, God and man.

A fourefold gradation of convinction of righteousness
The Holy Ghost convinces of righteousness in this order of a fourefold
gradation.

First that there must be a righteousness, and a full righteousness.

The second is this, that there is no such righteousness in the creature.

Thirdly, that this is to be had in Christ the Mediator.

Fourthly, that this righteousness is our righteousness.







Adam had, his righteousness was the righteousness of a man; This
righteousness is the righteousness of a mediator; And it is such a
righteousness, that when we are clothed with it, we may go through the
Justice of God, we may have access with boldness to the throne of grace, and
say, Lord I come in the righteousness of Christ that has appeased thy wrath
and satisfied thy justice: this the Holy Ghost convinces of.



brokenhearted sinners, here is Christ for you. The Spirit of God does not
only reveal the excellency of Christ, but that this belongs to me, that
Christ is given for me, and that revelation of the Spirit does sway the soul,
when the Spirit does not tell in general only, that Christ is an excellent
Savior, but shall relate to a Christian soul God gave Christ for thee: this
swayes the heart to rest upon Christ, whereupon the marriage is made up
between the soul and Christ, the soul says I am Christ's, and I give my
self to Christ, and to whatsoever accompanies Christ: and then as it is in
marriage, the persons by virtue of that relation have interest into each others
substance and estate. So when this mystical marriage is made up between
Christ and us, we have a right unto Christ by all rights, by titles of
purchase and redemption; He has purchased Heaven for us, and us for Heaven;
all that Christ has is ours, all his good is ours, our sins his, and his
righteousness ours; So when the Holy Ghost convinces me of Christ's
righteousness, and gives me faith to embrace it, then Christ is mine with all
he has. By this I have spoken you may see how the Spirit convinces, do but
imagine what a blessed condition the soul is in when this match is made.

But you will ask me why is the sending of the Spirit necessary for the
convincing of this righteousness?

I answer for diverse reasons.



the Father has appointed Christ, and Christ has wrought it, but the third
person must apply it to the soul, to assure us, that this belongs to us. The
application of all good things to the soul that Christ the Son has wrought,
is the proper office of the third person. In civil Contracts here there must
not only be a purchase but a Seal, though Christ has wrought righteousness
for us, the Spirit must Seal it to every soul, this righteousness belongs to
you, Christ is yours with all that is his.



Beloved this should make us take heed how we hear, and how we read, even to
beg this convincing of the Spirit in every Ordinance. O Lord vouchsafe the
Spirit of revelation, and take the scales off mine eyes, that as these are
truths of themselves, so they may be truths to me. Sway my soul that I may
cast my self upon thy mercy in Christ, etc.





Take this for a ground of comfort subscribed unto in the experience of all
believers, that the Spirit of God so far convinces them of Christ's
righteousness, as preserves in them such a power of grace as to cast
themselves upon the mercy of God in Christ; and God will not quench that
spark, though there be little or no light, yet there will be heat; God will
send his Spirit into the heart, so far as it shall not betray it self to
despair, and let such a beam into the soul, as all the power in hell shall
not be able to keep out; but it is our own neglect that we are not more
strongly convinced, so as to break through all. This is the privilege of a
constant careful Christian, to be strongly convinced of the righteousness of
Christ.

of the righteousness of Christ. Can I love thee except thou love me first?
Can thou have any free and voluntary obedience from me, unless J be
convinced that Christ is mine? Now Lord I beseech thee, let me be such as thou
may take delight in. Beloved, since we have means of such a gift, let us
never rest till we have it. If Satan set upon us, hold this out, if he tell
thee thou art a sinner, tell him I have a greater righteousness then my own,
even the righteousness of God-Man, I have a righteousness above all my
unrighteousness. Satan says God is displeased with me, J but he is more
pleased with me in Christ then displeased with me in my self. Satan says J
have sinned against God, I but not against the remedy, send Satan to Christ. O
but thou have a corrupt nature that makes thee run into this sin and that
sin; but there is a spring of mercy in God, and an overrunning fountain of
righteousness in Christ, an overflowing sea of the blood of Christ. Therefore
let us labor to improove this righteousness of Christ to God and Satan, and
against al temptations, yea against our own consciences; I am thus and thus;
yet God is thus and thus, all his Attributes are conveyed to me in Christ. Let
us exalt God and Christ, and set up Christ above our sins, above any thing in
the world, as S. Paul, who counted all things dung and dross for the excellent
knowledge of Christ. or no?



Therefore you have many perish because they never were abased enough. Beloved,
people are not lost enough, and not miserable enough for Christ, and not broken
enough for him, and therefore they go without him.

This in answer to that Question by the way. To return in the next place, I
may know I am convinced thoroughly of the righteousness of Christ by the
witness and work of the Spirit. The Spirit brings light, and faith, the work
of the Spirit has a light of its own, as I know I believe, when I believe,
but sometimes we have not the reflect act of faith whereby to evidence our
own graces to our selves, but ever he that is convinced of the Spirit of God,
his heart will be wrought to bear marveilous love to God; upon this
apprehension, that God is mine, and Christ is mine, the soul is constrained to
love, whereupon ensues an enlargement of heart and a prevalency of comfort
above all discomfort, for love casts out fear. This one comfort that our
sins are forgiven and that we have right and title to Heaven, when the soul is
convinced of this it is in a blessed condition, then what is poverty and what
is imprisonment? not worthy to be reckoned in respect of the glory that shall
be revealed.

Again, where the Holy Ghost convinces enough, there is inward peace and great
joy suitable to the righteousness. As the righteousness is an excellent
righteousness of God-Man, so that peace and joy that comes from it is
unspeakable peace and joy: So that when the heart sees it self instated in
peace and joy, as you have it, Romans 5. Being justified by faith we have peace
toward God, not only inward peace and joy, but a peace that will show it self
abroad, a glorious peace, a peace that will make us glory, verse 3. We glory in
tribulation. A hard matter to glory in abasement: not only so, but we glory in
God, God is ours, and Christ's righteousness ours; when Christ has satisfied
Gods wrath, then we may make our boast of God.

Again, where this conviction of righteousness is, it answers all objections,
the doubting heart will object this and that, but the Spirit of God shows an
All Sufficiency in Christ's obedience, and that sets the soul down quietly in
all crosses, and calmes it in all storms in some degree. Where the soul is
convinced of the righteousness of Christ, there the conscience demands boldly:
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that is dead and
risen again and sits at the right hand of God; Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods chosen. So that a convinced conscience dares all creatures in
Heaven and Earth, it works strongly and boldly. I shall not need to enlarge
this, you know whether you are convinced. upon me in Christ, He and I am one.
This should be every days exercise to see our selves in Christ, and so see
him and our selves one. I should enlarge the point further, but I will speak a
word of the reason.

What is the reason why the Comforter may and shall convince of righteousness?
Because I go to the Father; what strength is there in that reason? why this,
Christ took upon him to be our surety, and he must acquit us of all our sins
ere he can go to his Father? If one sin had been unsatisfied for he could
not have gone to his Father, but now he is gone to his Father, therefore all our
sins are satisfied for, so that now the Ascension of Christ is a sufficient
pledge to me that my person is accepted, and my sins pardoned, because he is
gone to his Father to appear before the Father for us, which he could not have
done, had he not fulfilled all righteousness.

But wherefore did he go to the Father? why, to make application of what he had
wrought. If Christ should not have gone to the Father, he could not have sent
the Holy Ghost to us. Therefore there is great use of this going to his Father.
Satan pleads before God we are such and such, I but says Christ I have shed my
blood for them, and there he perfumes all our weak prayers; if we were not
imperfect what need we a Mediator in Heaven. Therefore he is gone to Heaven to
disanull all Satan's accusations, and to provide a place for us; die when we
will, our place is ready.

Then again he is gone to the Father to cloth us with a sweet relation, to
make the Father our Father. For he says, John 12.17. I go to my Father and to
your Father; So that he is not ashamed to call us Brethren, by virtue of this
we may go to God and call him Father, and when we die we may without
presumption say; Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, for the Father
loves us as he loved Christ, with one and the same love, though in a far
different degree. What a comfort is this, that when we die, we go to our
Father that is better then any earthly Father; Therefore it should joy us when
the time of our departure comes: We see old Jacob when he saw the Chariots come
out of Egypt, how his heart leaped because he should go to see his Son
Joseph: So when death is sent to transport us to Christ, to Heaven, had we a
strong faith we should be exceeding glad.

And let us learn here the art of faith from Christ, I go to the Father, says
he, there was a great deal of time yet to pass, no less then forty days
after his Resurrection before he went to the Father, yet he says, I go to
the Father, to show that faith presents things future as present; Faith sees
Heaven as present, and the day of judgment as present, and does affect the
soul as if they were now existent. If we had a Spirit of faith it would thus
present things far off as nigh at hand. Therefore when we meet with any thing
that may make our way to Heaven seem long or troublesome, exercise your faith,
and make your term present to your spirit though remote from sense, say I go
to the Father, what though I go through blood and a shameful death, yea
perhaps a tormentfull death: yet I go to the Father; when a man is once
persuaded that God is his Father in Christ, it will make him walk to Heaven
before his time.

I go to the Father. If we love our friends, we should rejoice when they die;
Beloved, this should comfort us, Christ is gone to his Father, O what welcome
was there of Christ when he came into Heaven, the same welcome will there be
when we go to the Father? How joyful intertainement shall we have of the
Father and the Son? Therefore death should not be troublesome to us, say
Christ's righteousness is mine, therefore I know I shall go to the Father, what
care I then what kind of pains I go through. If a man be going to a desired
place, howsoever the way be troublesome, the sweetness of the end will make
him forget the discouragements of his passage. Perhaps we must wade to Heaven
through a Sea of blood, it matters not, the end will recompense all, though we
lose our limbs by the way: It is better to limpe to Heaven, then dance to Hell.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL Index of the Special points contained in this Book.
A
Actions.
ACtions that are good, are ever accompanied with comfort, Page 294.
Adulterers.
Adulterers corporal and spiritual hardly reclaimed, p. 359.
Affections.
Affections their use, p. 308, 309. Affections ought to be placed on their
right objects, page 325. Affections why planted in the soul, page 366, 367.
Afflictions.
Afflictions how to know they are not in wrath though they continue, page 194,
195. Afflictions not to complain of them, page 13. Afflictions profitable to
Gods children, page 280, and 283.
Almsdeeds.
Almsdeeds a Sacrifice, p. 47.
Amity.
Amity with Papists dangerous, page 342.
Anger.
Anger of God, what it is, page 183. Anger of God what effects it has against
sign, page 184. Anger of God the special thing in Afflictions, page 185.
Anger of God makes the least cross most terrible, page 186. Anger of God
turned away by Repentance, page 188, etc. Anger of God the means to avoid it,
page 195, 196, etc. Humility a certain way to avoid Gods Anger, page 197.
Annoyance.
No Annoyance in this life or another but God has provided some defense
against it, p. 383, 384.
Antimonians.
Antimonians error refuted page 170.
Association.
In Association we must join with those that are good, p. 223. All wicked
Associations will end in everlasting hatred, page 326, 327.
Assurance.
Assurance of Gods love causes thankfulness, page 53, 54.
B
Blessings.
Blessings of God not to be spent on our lusts, page 60. Outward Blessings may
be prayed for, page 36, 37. Blessings how to know they come from Gods love, p.
^7, etc.
Backesliding.
Backesliding Gods children prone too, page 131.
Barrenness.
Barrenness in goodness ought not to discourage us, page 213. Barrenness
under means not endured by God, page 254.
Baptism.
Baptism made an Idol by Papists, page 337.
Bread.
Bread in the Lords Supper made an Idol by Papists, p. 338.
Believing.
Believing more honors God then our sins dishonor him, p. 150, 151.
Boasting.
Boasting is Idolatry, page 82.
C
Confidence.
Carnal Confidence the danger of it, page 84. Confidence not placed on the
creature by a true Christian, page 78, 79. Confidence in outward helps men
prone to by nature, page 60. Confidence in the creature when exceeded in, page
80.
Creature.
The Creature not able to help us in our greatest need, page 71. Creature the
vanity of it, page 72. Creatures emptiness discovered in sundry respects, page
85, 86. The most comfortable Creatures in their excess hurt, p. 384, 385.
Christians.
Christians why hated of the world, page 105. Christians place no confidence in
the creatures, page 78, 79. Christian course to be in love with it, page 417,
418. A Christians glory is to be fruitful in his places, page 253, etc.
Christians their comfortable estate, page 243, and 253. Christians compared to
Lillies in regard of their growth in grace, page 219. Christians ought all to
be excellent in their kind, page 204, 205. Christians compared to Corn in
sundry respects, p. 279 etc. Christians are fruitful under good means, page
279. Christians like Vines for fruitfullnesse, page 283, etc. Christians that
are unfruitful are the worst of men, page 285. Christians that are fruitful
God takes a special care of, page 287, 288. Christians that are weak not to
be discouraged, page 289, 290. Christians how they come to send forth a sweet
sent, page 292, 293.
Church.
Church how God governes it by contraries, page 286, etc. Church in misery to
be prayed for, page 111. The Church yields a shadow, page 264, etc. Out of the
Church no salvation, page 267. Church the benefits of being in it, page 267.
Church who live out of it are in a woeful estate, page 274. Churches outward
condition despicable, page 284. Church of God weak of it self, page 286.
Children.
Children ought not to hinder our standing out in a good cause, page 114.
Children ought not to make us worldly, page 115. Children at our death in faith
to be commended to God, page 117, 118. Children of God are always in his
sight, page 379, 380. Comfort arising from hence, page 380, 381. Children of
God have a contrary disposition to the world, page 457, etc. Children of God
not to fear future things, page 416.
Confession.
Confession to whom to be made, page 24. Confession of our sins is a sign of
the forgiveness of our sins, page 29.
Conviction.
Want of Conviction of sin makes us careless of sin, p. 140.
Comforts.
Comforts abused prove snares, page 385. Comfort naturally accompanies good
actions, page 294. Comforts of Christians why not apprehended by them, page
230, 231.
Conversation.
Conversation fruitful the excellency of it, page 297, etc.
Communion.
Communion with God to be labored for, page 39, 40. No Communion between God
and Idols, page 103, 104. Communion with God will make us hate sin, page 321,
322.
Conscience.
A good Conscience ought not to be parted with, page 113.
Condition.
No Condition so disconsolate but God can alter it. page 102.
Crucifixes.
Crucifixes not to be used, page 343.
Causes.
In good Causes we ought to be resolute, page 413, 414. Having God for our
shelter, we ought to be bold in good Causes, page 395, etc.
Commandment.
Gods Commandments ought to be obeyed, page 447.
Company.
Good Company a means to enable us to walk resolutely in Gods ways, page
468.
D
Destruction.
Destruction, spiritual means the best to prevent it, page 7.
Distressed.
Distressed persons God very merciful too, page 109.
Diseases.
Diseases of the soul how to know them, page 134, 135, etc.
Doubting.
Doubting kills thankfulness, page 53. Doubting of Gods mercy a great sin,
page 150.
E
Eye.
Eye of God continually on all his children, page 379, 380. Gods Eye being upon
us should make our eye be upon him, page 38^. Gods Eye being upon us should
make us bold in his cause, page 381.
Extremities.
Extremities why Gods children suffered to fall into, page 108, 109.
Example.
We must not live by Example, page 4^7.
End.
To come to a right End, the best way is to take Gods way, page 448.
Consideration of our End will make us walk resolutely in Gods ways, page 468.
F
Falls.
Falls of Gods children made their gain, page 230.
Fatherless.
Fatherless. God especially merciful too, page 109.
Family.
Family all under it the better for a godly Governor, page ^08.
Forces.
Forces home or foreign not to be trusted too, page 77.
Forgiveness.
Forgiveness of sins how known to be truly desired, page ^6, 27.
Forgiveness of sins to be desired above all mercies, p. 27, 28. Forgiveness
of sins the misery of those that want it, p. 31, 32. Forgiveness of sins not
easily attained, page 164.
Free.
Free love of God to his people, page 172, 173, etc. Free love of God the cause
of all mercies, page 179, etc.
Fruitfullnesse.
Fruitfulness the benefit of it, page 256. Fruitfullnesse of Christians in
their particular places is their glory, page 253, etc. Fruitfullnesse of
Christians delightful to God and man, page 257, 258. Fruitfullnesse in grace
brings peace and comfort to a man, page 298. Fruitful Christians leave a good
sent behind them, p. 259. Fruitful Christians compared to Vines, page 283,
etc. Fruitful Christians God has a special care of, page 287, 288. Fruitful
Conversation the excellency of it, page 297, 298.
Fruitless.
Fruitless Christians of all men the worst; page 285.
G
Good.
All Good comes from God, page 405, etc. No Good that is saving comes from man,
page 403. Good works why they cannot merit, page 405.
God.
God rightly apprehended makes us shake off all false trusts, page 104. God is
our All Sufficiency in all estates, page 113. God in distresses to be trusted
in, page 119. God is the great Physician of the soul, page 140, etc. God is
willing to heal and save our souls, page 142, etc. God loves his people
freely, page 172, 173, etc. God to make him our shadow, page 394. God being our
shelter and shadow, we should be bold in good causes, page 395. God being
our shadow the comfort of it, page 396, etc. God how to be conceived of in our
worshipping of him, page 344, 345. God not to be transformed like our selves
in our affections, page 345, 346. To set up any thing in our souls above God
is Idolatry, page 347. God is the only true defense and shelter, page 386,
etc. Christians happiness arising from hence, page 387. God not being wicked
men's shelter makes their estate most woeful, page 387. Who have not God for a
shelter are most miserable, page 392, 393.
Grace.
Grace compared to dew in sundry respects, page 207, etc. Grace of God free, p.
207, 208 Grace of God comes insensibly and invisibly, page 208, 209. Grace
works mildly upon the soul, page 210. Grace cheeres and comforts the soul,
page 211. Grace makes barren souls fruitful, page 212. Grace of God
unresistible, page 212. Barrenness in Grace ought not to discourage us, page
213. Grace the means to increase it, page 113. Grace wrought in the soul is
an evidence of the pardon of sin in that soul, page 215. All Grace from God,
page 216, 217. Grace how to be attained, page 218. Grace compared to Olives in
diverse respects, page 250, etc. How to be rooted in Grace, page 237, etc.
Grace, why some have more then others, page 408. In praying for Grace we must
wait Gods leisure, page 408. Grace is of a fructifying nature, page 281.
Gracious fruit comes from God and us too, page 404.
Growth.
Growth of Christians like Lillies, page 219. Sudden Growth of Gods children,
page 220, 221. Growth in Grace the necessity of it, page 214. Growth in Grace
the means to attain to it, page 225, etc. Growth in Grace to be endeavored
after, page 242, etc. Christians many times deceived about their Growth in
Grace, page 240, etc. Growth in Grace the chiefest blessing, page 243. Growing
Christians their excellency, page 300.
Governors.
Governors of Families ought to endeavor to be good for their sakes that are
under them, page 272. Gracious Governors will communicate Grace to their
Family, p. 273.
Gospel.
Gospel first and second spring of it speedy, page 22^.
H
Hatred.
Hatred of sin how to discern it, page 311, 312, etc. True Hatred of sin is
universal, page 311, 312. True Hatred of sin is implacable* page 312, 313.
Hatred of sin ever follows true Conversion, page 319. Hatred of sin how to be
attained, page 321. and 368. Hatred of sin how known, page 371.
Heart.
Heart chiefly required of God, page 311. Broken Heart a sacrifice, p. 45.
Humility.
Humility a certain way to shun Gods anger, page 197.
I
Idolatry.
Idolatry men prone to it by nature, page 92. 356. Idolatry what it is, page
93. Idolatry frames base conceits of God, page 334. Idolatry how it is
committed, page 335. Idolatry the occasions of it to be avoided page 343, 344.
Close Idolatries of many Christians, page 344, etc. Idolatry Gods puishments on
people for it, page 357. Idolatry, means to avoid it, page 354, etc. Idolaters
hateful to God, p. 354 Idolaters Gods punishments on them, page 357. Idolatry
how slighted by many, page 360. Nothing lost by renouncing Idolatry, page 373,
374.
Idols.
Idols why to be hated, page 333, etc. Idols abominable to God, page 333.
Idols opposite to God, p. 334.
Infirmities.
Infirmities why God suffers them in his children, p. 161, etc. Infirmities of
Gods children made their gain, page 162. Our Infirmities ought not too much to
deject us, page 163.
Impenitent.
Impenitent sinners not to be envied, page 138.
Infidelity.
Infidelity the cause of all woe page 446.
Just.
Just men who they be, p. 450. Just men have respect to all Gods Commandments,
p 450, 451. Just men do^ all things to a good end, page 451, 452. Just men
desire to grow in grace, page 452. Just men love the Brethren, page 452. Just
men have only cause to rejoice, page 453.
K
Knowledge.
Knowledge of God and Christ is a means to make people leave Idolatry, page
354, 355.
L
Life.
Life of man subject to many annoyances both outward and inward, page 391, 392.
Men must be endewed with spiritual Life before they can walk in Gods ways,
page 461.
Love.
Love of God an evidence of the pardon of our sins, p. 30, 31. Love of God to
his people free, page 172, 173. Love of God to us eternal, page 177. Love of
God to us not to be measured by our feeling of it, page 179. Love of God the
cause of all mercies to us, page 179, etc. Gods Love is a fruitful Love, page
205.
M
Mercy.
Mercy Gods scope in the new Covenant, page 149. Gods Mercies are complete to
his children, page 33. Mercy sweetneth all Gods Attributes, page 106. Mercy
agreeable to Gods nature, page 191. God chiefly Merciful to those who most
stand in need of his Mercy, page 108.
Mercifullnesse.
Mercifullnesse to others is an evidence of the pardon of our sins, page 31.
Mercifullnesse a character of Gods child, page 116.
Means.
Means of salvation not profited by bring destruction, p. 255. In the use of
all Means to look up unto God, page 409.
Masses.
Masses that we ought not to be present at them, page 340.
Man.
Man not to be a prescriber of his own way, page 444.
O
Occasions.
Occasions of sin to be avoided, page 316.
P
Papists.
Papists gross Idolaters, page 94 and 335, etc. Their shifts for worshipping
Images answered, page 95. Papists how they Idolize Saints, page 336. Papists
make an Idol of the Pope, page 337. Papists worse Idolaters then the Heathen,
page 339. Papists why they are so impudent in their Idolatry, p. 340. Papists
why so hardly converted, page 356. Papists not to be conversed with, page 342.
Popish Writers to beware of them, page 343. No reconciliation between Papists
and Protestants, page 341.
Pardon.
Pardon of sin the chiefest mercy which makes way for all other, page 153.
God Pardons all sins, page 129, 130, 145. Pardon of sin why not
apprehended, page 153. Pardon of sin how known, page 156, etc. Pardon of
sin how known when we are still subject to sin, page 160. Pardon of sin
not attained without Humiliation and Reformation, page 166, 167.
Peace.
Peace of conscience is an evidence of the pardon of our sins, page 30, 157.
Peace of conscience in a carnal man whence it comes, page 159.
Perseverance.
Perseverance the ground of it, page 181.
Persons.
To have Persons of men in admiration is Idolatry, page 347.
Performances.
Outward Performances trusted too is Idolatry page 351.
People.
God has his People in the worst times, page 456, etc.
Prayer.
Prayer is a special help against all sin and sorrow, p. 17. Prayer sets God
on work, p. 18 Prayer answered where a Spirit of Prayer is given, p. 126, 127.
Our Prayers are heard when we renounce sin, page 375, 376.
Praise.
Praise an acceptable Sacrifice to God, page 48, 49. Helps to enable ^to Praise
God, page 50. Praising o^ ^od must be from a broken he^, page 51. Praisin^ of
God the encouragements to it. page 60, etc. Praise an honor to God, page 60.
Praise a gainefull trade, page 60, 61. Praise a noble act of Religion, page 61.
Praise a larger Sacrifice then Prayer, page 61. Praise an heavenly action, page
62. Praising God brings joy, page 62, 63. Praise how to know when it is
accepted, page 63.
Promises.
Promises of Christ known work grace in us, p. 238, 239. Promises, how God
stablisheth us in them, page 239.
Prudence, See Wisdom.
Heavenly Prudence, definition of it, page 430.
Providence.
The ways of Gods Providence are right, page 442.
R
Returning.
Of Returning to the Lord, page 8, etc. How to know whether we have Returned,
page 10, 11.
Reformation.
Reformation of life must be joined with Prayer and Praise, p. 66
Repentance.
True Repentance is of the particular sin we are most addicted too, page 67.
Repentance a trial of it, page 68. Repentance not to be delayed, page 139.
Repentance turns away Gods anger, page 188, etc.
Reproof.
Reproves for sin patiently endured is an evidence of the pardon of our sins,
page 315, 316. Reproof of sin how to be ordered, page 317, 318.
S
Sacrifices.
Sacrifices of Christians under the Gospel, page 45, etc.
Salvation.
Our Salvation is certain, p. 175 God willing to Save men, page 143, etc. No
Salvation out of the Church, page 267.
Stability.
Stability of Saints whence it arises, page 228, 250, 251. Comforts arising
from Saints Stability, page 234.
State.
State of Gods children firm, page 232. State of the wicked unstable, page
232, 333. Difference betwixt our State in Adam and in Christ, page 407.
Sincerity.
Sincerity makes a Christian, page 290.
Serve.
It is not in vain to Serve the Lord, page 419.
Sin.
All Sins alike hated by a sincere Christian, page 25. All Sin why to be
prayed against, page 25. Sin brings judgment, page 12. Sin hateful to a
conscience awakened, page 26. Sins formerly committed to be remembered, page
28. Sins how to know they are forgiven, page. 29, etc. Sins bitterness
causes Repentance, page 9^. Sin is a disease, p. 131, etc. All Sins God is
willing to pardon page 145, 146. Sins neglected prove incurable, page 133.
Sins being diseases are presently to be cured, page 138, 139. Sin to be
searched out, p. 151. Sin subdued is an evidence of the pardon of sin, page
156. Sin why suffered to remain in us, page 161, 162. Sin is the object of
Gods anger, page 183, etc. Sin contrary to Gods nature, page 184. Sin must
not only be left but hated, page 310. Sin how known to be hated, page 311,
etc. Sin truly hated when it is universally hated, page ^11, 312. Sin truly
hated when implacably hated, page 312, 313. Sin truly hated when chiefly hated
in our selves, p. 313, 314. Great Sins must be hated in the greatest
measure, p. 314, 315. Not to love to be flattered in our Sins is a sign of
the true hatred of our sins, page 316. Sin the occasions of it to be
avoided, page 316. Sin how we may come to hate it, page 321, etc. Sin set
forth as it is in its own nature will make us hate it, page 322. Sin is the
bane of all our comforts, page 324. Sin the only object of the hatred of
Gods children, page 367. Sin, helps to make us hate it, page 368. Sin the
cause of all ill, page 368. Sin our greatest enemy, p. 369 Sin renounced will
make God hear our prayers, page 375. Want of Conviction of Sin makes us
careless of sin, p. 40.
Sinner.
Impenitent Sinners not to be envied, page 138. Sinners unrepenting their
dangerous condition, page 323.
Soul.
Soul diseases how to know them, page 134, etc. Soul God is willing to save,
page 142, etc.
Suffer.
They who will not Suffer for Christ, make Christ an Idol, page 349.
T
Thankefullnesse.
Assurance of Gods love works Thankefullnesse in us, page 53, 54.
Thankesgiving, See Praise.
Thankesgiving verbal ought to be justified by deeds, p. 49 50. Thankesgiving
how to know it is accepted, page 63.
V
Vengeance.
Vengeance near those that profit not by the means of salvation, page 255.
Unworthiness.
Sight of our Unworthiness should not discourage us, p. ^75.
Vows.
Vows their use, page 42. Upright, See Just.
W
Ways.
Ways of God right, page 443. Ways of God wherein he walks to us, page 441.
Ways which God prescribes to us, page 442. Ways of Gods providence all right
and just, page 442. Man ought not to be a prescriber of his own Way, page 44.
To justify Gods Ways in evil times a note of Gods elect, page 459, etc.
Before men can walk in Gods Ways they must have spiritual life, page 461.
Walking in Gods Ways justifies men to be true Christians, page 462. Ways of
God must be walked in and not only talked of, p. 474. Having our end in our eye
will enable us to walk resolutely in Gods Ways, page 468, 469. To walk on in
the right Ways of God we must walk wisely. page 469, etc. In walking in Gods
Ways what we must avoid, p. 472. Ways of God the safest ways, page 472.
Ways of God the pleasantest ways, page 473. Ways of God the most holy and
clean ways, page 473. Walking in Gods Ways what it implies, page 493, 464.
How to know we walk on in Gods Ways, p. 464, 465, etc. Who will walk aright
in Gods Ways must be resolute against all opposition, p. 466. And pray to God
for strength, page 467. Good company a means to enable us to walk resolutely
and constantly in Gods Ways, p. 467. Walkers in Gods Ways their happiness,
page 474.
War.
War the lawfullnesse of it, page 77, 78.
Water.
Water every year turned into wine, page 222.
Weak.
Weak Christians not to be discouraged, page 289, 290.
Warning.
God gives Warning before he smites, page 6.
Wicked.
Wicked men's condition is fading, page 234, etc. Wicked men abominable to God,
page 260, 261. Wicked men most miserable in that they have not God for a
shelter, page 387.
Will.
How men make their own Wills and wits Idols, p. 346, etc. Will worship no
slight matter, page 338.
Wise.
Truly Wise but few, p. 426, 427 All men naturally desire to be thought Wise,
page 428.
Wisdom.
Heavenly Wisdom the definition of it, page 429. Heavenly Wisdom the signs
of it, page 432, etc.
Word.
Word of God is perfect, p. 445. Word of God to be believed, page 446, 447. The
Word without the Spirit is uneffectuall, page 434, 435. The same Word of God
that is a Word of life to the Godly, is a Word of perdition to the wicked, page
476. Word of God not to be loved the worse, because wicked men are made the
worse by it, p. 477. Words why used in prayer, p. 22
Works.
Want of of good Works ought not to hinder our Conversion or Justification,
page 452, 453. Good Works why they cannot merit, Page 405.
World.
World not able to deprive us of Gods Spirit and grace, page 414, 415.
Wrath.
Wrath of God makes crosses curses, page 141, 142.
FINIS.

