

The reverend, faithful, and profitable Minister of Gods word Richard Sibbes,
D: D: master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, and preacher of Grayes Inn,
London.

Will Marshalls^^

THE SAINTS PRIVILEGE OR A Christians constant Advocate:

Containing a short, but most sweet direction for every true Christian to walk
comfortably through this valley of tears.

By the faithful and Reverend Divine, R. SIBS, D. D. and sometime Preacher to
the Honorable Society of Grayes-Inne.

LONDON, Printed by G M for George Edwards dwelling in Green-Arbour at the
sign of the Angel, 1638

A Table of the several Heads contained in this Treatise.
1. COnviction of sin how necessary it is to salvation. Page 4. 2. What this
Convincing of sin is. Page 5, 6. 3. A particular Convincing of sin. Page 7.
How we shall know the common Conviction of conscience from this of the Spirit.
P. 8, 9, 10. The use of all this how the Spirit Convinces. Page 11, 12, etc.
Secondly, Conviction of Righteousness. P. 15. What the Conviction of
Righteousness is. P. 16. First, there is a fourefold Gradation of Conviction. 1.
There must be a Righteousness. P. 17. 2. That it is not in any creature. P.
18. 3. That this Righteousness is to be had in Christ. P. 19 4. The Spirit
Convinces that this belongs to all believers. P. 20. 1. Question How the Holy
Ghost does convince me of the righteousness of Christ. P. 21, 22. 2. Question
Why is the sending of the Spirit necessary for the convincing of this
righteousness. P. 23. For these reasons, 1. Because it is above the conceit of
man. P. 23. 2. Reason why the Holy Ghost is necessary for this conviction, P.
24. 3. Reason because flesh and blood is full of pride, P. 26, 27 Objection.
Alas I am not convinced of the Spirit that Christ is my righteousness,
therefore what case am I in. The full answer of this very comfortable, P. 28.
The use of all this, P. 30. In which is shown the privileges and prerogatives
of a man that is convinced in all temptations, P. 30. 1. When God himself
seems to be our enemy, P. 31 2. Against Satan, P. 32. 3. Against our own
consciences, P. 33 How we may know whether we be convinced of this
righteousness. The answer to this, P. 33 Secondly, but how shall I know that
the Holy Ghost has convinced me enough of sin, so that I may without
presumption apply the righteousness of Christ. 1. If the Holy Ghost have
discovered my sinful condition, P, 34 2. By the work of the Spirit, P, 35
3. By inward peace and great joy, P, 36, 37 4. Where this is it answers all
objections, P, 37, 38 The use. How we should live by faith, P, 38 2 How every
day to make use of the righteousness of Christ, P, 39 Wherefore did Christ go
to the Father. 1. To make application of what he had wrought, P, 41 2. To send
the Spirit, P, 41 3. To stop Satan's mouth, P, 41, 42 4. To make the Father our
Father, P, 42 5. Sweet comforts at the hour of death, P, 42, 43 The use. Great
comfort in the hour of death. P, 45, 46
April 10. 1638. Imprimatur THO: WYKES.

THE SAINTS Privilege.
JOHN 16.8, 9, 10. When he is come, he shall reproove the world of sin,
righteousness and Judgment. Of sin, because they believe not in me; Of
righteousness, because I go to my Father; Of Judgment, because the Prince of
this world is judged.

Especially the 10. verse. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father and
you shall see me no more.


OUR blessed Savior descending from Heaven to Earth for the Redemption of man:
after he had accomplished that great work, he ascended thither again. And
knowing his Disciples would take his departure very heavily, he labors to arm
them against the assaults of all grief and sorrow that might otherwise
oppress them, and that by many arguments. Among the rest, this is not the
least, that when he is gone away, he will send the Comforter unto them. God
never takes away any thing from his children but he sends them a better. And
this Comforter whom he promised to send shall bear them through in all their
Ministry, all function, and in effect he thus bespeaks them. You my Disciples
are to encounter with the world, Be of good comfort, my Spirit shall go along
with you, and he shall reproove the world of sin, righteousness, and
judgment. Of your selves you are too weak, but the Spirit shall strengthen
you, and make way into the hearts of those that shall be saved, by convincing
them of sin, righteousness, and judgment; So that be not discouraged, the
Spirit shall breath courage into you and make way for your doctrine. When the
Comforter is came, he shall reproove, the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and judgment: Of sin, because they believe not in me; Of
righteousness, because I go to the Father; Of judgment, because the Prince
of this world is judged.

There are three maine parts of salvation.

Knowledge of our misery, knowledge of our deliverance, and a life answerable.
The Holy Ghost shall work all these, he shall Convince the world of their
own sin, of righteousness by a Mediator, and of a reformation of life: So
that the Holy Ghost shall go along with you in the carriage of the whole
business of man's salvation. Where he begins, he makes an end. Where he
Convinces of sin, he Convinces of righteousness, and then of a necessity of a
reformation, he bears all before him, and he does it in a spiritual order.

Convincing of sin
First, he Convinces the world of sin, then of righteousness, then of
judgment, because it were in vain to Convince of the righteousness of
Christ, unless he has before Convinced of sin; For who cares for balm that
is not wounded? who cares for a pardon that is not condemned? therefore he
Convinces of sin first. I have spoken heretofore of Convincing of sin.

Here is a threefold Convincing, of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment,
and every one of these has a reason added thereto. Of sin, because they
believe not in me; Of righteousness, because I go to my Father; Of judgment,
because the Prince of this world is judged.

The Holy Ghost begins with Convincing of sin; What is this Convincing? It is
a clear and infallible demonstration of our condition, What is this convincing.
It brings a commanding light into the soul, It sets down the soul and takes
away all cavills, all turnings and windings. To Convince is to make a man as
the Psalmists phrase is, lay his hand upon his mouth. Light is a convincing
thing, now we see the Sun we see it is day, though ten thousand men should say
it is not day, we would not believe them, because the convincing hereof is
undeniable, that he must be an unreasonable man that gainesayes it.

So then, the Spirit of God brings a commanding light into the soul
undeniable; thou art thus and thus, here no shifting, no winding and turning
will serve the turn, when the Holy Ghost comes with this light. I do but
plainly unfold this.

This Conviction of the Holy Ghost is not in general only, that all men are
sinners, but particular and strong, thou art a sinner, and thou art in danger
of damnation; And it is universal, taking in sins of nature, sins of life,
sins of the understanding, will, and affections, and it is not of sin
only, but of the misery by sin, of the danger, folly, and madness of sin,
and of the aggravations that greaten sin: as of stifling so many good
motions, withstanding so many means, abusing so many mercies. The Holy Ghost
Convinces us thoroughly, that we can have nothing to reply. Because I have
spoken of this before, I am short. Beloved, unless the Holy Ghost Convince,
there will be no Convincing, our deceitful hearts have so many windings and
turnings; proud nature arms it self with defenses, as a hedge-hogg winds
himself round and defends himself by his pricks. So you have many cloth
themselves with strong words, ill translations upon others, frivolous
mitigations, the way of the multitude, as with a coat of male to keep out
this Conviction, that did not the Holy Ghost strike in hard with their
consciences, Thou art the man; this work would never be done.

Quest.
But you will ask me this Question, how shall we know common Conviction of
conscience from this of the Spirit? for carnal men that go to Hell are
Convinced by a common conviction, what is this saving Conviction?

I answer, Answ. 1 Difference.
Common Conviction by the light of Nature is a weak Conviction, a little
spark will show a little light, but it will not inlighten a room, it must be
the work of some greater light, as the Sun; the Spirit is a strong light,
stronger then natural conscience. Natural conscience and common light is of
some breaches of the second Table. Natural conscience never Convinces of
corrupt nature, but the Spirit does most of all, as you may see in David, Psalm.
51.
Psalm. 51. He resolves all into this, as if he should say, what should I tell
you of my murder and Adultery, in sin did my mother conceive me, so a true
Christian does not look to the branches so much as to the root.

2 Difference.
Then again, a natural conscience when it Convinces a man, it is against his
will, it makes him not the better man, he mends not upon it, but he is
tortured and tormented; But a man that is convinced by the Holy Ghost, he takes
Gods part against himself, he is willing to be laid open that he may find the
greater mercy; So that there is a grand difference between common conviction
of nature, and the Conviction of the Spirit. The Conviction of the Spirit is
the light of the Spirit, which is of a higher nature then that of natural
conscience, I will send the Comforter, when he comes he will greatly
inlighten and overpower the soul.

Again, the Conviction of the Spirit sticks by a man, it never leaves the
soul: But that of an ordinary conscience it is but for a flash, and after they
are worse then they were before. I must cut off these these things, because the
time is always past upon these occasions before we begin.

Come we therefore to make some Use. Use 1.
The Spirit does Convince of sin. But how? by the Ministry ordinarily, though
not alone by the Ministry. Therefore we must labor willingly to submit to the
Ministry Convincing of sin. Conscience will Convince first or last. Is it not
better to have a saving Conviction now to purpose, then to have a bare
desperate Conviction in Hell. O beloved all the admonitions we hear, if we
regard them not now, we shall hereafter, therefore labor to make good use of
this Sword of the Spirit of God, and it is an argument of a good heart to wish,
O that the Ministry might meet with my corruption, that it may be discovered
to me to the full. A true heart thinks sin the greatest enemy, and of all
other miseries it desires to be freed from the thraldom thereof; For that
defiles Heaven and Earth and separates God from his creature. Its that that
threw Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise. What imbitters blessings and
puts a sting into all afflictions but sin? if it were not for sin we would
take up any cross, and bear any affliction more quietly then we do.

Therefore as we desire to be saved, and to stand with comfort before God at
the day of judgment, let us desire and endeavor to be thoroughly Convinced of
sin. Take heed of resisting the Spirit of God in the Ministry: why are so many
led captive of their lusts, but because they hate the Ministry of the Word,
they look upon it as Ahab did upon Elias, Have thou found me, O my Enemy. They
naturally are in love with their sins, and there is none so much hated as
those that present themselves to themselves. A man take him in his pure
naturalls, is a foolish creature, his heart rises against Conviction. You see
the Pharisees Wise men, Learned men being convinced they hated Christ to the
death; why? because he did untombe them and discover the dead men's bones
within. So many now a days that are convinced, hate any that by life or speech
discover their sin unto them, if it were possible and in their power to the
death. Thus the Holy Ghost convinces of sin. But before I leave this point, let
me add this from the reason or ground of this Conviction [ because they believe
not in me] That unbeleefe makes all other sins damnable, no sin is damnable
if we could believe and repent. Therefore we are convinced of sin, because we
do not believe: as we say of a man that is condemned, because he cannot
read, therefore he is condemned, he should escape if he could read being for
no great fault; so it is here, it is not believing in Christ and repenting
makes all other sins deadly.

The differing of one man from another is their faith and repentance, some
there be whose sins are greater then others, yet by the Spirit of God and
faith, they work them out every day. It is faith in the brazen Serpent that
takes away the sting of the fiery Serpents.

I have done with the conviction of sin. Let us now come to speak of the
conviction of Righteousness.

Of righteousness, Conviction of Righteousness.
because I go to my Father and you shall see me no more; It is a fit time for
the Holy Ghost to convince Gods people of righteousness when they are
convinced of sin before, then they can relish Christ: Balm is balm indeed
when the wound is discovered and felt, O then a pardon is welcome when the
party is condemned. The reason of this conviction of righteousness is, because
I go to my Father and you shall see me no more. The Holy Ghost as he sets on
sin upon the conscience, so he takes off sin by applying to the conscience
the righteousness of Christ, this is his office, first, to convince the world
of sin, and then to convince of righteousness, whereby we stand righteous
before God.

And this righteousness here is not our own inherent, but the righteousness
of Christ a Mediator, God and man.

The Holy Ghost convinces of righteousness in this order of a fourefold
gradation. A fourefold gradation of conviction of righteousness.


First, that there must be a righteousness, and a full righteousness. The
second is this, that there is no such righteousness in the creature. Thirdly,
that this is to be had in Christ the Mediator. Fourthly, that this
righteousness is our righteousness.
First, Gradation.
there must be a righteousness, for we have to deal with a God who is
righteousness it self; and no unclean thing shall come into Heaven, unless
we have a righteousness, how shall we look God in the face, or how can we
escape hell.

Gradation.
Now for the second, that it is not in any creature men or Angels; we have not a
righteousness of our own; for there are diverse things to be satisfied, God
himself, and the Law, and our own consciences, and the world. Perhaps we may
have a righteousness to satisfy the world, because we live civilly; O but
that will not satisfy conscience; And then there must be a satisfaction to the
Law, which is a large thing that condemns our thoughts, desires, but God is
the most perfect of all. Put case we have a righteousness of a good carriage
among men, this will not satisfy God, and the Law, it will not satisfy
conscience; men they are our fellow prisoners, conscience will not be contented
but with that which will content God, when conscience sees there is such a
righteousness found out by the wisdom of God that contents him: else
conscience will be always in doubts and fears.

Thirdly, Gradation.
this righteousness is to be had in Christ. What is the righteousness of
Christ? The righteousness of Christ is that righteousness that is founded
upon his obedience, active fulfilling the Law, and passive discharging all our
debts, satisfying Gods Justice; the meritoriousnesse of both of them is founded
upon the purity of his Nature, all his sufferings and doings had their
excellency from the personal Union of God and Man, in reference to which Union
we may without blasphemy aver that God performed the Law, God died for us.

Gradation.
Fourthly and lastly, this righteousness is our righteousness, the Spirit
convinces that this belongs to all believers, for it is better then Adam had,
his righteousness was the righteousness of a man; This righteousness is the
righteousness of a Mediator; And it is such a righteousness, that when we are
clothed with it, we may go through the Justice of God, We may have access
with boldness to the throne of grace, and say, Lord I come in the
righteousness of Christ that has appeased thy wrath and satisfied thy
justice: this the Holy Ghost convinces of.

But you will ask me, Quest.
how does the Holy Ghost convince me of the righteousness of Christ?

I answer, Answ.
First, the Holy Ghost presents to the soul the knowledge of this excellent
righteousness, and then creates a hand of faith to embrace it being proposed;
you that are humble and brokenhearted sinners, here is Christ for you. The
Spirit of God does not only reveal the excellency of Christ, but that this
belongs to me, that Christ is given for me, and that revelation of the Spirit
does sway the soul, when the Spirit does not tell in general only, that
Christ is an excellent Savior, but shall relate to a Christian soul God gave
Christ for thee: this swayes the heart to rest upon Christ, whereupon the
marriage is made up between the soul and Christ, the soul says I am
Christ's, and I give my self to Christ, and to whatsoever accompanies Christ:
and then as it is in marriage, the persons by virtue of that relation have
interest into each others substance and estate. So when this mystical marriage
is made up between Christ and us, we have a right unto Christ by all rights,
by titles of purchase and redemption; He has purchased Heaven for us, and us
for Heaven; all that Christ has is ours, all his good is ours, our sins his,
and his righteousness ours; So when the Holy Ghost convinces me of Christ's
righteousness, and gives me faith to embrace it, then Christ is mine with all
he has. By this I have spoken you may see how the Spirit convinces, do but
imagine what a blessed condition the soul is in when this match is made.

But you will ask me why is the sending of the Spirit necessary for the
convincing of this righteousness?

I answer, for diverse reasons.

First, Reas. 1.
because it is above the conceit of man, that there should be such a
righteousness of God-Man; therefore it is discovered by the Spirit, and when
it is discovered, the Spirit must open the eyes of the soul to see, else we
shall have a natural knowledge of supernatural things; for a man by a
natural knowledge may understand them, so as to be able to discourse of them,
therefore to change the soul, there must be a supernatural sight to see
supernatural things. A devil incarnate may know all things and yet want to
see, only the Holy Ghost gives inward fight, inward eyes, and works faith to
see Christ as mine.

Again, the sending of the Holy Ghost is necessary for this conviction, Reas.
2.
because he alone must set down the soul and make the conscience quiet, who
is greater then the conscience. Conscience will clamor thou art a sinner, the
Holy Ghost convinces, in Christ thou art righteous. The Holy Ghost only knows
what is in the heart of God the Father, and in the heart of every man: He
only knows the intent of the Father to every Christian, and can answer all
inward Objections and Cavils of flesh and blood raised up against the soul;
therefore the convincing of the Holy Ghost is necessary. Howsoever Christ has
purchased our peace, yet the Holy Ghost must apply it: For the conscience is so
full of clamours, that unless the Holy Ghost apply what Christ has done,
conscience will not be satisfied: God the Father has appointed Christ, and
Christ has wrought it, but the third person must apply it to the soul, to
assure us, that this belongs to us. The application of all good things to the
soul that Christ the Son has wrought, is the proper office of the third
person. In civil Contracts here there must not only be a purchase but a Seal,
though Christ has wrought righteousness for us, the Spirit must Seal it to
every soul, this righteousness belongs to you, Christ is yours with all that
is his.

Reas. 3.
Again, it must needs be a work of the Spirit, because flesh and blood is
full of pride and would feign have some righteousness of their own, the Jews
were of this temper, and it has been the greatest question from the beginning
of the world till this day; what is that righteousness whereby we must stand
before God, but Gods Spirit answers all objections. Beloved, the best of us
though in an estate of grace, if the Holy Ghost do not convince us, we shall
be in darkness and call all into question, therefore we must not be
convinced only at the first, but in a continued course of Christianity:
unless the Holy Ghost does this, we shall fall into a dungeon of darkness,
therefore the convincing of the Holy Ghost is necessary.

Beloved this should make us take heed how we hear, and how we read, even to
beg this convincing of the Spirit in every Ordinance. O Lord vouch safe the
Spirit of revelation, and take the scales off mine eyes, that as these are
truths of themselves, so they may be truths to me. Sway my soul that I may
cast my self upon thy mercy in Christ, etc.

I must answer some Cases that many a poor soul is troubled withal. Ob.
Alas I am not convinced by the Spirit, that Christ is my righteousness therefore
what case am I in?

Answ.
I answer, some are more strongly convinced, and some less. Let a man be
careless of holy duties, and he is less convinced, but let him be constant
therein, and he shall find the Holy Ghost convincing him more strongly, that
the righteousness of Christ is his; there are many presumptuous persons that
turn the grace of God into wantonness, who because through the Enthusiasmes
of Satan they never question their estate, but conceit themselves to be good
men and in the estate of grace, think this to be the convincing of the Holy
Ghost: whereas this is a general rule, Spiritual convincing is not total but
always leaves in the heart some drugs of doubting, as a ship that rides at
anchor, though it may reele too and fro, yet is it safe for the maine. So it is
with the soul that is truly convinced, it is safe for the maine, yet it is
tumbled and tossed with many doubts and fears, but their Anchor is in Heaven.

Take this for a ground of comfort subscribed unto in the experience of all
believers, that the Spirit of God so far convinces them of Christ's
righteousness, as preserves in them such a power of grace as to cast
themselves upon the mercy of God in Christ; and God will not quench that
spark, though there be little or no light, yet there will be heat; God will
send his Spirit into the heart, so far as it shall not betray it self to
despair, and let such a beam into the soul, as all the power in hell shall
not be able to keep out; but it is our own neglect that we are not more
strongly convinced, so as to break through all. This is the privilege of a
constant careful Christian, to be strongly convinced of the righteousness of
Christ.

Thus we see how the Holy Ghost convinces us of righteousness, other things I
must omit. If this be so, Use.
I beseech you let us not loose our privileges and prerogatives, does God give
grace, and give Christ with all his righteousness, and shall not we improove
them? Let us use this righteousness in all temptations. Let us plead it to
God himself, when he seems to be our enemy. Lord thou have ordained a
righteousness, the righteousness of Christ, that has given full satisfaction
to thy justice, and he has given me a title to Heaven: howsoever my soul be
in darkness, yet Lord I come unto thee in the name of my Savior, that thou
would persuade my soul of that righteousness. I would glorify thy Name.
Wherein will thou be glorified? In mercy or justice? O in mercy above all. I
cannot glorify thee in thy mercy, unless thou persuade me of the
righteousness of Christ. Can I love thee except thou love me first? Can thou
have any free and voluntary obedience from me, unless I be convinced that
Christ is mine? Now Lord I beseech thee, let me be such as thou may take
delight in. Beloved, since we have means of such a gift, let us never rest
till we have it. If Satan set upon us, hold this out, if he tell thee thou art
a sinner, tell him I have a greater righteousness then my own, even the
righteousness of God-Man, I have a righteousness above all my
unrighteousness. Satan says God is displeased with me, I but he is more
pleased with me in Christ, then displeased with me in my self. Satan says I
have sinned against God, I but not against the remedy, send Satan to Christ. O
but thou have a corrupt nature that makes thee run into this sin and that sin;
but there is a spring of mercy in God, and an overrunning fountain of
righteousness in Christ, an overflowing sea of the blood of Christ. Therefore
let us labor to improove this righteousness of Christ to God and Satan and
against all temptations, yea against our own consciences; I am thus and thus,
yet God is thus and thus; all his Attributes are conveyed to me in Christ. Let
us exalt God and Christ, and set up Christ above our sins, above any thing in
the world, as S. Paul, who counted all things dung and dross for the excellent
knowledge of Christ. Quest.
You will ask me, How shall we know whether we be convinced of this
righteousness or no? Answ.
I answer, we may know by the Method Christ uses in convincing; First, he
convinces of sin and then of righteousness; for a man to catch at
righteousness before he be convinced of sin, it is but an usurpation; for
the Holy Ghost first convinces of sin.

Therefore you have many perish because they never were abased enough. Beloved
people are not lost enough, and not miserable enough for Christ, and not broken
enough for him, and therefore they go without him. Quest.
But how shall I know that the Holy Ghost has convinced me enough of sin, so
that I may without presumption apply the righteousness of Christ unto my
self? Answ.
Only thus, if the Holy Ghost have discovered my sinful condition of nature
and life, so as to work in me an hatred of sin, and to alter my bent another
way, and so make Christ sweet unto me, then I am sufficiently convinced of
sin.

This in answer to that Question by the way. To return in the next place, I
may know I am convinced thoroughly of the righteousness of Christ by the
witness and work of the Spirit. The Spirit brings light, and faith, the work
of the Spirit has a light of its own, as I know I believe, when I believe,
but sometimes we have not the reflect act of faith whereby to evidence our own
graces to our selves, but ever he that is convinced of the Spirit of God, his
heart will be wrought to bear marveilous love to God; upon this apprehension,
that God is mine, and Christ is mine, the soul is constrained to love,
whereupon ensues an enlargement of heart and a prevalency of comfort above all
discomfort, for love casts out fear. This one comfort that our sins are
forgiven and that we have right and title to Heaven, when the soul is
convinced of this it is in a blessed condition, then what is poverty and what
is imprisonment? not worthy to be reckoned in respect of the glory that shall
be revealed.

Again, where the Holy Ghost convinces enough, there is inward peace and great
joy suitable to the righteousness. As the righteousness is an excellent
righteousness of God-Man, so that peace and joy that comes from it is
unspeakeable peace and joy: So that then the heart sees it self instated
in'peace and joy, as you have it, Romans 5. Being justified by faith we have
peace toward God, not only inward peace and joy, but a peace that will show
it self abroad, a glorious peace, a peace that will make us glory, verse 3. We
glory in tribulation. A hard matter to glory in abasement: not only so, but we
glory in God, God is ours, and Christ's righteousness ours; when Christ has
satisfied Gods wrath, then we may make our boast of God.

Again, where this conviction of righteousness is, it answers all objections,
the doubting heart will object this and that, but the Spirit of God shows an.
All Sufficiency in Christ's obedience, and that sets the soul down quietly in
all crosses, and calmes it in all storms in some degree. Where the soul is
convinced of the righteousness of Christ, there the conscience demands boldly:
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that is dead and
risen again and sits at the right hand of God; Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods chosen. So that a convinced conscience dares all creatures in
Heaven and Earth, it works strongly and boldly. I shall not need to enlarge
this, you know whether you are convinced. To end the point, I beseech you
labor to live by this faith, Use.
here is an evidence if we can live by it; How is that? Every day to make use
of the righteousness of Christ, as every day we run into sin. Be sure we have
our consciences sprinkled with the blood of Christ, that as we increase new
guilt, so we may have a new pardon, therefore every day labor to see God as
reconciled, and Christ as our Advocate with the Father. Christ is now in
Heaven, if we sin, make use of him, this should be the life of a Christian,
to make use of Christ's righteousness; when you find nature polluted, go to
God, and say, Lord my nature though foul in it self, yet is holy and pure in
Christ, He took the weakness of the humane nature unto him that he might
communicate the worth and efficacy of his divine nature unto me, and for my
actions I am a sinner, but Christ has fully discharged all my debts, and is
now in Heaven, he has performed all righteousness for me. Look not upon me
as in my self, but look upon me in Christ, He and I am one. This should be
every days exercise to see our selves in Christ, and so see him and our selves
one. I should enlarge the point further, but I will speak a word of the reason.

What is the reason? why the Comforter may and shall convince of
righteousness? Because I go to the Father; what strength is there in that
reason? why this, Christ took upon him to be our surety, and he must acquit us
of all our sins ere he can go to his Father? If one sin had been
unsatisfied for he could not have gone to his Father, but now he is gone to his
Father, therefore all our sins are satisfied for, so that now the Ascension
of Christ is a sufficient pledge to me that my person is accepted, and my
sins pardoned, because he is gone to his Father to appear before the Father
for us, which he could not have done, had he not fulfilled all righteousness.

But wherefore did he go to the Father? why, to make application of what he had
wrought. If Christ should not have gone to the Father, he could not have sent
the Holy Ghost to us. Therefore there is great use of this going to his Father.
Satan pleads before God we are such and such, I but says Christ I have shed
my blood for them, and there he perfumes all our weak prayers; if we were
not imperfect what need we a Mediator in Heaven. Therefore he is gone to Heaven
to disanull all Satan's accusations, and to provide a place for us, die when we
will, our place is ready.

Then again he is gone to the Father, to cloth us with a sweet relation, to
make the Father our Father. For he says, John 12.17. I go to my Father and to
your Father; So that he is not ashamed to call us Brethren, by virtue of this
we may go to God and call him Father, and when we die we may without
presumption say, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, for the Father
loves us as he loved Christ, with one and the same love, though in a far
different degree. What a comfort is this, that when we die, we go to our
Father that is better then any earthly Father; Therefore it should joy us when
the time of our departure comes: We see old Jacob when he saw the Chariots
come out of Egypt, how his heart leaped because he should go to see his Son
Joseph: So when death is sent to transport us to Christ, to Heaven, had we a
strong faith we should be exceeding glad.

And let us learn here the art of faith from Christ, I go to the Father says
he, there was a great deal of time yet to pass no less then forty days
after his Resurrection before he went to the Father, yet he says, I go to the
Father, to show that faith presents things future as present; faith sees Heaven
as present, and the day of judgment as present, and does affect the soul as
if they were now existent. If we had a Spirit of faith it would thus present
things far off as nigh at hand. Therefore when we meet with any thing that
may make our way to Heaven seem long or troublesome, exercise your faith, and
make your term present to your spirits though remote from sense, say I go to
the Father, what though I go through blood and a shameful death, yea perhaps
a tormentfull death: yet I go to the Father; when a man is once persuaded that
God is his Father in Christ, it will make him walk to Heaven before his time.

Let us make Use of this point of Christ's going to the Father. Use.
Beloved, there is not a point of Religion but has a wonderful spring of
comfort, and it is want of faith that we do not draw more comfort from them.
When therefore we part with our friends by death, think they are gone to their
Father. If ye loved me says Christ, ye would rejoice, because I said I go
to the Father. If we love our friends, we should rejoice when they die;
Beloved, this should comfort us, Christ is gone to his Father, O what welcome
was there of Christ when he came into Heaven, the same welcome will there be
when we go to the Father? How joyful intertainement shall we have of the
Father and the Son? Therefore death should not be troublesome to us, say
Christ's righteousness is mine, therefore I know I shall go to the Father,
what care I then what kind of pains I go through. If a man be going to a
desired place, howsoever the way be troublesome, the sweetness of the end will
make him forget the discouragements of his passage. Perhaps we must wade to
Heaven through a Sea of blood, it matters not, the end will recompense all,
though we lose our limbs by the way: It is better to limpe to Heaven, then
dance to Hell.

FINIS.

