THE BRIDES Longing for her BRIDE-GROOMES second coming. A Sermon preached at
the funeral of the right Worshipful, Sir THOMAS CREW, Knight, Sergeant at
Law to his MAJESTY.

By The late learned and reverend Divine' RICH. SIBS.

REV. 22. 17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that hears,
say, come.

LONDON: Printed by E. P. for E. Langham, in Bambury. 1638.

To the Reader.
Loving Readers:
Lo here the verifying of that ancient adage, quod differtur, non aufertur,
for long looked for comes at last. That which before a Solemn and sad
assembly, was publicly preached and committed to the ears of some, is now
printed and committed to the eyes of all that have a mind to read it; which
thing has with a long and longing desire bin wished and waited for by sundry.
This Funeral sermon bespake your receiving and respecting of it in a double
consideration, each of which, in my opinion, has an important, rare, and
singular ponderation. Behold, first the Man; secondly, the matter. The Man by
whom, and the man for whom, it was made: the one that worthy Divine, Dr Sibs,
who in his life time intended and approoved it for the press, as it now comes
forth; the other that Worshipful Sergeant, Sir Thomas Crew, men of more then
ordinary worth and goodness; whom to name is enough, to those that knew them:
for if I should enter into a particular discourse, and discovery of their
deserved worth, I fear I should more dishonor my undertakings, and wrong your
expectation, then in any proportion answer the excellency of two such worthy
Theames. Secondly, for the matter, as the occasion and men's expectations were
extraordinary, so shall you find his preparation; Read, and then judge. It
sweetly, and to the life sets forth the duty, desire, and disposition of the
Church, and Spouse of Christ, Ecchoing a faithful and prayerful Amen, to all
the truths of God, especially to the precious promises, and chiefly to that
promise of promises, Christ's second coming; which in cold blood, undauntedly
to desire, is an unfallible mark of a true and through co^vert: which that we
may do, we must make sure our espousall to Christ here, and get to be clad
with the wedding garment of faith, and repentance, teaching us to ponder and
pray much, and then admirable shall be our confident standing before God; our
rich hope, our quietness and hearts ease, our joy, as if we had one foot in
heaven already. We shall be able with S. Paul, to cast down our gantlet, and
bid defiance to Devils, to men, to height, to depth, to things present, and
things to come. If all the hearts in the world were one Heart, it could not
comprehend those rich blessings, wherewith true Christians are richly endowed,
and those spiritual joys and comforts which shall rain upon them in sweet
showers from heaven: rich they are in hand, but richer in hope: rich in
possession, but richer in reversion. For what ravishing Joy, what inexplicable
sweetness shall then everlasting possess our souls? when as we who have bin
a long time contracted to our Lord and husband, shall see that blessed time
come, when we shall have that glorious marriage between him and us, really and
Royally solemnized, in the presence of God, and his holy Angels, and shall have
the fruition of him and all his happiness, and enjoy such heavenly fellowship,
familiarity and acquaintance with him, transcendantly above all the sweetest
relations here below, I say with him who is The Prince of Peace, the King of
glory, yea the very glory of Heaven and Earth, the express image of his
Fathers person, in whom those things which are invisible are seen, the
brightness of everlasting light, the undefiled mirror of the Majesty of God;
and the desire of all Nations. Blessed are they which are called to the
marriage supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19. 9 Whereunto that you may be admitted as a
welcome guest, you must both know and practice, what in this Treatise is
contained. To conclude, I am bold therefore in the cause of Gods honor, and
your salvation, to entreat you (as ever you would have interest in Christ's
blood and bles sednesse, sufferings and satisfactions; as you mean to have any
Fellowship or communion in Heaven, with the Blessed Saints and Angels; as you
intend to have any part in that Kingdom, which the Lord Jesus has purchased
with his own blood) that you would up, and be doing, that which the wife of
the Lamb is said to have done; Rev. 19. 7. make your s^lves ready, which if
you do, his speedy access, shall bring to you speeding success: which that
you may do, you shall not want his constant, and instant prayers, who is

Your christian and cordial wel-wisher, G. H.

The CONTENTS.
THe Churches happiness consummate in Heaven. page 2 Of the word Amen. p. 9
Doct. 1. The hearts of Gods Children are pliable to all divine truths; more to
the promises, above all, to the promises of Christ's second coming. p. 12 Rea.
1. There is a sutablenesse between a sanctified heart, and sanctified Truths.
p. ibid. Rea. 2. There is a spiritual taste infused to relish those truths. 13
Rea. 3. The Churches will is not her own, but Christ's. 14 Rea. 4. There is a
spiritual contract between Christ and the soul. ibid. Rea. 5. It is a seal
of effectual calling 15 What effectual calling is 16 Use 1. If we find an
unpliablenesse on our part, to beg the performance of the Covenant of grace.
17 Motives to give our Amen.
Mot. 1. God honors us in having our consent. 19 Mot. 2. We honor God in
sealing to his truth. 20
Use 2. A reproof of 2. sorts. 1. Those which have no Amen for God. 21 2.
Those which have a false Amen. 23 The desires of the Spirit, the true
Characters of a Christian. 28
Desires resembled to a Stream, in sundry particulars.
1. They come from a good Spring. 29 2. They carry all before them. 30 3. They
swell by opposition. ibid. 4. They are restless till they are emptied. ibid.
5. They increase in running. 31 6. They rest in their proper place. 32 7. They
constantly send up vapors. 33
5. Observations making way to the main point.
1. There will be a second coming of Christ, more glorious then the former. 34
2. A Christian that has true Faith in the times to come, will have answerable
desires and prayers. ibid. 3. Agracious heart turns promises into desires and
prayers. 38 4. The more assured one is of any thing, the more effectual it
makes him pray. 40 5. Gods promises have graduall performances. 43
The sixth and maine point. 6 It is the duty and disposition of a gracious heart
to desire the glorious coming of Christ; and all his other commings, in way
and order to this, as they make way for his last coming. 48 Rea. 1. The Church
is in want till then. 49 Rea. 2. Our life is hid with Christ in God. ibid Rea
3. Christ is in some sort imperfect till then. 50 Rea. 4. Where the treasure
is, there will the heart be. 51 Rea. 5. The members are carried to union with
the head. 52 Rea. 6. By comparing it with glory here in sundry particulars. 56
Rea. 7. From the state of the Church at the best in this World, in regard of
troubles without, 64. and corruptions within. 68 Trials of our desires for the
second coming of Christ.
Trial 1. By seeing what benefit we have by the first coming of Christ. 70
Trial 2. By our preparing for it. 73 Trial 3. Whether our hearts be the
Kingdom of Christ now. 74 Trial 4. By our holy exercises. 77
Directions inabling us to utter this desire and prayer.
Direct. 1. 1. Labor to be reconciled to God. 81 2. Labor to grow in the new
Creature. 83 3. Be sure to do what you do thoroughly and quickly. 85 4. Take
all advantages to help this desire, and prayer, from crosses and Satan. 92

Two objections answered.
1. Object. I find I am not so desirous of the coming of Christ as I ought. 9^
2. Object. But I desire to live still. 97 A pressing exhortation, to long for
the second coming of Christ, and from thence also to quicken our selves in our
Christian work. 98
A conclusion,
Upon the particular occasion. 111

THE BRIDEGROOMES PROMISE: And, The BRIDES Prayer.
REVEL. 22. 20. He which testifies these things, says, Surely, I come
quickly; Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus.
AS the Church of God, being the weakest and the most shiftlesse part of
mankind, is never without trouble in this world; so God would never have it to
be without comfort. And therefore, God reveals unto Christ in this Book, and
Christ unto the Angel, and the Angel unto John, things to come, from the
Ascension of Christ unto his second coming; that so, in all conditions of the
Church, the Church might have recourse unto this Book, to see what the issue
of all would be. This is their comfort, that howsoever things may be carried in
this world in a seeming confusion, in a cloud, and in a Mystery; yet in
conclusion, all shall end well on the Churches side: their trouble, shall end
in Peace; their abasement, in Glory; and their conflict, in a Crown. This we
may see here verified. This Revelation does end in the description of the
glorious condition of the Church. In the two last Chapters (as I take it) the
Evangelist Saint John sets down the glorious estate of the Church of God, even
in this world; yet so, as it shall end and be consummate in perfect glory, in
the world to come. For, the soul of a Christian, like Noah's Dove, cannot rest
in any glory here, till it return to the Arc, till it come to the enjoyment
of perfect glory, and have blissful communion with Christ for ever and ever
in Heaven. And therefore, Christ does terminate and end the sweetness of his
Promises, in Heaven, and at his last coming; and the Church likewise
stretches and rayseth up her desires to that. Howsoever there shall be
glorious times and things here; yet these are but as the first fruits to the
whole Harvest, and as a drop unto the Ocean. Therefore, when you read of a
glorious estate of the Church to be here upon Earth, your minds must have
recourse to the upshot and consummation of all, in Heaven; Jerusalem, which is
from above, must lead us to Jerusalem which is above.

Now, because that man's unbeleeving heart is too prone to think, that these
things are too good to be true, and too great to be performed, seeing such an
immeasurable disproportion between his own unworthiness, and the excellency
of the things promised; hereupon the mercy of our blessed Savior is such,
that he confirms this his second glorious coming, by all kind of Witnesses
that may be: Here is the Angel, Verse 6. Christ himself, Verse 7. The Spouse,
and the Spirit in the Spouse, Verse 17. And Christ himself again in the words
before the Text; Behold, I come quickly: then you have the Spouses answer;
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. Beloved, Faith is a supernatural thing: it has
no friend within us; it has no help, no cause in the world, except God
himself: therefore, it has need of all confirmation. God knows us, and our
needs, better then we do our selves; and you see, he uses confirmation, to
help our unbeleefe. And besides the Witnesses, the thing it self is repeated
again and again three or four times in this Chapter, Verse. 7, 12, 20.
Behold, I come quickly; And, behold, I come quickly; and, Surely, I come
quickly. By every repetition, Christ seeks to gain upon our mis-giving
souls. Behold, I come. Now because our spirit is exceeding short, and we are
ready to cry out, as it is in the fixed of this Book; How long, Lord, holy
and Rev. 6. 10.
true? How long? Why he answers; Behold, I come quickly. You shall also find
in the Prophesies of the Old Testament, the same Promises delivered and
repeated again and again, because of our unbeleefe; which arises from an
inward guilt, that cleaves to our Consciences; because we are subject to
failings, and are not so strict as we should be. But such are the yerning
bowels of our blessed Savior, that it grieves him to see his tender Church
afflicted and troubled in mind: therefore he helps all that he can.

Observe then, I beseech you, in the words the sweet Note.
intercourse that is between Christ, and his Spouse: Christ promises again
and again, Behold, I come quickly; and the Church says, Come: Amen; Even so,
come Lord Jesus. There is no intercourse in the world so sweet, as is that
between Christ, and his Church. But we will come unto the words themselves;
Amen, Even so, come Lord Jesus.

In these words, you have, first, the assent of the Church; secondly, the
consent: her assent, to the Truth; her consent, to the goodness of the Truth.
Amen; It is so: Nay, Amen; It shall be so: Nay, Amen; Be it so; or, Let it be
so: There is a wishing included in it; All these are wrought by the Spirit: The
Spirit convinces us both of the Truth, and of the goodness of the Truth. And
besides that, in the next words, the same Spirit stirs up a desire, and
prayer; Even so, come Lord Jesus. Holy desires, are turned into fervent prayers.

Amen is a short word, but marvelously pregnant; Note.
full of sense, full of spirit. It is a word that seals all the Truths of God,
that seals every particular Promise of God. And it is never likely to arise in
the soul, unless there be first an Almighty power from Heaven, to seize on
the powers of the soul, to subdue them, and make it say, Amen. There is such
an inward rising of the heart, and an innate rebellion against the blessed
Truth of God, that unless God by his strong Arm bring the heart down, it
never will nor can say, Amen.

But now the heart will not be pent in, or restrained; Note.
the Spirit is an enlarging thing: and therefore, besides Amen, (though Amen
includes that which follows) the Spirit breaks forth, and says; Amen, Even so
come Lord Jesus.

A little of Amen.

Christ is said, in the beginning of this Book, to be Amen, the true and
faithful Witness, Revel. 3. 14. Rev. 3. 14.
And all the Promises are said, in Christ Jesus, to be Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.
20. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
that is, they are made for his sake, and performed for his sake: They are made
in him, and for him; and they are performed in him, and for him. And when AMEN,
that is, Christ himself, shall say his Amen to any thing; is it so much for
us, to give our Amen?

The point I mean to raise out of this word Amen, is this:

That the hearts of the Children of God are pliable to Doct. 1.
Divine Truths, to yield to the whole Word of God, especially to the good Word
of God, viz. the Promises; and of all Promises, to the Promise of Promises, the
second coming of Christ.

They say Amen to that; and that, for these Reasons.

Because there is a sutablenesse of disposition, and Reas. 1.
a kind of connaturalnesse between a sanctified heart and sanctified Truths,
between an holy heart and holy things: insomuch, that if an holy Truth, never
heard of before, be heard by an holy heart, it will yield present assent; for
his heart is subdued so, that he has an Amen for it presently.

There is a sweet relish Reas. 2.
in all Divine Truths, and suitable to the sweetness in them; there is a
spiritual taste, which the Spirit of God puts into the soul of his children.
Though there be never so much sweetness in things, if there be not a suitable
taste, there is no relish in them. Therefore, the Spirit of God in his children
works a taste of the sweetness that is in the Word of God. And that is a maine
ground why they say Amen, especially to comfortable Truths.

Again, when the soul is once contracted unto Reas. 3.
God, it has no will of its own, but it yields up his will to Gods will. The
Spouse has no will of her own, but her Husbands will is her will. So, if
Christ say, Amen, I come quickly; the Spouse of Christ says Amen too.

God deals with his children likewise by way Reas. 4.
of a covenant, and a contract. And above all other covenants, the covenant of
a contract, is the sweetest covenant. Now in it, there must be a consent on our
part: and therefore it is, that the Spirit always stirs up an Amen on our
parts too. When he says, Amen, it shall be so; then the soul says, Amen,
Lord, let it be so. As in civil Marriage, there is a contract; so here, in the
spiritual: and seeing there is a contract, there is also an assent to the
second coming of Christ; the contracted Spouse must needs say Amen, to the
Marriage-day.

Lastly, the Spirit of God Reas. 5.
in the hearts of his children stirs up in them this Amen, as a seal of
their effectual calling. If you should ask me, what effectual calling is; I
answer, It is nothing else but the hearts Echo, and answer to Gods speech. God
calls, and we answer. This is by S. Peter called, The 1 Pet. 3. 21.
answer of a good Conscience. There must be in the soul the answer of a good
Conscience, to all Divine Truths. Do thou believe? I do believe. Do thou
repent? I do repent. Seek ye my face. Thy face, Lord, will I seek. Return
Psalm. 27. 8. Ier. 3. 22.
ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings. Behold, we come
unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God. Unless there be thus the answer of a
good Conscience, there is no effectual calling. Our calling is then
effectual, when the Spirit stirs up in the heart an answer unto it.
Therefore you see, there must needs be an Amen wrought in the hearts of the
children of God.

Beloved, if this be so, I Use.
beseech you, let us beg of God, if we find any stubbornness or renitencie
in our souls to Divine Truths, the performance of the covenant of grace. Lord,
thou have promised fleshy and sensible hearts, tender and yielding affections;
oh, now grant them, and work them.

For, beloved, this you Note.
must know; howsoever God deals with us by way of covenant, yet when he comes
to perform the covenant, he works in a manner our part and his own too. In
effect, he makes a Testament, and not a covenant. In a Testament we bequeath,
we do not covenant and condition. So, that though God deals with his people
by way of covenant, (as, if you repent, if you believe, if you obey) yet he
gives by way of Testament the grace that he bestows. Therefore beg of God,
that as he requires this condition, that we should assent and be pliable unto
his Word; so that he would make his covenant a Testament and a Will; I mean,
that he would effectually work it, and make us to do it. This should be our
desire of God. And so much the rather; first, because God Mot. 1.
honors us by it, in having our consent. Is not this a great honor to us,
that he will not perform things without our consent? For indeed, he will not
accomplish the work of our everlasting salvation, without it. But then, if we
set our Seals to Gods Seal, and we consent once, we even bind God himself:
when he seals to us, and we to him, we bind God Almighty; and by that power
of Faith, subdue Hell, and all our opposite enemies. When we seal to the Truth
of God, and cry Amen, it is a word that fills Heaven and Earth; there is not a
joyfuller word in the world, then when whole Congregations can say and shout
Amen. When God says Amen in Heaven, if we presently can say Amen to his Truth
upon Earth, he will say Amen to our Salvation. Thus God honors us by it, when
he comes for our consent: We Mot. 2.
honor God again, by our sealing to his Truth. Faith is that, which seals to
Gods Truth; and Amen, is the very voice of Faith.

It is a pitiful thing, Use 2. Reproof of two sorts.
but common in the world, that GOD should have no more credit with us. Poor
distressed Souls will say Amen to the Lies of their own hearts; and
presumptuous persons will say Amen to a Liar, to a Murderer, to an Enemy, to
Satan: but God has so little credit with us, that if he command, we will not
say Amen; if he pro mise, we have no Amen for him; if he threaten, we
bless our selves, saying, We shall do well enough; We shall have Deuteronomy. 29.
19.
peace, though we walk after the imagination of our own hearts, adding
drunkenness unto thirst. When the Spirit of God says, He will stir up a
fire in his anger, Deuteronomy. 32. 22.
and his wrath shall burn unto the lowest Hell, against all such as go on in
their sinful courses; yet they will flatter themselves. Well (beloved) we may
shake off Gods Word in the Ministry, as profane persons do; but, when God
comes in the execution of his Threatenings, then his wrath shall burn to Hell,
and not be quenched. Who can avoid or abide that dreadful Sentence; Go ye
cursed Matthew. 25. 41.
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels? Gods words are
not as Wind: Indeed, they are such a Wind, as will blow down all impenitent
sinners to Hell. We must have a Legal Amen to the Threatenings of God, as well
as an Evangelicall Amen to the sweet Promises. S. John here, by the Spirit of
God says Amen to the Promises of the time to come; to wit, for the confusion
of Antichrist, for the conversion of the Jews, and for the glorious times to
come, though he sees no evidence thereof, for the present; and so must we to
all Divine Truths.

But we have another 2
kind and company of men that must be taxed, that have indeed an Amen, and a
Seal, but it is to a blank: They are presumptuous persons, and such (which is
worse) as will have God to say Amen to their courses. They will be naught, and
sinful, and then study and strive to bring Gods Word to stand bent to their
bow; and so in their lying conceit, make God say Amen to their Lusts. They
account it not sufficient to have their will, but they will have God to be of
their mind too; and they will always get some daubers, that shall say, Go on,
and prosper. An Ahab will always have his false Prophets. What a wicked thing
is this, that we should make an Idol of God, and transform him into the
likeness of Satan, his Enemy? To make him like that, which he hates most? We
will continue in our sinful courses, and make as though we had the Word of God
for us; and, oh, we have the judgment of such, and such: and thus boulster up
our selves, by building upon such sandy foundations. When we should bring up
our souls, and resign them to God, and his Spirit; we will bring God down
to our bent, and make him to say this and that, agreeable to our carnal reason
and corrupt affections.

But I must not enlarge my self in this. In a word therefore, to conclude this
point: As there is a sweet harmony in Gods Truth, so let there be a harmony
in our hearts thereunto. Gods Truth always agrees with it self; oh, let our
hearts agree with it. When we hear a Threatening, a Precept, or a Promise, oh,
let us say Amen. It is the sweetest harmony in the world, when we can bring
our hearts to close with God and his Word, with his Spirit and Truth, when we
can be delivered into that form of Doctrine, which is delivered Romans 6. 17.
unto us.

But now I go on: Even so come Lord Jesus. We come from the assent unto the
consent; yielding unto that which Christ said, as true and good. We come unto
the desire and prayer of the Church; Even so come Lord Jesus.

Amen is an Hebrew word; Note.
and it is still retained, to show the consent of the Christian Church with the
Jewish, both with that which was before, and with that which shall be
afterward. And it is expressed and opened here, by a word following; Yea, or,
Even so, come Lord Jesus. You see the Church desires, and out of her desire
prays, Come Lord Jesus.

Now this desire of the Church, shows the gracious disposition of the Church.
These desires, are the breathings and motions of the Spirit in the soul,
tending to further union. Even as motion tends to rest, so desires tend to the
uniting unto the thing desired. The Churches desires here, are the immediate
issue of the soul, and therefore undissembled; and they show the true
character of a Christian soul. We may dissemble words and actions, but we
cannot dissemble our desires and affections: we may paint fire, but we cannot
paint heat. Therefore, God judges us more by our desires and affections, then
by our words and actions.

Now you may know, that our desires are holy and good, if so be that they be
heavenly; for, then it is a sign that they come down from Heaven: even as a
Spring will arise and ascend as high as the Spring Head, whence it comes. If
our desires rise to Heaven (as the Churches here do) then it is a sign they
come down from Heaven. Our desires are as a stream; which I will show you, by
prosecuting that metaphor, and allusion, in sundry particulars.

A good Stream has a good Spring; so must our desires. The Spring of the
Churches desires here, is Love; she loves Christ, and therefore desires him to
come quickly.

A Stream, you know, 2
carries all before it; so our desires are an holy Stream, issuing from a good
Spring, and carrying all before them. They are efficacious; not a mere
velleitie, as they say, a bare wishing and woulding.

A Stream, if it be stopped, will swell till it break 3
down all opposition, and carry all before it; so let a good desire be stopped,
and it will swell more and more, and grow bigger and bigger, till it makes way
for it self.

A Stream is restless, and incessant, till it meet 4
with the Ocean, and empty it self into the Sea; so, true and holy desires be
restless, and always in motion. They are not like a standing Poole, that
rests; but they are in motion still, till they have emptied themselves into the
boundless and bottomless Ocean of endless pleasure.

As true Streams that 5
arise from a Fountain, do wax bigger and bigger, the nearer they come to
the Ocean, because other Rivers join with them, and so they take advantage and
augmentation by other streams that run into them: so, if our desires be true,
they are growing desires; they increase bigger and bigger still, till they come
to Heaven.

At length, we see the 6
Streams empty themselves into the Sea; they are swallowed up there, where
they have a more constant being, then in themselves, namely, of the Ocean, the
true element and proper place of all waters: and so our desires, if they be
holy, as they are restless and growing, so at last they empty themselves into
Christ, and joins with God and happiness for the time to come: for, there is
a greater happiness for the souls of men, in God, in Christ, and in Heaven,
then there is in themselves; and there they are swallowed up.

Lastly, we may try our 7
desires by this. Vapors in a low place, do show that there is a Spring
there: you know, that the Springs are there, where there are most Vapors
constantly; so, where there be breathings of the soul upward (as there is here
of the Church) surely, there is a Spring of Love, that yields these Vapors,
and whence these desires flow.

But I come more particularly unto this particular desire of the Church, Come
Lord Jesus. I shall make way by some propositions which I shall praemise,
before I come to the maine thing which I shall stand upon at this time.

First, we must take it for granted;

That there will be a second glorious coming of Christ, Obser. 1.
that will be far more glorious then the former.

The best times and things are to come for Christians, every way; every day
they rise, they are nearer to their happiness.

Again, we must know this;

That a Christian, if he has true Faith in the times to Obser. 2.
come, he will have answerable desires, and correspondent prayers.

For (beloved) there is always an harmony between the heart and the brain,
between the understanding, and the will and affections: What we assent to as
true, and consent to as good, that we shall both desire and pray for.
Therefore, if you know there will be a glorious coming of Christ, and if you
assent to it, that the best times are yet to come, surely, there will be this
prayer too. There is always a sweet agreement and harmony between a sound
convinced knowledge and gracious affections. Hence it is, that in Scripture
what we do not wish and affect, we are said, not to know. We see not things in
their proper light, when we know and affect them not; but we have received
them only by tradition, and from others. But when we see proper things with a
proper light, spiritual things with a spiritual light; then there will be
always prayers and desires accordingly. As the Church here, after Amen, Even
so, there is the desire; Come Lord Jesus, there is her prayer.

And therefore, we may know whether our knowledge be spiritual, or not, by
this, if the heart be subdued to yield unto it: Otherwise, the heart will swell
when it comes to petition, and to particular Truths; what? shall I yield to
this? No: I have heard of this by the hearing of the ear, but I know not
whether it be true, or not; I have heard much talk of the Scriptures: but when
the Scripture comes to cross a man in this or that particular lust; then if
his knowledge be not spiritual, his heart will rise and swell against it, and
begin to call into question, and doubt; yea, and to think it folly, and a base
thing, for a man to yield to it: I am sure of my pleasures, I am sure of my
profits, but I am not sure whether this be true, or no: And thus the heart of
an Atheist comes to stand out, because his knowledge is not spiritual. But if
it be, then it carries an assent to it, with it, and a desire drawn into a
prayer.

Again, you must know this, before we come unto the maine point;

That a gracious heart turns promises into desires and Obser. 3.
prayers.

The Promise was, I come quickly: Here Faith claspes about the Promise, as a
Vine about the Elm, and says, Come Lord Iesw; Faith puts the Promise into
suit presently: Christ had no sooner said, I come quickly; but the Spirit of
Faith says, Nay, come Lord Jesus. But then we must be sure, that we have a
Promise out of the Word of God; Faith has no Amen for the word of a man, or
for any thing else, but the Word of God: and when it fastens upon that, as it
does here, you see it turns it into a holy desire and prayer, Come Lord Jesus.
Beloved, we believe not the Promises as we should do, else we would do so.
We have rich, exceeding 2 Pet. 1. 4.
great and precious Promises; but where is our rich, exceeding great and
precious Faith, to lay hold upon them, and to turn them presently into suites,
desires, and prayers? Thus if we would do, we should bind God with his own
Word; he cannot deny himself, or falsify his Truth.

You see again, That the more assured one is of any Obser. 4
thing, the more effectually it will make him to pray.

An Atheistical heart would say thus: Such a thing will be; Christ will come,
whether I pray, or no; what need I pray then? Nay, therefore pray, because he
will come. I come quickly: Therefore, Even so come Lord Jesus. Christ himself
was fully assured, that his Father would grant him all that he prayed for; I
know that thou Ioh. 11. 42.
hear me always, says he: yet you see what an heavenly prayer he makes,
John 17. Nay, God bids him do it; Ask of me, and I Psalm. 2. 8.
will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, etc. Christ himself must
ask, before God will give him the uttermost parts of the Earth for his
possession. So Ezekiel. 36. where you have the Covenant of Grace it self, with
many Promises attending it; to all which, it is added, Verse. 37. Yet for all
these things, will I be enquired of by the House of Israel, says the Lord.
Though he had made great Promises to his Church, yet he must be prayed to, for
the performance of them. He will have things received as fruits of our prayer,
as well as of his Promise and providence. We cannot be so thankful for things
that come only as fruits of his providence, as when we look upon them as
fruits of our prayers. David was a King, of prayers; but Saul came by
providence only, and by the peoples importunity: whether was the more blessed?

Oh then (my brethren) though we be never so much assured of things to come,
yet let us join prayer thereto: for, the assurance of the end, will stir us
up to the careful use of the means. None are so careful of the latter, as
they who are most assured of the former; witness the Church here.

The next thing I shall premise, as making way for that, that I mean more
fully to speak of, is this:

That Gods Promises have Obser. 5.
graduall performances.

They are made good, by degrees. God goes by many steps to the performance of
his great Promises: As here, the Promise of Christ's second glorious coming,
has many degrees to the accomplishment thereof. So, God promises a new Heaven,
Isa. 66. 22.
and a new Earth: That was one degree of the performance hereof, when the Jews
came out of Captivity. It had a second degree of performance, when Christ came
in the flesh: Then all things were new; there was a new Priest, a new Sabbath,
a new Nation. So, when the Gentiles were called, and came in, it had a third
gra'duall performance. When the Jews shall be called, when there shall be a
resurrection from Romans 11. 15.
the dead, as it were, then all things shall be new; that was a fourth. And the
last and full performance shall be, when all things shall be new indeed, that
is, when there shall be a new Heaven, and a new Earth. So this Promise here,
Come Lord Jesus, it has a latitude and breadth of performance: Come Lord into
our hearts first, and set up thy Kingdom and Scepter there; subdue all therein
unto thy self, throw down all lusts, thrust out Satan, take thine own
interest in us.

And then, come into thy Church, as you have it, Mark. 9. 1. There is a
powerful coming of Christ, in the Gospel; therein, the Kingdom of God comes
with Power: Come thus in the Ministry of thy Word. When Christ was bodily
ascended up into Heaven, he came spiritually in his Ordinances. And thus come
thou by thy Spirit.

And then, come to blast Antichrist, and to consume that Man of Sin; 2 Thessalonians.
2. 3.
and so make way for the other degree of thy coming: Come in the fullness of
the Gentiles, come in the conversion of thy people of the Jews, that their
Riches may be an increase of our Riches, that there may be golden times indeed;
as surely then they will be.

And then, because there is a certain number of the Elect of God, which must
be accomplished, and fulfilled; and Christ will delay his last coming, till
that be done: Therefore, Come and accomplish the number of thine Elect; as you
have it, Revel. 6. 11. And white Robes were given to every one of them, and it
was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellow servants also, and their brethren, that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled. They must stay, till the rest come in: As they that have
invited a company of Strangers to a Feast, do stay till the last be come; so
there will not be a glorious coming of Christ, until all the Elect be
gathered into one Body. And then shall be the Coming of all Commings; which is
the glorious coming of Christ, to take us to himself, and to make us sit with
him, to judge the 1 Cor. 6. 2.
World, as so many Kings and Judges of the World, and to be with him for ever.
As the Apostle says, Then shall we be ever with the Lord. And that is a 1 Thessalonians 4. 17, 18.
comfort indeed. As he adds there; Wherefore comfort one another with these
words. And so you see the graduall performance thereof.

Now I come unto the last, and that which I mean most to stand upon, being a
blessed Truth, most suitable to this occasion.

That as it is the duty, so it is the disposition of a gracious Obser. 6
heart, to aesire the glorious coming of Christ Jesus; and to desire all his
other commings in way and order to this, as they make way for his last coming.

In the unfoulding of this, I shall show you the grounds and reasons why the
Church does so; and then make some trials, whether we do so or no; and then
give you some few directions to help us therein. Why does the Church desire so
much this second and glorious coming of Christ?

Because the Church is Reason 1.
in want till that time, and the ground of all desire is want. We want our
bodies, we want many of our friends, etc. But then there shall be a supply of
all.

Because our life is hid Reason 2.
with Christ in God; and when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then
shall we also appear with him in Glory. Col. 3. 3, 4. Our glorious head is
there already; when he shall be revealed, then our glory shall be revealed, for
He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all those
that do believe.

In regard of Christ himself: Christ is in some Reas. 3.
sort imperfect till the latter day, till his second coming: for the mystical
body of Christ is his fullness; Christ is our fullness, and we are his
fullness: now Christ's fullness is made up, when all the members of his mystical
body are gathered and united together: the head and the members make but one
natural body; so Christ and the Church but one mystical. 1 Cor. 12. 12. As
the body is one, 1 Cor. 12. 12
and has many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are
one body, so also is Christ. Hence it is that the Saints are called, the glory
of Christ, Christ in this sense is not 2 Cor. 8. 23.
fully glorious therefore till that time. The church desires therefore that
Christ may be glorious in himself, and glorious in them, that he may come to
be glorious in his Saints. 2 These. 1. 10. Reas. 4. Mat. 6. 21


Because, where the treasure is, there will the heart be also; now where is the
Churches treasure but in Christ? Our spirits are supernatural, and carried to
the best of Spirits; and who is the best of spirits but Christ himself?

Because the members Reason 5.
are carried to union with the head. The happiness of the Soul is in union
with the fountain of happiness; and the nearer the fountain of happiness,
the more happy: what is it that makes the blessed body of Christ more happy,
then all the Angels and men, but because it is hypostatically united to the
second Person of the Trinity, and so to the fountain of the Godhead? the
nearer to God, the happier, the fuller of grace and glory; because he is the
God of all grace and glory; therefore the nearer to Christ, the more happy. Now
after the resurrection we shall be nearer both in soul and body; we may see
this by the contrary. What is it that makes Hell so horrible? because there is
an utter and eternal separation from the chiefest and choicest good, God
himself. Here the wicked men of the world have the presence of God in the
creatures; they taste the sweetness of Gods goodness in them; but in Hell
they shall have none to all eternity, there shall be an utter separation
between Christ and them. But now the joining to God, the fountain of all
good, in Heaven, makes Heaven to be Heaven indeed: if Christ was not there,
Heaven would be no Heaven; therefore Paul says, I desire to be dissolved,
Phil. 1. 21.
and to be with Christ: and so the Church here, Come LORD JESUS: then we shall
be near, not in soul only, but also in body and soul, and in both we shall
be for ever joined to the fountain of all good. It is that which the Church
desires here: and in the Canticles, what is it that the Church prays for in
the beginning? Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Cant. 1. 2.
lips, etc. There she desires the first coming of Christ: but you have it
afterward in the conclusion of the book, make haste Cant. 8. 14.
my beloved, and be thou like to the young Heart or Roe, upon the mountain of
Spices. Such is the disposition of the Church, that before Christ was come,
good people were known by the desire of his coming. And therefore it was the
description of holy men, that they waited for the consolation of Israel. Oh
Lord Luke 2. 25.
come quickly, come in the flesh. But now the first coming is past, they
desire as much his second coming, and therefore they are described in the
Epistle of Saint Paul, to be such as love and long for the appearing of Christ;
a Crown of Righteousness is laid up for all those that love his appearance.
Therefore if 2 Timothy 4. 8.
we had the Spirit of the Church, we would Echo to Christ, when he says I
come quickly, and say, make haste my beloved, etc. As the Church says in the
latter end of the Canticles.

Beloved, do but compare the glory of that Reason 6.
time, with the glory which we have here; and and that will show another Reason.
I will show it by way of comparison a little, why the Church should be
desirous of the second coming of Christ.

If the good things that we have by grace here, are such, as eye has not
seen, or ear heard, neither have 1 Cor. 29.
entered into the heart of man to consider of, (for the place is meant of grace
especially, that is the natural, and immediate meaning) how transcendantly
then unutterable, and unconceivable are those things that are reserved against
that time? If the first fruits are so sweet, what is the full Romans 8. 23
harvest? If the earnest be Ephesians. 1. 14.
so comfortable, what is the whole bargain? If 2 Cor. 5. 5.
this Joy be unspeakeable and full of Glory, and this peace, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
pass all understanding, what Phil 4. ^.
will the fullness of Joy, peace Psi. 16. 11.
and pleasures which are at Gods right hand for evermore, and which shall be
then, do?

If the Angels wonder at the wisdom of God, in the government of his Church
here, in the midst of confusion, how shall they be put into a new and
greater wonderment, when they shall see Christ glorious in his Saints. 2 These.
1. 10.


If when Christ was born in his abasement, they sang, Glory to God on high,
peace on earth, good will toward Luke 2. 14.
men, how joyful will those blessed spirits be, when Christ and all his
members, shall be joined together in one body in Heaven?

If Abraham rejoiced to foresee, by the eye of Ioh. 8. 59.
Faith, the first coming of Christ in the flesh, how should we joy by Faith to
see the second coming of Christ? If John Baptist leaped in the womb for Luke
1. 44.
joy, at the presence of Mary, the Mother of our Lord, how will our hearts
dance when we shall see the Lord himself in the great glory and Majesty of
Heaven?

If Peter was so ravished with a little drop and Math. 17. 4
glimpse of Heaven, when he saw the transfiguration of Christ in the mount, so
that he even lost and forgac himself, and wist not what he said; how shall we
be affected, think you, when we shall see Christ, not in his transfiguration,
but in his glorification for ever?

If old Simeon, when he saw Christ in his infancy, Luke 2. 29.
embraced him in his arms and said, Now Lord let thou thy servant depart in
peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation: How shall
we be transported with joy and admiration, to see Christ, not in his swaddling
clothes, nor in his infancy, but in heaven, all glorious?

If the sight of Christ in his Ordinances, in his 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Word and Sacraments, does so affect a Christians heart, as to transform him
into the Image of them; what will it do to see Christ face to face, without
these Glasses? 1 Cor. 13. 12


If the promises do so quicken us, as you have it in the Psalms, Thy word
has quickened me; what Psalm. 119.
will the full performance of them do?

If the communion of Saints here, be so sweet, 1 Ioh. 1. 3.
even an Heaven upon earth; what will it be, when all the blessed souls that
have bin from the beginning of the World; unto the end, shall be all together,
and they altogether freed from all corruptions and infirmities, what a blessed
sight will that be?

If so be that things prepared by men, be so glorious, as the temple of
Solomon was, what is that glory which was prepared before the World was, and is
in preparing still for the Church?

If rest from labor be so sweet, what is the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God? A little liberty from Romans 8. 21.
corruption, a little freedom and enlargement of Spirit here, how sweet is
that? when we are set at liberty to serve God, when we have the liberty of the
Spirit, to go boldly to God, and to the Throne Heb. 4. 16.
of Grace, how pleasant is that? But, oh the liberty of glory! that is true
liberty indeed. Beloved, these things deserve and desire admiration, rather
then expression; therefore I leave them to your wondering, and admiring, rather
then I will study long to express them. Oh ye blessed souls, stand still a
little, and consider by the eye of Faith, these glorious things and times to
come. You see then by this, the Church has great reason to say, Come Lord
Jesus.

Besides, do but consider the estate of the Church Reas. 7.
here in this world: even at the best, while we are present 2 Cor. 5. 6
in the body, we are absent from the Lord. But for the most part, the Church is
in this world, as Daniel in the Lions den, as sheep in the midst of ravening
wolves, as a Ship in the midst of the waves, and as a Lily among thorns. All
the birds of prey do seize on the poor Turtle-Dove of Chrict, and they bear
a special and implacable malice against Gods Church and Children. Yea
oftentimes, those that profess religion in the form of it, do let out the
heart blood of it in deed, and deny the power thereof. We see it has bin for
ever since Christ's coming, and it will be so to the end of the World. Satan
abuses the great Ordinances of God, and makes them serviceable to his own
ends, so that there is nothing free from Satan's defilement, no, not the best
Ordinances of God. We see how boisterously and roughly the poor church of God
is handled. Are there not oftentimes in the Church within it self, prejudices,
surmises, jealousies, one against another, that the company of one another is
not so sweet, and delightful? And Woe to the world because of offenses. Are
there not Mat. 18. 7.
scandals and offenses in the Church, that hinders the comfort of it, and many
times do cause the falling out of those, that are otherwise truly good? So that
in regard of Christians themselves, there is not such a sweet complacency and
delight one in another, as there should be; and as there shall be then. Where
there is a different sight, and a different light, there will be different
judgments, and affections. Now al Christians in this life, have both a
different light and sight; one sees things cleerer than another, and so their
judgments differ a little, and therefore their affections too: those promises
of the Lion and Isai. 11. 6.
the Lamb, dwelling together, shall not exactly be performed until this his
second coming; but there shall be something of the Lion, and of the Wolf, in
the best Christians: but then it shall be fully satisfied, then all Woolvish
and Lionish dispositions shall be subdued, then there shall be no infirmity in
others to displease us, nor any in us, to give distaste to them; but then we
shall have an eternal communion together. Therefore is there not in regard of
our selves, good reason for Christians to say, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus?
Then in regard of every one in his own particular: does not every one find
that true in himself, that Paul says of himself, that we carry about with us
a body of sin, and a body of death? our Romans 7. 24
corruptions that we carry about with us, are like a dead body tied unto a
living body, now what an odious and loathsome thing is it for a man to carry
about with him a dead body? Thus we do, and the more we grow in grace, the
more noisome it will be to us: for the more we grow in grace, the more life
we have, and therefore the more Antipathy against sin. The more we grow in
grace, the more light we have to discern the bad; and the more will our love
to grace increase; now the more light, and life, and love, the more shall we
be annoyed, carrying about with us, this body of sin, and the thorn in 2
Cor. 127.
the flesh. Some corruptions are as grievous to us as a Thorn, that rends the
flesh. And this is the disposition of the best in this life. Therefore in
regard of the Church, and the enemies of it, in regard of our selves, and every
particular Christian, in regard of their conflicting, and afflicted condition,
have we not cause to say, Amen, come Lord Jesus? Thus we see the grounds,
which the Church has to say so.

Let us now come to the second point, to try whether we can indeed express
this desire, that the spirit of God makes. (For it is only the Spirit in the
Spouse that says, Come Lord Jesus.) Let us see whether the Spirit says so in
us.

We shall not say much: it may be known by that which has bin said in the
beginning, and it is evident also besides: therefore in a word or two.

Let us try our selves by this: what benefit have we Trial 1.
by the first coming of Christ, by his death, and the shedding of his blood?
Does that pardon our sins? Are our Consciences besprinkled by that from dead
works, to Heb. 9. 14.
serve the everliving God? Are our hearts set at liberty to go to the Throne
of grace? Have we thus any benefit by his first coming? Then we cannot but
with a long and longing expectation look for his second.

But on the contrary, he that has no good by the first, cannot truly desire
nor comfortably expect the second coming of Christ: for why? the second
coming is but to make good what is begun here. The first is to redeem our
souls, the second is to glorify our bodies: If our souls be not redeemed,
never look for the redemption of our bodies. The first and second Romans 8. 23.
coming of Christ, are of so near connection, that oftentimes they are
comprised together, as the regeneration of our souls, and the regeneration of
our bodies, the Adoption of our souls, and the Adoption of our bodies, the
redemption of our souls, and the Redemption of our bodies; to show, that
wheresoever there is the true redemption and Adoption of the Soul, there the
Redemption and Adoption of the body will follow, and an expectation thereof
also: Christ will be redemption to us when he has bin redemption to our fowls
first, in the assurance of the pardon of our sins. Look then to that first.

If we desire the second Trial 2.
coming of Christ, we will prepare for it. If a man says, he desires to go
to some great person, and yet never thinks of any preparation for it, it is but
a pretended desire, if he does not put on his best clothes, and fit himself
for it, as Joseph did for Pharoh: so if a man hope for this coming of Gone. 41.
14.
Christ, he will purify himself for it, even as he is 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
pure. He will not appear in his foul clothes, but will put off the old man,
and Ephesians. 4. 22, 24.
put on the new. He will fit himself as the Bride, for the coming of the
Bridegroom. Beloved if the thoughts of Christ's second coming, be not
efficatious to work in the soul, a great care to fit and prepare for it, it
is but a false conceit and lying fancy, it is no holy desire: examine it by
this: Whether your heats be Trial 3.
the Kingdom of Christ, whether he rule in your hearts here: Do we think to
rule with him in Heaven, in his Kingdom, if we will not yield up our Hearts
to be his Kingdom upon earth? No, he will come into our hearts, before we
shall come to him, he will come to rule in us here, before we shall ever think
to come to rule with him in heaven. Therefore all they that stand out against
the Ordinances of God, and will live in sin against their knowledge and
conscience, do they spend any thoughts or wishes on Christ's second coming? He
will come indeed, but it will be a day of darkness and gloominesse unto them.
Joel. 2. 2.
Such persons cannot say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, but, Mountains come,
and Rocks come, come quickly: Rev. 6. 16.
Fall upon us and hide us from the presence of him that sits upon the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Nothing will be more terrible to such,
then that Day: Fire is the most comfortable thing, and the most terrible: and
so God is most comfortable to his, and yet most terrible to such, that do not
prepare for his coming. Who amongst us, Isa 33. 14.
(says the Prophet) shall dwell winh the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? Who shall appear before Christ? To them then
that live in their sins, in this glorious light of the Gospel, there is a
most terrible threatening, even from the coming of Christ. If any man love not
the LORD JESUS, when 1 Cor. 16. 22.
he is discovered clearly in the Gospel, Let him be Anathema, Maranatha,
which is a more terrible curse then any is in the Law. As the greatest
blessings are from the coming of Christ; so from the same is the most terrible
threatening. There is not such a terrible curse in all the Scriptures again, as
that is in the Corinthians. So that, The Lord shall come 2 Thessalonians. 1.
in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to all them that know him not, and that
obey not the Gospel: therefore take heed of this.

Try it again by holy Trial 4
exercises. They that desire indeed the coming of Christ they exercise
themselves much in holiness: they exercise themselves in the beginning of
Heaven here upon earth, in reading and hearing the Word, in the communion of
Saints, in praying, and acquainting themselves with God, etc. In what else
shall we be employed, when we come to Heaven? There shall be the perfection of
these graces, and exercises begun here upon earth. Many a profane wretches
heart swells when he coms to prayer, or any divine exercise; he is proudly
brought up, and his heart is not subdued to holy exercises here. Heaven will
not brook such, and such will not brook Heaven. There is nothing but praising
God continually. now if you will not endure these holy exercises here, what
should you do in Heaven? Therefore let us not deceive our own souls, I beseech
you. If we say this truly, Come Lord Jesus, undoubtedly it will have an
influence into our lives, it will stir up all graces in the soul; as Faith,
to lay hold upon it; hope, to expect it; love, to embrace it; patience, to
endure any thing for it; heavenlymindednesse, to fit and prepare for it;
faithfulness in our callings, that we may make up our accou^ts before that
time, etc. There is not a grace of the spirit, but it is stirred up and
quickened thereby. Therefore be not deceived: It is impossible that we should
have dead and dull and cold hearts, and yet believe this, that there is such a
glorious time to come, undoubtedly it will inspire and cause strength and
comfort in all our sufferings, and in all our doings, if our hearts do think
with the Spirit, and thought of Faith, of this glorious appearing of Christ:
therefore we should shame our selves: what? can I hear of these things, and be
no more affected with them then I am? thus we should complane of the deadness
and dullness of our hearts, and labor to work our hearts to an admiration of
the excellencies that shall be revealed then.

But I go on, and come in the last place to some few directions, how we
should come to frame our selves to this, to be able to utter this desire and
prayer.

Labor to be reconciled Direct. 1.
to God. Maintain and preserve thy peace and reconciliation with God, and then
all things will be reconciled unto us, that are between us and the second
coming of Christ. Nay, all shall be ours; life ours, death ours, devil ours,
to help us to heaven: when we are at peace with God, Job. 5. 23.
all shall be at peace with Hos. 2. 18.
us; and then we may have comfortable thoughts of that day; then we can think
of death and not be troubled; of hell and Godswrath, and not be disquieted.
Therefore above all, let us get the assurance of the grand point of
justification, of being clothed with the righteousness of Christ; Let us be
sure to be found in that, and appear in it, to understand that point well.
Saint Paul was wonderful careful hereof. He desires to have it as a seal of
the righteousness of Faith, and to be found in him, not having his own
righteousness, etc. As if he Phil. 3. 9.
were tender, to touch upon Christ's glory. If we be clothed with the Garments
of Christ's righteousness, we may go through the wrath of God: for, that
alone is wrath-proofe; that will pacify God, and pacify the Conscience too.
It is a righteousness of Gods own providing, and accepting. Be sure that you
understand it well; that you appear not in your own, but in his: and then may
you think of that day with comfort.

If we would think of the blessed times that are Direct. 2.
to come with comfort, then let us labor to grow in the New creature; to be
more and more filled with the fullness of God; to strive to have more of Christ
in us still: The more we have of Christ in us, the more shall we desire his
coming to us. Let us desire and labor to have all the corners of the heart
filled up with the Spirit of Christ; our understandings, with knowledge; our
affections, with love and delight; and our wills, with obedience. The Scripture
calls it, being Ephesians. 3. 19.
filled with all the fulness of God. Now, the more we enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, by growth in grace here, the fitter shall we be for it,
and the more shall we desire it. The more suteablenesse there is between us
and Heaven, and the glorious condition to come, the more shall we long after
it, and rejoice in the thoughts of it.

Be sure to do what you Direct. 3.
do quickly, and thoroughly. Satan is so wise, that he knows his time is but
short; and therefore lays about him with great Rev. 12. 12.
wrath and fury. Oh, let us be so wise, as to know that our time is but short!
God himself tells us, that it is so. Our time is a little 1 Cor. 7. 29.
spot of time, cut out between two Eternities; before, and after: then, let us
do our work quickly. We may be suddenly surprised, before we be aware:
and, as the Tree falls, so it lies; as a man lives, so he dies; as Death
leaves us, so Judgment, and the second coming of Christ, shall find us. We
should therefore (as the Apostle says) work out our own salvation with
fear, and Phil. 2. 12.
trembling. Many men, when they come to die, are troubled about this: Oh, I
have not done so; I should have done this and that, and have not; but I have
done amiss, I have not thoroughly repented; something is not done, that should
have been; I have not made mine Evidences sound, I have not made my Calling 2
Pet. 1. 10.
and Election sure: Oh, my Conscience is troubled, and my soul cannot find
that peace in God, etc. Oh, do you take warning by them, and now work out
your salvation with fear, and trembling: and that upon this ground, because
the time is short, and uncertain. Beloved, it is a great error in us; we
think of reaping, as soon as we begin to sow; nay, we begin to sow then,
when we should reap: Then we begin to think of God, and goodness, when we
lie a dying: That should be a time of reaping the comfort of all our former
life, and to think of the time to come, with joy. Oh, what a comfortable thing
would it be, if we can with S. Paul, look backward, and say; I have fought
the good fight, I have 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
finished my course, I have kept the Faith? etc. He looks back with comfort,
and therefore he looks forward with comfort too: From henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge,
shall give me at that day, etc. When a Christian man has done the will of God,
and looks back-ward, and says: I had a Race to run, and I have run it; I
had a Faith to keep, and I have kept it; I had a fight to fight, and I have
fought it: and then looks forward, and sees a Crown of eternal Glory before
his eyes; what a comfort and ravishing joy will this afford? Whether he
looks backward, or forward, all is glorious. But if we be careless, and
negligent, and will not work out our salvation; then we cannot with Hezekiah,
look back with comfort, and say to God: Lord, remember how I have walked
before thee in truth and uprightness of heart, and have done that which was
right in thy sight: Neither can we with S. Paul, look forward with any
comfort. Beloved, Heaven is a pure place, and requires a great deal of purity
in those that come thither: And Christ is holy, and glorious. Therefore, we
must set no measure and pitch to any holiness in this life; but grow still
more and more heavenly, till we come to Heaven. Therefore, the Apostle sets it
down by way of wonderment, in the last of S. Peter: Seeing all these things
shall be 2 Pet. 3. 11.
dissolved, says he: What says he to that? He cannot tell what to say;
therefore he says nothing in particular, but in general; what manner of
persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness? Some men will
set a measure and stint to themselves; and if any go beyond their measure,
then they are such and such, curious, nice, and precise, etc. Why? what measure
of holiness should be set to them, that look for the second coming of
Christ? What manner of persons ought we to be? He cannot tell what to say in
particular; and therefore leaves it to admiration. We must not then set up
our staff, and put any measure to any perfection here in this world; but still
grow in grace and godliness, looking for and hasting unto the coming of the
Day of the Lord.

Let us take all advantages, Direct. 4.
to help us in this desire and prayer for the second coming of Christ, from
all the crosses of this life, and from all the businesses of Satan. Satan was
shut out of Paradise, but he is still creeping into the Paradise of the
Church. But in Heaven, he shall never come. He was once there, and was cast
down from thence, never to come there again. But in the Church he is always
stirring. He is never so bound up, but he has some mischief to do. Now,
let the consideration of Satan and his instruments, that are always some way
or other molesting of the Church, and are as thorns in their sides, stir us
up to desire the second coming of Christ. So, from all particular losses and
crosses let us help our selves. If we have lost a friend, let us fill our
hearts with comfort from the second coming of Christ; and from the
consideration of that, that then the time will come, when all friends shall
meet together. Do we leave any thing in this world behind us? we shall meet
with better there; better friends, a better place, better employment; all
better. Therefore, let us take advantage from every thing, to help forward that
desire. In a word, I beseech you (because there be many things that might be
spoken to this purpose) let it be your maine care, to fit your selves for that
time. It is a time of longing here, while we live. It is the time between the
Contract and the Marriage; let us labor to be fitted and prepared for that
time.

But you shall have many a good soul cry out; Oh, Object.
I am not so desirous of the coming of Christ, as I ought.

True; it may be so, because of thy wants, because Answ.
thou have not prepared thy self, because thou art not spiritual, because
thou art not mortified. This arises further, as from other causes, so from
this. Thou art ignorant of the Covenant of Grace, that God is thy Father, and
that he has bound himself as a Father to pardon the sins of his children.
Therefore, if thy sins be but infirmities, that thou strivest against, thou
may be comforted. Mark what the Apostle says; We our selves, which have
the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selve, do Romans 8. 23.
groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our
bodies. If we labor against our corruptions, it should be so far from
hindering our desire of Christ's coming, that we should desire it the rather,
because we labor under them; for then we shall be fully rid of them. Labor
to understand the Covenant of Grace more fully. Christ is a Mediator and
Intercessour; for whom? for perfect men? no; but for them that unwillingly
run into debt with God every day. Therefore we say, in the Lords Prayer;
Give us this day our daily Matthew 6. 11, 12.
bread, and forgive us our debts, etc. The ignorance of Evangelicall points
makes us so cold, so dead and dull, as we are oftentimes.

But you will say; I desire Object.
to live still. Those that desire the second coming of Christ, desire that he
would come and fetch them out of the World, when they have done their work.
May not I do so?

Yes, you may; but it Answ.
must be with a reservation, that you may bring to Heaven as many as you can,
that you may get further evidence of your salvation: and so in other respects,
you may desire to live, so it may be that God may honor himself by our lives.
But simply, and as the thing is in it self, we ought to be of S. Paul's mind,
to desire to Phil. 1. 23.
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

Therefore, when the time of our dissolution comes, we are to be willing to
resign up our souls unto God, not only patiently, but cheerfully. For why?
The day of death is a day of Iubile, a day of Coronation, a day of Marriage, a
day of Harvest, a day of Triumph. We are to be ashamed of the disproportion
of our desires to earthly things, and to heavenly. Is the Labourer loath to
think of a Sabbath, or a day of Rest? Is a Soldier loath to think of a day of
Victory, and Triumph? Is a contracted person loath to think of the day of
Marriage? or a King, of the day of his Coronation? They are all desirous of
these things; and why should not we be of that time, when all these things
shall indeed and really be performed? All those things are but shadows, and
scarce that, of things to come; and yet how earnestly desirous are men of them?
Have not we then just cause to take occasion, to shame and blame our selves,
for the disproportion of our desires to earthly and heavenly things?

But now, when we have finished our work; when God has been served by us,
in our generations; as it was said of David, that Act. 13. 36.
be served God in his own generation, by the will of God; and after that,
fell on sleep: then God will take off our desire, of living any longer; then
he will make us even willing to die. As Saint Paul, in the last Epistle that
ever he made, when he had run his race, and fought his fight, and finished
his course; then, nothing but a Crown: Henceforth there 2 Timothy 4. 8.
is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc. And in the same Chapter
afterward; The Lord shall Verse. 18.
deliver me from every evil work, and preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom.
So says Christ: I have glorified thee on the Earth, I Job. 17. 45.
have finished the work which thou gave me to do; and now, O Father,
glorify thou me with thine own self. So, when the Children of God have an
Item from the Spirit of God, that they have done all that God would have them
for to do, then they will be most willing to go hence. In the mean time,
they must Heb. 12. 1*
run with patience the race that is set before them; they must fight the fight
that God has pitched for them, and keep the Faith, they must be willing to
do all that God would have them, in an humble submission to his will: But when
they have done all, then their hearts will be enlarged, to desire the coming
of Christ; that he would come, and call them home.

So then, this doubt is sufficiently answered. In a word, I will end with this.

When you find your hearts dull, and cold, and unactive to good, then fetch
fire from hence, to inflame them; from the second coming of Christ, from the
love of God in Christ, from the love of his appearance. Oh, rouse up and
quicken your hearts with such considerations: Do you conflict with any
enemies, either without or within? Remember what the Apostle says; Fight the
good fight of Faith, lay 1 Timothy 6. 12.
hold on eternal life. What is the way, to fight the good fight of Faith? why,
lay hold on eternal life; that will make a man fight indeed.

Are you in any disconsolate condition? If you be, see what the Apostle Paul
says to the The ssalonians; Wherefore, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18
comfort ye one another with these words: With what words? Why, we shall be
ever with the Lord. Oh, these words will comfort indeed. Consider, when you
have lost your friends, your estate, or any thing, it shall be all fully made
up there: Do you, as it were, make it up beforehand, with comforts of a higher
nature. They be things that will comfort indeed.

And so when you find your selves dull in doing the work of the Lord, think
upon the second coming of Christ, and that he will not then come
emptie-handed, but he will bring his reward Rev. 22. 12.
with him. Consider what Saint Paul said to Timothy: I charge thee therefore 2 Timothy 4. 1.
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at
his appearing, and his Kingdom, etc. The holy Apostle had no greater a
conjuration, to move Timothy to be diligent, and to quicken him in his
Ministry, then by the coming of our Lord Jesus. So let us stir up our
selves, and comfort our selves hereby.

Beloved, the Soul is never in such a tune, as when the thoughts of these
glorious Times have raised the Affections to the highest pitch, and pegge; then
the Soul is never uncomfortable; and so long as it is so affected, it cannot
sin: for we loose our frame, we let down the Soul in base desires, we
let loose our thoughts from closing with Christ, and with the time to come,
when we sin: when we let them loose, then they sink down to earthly
things; and that is the cause of all sin, and of all discomfort.

So long then, as we keep our hearts in a blessed frame of Faith, and in a
love of the appearing of Christ, they are impregnable; Satan cannot come
between us and our Faith: but he labors to loosen our Faith and Love, and to
distract us with the businesses of the World, that we shall have very seldom
thoughts of these things. Alas, that we who are borne again to an 1 Pet. 1. 4.
Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for us, should have so little and so light thoughts of our Inheritance!

If a man were to go a Journey by Sea a year hence, he would be thin king
every day upon his Journey, what he should have to carry with him, and what
will do him good when he comes there. We have all of us a long Journey to
go, from Earth to Heaven; and we should be thinking of it every day in the
year.

But we have a company of men in the World, all whose happiness is, in
putting off all thoughts in that kind; in deferring the day of their death, and
putting the evil day far away from them; not thinking upon them: that so
they may drown themselves in pleasure, and voluptuousness. Ah! what a
pitiful case has Satan and our own sinful dispositions brought us unto;
that we should place our happiness, safety, and comfort, in putting off the
thoughts of death? in going on presumptuously in sin, and never thinking upon
that great Day? Alas! they cannot think of it, but as Felix did; who, when he
heard Paul dispute Act. 24. 25.
and reason of Righteousness, and Temperance, and Judgment to come, trembled.

Why, let, Felix tremble, and let the World tremble; but let every Christian,
that has made his peace with God, rejoice. Even as poor Birds do sing, when
the Spring time is returned again; for it warmes them, and puts life and
spirit into them, and they entertain the light and heat of the Sun with
singing and melody: so let us, in our thoughts, entertain Christ's coming
with joy and comfort, having made our peace substantially and solidely with
God. Let us look up, and lift up our heads with joy, for our Redemption
draws nigh, Luke 21. 28.

Now I come to the particular occasion.
IT is well known, that the particular occasion of this Meeting, is, to
celebrate and solemnize the Funeral of that worthy man, Sir THOMAS CREW, one
of the Kings Sergeants: in regard of whom, I made choice of this Text. If I
wanted matter to speak of him, he had many natural excellent parts, which
did commend him. I might speak of the quickness of his wit, of the firmness
of his memory, of the readiness of his expressions, of the clearenesse and
soliditie of his judgment, able to penetrate into the depth of things, etc.
And for his ability in his particular calling, I might say many things. He
was a man very eminent in his calling; he was one of the Oracles of the Law,
in his time; one, that had gathered very long and large experience, and
wonderful great dexterity in that Profession. And surely, (Beloved) these
things are not to be neglected by us, though to Godward they are not much
regarded. For natural parts, the Devil excells, and has more then any man;
but yet to men-ward, they are to be esteemed; for they vindicate men from the
reproach and obloquie of the World. They will say, Such a man was a religious
man, but he had no skill in his calling; a good man, but unlearned. Now then
it takes away reproach and disgrace from Religion, when it can be said, This
was an excellent man in his Profession; and withal, a very excellent good
Christian. It is the guise and fashion of proud Profaneness, to lay Religion
as low as they can; they will take away or diminish all parts from religious
persons, as near as they can, that Religion it self may seem vile and
contemptible. For, if Religion once should win credit, then their baseness
would appear the more; and that their pride will not endure. Wherefore, if
these things be to be regarded, in regard of men; we ought to thank God for
it, when Grace is graced with excellent parts. Therefore, God sometimes
vouchsafes to men that are truly religious, excellency of parts; otherwise,
Grace is lovely in it self: But as a precious Stone and Pearl set in Gold, is
more precious and glorious; so Religion, set in the stem of Nature, and
excellent parts, has more luster and beauty, and the larger improvement.

You have a company of profane wretches in the World, even in these glorious
Times of the Gospel, that do glory only in their excellent parts; that will
seek even to the Devil himself, so they may out-bragge others, and gain to
themselves a reputation of wit: and some will vilely adventure upon sin
against their Conscience; thinking, that they should lose all reputation of wit
and parts, if they should become religious once. But you see, that God
oftentimes adornes religious men with excellent parts of Nature. Religion
indeed cuts off the froth, the exuberancie and redundancie of parts; but it
increases the soliditie of parts, and spiritualizeth them, and directs them to
their right end, to the glory of God, and good of mankind. Therefore, they may
stand well enough together.

Now, in this worthy man, there was a concentrating and joining together of the
parts of Nature, and the parts of Industry, and likewise of the parts of
Grace. And that which did steer his conversation, and rule all aright, was
indeed the true fear of God; which caused him to set the stamp of Religion on
all his courses, in his whole conversation.

For the Lords day, it may a little be discerned by that: He had a wonderful
care, to keep it holy. He was as eminent as any in his Profession, for that.
He would not entermeddle with the businesses of his calling, on that day. He
did not think it enough, to hear the Sermon, and Divine Service, and then to
go to the works of his calling. And in this he is to be commended. For whose
good has God appointed the Lords day? Is it not for our own? Should not we
grow base, and earthly minded, if one day in seven we should not be heavenly
minded, and think upon our ever-lasting condition in another World? Shall we
think much then of that which God appoints for us?

But to return; besides his care of the Lords day, (for he did not limit his
Religion to a day) he was careful in his Family of having Morning and Evening
prayers; yea, and private also, twice in a day at the least. And this, as it
did bring strength to his Soul, and put a beauty upon it; so it did also
sanctify his labors, and prosper his businesses, and bring them to a good
issue: He lost nothing by it. And seeing it is almost impossible, in these
profane times, but that such courses as these are, should meet with envy and
scorn from some; therefore he had learned with Moses, to Heb. 11. 26.
bear the reproach of Christ. He did account nothing more glorious, then the
profession of Religion. And truly, Religion is a glorious thing, it puts a
glory and beauty upon the Soul.

But there are many men in these days, that will not own Christ, in his
Cause: How will such look him in the face another day, when he has said;
Whosoever shall be ashamed Mar. 8. 38.
of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also
shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father,
with the holy Angels?

But this worthy man, I say, what he judiciously undertook, he constantly
went through withal. He would not be scorned, or turned out of his course by
any man; he was a Child of Wisdom, able to justify what he did, against
the spirit of gross and proud profaneness, and against an empty, formal,
dead, cold profession. He had not only the Word of God to back him, but his
own excellencies, and the sweetness that he felt and found in his Christian
course, to defend him. And this should all we labor for.

He was moreover, a man exceeding conscionable. He had a very tender
Conscience, being willing in all doubtful things to be directed, and resolved;
which was an excellent thing. He knew, and so should all you, that the time
would come ere long, that a man would give a great deal, to have a good
Conscience: and this was in him.

For his conversation in his Family, he was very mild and gentle at all
times: not as some, who being sweetened with a Fee, are wonderful mild and
calm to their Clients, but are Lions in their own Houses; his carriage was
not such.

For his conversation with other kind of men, it was sweet and loving, and very
useful. He was full of goodness, and offices of love. He did not bear
himself big upon his Offices, or Place; but was, as David says of himself,
as a weaned Child: Though his parts did raise him up, and advance him above
the ordinary sort of men; yet his grace levelled him, that he made himself
equal to the lower sort; and yet in such sort, that he had wisdom to
understand and know himself in his place: and, so grace will teach a man to
do.

He was a mavelous great encourager of honest, laborious, religious
Ministers, for their Masters sake, and for their works sake: and he lost
nothing by it; he had a Prophets reward, the prayers of all good men, that
were acquainted with him. And I hope, that that commendations will not die with
him, but that it will live in those that he lives in.

For his disposition toward the poor, he was very merciful, and
compassionate. He was the poor man's Lawyer: insomuch, that the last Cause
that ever he pleaded, was sub forma pauperis, for a poor man, and a Minister;
as it was publicly shown to the greatest and most judicious Magistrates in
the Kingdom. He was a foot to the lame, and eyes to the blind, as Job says,
he was; and, he made the Widows to rejoice. He was a helpefull and
fruitful man; a Tree of Righteousness, full of good fruit. He made the times
and places better, where he lived. H^e was a great lover of his Country, even
in some degree, to the prejudice of himself.

It pleased King James, of famous memory, to choose him, with some other
Commissioners, to go into Ireland, about public Employment; which he
performed with such care and Conscience, that when he returned home again,
he was made the Kings Sergeant; and after that, Speaker in the Parliament, and
the Mouth of the Commons.

He was forty years a Practitioner in his calling: In which time, God
blessed him with a great increase of his Estate. God sometimes does delight to
make good his temporal Promises, to a religious, industrious, and faithful
man, and that in the eyes of the World. Sometimes God carries things in a
Cloud, and in a Mystery; we cannot see how such and such men should go
backward in the World. This will appear to us another day, in the Day of
Revelation. But, because God would encourage Religion, faithfulness, and
industry, he makes good his temporal Promises to such faithful men as he
was. Such was his faithfulness, such was his dexterity and quickness, in
dispatching men's Causes, and Businesses, that men were willing to put their
Causes and Estates into his hands. Therefore it is no wonder, if in so long a
time, as forty years practice, God blessed him with so great an Estate.

But, some may object Object.
his going to London of late times, when his infirmities grew upon him.

But thus much I know; Answ.
That the exigencie and urgencie of other men's occasions, did importune, and in
part, draw him to it. And then again, his staying at home, was very tedious
to him. It is death to an industrious man, that has been in employment, to be
idle; as it is death to an idle man, to be employed. He was a man of an active
spirit; and one, that was not hindered by his Journeyes. Neither would it have
helped or eased him, to have stayed at home. Therefore, you must judge
charitably of that.

But I come in a word, to the time of his sickness, and so to the hour of his
death.

For these later years, he had two several fevere churlish Monitours, that
did put him in mind of his end; namely, the Stone, and the Strangurie. In these
sore Diseases, he carried himself with wonderful great patience: None did
ever hear any words fall from him, that witnessed any impatience.

Toward his end, he considered, that he was now for another, and a better
place. Therefore, when he was invited to Dinner, in the House of which he
was, in Grayes Inn; Says he, I must Dine in another place.

When his Sickness did seize upon him more sharply, though the pain thereof
took away a great part of the powers of his Soul; yet he did manifest a
great deal of strength of Faith, by diverse words that fell from him: As the
Heart brayes Psalm. 42. 1.
after the Rivers of Water, so pants my Soul after thee, O God: And as the
Church does here; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: And, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word. He was displeased with them
about him, that out of their love to him, did recall him by Cordialls out of a
Swoone; and so protracted his life longer then he would have had it: You keep
me too long from Christ, says he; God is merciful to me, but you are not;
with many the like. And when they heaved up his body, his spirit was so strong
in him, as if he desired to meet Christ, before his time.

And thus, at length, this blessed man meekely yielded up his blessed Soul
into the hands of his blessed Savior; that had so dearly bought it,
sanctified it, and sealed it by his holy and blessed Spirit.

Beloved, I think there were but few men of later times, of whom we had more,
and a more general loss, then of this worthy man. His Servants lost a kind
and loving Master; his Children lost a most tender and careful Father; his
Friends, a true, cordial, and hearty friend; the Professors of the Law, a
special Ornament of it; the Ministers especially, a sweet encourager; the
poor Clients, a loving Patron; the richer sort, a grave, wise, and judicious
Counselor; Religion and Justice, a great Supporter; the Country, where he
lived, a faithful Magistrate: So that here is the loss of many.

But what has he lost? He has attained to that which he desired so
earnestly; he has joined himself to Christ, and left behind him a Monument
of Mortality, the sad remembrance and remainder of him, his dead Body. He
has made an happy change; of Earth, for Heaven; of the company of men, for
the company of perfect Souls and Angels in Heaven; of troublesome employments
here, for glorious employments for ever. So that he is no loser.

He has left behind him likewise another sweet memorial, and remembrance of
him; as sweet as the Ointment of the Apothecarie, unto the Church and people of
God.

He lived (to end all) in the best times that have been in the Church since
the Apostles times, all his days. He was borne under the Gospel, and lived
under the Gospel. He began to savor the best things, even from his youth. And
God lengthened his days very long, for the good of us. Therefore God
miraculously, almost, preserved his weak worn body. It was much, that such a
spirit should endure in such a body so long, under such Diseases. But, at
length, being full of days, and full of honor with all good people, God
having blessed him in his Children, (for his Childrens Children inherit his
Blessing) in the comfort and assurance of an happy change, he yielded up his
blessed Soul, and triumphant Spirit, into the hands of God, whom he had
loved; whose Cause he had owned here in the World, in the midst of this
sinful generation; and whom he professed, even unto death; whose coming, he
desired so earnestly: where, and with whom, we now leave him.

And for you (Beloved) that fully know (as the Apostle Paul says) his 2 Timothy
3. 11
purpose, his manner of life, his Faith, his long suffering, his Charity,
Patience, etc. I beseech you, let not his memory die with him; but let those
Virtues that were in him, live in you, so long as you live. If there be any
thing prayse-worthie, Phil. 4. 8.
or of good report, (as indeed there was much in him) think on these things.
If there were any infirmities in him, (as, I think, there were as few in him
as in any man) Love has a Mantle, to cover them. He was a gracious man every
way; one, that adorned the Doctrine and Gospel of Christ, in every thing.
Therefore, I beseech you, as the Apostle says, be followers of him, as he was
of Christ. We must one day give an account to God, not only for what Sermons
we have heard, but for the examples of those amongst whom we have lived; how
we have profited by the Lights that God has set before us in the World,
whether we have imitated their examples, or no. We must give an account for
all the good we might have received, not only by the means of salvation, but
also by the Presidents of worthy persons, set before us.

I beseech you, in the bowels of the Lord Jesus, think on these things; and
the Peace of God be with you.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

THO. WYKES.
Feb. 13. 1637.

