THE BRVISED REED, AND SMOKING FLAX. Some Sermons contracted out of the 12:
of Matthew. 20. At the desire, and for the good of weaker Christians.

By R. SIBBES. D. D.

ZACH. 4. 10. Who has despised the day of small things?

LONDON, Printed for R. Dawlman, dwelling at the sign of the Brazen Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard, 1630.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir Horatio Veere Knight, Lord Veere of Tilbury, and
General of the English Forces under the High and mighty Lords the States
general of the united Provinces in the Netherlands. And to his pious Consort,
the Lady Mary Veere, increase of grace, etc.
Right Honorable,
Soldiers that carry their lives in their hands, had need above all others to
carry grace in their hearts, that so having made peace with God, they may be
fit to encounter with men. And having by faith in Christ disarmed death before
they dye, they may sacrifice their lives with the more courage and comfort:
which to neglect being a matter of eternity, is not valor but desperate
madness, because in this business as in oversights of war, there is no place
for a second repentance, the first error being unrecoverable. In evils above
the strength of man to prevail and his patience to endure, there God has
planted the affection of fear, which might stir us up to avoid the danger by
flying to him in Christ who being our friend it is no matter who is our enemy:
we may be killed, but cannot be hurt; so safe it is to be under his command
that has command over Death, Hell, Judgment, and all that we most fear. Yet
such is our nature that by familiarity with danger, we grow by degrees
insensibly to be hardened against it, and to look no further then death, as if
to die were only to give up the ghost, and then an end of all. And hereupon it
is that they that follow the wars are generally taken to be men not most
religious. The more respect those of that profession deserve, that have learned
upon what terms to live and dye, that are sure of a better life before they
leave this, that have laid up their life in Christ; Amongst whom (right
Honorable) the world has a long time taken notice of you, in whom both
religion, and military imployme^t, meekness of spirit, with height of courage,
humility with honor, by a rare and happy combination have met together. Whereby
you have much vindicated your profession from common imputation, and showed
that Piety can enter into Tents, and follow after camps. and that God has his
Iosuas, and his Corneliuses in all ages. But I will not use many words of your
self to your self, because though you have done much that may and will be
spoken of, yet you love not to hear or speak of what you have done.

I may seem to some unbefitting to offer a discourse of a bruised reed, to
such a strong and flourishing Cedar. But experience shows, that the strongest
plants in Gods house are exposed sometimes to strong winds of temptation, and
thereupon meet with bruisings; that they may the better know by whose strength
they stand, and that the greatest may learn to go out of themselves to the
same common rock and fountain of strength with the meanest. DAVID was a
valiant man, yet upon experience of his often failings and recoveries, he became
toward God as a weaned child. Lowliness of mind to Godward, and greatness of
spirit against his enemies may well stand together, for the way to be above
all other things, is to submit to God first. Besides; this Text speaks of the
prevailing government of Christ in his Church and in his Children, which may
be an encouragement to your Lordship still not only to own the c^use of
Christ in these times wherein men are ashamed of what they should glory in, and
glory in their shame; but likewise to fight the Lords battles (when called to
it) and help him against the mighty, for victory attends Christ's side in
the end. Though God to revenge the quarrel of his Covenant, suffers his
enemies, to prevail yet for a time, to harden them the more, yet they have
undertaken a damned cause, and howsoever the Church has justly provoked God,
yet the cause shall stand impregnable against all created power of Devils and
men. We naturally desire victory, and many desire it more then truth o^
goodness, which only are victorious, and so out of a depraved judgment they
cross their own desires, seeking to overcome in that wherein it were safer
for them to be overcome, they then are sure to meet with shame in the
conclusion in stead of victory; or else we must deny Christ to be King of his
Church, and Judge of the world. Proceed on still (honorable Lord) to stand for
Christ both in Peace and War, and this shall be found to your Honor, when
Christ shall come to be glorious in his Saints, that he thought you worthy to
honor himself by, when others that oppose or betray the cause of Christ for
base ends, shall not dare to hold up their ha ds.

I would not divide you from your Honorable Lady, being obliged to both, and
both being one as in other bands, so in that above nature, in love to the best
things: both exemplary in all religious courses, both in your places likewise
having been employed in great services for the common good, so that not only
this, but foreign States are bound to bless God for you both. Going on in
these ways you will find God making his promise good of honoring them that
honor him.

I do not so far overvalue this poor work, as to think it worthy of your
Honors, but thus I thought meet to witness my deserved respect to you both. If
I be to blame for suffering these Sermons long since preached, thus to come
forth, others must divide the fault with me, who had brought it to that pass,
that it was almost necessary for me to take this course. The Lord continue to
bless your Honors with all your branches, and to maintain his grace in you,
until he has brought forth judgment unto victory.

Your Honors to command in the Lord, Richard Sibbes.

To the Christian READER.
TO prevent a further inconvenience, I was drawn to let these notes pass with
some review; Considering there was an intendme^t of publishing them, by some
who had not perfectly taken them. And these first, as being next at hand, and
having had occasion lately of some fresh thoughts concerning this argument, by
dealing with some the chief ground of whose trouble, was the want of
considering of the gracious nature and office of Christ. The right conc^ipt of
which is the spring of all service to Christ, and comfort from him. God has
laid up all grace and comfort in Christ for us, and planted a wonderful
sweetness of pity and love in his heart toward us. As God his Father has
fitted him with a body, so with a heart to be a merciful Heb. 10. 7.
Redeemer. What does the Scriptures speak but Christ's love and tender care
over those that are humbled: and besides the mercy that rests in his own
breast, he works the l^ke impression in his Ministers and others, to comfort 1
Th. s. 5 14
the feeble minded, and to bear with the weak. Ministers by their calling are
friends of the Bride, and to bring Christ and his Spouse together, and
therefore ought upon all good occasions to lay open all the excellencies of
Christ, and amongst others, as that he is highly borne, mighty, one in whom
all the treasures of wisdom are hid, etc, so likewise gentle, and of a good
nature, and of a gracious d^sposition. It cannot but cheer the heart of the
spouse, to consider in all her infirmities and miseries she is subject unto,
that she has a husband of a k^nd disposition, that knows how to give the
honor of mild usage to the weaker vessel. That will be so far from
rejecting her, because she is weak, that he will pity her the more. And as he
is kind at all times, so especially when it is most seasonable, he will speak
to her heart, especially Hosea 2. 24.
in the wilderness. The more glory to God, and the more comfort to a Christian
soul arises from the belief and application of these things, the more the
enemy of Gods glory and man's comfort, labors to breed misperswasions of them,
that if he cannot keep men from heaven, and bring them into that cursed
condition he is in himself, yet he may trouble them in their passage. Some and
none of the worst, Satan prevails withal so far, as to neglect the means,
upon fear they should (being so sinful) dishonor God and increase their
sins: and so they lie smothering under this temptation as it were bound hand
and foot by Satan, not daring to make out to Christ, and yet are secretly
upheld by a spirit of faith, showing it self in hidden sighs and groans unto
God. These are abused by false representations of Christ; all whose ways to
such, being ways of mercy and all his thoughts, thoughts of love. The more
Satan is malicious in keeping the soul in darkness, the more care is to be
had of establishing the soul upon that which will stay it. Amongst other
grounds to build our faith on, as the free offer of grace to all that will
receive it; the gracious invitation of all Rev. 22. 17. M^. 11. 28
that are weary and heavy lad^n, those that have nothing to buy withal; The
command binding to believe, the danger Esaias 53. 1. 1 Ioh. 3. 23. Ioh. 16. 9. 2
Cor. 3. 20.
of not believing, being shut up prisoners thereby under the guilt of all other
sins, the sweet entreaty to believe, and ordayning Ambassadors to desire
peace, putting tender affections into them answerable to their calling,
ordaining Sacraments for the sealing of the covenant. Besides these (I say) and
such moving inducements, this is one infusing vigor and strength into all the
rest, that they proceed from Christ, a person authorized, and from those bowels
that moved him not only to become a man, but a curse for us, hence it is that
he will not quench the smoking wick or flax. It adds strength to faith, to
consider that al expressions of love issue from nature in Christ, which is
constant. God knows that as we are prone to sin, so when conscience is
thoroughly awaked, we are as prone to despair for sin; and therefore he
would have us know that he sets himself in the Covenant of grace to
triumph in CHRIST over the greatest evils and enemies we fear, and that his
thoughts are not as our thoughts are, that he is God Es. 5. 8.
and not man, that there is heights, and depths, and Hos. 11. 9.
breadths of mercy in him above Ephesians. 3. 18.
all the depths of our sin and misery; that we should never be in such a
forlorn condition, wherein there should be ground of despair, considering our
sins be the sins of men, his mercy the mercy of an infinite GOD. But though
it be a truth cleerer then the Sun beams, that a broken hearted sinner ought
to embrace mercy so strongly enforced: yet there is no truth that the heart
shuts it self more against, then this, especially in sense of misery, when
the soul is fittest for mercy, until the Holy spirit sprinkleth the
conscience with the blood of Christ, and sheddeth his love into the heart, that
so the blood of Christ in the conscience may cry louder then the guilt of
sin; for only Gods Spirit can raise the conscience with comfort above guilt;
because he is only greater then the conscience. Men may speak comfort, but it
is Christ's Spirit that can only comfort. Peace is the fruit of the lips, but
yet created to be Es. 57. 19
so. No creature can take off wrath from the conscience, but he that set it on,
though all the prevailing arguments be used that can be brought forth, till
the Holy Ghost effectually persuades by a divine kind of rhetoric, which
ought to raise up our hearts to him who is the comforter of his people, that he
would seal the^ to our souls. Now God dealing with me^ as understanding
creatures, the manner which he uses in this powerful work upon their
consciences, is by way of friendly intercourse, as entreaty, and persuasion,
and discovery of his love in Christ, and Christ's gracious inclination thus even
to the Loquitur Deus ad (...) nostrum, agi^ ad modum suum.
weakest and lowest of men. And therefore because he is pleased by such like
motives to enter into the heart, and settle a peace there, we ought with
reverence to regard all such sanctified helps, and among the rest this of
making use of this comfortable description of Christ by God the Father, in
going boldly in all necessities to the throne of grace. But we must know this
comfort is only the portion of those that give up themselves to Christ's
government, that are willing in all things to be disposed of by him. For here
we see in this Scripture both joined together, mercy to bruised reeds, and yet
government prevailing by degrees over corruptions. Christ so favors weak
ones, as that he frames their souls to a better condition then they are in.
Neither can it be otherwise, but that a soul looking for mercy should submit
it self at the same time to be guided. Those relations of husband, head,
shepherd, etc. imply not only meekness and mercy, but government likewise.
When we become Christ ans to purpose, we live not exempt from all service, but
only we change our Lord. Therefore if any in an ill course of life snatch
comforts before they are reached out unto them, let them know they do it at
their own perils. It is as if some ignorant man should come into an
Apothecaries shop stored with variety of medicines of all sorts, and should
take what comes next to hand, poison perhaps in stead of Physic. There is no
word of comfort in the whole book of God intended for such as regard iniquity
in their Psalm. 66. 18.
hearts, though they do not act it in their lives. Their only comfort is that
the sentence of damnation is not executed, and thereupon there is yet
opportunity of safer thoughts and resolutions, otherwise they stand not only
convicted, but condemned by the Word, and Christ that rides on the White horse
will spend all his arrows Rev. 6. 2.
upon them, and wound them to death. If any shall bless himself in an ill
way, Gods wrath shall burn to hell against such. There is no more comfort to
be expected from Christ, then there is care to please him. Otherwise to make
him an abetter of a lawless and loose life, is to transform him into a
fancy, nay into the likeness of him whose works he came to destroy, which
is the most detestable Idolatry of all. One way whereby the Spirit of Christ
prevails in his, is to preserve them from such thoughts; yet we see people
will frame a divinity to themselves, pleasing to the flesh, suitable to their
own ends, which being vain in the substance, will prove likewise vain in the
fruit, and as a building upon the sand.

The maine scope of all, is, to allure us to the entertainment of Christ's
mild, safe, wise, victorious government, and to leave men naked of all
pretenses, why they will not have Christ to rule over them, when we see
salvation not only strongly wrought, but sweetly dispensed by him. His
government is not for his own pleasure, but for our good. We are saved by a
way of love, that love might be kindled by this way in us to God again,
because this affection melts the soul, and mouldeth it to all duty and
acceptable manner of performance of duty. It is love in duties that God
regards more then duties themselves. This is the true and Evangelical
disposition arising from Christ's love to us, and our love to him again; and
not to fear to come to him as if we were to take an Elephant by the tooth. It
is almost a fundamental mistake, to think that God delights in slavish fears,
when as the fruits of Christ's Kingdom are peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost,
for from this mistake come weak, slavish, superstitious conceits.

Two things trouble the peace of Christians very much, their weaknesses
hanging 1. 2.
upon them, and fear of holding out for time to come. A remedy against both is
in this Text, for Christ is set out here as a mild Savior to weak ones; and
for time to come, his powerful care and love is never interrupted, until he
bring forth judgment to victory. And thereupon it is that both the means of
salvation and grace wrought by means, and glory the perfection of grace, come
all under one name of the KINGDOM of GOD so often; because whom by means he
brings to grace, he will by grace bring to glory.

This makes the thoughts of the latter Judgment comfortable unto us, that he
who is then to be our Judge, cannot but judge for them who ^ve been ruled by
him here, for whom he gu^des by his Psalm 73. 24.
counsel, those he brings to glory. If our says were but as firm as our
state in Christ is secure and glorious, what manner of men should we be?

If I had gone about to affect writing in a high strain, I should have missed
of mine end, and crossed the argument in hand. For shall we that are servants
quench those weak sparks which our Lord himself is pleased to cherish? I had
rather hazard the censure of some, then hinder the good of others; which if it
be any ways furthered by these few observations, I have what I aimed at. I
intended not a treatise, but opening of a Text, what I shall be drawn to do
in this kind must be by degrees, as leisure in the midst of many interruptions
will permit: The Lord guide our hearts, tongues, and pens, for his glory, and
the good of his people.

R. SIBBES.

A TABLE OF the Contents.
I. Part. Christ will not break the bruised Reed.
THose that Christ has to deal withal are bruised. Bruising is necessary. 1,
Before conversion. 10 2, After conversion. 16
Use. Not to be rash in judging such. 18 Christ will not break the bruised
Reed. 19 Confirmed from his borrowed titles. 20 Relations. 21 Offices. ibid.
Use. 1. Go boldly to the throne of grace. 25 Use. 2. Despair not in thy
bruisings. 27 Use. 3. See the contrary to this in Satan. 28 1 Signs of
bruisings. 30 2 M^anes of bruisings. 33 3 Measure of bruisings. 39 4 Comfort to
the bruised. 43

II. Part. Nor quench the smoking flax.
Grace is little at the first. 46 Use. Not to be discouraged at small
beginnings. 49 Grace is mingled with corruption 52 Use. Hence we judge so
variously of our selves. 56 Christ will not quench small and w^ake beginnings.
58 Because it is from him 58 for him ibid.
Use. No more should we; therefore 1 Let all men in general carry themselves
with moderation. 61 (Yet with wisdom to discern those that are not such) 67
And tenderness toward beginners. 70 2 In particular to admonish of this 1 The
Church. 76 2 Ministers. i^id. 3 Magistrates. 77 4 Private Christians: that they
quench not good things in others by their 1 Example. 81 2 Slanderings. 82 3
Censuring and judging them 1 For matters indifferent. 83 2 For weaknesses. 85



Use. 2. Examine whether we be such as Christ will not quench; 1 Rules how to
examine our selves 91 2 Signs whereby to examine our selves 101
Some scruples of heart answered, that keep us from the comfort of our
examination. 122 Use. 3. We are encouraged to set upon duties notwithstanding
our weaknesses and disabilities. 130 A case about indisposition to duty
resolved. 139 Two doubts of acceptance, either 1 From scruples about duties.
149 2 Ignorance of our condition in Christ. 151 Weaknesses what, 153 How to
recover lost peace. 157
Use. 4. Let us frame our conceits accordingly, and not believe Satan's
representations of Christ to us. 160 Or of us unto our selves. ibid Use. 5.
Reproof of such as sin against this merciful disposition in Christ, as
those do, 1 That go on in ill courses, either from despair, 175 or
presumption, 177 or a wilful purpose to quench the light that is in them. ibid.
2 Neglect good courses from hopes to have comfort, because Christ is thus
merciful. 182 3 That ill require so gracious a Savior as Christ is, 1 By
neglecting his Mediatorship. 2 Or by being cruel to him in his 1 Members 195 2
Name 195 3 By divisions in opinion. 197

4 That walk contrary to Christ in their dealing with the tender, for their
own gain, 202 5 That (...) and stumble at this low stooping of Christ. ibid.

III. Part. Until he send forth judgment unto Uictorie.
Explanation of the words. 208 The spiritual government of Christ is joined
with judgment and wisdom. 215 Use. 1. Spiritual wisdom and judgment is
excellent, and in what respects. 217 Why Satan envies and spighteth it. 221 It
is most necessary for the mannaging of a Christians course. 224 Where true
wisdom and judgment is, there Christ sets up his government, 230 The best
method for practice. 236 Use. 2. There is no true judgment where the life is
ill governed. 238 Christ's government is victorious. 239 1 In every private
Christian. 240 2 In the Church in general. 248 Why the victory seems
sometimes to go on the contrary side. 250 Use. 1. Confort to weak Christians,
the least spark in them if it be right will prevail. 257 1 Signs whether
there be any such grace in us as will be victorious. 260 2 Means to be used
that it may be so. 268
Use. 2. To admonish, 1 Nations and States. 2 Families. 3 Every one in
particular, 1 For himself, to side with Christ, and to embrace his government
286 2 His friends, to side with Christ, and to embrace his government 286

Use. 3. To inform us that then Popery must down. 290 Grace shall be glory.
291 Use. Deceit and error shall be shame and confusion. 297 This government is
advanced and set up by Christ alone. 304 In all spiritual Essays look for
strength from Christ, and not from thy self. 307 This prevailing and victory
will not be without opposition, 316 Because it is, 1 government, 2 spiritual
government, 3 government with judgment, 319, 321. Use. It is no sign of a
good condition to find all quiet. 323 Wheresoever Christ comes there will be
divisions. 324 Miserable are those men that stand out against him, and are
still under Satan's government. 325 Conclusion and general Application of all
this third part. 328 To encourage Christians to go on comfortably and
cheerfully, with confidence of prevailing, both in respect of our selves,
although beset with corruption; and the Church, although compassed with
enemies. 337
THE Bruised Reed, and Smoking Flax.
MATT. 12. 20. A bruised Reed shall be not break, and smoking Flax shall he
not quench, till he send forth judgment into victory.
THE Prophet Esaias being lifted up, and carried with the wing of prophetical
spirit, passes over all the time between him, and the appearing of JESUS
CHRIST in the flesh, and sees with the eye of prophecy, and with the eye of
faith, CHRIST as present, and presents him in the name of GOD to the
spiritual eye of others, in these words, Behold my servant whom I have chosen,
etc. which place is alleged by Saint Matthew, as fulfilled now in CHRIST.
Wherein is propounded,

First, The calling of CHRIST to his office:

Secondly, The execution of it.

For his Calling: GOD Division.
styles him here his righteous 1.
servant, etc. CHRIST was GODS servant in the greatest piece of service that
ever was; a chosen, and a choice servant: he did and suffered all by
commission from the Father: Wherein we may see the sweet love of GOD to us,
that counts the work of our salvation by Christ his greatest service. And that
he will put his only beloved Son to that service. He might well prefixe
[Behold] to raise up our thoughts to the highest pitch of attention and
admiration. In time of temptation, misgiving consciences look so much to the
present trouble they are in, that they need be rouzed up to behold him in whom
they may find rest for their distressed souls: In temptations it is safest to
behold nothing but CHRIST, the true brazen Serpent, the true Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the World: this saving object has a special
influence of comfort into the soul, especially if we look not only on
CHRIST, but upon the Fathers authority and love in him. For in all that CHRIST
did and suffered as Mediator, we must see GOD in him reconciling the World
unto himself.

What a support to our Faith is this; That GOD the Father, the party offended
by our sins, is so well pleased with the work of Redemption? And what a
comfort is this, that seeing GODS love rests on CHRIST, as well pleased in
him; we may gather that he is as well pleased with us, if we be in Christ. For
his love rests in whole CHRIST, in Christ mystical, as well as Christ
natural, because he loves him and us with one love. Let us therefore embrace
CHRIST, and in him GODS love, and build our faith safely on such a Savior,
that is furnished with so high a Commission.

See here (for our comfort) a sweet agreement of all three persons: The Father
gives a commission to Christ: The Spirit furnishes, and sanctifies to it:
CHRIST himself executes the office of a Mediator. Our Redemption is founded
upon the joint agreement of all three persons of the Trinity.

For the execution of 2.
this his calling, it is set down here to be modest, without making a noise,
or raising dust by any po^pous coming, as Princes use to do: [his voice shall
not be heard:] his voice indeed was heard, but what voice? Come unto me all
Matthew. 11.
ye, that are weary and heavy laden etc, he cried, but how? H^ every one that
Isai. 55. 1.
thirsts, come etc. And as his coming was modest, so it was mild, which is
set down in these words The bruised Reed shall he not break, etc. wherein we
may observe these three things.

First, the condition of those that CHRIST had to deal withal. 1, They were
bruised Reeds. 2, smoking Flax.

Secondly, CHRIST'S 2.
carriage toward them he brake not the bruised Reed, nor quenched the smoking
Flax: where more is meant, them spoken; sor he will not only not break the
bruised Reed, nor quench etc. But he will cherish them.

Thirdly, the constancy and progress of 3.
this his tender care, until Judgment come to victory, that is, until the
sanctified frame of grace begun in their hearts, be brought to that
perfection, that it prevails over all opposite corruption. For the first, the
condition of 1.
men, whom he was to deal withal, is that The condition of such Christ had
to deal with.
they were bruised Reeds, and smoking Flax, not Trees, but Reeds; and not
whole but bruised Reeds. The Church is compared to weak things; to a Dove
amongst the fowls; to a Vine amongst the Plants; to The Church likened to
weak things.
Sheep amongst the beasts; to a Woman, which is the weaker vessel: and here
GODS Children are compared to bruised Reeds, and smoking Flax. And first we
will speak of them as they are bruised Reeds, and then as smoking flax. They
are bruised reeds before their conversion, and often times after: Before
Conversion all (except such as being bred up in the Church, GOD has delighted
to show himself gracious unto from their Childhood) yet in different degrees,
as GOD sees meet; and as difference is in regard of temper, parts, manner of
life, etc. so GODS intendment of employment for the time to come: for usually
he empties such of themselves, and makes them nothing, before he will use
them in any great services.

This bruised reed is a Bruised Reed wha^.
man, that for the most part is in some misery, as those 1.
were, that came to Christ for help, and 2, by misery, 2.
brought to see sin the cause of it; for whatsoever pretenses sin makes,
yet bruising or breaking is the end of it: 3, he is sensible of sin, 3.
and misery, even unto bruising, and 4, seeing 4.
no help in himself, is carried with restless desire to have supply from
another with some hope, which a little raises him out of himself to Christ;
though he dares not claim any present interest of mercy. This spark of hope
being opposed by doubtings, and fears rising from Corruption, makes him, as
smoking flax, so that both these together, A bruised reed and smoking flax,
make up the state of a poor distressed man, such an one, our Savior Christ
terms Poor in spirit, Math. 5. who sees a want, and withal sees himself
indebted to divine Justice, and no means of ^uppie from himself or the
Creature, and thereupon mournes, and upon some hope of mercy from the promise,
and examples of those that have obtained mercy is stirred up to hunger, and
thirst after it.

This bruising is required before conversion, 1. Why bruising is requisite, 1.
Before conversion.
that so the spirit may make way for it self into the heart, by levelling all
proud high thoughts, and that we may understand our selves to be, what indeed
we are by nature: we love to wander from our selves, and to be strangers at
home, till GOD bruiseth us by one Cross, or other, and then we bethink our
selves, and come home to our selves with the Prodigal. A mavelous hard thing
it is, to bring a dull, and a shifting heart to cry with feeling for mercy. Our
hearts (like malefactors) until they be beaten from all shifts, never cry for
the mercy of the Judge. Again, this bruising makes us set a high price upon 2.
CHRIST, the Gospel is the Gospel indeed then, then the fig leaves of
morality will do us no good: and it makes us more thankful, and from 3.
thankfulness more fruitful in our lives; For what makes many so cold, and
4.
barren, but that bruising for sin never indeered Gods Grace unto them.
Likewise this dealing of 5.
God does establish us the more in his ways, having had knockes and bruisings
in our own ways. This is the cause often, of relapses, and apostasies, because
men never smarted for sin at the first, they were not long enough under the
lash of the Law. Hence this inferior work of the Spirit, in bringing down
high thoughts, is necessary before conversion. And for the most part, the Holy
Spirit to further the work of conviction, joins some affliction, which
sanctified, has a healing purging power.

Nay, after Conversion 2. After conversion.
we need bruising, that reeds may know themselves 1.
to be reeds, and not Oaks; Even Reeds need bruising by reason of the
remainder of pride in our nature, and to let us see, that we live by mercy, and
that weaker Christians 2.
may not be too much discouraged, when they see stronger shaken and bruised.
Thus Peter was bruised, when he wept bitterly; This Reed, til he met with this
bruise, had more wind in him, then pith. Though all forsake thee, I will not,
Mat 26.
etc.

The people of God cannot be without these examples. The Heroical deeds of
those great worthies comfort the Church not so much, as their falls and bruises
do.

Thus David was bruised, until he came to a free Psalm. 32.
confession without guile of spirit: nay, his sorrows did rise in his own
feeling, unto the exquisite pain of breaking of bones, Psalm. 51.
Psalm. 51. Thus Hezekiah Isai. 38. 13.
complains, that God had broken his bones as a Lion. Thus the Chosen vessel
S. Paul needed the messenger 2 Cor. 12.
of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be lifted up above measure.

Hence we learn, that we must not pass too harsh judgment upon our selves,
or others, when God does exercise us with bruising upon bruising; There must
be a conformity to our head Christ, who was bruised for us; Isa. 53.
that we may know how much we are bound unto him. Profane spirits ignorant of
Gods ways in bringing his children to Heaven, censure broken hearted
Christians for desperate persons, when as GOD is about a gracious good work
with them. It is no easy matter to bring a man from Nature to Grace, and from
Grace to Glory; so unyeelding, and untractable are our hearts.

The second point is, 2, Point.
That Christ will not break the bruised Reed; Physicians, though they put
their Patients to much pain, yet they will not destroy nature, but raise it up
by degrees; Surgeons will lance and cut, but not dismember; A mother that has
a sick, and froward Child, will not therefore cast it away; and shall there be
more mercy in the stream, then in the spring? shall we think there is more
mercy in our selves, then in GOD, who planteth the affection of mercy in us?
But for further declaration of Christ's mercy to all bruised Reeds: Consider
the comfortable relations he has taken upon him of Husband, Shepherd,
Brother, Isa. 53.
etc. which he will discharge to the utmost; for shall others by his grace
fulfill what he calls them unto, and not he that out of his love has taken
upon him these relations, so thoroughly founded upon his fathers assignement,
and his own voluntary undertaking? Consider his borrowed Names from the
mildest Creatures, as Lamb, Hen, etc. to show his tender care: Consider his
very name Jesus, a Savior, give^ him by GOD himself: Consider his Office,
answerable to his name; which is that he should heal the broken hearted, Esaias.
61. 1. At his Baptism the Holy Ghost sat on him in the shape of a Dove, to
show that he should be a Dovelike gentle Mediator. See the gracious manner of
executing his Offices, as a Prophet, he came with blessing in his mouth,
Blessed Matthew. 5.
be the poor in spirit, etc. and invited those to come to him, whose hearts
suggested most exceptions against themselves, Come unto me, all ye that are
weary, Mat. 11. 25.
and heavy laden: how did his boweis yearne, when he saw the people as sheep
without a Sheepherd? Mat. 9. 36.
he never turned any back again, that came unto him, though some went away of
themselves. He came to dye as a Priest for his enemies: In the days of his
flesh he dictated a form of prayer unto his Disciples, and put Petitions unto
GOD into their mouths, and his Spirit to intercede in their hearts, and now
makes intercession in heaven for weak Christians, standing between Gods
anger, and them; and shed tears for those that shed his blood: so he is a
meek King, he will admit mourners into his presence, a King of poor, and
afflicted persons: as he has beams of Majesty, so he has bowels of mercies
and compassion: A Prince of peace; Why was he tempted, but that he might
succor those that are tempted? What mercy may we not expect from so gracious a
Mediator, that took our nature upon him, that he might be gracious; he is
a Physician good at all diseases, especially at the binding up of a broken
heart, that he might heal our souls with a plaster of his own blood, and by
that death save us, which we were the procurers of, our selves, by our own
sins, and has he not the same bowels in heaven? Saul, Saul, why persecutest
Act. 19.
thou me, cried the Head in heaven, when the foot was trodden on, on earth. His
advancement has not made him forget his own flesh: though it has freed him
from passion, yet not from compassion toward us. The Lion of the Tribe of
Judah will only tear in pieces those that will not have him rule over them.
He will not show his strength against those that prostrate themselves before
him.

What should we learn Use 1. Encouragement to the bruised
from hence, but to come boldly to the throne of Grace in all our grievances?
Shall our sins discourage us, when he appears there only for sinners? Art
thou bruised? Be of good comfort, he calls thee; concoale not thy wounds,
open all before him, keep not Satan's counsel. Go to Christ though trembling
(as the poor woman) if we can but touch the him of his garment, we shall be
healed, and have a gracious answer: Go boldly to God in our flesh; for this
end that we might go boldly to him, he is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bone. Never fear to go to God since we have such a Mediator with him, that is
not only our friend, but our brother, and husband. Well might the Angels
proclaim from Heaven, Behold, we bring you tidings Luke 2.
of joy: well might the Apostle stir us up to rejoice in the Lord again and
again: Phil. 4.
he was well advised upon what grounds he did it: peace and joy are two maine
fruits of his Kingdom. Let the world be as it will, if we cannot rejoice in
the world, yet we may rejoice in the Lord. His presence makes any condition
comfortable. Be not afraid (says he to his Disciples when they were afraid
as if they had seen a Ghost) it is I; as if there were no cause of fear where
he is present.

Let this stay us, when Use 2.
we feel our selves bruised; Christ his course is first to wound, then to
heal; No sound whole soul shall ever enter into heaven: think in temptation,
CHRIST was tempted for me, according to my trials will be my Graces, and
Comforts. If CHRIST be so merciful as not to break me, I will not break my
self by despair, nor yield my self over to the roaring Lion Satan to break
me in pieces.

Thirdly, see the contrary Use 3.
disposition of CHRIST and Satan, and his instruments. Satan sets upon us
when we are weakest, as Simeon and Levi upon Genesis 34.
the Si^hemites, when they were sore; But CHRIST will make up in us all the
breaches sin and Satan have made, he binds up the broaken hearted, and as a
mother tendreth most the most diseased, and weakest child; so does CHRIST most
mercifully incline to the weakest: and likewise puts an instinct into the
weakest things to rely upon something stronger than themselves for support. The
Vine stays it self upon the Elm: and the weakest creatures have often the
strongest shelters. The consciousnesse of the churches weakness makes her
willing to lean on her beloved, and to hide her self under his wing.

But how shall we know Object.
whether we are such as those that may expect mercy?

By bruising here is not Answ.
meant those that are brought low only by crosles, but such as by the^ are
brought to see their sin, which bruiseth most of all. When conscience is
under the guilt of sin, then every judgment brings a report of GODS anger to
the soul, and all lesser troubles run into this great trouble of conscience
for sin: As all corrupt humors run to the diseased, and bruised part of
the body: And as every Creditor falls upon the Debtor, when he is once
arrested; so when conscience is once awaked all former sins, and present
crosses join together to make the bruise the more painful: Now he that is
thus bruised will be content with nothing, but with mercy from him that has
bruised him, he has wounded, and he must heal. 2. Again, a man truly
bruised, judges sin the greatest evil, and the favor of God the greatest
good. 3. He had rather hear of mercy, than of a kingdom. 4. He has mean
conceits of himself, and thinks he is not worth the earth he treads on. 5.
Toward others, he is not censorious, as being taken up at home, but is full of
sympathy and compassion to those that are under GODS hand, 6. He thinks those
that walk in the comforts of GODS Spirit the happiest men of the world. 7. He
trembles at the word of Isa. 66.
God, and honors the very feet of those blessed Romans 10.
instruments that bring peace unto him. 8. He is more taken up with the inward
exercises of a broken heart, than with formality, and yet careful to use all
sanctified means to convey comfort.

But how shall we come to have this temper? Quest.


First, we must conceive of bruising either as a state Ans. Means of bruising.
into which God brings us, or as a duty to be performed by us: both are here
meant, we must join with GOD in bruising of our selves; when he humbles us let
us humble our selves, and not stand out against him, for then he will redouble
his strokes; and let us justify CHRIST in all his chastisements, knowing that
all his dealing toward us is to cause us to return into our own hearts; his
work in bruising, tends to our work in bruising our selves. Let us lament
our own untowardnesse, and say, Lord, what an heart have I, that needs all
this, that none of this could be spared? We must lay siege to the hardness
of our own hearts, and aggravate sin all we can: we must look on CHRIST,
who was bruised for us, look on him whom we have pierced with our sins. But
all directions will not prevail, unless GOD by his Spirit convinces us
deeply, setting our sins before us, and driving us to a stand. Then we will
make out for mercy. Conviction will breed contrition, and this humiliation.
Therefore desire GOD, that he would bring a clear and a strong light into all
the corners of our souls, and accompany it with a spirit of power to lay our
hearts low.

A set measure of bruising our selves, cannot be prescribed, yet it must be so
far, as we may prize CHRIST above all, and see that a Savior must be had:
And secondly, until we reform that which is amiss, though it be to the
cutting off our right hand, or pulling out our right eye. There is a dangerous
slighting of the work of humiliation; some alleging this for a pretense for
their overly dealing with their own hearts, that CHRIST will not break the
bruised Reed; But such must know that every sudden terror and short grief is
not that which makes us bruised Reeds; not a little hanging down our heads
Isa. 58. 5.
like a Bulrush, but a working our hearts to such a grief, as will make sin
more odious unto us, than punishment. Until we offer an holy violence against
it: else favoring our selves, we make work for GOD to bruise us, and for
sharp repentance afterward. It is dangerous (I confess) in some cases with
some spirits, to press too much, and too long this bruising; because they may
die under the wound and burden, before they be raised up again. Therefore it
is good in mixed assemblies to mingle comforts, that every soul may have its
due portion. But if we lay this for a ground, that there is more mercy in
CHRIST, than sin in us, there can be no danger in through dealing. It is
better to go bruised to heaven, than sound to Hell. Therefore let us not take
off our selves too soon, nor pull off the plaster, before the cure be
wrought, but keep our selves under this work till sin be the sowrest, and
CHRIST the sweetest of all things. And when GODS hand is upon us in any kind,
it is good to divert our sorrow, for other things, to the root of all, which is
sin: let our grief run most in that channel, that as sin bred grief, so
grief may consume sin.

But are we not bruised Quest.
unless we grieve more for sin, than we do for punishment?

Sometimes our grief, Answ.
from outward grievances may lie heavier upon the soul, than grief for Gods
displeasure; because in such cases the grief works upon the whole man, both
outward and inward, and has nothing to stay it, but a little spark of faith:
which by reason of the violent impression of the grievance is suspended in the
exercises of it: and this is most felt in sudden distresses which come upon the
soul as a torrent or land flood, and especially in bodily distempers, which by
reason of the sympathy between the soul and the body, work upon the soul so
far, as they hinder not only the spiritual, but often the natural acts.
Hereupon S. James wishes in affliction to pray, our selves, but in case of
sickness to send for the Elders; that may, as Iam. 5. 14.
those in the Gospel, offer up the sick person to GOD in their prayers, being
unable to present their own case. Hereupon GOD admits of such a plea from
the sharpness and bitterness of the grievance, as in David, Psalm. 6. etc. the
Psalm. 6.
Lord knows whereof we are made. Psalm. 103. he Ps. 103. 14.
remembers we are but dust, that our strength is not the strength of steel.
It is a branch of his faithfulness unto us as his creatures, whence he is
called a faithful Creator, God is 1 Pe. 4. 19 1 Cor. 10. 13
faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able.
There were certain Commandments which the Jews called the hedges of the Law:
as to fence men off from cruelty, he commanded they should not take the dam^
with the young, nor sees the Kid in the mothers milk, nor muzzle the mouth of
the Ox: Has GOD care of beasts, and not of his more noble creature? and
therefore we ought to judge charitably of the complaints of Gods people, which
are wrung from them in such cases: Job had the esteem with GOD of a patient
man, notwithstanding those passionate complaints; faith overborne for the
present, will get ground again; and grief for sin, although it come short of
grief for misery in violence, yet it goes beyond it in constancy; as (...)
running stream fed with (...) spring holds out, when a sudden swelling brook
fails.

For the concluding of this point, and our encouragement to a through work of
bruising, and patience under Gods bruising of us, let all know that none are
fitter for comfort than those that think themselves furthest off. Men (for the
most part) are not lost enough in their own feeling, for a Savior. A holy
despair sin our selves is the ground of true hope. In GOD, the fatherless
find mercy: Hosea 14. (...).
if men were more fatherless, they should feel more Gods fatherly affection
from heaven: For GOD that dwells in highest Isa. 66. 2.
heavens, dwells likewise in the lowest soul. Christ's sheep are weak
Sheep, and wanting in something or other; he therefore applies himself to
the necessities of every Sheep. Ez. 34. he Ez. 34. 16.
seeks that which was lost, and brings again than which was driven out of the
way, and binds up that which was broken and strengthens the weak^ his te^derst
care is over the weakest. The Lambs he ca^ieth Es. 40. 11.
in his bosom: Peter, ^eed my Lambs. He was most familiar and open to ^he
troubled souls. How careful was he that Peter and the rest of the Apostles
should not be too much dejected after his resurrection, Go tell the
Disciples, and tell Peter. Christ Mar. 16. 7.
knew that guilt of their unkindnesse in leaving of him, had dejected their
spirits. How gently did he endure Thomas his unbeleefe? and stooped so far
into his weakness, as to suffer him to thrust his ^and into his side. The
second branch.


For the second branch, GOD will not quench the smoking flax, or wieke, but
will blow it up till it flameth. In smoking flax there is but a little light,
and that weak, as being not able to flame, and this little mixed with smoke.
The observations hence are first, That in GODS Children, especially in their
first conversio^, there is but a little measure of grace, and that little mixed
with much corruption, which as smoke is offensive. Secondly, that Christ will
not quench this smoking Flax.

For the first. Grace is Observe.
little at the first. There are several Ages in Christians, some Babes, some
young men: Grace is as a grain of Mustard Seed. Nothing so little as grace at
first, and nothing more glorious afterward: things of greatest perfection are
longest in coming to their growth. Man, the perfectest creature, comes to
perfection by little and little; Worthless things, as Mushromes, and the like,
like Jonas Gourd, soon spring up, and soon vanish. A new creature is the most
excellent frame in all the world, therefore it grows up by degrees. Wosee in
Nature, that a mighty Oak rises of an Akorne. It is with a Christian as it
was with Christ, who sprang out of the dead stock of Iesse, out of David's
family, when it Jsa. 53. 2.
was at the lowest, but he grew up higher than the heavens. It is not with the
trees of righteousness, as it was with the trees of Paradise, which were
created all perfect at the first. The seeds of all the creatures in this goodly
frame of the world, were hid in the Chaos, in that confused Mass at the first,
out of which GOD did command all creatures to arise; in the small seeds of
plants lie hid both bulk and branches, bud and fruit. In a few principles lie
hid all comfortable conclusions of holy truth. All those glorious fireworkes of
zeal and holiness in the Saints, had their beginning from a few sparks.

Let us not therefore be discouraged at the small beginnings of Grace, but
look on our selves, as elected to be blameless; and Ephesians. 1.
without spot. Let us only look on our imperfect beginning, to enforce further
strife to perfection, and to keep us in a low conceit. Otherwise, in case of
discouragement, we must consider our selves, as CHRIST does, who looks on us,
as such as he intends to fit for himself. CHRIST valueth us by what we shall
be, and by that we are elected unto. We call a little Plant a Tree, because
it is growing up to be so. Who is he that despises the day of little things?
Zach. 4. CHRIST would not have us despise little things.

The glorious Angels disdain not attendance on little ones: little in their
own eyes, and little in the eyes of the world. Grace, though little in
quantity, yet is much in vigor and worth.

It is CHRIST that raises the worth of little and mean places and persons.
Bethlem the least, and yet not the least; the least in it self, not the least
in respect CHRIST was born there. The second Temple came short of the outward
magnificence of the former: yet more glorious than the first, because CHRIST
came into it. The Lord of the Temple came in to his own Temple. The pupil of
the eye is very little, yet sees a great part of the heaven at once. A pearl,
though little, yet is of much esteem. Nothing in the world of so good use, as
the least dram of graces.

But Grace is not only little, but mingled with corruption; whereof it is that
a Christian is said to be smoking flax: whence we see, that Grace does not
waste corruption all at once, Observe.
but some is left to conflict withal. The purest actions of the purest men
need CHRIST to perform them, and so is his office. When we pray, we need to
pray again for CHRIST to pardon the defects of them. See some instances
Instances.
of this smoking flax. Moses at the red Sea being in a great perplexity, and
knowing not what to say, or which way to turn him, groaned to GOD: no doubt,
this was a great conflict in him. In great distresses we know not what Romans 8.
to pray, but the Spirit makes request with sighs that cannot be expressed.
Broken hearts can yield but broken prayers.

When David was before the King of Gath, and 1 Samuel 21.
dis-figured himself in an uncomely manner, in that smoke there was some fire
also; you may see what an excellent Psalm he makes upon that occasion, Psalm
34. Wherein Ps. 34. 18.
upon experience, verse. 18. he says, the Lord is near unto them that are of a
contrite spirit, Psalm. 31. 22. I Ps. 31. 22. David.
said in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight, there is smoke; Yet thou
heardest the voice of my prayer, there Matthew. 8. M^r. 9. 24.
is fire. (...), carest thou not that we perish? (cry the Disciples,) here is
smoke of infidelity, yet so much light of faith, as stirred them up to pray to
Christ: Lord I believe, there is light; But help my unbelief, there is smoke.

Jonas 2. 4. cries, I am Jonas.
cast out of thy sight, there is smoke; yet will I look again to thy holy
Temple, there is light.

O miserable man that I Romans 7. 24.
am, (says Saint Paul upon sense of his corruption;) but yet breaks out into
thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

I sleep (says the Church Cant. 5. 3.
in the Canticles) but my heart wakes. In the seven Churches, which for their
light are called seven golden Candlestickes, most Rev. 2. and 3.
of them had much smoke with their light.

The ground of this mixture is, that we carry about us a double principle,
Grace and Nature. The end of it is especially to preserve us from those two
dangerous Rocks our Natures are prone to dash upon, Security and Pride, and to
force us to pitch our rest on Justification, not sanctification, which besides
imperfection has some soil.

Our spiritual fire, is like our ordinary fire here below (mixed.) But fire is
most pure in its own Element, above: So shall all our graces be, when we are
where we would be, in Heaven, which is our proper element. From this mixture
it is that the Use.
people of GOD have so different judgments of themselves, looking sometime at
the work of grace, sometimes at the remainder of corruption; and when they look
upon that, then they think they have no grace: though they love CHRIST in his
ordinances, and children; yet dare not challenge so near acquaintance as to be
his. Even as a Candle in the socket sometimes shows its light, and sometimes
the show of light is lost: so sometimes well persuaded they are of themselves,
sometimes at a loss.

Now for the second observation, Christ will not Doct.
quench the smoking Flax: First, because this spark is from heaven, it is his
own, it is kindled by his own Spirit. And secondly, that tends to the glory
of his powerful grace in his children, that he preserves light in the midst
of darkness, a spark in the midst of the swelling waters of corruption.

There is an especial blessing in that little spark Isay 56. 8. When Wine is
found in a cluster, one says, Destroy it not, for there is a blessing in it.
We see how our Savior CHRIST bore with Thomas in his Ioh. 20. 27.
doubting: with the two Disciples that went to Emaus, who staggered, whether
Luke 24.
he came to redeem Israel or no: he quenches not that little light in Peter,
which was smothered: Matthew. 26.
Peter denied him, but he denied not Peter. If thou Matthew. 8.
wilt, thou can, said one poor man in the Gospel: Lord if thou can, said
another; both were this smoking flax, neither of both were quenched. If Christ
had stood upon his own greatness, he would have rejected him that came with
his [if,] but CHRIST answers his [if] with a gracious and absolute grant, I
will, be thou clean. The woman that was diseased with an issue, did but touch,
and with a trembling hand, and but the hem of his garment, and yet went away
both healed and comforted. In the seven Churches we see he Rev. 2. and 3
acknowledges and cherishes any thing that was good in them. Because the
Disciples slept of infirmity, being oppressed Matthew. 26.
with grief, our Savior CHRIST frames a comfortable excuse for them, The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.

If CHRIST should not be merciful he would miss of his own ends; There is
mercy with thee that thou may be feared. Now all are willing to come under
that banner of love which he spreads over his. Therefore to thee shall Psalm.
65.
all flesh come. He uses moderation and care, lest the spirit should fail
before Esaias 57.
him, and the souls which he has made. CHRIST'S heart yerned, the Text says,
when he saw them without meat, lest they should faint: Much more will he have
regard for the preventing of our spiritual faintings.

Here see the opposite disposition between the holy nature of CHRIST, and the
impure nature of Man. Man for a little smoke will quench the light: CHRIST
ever we see cherishes even the least beginnings. How bare he with the many
imperfections of his poor Disciples? If he did sharply check them, it was in
love, and that they might shine the brighter. Can we have a better pattern to
follow than this of him by whom we hope to be saved? Romans 15. 1. We that are
strong ought to bear with the infirmities of them that are weak. I become all
things 1 Cor. 9.
to all men, that I may win some. O that this gaining and winning disposition
were more in many! Many (so far as in us lies) are lost for want of
encouragement. See how that faithful fisher of men S. Paul, labors to catch
his Judge, I know thou Act. 26.
beleevest the Prophets; and then wishes all saving good, but not bonds; he
might have added them too, but he would not discourage one that made but an
offer, he would therefore wish Agrippa only that which was good in Religion.
How careful was our blessed Savior of little ones that they might not be
offended? How does he defend his Disciples from malicious imputations of the
Pharisees? Mat. 121 and 23.
How careful not to put new wine into old vessels, not to alienate new
beginners with the austerities of Religion (as some indiscreetly.) O (says
he) Mat. 9.
they shall have time to fast when I am gone, and strength to fast when the Holy
Ghost is come upon them.

It is not the best way to fall foul presently with young beginners for some
lesser vanities, but show them a more excellent way, and breed them up in
positive grounds, and other things will be quickly out of credit with them. It
is not amiss to conceal their wants, to excuse some failings, to commend
their performances, to cherish their towardness, to remove all rubs out of
their way, to help them every way to bear the yoke of Religion with greater
ease, to bring them in love with God and his service, lest they distaste it
before they know it. For the most part we see CHRIST planteth in young
beginners a love, which we call the first love, to carry them through their
profession with more delight, and does not expose them to crosses, before they
have gathered strength, as we breed up young plants, and fence them from the
weather, until they be well rooted. Mercy to others should move us to deny
our selves in our lawful liberties oftentimes, in case of offense of weak
ones, it is the little ones that are offended. The weakest are aptest to think
themselves despised, therefore we should be most careful to give them content.

It were a good strife amongst Christians, one to labor to give no offense,
and the other to labor to take none. The best men are severe to themselves,
tender over others.

Yet people should not tire and wear out the patience of others: Nor should
the weaker so far exact moderation from others, as to bear out themselves
upon their indulgence, and so to rest in their own infirmities, with danger to
their own souls, and scandal to the Church. The Church suffers much from
weak ones, therefore we may challenge liberty to deal with them, as mildly,
so oftentimes directly. The scope of true love, is to make the party better,
which by concealment oftentimes is hindered: with some a spirit of meekness
prevails most, but with some a rod. Some must be pulled out of the fire with
violence, and they will bless God for us in the day of their visitation. We
see our Savior multiplyes Mat. 23.
woe upon woe, when he was to deal with hardhearted Hypocrites; For
Hypocrites do need stronger conviction than gross sinners, because their
will is naught, and thereupon usually their conversion is violent. An hard knot
must have an answerable wedge, else in a cruel pity we betray their souls. A
sharp reproof sometimes is a precious pearl, and a sweet balm. The wounds
of secure sinners will not be healed with sweet words. The Holy Ghost came as
well in fiery tongues, as in the likeness of a Dove, and the same holy Spirit
will vouchsafe a spirit of prudence and discretion, (which is the salt to
season all our words and actions) And such wisdom will teach us to speak a
word in season both to the weary and likewise to the secure soul. And indeed
he had need have the tongue of the learned that shall either raise up, or cast
down: But in this place I speak of mildness toward those that are weak, and
are sensible of it: These we must bring on gently, and drive softly, as Jacob
did his Genesis 33. 14.
Cattle, according to the pace, and as his children were able to endure.

Weak Christians are like glasses which are hurt with the least violent usage,
otherwise if gently handled will continue a long time. This honor of gentle
use we are to give to the weaker vessels, by which we shall both preserve
them, and likewise make them useful to the Church and our selves.

In unclean bodies if all ill humors be purged out, you shall purge life and
all away. Therefore though GOD says, Zach. 13. 9. that he will fine them as
silver is fined. Yet Esaias 48. 10. he says, He has fined them, but not as
silver, that is, so exactly as that no dross remains, for he has respect
to our weakness. Perfect refining is for another world, for the world of the
souls of perfect men.

Divines had need to Use for Ministers.
take heed therefore how they deal with these in diverse particulars: as first,
let them be careful they strain not things too hie, making those general and
necessary evidences of grace which agree not to the experience of many a good
Christian, and lay salvation and damnation upon those things that are not fit
to bear so great a weight, whereupon men are groundlesly cast down lower by
them, than they can hastily be raised up again by themselves or others. The
Ambassadors of so gentle a Savior should not be over masterly, setting up
themselves in the hearts of people, where CHRIST alone should sit as in his
own Temple. How careful was Saint Paul in cases of conscience not to lay a
snare upon any weak conscience!

They should take heed likewise that they hide not 2 Dark speches.
their meaning in dark speeches, speaking in the clouds. Truth fears nothing
so much as concealment, and desires nothing so much as clearly to be laid
open to the view of all: When it is most naked, it is most lovely and powerful.

Our blessed Savior as he took our nature upon him, so he took upon him our
familiar manner of speech, which was part of his voluntary abasement. Saint
Paul was a profound man, yet became as a nurse to the weaker sort. 1 These. 2. 7.


That spirit of mercy that was in CHRIST should move his servants to be
content to abase themselves for the good of the meanest. What made the Kingdom
of heaven suffer violence after John the Baptists time, but that comfortable
truths were with that plainness and evidence laid open, that the people were
so affected with them, as they offered a holy violence to them?

CHRIST chose those to preach mercy, which had felt most meroy, as S. Peter,
and S. Paul: that they might be examples of what they taught. Saint Paul
became all things to all men, stooping unto them for their good: CHRIST came
down from heaven and emptied himself of majesty in tender love to souls:
shall not we come down from our high conceits, to do any poor soul good?
shall man be proud, after GOD has been humble? We see the ministers of Satan
turn themselves into all shapes to make proselytes. A Jesuit will be every
man. We see ambitious men study accommodation of themselves to the humors of
those by whom they hope to raise themselves: and shall not we study
application of our selves to CHRIST, by whom we hope to be advanced; nay, are
already sitting with him in heavenly places? After we are gained to CHRIST our
selves, we should labor to gain others to CHRIST. Holy ambition and
covetousness will move us to put upon our selves the disposition of CHRIST;
but we must put off our selves first.

We should not thirdly rack their wits with 3 Doubtful (...) (...) (...)
(...).
curious or doubtful disputes, for so we shall distract and tire them, and
give occasion to make them cast off the care of all. That age of the church
which was most fertile in nice questions, was most barren in Religion. For it
makes people think Religion to be only a matter of wit, in tying and untying
of knots, the brains of men given that ways are hotter usually than A caveat.
their hearts. Yet not withstanding, when we are cast into times and places
wherein doubts are raised about maine points, here people ought to labor to be
established. God suffer questions oftentimes to arise for trial of our love,
and exercise of our parts. Nothing is so certain Nil tam certum quam quod ex
dubio certum.
as that which is certain after doubts. Shaking settles and roots. In a
contentious age, it is a witty thing to be a Christian and to know what to
pitch their souls upon: It is an office of love here to take away the stones,
and to smooth the way to heaven. Therefore we must take heed that under
pretense of avoydance of disputes, we do not suffer an adverse party to get
ground upon the truth: For thus may we easily betray both the truth of God, and
souls of men.

And likewise those are 4. Austerity.
failing that by over much austerity drive back troubled souls from having
comfort by them, for by this carriage many smother their temptations, and burn
inwardly because they have none, into whose bosom they may vent their grief,
and ease their souls.

We must neither bind where GOD loses, nor lose where GOD binds, nor open
where GOD shuts, nor shut where God opens; the right use of the Keys is
always successful. In personal application there must be great heed taken:
for a man may be a false Prophet, and yet speak the truth, if it be not a
truth to the person to whom he speaks: if he grieve those whom God has not
grieved, by unseasonable truths, or by comforts in an ill way, the hearts of
the wicked may be strengthened. One man's meat, may be another bane.

If we look to the general temper of these times, rouzing and waking
Scriptures are fittest: yet there be many broken spirits, need soft and oily
words. Even in the worst time the Prophets mingled sweet comfort for the hidden
remnant of faithful people. GOD has comfort comfort ye my people, as well as
lift up thy voice as a Trumpet.

And here likewise there A caveat.
needs a caveat. Mercy does not rob us of our right judgment, as that we
should take smoking firebrands for smoking flax: none will claim mercy more
of others, than those whose portion is due severity. This example does not
countenance lukewarmnesse, nor too much indulgence to those that need
quickening. Cold diseases must have hot remedies. It made for the just
commendatio^s of the Church of Ephesus, that it could not bear them which are
evil. Rev. 2. 2.
We should so bear with others, as we discover withal a dislike of evil.
Our Savior CHRIST would not forbear sharp reproof, where he saw dangerous
infirmities, in his most beloved Disciples. It brings under a curse to do
the work of the Lord negligently: Even where it is a work of just severity:
As when it is sheathing the sword in the bowels of the enemy. And those whom we
suffer to be betrayed by their worst enemies their sins will have just cause to
curse us another day.

It is hard to preserve just bounds of mercy and severity, without a spirit
above our own: which we ought to desire to be led withal, in all things.
That wisdom which dwells with prudence will Pro. 8. 12.
guide us in these particulars, without which virtue is not virtue, truth not
truth: the rule and the case must be laid together: for if there be not a
narrow insight, seeming likeness in conditions will be the breeder of errors
in our opinions of them. Those fiery, tempestuous, and dist^ctive spirits in
Popery, that seek to promote their Religion by cruelty, show that they are
strangers to that wisdom which is from above, which makes men gentle,
peaceable, and ready to show that mercy they have felt before, themselves. It
is a way of prevailing, as agreeable to CHRIST, so likewise to man's nature, to
prevail by some forbearance and moderation.

And yet often we see a false spirit in those that call for moderation, it is
but to carry their own projects with the greater strength; and if they prove
of the prevailing hand, they will hardly show that moderation to others, they
now call for from others. And there is a proud kind of moderation likewise,
when men will take upon the^ to censure either party, as if they were wiser
than both, though if the spirit be right, a looker on may see more than those
that are in conflict.

So in the censures of the Church, it is more suitable 2. For the Church in
censures.
to the Spirit of CHRIST to incline to the milder part; and not to As
Pari^entis.
kill a fly on the forehead with a beetle; nor shut men out of heaven for a
trifle. The very snuffers of the Tabernacle were made of pure gold, to show the
purity of those censures, whereby the light of the Church is kept bright. That
power that is given to the Church, is given for edification, not destruction.
How careful was Saint Paul that the incestuous Corinthian repenting, should
not be swallowed up with too much grief?

As for civil Magistrates, 3. For civil Magistrates.
they for civil exigences and reasons of State, must let the Law have its
course: yet thus far they should imitate this mild King, as not to mingle
bitterness and passion with authority derived from GOD. Authority is a beam of
Gods Majesty, and prevails most where there is least mixture of that which is
man's. It requires more than ordinary wisdom to manage it aright. This string
must not be too much strained up, nor too much let loose. Justice is an
harmonicall thing. Herbs hot or cold beyond a certain degree kill. We see even
contrary Elements preserved in one body by a wise contemperation. Justice in
rigor is often extreme injustice, where some considerable circumstances should
incline to moderation, and the reckoning will be easier for bending rather to
moderation than rigor.

Insolent carriage toward miserable persons, if humbled, is unseemly in any who
look for mercy themselves. Misery should be a Loadstone of mercy, not a
footstool for Pride to trample on.

Sometimes it falls out that those that are under the government of others
are most injurious by way wardnesse and harsh censures, herein disparaging and
discouraging the endeavors of Superiors for public good. In so great
weakness of man's nature, and especially in this crazie age of the world, we
ought to take in good part, any moderate happiness we enjoy by government;
and not be altogether as a nail in the wound, exasperating things by
misconstruction. Here, Love should have a mantle to cast upon lesser errors of
those above us. Oft-times the poor man is the oppressor by unjust clamours: we
should labor to give the best interpretations to the actions of Governors,
that the nature of the actions will possibly bear.

In the last place, there is some thing for private 4. For private Christians.
Christians, even for all of us in our common relations, to take notice of: we
are debtors to the weak in many things. 1. Let us be evil examples.
watchful in the use of our liberty, and labor to be in offensive in our
carriage, that our example compel them not. There is a commanding force in an
example, as Peter, Gal. 2. A loosnesse of life is cruelty to our selves, and
to the souls of others, though we cannot keep them from perishing, which
will perish, in regard of the event; yet if we do that which is apt of it
self to destroy the souls of others, their ruin is imputable to us.

2 Let men take heed Slandring.
of taking up Satan's office, in deprauing the good actions of others, as he
did Jobs, Does he serve God for naught? or slandering their persons, judging
of them according to the wickedness that is in their own hearts. The Devil
gets more by such discouragements, and these reproaches, that are east upon
religion, then by fire and faggot. These (as unseasonable frosts) nip all
gracious offers in the bud, and as much as in them lies, with Herod labor to
kill Christ in young professors. A Christian is a hallowed and a sacred thing,
CHRIST'S Temple, and he that destroys his Temple, him will CHRIST destroy.

3 Amongst the things Censuring and Judging.
that are to be taken heed of, there is amongst private Christians a bold
usurpation of censure, not considering their temptations. Some will unchurch
and unbrother in a passion, 1 For the use of indifferent things.
But distempers do not alter true relations, though the child in a fit should
disclaim the mother, yet the mother will not disclaim the child.

There is therefore in these judging times good ground of S. James his Caveat,
that there should not be too many masters; that we should not smite one
another, by hasty censures especially in things of an indifferent nature: some
things are as the mind of him is, that does them, or does them not; for both
may be unto the Lord.

A holy aim in things of a middle nature, makes the judgments of men,
although seemingly contrary, yet not so much blameable. Christ, for the good
aims he sees in us, over-looketh any ill in them, so far as not to lay it
to our charge.

Men must not be too 2. For weaknesses Nemo curiosus qui non malevolus.
curious in prying into the weaknesses of others; we should labor rather to see
what they have that is for eternity, to incline our heart to love them, then
into that weakness which the Spirit of GOD will in time consume, to estrange
us: some think it strength of grace to endure nothing in the weaker, whereas
the strongest are readiest to bear with the infirmities of the weak, Where
most holiness is, there is most moderation, where it may be without prejudice
of piety to God and the good of others, we see in Christ a mavelous temper
of absolute holiness, with great moderation in this Text. What had become of
our Salvation if he had stood upon terms and not stooped thus low, unto us! We
need not affect to be more holy then Christ, it is no flattery to do as he
does, so it be to edification.

The Holy Ghost is content to dwell in smoakie offensive souls, Oh that, that
spirit would breath into our Spirits the like merciful disposition? We endure
the bitterness of Wormwood, and other distasteful plants, and herbs, only
because we have some experience of some wholesome quality in the^; and why
should we reject men of useful parts, and graces, only for some harshnesse of
disposition, which as it is offensive to us, so grieveth themselves?

Grace whilst we live here is in souls, which as they are unperfectly
renewed, so they dwell in bodies subject to several humors, which will
incline the soul sometimes to excess in one passion, sometimes to excess in
another.

Bucer was a deep, and a moderate Divine. Upon long experience resolved to
refuse none, in whom he saw (aliquid Christi) something of Christ.

The best Christians in this state of imperfection, are like Gold that is a
little too light, which needs some grains of allowance to make it pass. You
must grant the best their allowance. We must supply out of our love and mercy,
that which we see wanting in them.

The Church of Christ is a common Hospital, in all are in some measure sick
of some spiritual disease, or other; that we should all have ground of
exercising mutually the spirit of wisdom and meekness.

This that we may the How to attain a right spirit to deal with infirmities.
better do, let us put upon our selves the spirit of CHRIST: The spirit of GOD
caryeth a majesty 1.
with it. Corruption will hardly yield to eorruption. In another, Pride is
intolerable to pride. The weapons of this warfare must not be carnal. The
great Apostles would not Luke 24. 49
set upon the work of the Ministry, until they were clothed, as it were,
with power from on high. The Spirit will only work with his own tools. And we
should think what affection Christ would carry to the party in this case. That
Aug. in 6. Gal. Nil sic spiritualem virum indicat quam alient peccati tractatio.
great Physician, as he had a quick eye, and a healing tongue, so had he a
gentle hand and a tender heart.

And secondly, put upon us the condition of him, 2.
whom we deal withal, we are, or have been, or may be such: make the case
our own, and withal consider in what near relation a Christian stands (...)
unto us, even as a brother, a fellow-member, heir of the same salvation. And
therefore let Nil magis ad misericordiam inclinat quam propry periculi
cogitatio. Aug.
us take upon our selves, a tender care of them every way: and especially in
cherishing the peace of their consciences. Conscience is a tender and delicate
thing, and so must be used. It is like a Lock, if the Wards be troubled, it
will be troublesome to open.

For trial, to let us see whether we be this smoking Use 2. For trial.
Flax, which Christ will not quench. In this Trial remember these Rules.

1 We must have two 1.
eyes, one to see imperfections in our selves and others; the other to see what
is good. I am black, says the Church, but yet comely. Those ever want
comfort, that are much in quarrelling with themselves, and through their
infirmities are prone to feed upon such bitter things, as will most nourish
that distemper they are sick of. These delight to be looking on the dark side
of the cloud only.

2. We must not judge 2.
of our selves always according to present feeling: for in temptations we
shall see nothing but smoke of distrustful thoughts. Fire may be raked up in
the ashes, though not seen; life in the winter is hid in the root.

3 Take heed of false 3.
reasoning; As because our fire does not blaze out, as others, therefore we
have no fire at all, and by false conclusions come to sin against the
Commandment in bearing false witness against our selves. The Prodigal would
not say he was no son, but that he was not worthy to be called a son. We
must neither trust to false evidence, nor deny true; for so we should
dishonor the work of Gods Spirit in us, and lose the help of that evidence
which would cherish our love to Christ, and arm us against Satan's
discouragements. Some are so faulty this way, as if they had been hired by
Satan the Accuser of the Brethren, to plead for him, in accusing themselves.

4 Know (for a ground of this) that in the Covenant 4.
of Grace, GOD requires the truth of Grace, not any certain measure, and a
spark of fire is fire as well as the whole Element. Therefore we must look to
Grace in the spark as well as in the flame. All have not the like strong, yet
the like precious Faith, whereby they lay hold, and put on the perfect
righteousness of Christ. A weak hand may receive a rich Jewel; a few grapes
will show that the Plant is a Vine, and not a Thorn. It is one thing to be
wanting in Grace, and another thing to want Grace altogether. GOD knows we
have nothing of our selves, therefore in the Covenant of Grace he requires no
more then he gives, and gives what he requires, and accepts what he
gives; He that has not a Lamb, may bring a pair of Turtle Doves. What is
the Gospel it self but a merciful moderation, in which Christ's obedience is
esteemed ours, and our sins laid upon him; and wherein GOD of a Judge
becomes a Father pardoning our sins, and accepting our obedience though
feeble and blemished. We are now brought to heaven under the Covenant of
Grace, by a way of love and mercy.

It will prove a special help to know distinctly the difference between the
Covenant of works, and the Covenant of Grace; between Moses and Christ: Moses
without all mercy breaks all bruised Reeds, and quenches all smoking Flax.
For the Law requires, 1, personal, 2, perpetual, 3, perfect obedience, 4, and
from a perfect heart; and that under a most terrible curse, and gives no
strength, a severe Taske-master, like Pharaohs, requires the whole tale, and
yet gives no straw. CHRIST comes with blessing after blessing, even upon
those whom Moses had cursed, and with healing Balm for those wounds which
Moses had made.

The same duties are required in both Covena^ts; as to love the Lord with all
our hearts, with all our souls, etc. In this Covenant of works, this must be
taken in the rigor: but under the Covenant of Grace, as it is a sincere
endeavor proportionable to grace received: and so it must be understood of
Josias, and others, when it is said, they loved GOD with all their hearts, etc.
It must have an Evangelical mitigation.

The Law is sweetened by the Gospel and becomes delightful to the inner Romans 7.
man. Under this gracious Covenant synceritie is perfection. This is the Death
in the pot in the Roman Religion, that they confound two Covena^ts: and it
deads the comfort of drooping ones, that they cannot distinguish them. And thus
they suffer themselves to be held under bondage, when Christ has set them
free; and stay themselves in the prison, when Christ has set open the doors
before them.

5 Grace sometimes is so little, as is undiscernable 5.
to us: the Spirit sometimes has secret operations in us, which we know not
for the present; but Christ knows. Sometimes in bitterness of temptation, when
the Spirit struggles with sense of Gods anger, we are apt to think GOD an
enemy; and a troubled soul is like troubled waters, we can see nothing in it;
and so far as it is not cleansed, it will cast up mire and dirt. It is full
of objections against it self, yet for the most part we may discern something
of this hidden life, and of these smothered sparks.

In a gloomy day there is so much light whereby we may know it to be day, and
not night: so there is something in a Christian under a cloud, whereby he may
be discerned to be a true Believer, and not an Hypocrite. There is no mere
darkness in the state of Grace, but some beam of light, whereby the kingdom
of darkness wholly prevails not.

These things premised, 2. Particular trials to know if we be smoking Flax.
let us know for a Trial.

First, if there be any holy fire in us, it is kindled from heaven by the
Father of lights, who commanded 1.
light to shine out of darkness. As it is kindled in the use of means, so it
is fed. The light in us, and the light in the word spring one from the other,
and both from one Holy Spirit: and therefore those that regard not the word, it
is because there is no light in them. Heavenly truths must have a heavenly
light to discern them. Natural men see heavenly things, but not in their own
proper light, but by an inferior light. GOD in every converted man puts a
light into the eye of his soul, proportionable to the light of truths revealed
unto the^. A carnal eye will never see spiritual things.

Secondly, the least divine 2.
light has heat with it in some measure: Light in the understanding breeds
heat of love in the affections. In what measure Charitas in intellectu parit
ardorem in affectu.
the sanctified understanding sees a thing to be true, or good, in that
measure the will embraces it. Weak light breeds weak inclinations: a strong
light, strong inclinations. A little spiritual light is of strength enough to
answer strong objections of flesh and blood; and to look through all earthly
allurements, and all opposing hindrances, presenting them as far inferior to
those heavenly objects it eyeth.

All light that is not spiritual, because it wants the strength of
sanctifying grace, it yields to every little temptation, especially when it
is fitted and suited to personal inclinations. This is the reason why
Christians that have light little for quantity, but yet heavenly for quality,
hold out, when men of larger apprehensions sink.

This prevailing of light in the soul, is, because together with the spirit of
Illumination, there goes in the godly) a spirit of ^ower, to subdue the heart
^o truth revealed, and to ^ut a taste and relish into ^he will, suitable to the
sweetness of the truths, else (...) mere natural Will, will rise against
supernatural truths, as having an antipathy and enmity against them. In the
godly, ^oly truths are conveyed by way of a taste, gracious men have a
spiritual pallat as well as a spiritual eye. Grace alters the relish.

Thirdly, where this heavenly light is kindled, it 3.
directs in the right way. For it is given for that use, to show us the best
way, and to guide in the particular passages of life: if otherwise, it is but
common light, given only for the good of others. Some have light of Knowledge,
yet follow not that light, but are guided by carnal reason and policy: such
as the Prophet speaks of, All you that kindle (...) Isa. 50. ^1.
fire, walk in the light of your own fire, and in the sparks that you have
kindled, but this you shall have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.
GOD delights to confound carnal wisdom, as enmity to him, and robbing him
of his prerogative, who is God only wise. We must therefore walk by his
^ight, and not the blaze of our own fire. God must light our candle, Psalm. 18.
28 or else we are like to abide in darkness. Those sparks that are not
kindled from heaven, are not strong enough to keep us from ^ying down in
sorrow, though they make a greater blaze and show then the light from above, as
mad men do greater things then sober, but by (...) false strength: so the
excess of these men's joy arises from a false light, The candle of the wicked
shall ^e put out.

The light that some m^ have, it is like lightning, which after a sudden fla^
leaves the^ more in darkness. They can love the light as it shines, but hat^
it as it discovers, and directs. A little holy ligh^ will enable to keep the
word, and not to betray Religion, and deny Christ's name, as CHRIST speaks of
the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 8.

Fourthly, where thi^ fire is, it will sever things 4
of diverse natures, and show a difference between^ things, as gold and dross.
It will sever between flesh and spirit, and show this is of Nature, this of
Grace. All is not ill in a bad action, or good in a good action. There is gold
in oar, which God and his Spirit in us can distinguish. A carnal man's heart is
like a dungeon, wherein is nothing to be seen but horror and confusion: this
light makes us judicious, and humble, upon clearer sight of Gods purity, and
our own uncleannes: and makes us able to discern of the work of the Spirit
in another.

Fifthly, so far as a man is spiritual, so far is light 5
delightful unto him, as willing to see any thing amiss, that he may reform,
and any further service discovered that he may perform: because he truly
hates ill and loves good: if he goes against light discovered, he will
soon be reclaimed, because light has a friendly party within him. Whereupon,
at a little sight of his error, he is soon counsellable, as David in his
intendment to kill Nabal, and blesses God afterward when he is stopped in an
ill way.

In a carnal man the light breaks in upon him, but he labors to shut the
passages, he has no delight to ^ome to the light. It is impossible before the
spirit of grace has subdued the heart, but that it should sin against the
light, either by resisting of it, or keeping it prisoner under base lusts,
burying it as it were in the earth; or perverting of it, and so making it an
agent and factour for the flesh, in searching out arguments to plead for it, or
abusing that little measure of light they have, to keep out a greater, higher,
and more heavenly light, and so at length make that light they have, a
misleading guide to utter darkness. And the reason is that it has no friend
within, the soul is in a contrary frame, and light always hinders that
sinful peace that men are willing to speak to themselves, whence we see it
often inrage men the more: as the Sun in the Spring breeds agui^h distempers,
because it stirs humors, and does not wast them. There is nothing in the
world more unquiet, than the heart of a wicked man, that sits under means
of knowledge, until like a thief he has put out the candle that he may
sin with the less check. Spiritual light is distinct, it sees spiritual
good, with application to our selves; but common light is confused, and lets
sin lie quiet. Where fire is in any degree, it will fight against the contrary
matter^: GOD has put irreconciliable hatred between light and darkness at
first, so between good and ill, flesh and spirit. Grace will never join with
sin, no more than fire with water. Fire will mingle with no contrary, but
preserves its own purity, and is never corrupted as other Elements are.
Therefore those that plead and plot for liberties of the flesh, show themselves
strangers from the life of God. Upon this strife gracious men often complain
that they have no grace, but they contradict themselves in their complaints: as
if a man that sees, should complain he cannot see, or complain that he is
asleep, when the very complaint springing from a displeasure against sin,
shows that there is something in him opposite to sin. Can a dead man
complain? Some things, though bad in themselves, yet discover good; as smoke
discovers some fire. Breaking out in the body shows strength of Nature. Some
infirmities discover more good than some seeming beautiful actions; excess of
passion in opposing evil, (though not to be justified) yet shows a better
spirit, than a calm temper, when there is just cause of being moved. Better it
is, that the water should run something muddily, than not at all. Job had
more grace in his distempers, tha^ his friends in their seeming wise carriage.
Actions soiled with some weaknesses, are more accepted than complementall
performances.

Fire, where it is 6.
in the least measure, is in some degree active; so the least measure of grace
is working, as springing from the Spirit of GOD, which from the working nature
of it, is compared to fire. Nay, in sins, when there seems nothing active,
but corruption, yet there is a contrary principle, which breaks the force of
sin, so that it is not out of measure sinful, as in those that are carnal.

Fire makes metalls 7.
pliable and malliable, so does Grace, where it is begun, it works the
heart to be pliable and ready for all good impressions. Intractable spirits
show that they are not so much as smoking flax.

Fire turns all, as 8.
much as it can, to fire; so grace makes a gracious use even of natural and
civil things, and does spiritualize them, what another man does only civilly,
a gracious man will do holily.

Sparks by nature 9.
fly. upwards: so the spirit of Grace carries the soul Heavenward, and
sets before us holy and heavenly aims, as it was kindled from heaven, so it
caries us back to heaven. The part follows the whole: Fire mounteth upward,
so every spark to its own element. Where the aim and bent of the soul is
God-wards, there is grace though opposed. The least measure of it is holy
desires springing Desires.
from faith and love, for we cannot desire any thing which we do not believe
first to be, and the desire of it issues from love. Hence desires are counted a
part of the thing desired in some measure, but then they must be, First,
constant, for constancy shows that they are supernaturally natural, and not
enforced: Secondly, they must be carried to spiritual things, as to believe,
to love GOD, etc. not out of a special exigent, because if now they had grace,
they think they might escape some danger, but as a loving heart is carried to
the thing loved for some-excellency in it self: And thirdly, with desire there
is grief when it is hindered, which stirs up to prayer: Oh that my ways were
so directed, Psalm. 119. 5.
that I might keep thy Statutes, Psalm. 119. 5. O miserable man that I am, who
shall deliver? etc. Romans 7. 24.
Fourthly, desires put us onward still, O that I might serve GOD with more
liberty; O that I were more free from these offensive, unsavory, noisome lusts.

Fire works it self (if it has any matter to feed on) into a larger
compass, and mounteth higher and higher, and the higher it rises, the purer is
the flame: So where true grace is, it grows in measure and purity. Smoking
flax will grow to a flame, and as it increases, so it works out the
contrary, and refineth it self more and more. Therefore Ignis qu^ magis l^cet,
eo minus fumat.
it argues a false heart to set our selves a measure in grace, and to rest in
beginnings; alleging, that CHRIST will not quench the smoking flax. But this
merciful disposition in CHRIST is joined with perfect holiness, showed in
perfect hatred to sin: for rather than sin should not have its deserved
punishment, himself became a sacrifice for sin, wherein his Fathers
holiness and his own mo^ of all shined. And besides this, in the work of
sanctification, though he favors his work in us, yet favors he not sin in
us; for he will never take his hand from his work, until he has taken away
sin even in its very being from our natures: the same Spirit that purified that
blessed Mass whereof he was made, cleanses us by degrees to be suitable to so
holy a Head, and frames the judgment and affection of all to whom he shows
mercy, to concur with his own, in laboring to further his ends, in abolishing
of sin out of our nature.

From the meditations of these rules and signs, Use.
much comfort may be brought into the souls of the weakest; which that it may
be in the more abundance, let me add something for the helping them over
some few ordinary objections, and secret thoughts against themselves, which
getting within the heart, oftentimes keeps them under.

Some think they have 1.
no faith at all, because they have no full assurance, when as the fairest fire
that can be will have some smoke. The best actions will smell of the smoke.
The mortar wherein Garlic has been stamped will always smell of it: So all
our actions will savor something of the old man.

In weakness of body some think grace dies, 2.
because their performances are feeble, their spirits being the instruments of
the souls actions, being wasted, not considering that GOD regards those hidden
sighs of those that want abilities to express them outwardly; he that
pronounces them blessed that consider the poor, will have a merciful
consideration of such himself.

Some again are haunted with hideous representations 3.
to their fantasies, and with vile and unworthy Vellem servari Domine, sed
cogitationes non pa^iuntur.
thoughts of GOD, of CHRIST, of the word, etc. which as busy flies disquiet
and molest their peace; these are cast in like wilde-fire by Satan, as may be
discerned by the 1 strangeness, 2 strength and violence, 3 horriblenesse of
them even unto nature corrupt. A pious soul is no more guilty of them, than
Benjamin of Joseph's cup put into his sack. Amongst other helps prescribed by
godly Writers (as abomination of them, and diversion from them to other things,
etc.) let this be one, to complain unto CHRIST against them, and to fly under
the wings of his protection, and to desire him to take our part against his and
our enemy. Shall every sin and blasphemy of man be forgiven, and not these
blasphemous thoughts, which have the Devil for their father? When CHRIST
himself was therefore molested in this kind, that he might succor all poor
souls in the like case?

Some think, when 4.
they begin once to be troubled with the smoke of corruption more than they
were before, therefore they are worse than they were. It is true, that
corruptions appear now more than before, but they are less. For first, 1.
sin the more it is seen, the more it is hated, and thereupon is the less.
Moats are in a room before the Sun shines, but they then only appear.

Secondly, Contraries, 2.
the nearer they are one to another, the sharper is the conflict betwixt them:
now of all enemies the spirit and the flesh are nearest one to another, being
both in the soul of a regenerate man, and in all faculties of the soul, and
in every action that springs from those faculties, and therefore it is no
marvel the soul (the seat of this battle) thus divided in it self, be as
smoking Flax.

Thirdly, the more grace, the more spiritual life, 3.
and the more spiritual life, the more antipathy to the contrary, whence none
are so sensible of corruption, as those that have the most living souls.

And fourthly, when 4.
men give themselves to carnal liberties, their corruptions trouble the^ not,
as not being bounded and tied up. But when once grace suppresseth their
extravagant and licentious excesses, then the flesh boyleth, (as disdaining to
be confined) yet they are better now than they were before. That matter which
yields smoke, was in the Torch before it was lighted, but it is not offensive
till the Torch begins to burn. Let such know, that if the smoke be once
offensive to them, it is a sign that there is light. It is better to enjoy the
benefit of light, though with smoke, than to be altogether in the dark.

Neither is smoke so offensive, as light is comfortable to us, it yielding an
evidence of truth of grace in the heart, therefore though it be combersome in
the conflict, yet it is comfortable in the evidence. It is better, corruption
should offend us now, than by giving way to it to redeem a little peace with
loss of comfort afterward. Let such therefore as are at variance and odds
with their corruptions, look upon this Text, as their portion of comfort.

Here is an use of encouragement Encouragements.
to duty, That CHRIST will not quench the smoking flax, but blow it up. Some
are loath to perform good duties, because they feel their hearts rebelling,
and duties come off untowardly. We should not avoid good actions for the
infirmities cleaving unto them: CHRIST looks more at the good in them that
he means to cherish, than the ill in them that he means to abolish. A
sick man though in eating he something increases the disease, yet he will
eat, that nature may get strength against the disease: So though sin cleaves
to what we do, yet let us do it, since we have to deal with so good a Lord,
and the more strife we meet withal, the more acceptance: Christ loves to taste
of the good fruits that come from us, although they will always relish of the
old stock.

A Christian complains he cannot pray; O^ am troubled with so many
distracting thoughts, and never more than now. But has he put into thine heart
a desire to pray? he will hear the desires of his; own Spirit in thee. Romans
8. 26. We know not what to pray as we ought, (nor do any thing else as we
ought) but the Spirit helps our infirmities, with unexpressible sighs and
groans, which are not hid from GOD. My groanings Psalm. 38. 9.
are not hid from thee; GOD can pick sense out of a confused prayer. These
desires cry louder in his ears, than thy sins. Sometimes a Christian has
such confused thoughts, he can say nothing, but as a child cries, O Father,
not able to show what it needs, as Moses at the Red sea.

These stirrings of spirit touch the bowels of GOD, and melt him into
compassion toward us, when they come from the spirit of adoption, and from a
striving to be better. Oh but is it possible Object.
(thinks the misgiving heart) that so holy a GOD should accept such a prayer?
Yes, he will accept that Answ.
which is his own, and pardon that which is ours. Jonas prayed in the Whales
belly, being burdened with the guilt of sin, yet GOD hears him: Let not
therefore infirmities discourage us. Saint James takes away this objection,
Cap. 5. 17.

Some might object, If I were as holy as Elias, then my prayers might be
regarded: But (says he) Elias was a man of like passions to us, he had his
passions as well as we; For do we think that GOD heard him because he was
without fault? No surely. But look we to the promises. Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee. Matt. 7. 7. Ask and ye shall
receive, and such like: GOD accepts our prayers though weak, first, because
we are his Why first God accepts of weak Prayers. 2.
own children, they come from his own Spirit. Secondly, because they are
according to his own will. Thirdly, because they are offered in Christ's
mediation, and he takes them, and mingleth them with his own odours. There
Revel. 8.
is never a holy sigh, never a tear we shed, lost. And as every Grace
increases by exercise of it self, so does the grace of prayer; by prayer we
learn to pray. So likewise we should take heed of a spirit of discouragement
in all other holy duties, since we have so gracious a Savior. Pray as we are
able, hear as we are able, strive as we are able, do^ as we are able,
according to the measure of Grace received; GOD i^ CHRIST will cast a gracious
eye upon that which is his own. Would S. Paul do nothing, because he could
not do the good he would? Yes, he pressed to Phil. 3. 14.
the mark. Let us not be cruel to our selves, when CHRIST, is thus gracious.

There is a certain meekness of spirit, whereby The effect of Christian
meekness, contentation.
we yield thanks, to God for any ability at all, and rest quiet with the
measure of Grace received, seeing it is GODS good pleasure it should be so,
who gives the will and the deed; yet so, as we rest not from further
endeavors. But, when upon faithful endeavor we come short of that we would
be, and short of that others are, then know for our comfort, CHRIST will no^
quench the smoking flax, and that sincerity and truth (as before was said)
with endeavor of growth, is our perfection. It is comfortable what GOD says,
1 King: 14. 13. He only shall go to his grave in peace, because there is some
goodness; though but some goodness: Lord I believe with a weak faith, yet
with ^aith; love thee with a faint love, yet with love; endeavor in a feeble
manner, yet endeavor; a little fire is fire, though it smoaketh. Since thou
have taken me into thy Covenant to be thine of an enemy, will thou cast me
off for these infirmities, which as they displease thee, so are they the grief
of my own heart?

From what has bin spoken, (with some* little addition) it will not be
difficult to resolve that case which some A case about indisposition to duty.
require help in, namely, whether we ought to perform duties, our hearts
being altogether indisposed. For satisfaction, we must know, I, our hearts of
themselves do linger after liberty, and are hardly brought under the yoke of
duty: and the more spiritual the duty is, the more is their unto wardnes.
Corruption gets ground for the most part, in every neglect, it is as in
rowing against the tide, one stroke neglected will not be gained in three, and
therefore it is good to keep our hearts close to duty, and not to he a rken
unto the excuses they are ready to frame.

In the setting upon duty, God strengthens his 2.
own party that he has in us: we find a warmenesse of heart, and increase
of strength, the Spirit going along with us, and raising us up by degrees,
until it leaves us as it were in heaven. God often delights to take the
advantage of our indisposition, that he may manifest his work the more
clearly: and all the glory of the work may be his, whose all the strength is.

Obedience is most direct, when there is nothing 3.
else to sweeten the action, although the sacrifice be imperfect, yet the
obedience, with which it is offered, has acceptance. 4. That which is won as a
spoil from our corruptions, will have such a degree of comfort afterward, as
for the present it has of comber. Feeling and freeness of spirit is often
reserved until duty be discharged: reward follows work. In and after duty,
we find that experience of Gods presence, which without obedience we may
long wait for, and yet go without. This hinders not the Spirits freedom in
blowing upon our souls when it lists. For we speak only of such a state
of soul, as is becalmed, and must row (as it were) against the stream. As in
sailing, the hand must be to the stern, and the eye to the star: so here,
put forth that little strength we have to duty, and look up for assistance.

Yet in these duties that require as well the body Caution.
as the soul, there may be a cessation till strength be repaired: whetting
does not let but fit. (...). In sudden passions there should be a time to
compose and calm the soul, and to put the strings in tune. The Prophet would
have a Minstrell to bring his soul into frame.

So likewise we are subject to discouragements in Discouragement from
impatience in suffering
sufferings, by reason of impatiency in us: Alas, I shall never get through such
a cross. But if God bring us into the cross, he will be with us in the
cross, and at length bring us out more refined. We shall lose nothing, but
dross, as in Zach. 13. 9. Of our own strength we cannot bear the least
trouble, and by the Spirits assistance we can bear the greatest, the Spirit
will join his shoulders to help us to bear our infirmities. The Lord will put
his hand to heave us Psalm. 37. 24.
up. You have heard of the patience of Job; (says ^ames) we have heard
likewise of his impatiency too. But it pleased God mercifully to over-looke
that. It yields us comfort also in desolate conditions, as contagious
sicknesses, and the like, wherein we are more immediately under Gods hand.
Then Christ has a throne of Mercy at our beds side, and numbers our tears and
our groans. And to come to the matter we are now about. The Sacrament it was
ordained not for Angels, This was preached at the Sacrament.
but for Men, and not for perfect men, but for weak men, and not for Christ,
who is truth it self, to bind him, but because we are ready by reason of our
guilty and unbeleeving hearts to call truth it self into questions. Therefore
it was not enough for his goodness to leave us many precious promises, but he
gives us seals to strengthen us: and what though we are not so prepared as we
should, yet let us pray as Hezekias did, The Lord 2 Chronicles. 30. 19
pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek the Lord God of his
fathers, if he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary.
Then we come comfortably, to this holy Sacrament, and with much fruit. This
should carry us through all duties, with much cheerfulness, That if we hate
our corruptions and strive against them, they shall not be counted ours. It is
not I (says Saint Romans 7. 17.
Paul) but sin that dwells in me, for what displeases Quod non pl. cet,
non nocet. When sin is our sorrow, it shall not be our ruin.
us, shall never hurt us, and we shall be esteemed of GOD to be that we love,
and desire, and labor to be. What we desire to be, we shall be, and what we
desire truly to conquer, we shall conquer; for God will fulfill the desire of
them that fear him. The Ps. 145. 19.
desire is an earnest of the thing. How little encouragement will carry us to
the affairs of this life? and yet all the helps GOD offers will hardly
prevail with our backward natures. Whence are then Discouragements whence?
discouragements? not from the Father, for he has bound himself in 1.
Covenant to pity us as a father pittieth his children, Psalm. 103.
and to accept as a father, our weak endeavors, and what is wanting in the
strength of duty, he gives us leave to take up in his gracious indulge^ce,
whereby we shall honor that grace wherein he delights as much as in more
perfect performances.

2. Not from Christ, for he by office will not quench the smoking flax. 3.
Not from the Spirit, he helps 3. John 16.
our infirmities, and by office is a Comforter. Discouragements then must come
from our selves and Satan, who labors to fasten on us a loathing of duty, and
among other causes of discouragement, some are much vexed with scruples, (even
against Discouragement from scruples.
the best duties) partly by distemper of body, helped by Satan's malice, casting
dust in their eyes, in their way to heaven: and partly from some remainder of
ignorance, which like darkness breeds fears: and as ignorance of other
things, so especially of this merciful disposition in Christ. The persuasion
of which would easily banish false fears; they co^ceive of him as one sitting
at a catch for all advantages against the^, wherein they may see how they wrong
not only themselves but his goodness This scrupulosity for the most part is a
sign of a godly soul, as some weeds are of a good soil: therefore are they
the more to be pitied, for it is a heavy affliction, and the ground of it in
most is not so much from trouble of conscience as from sickness of fa^tasy: the
end of Christ's coming was to free us from all such groundless seares. 2.
There is still in some such ignorance of Discouragement from ignorace of our
condition in Christ.
that comfortable condition we are in under the Covenant of Grace, as by it
they are much discouraged. Therefore we must know, that weaknesses do not
break covenant with GOD: they do not between husband and wife; and shall we
make our selves more pitiful then Christ? who makes himself a pattern of
love to all other husbands.

2. Weaknesses do not debar us from mercy, nay they incline GOD the more.
Psalm. 78. 39. Mercy is a part of the Churches jointure, CHRIST marrics her in
mercy. The husbands be bound Hos. 2. 19.
to bear with the wife, as being the weaker vessel, and shall we think he
will exempt himself from his own rule, and not bear with his weak Spouse.
Possibilitas tua mensuratus.


3. If CHRIST should not be merciful to our infirmities, he should not have
a people to serve him.

Put case therefore we be very weak, yet so long as we are not found
amongst malicious opposers, and underminers of GODS truth, let us not give way
to despairing thoughts, we have a merciful Savior. But lest we flatter our
selves without ground, we must know that weaknesses are accounted Weaknesses
what?
either 1. imperfections cleaving to our best actions, or 2. such actions, as
proceed from want of age in CHRIST, whilst we are Babes; or 3. from want of
strength, where there has been little means, or 4. they are sudden
indeliberate breakings out, contrary to our general bent and purpose, whilst
our judgment is overcast with the cloud of a sudden temptation. After which, 1
we are sensible of our infirmity, 2 we grieve or it, 3, and from grief
complain, and with complaining strive, and labor to reform, and in laboring
get some ground of our corruption. There be some (almost) invincible
infirmities, as forgetfulness, A necessitatibus meis libera me Domaine. Aug.
heaviness of spirit, sudden passions, fears, etc. which though natural, yet
are for the most part tainted with sin, of these we are weary, and would
feign shake them off, as a Sickman his Ague; otherwise it is not to be
esteemed weakness, so much as wilfulness, and the more will, the more sin:
and little sins when God shall awake the conscience, and set them in order
before us, will prove great burdens, and not only bruise a Reed, but shake a
Cedar. Yet GODS children never sin with full will, because there is a
contrary Law of the mind, whereby the Dominion of sin is broken, which
always has some secret working against the Law of sin. Yet there may be so
much will in a sinful action, as may wonderfully waste our comfort afterward,
and keep us long upon the rack of a disquieted Conscience, GOD in his
fatherly dispensation suspending the sense of his love. So much as we give way
to our wills in sinning, in such a measure of distance we set our selves from
comfort. Sin against conscience is as a thief in the Candle, which wastes our
joy, and thereby weakneth our strength. We must know therefore, that wilful
breaches in Sanctification, will much hinder the sense of our Justification.

What course shall such take to recover their Quest.
peace?

Such must give a sharp sentence against them Answ.
selves, and yet cast themselves upon GODS mercy in CHRIST, as at their The way
to recover our lost peace.
first conversion. And now they had need to claspe about CHRIST the faster, as
they see more need in themselves, and let them remember the mildness of CHRIST
here, that will not quench the smoking flax. Ofttimes we see that after a
deep humiliation, Christ speaks more peace, then before, to witness the
truth of this reconciliation, because he knows Satan's enterprises in casting
down such lower; and because such are most abased in themselves, and are
ashamed to look Christ in the face, by reason of their unkindnesse. We see GOD
did not only pardon David, but after much bruising, gave him wise Solomon to
succeed him in the Kingdom. We see in the Canticles, that the Church after she
had been humbled, (for her slighting of Christ) Christ sweetly entertaines her
again, and falls into commendation of her Beauty, Cant. 6. We must know for
our comfort, that CHRIST was not anointed to this great work of the Mediator
for lesser sins only, but for the greatest, if there be but a spark of true
faith to lay hold on him. Therefore if there be any bruised Reed, let him not
except himself, when Christ does not except him; Come unto me all ye, that are
weary, and heavy laden, etc. Why should we not make use of so gracious a
disposition; we are only therefore poor, because we know not our riches in
CHRIST. In time of temptation rather believe CHRIST, then the Devil, believe
truth from Truth it self, hearken not to a liar, an enemy, and a murderer.

Since CHRIST is thus comfortably set out unto us, let us not believe Sarans
representations of him. When we are troubled in conscience for our sins, his
manner is then to present him to the afflicted soul as a most severe Judge
armed with Justice against us. But then let us present him to our souls, as
thus offered to our view by GOD himself, as holding out a Scepter of mercy,
and spreading his arms to receive us. When we think of Joseph, Daniel, John
the Evangelist, etc. we frame conceits of the^ with delight as of mild and
sweet persons, much more when we think of CHRIST, we should conceive of him
as a mirror of all meekness. If the sweetness of all flowers were in one, how
sweet must that flower needs be? In CHRIST all perfections of mercy and love
meet, how great then must that mercy be that lodges in so gracious a heart?
Whatsoever tenderness is scattered in, husband, father, brother, head, all is
but a beam from him, it is in him in the most eminent manner. We are weak,
but we are his; we are deformed, but yet carry his Image upon us. A father
looks not so much at the blemishes of his child, as at his own nature in him;
so Christ finds matter of love from that which is his own in us. He sees his
own nature in us, we are diseased, but yet his members; who ever neglected
his own members because they were sick or weak: none ever hated his own
flesh. Can the head forget the members? Can CHRIST forget himself? we are his
fullness as he is ours. He was Love it self clothed with man's nature, which
he united so near to himself, that he might communicate his goodness the
more freely unto us. And took not our nature when it was at the best, but when
it was abased, with all natural and common infirmities it was subject unto.
Let us therefore abhor all suspicious thoughts, as either cast in, or
cherished by that damned spirit, who as he labored to divide between the
Father and the Son by jealousies, If thou be the Son of Mat. 4. 6.
God, etc. So his daily s^udy is to divide betwixt the Son and us, by
breeding misperswasions in us of CHRIST, as if there were not such tender love
in him to such as we are. It was his art from the beginning, to discredit God
with man, by calling Gods love into question, with our first Father Adam: his
success then makes him ready at that weapon still.

But for all this, I feel Object.
not CHRIST so to me (says the smoking flax) but rather the clean contrary,
he seems to be an enemy unto me, I see and feel evidences* of his just
displeasure?

CHRIST may act Answ.
the part of an enemy a little while as Joseph did, but it is to make way for
acting his own part of mercy in a more seasonable time; he cannot hold in his
bowels long, he seems to wrestle with us, as with Jacob, but he supplies us
with hidden strength, at length to get the better. Faith pulls off the vizard
Fides Christo (...) detra^t.
from his face, and sees a loving heart under contrary appearances. At first he
answers the woman of Canaan crying after him, not a word; 2. then gives her a
denial; 3. gives an answer tending to her reproach, calling her dog, as
being without the Covenant; yet she would not be so beaten off; for she
considered the end of his coming. As his Father was never nearer him in
strength to support him, then when he was furthest off in sense of favor to
comfort him; So CHRIST is never nearer us in power to uphold us, then when he
seems most to hide his presence from us. The influence of the Sun of
righteousness pierces deeper then his light. In such cases, whatsoever
CHRIST'S present carriage is toward us, let us oppose his nature and office
against it, he cannot deny himself, he cannot but discharge the office his
Father has laid upon him. We see here the Father has undertaken that he
shall not quench the smoking flax; and CHRIST again undertaken for us to the
Father, appearing before him for us; until he presents us blameless before
him. The Father has given us to Christ, John 17.
and Christ gives us back again to the Father.

This were good comfort, Object.
if I were but as smoking flax.

It is well that thy objection Answ.
pincheth upon thy self, and not upon Christ, it is well thou give him the
honor of his mercy toward others, though not to thy self: but yet do not
wrong the work of his Spirit in thy heart. Satan as he slaundereth CHRIST to
us, so he slandereth us to our selves. If thou be not so much as smoking
flax, the^ why do thou not renounce thy interest in Christ, and disclame the
Covenant, of grace? this thou dare not do; why do thou not give up thy
self wholly to other contents? this thy spirit will not suffer thee. Whence
comes these restless groanings and complaints? Lay this thy present estate,
together with this office of CHRIST to such, and do not despise the
consolation of the Almighty, nor refuse thy own mercy. Cast thy self into the
Arms of CHRIST, and if thou perishest, perish there; if thou do not, thou
art sure to perish.

If mercy be to be (...) any where* it is there, herein appears Christ's care
to thee, that he has given thee a heart, in some degree sensible: he might
have given thee up to hardness, security, and profaneness of heart, of all
spiritual judgments the greatest. He that dyed for his enemies, will he
refuse those the desire of whose soul is toward him? he that by his
messengers desires us to be reconciled, will he put us off when we earnestly
seek it at his hand? No, doutblesse, when he prevents us by kindling holy
desires in us, he is ready to meet us in his own ways. When the Prodigal
set himself to return to his father, his father stays not for him, but meets
him in the way. When he prepares the heart Psa. 10, 17.
to seek, he will cause his ear to hear. He cannot find in his heart to
hide himself long from us. If God should bring us into such a dark condition,
as that we should see no light from himself, or the creature, then let us
remember what he says by the Prophet Esaias, He that is in Es^. ^0. 10.
darkness, and sees no light, no light of comfort, no light of Gods
countenance, yet let him trust in the name of the Lord. We can never be in
such a condition, wherein there will be just cause of utter despair; therefore
let us do as Mariners do, cast Anchor in the dark. CHRIST knows how to pity
us in this case; Look what comfort he felt from his Father in his breakings,
the like we Es. 53. 5.
shall feel from himself in our bruising.

The sighs of a bruised heart, carry in them some report, as of our affection
to CHRIST, so of his care to us. The eyes of our souls cannot be toward him,
but that he has cast a gracious look upon us first; The least love we have
to him, is but a re^ion of his love first shining upon us. As Christ did in his
example whatsoever he gives us in charge to do, so he suffered in his own
person whatsoever he calls us to suffer, that he might the better learn to
relieve and pity us in our sufferings. In his desertion in the Garden, and
upon the Cross, he was content to want that unspeakable solace in the presence
of his father, both to bear the wrath of the Lord for a time for us, and
likewise to know the better how to comfort us in our greatest extremities; GOD
sees it fit we should taste of that cup of which his Son drank so deep,
that we should feel a little what sin is, and what his Sons love was; but
our comfort is, that Christ drank the dreggs of the cup for us, and will
succor us, that our spirits utterly fail not under that little taste of his
displeasure which we may feel. He became not only a man, but a curse, a man
of sorrows for us. He was broken, that we should not be broken; he was
troubled, that we should not be desperately troubled: he became a curse, that
we should not be accursed. Whatsoever may be wished for in an all-sufficient
Comforter is all to be found in Christ. 1, Authority, from the Father all
power was given him: 2, Strength in himself, as having his name The mighty
GOD: Esaias 9.
3, Wisdom, and that from his own experience how and when to help: 4,
Willingness, as being flesh of our flesh, and bone Es. 9. 6.
of our bone.

We are now to take notice of diverse sorts of men that offend deeply against
this merciful disposition of Christ: As, 1. Such as go on in ill courses of
life upon this conceit, as if it were in vain to go to CHRIST their lives
have been so ill; when as so soon, as we look to heaven, all encouragements
are ready to meet us, and draw us forward. Amongst others this is one
allurement, that CHRIST is ready to welcome us, and lead us further. None are
damned in the Church, but those that will. Such as either enforce upon
themselves hard conceits of CHRIST, that they may have some show of reason to
fetch contentment from other things: as that unprofitable servant, that would
needs take up a conceit, that his Master was a hard man; hereby to flatter
himself in his unfruitful courses, in not improving that talent which he had.

2. Such as take up a hope of their own, that Christ will suffer them to walk
in the ways to hell, and yet bring them to heaven: whereas all co^sort should
draw us nearer to Christ, else it is a lying comfort, either in it self, or in
our application of it.

And 3. those that will east water themselves upon those sparks, which Christ
labors to kindle in them; because they will not be troubled with the light of
them.

Such must know, that the Lamb can be angry, and they that will not come under
his Scepter of Mercy, shall be crushed in pieces by his Scepter of Power. Psalm.
2. 9.
Though he will graciously tender, and maintain the least spark of true
grace, yet where he finds not a spark of Grace, but opposition to his
Spirit striving with them, his wrath once kindled shall burn to hell. There is
no juster provocation, then when kindness is churlishly refused.

When God would have cured Babylon, and she would Ier. 51. 9.
not be cured, then, she was given up to destruction.

When Jerusalem would not be gathered under the Matthew. 23.
wing of Christ, then their habitation is left desolate.

When Wisdom stretches Prove. 16.
out her hand and men refuse, then Wisdom will laugh at men's destruction.
Salvation it self will not save those that spill the potion, and cast away the
plaster. A pitiful case, when this merciful Savior shall delight in
Destruction: when he that made men, shall have no Es. 17. 11.
mercy on them.

Oh say the Rebels of the time, God has not made usto damn us. Yes, if you
will not meet Christ in the ways of his mercy, it is fit you should eat the
fruit of your own ways, and Pro. 1. 3.
be filled with your own devices.

This will be the hell of hell when men shall think that they have loved their
sins, more then their souls: when they shall think, what love and mercy has
been almost enforced upon them, and yet they would perish. The more accessory
we are in pulling a judgment upon our selves, the more the conscience will be
confounded in it self, when they shall acknowledge Christ to be without all
blame, themselves without excuse.

If men appeal to their own consciences, they will tell them, the Holy Spirit
has often knocked at their hearts, as willing to have kindled some holy desires
in them. How else can they be said to resist the Holy Ghost, but that the
Spirit was readier to draw them to a further degree of goodness, then stood with
their own wills? whereupon those in the Church that are damned, are
selfe-condemned before. So that here we need not to rise to higher causes, when
men carry sufficient cause of their own damnation in their own bosoms.

4 And the best of us all may offend against this merciful disposition, if we
be not watchful against that liberty our carnal dispositions will be ready
to take from it. Thus we reason. If Christ will not quench the smoking Flax,
what need we fear that any neglect of our part can bring us under a
comfortless condition? If Christ will not do it, what can?

Ans. You know the Apostles prohibition notwithstanding 1 Thessalonians. 5. quench not
the Spirit. These cautions of not quenching are sanctified by the Spirit as
means of not quenching. CHRIST performs his office in not quenching, by
stirring up suitable endeavors in us, and none more sollicitous in the use of
the means, than those that are most certain of the good success: the ground
is this, the means that GOD has set apart for the effecting of any thing,
fall under the same purpose that he has to bring that thing to pass; and this
is a principle taken for granted even in civil matters: as who if he knew
before it would be a fruitful year, would therefore hang up his plough and
neglect tillage.

Hence the Apostle stirs up from the certain 1 Cor. 15. (...)
expectation of a blessing, and this encouragement here from the good issue of
final victory is intended to stir us up, and not to take us off, if we be
negligent in the exercise of grace received, and use of means prescribed,
suffering our spirits to be oppressed with multitudes and variety of cares of
this life, and take not heed of the damps of the times, for such miscariage GOD
in his wise care suffers us often to fall into a worse condition for feeling,
than those that were never so much enlightened. Yet in mercy he will not suffer
us to be so far enemies to our selves, as wholly to neglect these sparks
once kindled, were it possible that we should be given up to give over all
endeavor wholly, then we could look for no other issue but quenching. But
CHRIST will tend this spark, and cherish this small seed so as he will
preserve in the soul always some degree of care. If we would make a
comfortable use of this, we must consider all those Helps of not quenching.
means whereby CHRIST does preserve grace begun, as first, holy communion 1.
whereby one Christian heateth another: Two are better than one, etc. Did not
our hearts burn, said the Disciples? Secondly, Much more communion 2.
with GOD in holy duties, as Meditation and Prayer, which does not only
kindle, but adds a luster to the soul. Thirdly, we feel by experience 3.
the breath of the spirit to go along with the ministerial breath, whereupon
the Apostle knits these two together, Quench not the Spirit, Despise not
Prophesies. Nathan by a few words blew up the decaying sparks in David. Rather
than God will suffer his fire in us to dye, he will send some Nathan or other,
and some thing always is left in us to join with the word, as connaturall to
it as a coal that has fire in it will quickly catch more to it: smoking
flax will easily take fire. Fourthly, grace 4.
is strengthened by the exercise of it, Up and be doing, and the Lord be with
thee, says David to his son Solomon. Stir up the grace that is in thee, for
so holy motions turn to resolutions, resolutions to practice, and practice to
a prepared readiness to every good work.

Yet let us know that grace is increased in the Caution.
exercise of it, not by virtue of the exercise it self, but as CHRIST by his
Spirit flows into the soul, and brings us nearer unto himself the
fountain, and in^illeth such comfort in the act whereby the heart is further
enlarged. The heart of a Christian is Christ's Garden, and his Graces are as so
many sweet spices and flowers, which his Spirit blowing upon makes them to
send forth a sweet savor: therefore keep the soul open for entertainment of
the Holy Ghost, for he will bring in continually fresh forces to subdue
corruption, and this most of all on the Lords day. John was in Revel. 1.
the Spirit on the Lords day, even in Pathmos, the place of his banishment,
then the gales of the Spirit blow more strongly and sweetly. As we look
therefore for the comfort of this doctrine, let us not favor our natural
sloth, but exercise our selves to god linesse, and labor to keep 1 Timothy 4 7.
this fire always burning upon the Altar of our hearts, and dress our Lamps
daily, and put in fresh oil; and wind up our souls higher and higher still:
resting in a good condition, is contrary to grace, which cannot but promote it
self to a further measure: Let none turn this grace into wantonness.
Infirmities Iud. 4.
are a ground of humility, not a plea for negligence, not an encouragement to
presumption. We should be so far from being ill, because CHRIST is good, as
that those coals of love should melt us, therefore those may well suspect
themselves in whom the consideration of this mildness of CHRIST does not work
that way. Surely where grace is, corruption is as Smoke to their eyes, and
vinegar to their teeth. And therefore they will labor in regard of their own
comfort, as likewise for the credit of Religion, and the glory of GOD, that
their light may break forth. If a spark of faith or love be so precious, what
an honor will it be to be rich in faith! Who would not rather wa^e in the
light, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost, than to live in a dark perplexed
estate? and not rather be carried with full sail to heaven, than be tossed
always with fears and doubts? The present trouble in conflict against a sin
is not so much as that disquiet which any corruption favored, will bring upon
us afterward: True peace is in conquering, not in yielding. The comfort in
this Text intended is for those that would feign do better, but sinde their
corruptions clog them, that are in such a mist, that often times they cannot tell
what to think of themselves; that feign would believe, and yet often fear they
do not believe, and think that it cannot be that GOD should be so good to
such sinful wretches as they are, and yet they allow not themselves in these
fears and doubts.

And among others. 5.
How do they wrong themselves and him, that will have other Mediators to GOD
for them than he: are any more pitiful than he, who became man to that end,
that he might be pitiful to his own flesh? let all at all times repair to
this meek Savior, and put up al our suits in his prevailing name. What need
we knock at any other door? can any be more tender over us than CHRIST? What
encouragement have we to commend the state of the Church in general, or of any
broken hearted Christian, unto him by our prayers? Of whom we may speak unto
CHRIST as they of Lazarus, Lord, the Church which thou love, and gave thy
self for, is in distress: Lord, this poor Christian for whom thou Esaias 53.
were bruised, is bruised and brought very low. It cannot but touch his bowels
when the misery of his own dear bowels is spread before him.

Again, considering 6.
this gracious nature in CHRIST, let us think with our selves thus, when he is
so kind unto us, shall we be cruel against him, in his name, in his truth, in
his children? how shall those that delight to be so terrible to the meek of
the earth, hope to look so gracious a Savior in the face: they that are so
boisterous toward his Spouse, shall know one day they had to deal with
himself in his Church. So it cannot but cut the heart of those that have felt
this love of CHRIST, to hear him wounded who is the life of their lives, and
the foul of their souls: this makes those that have selt mercy weep over
CHRIST whom they have pierced with their finnes; there cannot but be a mutual
and quick sympathy between the Head and the Members. When we are tempted to
any sin, if we will not pity our selves, yet we should spare CHRIST in not
putting him to new torments. The Apostle could not find out a more
heartbreaking argument to ensorce a sacrificing our selves to GOD, than to
conjure us by the mercies Romans 12, 1.
of GOD in CHRIST. This mercy of CHRIST likewise should moove us to 7.
commiserate the estate of the poor Church torn by enemies without, and
renting it self by divisions at home. It cannot but work upon any soul that
ever felt comfort from Christ, to consider what an affectionate entreaty the
Apostle uses to mutual agreement in judgment and affection, If any
consolation Philip. 2. 1.
in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, any
bowels and mercies, fulfill my joy, be like minded. As if he should say,
unless you will disclaim all consolation in Christ, etc. labor to maintain
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: What a joyful spectacle is this
to Satan and his faction, to see those that are separated from the world, fall
in pieces among themselves. Our discord is our enemies melody.

The more to blame those that for private aims affect differences from others,
and will not suffer the wounds of the Church to close and meet together. Which
must not be understood as if men should dissemble their judgment in any truth,
where there is just cause of expressing themselves, for the least truth is
Christ's and not ours, and therefore we are not to take liberty to affirm or
deny at our pleasures: there is a due in a penny, as well as in a pound,
therefore we must be faithful in the least truth, when season calls for
it, then our words are like Apples of gold with pictures of silver. One word
spoken in season will do more good, than a thousand out of season. In some
cases peace by keeping our faith to our selves, is Romans 14. 22
of more consequence, than the open discovery of some things we take to be
true, considering the weakness of man's nature is such that there can hardly be
a discovery of any difference in opinion, without some estrangement of
affection. So far as men are not of one mind, they will hardly be of one
heart, except where grace and the peace of God bear great rule in c^loss. 3.
15.
the heart, therefore open show of difference is never good but when it is
necessary; howsoever some from a desire to be some body, turn into by-waies,
and yield to a spirit of co^tradiction in themselves; yet if Saint Paul may be
Judge, Are they not carnal? if it be wisdom, it is 1 Cor. 3. 3.
wisdom from beneath; for the wisdom from above, as it is pure, so it is
Iam. 3. 17
peaceable. Our blessed Savior when he was to leave the world, what does he
press upon his Disciples more than peace and love. And in his last prayer with
what earnestness did he beg of his Father that They might be one as he and the
Father were John 17.
one. But what he prayed for on earth, we shall only enjoy perfectly in
heaven. Let this make the meditation of that time the more sweet unto us.

And further to lay open 8.
offenders in this kind, what spirit shall we think them to be of, that take
advantages of the bruisednesse and infirmities of men's spirits, to relieve them
with false peace for their own worldly ends. A wounded spirit will part with
any thing. Most of the gainful points of Popery, as confession,
sasatisfaction, merit, Purgatory, etc. spring from hence, but they are
Physicians of no value, or rather tormentors than Physicians at all. It is a
greater blessing to be delivered from the sting of these Revel. 9. 5.
Scorpions, then we are thankful for. Spiritual tyranny is the greatest
tyranny, and then especially when it is where most mercy should be showed, yet
even there some like cruel surgeons, delight in making long cures, to serve
themselves upon the misery of others. It brings men under a terrible curse:
When they will not remember to show mercy, but persecute the poor and needy
Ps. 109. 16.
man, that they might even slay the broken in heart.

Likewise to such as raise temporal advantage to themselves out of the
spiritual misery of others, join such as raise estates by betraying the
Church, and are unfaithful in the trust committed unto them: when the children
shall cry for the bread of life, and there is none to give them, bringing thus
upon the people of GOD that heavy judgment of a spiritual famine, starving
CHRIST in his members. Shall we so requite so good a Savior, who counts the
love and mercy showed in feeding his Lambs, as showed to himself.

Last of all, they carry themselves very unkindly toward CHRIST, who ^umble at
this his low stooping unto us in his government and ordinances, that are
ashamed of the simplicity of the Gospel, that count Preaching foolishness.
They out of the pride of their heart think they may do well enough without the
help of the Word and Sacraments; and think CHRIST took not state enough upon
him, and therefore they will mend the matter with their own devises, whereby
they may give the better content to flesh and blood, as in Popery. What greater
unthankfulness can there be, then to despise any help that CHRIST in mercy
has provided for us. In the days of his flesh, the proud Pharisees took
offense at his familiar conversing with sinful men, who only did so, as a
Physician to heal their souls. What defenses was Saint Paul driven to make
for himself, for his plainness in unfolding the Gospel? The more CHRIST in
himself, and in his servants shall desce^d to exalt us, the more we should
with all humility and readiness entertain that love, and magnify the
goodness of GOD that has put the great work of our salvation, and laid the
government upon so gentle a Savior, that will carry himself so mildely in all
things wherein he is to deal betwixt GOD and us, and us and GOD; The lower
CHRIST comes down to us, the higher let us lift him up in our hearts: so will
all those do that have ever found the experience of CHRIST'S work in their
heart.

We come to the third part, the constant progress The third part. Judgments
Victory.
of CHRIST'S gracious power, until he has set up such an absolute government
in us, which shall prevail over all corruption. It is said here, he will
cherish his Beginnings of Grace in us, until he bring forth judgment unto
victory. By judgment here is meant the Kingdom of Grace in us; that
Government, whereby CHRIST sets up a Throne in our hearts. Governors among the
Jews were first called Judges, then Kings, whence this inward rule is called
Judgment: as likewise, because it agrees unto the judgment of the word, which
the Psalmi^ft calls Psalm. 72. 7.
judgment, because it agrees to Gods judgment: Men may read their doom in
GODS: word, what it judges of them, GOD judges of them. By this judgment set
up in us, good is discerned, allowed, and performed; sin is judged, condemned
and e^ecuted. O^ spirit being under the Spirit of CHRIST, is governed by him,
and so far as it is governed by Christ it governes us graciously. CHRIST and
we are of one judgment, and of one will, he has his will in us, and his
judgme^ts are so invested into us, as that they are turned into our judgment,
we carrying his Law in our hearts, written by his Spirit: and the law in the
inner man, and the law written answer as counter pa^es each other.

The meaning then is, that the gracious frame of holiness set up in our hearts
by the Spirit of CHRIST shall go forward until all contrary power ^ee brought
under. The spirit of judgment will be a spirit of burning, to consume Es^y 4.
4.
whatsoever opposed corruption like rust eats into the soul. If GODS builders
fall into errors and build stubble upon 1 Cor. 3. 13.
a good foundation, GODS Spirit as a spiritual fire will reveal this in time,
and wast it: they shall by a spirit of judgment condemn their own errors
and courses.

The whole work of grace in us is set out under the name of judgment, and
sometimes wisdom, because judgment is the chief and leading part in grace;
whereupon that gracious work of repentance is called a change of the mind,
and an after* wisdom. As on the other (...)
side in the learned languages, the words that express wisdom, implie
likewise the general relish and savor of the (...). ^pere.
whole soul: and rather more the judgment of taste, then of ^ight, or any
other sense, because Taste is the most necessary sense, and requires the
nearest application of the object of all other* senses. So in spiritual life,
it is most necessary that the spirit should alter the taste of the soul, so as
that it might savor the things of the spirit so deeply, that all other things
should be out of relish.

And as it is true of every particular Christian, that CHRIST'S judgment in him
shall be victorious, so likewise of the whole body of Christians, the Church.
The government of CHRIST and his truth whereby he rules as by a Scepter,
shall at length be victorious in spite of Satan, Antichrist, and all Enemies.
CHRIST ryding on his white horse, has a Bow and goes forth conquering Revel.
6. 2. Rev. 19. 11.
in the ministry, that he may overcome either to conversion or to confusion.
But yet I take Judgment, for CHRIST'S Kingdom and government within us,
principally. 1, Because GOD especially requires the subjection of the soul
and conscience as his proper Throne. 2, Because if judgment should prevail in
all others about us, and not in our own hearts it would not yield comfort to
us; hereupon, it is the first thing that we desire when we pray, Thy Kingdom
come, that CHRIST would come and rule in our hearts: The Kingdom of CHRIST in
his ordinances serve but to bring CHRIST home into his own place, our hearts.

The words being thus explained, that judgment here includes the government
of both mind, will, and affections, there are diverse conclusions that naturally
do spring from them.

First, that CHRIST'S 1. Conclusion. It has 2. Branches.
government in his Church and in his children, is a wise and well ordered
government, because it is called Judgment, and Judgment is the life and soul
of wisdom. Of this Conclusion there are two branches; 1, that the spiritual
government of CHRIST in us is joined with judgment and wisdom. 2,
Wheresoever true ^spirituall wisdom and judgment is, there likewise the
Spirit of CHRIST brings in his gracious government. For the first, a well
guided life by the rules of 1.
CHRIST, stands with the strongest and highest reason of all; and therefore
holy men are called the children of wisdom, and are able to justify both by
reason and experience all the ways of wisdom. Opposite courses are solly and
madness. Hereupon Saint Paul says, that a spiritual man judges all things 1
Cor. 2. 15.
that appertain to him, and i^ judged of none that are of an inferior rank,
because they want spiritual light and sight to judge; yet this sort of men
will be judging, and speaking ill of what they know not, they step from
ignorance to prejudice and rash censure, without taking right judgment in
their way, and therefore their judgment comes to nothing. But the judgment of
a spiritual man, so far forth as he is spiritual shall stand, because it is
agreeable to the nature of things: as things are in themselves, so they are in
his judgment. As GOD is in himself infinite in goodness and majesty, etc. so
he is to him, he ascribes to GOD in his heart his divinity and all his
excellencies. As CHRIST is in himself the only mediator, and All in All in
the Church, so he is to him, by making CHRIST so in his heart. As all things
are dung Philip 3.
in comparison of CHRIST, so they are to Paul a sanctified man. As the very
worst thing in religion, the reproach of Christ is better Heb. 11.
then the pleasure of sin for a season, so it is to Moses a man of a right
esteem, A^ one day in the Courts of God is better then a thousand elsewhere,
so it is to David a man of a reformed judgment. There is a conformity of a
good man's judgment to things as they are in themselves, and according to the
difference, or agreement put by GOD in things, so does his judgment differ or
agree.

Truth is truth, and error error, and that which is unlawful, is unlawful
whether men think so or no. GOD has put an eternal difference betwixt light
and darkness, good and ill, which no creatures conceit can alter, and
therefore no man's judgment is the measure of things further then it agrees to
truth stamped upon things themselves by GOD. Hereupon because a wise man's
judgment agrees to the truth of things, a wise man may in some sense be said
to be the measure of things; and the judgment of one holy wise man, to be
preferred before a thousand others. Such men usually are immovable as the Sun
in its course, because they think, and speak, and live by rule. A Iosuah and
his house will serve God whatsoever others do, and will run a course contrary
to the world, because their judgments leads them a contrary way. Hence it is
that Satan has a spite at the eye of the soul, the judgment, to put out
that by ignorance and false reason, for he cannot rule in any, until either
he has taken away or perverted judgment: he is a Prince of darkness, and
rules in darkeness of the understanding. Therefore he must first be cast out
of the understanding by the prevailing of truth, and planting it in the soul.
Those therefore (...) ^ledge, help Satan and Antichrist (whose Kingdom like
Satan's is a kingdom of darkness) to erect their throne. Hence it is promised
by CHRIST that the holy Ghost shall convince the world of judgment, that is,
that he is resolved to set up a Throne of government, because the great lord of
misrule Satan the Prince of the world is judged by the Gospel, and the Spirit
accompanying it, his impostures are discovered, his enterprises laid open;
therefore when the Gospel was spread, the Oracles ceased. Satan fell from
heaven like lig^g, men were translated out of his Kingdom into Christ's. Where
prevailing is by lies, there discovery is victory: they shall proceed no
further, for their ^lly shall 2 Timothy 3. 9.
be manifest to all. So that manifestation of error gives a stop to it, for
none will willingly be deceived* Let truth have full soope without check or
restraint, and let satan and his instruments do their worst, they shall not
prevail; as Ierom Sententi^ vestras pr^didisse, (...)perasse est. Hier. i^
Epist. ad Tessep^. primae f^nte apparent blasphemi^.
says of the Pelagians in his time, The discovery of your opinions is the
vanquishing of them, your basphemies appear at the first blush.

Hence we learn the necessity that the understanding Use. The necessity of
knowledge
be principled with supernatural knowledge for the well managing of a
Christian conversation.

There must be light to discover a further end then nature, for which we are
Christians, and a rule suitable directing to that end, which is the will of GOD
in CHRIST, discovering his good pleasure toward us, and our duty toward him,
and in virtue of this discovery, we do all that we do that any way may
further our reckoning: the eye must first be single, and then the whole body
and frame of our conversation will be light: otherwise both we and our course
of life are nothing but darkness; The whole conversation of a Christian is
nothing else but knowledge digested into will, affection, and practice. If the
first (...) in the stomach be not good, that in the liver cannot be good: so if
there be error in the judgment it marres the whole practice, as an error in
the foundation does the building: GOD will have no blind sacrifices, no
unreasonable services, but will have us to love him with all our mind, that
is, with our understanding part, as well as with all our hearts, that is, the
affecting part of the soul.

This order of Christ's government by judgment, is agreeable unto the soul, and
GOD delights to preserve the manner of working peculiar unto man, that is, to
do what he does out of judgment as grace supposes nature as founded upon
it, so the frame of grace preserves the frame of nature in man. And therefore
Christ brings all that is good in the soul through judgment, and that so
sweetly that many out of a dangerous error think, that that good which is in
them and issues from them, is from themselves, and not from the powerful
work of grace. As in evil the devil so subtlely leads us according to the
stream of our own nature, that men think that Satan had no hand in their
sin: but here a mistake is with little peril, because we are il of
ourselves, and the devil does but promote what ill he finds in us. But there
are no seeds of supernatural goodness at all in us, GOD finds nothing in us
but enmity, only he has engraven this in our nature to incline in general
to that which we judge to be good. Now when he shall clearly discover what is
good in particular, we are carried to it, and when convincingly he shall
discover that which is ill, we abhor it as freely as we embraced it before.

From whence we may know when we work as we should do or no, that is, when we
do what we do, out of inward principles, when we fall not upon that which is
good only because we are so bred, or because such; or such whom we respect do
so; or because we will maintain a side, so making religion a faction: but out
of judgment, when what we do that is good, we first judge it in our selves
so to be: and what we abstain from that is ill, we first judge it to be ill
from an inward judgment. A sound Christian as he injoyeth the better part, so
has first made choice of it with Mary, he establishes all his thoughts by
counsel. GOD indeed uses carnal men to very good service, but wthout a
through altering, and conviction of their judgments. He works by them, but
not in them, therefore they do neither approve the good they do, nor hate the
evil they abstain from.

The 2 branch, is that 2. Branch.
wheresoever true wisdom and judgment is, there Christ sets up his government,
because where wisdom is, it directs us not only to understand, but to order
our ways aright; where Christ by his Spirit as a Prophet teaches, he like
wise as a King by his Spirit subdueth the heart to obedience of what is taught.
This is that teaching which is promised of GOD, when not only the brain, but
the heart it self is taught. When men do not only know what they should do,
but are taught the very doing of it, they are not only taught that they should
love, fear, and obey, but they are taught, love it self, and fear, and
obedience it self. CHRIST sets up his chair in the very heart and alters the
frame of that, and makes his subjects good, together with teaching of them to
be good. Other Princes can make good Laws, but they cannot write them in
their peoples hearts. This is CHRIST'S Prerogative; He infuseth into his
subjects his own Spirit, upon him there does not only rest the spirit of
wisdom and Esaias 11. 2, 3
understanding, but likewise the spirit of the fear of the Lord. The knowledge
which we have of him from himself is a transforming knowledge. The same
spirit that inlighteneth the mind, inspireth gracious inclinations into the
will and affections, and infuseth strength into the whole man. As a gracious
man judges as he should, so he affects and does as he judges, his life is
a commentary of his inward man; there is a sweet harmony betwixt GODS truth,
his judgment, and his whole conversation. The heart of a Christian is like
Jerusalem when it was at the best, a City compact Psalm. 122. 3.
within it self; where are set up the thrones of judgment. Judgment should
have a throne in the heart of every Christian. Not that judgment alone will
work a change, there must be grace to alter the bent and sway of the will
before it will yield to be wrought upon by the understanding; GOD has so
joined these together as that whensoever he does savingly shine upon the
understanding, he gives a soft and pliable heart, for without a work upon the
heart by the Spirit of God, it will follow its own inclination to that which it
affects whatsoever the judgment shall say to the contrary: there is no
connaturall proportion betwixt an unsanctified heart and a sanctified judgment.
For the heart unaltered will not give leave to the judgment, coldly and so
berly to conclude what is best, as the sick man whilst his aguish distemper
corrupts his taste, he is rather desirous to please that, then to hearken
what the Physician shall speak. judgment has not power over it self, where
the will is unsubdued, for the will and affections bribe it to give sentence for
them when any profit or pleasure shall come in competition with that which the
judgment in general only shall think to be good, and therefore it is for the
most part in the power of the heart, what the understanding shall judge and
determine in particular things. Where grace has brought the heart under, there
unruly passions do not cast such a mist before the understanding but that in
particular it sees that which is best; and base respects, springing from
self-love do not alter the case and byas the judgment into a contrary way,
but that which is good in it self, shall be good unto us, although it cross
our particular worldly interests.

The right conceiving of this has an influence into Use.
practice, which has drawn me to a more full explanation: this will teach us
the right method of godliness, to begin with judgment, and then to beg of
GOD together with illumination, holy inclinations of our will and affections,
that so a perfect government may be set up in our hearts, and that our
knowledge may be Phil. 1. 9.
with all judgment, that is, with experience and feeling: when the judgment of
CHRIST is set up in our judgments, and thence by the Spirit of CHRIST brought
into our hearts, then it is in its proper place and throne, and until then
truth does us no good, but helps to condemn us. The life of a^ Christian is
a regular life, and. he that walks by the rule Gal. 6.
of the new creature, peace shall be upon him, he that despises his way, and
loves to Pro. 19: 16.
live at large seeking all liberty to the flesh shall dye. And it is made good
by Saint Paul, If we live after Romans 8. 13.
the flesh we shall dye.

We learn likewise that men of an ill governed life have no true judgment:
no wicked man can be a wise man. And that without CHRIST'S Spirit the soul is
in confusion, without beauty and form, as all things were in the Chaos before
the creation. The whole soul is out of joint till it be set in again by him
whose office is to restore all things. The baser part of the soul which should
be subject, rules all, and keeps under that little truth that is in the
understanding, holding it captive to base affections, and Satan by corruption
gets all the holds of the soul, till CHRIST stronger then he comes, and
drives him out, and takes possession of all the powers and parts of soul and
body, to be weapons of righteousness, to serve him, and then, new Lords, new
Laws, CHRIST as a new Conqueror changes the fundamental laws of old Adam,
and establishes a government of his own.

The second Conclusion 2. Conclu^.
is, that this government is victorious. The reasons are: The reasons why
Christ's government in victorious.


1, Because CHRIST has conquered all in his own person first, and he is GOD
over all blessed for evermore; and therefore over Sin, Death, Hell, Satan,
1. Romans 9. 5.
the world, etc. And as he has overcome them in himself, so he overcomes them
in our hearts and consciences. We use to say, Conscience makes a man a King
or a caitife, because it is planted in us to judge for GOD, either with us, or
against us. Now if natural conscience be so forcible, what will it be when
besides it own light it has the light of divine truth put into it? It will
undoubtedly prevail, either to make us hold up our heads with boldness, or
abase us beneath our selves. If it subject it self by grace to CHRIST'S truth,
then it boldly overlookes Death, Hell, Judgment, and all spiritual enemies,
because then Christ sets up his Kingdom in the conscience, and makes it a kind
of Paradise.

The sharpest conflict which the soul has is between the conscience and GODS
Justice: now if the conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ has
prevailed over assaults fetched from the justice of GOD as now satisfied by
CHRIST, it will prevail over al other opposition whatsoever.

2 We are to encounter 2.
with accursed and damned enemies; therefore if they begin to fall before the
spirit in us, they shall fall: if they rise up again, it is to have the
greater fall.

3 The spirit of truth to whose tuition CHRIST 3.
has committed his Church: and the truth of the spirit which is the Scepter of
CHRIST, abide for ever; therefore the soul begotten by the immortal 1 Pet. 1.
23.
feed of this spirit, and this truth, must not only live for ever, but
likewise prevail over all that oppose it, for both the word and spirit are
mighty in operation; Heb. 4. 12.
and if the ill spirit be never idle in those whom GOD delivers up to him, we
cannot think that the Holy Spirit will be idle in those whose leading and
government is committed to him. No, as he dwells in them, so he will drive
out all that rise up against him, until he be all in all.

What is spiritual is eternal; truth is a beam of CHRIST'S Spirit both in it
self, and as it is ingrafted into the soul, there fore it, and the grace
(though little) wrought by it, will prevail; a little thing in the hand of a
Giant will do great matters. A little faith strengthened by CHRIST will work
wonders.

4 To him that has shall be given, the victory over any 4. Mat. 25. 29.
corruption or temptation is a pledge of final victory. As Joshua said when he
set his foot upon the five Kings which he conquered; Thus God shall Jos. 10.
25:
do with all our enemies; heaven is ours already, only we strive till we have
full possession.

5 CHRIST as King, 5.
brings in a commanding light into the soul, and bows the neck, and softens
the Iron sinew of the inner man, and where he begins to rule, he rules for
ever, his Kingdom has Luke 1. 33.
no end.

6 The end of CHRIST'S, 6. 1 John 3. 8.
coming was to destroy the works of the Devil, both for us and in us. And
the end of the resurrection, was as to seal unto us the assurance of his
victory; So I, to quicken our souls from death in sin, 2, to free our
souls from such snares and sorrows of spiritual death as accompany the guilt
of sin, 3, to raise them up more comfortable, as the Sun breaks forth more
gloriously out of a thick cloud, 4, to raise us out of particular slippes, and
failings, stronger; 5, to raise us out of all troublesome and dark conditions
of this life: And 6, at length to raise our bodies out of the dust. For the
same power that the Spirit showed in raising CHRIST our Head, from the sorrows
of death, and the lowest degree of his abasement; The same power obtained by
the death of CHRIST from GOD now appeased by that sacrifice, will the Spirit
show in the Church which is his body, and in every particular member thereof.

And this power is conveyed by faith, whereby after union with CHRIST in both
his estates of humiliation and exaltation, we see our selves not only dead with
Christ, but risen and sitting together with him in heavenly places. Now we
apprehending our selves to be dead, and risen, and thereupon victorious over
all our enemies in our Head. And apprehending that his scope in all this is to
conform us to himself, we are by this faith changed into his likeness, and
so become conquerors over all our spiritual enemies as he is, by that power
which we derive from him who is the storehouse of all spiritual strength for all
his. CHRIST at length will have his end in us, and faith rests assured of it,
and this assurance is very operative, stirring us up to join with CHRIST in
his ends.

And so for the Church in general, by CHRIST it will have its victory: CHRIST
is that little stone cut out of the mountain Da^. 2, 35.
without hands, that breaks in pieces that goodly Image, that is, all
opposite government; until it become a great mountain, and fills the whole
earth. So that the stone that was cut out of the mountain; becomes a mountain
it self at length; who art thou then O mountain, that think to stand up
against this mountain: all shall lie flat and level before it. He will bring
down all mountainous high-exalted thoughts and lay the pride of all flesh low.
When chafe strives against the wind, stubble against the fire, when the heel
kickes against the pricks, when the potsheard strives with the potter; when
man strives against GOD, it is easy to know on which side the victory will
go. The winds may toss the ship wherein CHRIST is, but not overturne it. The
waves may dash against the rock, but they do but break themselves against it.

If this be so, why is it thus with the Church of Object.
GOD, and with many a gracious Christian: the victory seems to go with the
enemy.

For answer, remember, Answ. 1.
I, GODS children usually in their troubles overcome by suffering, here Lambs
overcome Lions, and Doves Eagles by suffering, that herein they may be
conformable to Christ, who conquered most, when he suffered most, together with
Christ's kingdom of patience, there was a Kingdom of power.

2 This victory is by degrees, and therefore they 2.
are too hasty spirited, that would conquer so soon as they strike the first
stroke, and be at the end of their race at the first setting forth: the
Isra^ites were sure of victory in their voyage to Canaan, yet they must fight
it out. GOD would not have us presently forget what cruel enemies CHRIST has
overcome for us, destory them not, lest the people forget it (says the
Psalmist) Psalm. 59. 11.
That so by the experience of that anoyance we have by them, we might be kept
in fear to come under the power of them.

3 That GOD often works by contraries, 3.
when he means to give victory, he will suffer us to be foiled first, when
he means to comfort, he will terrify first, when he means to justify, he
will condemn us first, whom he means to make glorious, he will a base first.
A Christian conquers even when he is conquered; when he is conquered by some
sins, he gets victory over others more dangerous, as spiritual Pride,
security, etc.

4, That CHRIST'S 4.
work both in the Church and in the hearts of Christians often goes backward,
that it may go the better forward: As seed rotts in the ground in the Winter
time, but after comes better up, and the harder the Winter, the more
flourishing the Spring, so we learn to stand by falls, and get Virtutis
custos infirmitas.
strength by weakness discovered, we take deeper root by shaking; and as
torches, flame brighter by mooving. Thus it pleases CHRIST out of his
freedom, in this manner to maintain his government in us. Let us herein
labor to exercise our Faith, that it may answer Christ's manner of carriage
toward us, when we are foiled, let us believe we shall overcome, when we are
fallen let us believe we shall rise again. Jacob after he had a blow upon
which he halted, yet would not give over wrestling till he had gotten the
blessing, so let us never give over, but in our thoughts knitt the beginning,
progress, and end together, and then we shall see our selves in, heaven out of
the reach of all enemies. Let us assure our selves that GODS grace even in this
imperfect estate, is stronger then man's free will in the state of first
perfection, and it is founded now in CHRIST, who as he is the author, so will
be the finisher of our faith, we are under a more gracious covenant.

Here upon it follows, that weakness may stand with the assurance of
salvation; the disciples notwithstanding, all their weaknesses, are bidden to
rejoice that their names are Luke 10. 20
written in heaven. Failings (with conflict) in sanctification should not
weaken the peace of our justification and assurance of salvation. It mattereth
not so much, what ill is in us, as what good, not what corruptions, but how we
stand affected to them: not what our particular failings be so much, as what
is the thread and tenor of our lives: for CHRIST'S mislike of that which is ami^e
in us redounds not to the hatred of our person, but to the victorious subduing
of al our infirmities.

Some have after conflict wondered at the goodness of GOD, that so little and
shaking faith should have upheld them in so great Combats, when Satan had
almost catched them. And indeed it is to be wondered, how much a little grace
will prevail with GOD for acceptance, and over our enemies for victory, if the
heart be upright. Such is the goodness of our sweet Savior, that he
delights still to show his strength in our weakness.

First therefore for the Use 1.
great consolation of poor and weak Christians, let them know, that a spark
from heaven though kindled under green wood that sobbes and smoakes, yet it
will consume all at last, Love once kindled is strong as death, much water
cannot Cant. 8. 6.
quench it, and therefore it is called a vehement flame, or flame of GOD,
kindled in the heart by the Holy Ghost. That little that is in us, is fed with
an everlasting spring. As the fire that came down from heaven in Elias his
time, licked up all the water, to show that it came from GOD, so will this fire
spend all our corruption, no affliction without, or corruption within shall
quench it. In the morning we see often clouds gather about the Sun, as if they
would hide it, but the Sun wastes them by little and little, till it come to
its full strength. At the first, fears and doubts hinder the breaking out of
this fire, until at length it gets above them all, and CHRIST prevails; and
then he backs his own graces in us. Grace conquers us first, and we by it
conquer all things else, whether it be corruptions within us, or temptations
without us.

The Church of CHRIST begotten by the word of truth, has the doctrine of the
Apostles for her crown, and tramples the Rev. 12. 1.
Moon, that is, the world, and all worldly things under her feet; Every one
that is borne of God overcomes 1 John 5. 4.
the world. Faith whereby especially CHRIST rules, sets the soul so high, that
it overlookes all other things as far below, as having represented to it, by
the Spirit of CHRIST, riches, honor, beauty, pleasures of a higher nature.

Now that we may not come short of the comfort intended; there are two things
especially to be taken notice of by us, I, whether there be such a judgment,
or government set up in us, to which this promise of victory is made. 2, Some
rules or directions how we are to carry our selves, that the judgment of Christ
in us may indeed be victorious.

The evidences whereby Trial to know whether this judgment in us is such as
will be victorious.
we may come to know, that CHRIST'S judgment in us, is such as will be
victorious, are, 1, If we be able from experience to justify all CHRIST'S 1.
ways; let flesh and blood say what it can to the contrary; and can willingly
subscribe to that course which GOD has taken in CHRIST, to bring us to heaven,
and still approve a further measure of grace then we have attained unto, and
project and forecast for it. No other men can justify their courses when their
conscience is awaked. 2, When reasons of religion, be the strongest 2.
reasons with us, and prevail more* then rea: sons fetched from worldly policy.
3. When we are so true to our ends and fast 3.
to our rule, as no hopes or fears can sway us another way, but still we are
looking what agrees, or differs from our rule. 4, When 4.
we can do nothing against 2 Cor. 13. 8.
the truth, but for the truth, as being dearer to us then our lives, truth has
not this sovereignty: in the heart of any carnal man. 5, When, if we had
liberty 5.
to choose under whose Government we would live, yet out of a delight in the
inner man to Christ's government, we would make choice of him only, to rule us
before any other, for this argues that we are like minded to CHRIST. A free
and a voluntary people, and not compelled unto Christ's service, otherwise then
by the sweet constraint of love. When we are so far in liking with the
government of CHRIST'S Spirit, that we are willing to resign up our selves to
him in all things, for then his kingdom is come into us, when our wills are
brought to his will; it is the bent of our wills that makes us good or ill. 6,
A well ordered uniforme 6.
life, not by sits or starts, shows a well ordered heart, as in a clock when
the hammer strikes well, and the hand of the Dyall points well, it is a sign
that the wheels are right set. 7, When Christ's 7.
will comes in competition with any earthly loss or gain, yet if then in
that particular case the heart will stoop to CHRIST, it is a true sign; for^
the truest trial of the power of grace is in such particular cases which ^ch
us nearest, for there our corruption makes the greatest head; when CHRIST came
near home to the young man in the Gospel, he lost a disciple of him. 8, When
we can practice 8.
duties pleasing to Christ, though contrary to flesh, and the course of the
world. And when we can overcome our selves in that evil, to which our nature
is proane, and stands so much inclined unto, and which agrees to the sway of
the times, and which others lie inthralled under, as desire of revenge, hatred
of enemies private ends, etc. then it appears that grace is in us above
nature, heaven above earth, and will have the victory.

For the further clearing of this, and helping of us in our trial; we must
know there be three degrees of victory. 1, When we resist though we be
foiled. 2, When Grace gets the better though with conflict. 3, When all
corruption is perfectly subdued. Now when we have strength but only to
resist, yet we may know CHRIST'S government in us will be victorious, because
what is said of the Devil, is said of all our spiritual enemies; If we
resist, James 47.
they shall in time fly from us: because stronger is he that is in us, that
takes John 4. 4.
part with his own Grace, than he that is in the world. And if we may hope
for victory upon bare resistance, what may we not hope for when the Spirit
has gotten the upper hand?

For the second, that is, directions.

We must know, though Christ has under-taken Directions
this victory, yet he accomplisheth it by training us up to fight his
battles; he overcommeth in us, by making us wise to salvation: and in what
degree we believe Christ will conquer, in that degree we will endeavor by his
grace that we may conquer: for Faith is an obedient and a wise grace: Christ
makes us wise to ponder and weigh things, and thereupon to rank and order
them so, as we may make the fitter choice of what is best. Some Rules to help
us in judging are these.

To judge of things as Rules whereby we may better judge.
they help or hinder the maine: as they surther or hinder our reckoning: as
they make us more or less 1.
spiritual, and so bring us 2.
nearer to the fountain of Goodness, GOD himself: 3.
as they bring us peace or sorrow at the last: as they 4.
commend us more or less 5.
to GOD, and wherein we shall approve our selves to him most: Likewise to 6.
judge of things now, as we shall do hereafter, when the soul shall be best
able to judge, as when we are under any public calamity, or at the hour of
death, when the soul gathers it self from all other things to it self.
Look back to former experience, 7.
see what is most agreeable unto it; what was best in our worst times. If Grace
is or was best then, it is best now. And labor to judge of things as he 8.
does, who must judge us, and as holy men judge, who are led by his Spirit:
more particularly, what those judge, that have no interest 9.
in any benefit that may come by the thing which is in question: for outward
things blind the eyes even of the wise; we see Papists are most corrupt in
those things, where their honor, ease or profit is engaged, but in the doctrine
of the Trinity, which does not touch upon these things, they are found. But it
is not sufficient that judgment be right, but likewise ready and strong.
Further directions for judgment.


Where Christ establishes this government, he inspireth care to keep the
Judgment clear and fresh, 1.
for whilst the Judgment stands straight and firm, the whole frame of the
soul continues strong and impregnable. True Judgment in us advancet^ Christ,
and Christ will advance it. All sin is either from false principles or
ignorance, or mindlesnesse, or unbeleefe of true. By inconsideration, and
weakness of assent Eve lost her hold at first. It is good therefore to store
up true principles in our hearts, and to refresh them often, that in virtue of
them our affections and actions may be more vigorous. When Judgment is
fortified, evil finds no entrance, but good things have a side within us, to
entertain them. Whilst true convincing light continues, we will not do the
least ill of sin, for the greatest ill of punishment. In vain Prove. 1. 17.
is the ^et spread in the eyes of that which has wings. Whilst the soul is
kept aloft, there is little danger of snares below: we lose our high estimation
of things, before we can be drawn to any sin.

And because knowledge 2.
and affection mutually help one another* it is good to keep up our
affections of love and delight by all sweet inducements, and divine
encouragements, for what the heart likes best, the mind studyeth most. Those
that can bring their hearts to delight in Christ, know most of his ways.
Wisdom loves them that love her. Prove. 8. 27.
Love is the best entertainer of truth, and when it is not entertained in the
love of it, (being so lovely as it is) 2 Thessalonians. 2.
it leaves the heart, and will stay no longer. It has been a prevailing way
to begin by withdrawing the love, to corrupt the Judgment; because as we
love so we use to judge: and therefore it is hard to be affectionate and wise
in earthly things, but in heavenly things, where there has been a right
information of the judgment before, the more our affections grow, the better
and clearer our judgments will be, because our affections though strong, can
never rise high enough to the excellency of the things. We see in the
Martyrs, when the sweet doctrine of Christ had once gotten their hearts, it
could not be gotten out again by all the torments the wit of cruelty could
devise. If Christ has once possessed the affections, there is no dispossessing
of him again. A fire in the heart overcommeth all fires without.

3, Wisdom likewise 3.
teaches us, wherein our weakness lies, and our enemies strength, whereby a
jealous fear is stirred up in us, whereby we are preserved. For out of this
godly jealousy we keep those provocations which are active and working from
that which is passive and catching in us, as we keep fire from powder. They that
will hinder the generation of noisome creatures, will hinder the conception
first, by keeping male and female asunder. This jealousy will be much furthered
by observing strictly what has helped or hindered a gracious te^per in us: and
it will make us take heed that we consult not with flesh and blood in our
selves or others. How else can we think that Christ will lead us out to
victory, when we take counsel of his and our enemies.

4, Christ makes us likewise 4.
careful to attend all means, whereby fresh thoughts and affections may be
stirred up and preserved in us. Christ so honors the use of means, and the
care he puts into us, that he ascribes both preservation and victory unto
our care of keeping our selves. He that is begotten of God, keeps himself;
1 John 3. 1^.
but not by himself, but by the Lord, in dependence: on him in the use of
means. We are no longer safe, then wife to present our selves to all good
advantages of acquaintance, etc. By going out of Gods walks, we go out of his
government, and so lose our frame, and find our selves overspread quickly
with a contrary disposition. When we draw near to Christ in his ordinances,
he draws near to us.

5 Keep grace in exercise: it is not sleepy habits 5.
but Gracein exercise that preserves us. Whilst the soul is in some civil
or sacred employment, corruptions within us, are much suppressed, and Satan's
passages stopped, and the spirit has a way open to inlarge^ it self in us,
and likewise the guard of Angels then most nearly attend us; which course
often prevails more against our spiritual enemies then direct oppo sition. It
stands upon Christ's honor to maintain those that are in his work.

Sixthly, in all directio^s 6.
we must look up to Christ the quickening spirit, and resolve in his strength,
though we are exhorted to cleave to the Lord with Act. 11. 23
full purpose of heart, yet we must pray* with David, Lord for ever keep it in
the thoughts of our hearts, and prepare our hearts unto thee: 1 Chronicles. 29. 1^.
our hearts are of themselves very loose and unsettled, Lord unite our hearts
unto thee to fear thy name, or else without him our Ps 86. 11.
best purposes will fall to the ground. It is a pleasing request out of love to
GOD, to beg such a frame of soul from him, wherein he may take delight; and
therefore in the use of all the means, we must send up our desires and
complaints to heaven to him for strength and help, and then we may be sure,
that he will bring forth judgment into victory.

Lastly, it furthers the state of the soul, to know 7.
what frame it should be in, that so we may order our souls accordingly; we
should always be fit for communion with GOD, and be heavenly minded in
earthly business, and be willing to be taken off from them, to redeem time for
better things; we should be ready at all times to depart hence, and to live in
such a condition, as we would be content to dye in: we should have hearts
prepared for every good duty, open to all good occasions, and shut to al
temptations, keeping our watch, and being always ready armed: so far as we
come short of these things, so far we have just cause to be humbled, and yet
press forward that we may gain more upon our selves, and make these things
more familiar and lovely unto us, and when we find our souls any ways
falling downwards, it is best to raise them up presently by some waking
meditatio^s; as of the presence of God, of the strict reckoning we are to make,
of the infinite love of GOD in CHRIST, and the fruits of it, of the excellency
of a Christians calling, of the short and uncertain time of this life: how
little good all those things that steal away our hearts, will do us ere long;
and how it shall be for ever with us thereafter as we spend this little time
well, or ill, etc. the more we give way for such consideratio^s to sink into
our hearts, the more we shall rise nearer to that state of soul which we
shall enjoy in Heaven. When we grow regardlesse of keeping our souls, then
GOD recovers our taste of good things again, by sharp crosses, thus David,
Solomon, Sampson, etc. were recovered: it is much easier kept then recovered.

But notwithstanding Object.
my striving, I seem to stand at a stay.

Grace (as the seed in the Answ. 1.
Parable) grows we know not how, yet at length when GOD sees fittest we
shall see that all our endeavor has not been in vain, the tree falls upon
the last stroke, yet all the former strokes help it forward.

Sometimes victory is suspended, Ans. 2
because some Achan is not found out, or because we are not humble enough: as
Israel had Judge. 20. 26.
the worst against the Benjamites till they fasted and prayed, or because we
betray our helps, and stand not upon our guard, and yield not presently to the
motions of the Spirit, which minds us always of the best things, if we
would regard it. Our own consciences will tell us, if we give them leave to
speak, that some sinful favoring of our selves is the cause. The way in this
case to prevail, is I, to get the victory over the pride of our own nature,
by taking shame to our selves, in humble confession (...) GOD; and then ^23 to
overcome the unbelief of our hearts by yielding to the promise of pardon, and
then 3, in confidence of CHRIST'S assistance to set our selves against those
sins which have prevailed over us; and then prevailing over our selves we shall
easily prevhile over all other enemies, and conquer all conditions we shall be
brought into.

If Christ will have the Use 2.
victory, then it is the best way for Nations and States to kiss the Son,
and to embrace Christ and his religion; to side with Christ, and to own his
cause in the world, his side will prove the stro^gest side at last, happy are we
if Christ honor us so much as to use our help to fight his battle against
the mighty. True religion in a State, is as the maine pillar of a house, and
staff of a te^t that upholds all: 2 so for families let CHRIST be the chief
Governor of the family; and 3, let cuery one be as a house for CHRIST to dwell
familiarly in, and to rule; where CHRIST is, all happiness must follow. If
Christ goes, all will go; where Christ's government in his ordinances, and his
spirit is, there all subordinate government will prosper: Religion inspireth
life and grace into al other things, all other virtues without it are but as a
fair picture without a head. Where Christ's laws are written in the heart,
there all other good laws are best obeyed, none despise ma^s law, but those
that despise Christ's Nemo huma^m authoritatem (...), nisi qui divinam pri^s
contemps^.
first. Of all persons a man guided by Christ is the best, and of all creatures
in the world, a man guided by will and affection (next the devil) is the worst.
The happiness of weaker things stands in being ruled by stronger: it is best
for a blind man to be guided by him that has sight; it it best for sheep and
such like shiftlesse creatures to be guided by man; and it is happiest for man
to be guided by CHRIST, because his government is so victorious that it frees
us from the fear and danger of our greatest enemies, and tends to bring us to
the greatest happiness that our nature is capable of. This should make us to
joy when CHRIST reigns in us. When Solomon was crowned the people shouted, so
that the earth rang; much more should we rejoice in CHRIST our King. And
likewise for those, whose souls are dear unto us, that Christ may reign in
them also, that they may be baptized Mat. 3. 11.
by CHRIST with this fire, that these sparks may be kindled in them. Men
labor to cherish: the spirit and metal (as they term it) of those they
train up, because they think they will have use of it in the manifold affairs
and troubles of this life. Oh, but let us cherish the* sparks of Grace in
them: sor a natural spirit in great troubles will fail, but these sparks
will make them conquerors over the greatest evils.

If CHRIST'S, judgment sall be victorious, Use. 3.
then Popery being an opposite frame, set up by the wit of man^ maintain
stately ^enesse, must fall. And it is fallen already in the hearts of those upon
whom CHRIST. has shined. It is a lie, and founded upon a lie, upon the
infallible judgment of a man subject to sin and error: When that which is
taken for a principle of truth, becomes a principle of error, the more relying
upon it, the more danger.

It is not only said, judgment 6 Corclusio^.
shall be victorious, but that CHRIST will bring it openly forth to victory.
Whence we observe that Grace shall be glory, and run into the eyes of all.
Now CHRIST does conquer and has his own ends, but it is in some sort
invisibly: his enemies within and without us seem to have the better. But he
will bring forth judgment into victory, to the view of all. The wicked that
now shut their eyes shall see it to their torment. It shall not be in the power
of subtle men to see or not see what they would, CHRIST will have power over
their hearts, and as his wrath shall immediately seize upon their souls
against their wills; so will he have power over the eyes of their souls to see
and know what will increase their misery; Grief shall be fastened to all their
senses, and their senses to grief.

Then all the false glosses which they put upon things shall be wiped away.
Men are desirous to have the reputation of good, and yet the sweetness of ill;
nothing so cordially opposed by them, as that truth which lays them open to
themselves, and to the eyes of others; their chief care being how to daube
with the world and their own consciences. But the time will come when they
shall be driven out of this fools paradise, and the more subtle their
conveyance of things has been, the more shall be their shame. CHRIST whom GOD
has chosen to set forth the chief glory of his excellencies, is now veyled in
regard of his body the Church, but will come ere long to be glorious in his
Saints; and not lose the clear manifestation of any ofhis attributes, and will
declare to all the world what he is. When there shall be no glory but that of
CHRIST and his Spouse, Those that are as smoking flax now, shall then shine
as the Sun in the firmament, and their righteousness break forth as the noone
day.

The Image of GOD in Adam had a commanding majesty in it, so that all
creatures r^vereneed him, much mo^e shall the Image of GOD in the perfection of
it; command respectin all. Even now there is a (...) awe put into the hoasts of
the greatest, toward those in who^ they* see any grace to shine* from whence
it was that Herod ^eared ^ohn Baptist, but what will this be in their day of
bringing forth, which is called the day of the revelation of the son^es of God.

There will be more glorious times, when the Rev. 11.
Kingdoms of the earth shall be the Lord Jesus Christ's; and he shall reign
for ever: then shall judgment and truth have its victory: Then CHRIST will
plead his own cause, truth shall no longer be called heresy, and schism,
nor heresy catholic doctrine, wickedness shall no longer go masqued and
disguised, goodness shall appear in its own luster, and shine in its own
beams, things shall be what they are, nothing is hidden but shall be laid
open. Iniquity shall not be carried in a mystery any longer. Deep dissemblers
that think to hide their counsels from the Lord shall walk no longer
invisible as in the clouds.

If this were believed, Use.
men would make more account of sincerity, which will only give us boldness,
and not seek for covershames; the confidence whereof as it makes men now more
presumptuous, so it will expose them hereafter to the greater shame.

If judgment shall be brought forth to victory, then those that have been
ruled by their own deceitful hearts, and a spirit of error, shall be brought
forth to disgrace: That GOD that has joined grace and truth with honor, has
joined sin and shame together at the last; all the wit and power of man can
never be able to sever what God has coupled. Truth and piety may be trampled
upon for a time, but as the two witnesses after they were slain rose again
and stood upon their feet; so whatsoever is of GOD shall at length stand upon
its own bottom. There shall be a resurrection not only of bodies but of
credits. Can we think that he that throw the Angels out of heaven, will
suffer dust and worms meat to run a contrary course, and to carry it always
so; No, as verily as CHRIST is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, so will he
dash all those pieces of earth which rise up against him, as a p^tters Psalm. 2.
vessel. Was there ever any fierce against God and, prospered? No doubtless,
I^b 9. 4.
the rage of man shall turn to CHRIST'S praise: Psa. 76. 10.
What was said of Pharaoh shall be said of all headdy enemies, who had rather
lose their souls, then their wills, that they are but raised up for CHRIST to
get himself glory in their confusion.

Let us then take heed that we follow not the ways of those men, whose ends
we shall tremble at: There is not a more fearful judgment can befall the
nature of man, then to be given up to a reprobate judgment of persons and
things, because it comes under a w^e, to call ill good, and good ill.

How will they be laden with curses another day that abuse the judgment of
others by sophistry and flattery, deceivers, and being deceived? Then the
complaint of our first mother Eve will be taken up, but fruitlesly; The serpent
has deceived me, Satan in such and such has deceived me. Sin has deceived
me, a foolish heart has deceived me. It is one of the highest points of
wisdom, to consider upon what grounds we venture our souls. Happy men will
they be who have by CHRIST'S light, a right judgment of things, and suffer
that judgment to prevail over their hearts.

The soul of most men is drowned in their senses, and carried away with weak
opinions, raised from vulgar mistakes and shadows of things. And Satan is
ready to enlarge the imagination of outward good, and outward ill, and make it
greater then it is, and spiritual things less, presenting them through false
glasses. And so men trusting in vanity, vanish themselves in their own
apprehensions. A woeful condition, when both we and that which we highly
esteem shall vanish together, which will be as truly as Christ's judgment
shall come to victory; and in what measure the vain heart of man has been
enlarged to conceive a greater good in things of this world then there is, by
so much the soul shall be enlarged or be more sensible of misery when it sees
its error. This is the difference betwixt a godly wise man, and a deluded
worldling; that which the one does more judge to be vain, the other shall
hereafter feel to be so, when it is too late. But this is the vanity of our
natures, that though we shun above all things to be deceived and mistake^ in
present things; yet in the greatest matters of all we are willingly ignorant
and misled.

The fourth conclusion is, Conclusi^ 4.
That this government is set up and advanced by Christ alone. He brings
judgment to victory. We both fight and prevail in the power of his might, we
overcome by the Spirit obtained by the blood of the Lamb.

It is he alone that teaches our hands to war, and Psalm. 144 1.
fingers to fight. Nature (as corrupted) favors its own being, and will
maintain it self against CHRIST'S government. Nature (simply considered)
cannot raise it self above it self to actions spiritual of a higher order
and nature, therefore the divine power of CHRIST is necessary to carry us above
all our own strength, especially in duties wherein we meet with greater
opposition; for there, not only nature will fail us, but ordinary grace,
unless there be a stronger and a new supply. In taking up a burden that is
waightier then ordinary, if there be not a greater proportion of strength then
weight, the undertaker will lie under it. So to every strong encounter there
must be a new supply of strength: as in Peter when he was assaulted with a
stronger temptation, being not upheld and shored up with a mightier hand,
notwithstanding former strength foully fell. And being fallen, in our raisings
up again it is CHRIST that must do the work, 1, by removing, or 2, weakening,
or 3, suspending opposite hindrances, 4, and by advancing the power of his
grace in us to a further degree then we had before we fell; therefore when we
are fallen, and by falls have gotten a bruise, let us go to Christ presently
to bind us up again.

Let us know therefore Use.
that it is dangerous to look for that from our selves, which we must have ^om
CHRIST. Since the fall, all our strength lies in him as Sampsons in his hair,
we are but subordinate agents moving as we are moved, and working as we are
first wrought upon, free so far forth as we are freed, no wiser nor stronger
then he makes us to be for the present Sic s^ (...): ^ortalium cord a quae
scimus, (...) necesse non est, in necessitate (...)mus. Ber^* de cons^.
in any thing we undertake. It is his Spirit that actuates and inliveneth and
applies that knowledge and strength we have, or else it saileth and lies as
useless in us; we work when we work upon a present strength. therefore
dependant spirits, are the wisest and the ablest. Nothing is stronger (...)
^ititur qui non (...).
then humility, that goes out of it self; or weaker then pride that rests
upon its own bottom: and this should the rather be observed, because
naturally we affect a kind of Divinity, Ass^llalie di^initatis.
in setting upon actions in the strength of our own parts; whereas CHRIST
says, without me you can do nothing, he does not say you can do a little,
Job. 15.
but nothing; therefore in all (especially difficult encounters) let us lift up
our hearts to CHRIST, who has spirit enough for us all, in all our exigences;
and say with good Iehosaphat, Lord we know 2 Chro^. 20* 2.
not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee; The battle we fight is thine,
and the strength whereby we fight must be thine. If thou go not out with
us, we are sure to be foiled. Satan knows nothing can prevail against
CHRIST, or those that rely upon his power; therefore his study is, how to
keep us in our selves, and in the creature: but we must carry always in our
minds, that that which is begun in selfconfidence will end in shame.

The manner of Christ's bringing forth judgment to victory, is by letting us
see a necessity of dependence upon him: hence proceed those spiritual
desertions, wherein he often leaves us to our selves, both in regard of grace
and comfort, that we may know the Springhead of these to be out of our selves.
Hence it is that in the Mount, that is, in extremities, Genesis 22. 13.
God is most seen. Hence it is that we are saved by the grace of faith, that
carries us out of our selves to rely upon another; and that faith works best
alone, when it has least outward support. Hence it is that we often fail in
lesser conflicts, and stand out in greater, because in less we rest more in
our selves; in greater we fly to the rock of our salvation which is Psalm. 61.
(...).
higher then we. Hence likewise it is, that we are stronger after foyles,
because hidden corruption undiscerned before, is now discovered, and thence we
are brought to make use of mercy pardoning, and power supporting: One maine
ground of this dispensation, is, that we should know it is Christ that gives
both the will, and the deed: and that as a voluntary worker, according to his
own good pleasure. And therefore we should workout our salvation in a jealous
fear and trembling, lost by unreverent Phil. 2. (...)
and presumptuous walking, we give him cause to suspend his gracious
influence, and to leave us to the darkness of our own heart.

Those that are under CHRIST'S government, have the spirit of Revelation whereby
they see and feel a divine power sweetly and strongly inabling the^ for to
preserve faith when they feel the contrary, and hope in a state hopeless, and
love to GOD under signs of his displeasure, and heavenly mindedness in the
midst of worldly affairs and alluremets drawing a contrary way; they feel a
power preserving patience, nay joy in the midst of causes of mourning, inward
peace in the midst of assaults. To make so little grace so victorious over so
great a mass of corruption, this requires a spirit more then humane; this is
as to preserve fire* in the sea, and a part of heaven even as it were in hell.
Here we know where to have this power, and to whom to return the praise of
it. And it is our happiness, that it is so safely hid in CHRIST for us, in one
so near unto GOD and us. Since the fall, GOD will not trust us with our own
salvation, but it is both purchased and kept by CHRIST for us, and we for it
through faith, wrought by the power of GOD, and laying hold of the same: which
power is gloriously set forth by Saint Paul, I, to be a great power, 2, an
Ephesians 5. 19.
exceeding power, 3, a working and a mighty power, 4, such a power as was
wrought in raising Christ from the dead. That grace which is but a persuasive
offer, and in our pleasure to receive or refuse, is not that grace which brings
us to heaven; but Gods people feel a powerful work of the Spirit not only
revealing unto us our misery, and deliverance through Christ, but emptying us
of our selves as being redeemed from our selves, and infusing new life into us,
and after strengthening us and quickening of us when we droop and hang the wing,
and never leaving us till perfect conquest.

The fifth conclusion is, that this prevailing Government 5 Conclusion.
shall not be without fighting; there can be no victory where there is no
combat; in Esaias it is said, he shall bring Esaias 42. 3.
judgment in truth: here it is said, he shall send forth judgment into victory.
The word send forth has a stronger sense in the original, to send forth with
force, to show, that where his government is in truth, it will be opposed,
until he gets the upper hand. Nothing is so opposed, as CHRIST and his
government both with in us, and without us. And within us most in our first
conversion, though corruption prevails not so far as to make void the
powerful work of grace, yet there is not only a possibility of opposing, but
a proannesse to oppose, and not only a proanness, but an actual withstanding
the working of CHRIST'S Spirit, and that in every action, but yet no prevailing
resistance, so far as to make void the work of grace, but corruption in the
issue yields to grace.

There is much: adoc to bring CHRIST into the heart, and to settle a Tribunal
for him to judge there, there is an army of lusts mutiny against him. The
utmost strength of most men's endeavors and parts, is to keep CHRIST from
ruling in the soul, the flesh still labors to maintain its own regency,
and therefore it cries down the credit of whatsoever crosses it, as Gods
blessed ordinances, etc. and highly prizeth any thing, though never so dead and
empty, if it give way to the liberty of the flesh.

And no marvel if the spiritual government of CHRIST be so opposed, Reasons
why Christ's government is opposed.
1, because it is government, and that limits the course of the will, and
casts a bridle upon its wanderings, 1.
every thing naturally resists what opposes it; so corrupt will labors to
bear down all Laws, and counts it a generous thing not to be awed, and an
argument of a low spirit to fear any, even GOD himself, until unavoydable
danger seizes on men, and then those that feared least out of danger, fear
most in danger, as we see in Balthazar. Dan 5. 6.


2, It is spiritual government, 2.
and therefore the less will flesh endure it: Christ's government brings the
very thoughts and desires which are the most immediate and free issue of the
soul into obedience, though a man were of so composed a carriage that his whole
life were free from outward offensive breaches, yet with Christ, to be
carnally or Rom 8 6 G^atius est, peccatum diligere qua^ perpetrare etc. Greg.
Moral lib. 25. cap. 11. Object.
worldly mindeded is death, he looks on a worldly mind with greater
detestation then any one particular offense.

But Christ's Spirit is in those who are in some degree earthly minded?

True it is, but not as an Ans.
allower and maintainer, but as an opposer, subduer, and in the end as a
Conqueror: Carnal men would feign bring Christ and the flesh together and
could be content with some reservation to submit to Christ, but Christ will be
no underling to any base affection; and therefore where there is allowance of
our selves in any sinsull lust, it is a sign the Keys were never given up to
Christ to rule us.

3, Because it is judgment, 3.
and men love not to be judged and censured. Now Christ in his truth arraigneth
them, gives sentence against them, and binds them over to the latter
judgment of the great day. And therefore they take upon them to judge that
truth that must judge them, but truth will be too good for them; Man has a
day now, which Saint Paul calls man's day, wherein he gets upon 1 Cor. 4. 3.
his bench, and usurpeth a judgment over Christ and his ways; but GOD has a
day, wherein he will set all straight, and his judgment shall stand. And the
Saints shall have their time, when they shall sit in judgment upon them 1 Cor.
(...). 2.
that judge them now. In the mean time CHRIST will rule in the midst of
Psalm. 110.
his enemies, in the midst of our hearts.

It is therefore no sign Use.
of a good condition, to ^nde all quiet and nothing at odds. For can we think
that corruption which is the elder in us, and satan the strong man, that keeps
many holds in us, will yield possession quietly: No, there is not so much as a
thought of goodness discovered by him, but he joyneth with corruption to kill
it in the birth. And as Pharaohs cruelty was especially against the male
children; so Satan's malice is especially against the most religious and manly
resolutions.

This then we are always to expect, that wheresoever Christ comes, there
will be opposition: when Christ was borne all Jerusalem was troubled; so when
Christ is borne in any man, the soul is in an uproare, and all because the
heart is unwilling to yield up it self to Christ to rule it.

Wheresoever Christ comes, he breeds division, not only I, between man and
himself, but 2, between man and man, and 3, between Church and Church: Of
which disturbance Christ is no more the cause, they Physic is of trouble in a
distempered body, of which noisome humors are the proper cause, for the end of
Physic is the peace of humors. But Christ thinks it fit that the thoughts
of men's hearts should be discovered: and he is as well for the falling, as
the rising of many in Israel.

Thus the desperate madness of men is laid open, that they had rather be
under the guidance of their own lusts, and by consequent of Satan himself to
their endless destruction, then put their feet into Christ's setters, and their
necks under his yoke; whereas indeed Christ's service is the only true
liberty, his yoke an easy yoke, his burden but as the burden of wings to a
bird, that makes her fly the higher. Satan's government is rather a bondage
then a government, unto which Christ gives up those that shake off his own,
for then he gives Satan and his factors power over them, since they will not
receive the 2 These 2. 20.
truth in love, take him Jesuit, take him Satan, blind him, and bind him,
and lead him to perdition. Those that take the most liberty to sin, are the
most perfect slaves, because most voluntary slaves, the will in every thing
is either the best or the worst, the further men go on in a wilful course,
the deeper they sincke in rebellion; and the more they cross CHRIST, doing
what they will, the more they shall one day suffer what they would not. In the
mean time they are prisoners in their own souls, bound over in their
consciences to the judgment of him after death, whose judgment they would
none of in their lives. And is it not equal that they should feel him a
severe Judge to condemn them, whom they would not have a mild Judge to rule
them.

For Conclusion and general application of all that has been spoken, unto
our selves. We see the conflicting, but yet sure and hopeful state of Gods
people. The victory lies not upon us, but upon CHRIST who has taken upon him
as to conquer for us, so to conquer in us. The victory lies neither in our own
strength to get, nor in our enemies to defeat it. If it lay upon us we might
justly fear. But CHRIST will maintain his own government in us, and take our
part against our corruptions; they are his Enemies as well as ours. Let us Ephesians.
6. 10.
therefore be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; Let us not
look so much who are our enemies, as who is our Judge, and Captain; not what
they threaten, but what he promises; we have more for us, then against us.
What coward would not fight, when he is sure of victory; none are here
overcome, but he that will not sight. Therefore, when any base fainting seizes
upon us, let us lay the blame where it is to be laid. We see here what we
may look for from heaven. O beloved it is a comfortable thing to conceive of
CHRIST aright, to know what love, mercy, strength we have laid up for us in
the breast of CHRIST. A good conceit of the Physician (we say) is half the
cure; Let us not suffer Satan to transform Christ unto us, to be otherwise
then he is to those that are his. Let us make use of this his mercy and power
every day, in our daily combats: CHRIST will not leave us, till he has made
us like himself, all glorious within and without, and presented us blameless
before his Father. What a comfort is this in our conflicts with our unruly
hearts, that it shall not always be thus; let us strive a little while, and we
shall be happy for ever. Let us think when we are troubled with our sins,
that CHRIST has this in charge of his Father, That he shall not quench the
smoking slaxe, until he has subdued all. This puts a shield into our
hands to beat back all the fiery darts of Satan: he will object, ^hes. 6 16.
thou art a great sinner; we may answer, CHRIST 1.
is a strong Savior: but he will object, thou have no faith, no love? Yes a 2.
spark of faith and love: but CHRIST will not regard that? Yes, he will not
quench the smoking flax. 3.
But this is so little and weak, that it will vanish, and come to naught? Nay,
but CHRIST will cherish 4.
it until he has brought judgment to victory. And thus much for our comfort
we have already, that even when we first believed we overcame God himself (as
it were) by believing the pardon of all our sins; notwithstanding the guilt
of our own consciences, and his absolute justice. Now having been prevailers
with GOD, what shall stand against us if we can learn to make use of our faith?

O what a confusion is this to Satan, that he should labor to blow out a
poor spark, and yet should not be able to quench it; that a grain of
Mustard seed should be stronger then the gates of Hell; that it should be able
to remove mountains of oppositions and temptations cast up by Satan and our
rebellious hearts between GOD and us. Abimelech could not endure that it should
be said a Woman Judge. 9. 54.
had slain him, and it must needs be a Torment to Satan, that a weak child,
a woman, and decrepit old man should by a spirit of faith put him to flight.

Since there is such comfort, where there is a little truth of grace, that it
will be so victorious, Let us often try what: GOD has wrought in us, search our
good, as well as our ill, and be thankful to GOD for the least measure of
grace, more then for any outward thing, it will be of more use and comfort then
all this world which passes away and comes to nothing. Yea let us be thankful
sor that promised and assured victory, which we may rely on without
presumption, as Saint Paul does; Thanks be to GOD, 1 C^. 25. 57.
that has given us victory in Jesus Christ. See a slame in a spark, a tree in
a seed; see great things in little beginnings; Look not so much to the
beginning, as to the perfection, and so we shall be in some degree joyful in
our selves, and thankful unto Christ.

And let all this that has been spoken, allure those that are not yet in
state of grace, to come under CHRIST'S sweet and victorious government, for
though we shall have much opposition, yet if we strive, he will help us, if
we fail, he will cherish us, if we be guided by him, we shall overcome, If we
overcome, we are sure to be crowned. And for the present state of the Church
we see now how forlorn it is, yet let us comfort our selves, that CHRIST'S
cause shall prevail, Christ will rule, till he has made (...). 110. 1.
his enemies his footstool, not only to trample up on: but to help him up to
mount higher in glory. Babylon shall fall, for strong is the Lord who has
condemned her, Rev. 18. 8. Christ's judgment not only in his children, but
also against his enemies shall be victorious, for he is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. GOD will not suffer Antichrist and his supports to revell and
ruffle in the Church as they do.

If we look to the present state of the Church of CHRIST, it is as Daniel in
the midst of Lions, as a Lilly amongst thorns. As a ship not only tossed, but
almost covered, with waves. It is so low, that the enemies think they have
buried CHRIST in regard of his Gospel, in the grave, and there they think to
keep him from rising: but CHRIST as he rose in his person, so he will roll
away all stones, and rise again in his church: how little support has the
Church and cause of CHRIST at this day* how strong a conspiracy is against it.
The spirit of Antichrist is now lifted up, and marches furiously; things seem
to hang on a small and invisible thread. But our comfort is that CHRIST lives
and reigns, and stands on Mount Sion in defense of Re^. 1 4. 1.
them that stand for him; and when States and Kingdoms shall dash one against
another; CHRIST will have care of his own Children and cause, seeing there is
nothing else in the world that he much esteems. At this very time the
delivery of his Church, and the ruin of his enemies is in working: we see not
things in motion till CHRIST has done his work, and then we shall see that
the Lord reigns. CHRIST and his Church when they are at the lowest, are
nearest rising: his enemies at the highest are nearest a downfall.

The Jews are not yet come in under CHRIST'S banner, but GOD that has
persuaded Iaphet to come into the Tents of Shem, will persuade Shem to come
into the Tents of Genesis 9. 27.
Iaphet. The fullness of the Gentiles is not yet come in, Romans 11. 25.
but CHRIST that has the utmost parts of the earth given him for his
possession, will gather all Psalm. 2. 8.
the sheep his Father has given him into one fold, that there may be one
sheepfold, and one shepherd. Ioh. 10. 16.


The faithful Jews rejoiced to think of the calling of the Gentiles: and why
should not we joy to think of the calling of the Jews?

The Gospels course has hitherto been as that of the Sun from East to West,
and so in GODS time may proceed yet further West. No creature can hinder the
course of the Sun, nor stop the influence of heaven, nor hinder the blowing of
the wind, much less hinder the prevailing power of divine truth, until
CHRIST has brought all under one head, and then he will present all to his
Father; these are they thou have given unto me; these are they that have taken
me for their Lord and King, that have suffered with me. My will is that they
be where I am, and reign with me. And then he will deliver up the Kingdom
even to his Father, and put down all other rule, and authority, and 1 C^. 15.
14.
power.

Let us then bring our hearts to holy resolutions, and set our selves upon that
which is good, and against that which is ill, in our selves or others,
according to our callings: upon this encouragement, that CHRIST'S grace and
power shall go along with us. What had become of that great work of
Reformation of Religion in the latter Spring of the Gospel, if men had not
been armed with invincible courage to outstride all lets, upon this faith that
the cause was CHRIST'S, and that he would not be wanting to his own cause.
Luther ingenuosly confessed, that he carried matters often inconsiderately, and
with mixture of passion, but upon acknowledgement, GOD took not advantage of
his errors, but the cause being GODS, and his aims being holy, to promote the
truth, and being a mighty man in prayer, and strong in faith, GOD by him
kindled that fire, which all the world shall never be able to quench.
According to our faith so is our encouragement to all duties, therefore let us
strengthen faith that it may strengthen all other graces. This very belief,
that faith shall be victorious, is a means to make it so indeed. Believe it
therefore, that though it be often as smoking flax, yet it shall prevail. If
it prevail with GOD himself in trials, shall it not prevail over all other
opposition? Let us wait a while, and we shall see the salvation of the Lord.

The Lord reveal himself more and more unto us in the face of his Son Jesus
CHRIST, and magnify the power of his grace in cherishing those beginnings of
grace in the midst of our corruptions; and sanctify the consideration of our
own infirmities to humble us, and of his tender mercy to encourage us: And
persuade us that since he has taken us into the covenant of grace, he will
not cast us off for those corruptions; which as they grieve his Spirit; so they
make us vile in our own eyes. And because Satan labors to obscure the glory^
of his mercy, and hinder our comfort by discouragements. The Lord add this to
the rest of his mercies, that since he is so gracious to those that yield to
his government, we may make the right use of this grace, and not lose any
portion of comfort that is laid up for us in CHRIST. And he vouchsafe to let
the prevailing power of his Spirit in us, be an evidence of the truth of grace
begun, and a pledge of final victory, at that time when he will be all in all,
in all his for all eternity.

Amen.
FINIS.

